1694 BENJAMIN KEACH MINISTER OF Ye GOSPEL AND PASTOR OF A CHURCH AT HORSLY
DOWN SOUTHWORK AGED 54.

The Shadow of his Face you se
Who nothing has to Glory in,
But his Bless't Lord, unless it be,
His trials which not small have been,
By Persecution once most sore
But by false friends afflicted more.


A GOLDEN MINE OPENED: OR, The Glory of God's Rich Grace Displayed in the
Mediator to Believers: AND HIS Direful Wrath against Impenitent Sinners.
Containing the Substance of near FORTY SERMONS Upon several Subjects.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of
Christ. London, Printed, and sold by the Author at his House in Horse-lie-down,
and William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1694.

Reader, There are two Mistakes in the first Column of the first Page of the
Contents of the Sermons: Viz. Line 7, for Fear, read Fan, Line 25, for Eternal,
read External.

To the Christian Readers;
Chiefly to such who were the Subscribers for, and principal Promoters of the
Publication of this Work.
Beloved in our Blessed Redeemer.
IT was the least of my Thoughts, when I had preached the greatest part of the
ensuing Sermons, once to suppose they should ever be published to the World:
But through some of your important Requests and Desires, I was prevailed with,
many of you so readily and unexpectedly subscribing to take off so great a
Number of them; which had you not done, they had never seen the Sun, I not
judging them deserving such a Publication. I am sensible of my great
Insufficiency; and might, from the Defects of my Ability for the great Work
called to, have seen cause enough to have denied a Compliance with you herein:
But having so often formerly passed through the Censure of the World, made me
perhaps the more unconcerned; and knowing that the most of them will come into
your Hands, (who I hope will cast a Mantle on my Humane Frailties) it was a
farther Inducement to consent. However, if the Holy God be pleased to succeed
the great Pains I have taken, with his Blessing, I shall see no cause to be
troubled at what I have done. It Is like some may object, I do not well to
meddle with Controversies at this time. I answer, that I have, it is true,
touched upon several controvertable Points; but not as they are Matters of
Controversy, but to clear up the Truths of Christ for the Establishment and
Comfort of the People committed to my Care. Besides, I being misrepresented as
touching my Judgment in some great Points, (as I have been informed) I thought
it was my Duty to rectify such Mistakes. The grand Controversy here insisted
upon, is that about Election, and the Saints Final Perseverance, which I hope
the Reader will find to his satisfaction confirmed.

Reader, I have since these Sermons were printed off, met with a Book wrote by
a Person, whom I both esteem and honor, (excepting his Opinion) entitled, A
Treatise touching Falling Away; wherein he endeavors to answer some of our
Arguments: Had I met with it sooner, I had given a particular Reply; but in the
general he may find he has here an Answer to what he has said. He endeavors
to prove the Elect may be deceived; which we deny not, though not finally
deceived; for that our Savior intimates to be impossible: And to say, none are
the Elect but they whose Warfare is finished, seems strange to me; and to
suppose the New Covenant spoken of Jer. 31. refers to the Jews only when called
at the latter Days, is not true, but is contradicted by the Apostle, Heb. 8.
Heb. 10. Our Argument, That Sin cannot separate from God's Love, is here also
fully cleared: As also what he says, That Christ's Sheep may cease following
him, and so fall out of his Hand, I have answered likewise: It is the Property
of such, they do and shall follow him; God has put his Fear into our Hearts,
and we shall not depart from him. Moreover, the Absurdities that he pretends,
do attend the Doctrine of Final Perseverance, I find I have taken off, though I
saw not his Book.

Object. But still the Cry is, Your Doctrine renders God so severe to his
Creatures, it cannot be a Truth. In answer; Consider, all acknowledge that God
foreknew all his Creatures from Eternity, and who would not be saved, (which
were far the greatest number); and yet nevertheless he created them whom he
knew would refuse his Grace, and perish Eternally; is he unmerciful and too
severe therefore? But enough is said to remove such Cavils in the ensuing
Treatise.

Reader, There is one thing I thought good to hint unto thee, viz. I have
quoted several Authors and worthy Writers in transcribing these Sermons for the
Press, that were not mentioned when I preached the Sermons; which may be I had
then done, had I thought they should have been published to the World. Also I
have left out many of the Enlargements, for otherwise the Book had swelled
almost as big again; so that you have but the Substance of what was delivered
on these Texts, except it be that upon the Fan in Christ's Hand, which you have
larger, God having been pleased to bless those Sermons to the great Profit of
many Persons. But I am persuaded the Reader will like this Treatise not the
worse for my brevity on each particular Head; for great Enlargements I find are
not profitable nor approved of by Christians of this present Age. I shall not
therefore retain thee longer at the Door, but shall desire thy Prayers, (as I
have made them mine, and shall, God assisting me) that this Work may be
attended with Divine Blessings to thee from the Press, as it has been to many
from the Pulpit. And let me, Reader, have a share in thy servent Breathings (as
I hope I shall not forget thee) when at the Throne of Grace; that I with you,
and you with me, may be kept from falling, and preserved in Christ's Hand to
Eternal Life, who am willing to serve thee according to that small Ability
received, whilst,

From my House at Horse-lie-down, in Freeman's-Lane, Southwark, September. 13.
1694. Benjamin Keach.

A Table of the Contents of all the Sermons contained in this Book.
FIRST Text, Mat. 3. 12. The Text opened, Page 2 The Parts of the Text opened,
3 What meant by Christ's Floor, showed in 4 respects, 4 Filth of the National
Floor, in 7 particulars, 4, 5, 6 Great Evils among God's People showed, 7, 8 2.
What meant by Christ's Fear, showed in five or six Particulars, 9, to 17 3.
What meant by the Chaff, showed in 2 things, 18 4. Why are Hypocrites compared
to Chaff, showed in six Particulars, 18, to 25 5. Why the Saints are compared
to Wheat, opened in nine Particulars, 27, 28, 29 6. What meant by Christ's
Garner, showed in two things, 29, 30 7. What meant by burning up the Chaff, 30
8. Why God's Wrath is compared to Fire, opened in eight Particulars, 31, 33, 33
9. Doctrines raised, 33, 34, 35 The Application, 36, 37, 38, 39
Second Sermon. Doct. God's Wrath is like to Fire, it is intolerable. 1.
Demonstrated in. 2. External and Internal Wrath opened, 41, 42, 43 3. The
Nature of Eternal Wrath, showed in Spira and Child, 44, to 51 4. Eternal Wrath,
or Hell Torments, and the Nature thereof, opened largely, 52, etc.

Second Text, John 10. 27, 28. First Sermon. 1. The Text opened and Terms
explained, 75, 76 2. The Doctrine propounded, viz. All true Believers are the
Sheep of Christ, 76
The Doctrine opened. 1. How they may be called Christ's Sheep, showed in seven
Particulars, 77, to 80 2. What meant by Christ's Voice, showed in 4 respects.
1. The Voice of his Word. 2. Of his Spirit. 3. Of his Doctrine. 4. Of his Rod,
80 The Nature of the Voice of Christ's Spirit, opened in eight Particulars, 81,
82, 83 3. The chief Essentials of Christianity, what; showed in seven
Particulars, 85, 86

Second Sermon. 1. How Christ's Sheep hear his Voice, showed in nine
Particulars, 87, 88, 89 2. Why False Teachers are called Strangers, showed in
five Particulars, Page 90 3. The Application, 91 Distinct Persons in the
Godhead, proved by five Arguments. Christ God and Man, 92, 93
Third Sermon. 1. In what respect Christ knows his Sheep, showed in five
respects, 98, 99 2. What a kind of Knowledge the Knowledge of Christ is, showed
in ten Particulars, 100, 101 All further opened, in 13 Parts, 101, 102 3. The
Application, 104, 105
Fourth Sermon. 1. The Characters of Christ's Sheep, showed in 15 Particulars,
107, to 11^ 2. Christ's Sheep do follow him, how; in 8 Parts. 3. Christ's Sheep
have his Mark, 118 4. They follow the Footsteps of the Flock* 119 The
Application, 121
Fifth Sermon. 1. What kind of Shepherd Christ is, 122, to 130 2. What Pastures
Christ feeds his Sheep in, 130 1. The Word, 130 2. The Ordinances, 131 3. The
Promises, 135 4. His Providence, 136
3. What the Nature of Spiritual Food is, showed in seven Particulars, 137 4.
The Application, 139, 140
Sixth Sermon. I give them Eternal Life, etc. 1. The Text further opened, 141
2. How Believers are in Christ's Hand, in seven Particulars, 142 3. What being
in Christ's Hand denotes, showed (...) three Particulars, 142, 143 4. What
meant by Eternal Life. A threefold Life of Man, 143 5. How Christ is our Life,
in four respects, 144 6. Man naturally dead opened, and Free Will detected,
144, 146, 147 7. Salvation or Eternal Life wholly of Grace, proved, 147, to 152
8. Why Salvation is wholly of Grace, 152, 153, 154 9. Why Christ will give
Eternal Life to his (...), showed in seven Parts, 155, 156 10. The Application.
Seventh Sermon. Third Doctrine raised, viz. None of Christ's Sheep can so fall
away, as to perish eternally. 1. Something first premised before the Doctrine
is proved. 2. Believers may fall foully, how far, showed, page 162, 163 3. The
Causes of the Saints falling opened, 164, -- 169 4. The Doctrine confirmed,
That the Saints cannot fall finally. First Argument taken from Election, 169 1.
The Doctrine of Personal Election proved, 170, 171, 172, 173 2. The Objection,
I am not elected, a ninefold Answer, 175, 176

Eighth Sermon. 1. How Election tends to prove the Saints final Perseverance,
showed in seven Particulars, from 177, to 183 Second Argument to prove the
Saints final Perseverance, taken from the Nature of the Love of God the Father,
in four Particulars, 184 3. Sin cannot separate a Believer from God's eternal
Love demonstrated, and many Objections answered, from 185, to 190 4. From what
Principle Believers do oppose and resist Sin, showed in 10 Particulars, 191,
192, 193

Ninth Sermon. Third Argument to prove the Saints final Perseverance, taken
from the Nature of Christ's Love, 193 1. What kind of Love Christ's Love is,
showed in many Particulars, 193, 194, 195 Application. The excellent Nature of
the Knowledge of Christ's Love, 200, 201, 202 Fourth Argument to prove the
Saints final Perseverance; 1. Taken from the Nature of the Covenant of Grace.
2. Which is opened in ten Particulars, from 202, to 210. 3. This general
Argument summed up, 210, 211
Tenth Sermon. Fifth Argument to prove the Saints final Perseverance, taken
from their bring the Children of God, demonstrated in seven Particulars, 212,
213, 214, 215 How they that are born again cannot sin, showed in six
Particulars, 216, 217 The general Argument summed up, page 218, 219 The
Application, 220
Eleventh Sermon. Sixth Argument to prove the Saints final Perseverance, taken
from their Union with Christ, 221 The Nature of that Mystical Union opened, in
five or six Particulars, 222 -- 229 Ten Arguments taken from thence, 230, 231
The Application.
Twelfth Sermon. Seventh Argment to prove the Saints final Perseverance, taken
from the Death of Christ, 235 Christ died not only for the good of his Elect,
but also in their stead, proved by nine Arguments, 236 -- 248 Four Arguments
further from thence, 241, 242, 243 Arminian Errors about universal Redemption
confuted by 19. or 20 Arguments, 249, to 256
Thirteenth Sermon. Eighth Argument to prove the Saints final Perseverance,
taken from the Effects of Christ's Death, 257 What the Effects of Christ's
Death are, largely opened, 257, to 266 The Application, 267, 268
Fourteenth Sermon. Ninth Argument to prove the Saints final Perseverance,
taken from their being in the Father's Hand, 269 What is meant by the Father's
Hand, showed in three Particulars, 270, 271 2. From their being in Christ's
Hand, what it imports, or meant thereby, 274, 275, 276, 278, 279 In what
respects the Saints are said to be in Christ's Hand, opened in thirteen
Particulars, 280, 281, 282, 283 The general Argument summed up, 284
Fifteenth Sermon. Tenth Argument to prove the Saints final Perseverance, taken
from the nature of true Grace. What a Principle of trut Grace is, showed in six
Particulars, 287, 288, 289 Weak Grace shall be victorious, 290 to 295
Sixteenth Sermon. The grand Objection against final Perseverance answered,
297, 298 1. Christ's Birth matter of Joy to all People, answered, 2. If none
saved but such that are elected, what need any look after Salvation? answered,
3. Doctrine of Election tends to make the Saints loose and remiss in God's
Service, answered, page 299 4. Take beed, watch, etc. answered, 5. Some
Branches in Christ wither and are cut off, answered, 226, 301 6. If Christ died
not for all, how can I know he died for me? answered, 301, 302 7. Work out your
own Salvation with Fear and Trembling; what intended by it, and the Objection
from thence answered, 302, 303, 304 8. If you abide in me, answered, 9. Some
have made Shipwreck of Faith, etc. answered, 306 10. A righteous Man may turn
from his Righteousness, answered, 307 11. God would have all Men be saved, etc.
answered. 12. What need preaching, etc. if all are absolutely elected to
Salvation, that shall be saved? answered, 309 13. Those in every Nation that
(...) are accepted of him; answered, 383, 384 Absurdities attending the
Doctrine of the final Apostasy of true Believers, opened in twelve Particulars,
313. The Application, 315, to 318

Third Text, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. 1. This Scripture mistaken by the ancient
Fathers, 319 2. The Text opened, with the Connection of what precedes and
succeeds, Doct. 1. The severest Doctrine useful to Professors that are
slothful, or dull of hearing, 321 2. What those Persons Seize were, and
what not, 322, 323 They were not true Believers, 323, 324 Doct. 2. It is a high
Privilege for Men to be enlightened with the Knowledge of the Gospel. 3. What
common and saving Illuminations of the Spirit are, and how they differ, 325, to
331
Second Sermon. What is meant by the Heavenly Gift, 332 What by tasting the
Heavenly Gift, 333, 334 How said to partake of the Holy Ghost, 334 And tasted
of the good Word of God, 335 1. What is meant by the Word of God, 335 2. Why
called the good Word of God, showed in eight Particulars, 336 What a kind of
Taste an unsound Christian may have of the Word of God, 337, 338 What a kind of
Taste Believers have of God's Word, page 340, 341 What is meant by the World to
come, 343 The Nature of the World to come, 346 The Riches, Honor, Joy and
Pleasures of the World to come, 349, 350, 351, 352
Third Sermon. What meant by the Powers of the World to come, 354 What a kind
of Taste the Persons in the Text were said to have of the Powers of the World
to come, showed in six Particlars, 355, 356, 357, 358 What is spoken concerning
those Persons, viz. They may fall away, How it is impossible to renew such unto
Repentance, how not impossible, 359, 360 Why it is impossible, etc. 360 What
the Sin against the Holy Ghost is, 361, 362, 363 The Application, 364

The fourth and last Text, Heb. 2. 3. 1. The scope of the Text opened, 368 2.
The Terms and Parts explained, 369 Doct. 1. That the Salvation of the Gospel is
great and glorious. Doct. 2. That the Means of this Salvation may be neglected.
Doct. 3. That such who neglect this Salvation cannot escape, 369 Doct. 1. Two
things proposed to be done. 1. To prove the Proposition, That Gospel-Salvation
is great, etc. 2. To improve it by way of Application. Arg. 1. Salvation great
comparatively, 369, 370 Arg. 2. Salvation great positively, Great and glorious
in respect of the time when found out and promised, 370, 371 Arg. 3. Great in
respect of that great Counsel held in Eternity between the Father and Son about
it, 371 Arg. 4. Great in respect of the Design of God therein, which is
threefold: 1. His own Glory. 2. The Ruin of Satan and his Kingdom. 3. The
Eternal Happiness of Man, or of all that believe. Arg. 5. Great considering how
low Man was fallen, and the seasonableness of it.
Second Sermon. Arg. 6. Salvation is great considering the Persons that brought
it about, or do (...) it, viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy (...) What
part of Gospel-Salvation may (...) rectly attributed to God the Father, (...)
seven Particulars, (...) 79 What part Christ has in it, page 379, 380 Christ a
great and Almighty Savior, showed in many Particulars, 381, 382 What part the
Holy Ghost has in working out our Salvation, 382, 383
Third Sermon. Arg. 7. Gospel-Salvation great, considering what we are
delivered from. 1. Sin that has corrupted our Nature. 2. From that which is
destructive to our Nature, which is Punishment, both here and hereafter. 1. The
Evil of Sin opened, in six Partic. 391, 392 2. The nature of that Punishment we
are delivered from, 393, 394, 395 Arg. 8. Gospel-Salvation great, considering
what Christ has done and suffered to effect it, opened in five Particulars,
397, 398, 399
Fourth Sermon. Arg. 9. Salvation great, considering the Subjects redeemed. 1.
The Soul of Man. 2. The Body, 400 The Soul of Man exceeding precious, proved by
eleven Arguments, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405 The Soul Immortal, proved by seven
Arguments, 406, 407. The Application, 408, 409 Ministers and Parents have a
great Charge committed to them, the Charge of Souls, 410, 411 False Teachers
much to answer for, that deceive Souls.
Fifth Sermon. Arg. 10. Gospel-Salvation great, considering what Believers are
thereby raised up unto, or the Privileges invested with, showed in many
Particulars, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419 The Application. Object. I
cannot rise to a full Persuasion that Christ is mine, answered. Such a full
Persuasion appertaining not to the Being of true justifying. Faith, but is a
high degree of it, 420
Sixth Sermon. Arg. 11. Gospel-Salvation great and glorious, because a full,
complete, comprehensive Salvation, 421. It has all things in it that either
Sinners or Saints do need, proved at large, 422, to 428
Seventh Sermon. Arg. 12. Salvation great in respect of Christ himself, the
first and great Minister thereof, 429 When Christ first began to preach this
Salvation, 431 Arg. 13. Gospel-Salvation great considering its wonderful
Confirmation, page 432, 433 Arg. 14. Gospel-Salvation great, because the holy
Angels pry into it, and are amazed at it, 433, 434 Arg. 15. Salvation great,
because so free a Salvation, 434, 435 Arg. 16. Salvation great, because it is
eternal, 435
Eighth Sermon. Doct. 2. opened, Gospel-Salvation may be neglected. Four things
proposed, 436 1. What meant by neglecting it, 436 2. Who may be said to neglect
this Salvation opened in eighteen Particulars, 436, to 443
Ninth Sermon. 3. From whence it is Men neglect this Salvation, largely opened,
443, 444, 445, 446, 447 The Application, 451, 452
Tenth Sermon. 4. The great Evil and Sin of (...) of the Gospel opened, 453 1.
In respect of God the Father, 453 2. In respect had to Christ, 457, 458, 459 3.
In respect had (...) holy Spirit, 461, 462

Eleventh Sermon. What a great Sin it is to neglect Gospel-Salvation opened in
respect of the Sinner himself, 464, etc.
Twelfth Sermon. 1. What those cannot escape that neglect Gospel-Salvation, 471
1. Not escape the Curse of the Law, 471, 472 2. The Guilt and Punishment of
Sin. 3. The Wrath of God. 4. The Damnation of Hell.
2. The Cause and Reasons why they cannot escape, showed in nine Particulars,
475
Thirteenth Sermon. 1. When, or at what time they shall not escape, showed in
four respects, 477 2. The nature of that Wrath showed in nine Particulars,
which they cannot escape, 480, 481, 482
Fourteenth Sermon. 1. Why the Gospel is attended with such Threats, 483, 484,
485, 486 2. What Sinners shall not escape, 487, 488
Fifteenth Sermon. 1. What is not a Legal Doctrine, 489, 490 2. What is a Legal
Doctrine, 490, 491.


A TRUMPET Blown in ZION, OR AN ALLARM IN God's Holy Mountain: CONTAINING An
Exposition of that Metaphorical Scripture MATTHEW. III. 12.

Lately delivered in Two Sermons, and now Published to awaken the Drowsy and
Formal Professors of this Age.

Wherein the Nature of God's Wrath both Internal and Eternal is discovered, as
seizing upon the Chaff, and Burning of it up with Unquenchable Fire.

Together with an Account how Professors may know whether they are Wheat or
Chaff.

By BENJAMIN KEACH, Pastor of a Congregation at Horsly-down, Southwark.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

A Trumpet blown in Zion, OR An Allarum in God's Holy Mountain: Containing an
EXPOSITION of that Metaphorical Scripture MATTHEW. III. 12. Lately delivered in
Two Sermons, and now Published as an Allarm to the Drousie and Chaffie
Professors of this Age.
MATTHEW. III. 12. Whose Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
floor, and gather the Wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn up with
unquenchable fire.
Sermon 1. Preached Feb. 5. 1693.
OUr Text is Metaphorical, and as touching the main Scope and Coherence of it,
it is one and the same with the 10 th. verse of this Chapter, which I have
already spoken unto, and lately published the Sermons unto the World.

John the Baptist endeavors to take off the Jews from their pretended
Privileges, of having Abraham to their Father, or their being his natural
Seed, or Offspring; and as so considered in Covenant with God, and thought
their State and Condition good: Which he strove to convince them was a mistake,
and this he does by that Tropical Expression in ver. 10. Now also is the Ax
laid to the root of the Trees. And in this 12 th. verse, Whose Fan is in his
hand, etc. As if he should say, You shall e're long see your selves deceived,
for all your great confidence in the flesh, touching your external, federal,
relative holiness, and legal privileges: For Christ with his Ax will now
quickly cut you down: And with his Fan, fan you away as Chaff, if you have no
better right to Church Membership on Earth, and to the glory in Heaven, than
that which is derived to you from the account whereof you boast, viz. Having
Abraham to your Father. So much only shall now serve as to the Scope and
Coherence of the Words. 1. I shall proceed to give you the parts of the Text.
2. Open the Terms thereof. 3. Note two or three points of Doctrine therefrom.
4. Apply the whole.


1. As to the parts, you have, Parts opened.
First, The person speaking, and that is John the Baptist. Secondly, The person
spoken of, and that is Jesus Christ. Thirdly, The Predicate, or what is spoken
of Christ, i. e. Whose Fan is in his hand, etc.


John the Baptist was a great Prophet, yea the greatest Prophet Luke 7. 28.
that was born of Women, having greater Light and Knowledge of the Messiah than
any of them that went before him, in that he could tell them this is he: He was
sent to prepare the way of the Lord, as his great Messenger or Harbinger. He
therefore was well instructed into the Nature and Excellency of his Masters
Kingdom; which was suddenly to be set up, upon the removalof the old Jewish
Church, and Church Membership; Mal. 3. 1, 2.
this John was he that the Prophet Malachi spoke of, that God would send as his
Messenger, to prepare the way of the Lord, as also how he would do this, even
by a spirit of Burning: that should consume that People, and leave them neither
Root nor Branch, i. e. burn up all their hopes in respect of their Root, viz.
That external Covenant God made with Abraham; on which they stood, and of which
they boasted; as also all that confidence they had in their own good works, and
inherent Righteorsness: And this John's Ministry clearly held forth, and
thereby discovered the grand Effect and glorious Design or Christ's Doctrine,
and Nature of his spiritual Kingdom, which was near at hand.

Secondly, As touching Jesus Christ, who is the person John speaks of. I shall
not now treat of his Office, Power, Dignity, and Glory, which are more fully
hinted at in the Context: Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost and with Fire. v. 11.

But I shall pass by that, and shall explain the Terms. 1. Show you what is
intended by Christ's Floor. 2. What is intended by the Fan in his hand, by which
he does purge his Floor. 3. What is meant by the Chaff, and why so called. 4.
What is intended by the Wheat, and why so called. 5. What we are to understand
by Christ's Garner, and gathering the Wheat into it. 6. And lastly, what is
intended by the Fire, and by Burning up the Chaff.


Terms opened.
First, I said before our Text is Metaphorical, therefore no doubt by floor the
holy Ghost alludes to that which in common acception is well understood by
Husbandmen, i. e. A floor is a heap of Corn, that is threshed out of the Straw,
and laid in a Barn, Wheat and Chaff together; this usually is called a floor.

Quest. But what is intended or meant by it here? what is Christ's floor, which
he is said to purge?

Answ. What meant by Floor.
I answer, By floor is doubtless intended hereby more directly and immediately
the Jewish Church, but in a more remote and comprehensive sense, any spiritual
community of Christians, Church, or body of People, professing religion.

1. The Jews were then Gods floor (or Gods People) as God himself is called an
Husbandman, and they were a great Heap, John 15. 1.
a mighty floor: But almost all Chaff; very Lees, i. e. loose, vain, empty,
carnal, and unbelieving Men and Women. A more profane and ungodly generation
was hardly ever in the world; and but a very few godly ones among them, but a
very little wheat, viz. few sincere ones, or believing persons in all that
floor, who waited for Christ's Coming, and did when he came, in truth receive
him.

But now the Lord Jesus was come, with his Fan in his hand, to separate the
Wheat from the Chaff, and not let them remain any longer together on that
floor, in that old Barn, i. e. in the Legal Jewish Church state, according to
the external Covenant of peculiarity God made with Abraham, and his natural
Seed as such: Which had stood near its full period of time perfixed by the
Almighty, but now must be pulled down, Jesus Christ being come, and just a
going to build a new spiritual Garner, or Gospel Church, to put all his choice
Grain or Wheat into, viz. all believing and true penitent persons; this
primarily I am satisfied is intended by floor: For the Jewish Church was not to
abide or continue any longer than till the Death and Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, it being a Typical Church, when the Antytype was come that must needs
vanish away.

2. Yet in a remote sense, floor may refer to any Spiritual Community, Church,
or people, in the times of the Gospel; professing themselves to be Christians:
Among which may be Chaff as well as Wheat: Evil and ungodly Persons, as well as
Believers, gracious and true Religious ones; and the truth is, there is more
than one floor of this sort in our days. For,

National floor opened.
First, If we cast our eyes abroad, we shall soon espy a very great, old and
decayed Barn, that has a mighty floor or heap of People in it; called
Christians, and Reformed ones too; But it is to be feared, when Jesus Christ
comes with his Fan, to fan, and purge this floor, he will find it almost all
Chaff: 'Tho' I doubt not, but in this great heap there will be found some
Wheat, or godly Christians, but like as when a man comes into a Barn, and views
a floor of Corn newly thrashed, he at first sight can hardly see or discern any
thing save a heap of chaff: so it is here: Do but view the National floor, and
you cannot but say, Sure it is a heap of filth, a heap of Chaff; for what an
evil, polluted, and abominable Company; of People are in this floor! are there
worse, or more notorious, more loose, light, profane, unbelieving and ungodly
Wretches living on the face of the Earth? yet call themselves Christians, and
members of Christ, and despise, nay reproach others, as if they deserved not
that Name. I question whether there were worse in Sodom than some are who
belong to this floor: Turks and Pagans abominate some of those actions and
deeds of Darkness that are among them, behold their hellish Debauchery.

1. See what a heap of profane Swearers and cursed Blasphemers are here, who
daily belch out most abominable Oaths, calling upon the holy and patient God to
Damn them every day: you may hear them as you walk along the streets; nay their
very Children by the Example of their wicked Parents, learn to swear and curse,
as soon as, nay before, they can speak plain.

2. Then, O what a great and a filthy heap of beastly and brutish Drunkards are
in this floor also, who show their Sins as Sodom, and hide it not! many of them
go reeling along the Streets, and some spuing as they go, foaming out their own
shame, and little think what Poison they drink to their own precious and
Immortal Souls, whilst they Tipple down their glasses of Wine and strong
Drink; and this they do without all fear of humane, or divine Laws, having no
dread of present nor future Punishment; though God positively theatens them, and
all other ungodly Persons, with the loss of Heaven, and the Torments of
Hellfire (for, no drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.)
yet they dread it not.

3. Behold also in this floor a third Sort, even as bad or worse than the other
two, viz. Unclean Persons, or vile, filthy and impudent Whores and
Whoremongers, who are the shame of this City and Nation! What a multitude of
common Harlots are here among us, besides Secret ones, who are beheld by him
whose eyes are like a flaming fire. Alas! they cannot hide their filthiness
from his eyes, yet without fear how do they sin, 'till some bring Rottenness on
their Carcasses, a Curse upon their Estates, Poverty on their Families, and
Hell upon their own Souls: for he that commits Adultery with a Woman destroys
his own Soul. Pro. 6. 32.


4. There is also another part of this floor, that are Chaff, which the fire of
Gods wrath will Consume and burn up, viz. all the proud and haughty ones. This
Sin reigns at this time to such a degree that we may fear some sad and fearful
Judgment is near; Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty Spirit before ^
fall. Behold the strange Dresses, and high Heads! which clearly Pro. 16. 13.
represents the Vanity and Haughtiness of the Heart: The show of their
Countenance testifies against them: Women go to the Assemblies of religious
Worshp as if they went to Play Houses; and though God has showed in several poor
Animals, his great Wrath and displeasure against this filthy Fashon, or high
and shameful Head-dresses, yet they will not reform, nor leave them off: Nor is
this sin only found among those of this floor, this heap, but also amongst
others, who would be thought more pure, and of a siner sort: but let them know,
the Fanner will suddenly come with his Fan in his hand; the day comes shall
burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do evil, shall be stubble,
etc. Mat. 4. 1.


5. What a cursed heap is there also of Atheists, and Graceless Wretches, who
contemn God and all Supernatural Revelation of the Divine Being, and Religion!
these despise and ridicule the holy Gospel, or at best will acknowledge no
other Worship nor Religion, than what the old Heathens owned, and were taught
by the Light of Nature: The preaching of the Cross, or of 1 Cor. 1. 18.
a Crucified Christ, is to these foolishness; others that cannot believe, nor
will receive that Doctrine that comports not with their own carnal reason: What
believe they can be justified by the Righteousness and Obedience of another!
and their own Inherent Righteousness no part of their Justification before God!
This is a strange Doctrine. For there are of this sort in this heap, such as
are grievously corrupted, and erroneous, carried away with Arminianism,
Socinianism and Antitrinitaism, and disallow of the chief Cornerstone God has
laid in Sion: For if Christ be not the most high God, God by Nature, Coequal
and Coeternal with the Father, and one in Essence, it is Idolatry to yield
divine Worship and homage to him; for that glory Isa. 42. 8.
God will not give unto another. The gods that have not made the Heaven and the
Earth, even they shall perish. Jer. 10. 11.


6. What abundance of carnal Worldlings, covetous and Earthly-minded Wretches
are there also, whose gain is their Godliness, who value no Religion, but what
suits with their filthy Lusts! some of these set up for Preachers, merely for
their Earthly gain, and make a Trade of it, living profane and ungodly Lives,
being Guilty almost of all manner of gross and abominable Sins, preferring
humane Rites and Ceremonies above Christ's Institutions, and a Form of Godliness
above the Power of it.

7. Besides, what a heap have we among us, of Traitorous, blind and deceitful
Persons, who seek to betray the Protestant Interest, and all our Civil and
Religious Liberties, into the hands of the common Enemy; who neither Fear God,
nor Honor the King! As also what a multitude of Thieves, High-waymen,
House-breakers, and bloody Villains, skulk and hide themselves in this heap!
The very mentioning of these things is enough to grieve and wound our very
Souls, considering how good and gracious God has been to us in this Land; and
what a Nation this has been, and what Wonders the Almighty has formerly and
of late times wrought for us, I mean for the Land in general. May we not fear
that the Fanner will come with his Fan, and sever the Chaff in his direful
Indignation from the Wheat, and let the Fire of his Anger seize upon it and
burn it up? what can we expect but some amazing and fearful Judgments from the
Lord, unless a National Repentance and Reformation, like that of Nineveh, does
speedily prevent it?

Secondly, There is another Heap, that may be called Christ's floor, though not so
big as the former, and though they seem to be more refined -- yet if we consider
them all together (for they are too much divided amongst themselves) what
abundance of Chaff is there here also! Are there not many amongst these as bad
as others, viz. People of ill and corrupt principles, bitter and censorious
Spirits, and of scandalous lives: What Malice, Envy and Hatred, do they
discover one against another, because of their differing Sentiments in and
about some principles of Religion, rendering their Brethren odious to the
World, Backbiting, Reproaching and Scandalizing each other, to the great
dishonor of God, and shame of their sacred profession? one while charging and
condemning the Innocent, and yet acknowldege not their Evil; and at another
time striving to vindicate and clear such as are greatly guilty before God?
both which are abominable and hateful in his sight, who will judge righteously,
and render to every man at last according to his Works.

Certainly there is sarcely a worse Sin than the Sin of Backbiting; he that
hates his Brother (Robbing him of his good Name out of Malice and Envy) is a
Murderer, and no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3. 17.
such who are destitute of Christian Love and Charity, or hate their Brethren,
clearly show they act contrary to the divine Principle of Grace, nay of
Morality, and so are void of that sacred Life, Nature, and Image of God. For as
love to the Brethren is an Evidence of our being the Children of God, so he
that is possessed with Wrath, Envy, Malice, and Hatred, shows he is one of the
Children of the wicked one, who is called the Accuser of the Brethren. Clear it
is that this is a Diabolical Sin, and renders such in whom it is found, like to
the Devil. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the
Devil; Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves
not his Brother. 1 John 3. 10.


Nay this great evil and wickedness is a sad sign that such are given up and
left of God, as not retaining God in their knowledge, as the Apostle speaks of
the Gentiles, who when they arrived to some degree of knowledge of God, yet did
not glorify him as God; but violated his Law written in their Hearts:
Therefore it is said, that God gave them up to vile Affections, and they were
filled with all Unrighteousness, Romans 1. 28. 29.
Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, full of Envy, Murder,
Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whisperers, Backbiters, Despiteful, Proud, Boasters,
etc. No doubt but that the Sin of Backbiting, Wrath, Malice, and Envy is as
bad, if not worse, than Fornication, Swearing or Drunkenness; and lamentable it
is to see this Sin, found among some who account themselves no small persons
for Knowledge, Zeal and Piety in these days. But alas! alas! how sad and
deplorable is their Condition, and vain that profession they make of Religion!
let them repent of this their great wickedness, and get a changed heart.
Moreover, are there not in this floor others who are proud, earthly, carnal and
covetous Persons? they are called Nonconformists, but it is not so far as they
ought from the Sins and Pollutions of this World, they conform to them in their
detestable fashions and covetous practices: Do not many of them appear to love
Sons and Daughters more than Christ or his sinking Interest? they can lay out
plentifully to feed and cloth their own Children, whilst their bowels are shut
up against the poor Members of Christ or Children of God; they will spare more to
gratify the Pride and base Lusts of their Children, than they will spare to
supply the necessities of the poor Saints, or to support the Interest of Christ
and his Gospel: Many pounds shall go for the first use, when a Shilling is
thought a great deal with some of them for the second; they think nothing too
much to enrich and uphold their own Families, whilst the Family of God suffers
want, and the Cause of Christ languishes in their hands. O how little does the
power of Grace and true Godliness shine amongst this sort! what formality and
lukewarmness is there in these days, amongst such who are called Saints and
holy Brethren! This, it is true, may be called Chirists Floor especially, but
abundance of Chaff, no doubt will be found in it, when the Fanner comes to fan
it. Look to it you Sinners in Sion: Fearfulness will e're long surprise the
Hipocrite. Who among us shall dwell with devouring Fire? who amongst us shall
dwell with Everlasting Burning? Isa. 33.

But so much as to what is meant by Christ's Floor.

Quest. 2. What is intended by the Fan?

Answ. A Fan is a certain Instrument which the Husbandman uses to cleanse, or
purge his Corn from the Chaff, evil Seeds, and all silth whatsoever: And this
Instrument he holds in his hands, and uses upon his Knees, by which he tosses
up the Wheat and Chaff together: And then shakes it to and fro, moving all at
once, by which a wind is made, and the Chaff is blown away, and the Wheat
separated and purged from it: Now John Baptist alludes to such an Instrument as
this.

Quest. But what is meant by Christ's Fan in a spiritual sense? what is
signified hereby?

What is meant by Christ's Fan.
First, I answer, By Christ's Fan is meant his Word, his holy Gospel, especially
the Doctrine thereof; it is by this he cleanses, and purges his floor. Now you
are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you. ( Now the unclean
person, the Traitor Judas John 15. 3.
is gone out from you:) Through my Word, i. e. through my Doctrine, you believing
in me, and receiving me by Faith for Righteousness and eternal Life. It Is said
Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water by the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. Cleansing here imports the means
by which it is wrought, or the Instrument, namely the Word of the Gospel,
especially the Promise of free Justification and Sanctification by Christ,
received through Faith, which Baptism was a Sign or Symbol of; see 1 Pet. 1. 22.
Seeing ye have purified your selves in obeying the truth through the Spirit, etc.
This was done in subjecting themselves to the Faith of the Gospel, to which the
purifying of the heart is ascribed principally in Act. 15. 9. Annatators.
Justification, whereby the guilt of Sin is purged away, as appertaining to the
conscience; he alludes also to the sanctifying power and virtue of the holy
Spirit. Compare this with Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his
way? that is, the way of his Heart, and also the way of his Life: The answer
is, By taking heed thereto according to thy Word; that is, let him take heed
according to that holy doctrine taught and held forth in God's Word; so that he
attain unto a right knowledge of God, and of the Messiah, promised and typified
by the Sacrifices of Aaron, by whose Blood, and through whose Righteousness only,
Justification is to be had: for without Christ's Blood there is no cleansing
from Sin and silthyness, neither of Heart, nor Life, for young nor old. It is
not only to direct young Men to reform their Lives and Ways according to the
Precepts of God's Word, nor to think by any degree of moral Righteousness or
inherent Holiness they could be cleansed; no, no, but to take heed according to
the mysterious and sublime Doctrine of God's free grace in Christ: Which was
the only way of Salvation, as well under the Law as under the dispensation of
the Gospel. Sirs, this was, and still is, Christ's Fan, namely the glorious
Doctrine of God's Grace through the Redemption that is in Christ's blood; and it
was by this fan Christ cleansed that Jewish floor, to which my Text primarily
refers. For the Jews were his floor, in which was abundance of Chaff; and now
Jesus Christ was come with his fan in his hand, to purge this floor; and
evident it is, his holy Doctrine severed, or separated the Wheat from the
Chaff; and by this means was the Wheat gathered into Christ's Gospel-Garner, and
the Chaff blown away: for as Chaff cannot endure the wind of the fan, so could
not those unbelieving Jews, and hypocritical Pharisees, endure Christ's holy and
heavenly Doctrine. See Joh. 6. 52. to v. 60. How can this Man give us his flesh
to eat? They thought he spoke of a Natural eating of his flesh, as we eat the
flesh of Beasts or Fish: His Doctrine was not understood by them. Then Jesus
said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, ver. 53.

Now the eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood, is no other thing
than the receiving Jesus Christ by Faith for Righteousness and eternal Life:
Believing in Christ, coming to Christ, looking to Christ, leaning, trusting, or
staying on Christ, receiving of Christ, and eating of Christ, imply one and the
same thing: It is our going out of our selves to him, or feeding by faith on
him, or resting, or relying on his Merits, on his Obedience in his Life, and in
his Death, for Justification and eternal Life, without any Works done by us, or
any Righteousness wrought in us, as the Apostle speaks. But to him that Romans 4.
5.
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness.

But this mysterious and sublime Doctrine the Jews could not bear, but it was
such a Fan as fanned them all away that believed not: For they being ignorant
of God's Righteousness, going about to establish their own Righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God. They thought their own
personal Romans 10. 3.
and inherent Righteousness was that by which they must be justified, accepted,
and eternally saved: they had meat of their own to eat; and therefore saw no
need to go to their Neighbors door for it; they were full, and increased in
Goods, and thought they had need of nothing: And hence the Doctrine of
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ alone was rejected by them, it was
not understood by them; that Christ's flesh should be Meat indeed, and his
blood Drink indeed, was a strange Doctrine in their apprehensions; they could
not conceive how such things could be, (as Nicodemus spoke of Regeneration.)
Nor can any Man whatsoever who will receive Joh. 3. 9.
no point of Faith, but what his natural reason can comprehend; and thus this
Doctrine of our Lord Jesus was a Fan in his hand, and it fanned away all the
Chaff of that mighty Jewish floor, even all that received not that Doctrine, or
who believed not in Christ, received not Christ by Faith for righteousness and
eternal life: Nay it was such a Fan that it fanned away some of Christ's
Disciples, (not such who were his Disciples indeed,) but many that followed
him, and who are said to believe on him; they believed he was the true Messiah,
had some kind of faith, though not the Faith of Gods Elect: Many of his Disciples
when they heard this, said, This is a hard saying, Joh. 6. 60.
who can bear it? It seemed hard to them, because they could not comprehend it
by their own carnal reason: From that time many of his Disciples went back, and
walked no more with him. Such a Fan was this Doctrine then, and such a Fan it
is now, Joh. 6. 66.
that it may be said to make a discrimination between the pure Wheat and the
Chaff: for no doubt all that receive not this holy Doctrine (whatever fair show
they make in the flesh) are but Chaff in the sight of God, and will be found
such at the last day. Nor ought they to be suffered to abide in Christ's Garner
on Earth, (as they shall not be gathered into his Garner in Heaven) but be
esteemed as Chaff, or drossy, professors, whatsoever their conversations may
be: (I mean such who eat not Christ's flesh, and drink not his blood, i. e.
wholly feed not upon Christ, rely not alone upon the Merits of a crucified
Christ, or seek not Justification by his Righteousness only, but go about to
bring in their own Works and inherent Holiness with Christ's Merits in point of
Justification in God's sight.) But to proceed: But like as a Husbandman has
more Fans than one, even so also in the

Second place, Jesus Christ has another Fan also, and that is (I doubt not)
likewise intended here: viz. The dispensation of God's Providence; for this was
as a Fan in Christ's hand, by which he fanned away those unbelieving Jews, and
so purged his floor: I mean, the time was now come, that their national, legal
and external Church State must be pulled down and dissolved; the Dispensation
was changed, the Priesthood changed, and right of Church Membership changed;
they having Abraham to their Father, or being the Seed of professing Parents,
would do them no good, nor avail them any thing. Because the Covenant of
Peculiarity God made with him and his natural seed as such, as to the Date of
the Duration thereof, was now run out and expired, the Ax being now laid to the
root of the Tree, ver. 10 th. So that unless they receive Christ, believe in
Christ, and are found gracious persons, fit Wheat for Christ's spiritual Garner,
or Gospel Church (which is built up of lively stones) as Chaff the
Gospel Dispensation like a Fan purges them out; as indeed it did, and blew them
all away: And we are not alone in respect of this great Truth, for many of our
worthy Brethren (who in some things differ from us) assert the same:
particularly, Reverend Mr. Cotton, who speaking of this Text, Mat. 3. 10.
says, "The first is the root of Abraham's Covenant, which this people much
trusted upon, and of that it is which John Baptist speaks, Now is the Ax laid
to the root of the Tree, think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham
to our Father; so that all their confidence that they had in Abraham's
Covenant, Temple and Tabernacle, and such things, are burnt up, and so they
have no Root left them to stand upon, and this is one thing intended by the
Root."

" Secondly, There is (says he) something more in it; the Lord by the power of
his Spirit does cut us off from any power of our natural Gifts and Parts, and
spiritual Gifts also, or from any Confidence of our own sufficiency; the Lord
has cut us off from hope in the Righteousness of our Parents, and from
boasting of Ordinances. And again he says, This we read of, Mat. 4. 1. It is
spoken of the Ministry of John the Baptist, which did burn as an Oven, against
all the Scribes and Pharisees, and left them neither the Root of Abraham's
Covenant, nor the Branch of their own good Works: He cutteth them off from the
Covenant of Abraham, etc. And by cutting them off from the Root, he leaves
them no ground to trust on." Thus Mr. Cotton on The Covenant, p. 177, and p.
21, 22. Now evident it is, that nothing but the dispensation of God's
Providence, or the Expiration of that period of Time determined by the Almighty
for the standing of the Church of Israel, could cut the Jews off as a Nation,
from being a Church and peculiar People unto God; I mean in respect of that
Legal Covenant. I deny not but that the Covenant of Grace God made with
Abraham, and with his true spiritual Seed, stands firm for ever and ever, and
none in that Covenant can be cut off, nor fanned away: for the Jewish
Priesthood, Churchstate and Church Membership, and all their
Church Priviledges, were to remain until Christ came, or until the time of
Reformation; that is, till the Gospel-days and Gospel Dispensation took place,
and no longer: But now that time being come, and they not seeing an end put to
the old Covenant-Church, as it was made with the natural Offspring of Abraham;
and that their right to legal Ordinances, and Church Membership, could not give
them any right to Gospel Ordinances, nor Gospel-Church-membership, and they not
believing in Christ, not accepting of the Terms of the Gospel, were all of
necessity purged out or fanned away, by the Fan of the New
Testament-dispensation, and so were no longer a people in any sense in Covenant
with God.

Thirdly, Christ has also another Fan in his hand, viz. The Fan of
Church Discipline. And many persons falling into sin are purged like Chaff out
of his floor. Hereby,

1. Sometimes some evil and corrupt Persons, who get among God's people (or
into his Church) and pass a while for Wheat, i. e. for gracious Persons, yet in
time God suffers them to fall into one Temptation or another, by which means
they are fanned away, the Holy Jesus by his wise. Providence making a
discovery of them, and their evil Tempers and Dispositions.

2. May be some glorious Truths, or Truth of Jesus Christ, is revealed, or
cleared up to his Church in General, to which several Persons of the same
Congregation may not only want Light in, but may be filled with Prejudice
against, and not only against the Truth, but against the Church or Minister for
seeking to bring it in; and this may rise to such a height, through their Pride
and Stubborness, that they will not abide any longer Members thereof, but
violently rend themselves by Schism, and so are purged out. Though (as it is
observed by an Husbandman) some light Corn, may be good Wheat, may be fanned
out with the Chaff, which he knows how to recover by fanning the Chaff also
afterward. And thus it was with some of those who were called Christ's
Disciples, they could not, would not endure that blessed Truth Christ Joh. 6.
60. 66.
preached to them, of Eating of his Flesh, etc. but cried out, This is a hard
saying, who can bear it? and so went away and walked no more with him. O see
what the Effects of preaching some Truths may be! how many are there who cannot
bear in this day sound Doctrine, but desert his People, and some Truths of
Christ, and seem to shut their eyes against them, caling them Error and false
Doctrine, and what not? And this way God takes (in his wise Providence) to
purge out some rotten Members, which possibly were a repoach to his People: And
although may be some Wheat, may by this means through Satan's Temptations, and
Corruptions of their own hearts, and their great Ignorance, be fanned out with
the Chaff, they being carried away by the Craftiness and Subtilty of such whom
Christ has a mind to sever from the Body; yet he knows how to gather up the
Wheat again, as the Husbandman does.

3. Others, whom Christ would have purged out of his Church, may be suffered to
suck in some evil, corrupt and dangerous Principles, or Errors in Fundamentals,
like that of Hymeneus and Alexander, whose Errors being discovered, were
purged out. 1 Timothy 1. 20.


4. Also others fall into notorious and scandalous Sins, and so are purged out.

5. Some who are Chaff, or unsound Christians, may be suffered to take up undue
offenses against the Church, or Churches to whom they belong, and by giving way
to Temptation, they may become unreconcileable, magnifying their own Wisdom and
Self-conceitedness, and so by a secret hand of God be discovered and purged
out: But it must be considered that the use and exercise of the Keys, or Rules
of Church Discipline, is appointed by Christ, as the proper Fan by which those
sorts of Persons last mentioned, and some others, are to be purged out of the
Church or Congregations of the Saints. Now the Fan of Discipline is twofold.

First, The Act of Excommunication: In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
ye are gathered together, with my Spirit, to deliver such a one unto Satan, for
the Destruction of the Flesh, that 1 Cor. 5. 41.
the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. The Persons, Christ by
this Fan of Discipline purges out, are of three sorts.

1. All gross and scandalous Persons, who are Guilty of any Act or Acts of
Immorality, as Theft, Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Covetousness, Lying,
etc. These being public and reproachful Crimes, the Offender ought sorthwith
(upon clear proof) to be purged out, that the Name of the Lord may not be
exposed to contempt, and his People villified by the ungodly World; and time
given to him for the proof and Trial of the sincerity or Truth of his
Repentance; which in part will be manifested by his Carriage and Behavior
under his Punishment; I mean the Righteous Censure of the Church.

The Second sort that this Fan of Discipline takes hold of, are such that suck
in Heresies or Capital Errors; these after Tit. 3. 10.
the first and second Admonition, ought to be rejected and delivered up to
Satan, that they may not learn to Blaspheme. 1 Timothy 1. 20.


The Third sort are such who refuse to hear the Church after their case (in
which they have offended) is regularly brought in against them according to the
Rule contained in Matthew; Matthew. 18. 17.
the offense at first may be against one brother, and the offended party is
first to tell him his fault between himself and his Brother or Sister that has
offended him alone: Whom if he can bring to see and acknowledge his evil, it is
to proceed no further; but if he cannot, then he is obliged by the holy Law of
Christ to take one or two more, and go to him, and strive to convince him, and
bring him to a sight and sense of his iniquity; but if he cannot do it, then it
ought to be brought unto the Church, and if he will not hear the Church, then
the Fan of Excommunication is to be used in the Name of Jesus Christ, and they
purged out.

As to such who rend themselves from a Church, or violate their sacred Covenant
by irregularly withdrawing themselves, they ought to be marked, and solemnly in
the public Congregation Romans 6. 17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. Matthew. 18.
declared to have withdrawn, rent, and cut off themselves from the Communion of
the Church, and no longer to be owned nor looked upon as Members, and none to
Communicate with them until they have given satisfaction by Repentance.

The Second part of the Fan of Discipline is that rule laid down by the
Apostle, of withdrawing from every Brother and Sister that walks disorderly;
as such that are Busibodies, Tatlers, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Matthew. 18. 17.
or Idle; or such that neglect their Duties in attending on the Church in times
of solemn Worship, or that make Parties, or cause Division in the Church, and
refuse to live in Obedience to Christ, under the due and just Government
thereof, or to obey them that are set over them in the Lord, or who strive to
have the prehemience, like Diotrophes, being Vainglorious, prating against, or
despising of Dignities, or the just Authority of Christ's Ministers, or Angels
of his Churches, as the beloved Apostle speaks, 3 John 9, 10. Wherefore if I
come, I will Remember his deeds which he does, prating against us with
malicious Words, and not content therewith, neither does he himself receive the
Brethren, and forbideth them that would, and casts them out of the Church.
These are to be marked and withdrawn from, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Not to be counted as
Enemies, but exhorted as Brethren: Unless they provoke the Church to further
and a more severe Censure. Some of this sort oft-times strive to draw away
disciples after them, and seek to disquiet the Peace of the Church, and in a
fawning and flattering manner to deceive the hearts of the Simple; therefore
these, if they will not hear the Church, are to be quite fanned out also by
Excommunication, and to be looked upon as an Heathen-man or Publican, as in the
Case of Notorious and Scandalous Sinners, or such who are guilty of Heresy.
Mat. 18.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ has also another Fan in his hand to purge his floor, or
cleanse his Wheat from the Chaff, filth and defilement of Sin, namely, the Holy
Spirit; and by this means he cleanses and Purifies in a gracious manner the
Souls of his own People: Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
and by the Spirit of our God. What filthy Creatures were those Corinthians,
before the Lord Jesus by his Spirit had purged and Sanctified them.

Faith, of the the Operation of God, is a most excellent Grace; it is by Faith
in the Blood of Christ that we come to be purged from the Guilt of Sin; Faith
applying his Merits and Righteousness unto the Soul in Justification; and such
is the Nature thereof, that it makes holy the Hearts and Lives of all such
Persons in whom it is by the Spirit wrought or infused in Sanctification: And
has put no difference between them and us, Purifying their hearts by Faith.
Yea, it cleanses them Acts 15. 9.
from all filthyness of Flesh and Spirit, that they may perfect Holiness in the
fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.


But let me tell you that the Spirit and Grace of Christ in this respect is as
a Fan, rather to Cleanse the Saints, by purging out the Chaff of Corruption,
which naturally is in their Hearts and Lives, than to purge Hypocrites and
gross Professors out of the Church, and to that I Principally referr here.

6. Moreover Christ has the Fan of Persecution, or the Sufferings of the
Cross, and all other afflictions which he brings upon his People, which he uses
to purge and purify their Souls, and his Churches too.

And from hence Afflictions are compaired to a Refiners fire: He shall set as a
Refiners fire, and Purifier of Silver: He, that is the Messiah, i. e. our Lord
Jesus Christ; this is his Mat. 3. 3.
Work, viz. to purge his People, who in this Place are compared to Silver and
Gold that is refined: As in my Text they are likened unto Wheat, in this he is
compared to a Refiner, and has his Furnace; in the other to an Husbandman, and
so has his Fan. Both these Texts allude to the same thing, and doing the same
work, namely, to sever and separate the clean from the unclean, the Gold from
the Dross, the Chaff from the Wheat. And evident it is, that Persecution,
Trials and Afflictions, commonly make a great discovery who are Wheat or pure
Gold, viz. Sincere Believers; and who drossy and chaffy Professors. If Wheat,
Persecution purges and purified them: But if they are Chaff, it usually fans
them away. But he that received the seed in stony places, the same is he which
hears the Word, and anon with joy reciveth it: Yet has he not root in
himself, but endures for a while; for when Tribulation or Persecution arises,
because Mat. 13. 20. 21.
of the Word, by and by he is offended. Thus the fan of Persecution purges
these Chaffy Professors out of Christ's Spiritual floor, or rather his garner:
Namely, his Church, into which in a day of Liberty they got, and had a place;
but they cannot bear the Wind and blast of Affliction and Tribulation: And as
it purges out much Chaff, so also the Wheat is thereby refined and made more
clean and fit for the Lords use. Of so great benefit is Persecution to Gods
Church, that they cannot some times be without it; it is if need be that we are
in heaviness; if we need it not, or if Christ sees there is no need of it, we
shall never feel the Rod: He does it Heb. 12. 10.
not for his pleasure, but for our profit, that we might partake of his
Holiness. And this Jehovah by the Prophet further makes known to us: This is
the fruit of all, the taking away your Isa. 27. 9.
Sin. And thus the Lord purges away the filth of the Daughter of Sion, and the
Blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the Spirit of Judgment and by the
Spirit of burning. The Rod of Affliction, or Furnace of Persecution, cannot
purge out the Isa. 4. 4.
filth of Sin that is in the Lords People, without the operations of the Holy
Spirit: The Spirit is called a Spirit of burning, because like fire it burns up
and consumes the Filth, Chaff and Dross that is in us: Before Trials and
Persecution comes, Christ seems to have a very great floor, a great heap, or
much Corn; but when he comes to try them with this fan in his hand, one great
part thereof is found mere Chaff, and the wind drives it away. So much shall
suffice as to the Fan in Christ's hand by which he purges his Floor.

Quest. Thirdly what is meant by the Chaff?

Answ. I answer the Chaff may be understood to be two fold.

1. Men and Women who get into Gods Church, or among his People, but are not
Wheat, but vile Hypocrites, pretending to be that which in truth they are not;
thus all that are of Israel are not Israel. Though they bore his Name, were
called Jews, called Saints, yet were unsound at heart, and graceless Romans 9. 6.
Souls, or mere Chaff in Gods sight.

2. By Chaff may also be intended Sin, or that Filth and Corruption which
cleaves oft-times to the best of Gods People, which Christ must and will purge
out.

Quest. Why are Hypocrites or ungodly Persons in the Church compared to Chaff?
and how may they be known?

Answ. I answer, Hypocrites and ungodly men in the Church are compared to Chaff;

1. Because Chaff before it is separated from the wheat, cleaves close to it,
and it is hard to sever it from the wheat, and it also seems like unto it: Even
so some carnal and hypocritical Professors cleave to the Church, and seem to
love and embrace the Godly in their Arms, and to lay them in their hearts; they
walk in Company, nay in outward Fellowship and Church Communion with them; they
Pray, and Break-bread with them, as if they were really gracious, and are not
known to their Brethren to be otherwise: And as it is hard to discern them from
the Godly, so it is as hard to separate such from them. Chaff is so much like to
the Wheat, that some have taken it at first view to be Wheat; so are these
taken to be Saints, and there may be no severing them from the Congregation of
the Lord, till Christ comes with his Fan to purge his floor.

2. They may be compared to Chaff, in regard of the great pains that is, and
must be used to separate it from the Wheat: The wheat must be threshed and
fanned, nay fanned again and again, before all the Chaff can be severed from
it. So unsound Professors or some Hypocrites in the Church, seem to cleave so
close to the Godly, and are in such seeming union and and oneness with them,
that the Lord sees there is no other way to sever them from each other, but by
threshing his wheat with the flail of Persecution, and then the chaff flies
away by the wind of this fan. O what a multitude seemed to cleave to our
blessed Savior, and to be his Disciples, in a day of peace and prosperity,
when he was riding in Triumph to Jerusalem, Crying out, Hosanna, blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord! but when our Savior came to the Cross,
how did they Mat. 21. 29.
leave him, and disown him, nay, may be cried out Crucify, Crucifice him: So
and in like manner in our former days of Joh. 12. 13.
Liberty, what great numbers flocked to our Assemblies, and made a profession
of Religion; but when that hot persecution arose, how did they fall off, and
disown that People which once they seemed to cleave unto: The fan of
persecution fanned them away as chaff, and not only a multitude of Professors,
but also how many great Preachers did basely betray the truth which they
professed, and in their Pulpits seemed a little before zealously to maintain,
particularly that of Separation from the National Church. This way Christ took
to discover the filthy and rotten hearts of some, and slavish fear and weakness
of Faith in others, who were left to a sinful Compliance and Confirmity,
building again that which they had destroyed, and destroying that which they
had been a building; and thus it appears Jer. 23. 2^.
as Chaff, cannot bear fanning, but is blown away; so chaffy Professors cannot
bear spiritual fanning, i. e. they cannot stand in an hour of Temptation, but
fall away. Alas! tho we have now again multitudes that seem to cleave to our
Churches and to our Assemblies, yet should Christ come with his Fan upon us,
you will soon see (it is to be feared) the former Effects again.

3. Chaff is of very little worth or value unto Wheat: What is the Chaff unto
the Wheat, says the Lord? One peck of good Jer. 23. 28.
Wheat is worth many Bushels of Chaff. So ungodly men and and women are but of
little worth in Gods sight; a wicked man to him is lothsom, as Solomon shows,
and that which is loathsome and hateful in our sight we value not, but cast
away: Pro. 13. 5.
The Prayers of the wicked are abominable to the Lord, because their persons
are not accepted in Christ; Whatsoever the ungodly do, or whatsoever show they
make of Religion, let them Pray, Hear, Read, Preach, or give to the Poor, it is
not regarded nor accepted of the Lord; one godly Person is more to him than a
multitude of unsanctified and hypocritical persons. The tongue of the just is
as choice as silver, the heart of the wicked is but of little worth. The best
part of a Child of God is his Heart, though he thinks that is the worst of all;
and the worst part of an unholy man is his Heart, though he thinks that is best
of all. Saints are wheat, Hypocrites chaff, the one is Gold, the other Dross in
Gods esteem. Hence the Lord says, Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou
have been honorable, and I have loved thee, therefore will I give men for
thee, and People for thy life: I will give Egypt for thy Ransom, Aethiopia and
Sheba Isa. 43. 3, 4.
for thee. God so little values graceless persons, that he will sacrifice
thousands of them in love and mercy to his faithful ones.

4. Chaff is light and airy, it is no ponderous thing, therefore the wind
carries it this way and that way at every turn: Nay, every small breath of wind
moves it to and fro, whereas wheat stirs not, moves not, but abides in its
place, it being a weighty and ponderous thing. Even so all hypocritical and
unsound Professors, whatsoever they seem to be at some times, (by making a show
of Religion and pretending to Piety) yet they are in Gods sight as light as
vanity; they are like chaff, not serious, weighty and ponderous, they are but a
flash, a shadow, and no substance, having mere dry, barren and empty Souls:
And their lightness appears and shows it self in many respects.

1. It appears sometimes by their light, frothy and airy talk and discourse:
They may sometimes seem serious, but if watched, they will be discovered, their
Tongues will betray them, by their foolish and vain words, and communication:
They setting no watch before the door of their lips, and bridle not their
Tongues, therefore their Religion is vain; as the Apostle James shows: They are
full of vain James 1. 26.
words and foolish talk; The words of the wise are gracious, but the lips of a
fool will swallow up himself: They are offensive to others, and pernicious to
themselves: A fool also is full of Words; either a Talkative, or else full of
vain Boasts, magnifying and admiring Eccl. 10. 14.
himself, and lessning the worth and worthiness of others: His vain and light
Tongue discovers a vain, carnal, proud and empty heart, some unprofitable
matter in discourse or another you shall observe these people will be full of:
May be talk and prate of this Man, or that Woman, to pick up one thing or
another to their reproach, (who are gracious persons) and instead of
discoursing of a Sermon they have heard, or telling their Experiences, may be
they will tell you what Garbs, Clothes and Dresses, such and such People had
on, or else they talk of their earthly and worldly Affairs, or some Idle Jests,
Stories, or foolish Talk; but little of God besure is in their mouths, when
they are out of the sight and hearing of sober and pious Christians: Indeed as
our Savior intimates, how can they being evil, speak of good things? there is
much vanity in their unsanctified Hearts, and their Tongues discover it; Mat.
12. 34.
For out of the abundance of the Heart the mouth speaks; a good man out of
the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things, and an evil man out
of the evil treasure brings forth evil things. v. 35.


But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
an account thereof in the day of Judgment. v. 36.


For by thy word thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. v. 37.


God will not only condemn men for evil actions, but their evil words also
shall rise up against them at the great day: And as the gracious words which
proceed from a sanctified and renewed Christian tends to his Justification,
especially when the main design and purport of his Speech tends to exalt and
magnify God and his Free Grace in Jesus Christ; so the evil words of the
unsanctified Christian tends to his Condemnation, and declares him to be but
mere chaff, or a hypocritical person; but if idle Jesting and foolish Talking
is the Character of a vain man, what is a detracting and backbiting Tongue, a
Tongue that is set on fire by hell, who vilify and render odious such who
truly fear God, that are not guilty of those foul things laid to their charge;
such persons are not like to ascend Psa. 15. 1.
Gods holy hill, nor abide in his Tabernacle, viz. That takes up false and
wicked slanders and reports against his Neighbor, to lessen his reputation
among Men: And it is with the greater aggravation, when it is done out of Envy,
Prejudice or Malice; and it is further aggravated when it is done to a Minister
of the Gospel, on purpose to obstruct or hinder unthinking Christians to adhere
unto his Doctrine, or receive that truth which they see not; but set themselves
to oppose and gainsay, who do not only in an undue manner spread such
Reproaches, but also raise them: It is a great evil to divulge or propagate a
fault committed by a Brother, by making it public when it was private, (they
breaking thereby the express Precept of Jesus Christ, Mat. 18.) But it is far
worse to publish false and groundless Slanders and Accusations of him or
others: And it is an abominable evil in such who are ready to entertain, and
easily to believe, and greedily receive such Reports of him who deserves it
not. Such men are by the Lord called vile persons, Psa. 5. 4. and are contemned
by such that fear the Lord, howsoever great and honorable they seem to be.
Moreover, if it be so great an evil for men thus to use their Tongues or Pens,
to speak evil of, and to blaspheme innocent men, what is the Nature of their
Crimes who curse and swear, and blaspheme the sacred Name of God and the holy
Jesus? like as the Pharisees did, who said, this fellow does not cast out Mat.
12. 24.
Devils but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; ascribing that to the Devil that
was proper to God alone, and wrought by his almighty Power.

Christians, if you would not be found chaff at the great day, take heed of a
reviling Tongue, least you deceive your selves, and all your Religion and
Profession be vain: Jam. 1. 26.
"He either decieveth his own heart (says our Annatotors) in thinking himself
religious, when indulging himself in things contrary to Religion, or else
deceives his own heart, being blinded with self love, and lifted up with
self-conceit, which is the cause of his Railing, Censuring, and speaking evil
of others: Their Religion is vain, empty, and to no purpose, having no reality
in it self, and brings no Benefit to them."

O what a Reproach does the talkative and prating person bring on the Name of
God: This Man, this Woman, say they, is a Member of such or such a Church, and
see what vain talk, frothy words, and frivolous Discourse proceeds from their
Lips: But much more evil is in such who back-bite, revile, and defame others
(as was hinted before.) This I say may discover such to be but chaff.

2. They appear to be Chaff, not only by their light, vain, idle and
backbiting Tongues, but also by their light Behavior; for the lightness of
the heart is as much discovered by a loose and airy Deportment, as by loose and
vain words; their wanton Looks, and rolling Eyes, or other unseemly and
uncomely carriage, shows in part what they are; they being not of a grave,
sober, and serious spirit, but behave themselves as if they had no sense of the
Omnisciency of God upon their hearts, nor of his holiness, not setting the Lord
always before them, gives cause to all to fear they are but chaff.

3. Their light, empty and airy Attire, Dresses, and antic Antic Head-Dresses
discovers the vanity of the Heart.
Fashions, which they wear and take delight in, doubtless too much discovers
the Lightness, Vanity and Emptiness of their Spirits: I am persuaded these high
and shameless Head-dresses which some Women appear in, that come into Christian
Assemblies, are but as Tell-tales of the Vanity, Pride, Emptiness, and
Haughtiness of their hearts; who but they that sell Wine will put forth a Bush?
I cannot see how a sober, serious Christian Woman should be satisfied to wear
such Antic Dresses: Their Souls sure must needs blush at the Thoughts of them;
when they consider whose Eyes behold them, First, Many gracious Men and Women,
with no little trouble: And in the second place, their faithful Ministers, to
the wounding and grieving their Souls. Thirdly, And a multitude of loose and
ungodly People, who reproach and laugh at them, and cast contempt upon Religion
on that account. Fourthly, And which is more, the holy Angels, they come into
our Assemblies, and observe all, both Males and Females, how they do adorn
their Profession and behave themselves. Women should cover their heads, because
of the Angels; they ought to be in subjection, and therefore 1 Cor. 11. 10.
before all things their head ought not to be exalted, but to lie low, and be
modestly attired; no doubt it is a palpable Breach of the holy Precept, for it is
not a modest dress, becoming Women professing Godliness; though I dare not say
but some sincere Christians may be overtaken with this Evil as well as others,
yet I hope God will soon convince them of the odiousness of it: Yet no doubt it
does clearly discover that some of this sort are loose and vain persons, and
but mere chaff in Gods sight, which the day that is coming will burn up: And
such especially have cause to suspect themselves, who pride it in their own
hearts, and take delight in those hateful and abominable fashions, and cannot
bear to be told of it, though in never so wise and discreet manner, nor will they
be brought by any persuasions to reform, and leave them off, though it wounds the
very Souls of many of them they have Communion with. Fifthly, O that they that
fear God would consider that he beholds them, and looks upon them, whose eyes
are like unto a flame of Fire. These Dresses, O ye Daughters of Zion, know
assuredly none but foolish and vain persons do like and approve of, even none
but the Devil and his Followers; is it not sad, in such a day of distress,
sorrow and humiliation, when Gods Hand is lifted up upon the Nation, and
thousands of poor Families want Bread, that Christians should thus walk, and
consume their Substance on their Pride and costly Lust.

4. They appear to be but chaff, who seem to make it a small matter to grieve
the Hearts of sincere Christians; what care they who they wound and afflict,
they will have their Fancies, their Humors, though the thing in it self may be
doubtful, whether a breach of Gods Law or not; and so like eating of Meats,
that was a thing indifferent in it self, and might or might not be done. Nay,
that make light of grieving the Holy Spirit, in themselves, and in others also;
let the Lord be grieved, his Spirit grieved, his poor Ministers grieved, and
his faithful Children grieved, they regard it not, but set light by it. These
may also be suspected, i. e. that are indifferent in and about Closet and
Family Prayer, (and other weighty Duties of Religion) or are loose and formal
in it: This shows they bear no weight, they are not ponderous, but light as
Chaff. Moreover, such may be suspected, who set light by Hearing the Word of
God; alas, to go to hear a Sermon is a light thing with some, if there be any
worldly Loss attending it, though it be not to the Value of a Groat, they cannot
go, or if the Weather be not very good, they plead Excuse; as not being able to
go so far, though may be the next day in worse Weather they can go about their
earthly Business twice as far.

Likewise such who for every small matter refrain from coming to the Lords
Table; may be any trivial offense shall hinder them; they are offended with
this Person, and that Person, and so cast a slight upon Christ, and on his
Sacred Ordinance, and thus persist from time to time: They can go to Church, or
stay at home: Can pray, and hear, and can forbear: Religion is a light and
indifferent thing with them. This shows such are under fearful Temptations, or
else loose and light Professors in the sight of God.

5. Such are Chaff that only have the husk or shell of Christianity: Chaff is
the husks of Wheat; many Professors please themselves with the external part of
Religion, having a form of Godliness, but are Strangers to the Life and Power
thereof: Like the foolish Virgins they have Lamps, but no Oil; a Name, but want
the Nature of true Believers; can talk and discourse of Religion, of the
Covenant of Grace, and excellency of Christ; they may have, I grant, clear
Notions in their heads of the Mysteries of the Gospel, and defend it too
against opposers, yet their Hearts are unsanctified, and never felt nor
experienced the work of Faith with Power; they have the outside of a true
Christian, the Shell of the Wheat, but if tried and searched there is nothing
but Chaff, no Kernil in them, they want the root of the Water: All true
Believers have past through the Pangs of the New Birth; they found they were
once Dead, but are now alive, once blind, but now they see, once lost in their
own Eyes, but now found, once Carnal, but now Spiritual, once had their
affection set on things below, but now on things above; Sin was once Sweet and
Pleasant to them, but now it is bitter and Loathsome in their Eyes, because they
see it is so in the sight of God: Their Judgments are informed, their
Understandings savingly enlightened; Christ and heavenly things are valued and
esteemed above all things here below, yea, above ten thousand Worlds, by them;
and their understandings are not only brought to assent to the truth of Christ,
to the Glory and Beauty of Christ; but their wills also are subjected to him,
they are brought to consent, and yield themselves to the Lord; they believe,
and love, believe and obey, believe and suffer reproach, taking up the Cross,
putting on the yoke of Christ; their affections are so changed, and under
divine Influences, that what they loved once, they hate, and what they once
hated, or liked not, they dearly love and approve of now: But thus it is not
with Chaffy Professors: They may be changed from open Prophanness to an outward
Reformation of life, but their Hearts are not changed, Sin is not Crucified in
them, self is not subdued; that enmity that was naturally in their hearts, or
dislike of the Life and Power of strict Godliness is not removed; they act only
from common Illuminations of the Spirit, and so they put a force upon
themselves, when found in religious Duties; and find not a natural Inclination
and sweet Propensity in their hearts to heavenly things, and this shows they
are no more then Chaff.

6. And lastly, Chaff I told you was Light, and every breath of wind will move
it, this way, and that way, and if it rises high it will may be blow it quite
away, there being no Kernel in it, whereas the Wheat abides.

So Chaffy and vain Professors are startled at every small blast of
Persecution, and presently begin to move out of their place, and shun
assembling themselves with Gods People: Nay, every wind of corrupt Doctrine is
ready to blow some of this sort a way; they are unsettled Persons, they want
weight, or are not rooted in the Truth, wanting a good Understanding, and a
Principle of saving Grace in their Hearts; Be not carried away with diverse and
strange Doctrines, for it is good to have the heart established with Grace, and
not with Meats. Heb. 13. 9.


This sort are soon corrupted from the Simplicity of the Gospel, by the Cunning
Crastiness of Men, being ready to receive any strange Notion, or close in with
a New Scheem of Religion, some turning to Judaism, and add Moses to Christ, or
join to the Gospel their own Works; they are commonly corrupt, either in
Principles or Practices, or in both, making a stir about the Mint, Annis and
Commin, i. e. about the smaller matters of Religion, as concerning Meats and
Observation of Days, as if in such things lay the great stress of Christianity;
how many are there who like those false Teachers, and deluded People in the
Primitive Times, plead for Justification some other way than by Faith only, and
bring in their own inherent Holiness and sincere Obedience, and add that to the
Merits of Christ, in point of Justification before God; or exalt the Power and
Will of the Creature, to the Eclipsing the Doctrine of Free Grace. Sirs, though I
will not deny but many sincere Christians may be shaken by the wind of false
and corrupt Doctrine, or drawn away through the subtilty of men, yet no doubt
chiefly they are the Light, Formal and Chaffy Professors which are carried
away, and Tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, and this because of
the want of Grace, a sound Judgment and a good Understanding in the Mysteries
of the Gospel. A good understanding (says David) have all they that do his
Commandments. Psa. 111. 10.
Moreover, such who seem unsettled in their places in Gods House, or particular
Churches where they are Members, being uneasy, and every little difference
that may arise in a Congregation is ready to turn them away; or seem to be
moved and disturbed at the Charges the Interest of Christ, or which the House
of God calls for; these I say, give cause to fear they are but Chaff, or under
great Temptation, if Sincere.

Secondly, By Chaff may also be meant, Sin, Filth and Corruption, Sin is
likened to Chaff.
which cleaves to the Hearts and Lives of true believers, which Christ by the
Fan of his Word, Spirit, and Afflictions, as you have heard, purges out: He
shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may
offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. This is spoken of Jesus
Christ, Mat. 3. 3.
whose Fan is in his hand: It shows his Work and Office, namely, to refine and
fan his People, not only Members, but Ministers also, signified by the Sons of
Levi, that they all may offer acceptable Service unto God: Besides, our Lord
Jesus sometimes makes use of wicked Men as a Fan in his hand to purge his
People, and thus he did of old fan Israel by the Babylonians, and by the
Assyrians; I will send unto Babylon Fanners, as I have sometime fanned and
scattered my people by them; so will Ger. 51. 2. Chap. 4. 11. 12. Jer. 35. So
Jer. 15. 7.
I fan them by the Medes and Persians, who shall empty the Land of them; After
Christ has fanned or purged away the Chaff and Filth of the Daughter of Zion,
he will fan their Enemies, and they being all Chaff, the wind of his
Indignation will drive them away. Let this be noted, that Christ has many ways
to fan and purge his People, yet still it is for their good, and they shall
lose nothing but their chaff, their Sin and Corruptions thereby.

Quest. Fourthly, Why are the Saints compared to Wheat?

Answ. I answer, for many Reasons.

Why the Saints are compared to Wheat. Prove. 12 26. Psa. 6. 3. Mat. 3. ult.
1. Wheat is a choice Grain, the best Grain, so true Believers are a choice
People in Christ's sight: The righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor;
they are called the excellent in all the Earth. God calls his People his
Jewels, or choice Treasure; they are men of a high and heavenly Birth, of a
high sublime and excellent Spirit, they are espoused by an excellent person,
act and are influenced by excellent principles, and have glorious Ends and Aims
in all they do; and from hence may be compared to Wheat.

2. Wheat has much pains used with it, the ground must be made good, it must
be well plowed and manured before the Wheat is sown; so the hearts of poor
sinners must be first made good, and by spiritual Convictions be plowed up,
before the seed of Grace is sown; for like as Believers are compared to Wheat,
so is also the Grace of God.

Wheat must be weeded as well as gathered into the Barn, and also Threshed,
fanned, and well Purged.

Believers may be compared to Wheat upon this respect, Christ takes much pains
(to speak after the manner of men) with his own Elect, not only by Plowing,
Manuring, but by sowing, watering, weeding, fanning and Purging them like Wheat.

3. Wheat will endure cold Frosts and Snow, and all manner of bitter and sharp
Weather, better than any other Grain. Sow Barley before Winter, and you will
find but little of it will live, but Wheat will live in the sharpest Winter
that can come; what a good Harvest had we here in England after the last great
Frost; alas, the Wheat was not destroyed thereby, but was made better, the
Weeds and Worms being killed, which is found to hurt and annoy it oft-times.

Even so sincere Christians, who are Christ's Spiritual Wheat, abide faithful
under the greatest Trials, Persecutions and Afflictions they can meet withal;
they endure the Frosts and bitter North-Winds of Tribulation, and furious
Storms of the Wrath of wicked men, which kills the false-hearted Professor,
they die and wither away, they cannot live, and maintain their seeming hope and
Confidence, when true Believers can; a Hypocrite is but Summer Corn, or rather
Weeds or Tares that spring up with the Wheat, though they look like it, yet are
only the product of Natural Conscience, or the common Influences of the Sun, or
Gospel of Jesus Christ.

4. An Ear of Wheat when it is near ripe does hang down its head, the Corn
being full and weighty, when light and empty Ears hold up theirs; commonly a
light and chaffy Ear stands strait upright, in a lofty manner.

So a true gracious Christian is of an humble Spirit, he hangs down his head
(as it were) and is ashamed of his best Duties and Services, seeing so great
weaknesses and Infirmities to attend him; he abhors himself, yea, loathes
himself; he knows he has nothing to glory in, but in the Cross of Jesus
Christ; he sees himself nothing; Unto me who am less than the least of all
Saints, is Ephesians. 3. 8.
this Grace given, (says Paul:) what an humble Person was he, what a full and
weighty Ear of choice Wheat was this Apostle: If you see a Man or Woman proud,
or of an haughty and conceited Spirit, being lifted up, you may conclude they
are but empty Ears, no true Grace being in their hearts.

5. Wheat has its Chaff cleaving oft-times close to it, yea, it will stick and
cleave so to it, that it is not easily separated.

So it is with Christ's Spiritual Wheat, the filth or Chaff of internal
Corruption is very subject to cleave to them, and hard it is for them to get
rid of it. When I would do good, Sin is present with me, for the good I would,
I do not, but the evil which I would not do, that do I. Romans 7. 21.


Oh! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death! v.
19. and 24.
I am (as if he should say) even wearied with continual Combating, I cannot get
rid of this dead Body, this inward Filth and Corruption, the remainders of Sin
in my flesh; this Chaff cleaves to all Christ's Wheat.

6. Wheat is of prime and chiefest use, of it excellent things are made, as
Meat for Princes. So the Lords faithful People are of chief use in Gods hand of
all others; the Lips of the Righteous feed many.

7. That Nation that abounds with the finest Wheat is esteemed a choice Land, a
happy Nation: So likewise that Kingdom and Nation in which are abundance of
godly Christians, it is a happy Kingdom, a blessed Nation, because such are the
common Interest of the Land or Place where they dwell; they are called the
Pillars of the Earth.

8. Wheat is Threshed with the flail, to sever it from the straw and chaff, by
the Husbandman; so God to sever the Wheat, i. e. the godly from the chaffy
Professor, and free them of the Filth and Corruption of their own hearts,
brings his flail of Affliction and Persecution upon them.

9. Wheat is also fanned, to cleanse it; and it is to be noted, that the fan in
the Hand of the Husbandman tosses up the Wheat and Chaff together, and then he
shakes it to and fro, this way and that way, on his knees.

So the Lord Jesus with his spiritual Fan tosses the Godly and Hypocritical
Professor, by the same Afflictions, Trials, Persecutions and Tempations. And O
what hurryings, tossings and Tumblings to and fro in their Spirits have some
Christians met with in the late times, and still daily meet withal? they have
their ups and downs, this Affliction, and the other Temptation, this Loss, and
the other Cross: But yet, nevertheless, they are not tossed out, or blown away by
the fan, but evident it is the Chaff is hereby purged out; while Christ's Wheat
is refined, they abide fanning, (as I hinted before) but so does not the Carnal
and light Professor: They are offended, through this means, as our Savior
shows, and are ready to say with that Mat. 13.
wicked man of old, this Evil is of the Lord, why should I wait upon 2 King 6.
33.
him any longer? Believers know, God does it not for his Pleasure, but for
their Profit, that they might be partakers of his Holiness. Heb. 12. 10.
Hence it is said, that they endure Chastening, and faint not when they are
rebuked of the Lord.

Quest. 5. What is intended by Christ's Garner?

I answer, Christ has a twofold garner.

First. His Church is his garner.

1. A Garner is prepared on purpose to retain, and safely The Church is Christ's
Spritual Garner.
to secure the Wheat in a heap together, where it is carefully to be looked
after. So is the Church of God appointed and prepared to receive and secure his
faithful People together; it is not built for Chaff nor Tares, and great care
and pains is required of Christ's servants in looking to, and taking care of his
Spiritual Wheat in his Church.

2. Yet through the Negligence or want of Wisdom in the Servants, oft-times
some Chaff is brought into the Garner with the Wheat, which when the Husbandman
see's it, by viewing his Grain, he is Troubled at his servant; see (says he)
what abundance of Chaff you have brought in with the Wheat, which spoils the
beauty of it to such a degree, that it does not seem to be near so good as
indeed it is.

So it is here for want of Care, or through weakness or want of Knowledge in
Christ's Ministers and Servants, in discerning who are sincere Christians and
who are not: Many unsound and Chaffy Professors are let into the Church or
Churches of Jesus Christ, which is displeasing unto him, because they spoil the
Beauty and Glory thereof, and cause many to reproach his faithful ones; as it
also renders them in the sight of the Carnal World not to be the People which
indeed they are.

3. The Husbandman therefore causes the Wheat in his Garner to be fanned again,
to clear it of the Chaff that is got in amongst it; so Christ with the Fan of
Persecution often times fans his, People to purge out the loose and profane
from among them.

Secondly, By the Garner is meant Heaven it self, into which Heaven is Christ's
Garner.
all the Elect shall be put at the last day, and into this Garner shall none
come but pure Wheat: And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, Rev. 21. 27.
or that makes a Lie, but they which are written in the Lambs book of Life.

6ly. And lastly, What is meant by burning up the Chaff with unquenchable fire?

Answ. I answer, by burning up the Chaff with unquenchable fire, What meant by
burning up the Chaff.
is meant the direful Wrath of God, which sometimes seizes on ungodly persons
in this world, and shall eternally take hold of all the Chaff in the world to
come. The Wrath of God is often compared to fire in the Scripture. There went
up a smoke Psa. 8. 8.
out of his nostrils, and a fire out of his mouth devoured; Coals were kindled
by it. So in another place it is said, A fire goes before Psa. 97. 3.
him, etc. Shall thy wrath burn like fire, Psa. 89. 46. His fury Nah. 1. 6.
is poured out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him.

1. Fire is a terrible and most amazing Element, especially when it breaks
forth like a masterless Enemy, and none can stop it: So is the Wrath of God
very terrible, when he pours it forth in his greatest fury. O what a
frightful Cry does a dreadful Fire that breaks out in a Town or City cause!
what wringing of hands! Men tremble, Women miscarry oft-times, Children screech
out, it frightens the very Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Earth, and turns
all Faces into Paleness! how amazing was the flames of Sodom, and how terrible
is the burning of Monnt Aetna! the Wrath of God when it furiously breaks
forth upon a People and Nation, or particular Person, causes dreadful horror,
it makes the stoutest heart to quake, and the strongest hands feeble: At his
wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his
indignation: His fury Jer. 10. 10.
is poured out like fire, and the Mountains are thrown down before him: Can thy
heart endure, or thy hands be strong, in the day when I contend Nah. 1. 6.
with thee? Who can stand before his indignation? O how will the wicked fly
into holes, quiver like a leaf, and cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon
them, and hide them from the face Rev. 6. 16.
of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

2. Fire breaks out sometimes very suddenly, when none think of it, but all are
as they judge, safe and secure, yet in a moment how are they surprised, when
nothing but the horror and cry of fire, fire, fire, is heard in their ears. So
Gods Wrath, like a dreadful and an unexpected fire, breaks out sometimes
suddenly upon the ungodly. How surprising were the flames of Sodom, and the
amazing handwriting on Belshazars wall, when he was drinking Wine in Bowls!
immediately the Kings countenance was changed, and he was troubled in his
thoughts, so that Dan. 5. 5. 6.
the joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote one against the
other: When they cry peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3.


3. A fire sometimes breaks forth in the Night, when men are asleep: So God
comes upon men many times in the night of ignorance and unbelief, while they
lie on their Beds of Ease and carnal Security, by amazing Judgments, or by
sudden Death. How secure was the old World, and the rich man in the Gospel, to
whom God said, this night thy soul shall be required of thee.

4. A consuming Fire destroys, wastes and devours exceedingly, as Sodom found,
and London also by woeful experience. So God when he breaks forth in his Wrath
and Fury, he makes most lamentable desolation, The Lord shall swallow them up
in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. The Wrath of God is Psa. 21. 9.
10.
compared to a consuming fire: For our God is a consuming Fire. Heb. 12. ult.


5. A Consuming and raging fire spares none, the Palace of the Prince no more
than the Cottage of the Peasant, the mighty Oaks as well as the lowest Shrubs
are devoured by it; so the wrath of God seizes, and will seize on all wicked
men, on the mighty and honorable of the Earth, as well as the poor and
contemptible ones; the King on his Throne, as well as the Beggar on the
Dunghill: His wrath shall be on every one that is lofty, and upon every one
that is proud and lifted up, and Isa. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
he shall be brought down; upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, and upon all the
Oaks of Bashan. -- He will come upon Princes as upon mortar, the whole earth
shall be devoured by the fire of his Jealousy, neither Zeph. 1. 18.
their Gold nor Silver shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords
wrath.

6. Wood, Hay and Stubble, are fit fuel for the fire to seize upon, and such
things that are combustible make it to burn the more vehemently. And if high
strong Towers cannot stand before a consuming fire, how is it possible for
Briars and Thorns? Some Sinners are like stubble fully dry: They are fit Fuel
for the Wrath of God like fire to take hold of. O what horrid Guilt lies upon
some men's Consciences, just like a great heap or pile of wood, well dried, or
Cart loads of straw, or dry stubble: What if God will to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath
Romans 9. 22.
fitted to destruction.

A long Course in sin, Custom in sin, resisting the Grace of God, slighting
Convictions, hardening the Heart against Reproof, stisling the Accusations of
Conscience, and abusing the Patience and long Suffering of God, fits men for
the fire of his Wrath; Whilst they are folden together as Thorns, and whilst
they are drunken Nah. 1. 10.
as Drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. Such that are drunk
with Pride, drunk with Pleasures, or whose Souls are surfited with the Riches
and Cares of the World, the fire of Gods Wrath, as fit matter or combustable
stuff, will seize upon.

7. A dreadful fire when it breaks out, turns all joy into sorrow, and makes a
day of mirth a day of Mourning: So the consuming wrath of God, whether it
seizes on the consciences of Men only whilst alive in the body, or on Body and
Soul both here, or on the Soul at Death, it turns all joy into sorrow. O what
extremity of misery do such feel! ask Judas or Spira, they could tell you.

8. Fire is a most cruel and dreadful tormentor; if a man be cast into a fire,
what intolerable pain and anguish does it put him to! but alas, alas, that is
nothing to the Wrath of God, when God kindles it in the Consciences of men, nor
to Hell fire. You will say, O it is a fearful thing to fall into a furious fire,
into a burning Furnace, but O Sirs, how much more dreadful is it to fall under
the Wrath of God! It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God: For our God is a consuming fire. Heb. 2. 12.
If it be terrible to have a finger, a foot, or a hand to be burned off, or to
have the whole body cast into a Furnace of boiling Oil, (as some of the holy
Martyrs were) how then can sinners, who are as chaff, bear the Thoughts of Gods
wrath and vindictive Vengance, which is far more intolerable than any fire
into which any Mortal was ever cast? For 1. Other fire burns only the external
part, or temporal, or corporal matter, but the fire of Gods wrath burns and
torments the Spirit, the Soul, the invisible part. 2. Elementary fire is seen,
but internal Wrath is only felt inwardly, it cannot be seen. 3. The fiercest
fire that ever was kindled has been overcome, and by Engines or Instruments
put out, but the fire of Gods Wrath when kindled, and the Soul thrown into
Hell, cannot be put out, nor be extinguished, it is unquenchable fire. Though the
burning of Mount Aetna, and other burning Mountains, are impossible for man to
extinguish, yet doubless they shall not burn always, they will be put out, but
wrath shall burn for ever. So much as to the Explanation of our Text. From
hence we may observe diverse Propositions or Points of Doctrine.


1. Doct. The old floor is gone, it is removed, viz. The old Jewish Church, or
national Church of Israel, the wheat that was in it being taken into Christ's
Gospel-Garner, and the chaff or all graceless persons or unbelievers, are
fanned away. Now Christ has removed the partition wall that was between Jew
and Gentile, and has reconciled both unto God in one body. Now there is no
knowing men after the flesh, fleshly Privileges, i. e. being Ephesians. 2. 16. 2
Cor. 5. 17.
the Seed of Abraham, or being the Seed of Believers, as such, gives no right
to Spiritual saving and eternal Blessings. Both those two People, Jews and
Gentiles, that believe of twain are made one, i. e. one new man, or one
Christian or Gospel Church. And this is done by Jesus Christ, who by his Fan or
Dispensation of the New Testament has abolished the old Covenantright of
Church Membership; not the fleshly Seed, but the spiritual Seed of Abraham, are
to be received into Christ's Gospel Garner; Ye as lively stones are built up a
spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
etc. But this I shall not prosecute.

2 Doct. Jesus Christ would have none but pure Wheat be gathered into his
Garner; not the fleshly and spiritual Seed, not the Believer and the
Unbeliever, not godly ones and ungodly ones, not the Chaff and the Wheat, as it
was under the Law, in the National Church of the Jews. Not whole Parishes, or
whole Nations, no, no, none but true Christians, or holy persons, sanctified
and sincere, and truly gracious Souls.

3 Doct. Christ's great Work and Office is to purge his People, to cleanse them,
and make them holy, and to sever the Wheat from the Chaff, the pure from the
impure; or to separate Hypocrites from his Church, and purge his Saints from
all their inward Filth and Corruption: He would have no Chaff there, none that
are falsehearted and unsound, such he will first or last purge out; and he will
make them that are good to be much better, more clean, more holy, more pure, he
will purge out the chaff of Hypocrisy, Unbelief, Pride, Passion, Covetousness,
Vain Glory, Carnality, and all manner of Corruption whatsoever that is in them;
he sets as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver, and he will thoroughly purge away
their Dross, and take away all their Tin. The Isa. 1. 25:
time draws near in which the sinners in Zion shall be afraid, fearfulness
shall surprise the Hypocrites: Who amongst us shall dwell with Isa. 33. 14.
devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings?

4. Doct. All true Believers, or all Christ's Wheat, shall be saved, shall be
received into Heaven, or be gathered into his glorious Garner above, and into
which place no wicked person, no false-hearted professor, no hypocrite, no
carnal and self-deceived Gospeller, shall come. Though some of this sort get
into the Church militant, they shall not get into the Church triumphant, though
they may get a seeming place in his Garner below, yet they shall have no place
in his glorious Barn or Garner above. Sirs, you that seem to take delight in
the Company of the Saints, and seem to feed and lie down with Christ's sheep,
yet know you shall one day be separated as Goats from the Sheep, as foolish
Virgins from the wise, as Chaff from the Wheat, and as Dross from the Gold; all
you that are not sincere must go to your place; and those that shall be set at
Christ's right hand shall receive the Kingdom prepared for them, and all that
shall be on his left hand must go into everlasting fire, prepared Math. 25. 41.
for the Devil and his Angels.

Doct. 5. A discriminating day will come, a day of severing the good from the
bad, etc.

Doct. 6. The Wrath of God, whether internal or external, is intolerable.
That the Wrath of God is like fire, it is intolerable; or the misery and
torments of the damned, or of all hypocrites and unbelievers, will be dismal
and amazing; or there is no expressing how fearful their condition is and will
be, who fall under the vindictive Wrath and Vengance of an angry God. I purpose
to speak unto one or two of these Propositions, but at present I shall close
with a word or two by way of Use.

The Application.

1. Caution. Take heed you are not Chaff, or prove not chaff, when the Fanner
comes to fan you. O see you are not loose, carnal and empty Professors; if you
have only a form of Godliness, the Name of Christ only, or Lamps, and no more,
sad will it be with you; if you are not solid, weighty and ponderous
Christians, if you experience not the divine power of Godliness, the
Sin-killing, the Soul-quickning, the Heart-transforming, and God-exalting power
of Christ's Spirit, you are undone.

Take a few Motives to stir you up to take heed.

1. The Fanner is coming with his fan in his hand: A Providence may be near,
yea, such a providence and dispensation which you little think or dream of. I
might have showed you that the whole Earth is but Christ's common floor, and he
is now about to fan this mighty floor; he has many fans to do this. What are
his fearful Judgments but as a fan in his hand, whether it be War, Pestilence,
or Famine, or other strange Judgment, it is and will be but as a fan to purge
the Earth, and consume the ungodly, or blow them away as Chaff.

What amazing Earthquakes have there been lately in diverse places, have not we
in England, in London, felt some of it, (as well as most Nations in Europe)
though not like to that in Jamaica, and some other places? are not these fearful
Tokens and Signs of Gods Wrath and Indignation? are they not Harbingers and
Presages of what is coming upon the World, and of the end thereof? Look to it,
there is great Wrath at the door, I am afraid thousands will be suddenly
surprised, and paleness of face take hold of them: God is certainly abnout to
shake and Toss the Earth too and fro; the seven Viols of his Wrath will quickly
now begin to be poured out: Expect all of you to be tossed and fan'd, as wheat
and chaff is tossed and shook together: The lion has roared, who will not
fear? the Lord has spoken, who can but prophecy? there is a worser Amos 3, 8.
Earthquake near, as the wicked shall find it; yea, such an Earthquake that
will make all their hearts to tremble, which will shake down the foundations of
Mystery Babylon, and all false States; it will be such a one that never was
since the World began; these which have been of late, may be but Signs and
forerunners of that. In the Earthquake which is near, the tenth part of the
great City shall fall, and seven thousand of the names of men, or names given
to religious men, that were never given to them by Jesus Christ, mere
Antichristian names, shall be no more, strange will be the effects of it no
doubt. O what will you do in the day of Gods Wrath if ye are Chaff, or but
counterfeit Christians? if not sincere? if not in Christ? thou shall be visited
of the Lord with Earthquakes and a great noise, etc. Isa. 29. 6.
Great Changes, Commotions, Mutations and Revolutions, will suddenly come from
the Lord of Hosts: He will make the earth empty, and turn it upside down, and
it shall be as with the people so with the priest: He will fan, shake and
tumble the People together Isa. 24. 1.
; you will find Distress of Nations, and Perplexity with a witness in a short
time; nay, no doubt but the day of Judgment and End of the World, or Coming of
Christ is very near; for he has foretold as Signs thereof, that there shall be
great Earthquakes in diverse places.

Mat 2. 4.
2. If you be Chaff among the Wheat, you spoil the Beauty and glory of the
Wheat; you bring a reproach upon the Saints and upon the Church; the ways of
God are evil spoken of through your means; your Pride, your Covetousness, your
Backbiting and detracting Tongue, and Unjust Dealing, hinders the propagation
of the Gospel; your formality, deadness, slighting and neglecting of the
Worship of God, and want of Zeal, and Love to Christ and to his people, has
bitter effects on the unbelieving World, as well as it will have on your own
Souls.

3. If you are Chaff, you shall e're long be separated or severed from the
Wheat: There is a time near that that will discover all, and make a full
discrimination between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves
the Lord, and him that serves him not. There shall not (e're long) be a
Cannanite Mal. 3. ult.
in the House of God any more.

4. Nay, and (remember my Text) The Chaff shall be burned with unquenchable
fire; into Hell at last all false-hearted, light and loose Professors, shall be
thrown. O Take heed for your Souls sake, that you rest not upon a bare
Profession, or on a name of Christians!

This may inform us also, that Christ has a gracious end in bringing
Persecutions and Trials on his People; it shows us why he uses the Fan of
severe Providence, Judgments and Afflictions: It is, you have heard, to purge,
to purify them, and to separate the Chaff from them. O do not then think it
strange concerning fiery trials, as if some strange thing had befallen you.

Exhort. Let me exhort you to see to it in time, that you are not deceived, and
so prove Chaff, and Vain Persons, empty and foolish Virgins at last.

Motives, 1. O how far may men go, and yet be but almost Christians! Remember
this.

2. Many when Christ comes shall have great Confidence, and go forth to meet
him, and yet be found foolish ones: Some deceive their own Hearts, and others
have Hearts that deceive them, by trusting in them, and never examine how
matters are between God and their own Souls.

3. Men may Preach and Prophecy, yea, speak as if they had the Tongue of Men
and Angels, and Cast out Devils in Christ's 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.
Name, and yet be nothing; they may Preach, no doubt, to the Conversion of
others, and yet may not be Converted themselves.

4. Wheat is commonly weighed, to know the goodness of it; so God weighs Men,
he weighs the Actions of Men: Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found
wanting: Weighed in a Balance alluding to the weighing of Gold or Goods
exactly in Scales. God tries Men and Women, that all may know he will proceed
Justly and Righteously with them; he weighs them in the balance of the
sanctuary, or trys them by the Touchstone of his Word, and if found full
weight, or pure Gold, then he declares that they are his, and he owns them as
his People, as his Wheat; but if too light, or not hold weight, but are greatly
wanting, there being no worth in them, but are Dross, Chaff, light and empty
Persons, unfound and unsanctified ones, then he rejects them as none of his,
but are as reprobate Silver, false Coin, People of no value with him.

As he weighs Men, so he weighs their Works, their Graces, their Gifts, their
Duties, to see whether they hold weight, whether true and righteous or not;
whether the Grace be true Grace, special Grace, not common Grace, and their
Gifts not Counterfeit Gifts, or mere Natural Gifts, or only humane and acquired
Gifts: Some boast of false Gifts, which as Solomon tells us, is like Clouds and
Wind without rain: What a stir does a vain Person make of a strong Memory,
crying it up as if it was a Spiritual Gift, and as if none were true Ministers
but such who have a great Memory, and can deliver all they have got by their
Study, by the strength of their Memory; alas, all men of any sense know, that
is but a Natural Gift, which some wicked men have as well as some good men; but
let him know, God knows what men's Hearts are, what their Ends 1 Samuel 2. 3.
and Designs are, what their Gifts are, and what their Duties are, as well as
what the matter of their Worship is, which they perform to God; that is,
whether it has his Image stamped upon it; or is of his Authority, his own
Appointment, his own Institution, or but Humane Inventions; he also weighs the
manner how they perform all Divine Worship toward him, from what Principle,
Life, Power, End and Design; whether it is from a changed Heart, from unfeigned
Faith and Love to Christ, in sincerity, with Zeal, and to glorify God; if not,
he will discover them, weigh them, and they will be found wanting, and be found
no better than Chaff at last: Though they may seek ways to hide and cover their
Wickedness, and false Spirits, and base designs, yet let them know, he that
weighs the hill in scales, and the mountains in balances, does and will weigh
them, and find out all their Cursed Deeds, their Pride, their Malice, and put a
rebuke upon their backsliding and detracting Tongues: Talk (says Hannah) no
more so exeeding proudly, let not arrogance come out of thy mouth for God is a
God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed: "Thou Peninnah (as our
Annotators note) speak no more so insolently and reproachfully of me as thou
have done; he knows thy Heart, and all that Pride, Envy and Contempt of me,
which thy own Conscience knows, and thy perverse Carriage toward me:" God
pondereth, and tries all men's Thoughts and Actions, as a Just Judge, to give
to every one according to their works.

Oh what a Motive should this be to us all; God weighs our Persons, our Graces,
our Gifts, our Dutys, and all our Services, in Scales: Take heed you are not
found too light, found wanting, as be sure you will if you be found Chaff, when
put into the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Direction. 1. If you would not be found Chaff, try and weigh your Spirits,
your Persons, your Faith, your Love; see if it holds weight by the Kings
standard, see on what Foundation you are built; have you dugg deep, and laid
your foundation on a Rock? what Love have you to Christ? is he precious to your
Souls, the chiefest of ten thousand? what Love have you to the Children of God?
how do you carry it at home and abroad? do you feed the Hungry, Visit the Sick,
and Cloth the naked? is Christ's Family, Christ's Servants, Christ's Poor, more
in your esteem, love and affections, than Sons and Daughters, than Brethren and
Sisters, that are not his Children? if you do not love Christ more than Father
and Mother, more than Son or Daughter, you may justly fear whether you are
Wheat or no: And if it be so, that you do so Love him, and his Saints,
Ministers and People, it will appear whilst you live; and when you come to die,
you will not forget Christ then, his People and Interest then: O think onthis!

2. And to you Sinners, if you would be found Wheat in the day of Christ, then
receive Christ's true Doctrine, labor to distinguish between Truth and Error;
beware of that strange and new Scheme that darkens the Free Grace of God, and
tends to destroy the Covenant of Grace: Remember to exalt Christ alone in your
Salvation. How do some turn the Gospel of Gods Free Grace into a Law, by the
performance of which, as the Conditions of Life and Justification tell thee,
thy Salvation does depend. See what subtle Opposers (of the clearest Gospel)
are risen up amongst us, and labor to avoid them, though their Tongues should
seem to be tipp'd with Silver, yet their Doctrine is Copper.

3. Be sure Build on Christ alone, and see that that Faith thou have in him, be
the Faith of Gods Elect, which sanctifies both Heart and Life, and is attended
with Good Fruits; you must work from Life, and not for Life.

Consolat. 1. Lastly, By way of Comfort and Consolation: Be not afraid, O Child
of God, though thou art in Christ's Fan, and art tossed up and down with
Temptations, Trials and Afflictions: Know that his Design is wholly herein for
thy good, it is but to purge out thy Chaff, that thou as pure white Wheat
may shine the more bright and clear in Grace and Gospel-Holiness, for Sin
and Corruption spoils thy Beauty to all that behold thee. No Doctrine tends to
promote Gospel Holiness like the Doctrine of Gods Free Grace: Shall we sin
because grace has abounded? God forbid.

2. O what a Mercy of Mercies it is that Gods Wrath is appeased toward you:
Christ's Blood has quenched this dreadful fire, as to you who believe, and
indeed nothing else could do it; O bless God for Christ, and for that River of
Water which proceeds from him, to the extinguishing this flaming Fire; he has
born it, and allayed it, nay, quite put it out, so that you shall never feel
the burning or tormenting Nature thereof.

3. Thou shall at last, whosoever thou art, if sincere, if Wheat, be gathered
into his Garner; viz. into Heaven it self, for Christ will not lose one grain
of his spiritual Wheat, not one Sheep of his shall perish; He that has begun
that good work in thee, will perform it to the day of Christ. Joh. 10. 28.
Phil. 1. 6.


He will gather his wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn up with
unquenchable fire.

So much for this time.

MATTHEW. III. 12. Whose Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
floor, and gather the Wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn up with
unquenchable fire.
Sermon. II. Preached March 12. 1693.
BEloved, I have gone through the several Terms of the Text, by way of
Explaination, and have taken Notice of several Propositions or Points of
Doctrine that naturally arise therefrom. I purpose only to prosecute but one of
them, namely, the 6 th. and last, viz.

Doct. That the Wrath of God is like Fire, it is intolerable; or, the Misery
and Torment of the Damned will be dismal and amazing; there is no expressing how
fearful their condition is and will be, who fall under the vindictive Wrath and
Vengeance of an angry God.

I shall only do three things 1. Further open the Nature of Gods Wrath. 2.
Prove and demonstrate the Truth of the Proposition. 3. Improve it by way of
Application.


And to proceed, it is necessary to note to you in the first place, (as I
before hinted) that the Wrath of God may be considered under a twofold
Consideration: As it is manifested, Gods Wrath opened.
1. Internally or Externally, taking hold of, and seizing upon some ungodly
persons here, whilst in this World. 2. As it is Eternal, seizing on and taking
hold of all undone and lost Sinners hereafter.


Sin is the cause of Gods Wrath and Vengance, both of that which is felt here
and shall eternally be felt and undergone hereafter; the word (as the learned
note) which is translated Wrath, comes from a Root (...) that signifies heat,
or to be hot, and hence it is compared to fire; an angry Man we say is a fiery
Man, a Man that has much fire or fury in him; the Wrath of man is hot, but the
Wrath of God is much hotter: Because there is Wrath, beware. Sirs, there is
Wrath in the Heart of Job 36. 18.
God against Sinners, there his anger is kindled; there is Wrath also in his
Decree, and in his Threatenings, his Wrath continues on all Unbelievers: He that
believes not, the Wrath of God abides upon him. Though many of them do not feel
it, they Joh. 3. 36.
have not the sense of it, but shall have one day; yet there are some that God
lets out his Wrath upon to such a degree here, that they do feel it, and cry
out under the sense and horror thereof in a fearful manner.

External wrath opened.
Secondly, The Wrath of God, as it is compared unto fire, is oft-times let out
to consume men in diverse respects.

1. Sometimes by Poverty, as by a flame he consumes in a secret way their
outward substance; there is a Curse upon their estates, which dries up their
Riches in which they Trusted, and set their Hearts upon, forgetting God their
Maker, their Chief Good and Last End.

2. Sometimes he Consumes their Honor, Reputation and Credit, they falling by
their Iniquity into disgrace, after they have made a Profession of Religion,
and have been in the Love and Esteem of good Men.

3. Sometimes also by Sickness as by a flame he consumes their Health; and thus
he threatened the People of Israel, The Lord shall smite thee with a
Consumption, and with a Fever, and with an Inflammation, and with extreme
Burning. Deuteronomy. 28. 22.


4. Also his Wrath oftentimes breaks out like fire on some Men by sudden
Death, in a strange and unusual manner, as in the case of Lots Wife, and of
Nadab and Abihu; and there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and
they died before Levit. 10. 1, 2.
the Lord. This was so amazing, that Moses said unto Aron and unto Eleazor, and
unto J^hamar, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes, least ye die,
and least Wrath come upon all the People; but let your brethren, the whole
house of Israel bewail the burning verse 6
which the Lord has kindled: Open not your Mouths, (as if he should say) show
no such sorrow as at other times, for God is Just, (and he has let out his
deserved Wrath against these young Men) least you should seem to Justify them,
and show a dislike of God's token of Divine dispeasure.

5. Moreover God many times lets out his Wrath by War, and the Sword consumes
and devours much people: As also by Famine and by the Pestilence. The Wrath of
God, as it is let out in this World is as a drying, scorching and devouring
fire: The flame of Gods Displeasure puts all into a flame; as at this day, all
the Earth seems to be on a fire, God is now a burning up, and consuming the
Nations; Therefore he has poured upon him (speaking of Jacob) the fury of his
anger, and the strength Isa. 42. 25.
of Battle, and it has set him on (...) round about, yet he knew it not, and
it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart: War consumes the Riches, the
Wealth, the Strength, the Food and Bread of the Nation, as well as the People,
but it is not laid to heart. He Job. 16. 9.
teareth me (says Job) in his Wrath: The Hebrew Word (...) (as Mr. Caryl
Notes) "is near in sound to our English Tear, and it signifies to Tear as a
Lion his prey." Wrath is of a Tearing and devouring Nature. God sometimes in
his Wrath Tears in pieces the Bodies of Men, he tears their Power, their
Riches, and consumes their Beauty, and turns all (as it were to Ashes) and thus
he will pour out his Wrath on Babylon, and she shall be burned with fire.

6. The Wrath of God also Seizes on the Souls of some men, whilst they are in
this World; as when they are left, or given Internal Wrath explained.
up unto hardness of Heart, Unbelief, and blindness of Mind; indeed this is
most dreadful of all: What can be a greater Token of Gods Divine Wrath? it is
the beginning of that Future Vengeance that shall be poured forth upon them to
Eternity.

Thus the Almighty dealt by the Jews for their Sin in rejecting of Jesus
Christ, and putting him to death by wicked hands, for this he gave them up to
an hard, unbelieving, and an impenitent heart, and then let in the Romans upon
them, who utterly destroyed their City and Temple, and so scattered them on all
the face of the Earth; and hence the Apostle says, that Wrath was come upon
them to the uttermost. 1 These. 1. 16.


7. Internal wrath on the Consciences of Men opened.
The Wrath of God like Fire sometimes also seizes on the Consciences of men, by
which means they are fearfully tormented, for their horrid Blasphemy,
Profaneness, Atheism, Apostasy, etc. We have had two Examples of this sort, viz.
Mr. Francis Spira in the last Century, and Mr. John Child in this.

It is enough to make all who read those Naratives to Tremble, at the very
thoughts of the incensed Wrath and Anger of an offended God. Who can stand
before his indignation, when his wrath is poured out like fire, on the Souls
and Consciences of Men? O how does he seem to Tear them into pieces, even to
such a degree as they seem to be in the very torments of Hell, while in the
Body: And not knowing but that a faithful reciting of some Passages concerning
the inward Horror of the said Spira and Child, may be of some use to Caution
all to take heed of such like sins which they fell under, I shall (though more
briefly than I intended) compare their States, Circumstances, inward Anguish
and Horror of their Spirits, together.

SOME PASSAGES Of the Fearful Estate of Francis Spira,
SPira having received the Light of the Gospel, became a Teacher of the Blessed
Truths thereof amongst his Friends and familiar Acquaintance; and (says the
Narrative) in comparison seemed to neglect all other Affairs, much pressing
this main point of Doctrine, viz. That we must wholly and only depend on the
free and unchangable Love of God in the Death of Christ, as the only way to
Salvation.

As to his natural and corrupt Inclination; 'I was, says he, excessively
Covetous of Money; and accordinly applied my self to get it by Injustice,
corrupting Justice by doing it,' etc.

As touching Spira's Sin and his grand fall, it was thus, viz. The Popes
Legate, Resident at Venice, was stirred by the malice of the Papists to accuse
Spira to him, and by the Craft and Policy of the Legate, and through slavish
Fear, Spira first fled, and afterward renounced his Testimony to the Truth;
before which it appears he reasoned thus within himself, through the Suggestion
of the Devil, viz. 'Be well advised, fond Man, consider Reasons on both sides,
and then judge, how can thou thus overwean thine own sufficiency, as thou
neither regardest the Examples of thy Progenitors, nor the Judgment of the
whole Church? do thou not consider what misery this thy Rashness will bring
thee into? thou shall lose thy Substance gotten with so great Care and Travel;
thou shall undergo the most exquisite Torments that Malice (...) devise; thou
shall be (...) an Heretic of all; (...) to close up all, thou shall die
shamefully: What think thou of the lothsom stinking Dungeon, the Bloody Ax,
the Burning Faggot? are they delightful? be wise at length, and keep thy Life
and Honor. -- Go to the Legate, Weak Man, and freely Confess thy Fault,' etc.
And upon these thoughts he goes to the Legate, and salutes him with this News,
viz.

Having for these diverse years entertained an Opinion concerning some Articles
of Faith, contrary to the Orthodox and received Judgment of the Church, and
uttered many things against the Authority of the Church of Rome, and the
universal Bishop, I humbly acknowledge my Fault and Error, and my Folly in my
misleading others; I therefore yield my self in all Obedience to the supreme
Bishop of Rome, into the Bosom of the Church of Rome, never to depart again
from the Traditions and Decrees of the Holy See; I am heartily sorry for what
is past, and I humbly beg Pardon for so great an Offense.

The Legate at this commanded him to return to his own Town, and there to
confess and acknowledge the whole Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be holy and
true, and to abjure the Opinions of Luther, etc.

After this he signed an Instrument of Abjuration, and then fell under horrid
Despairation.

'And he thought he heard a direful Voice,' saying, Thou wicked Wretch, thou
have renounced the Covenant of thy Obedience, thou have broke thy Vow; henc
Apostate bear with thee the Sentene of thy Eternal Damnation. He trembling in
Body and Mind fellinto a Swound.

Now began some of his Friends to repent too late of their Rash Council, not
looking so high as to the Judgment of God, laid all the blame on his
Melancholy Constitution, that over-shaddowing his Judgment, wrought in him a
kind of Madness, and directed him to the use of Physicians, etc.

To which Spira replied, Alas poor men! how far wide are you? do you think that
this Disease is to be Cured by Potions? believe me, there must be another
manner of Medicine; it is neither Plaster nor Drugs that can help a fainting
Soul, cast down with the sense of sin, and the Wrath of God; it is only Christ
that must be the Pysician, and the Gospel the Souls Antidote. Amongst others
that come to visit him was Panlus Vergerius, and Mattheus Gribauldus, principal
Laborers for his Comfort; they sound him about 50 Years of Age.

Neither affected with Doteage, nor with the unconstant headstrong Passion of
Youth, but in the strength of his Experience and Judgment; in a burning heat,
calling for drink; yet his Understanding active, quick or Apprehension, Witty
in Discourse, above his ordinary manner -- they forcibly infused some liquid
Sustenance into his Mouth, most of which he spit out again, and in a fretting
mood said, As it is true, that all things work for the better to those that
Love God, so to the wicked all to the contrary; for whereas a plentiful
Offspring is the Blessing of God and his Reward, being a stay to the weak
Estate of their Aged Parents, to me they are a cause of bitterness and
vexation; they do strive to make me tire out this misery, I would fain be at an
end; I deserve not this dealing at their hands. Oh that I were gone from hence,
that some body would let out this weary Soul! My sin, said Spira, is greater
than the Mercy of God; nay, answered his Visitors, the Mercy of God is above
all sin, God would have all men to be saved; it is true, (said he) God would
have all the Elect to be saved; he would not have damned Reprobates to be
saved: I am one of that Number; I know it, for I willingly denied Christ, and I
feel that he hardens me, and will not suffer me to hope. Being asked whether he
did believe that Doctrine to be true for which he was accused before the
Legate, he aswered, I did believe it when I denied it, but now I neither can
believe that nor the Doctrine of the Roman Church; I believe nothing, I have no
Faith, no Trust, no Hope, I am a Reprobate, like Cain or Judas, who casting
away all hope of mercy, fell under despair; and my Friends do me wrong, that
they suffer me not to go to the place of Unbelievers, as I justly deserve.

The mercy of God (said he) is exceeding large, and extends to all the Elect,
but not to me, or any like me, who are sealed to Wrath: I tell you I deserve
it, my own Conscience condemns me, what needs any other Judge; if Peter
grieved, and repented, it was because Christ beheld him with a merciful Eye,
and in that he was pardoned; it was not because he wept, but because God was
gracious to him; but God respects not me, and therefore I am a Reprobate; I
feel no Comfort can enter into my Heart, there is place only for Torments and
Vexings of Spirit: I tell you, my Case is properly mine own, no Man was ever in
the like plight, and therefore my Estate is fearful.

And then roaring out in bitterness of Spirit, he said, It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.

Some said with a whispering Voice that he was possessed; he over-hearing it,
said, Do ye doubt it? I have a whole Legion of Devils that take up their
dwelling in me, and possess me as their own; and justly too; for I have denied
Christ, Christ will not be denied, no not in a word, and therefore it is
enough; in Heart I never denied him.

He said, when asked, that he knew there were worse, far worse pains than those
that he then suffered; for the wicked shall rise to their Judgment, but they
shall not stand in Judgment; this I tremble to think of, yet I desire nothing
more than that I might come to that place, where I may be sure to feel the
worst, and to be freed from fear of worse to come.

Being bid to believe the Truths he had denied, he replied, I cannot, God will
not suffer me to believe them, nor to trust in his mercy; what would you have
me to do? I would, but I cannot, though I presently be burnt for it.

I find I can neither believe the Gospel, nor trust in Gods Mercy; I have
sinned against the Holy Ghost, and God by his immutable Decree has bound me
over to perpetual Punishment: God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth; God has taken away from me all power of
Repentance, and brings all my sins to remembrance; and guilty of one, guilty of
all, fore it is no matter whether my sins be great or small, few or many; they
are such, that Christ's Blood, nor the Mercy of God belongs not to me; he has
hardened me, I find that he daily more and more does harden me, and therefore I
am without hope; I feel it, therefore cannot but despair: I tell you, there was
never such a Monster as I am, never was any man alive a spectacle of such
exceeding Misery. I know that Justification is to be expected by Christ, and I
have denied and abjured it, to the end I might keep my frail Life from
Adversity, and my Children from Poverty, and now behold how bitter my Life is
to me, and God only knows what will become of this my Family; but sure no good
is likely to betide it, but worse and worse, and such at length as one stone
shall not be left upon another.

Said he, The Spirit of God often admonished me, when at Cittadella I did as it
were set my Seal, the Spirit of God often suggested to me, Do not write Spira,
do not Seal, yet I resisted the Holy Ghost, and did both, and at that very time
I did evidently feel a wound inflicted my very will, etc.

David was Elected and dearly Beloved, and though he fell, yet God took not
utterly away his holy Spirit, and therefore was heard when he prayed, 'Lord
take not thy holy Spirit from me.' But I am in another Case, being for ever
accursed from the presence of God; neither can I pray as he did, because the
Holy Spirit is quite gone, and cannot be recalled, -- 'O that I might feel but
the least sense of the Love of God to me, though but for one small moment, as I
now feel his heavy Wrath that burns like Torments of Hell within me, and
afflicts my Conscience with pangs unutterable: Very Desperation is Hell it
self; you persuade me to believe, how fain would I do it, but I cannot:' Then
violently grasping his Hands together, and raising himself, 'Behold, said he, I
am strong, yet by little and little I decay and consume, and my Servants would
fain preserve this weary Life, but at length the Will of God must be done, and
I shall perish miserably.'

'I see, said he, my Damnation, and I know my remedy is only in Christ, yet I
cannot set my self to take hold of him! Such are the Punishments of the Damned,
they repent of their loss of Heaven, they cannot amend their ways.'

'Now also Beelzebub comes to his Banquet; you shall see my End, and in me an
Example to many, of the Justice and Judgment of God.'

'What Hell can be worse than Desparation, or what greater Punishment than the
gnawing worm, and unquenchable Fire? Horror, Confusion, and which is worse than
all, Desparation it self, continually tortures me; and now I count my
present-Estate worse than if my Soul were separated from my Body, and were with
Judas and the rest of the damned; therefore I desire to be there, rather than
alive in the Body.'

'God has taken Faith from me, and left me other common Gifts for my deeper
Condemnation, by how much the more I remember what I had, and hear others
discourse of what they have, by so much the more is my Torment, in that I know
what I want, and there is no way to be relieved: Thus spoke he, the Tears
trickling down; professing that his Pangs were such, as that the Damned in Hell
endure not the like Misery. That his Estate was worse than that of Cain or
Judas, and therefore he desired to dye; yet, Behold, said he, the Scriptures
are accomplished in me, They shall desire to dye, and Death shall fly from
them.' See the Relation of him at large, Sold by A. and J. Churchil, at the
black Swan in Paternoster Row.


SOME PASSAGES Of the Fearful Estate of John Child,
MR. John Child was a Preacher, and when he was young a very zealous Asserter
of the Doctrine of Gods Free Grace; Namely, of Personal Electrion, and of the
Saints final Perseverance; and was a man of considerable Natural Parts and
Ability, being much followed wherever he preached, both in the City and
Country, yet seemed to be of a haughty Spirit, loving Applause and Popularity,
which it may, be feared was the Cause of his Fall, and may be a Warning to all
how they have men's Persons in Admiration. But he had not many years asserted
the Doctrine before mentioned, before he changed his Judgment, and turned to be
a grand Arminian; which Notions he maintained with great Confidence, and was so
conceited of his Abilities, that he feared not to Dispute with any Man,
charging the Doctrine of Personal Election at a strong manner, as if the
Asserters of it rendered God cruel, and worse than the worst of Mortals: In his
Judgment he was a Baptist, being against Infants Baptism, and for the Baptism
of Believers; for many years he lived in Buckingham-shire, near me, I being
intimately acquainted with him for near 30 years; but a little before the last
Persecution of Dissenters he removed his Dwelling, and came to London, and
lived near to my Habitation, in Paul's Shadwel; now the first time I came to
fear him, was through some Words he uttered to me, which was to his effect; I
have, said he, seriously considered whether there be any thing in Religion
worth suffering for: Which Words I wondered at, from such a one as he; but soon
after he Conformed, (Troubles rising high,) and then wrote a Cursed Book,
rendering the Dissenters, especially the Baptists, very odious; casting
Reproach upon their faithful Ministers, because some of them were not learned
men, I mean with the Knowledge of the Tongues; and quickly after this he fell
under fearful Despairation: I was one of the first Men that he sent for, and I
found him in a dismal State and Condition, being filled with Horror, saying, he
was damned, and crying out against himself for Writing that Book; saying, he
had touched the Apple of Gods Eye; I said all I was well capable to speak, to
Comfort him, but all in vain; at another time he said, Mine iniquities are
great and many, old sins as well as of a late date come to mind; Wrath is come
upon me to the utmost, God has forsaken me, good Men are my Enemies; I hate my
self, I am afraid and ashamed to go abroad, and am confused and distracted at
home; the Scriptures look dreadfully upon me, I have raised Reproach, invented
Reproach, and by it wronged multitudes, -- I am afraid to live, and afraid to
dye; Judgment I fear will be terrible in this World, and more in the World to
come; I cannot give an Account of my Actions to Men, how much less to God! my
Heart condemns me, and he is greater, and knows more: I think I have not only
outdone Cain, Balaam, and Judas, but some of the Devils themselves.

O I cannot Repent, I cannot Repent! I shall go to Hell! I am broken in
Judgment; When I think to Pray, either I have a flushing in my Face as if I
were in a flame, or I am dumb, I cannot speak; all the signs of one whom God
has left, forsaken and hardened -- If I was in Heaven, it could not relieve
me, for I should behold the Face of God and holy Saints, as now I behold the
Face of good Men upon Earth, with shame and confusion of Face -- and then again
said, Wrath is come upon me to the utermost -- I am one of the greatest
Hypocrites that ever lived upon the Earth, and shall be so accounted: God has
and will do his will upon me -- Oh he thunders upon me! should God let out the
sense of my sins on me, (as he will) I should howl like a Dog, roar like a
Lion, bellow like an Ox; mine inward parts would melt within me, as brass melts
in a flaming fire; I shall lie lower than Judas, I have sinned worse then Judas
-- he quoting those words in Heb. 10. 2, 6. If we sin wilfully, after we have
received the knowledge of the truths, remains no more sacrifice for sin, etc.
he said, when I am faint and low, I take some refreshments, but in Hell, there
is no refreshment, not a drop of Water to cool my Tongue.

To some that came to visit him, and to Comfort him, he said, All is gone, I am
undone -- I have been so great a sinner against God, and the people of God,
that God will have no Mercy on me, but will glorify himself by me, and make me
an Example for the strengthening and establishing of his People, but it shall
end in my destruction -- God has sworn in his Wrath that I shall never enter
into his rest -- I have been a loose and carnal Professor, and if I were in the
place of God, I should meet the same measure that God does to me: My Calamity
is even at the door, and all men in a little time will justify Gods dealing
with me: The Wrath of God is kindled, and burns in me; it is impossible for you
to imagine my torment, and this is but an Earnest penny of my Eternal Damnation.
Said a godly man, this is a humbling dispensation that you are exercised under
-- A humbling dispensation, said he, do you call it? I tell you, it is an
hardening dispensation, and I feel it to be so: Said his Friend, I hope there
is mercy yet reserved for you; to whom he replied, I know I shall have such
Mercy as the Damned have; I do highly justify God in his dealings with me --
at another time, I once thought, said he, that there was a power in man, but
now I find it otherwise, for I cannot Pray -- I have no desire after any thing
that is good; I cannot Repent. His Visitors asked him if they should Pray for
him? he said, No, No.

One said to him, the Learned Dr. Twist in his Vinditiae Gratiae consesseth
there were Depths in the Controversy between the Calvinists and Arminians, yet
he believed the Truth against the Arminians.

Mr. Child replied, I thought I could have dived to the bottom of it by my
parts, but I see I cannot; and then, and many other times said, I am broken in
Judgment -- One of his Visitors said, you are obliged to stoop to the
Sovereignty of God; he replied, Oh I cannot! I would be above him! O that there
should be an Eternal blessed Being, and I sure never to enjoy him; there shall
be an Eternal Wrath and Punishment, and I sure to fall under it. I shall be an
eternal Monument of the Wrath of God -- Pride and Covetousness has ruined me,
it has undone me; I have been too much influenced thereby: I have been a
Hypocrite, I am so now: I seem to repent, I do not, I cannot repent: And
walking to the end of the room, turned back with a very stern Countenance, and
striking his Hand on his Breast, said, No Sir, I cannot pamper this Body, for
God will have it made a remarkable Example to this Generation. He cried out
against himself for charging those that hold the Doctrine of Personal-Election
with Consequences beyond the Sense of their Minds or Principles; I have, said
he, made this World my God, I have been guilty of Idolatry, I have been guilty
of Pride, endeavoring to run every Man down in Dispute; I have endeavored to
shake the Cross off my Shoulders; how deplorable a thing is this, that I that
have preached so much of the glory of another World, should now be deprived of
it all: You will as surely see me damned, as you now see me stand here.

To others he said, I have trifled in Religion, trifled, trifled -- I am lost,
there is no Hope, no Hope: At another time he said, The black Tokens of
Reprobation are upon me: He said to Mr. Plant, smiting on his Breast, Sir, I am
Damned, I am Damned; it is so most certainly: My day is over; O that it was
with me as in days past! but it is too late, the Decree is gone forth, it is
Sealed in Heaven, and it is irreversible. Jesus Christ cannot save me, he will
not, he cannot Mediate for me, I have so much offended him, in maliciously
abusing of his People: O what a Wretch was I! what a Spirit was I led by! I
have guilt enough, said he, to sink seventeen Kingdoms, and I know the Earth
would open its mouth and swallow me alive, like Corah, Dathan and Abiram, were
it not that God has reserved me to be a more public Spectacle of his Anger
and Displeasure both to Angels and Men. I can neither Pray, nor desire others
to pray for me; my Heart is perfectly hardened; how should I, when I cannot
desire Jesus Christ to pray for me; floods of Tears flowing from him, Dear
bought Experience, says he, has taught me, that it is no small thing to
trifle with him in the great things of Religion and Eternity, etc. In one of
his Letters sent to Mr. James Jones are these Expressions, viz. Being possessed
with Doubts, Fears and Tremblings, night and day, the sad savor of Gall and
Wormwood, an horrible Relish of Gravel-stones, the sad Apprehensions of Curses,
Blastings and Mildew -- the dismal sound of the mad Prophets words, I shall see
him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not nigh -- had I been a Backslider
of an ordinary size -- I have a Voice behind me, or dire Texts -- to love and
make a Lie is a qualification for the Lake.

His poor Wife, as I remember, intimated to me, that the very Ends of the Halr
of his Head in the Night-season did stand in Drops through the Anguish of his
Soul.

The Narrative concerning Mr. Child is Sold by Tho. Fabian at the Bible in
Cheapside, and worthy it is, Reader, of thy perusal.
Thus he continued for several Months under most dreadful horror and fearful
desparation, until the 13 th. of October. 1684. when to put an end to his
miserable Life, he hanged himself in his own hired house, in Bricklane near
Spitlefields, London, leaving a sorrowful Widow and several Children: But she
poor Woman lived not long after. It Is to be noted, that there was a strange
blast upon his Estate, for though I understood by a Friend that was intimate with
him, he was little before his fall worth near a thousand pounds, yet I can hear
but of a little left to his Children, his Eldest Son being but in a low and
mean Condition. I take not upon me to pass Judgment upon this miserable Man,
not knowing how God might deal with him, whose Mercy is Infinite, for I do not
believe Self-murder is an unpardonable sin; for if so, there is more Sins unto
Death than one; certainly it is a Sin against the Father and the Son, and not
against the Holy Ghost, and therefore may be forgiven unto men, who may before
their Life is quite gone have Repentance given to them. But I am of the
Opinion, (with a worthy Minister that visited him) that if any Atheist in the
World who had formerly known this man, and had conversed with him in his bitter
Agonies, he would have seen sufficient Demonstrations to have convinced him
that there is a dreadful God, or a Power besides and above Nature, who can
touch, shake, and disorder, and turn into Confusion the strongest constitution
of body, by ministering and fastening terrible things upon the Soul; and as he
says, let this Pillar of Salt tend to warn and season the People of this
present and future Ages, of the danger of sinning against the light of their
understanding.

Moreover, it does I am sure serve with a witness to prove, and fully to
demonstrate the truth of that Proposition I am upon, viz. That God does
sometimes let out his Wrath on the Consciences of some men, for their horrid
evil in this World, which seems intolerable and hard to be born or undergone
by any Mortal. But,

Secondly, The fire of Gods eternal wrath opened.
To proceed, by buring up the Chaff with unquenchable fire, or by the Wrath of
God in this place, our Blessed Savior does intend, casting the wicked into
Hell it self: Remarkable it is, that no less than four or five times the Lord
Christ positively affirms in Mark 9. that the fire of Hell into which Body and
Soul of wicked men shall be cast, cannot be quenched; where the worm dies not,
and the fire is not quenched, etc. Why repeated so often? is it not to assure
all ungodly persons of the certainty Mark 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
of it? Men are not willing to believe this great truth, they are too ready to
think that it is inconsistent with infinite goodness to inflict such Punishment
on his Creatures, but alas, they forget that there is an infinite perfection in
every one of the Divine Attributes, and that as Gods mercy is infinite,
unsearchable, and unconceivable, so is his wrath and fury; none are able to
conceive, much less to declare, what pain and anguish the damned undergo. What
torments like fire? and what fire is so hot and so tormenting as Hellfire? sad
it is to burn half an hour in an Elementary fire, yet the Martyrs have endured
that for Christ's sake; God made it easy to some of them: But alas, who can
bear the burnings of Hellfire, when wrath shall be let out upon the Soul to
the utterermost?

O Sirs, what a fearful thing will it be to be found chaff, and false
hypocritical Persons! such cannot escape the damnation of Hell; No, nor can any
sinner whatsoever, except they believe, repent, or are born again; there is no
avoiding being cast into unquenchable fire.

Thirdly, I shall now endeavor to prove the point, viz. That the Wrath of God
in Hell is intolerable, and far greater than any Wrath let out here, either on
the Bodies or Souls of men; which will appear, if we consider these particulars
following:

First, The extremity of their Torment will appear, upon the Consideration that
it is inconceivable, beyond all men's understanding Psa. 90. 11.
; who knows the power of thy Anger? who can apprehend Tormens of Hell
inconceivable.
it, or is rightly and duly affected therewith? we can conceive of all bodily
pain, or external Torment, but cannot comprehend the Nature of infinite Wrath,
no more than we can conceive or apprehend the Nature of infinite Love and
Goodness.

Secondly, It is and will be intolerable, because it is according to that
fear, nay beyond the fear that an awakened Conscience has Hells Torments
according to the fear of them.
of it; even according to thy fear so is thy Wrath. O what frightful thoughts
and astonishing fears had Spira and Child of Gods Wrath: Now Sirs, it cannot be
said of the Wrath of God as some other things, or of Death it self, i. e. that
the fear is worse than the thing; No, no, acording to the fear, so is the the
Wrath and Vengeance of an angry God. The fears of a dreadful Deity are not vain
Bugbares, and the effects of ignorance, or of a crasie head, of Folly,
Melancholy, or Superstition, as some Atheistical Wretches are ready to say;
No, no, but it is grounded and built upon solid Foundations, as it is in part
made manifest sometimes by the terrible effects upon mankind, (as I have
hinted.) Wrath bears proportion unto the greatest fear of it, nay, does far
exceed the fear thereof, and what prepared Plagues, infinite pains,
intolerable anguish, have some self-accused, and self-condemned mortals seared
and looked for? what is the nature of that certain fearful looking for of
Judgment Heb. 10. 26.
and fiery indignation? why now according to the fear of it, so will the thing
it self be. Some have felt much Sorrow, but have feared much more: Man's
thoughts and fears exceed all that can be expressed, etc.

Thirdly, The Wrath of God will be intolerable in Hell, No pains like the
pains of Hell.
and the extremity of the damned amazing, if we compare that misery and anguish
with all, or any, nay the worst of Plagues and Punishments that can be
undergone in this World; I mean of all temporal Miseries, as Pestilence,
Famine, War, or any tormenting Disease, as the Stone, Gout, etc.

1. These may be but the Fatherly Rebukes and Chastenings of the Almighty; not
from a Sin-revenging hand, but a Sin-correcting hand of God; not in Wrath, but
in Love; but if his Anger be so terrible when he chastizes as a compassionate
Father, what is his fury when he punishes as a severe Judge? if he deals thus
sharply with those he loves, what will their portion be whom he hates? if his
Wisdom leads him forth thus to corect in mercy, what will be the strokes of
his Justice and incensed Wrath and Fury?

2. The Miseries of this present Life are abated, or mitigated with the mixture
of some Sweet: None are so universally afflicted, so deplorable, but some thing
remains to ease their sufferings and tormenting pains: Judgments are tempered
with Mercys. No man (as one observes) is tortured with all Diseases, nor
forsaken of all Friends; besides, if the Malady be incurable and remediless,
yet their grief is a little allayed by the Sympathy of Friends and Neighbors:
But in Hell the damned are tortured and surrounded with pain and horror, and
encompassed with flames, without any mixture, nothing to refresh their
distressed Souls and Bodies, no, not one drop of water to cool their Tongue.
The rich Man desired but so much water that Lazarus could bring upon the tip of
his finger, and it was denied him. Luke 16. 24.


Fourthly, The State of the Damned is void of the least degree of Comfort, Ease
and Refreshment: The same shall drink of No Ease, no Comfort in Hell. His Wrath
without mixture. Rev. 14. 10.
the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup
of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of his holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: They shall have
Judgment without Mercy, Sorrow without Joy, Pain without Ease, Darkness without
Light, all felicity is totally withdrawn. Pity is the cheap and smallest
relief any here can meet withal in misery, not denied to the most guilty
notorious Criminal, but yet this is not afforded to the damned; all their
bitter Cries cannot move the Compassion of God nor the Blessed Angels or Saints
in Heaven toward them, for they are not Objects of Compassion, their Miseries
being the just punishments of an offended God, whom they wilfully and of their
own choice contemned, through love to Sin and this present World; besides, in
Hell all humane affections are extinguished for ever. Ah, this is the
quintisence and perfection of Misery, the excess of Anguish and Sorrow, to be
deprived of all good things pleasing to our desires, and to suffer all evils
from which we have the deepest aversation and abhorrence; for as in Heaven all
Good, all Felicity, all Joy, is inconceivable, so in Hell all evil is felt and
endured to the highest degree, and nothing but what is evil.

Some of the greatest miseries that Mortals have met with here in this World,
have been inflicted upon them by the hand of Man, (whose power is but little,
and oft-times restrained and mittigated by the Lord) as in the case of the poor
Martyrs: But in Hell the pain and punishment the of damned will be from the
immediate hand of Almighty God, whose power is Infinite; nay, and it shall be
according to his glorious Power, or the greatness of his Power; Who knows the
power of thine anger? When 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Psa. 80. 11.
infinite power is exerted in punishing the offending Sinner, who can conceive
of that? what are the Lashes of a small Whip, to that with Scorpions? or the
strokes of a Child, to the blows of a Giant? but alas, this will not reach it,
because the Strokes of Gods Wrath are incomprehensible; in Hell he lets out the
perfection of his Wrath, as in Heaven the perfection of his Love, etc. The
Sorrows and Miseries we endure here from the hand of God, may by Repentance, by
Cries and Tears, through Christ's Blood be taken off; God has promised to ease
such who fly unto him (and look up to his Son) of their burden, as he did
those that were stung with fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, who looked up to
the brazen Serpent; but no Tears, no Cries, no Repentance, will do in Hell,
there is no Gospel preached, no means of Grace afforded, no Christ held forth.

Fourthly, The Torments of the damned will be dismal, intolerable The damned
cast into a la7c of fire.
and amazing, because they shall be cast into a lake of fire, or be tormented
with fire. O how amazing is it, to be thrown into a fierce fire! look into a
Glass-house, (behold their burning Furnaces) or into a hot Oven; can you bear
the thoughts of being thrown into one of them? whether the fire of Hell be
material or metaphorical Fire, however the reality and extensiveness of the
Torment is signified by it, held forth by it, and as in other tropes in the
Scripture, the things signified or held forth by those Metaphors far exceed
what they are borrowed from, so no doubt it is here, our ordinary fire is not
an adequate Representation of the fire of Gods Wrath, though it may seem to set
it forth to our Capacities in some measure; what is the fire that man kindles,
to the fire that God kindles? nay, to that Divine Wrath does kindle? The breath
of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone does kindle Isa. 30. 33.
it. It is mingled with the most tormenting Ingredients, and not a little of
it, but a River; this serves so Illustriously to set it forth, that as one
hints, as some of the Ancient Fathers expressed it, if one of the damned might
pass out of Hell flames into the fiercest fires here, it were to exchange a
torment for a refreshment.

Fifthly, It will be intolerable, because the punishment of Hell Hell Torments
can never satisfy Divine Justice.
is to satisfy Divine Justice, to pay the just Debt owing to God for the
breach of his holy Law; true, because sin is an infinite wrong, and the
Creature is but finite, they can never pay the Debt, nor make a satisfaction
for the injury done to God, therefore they must suffer eternally; they are
always a paying, but can never fully pay what they owe, Justice requiring the
utmost farthing Mat. 5. 26.
: Nothing can surely set forth the dismalness of their torment more than this.
Oh take a view of Divine Wrath in the sufferings of our Blessed Savior, when
he stood in our stead, and was to satisfy for the Sins of all the Elect, how
did it bring him down prostrate to the ground, and made him sweat great drops
of blood, and to Cry out, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death! Though
he was God as well as Man, and had the Strength of the infinite Deity to
support him! Ah Sirs, this wrath laid upon finite Creatures, will sink them
down to the lowest Hell, and grind them to Powder.

Sixthly, It will be Wrath-amazing, and very terrible Wrath, The Torments of
Hell seize on the Souls of the damned.
because it will seize on the Soul of the Sinner, it will put the Soul into the
fire: The Soul has been the chief sinner here, and therefore shall be the
chief sufferer in those Regions of Sorrow; and how unsupportable is that Wrath
which is let out on the Soul or Spirit of man, you have had a taste in Spira
and Child. If, Sirs, a spark of Divine Displeasure, when it falls upon the
guilty Conscience, tears it pieces, what will be those floods of Divine Wrath
poured forth in Hell on the Souls of Men and Women? who can stand here whilst
in this World before an Angry God, or encounter with Offended Omnipotency? such
is the sharpness of his Sword, the heaviness of his Rod, when laid on by the
hand of his Wrath, that every stroke is deadly, and no doubt Satan greatens the
wounds on the Conscience, he charges the guilt upon their Spirits with all the
Soul-killing aggravations, and strives to hide Divine Mercy, and Rob the Soul
of the precious Blood of Christ, the only lenitive and choice balm to heal a
wounded Spirit. O what visions of horror, what sense of fear, and perplexity,
were presented to the distressed minds of these two miserable Creatures before
mentioned! the guilty Conscience turns all Joy into Sorrow, all Light into
Darkness, the sweet Promises of the Gospel, that assure of favor and pardon to
believing Sinners, afford no relief, but are turned into arguments of Despair,
by reflecting on their former Iniquities and abuse of Mercies, so that Christ
himself they see is become their Accuser.

'Whatever the wounded Sinner sees and hears (says a worthy Minister) afflicts
him, whatever he thinks of, torments him; all the diversions in the World,
Business, Pleasures, Merry Conversations, Comedies, are as ineffectual to give
him freedom from those stings and furies in his breasts, as the sprinkling of
holy Water is to expel the Devil from a possessed Person; those who in their
Pride and Jollity have despised serious Religion, either as a fond Transport
and Ecstasy, or a dull Melancholy and Dejection about the Soul, etc. yet when
God has set their sins, with all their killing circumstances, before their
Eyes, how changed, how confounded are they at that apparition! how restless in
the dreadful expectation of the doom that attends them!' But alas, alas, what
is internal Wrath let out on the Soul in Hell, as he notes? for the
Aprehensions of the Soul will be enlarged, and their spirits work with the
quickest activity: Here though they have no hope at present, yet they know not
what God may do in a moment to turn their Sorrow into Joy, and their Night into
Noonday; here are many things to divert their thoughts, and they meet with
some intermission of their horror and perplexity, as Mr. Child intimated, but
in Hell there is none of this.

Seventhly, It will be intolerable misery, because it shall be Torments on the
Body and Soul too, not on the Soul only, Body and Soul both shall be tormented
in Hell.
but on both. O it will be a dismal Meeting, when they two old Companions meet
together at the last day, I mean the miserable Soul and Body of a wicked man,
at the Resurrection, and hear the dolesom Sentence, Go ye cursed. Spira and
Child had direful Sorrow and Anguish in their Souls, but their Bodies were not
much tormented, they both being in a state of Health as to the outward man; but
the fire of Gods Wrath will extend to and seize upon the Body as well as on the
Soul in that day; every Faculty of the Soul and Member of the Body which have
been Instruments of Sin, shall then be in Pain, and under fearful Torture and
Misery: Now the Spirit of a man may support or sustain his bodily Infirmities
and Afflictions, but in Hell the Spirit cannot afford any Relief to the Body,
because it cannot sustain its own misery, both must and shall suffer.

Eighthly, All the Perplexing Passions and Faculties will then be let out upon
the wicked, beyond whatever they have been here whilst in this World.

1. The Conscience in a fearful manner shall torment the damned: Conscience
will torment the damned.
May we not conclude Conscience will terrify them after this manner? O thou
Wretch, what a God have thou lost, who is a most infinite, suitable,
seasonable, and a Soul-satisfying Good! what a Christ art thou deprived of, who
died for poor Sinners! how often did he knock at thy Door, calling upon thee,
entreating thee to let him in, who stood with his Arms spread open to embrace
all that came to him! and what a Heaven and endless Joy have thou contemned,
and this for one base Lust, for brutish Pleasure for a moment, for a little
Earthly Profit, and sinful Honor! How did thou hearken to thy vile
Companions, and close in with them, rather than adhere to me, who accused thee
for thy cursed Evils! thou would not mind those Checks and Lashes thou had
from me in thy Bosom; did not I tell thee what thy Pride, thy Lying, thy
Swearing, thy Whoreing, thy Theft, thy Cheating, thy Covetousness, and Cruelty
to the Poor, or Unmercifulness, thy Neglect of the means of Grace, and of
Gospel or Christian Duties, thy Hardness of Heart, thy Unbelief, thy Hypocrisy
and Formality, would bring thee to in the End? This is the gnawing Worm that
dies not: O how fearfully will Conscience terrify and torment the Soul of the
Damned then! now it is Blinded; Misled, Deceived, may be seared with a hot
Iron; but then it will be thoroughly awakened, and all Vails taken off; it will
lay unmerciful Blows upon the Soul, and make it cry, yea, roar, and none to
speak a word to allay or appease its Acclamations and its fearful Outcries: You
may judge of the Nature of a Tormenting Conscience in Hell, by what those have
sound and experienced to be the Effects of it, who have been under Desparation
in this World.

2. Shame also will torment them, some shall rise to Shame and Dan. 12. 2.
Shame will torment the damned.
everlasting Contempt. O what Shame and Confusion of Face shall the Damned be
clothed with! should a King lose his Crown and Kingdom to get a few
Cockle-shells, would it not bring Shame upon him? O how will the Damned Soul
cry, I have for mere Toys and Trifles lost that God that made me, that Christ
that is worth ten thousand Worlds, even he that is the Pearl of great Price: I
have been that Judas that did not value him above thirty pence, no, not above
the sinful Profits of this World, not above the Pleasure of Sin, and the filthy
Lusts of the Flesh; thus will the unclean Person be ashamed, Shame will torment
him; I must, says he, now lie in Hell for ever, and pay dear for my Folly.

2. The Drunkard will be also tormented with Shame: I was such a Fool, (he then
may say) that for the sake of my Cups, and Love to my cursed Companions, and
merry Bouts, have lost God, the Perfection of Happiness; I rather chose to go
to the Alehouse, or Tavern, to Drink and carouse with these Damned Wretches,
than to go to hear Gods Word; I derided them that feared to sin against God,
and accounted them Fools, but I must lie in Hell for ever, and pay dear for my
wickedness.

3. Shame also will torment the Proud and Ambitious Person: Ah what a Fool was
I, he will say, to love the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God! I sought
vain Honor, and pleased my self with a Name, all my Design was to be great,
and had in Esteem among Men; I was proud of my Estate, and despised he Poor; I
was of a Haughty Spirit, and gloried in my Titles of Honor; I sought the
Favor of my Prince, but regarded not the Favor of God; I was proud of my
Parts, I gloryed in my Gifts, in my Beauty, in my Strength; I delighted my self
in Antic Dresses, and in Decking of my Vile Body that now is here burning in
Hell; I was so Graceless, that I would not leave off Idle and Foolish Fashions,
though Godly Ministers were grieved at me, and told me my Doom, and though God
bore Witness against my High Head and Haughty Heart, by strange Prodigies in
Nature, seen in diverse poor Animals, yet I still vaunted my self in Pride, and
Wantouness, and laughed at Christ's Ministers when they reproved me. O what shame
torments me now, here must, I lie in Hell under Gods Wrath for ever, and pay
dear for my Folly!

4. The profane Swearer and Blasphemer will be also tormented with Shame: O,
says he, I looked upon my self to be no small Person, but one of the Hero's of
my Day, and fit to keep Company with great Men, because I could swear and curse
with any of them; how often did I call upon God to Damn me! I have but that
which I desired, he has now damned me indeed: I acted like a fearless Brute
Beast: O what Shame do I find my Soul covered with, that I should cast away my
self for that filthy Vice that was no Profit to me any manner of way!

5. Shame also will terrisie, and bring Confusion upon the carnal Worldling, or
Covetuous Person, who made this World his God I had, he will say, store of Gold
and Silver in my Bags and Chests, where it lay to rust, but I refused to feed
the Poor, and to cloth the Naked, I regarded no distressed Members of Christ;
I set my Heart upon my Earthly Treasure, valuing it above God and Jesus Christ:
O what a Fool was I, in that I could not foresee how soon I must leave all that
which I had gathered. I to get the World, slighted, nay, despised my own Soul;
now if I had ten thousand Worlds, I would give them for the Favor of God, nay
for one drop of Water to cool my Tongue.

6. The Liar moreover will be tormented with Shame. Ah! says he, how often did
I read, that those that did love and make Lies should burn in this Lake, but I
would not believe it; I damned my own Soul by telling Lies to please my
graceless Companions, even to cause them to laugh and be merry, or to excuse my
self, and free me from shame when on Earth, or for a little worldly Profit,
Gain, or for popular Applause, I made no Conscience oftelling Lies: O what
Shame does these things now bring upon my Spirit!

7. The Seducer and Heretical person likewise will be filled and tormented with
shame, who preached false Doctrine, or sucked in detestable Errors, laying
aside the chief Cornerstone, and magnifying Morality, or the Light of natural
Conscience, above Christ: I seemed, says he, to be a strict and zealous
Person, and deceived multitudes of People, but for trusting in my own
Righteousness, for hugging a few base filthy Rags I am damned: I was ignorant
of Gods Righteousness, and of the Mysteries of the Gospel, yet gave out that
none were true Christians but such as my self; I denied that Christ that bought
me, and did not believe the Resurrection of my Body, but now I find how the
Devil blinded my Eyes, and now here tormented with Shame I must lie in these
flames, Body and Soul for ever! O! and what a multitude of poor deluded
Creatures have I been an Instrument to bring into this place! Woe is me that
ever I was born!

8. The Hypocritical Professor will be tormented with Shame also: I rested (he
will say) upon a bare Name of being Religious, pleased my self with the Shell,
withan empty Cabinet, without the Jewel, a Lamp of Profession, with a Form of
Godliness, my Business was to keep up my Credit amongst Gods People, that they
might take me to be one of them; yet my own Conscience often told me I was not
sincere, I loved not the Life and Power of Godliness, I did all to be seen of
men, had base ends, I appeared abroad to be what I was not at home: O what
Shame now torments my Soul! I had a darling Lust which I would not forego, my
heart was never really changed -- Thus I might go on to the rest, etc. O what
Shame will seize upon the Sinner, when all his vain Excuses are laid open, and
all his Extenuations of his Guilt are discovered, when his secret Deeds of
Darkness are published (as it were) on the Housetop, when his Breast shall be
transparent to all Eyes, when his inward Thoughts, cursed Lusts, cruel Malice,
Murders and Deceits, are made manifest, and all his beastly Sensualities shall
be laid open before God, Angels and Saints, when the Vails and Covers of Shame
shall be taken off, how will he be confounded for ever!

9. The Devil also no doubt will reproach them for their Folly, The Devil will
upbraid the damned.
though he be in Misery with them: Ah thou Wretch, may not he say, wast thou
not a Fool to believe me, (whom thou wast often told was a Liar from the
Beginning) and would not believe thy God? See how I have betrayed thee, and
blinded thine Eyes, and made thee taken with silly Rattles, Toys and Triffles;
I presented thee with false Money, with brass Counters, and thou did take
them, and refuse precious Gold and Pearl; I knew I was damned, and should be
tormented, and I out of Malice to thy Soul resolved to try to make thee as
miserable as my self, and I have done it: Alas I had no power to force thee,
but I saw thou had no Strength to resist my Enticements, nor did thou see
thy own Disability, I hid it from thee, that thou might not look up to
Christ for Help: I made thee believe thou wast a Christian, it was I that told
thee thy Heart and State was good, (when I knew thou wast an undone Man) and
thou did believe me; I had more Honor showed me by thee, than the Great God;
thou did believe me, and would not believe Him, his Word, his Ministers. Ah
how just is it, thou Fool, that thou should stlie here with me to Eternity in
these Flames,

3. Moreover, Sorrow will violently penetrate and seize on the Soul of the
Damned, partly upon the Account of what they The sorrow and despair of the
damned will be great.
have lost, together with the sense of the Evil they feel. O how great is the
loss of an earthly Kingdom! doubtless no little Grief and Sorrow to a King who
meets with that Affliction, but what is that to the loss of the presence of
God, the Vision of God, and the glorious Enjoyment of Christ, and the Eternal
Crown and Kingdom above. Oh! what Grief and Perplexity will this be unto them,
especially when they reflect on the small value of those Things for the sake of
which they deprived themselves of Eternal Felicity! How have some mourned for
the Loss of an Husband, a Wife, or Children! What will then the Sorrow be for
the Loss of Jesus Christ? Christ is lost, Heaven is lost, and now here must I
lie! O gulf of misery, dolesom darkness and endless Torment!

4. Despair will torment them also, this will make their pain and anguish more
intolerable. O how dismal was the Despair of Spira and Child, but in Hell it
will exceed, it will be utter Despair, without all Hope and Intermission!

5. Fury and Rage will afflict them also: O how will they tear, roar and howl
in a hideous manner, hating themselves and cursing those that enticed them to
sin and folly, and to slight the eternal Joys of Heaven?

Tenthly, The Misery which the Damned undergo in Hell will The wicked in Hell
shall have the frightful company of Devils.
be great, upon the Account of their hateful and amazing Companions, viz. the
Devils, they must dwell with Devils for ever: how have some who have but
thought they have seen the Devil, trembled, and been terrified! Alas, alas! in
Hell sinners shall be continually with him, nay with millions of Devils; who
can express the Horror that will seize on the damned in this respect? We do not
love to see such who have ruined us of our Estates, robbed us out of Malice of
our good Names; a King in Chains, in a Dungeon, cannot like to behold the vile
Traitor that dethroned him, that wounded him, and stripped him of all his Royal
Robes; thus has the Devil dealt with those miserable Creatures of lost Mankind
that are damned; yet he shall be with them, and be their Companion, and may, as
you heard, reproach them, which with the constant sight of his ugly face, will
add to their Misery and Sorrow.

Eleventhly, The Place of Torment is called a Lake of Fire, yet Hell is a dark
place.
it is called utter Darkness, they shall never see the least Glimpse of Light
any more for ever. O how grievous is it to dwell in darkness! the Darkness of
Egypt no doubt was one of their worst Plagues, Darkness that might be felt, but
alas what was that Exodus 10. 21.
darkness to the darkness which the damned shall be in; and feel to Eternity?
If therefore the fire of Hell be material fire, yet it will not be like our
common fire, the Property of which is to give Light; but it will be dark fire:
God can change that quality of Fire, if he please, though it may have all other
Properties, yet not that. The Holy Ghost says, speaking of the ungodly, who
are as Clouds without Water, Trees whose Fruit is withered, twice dead, plucked
up by the Root, that to them is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever.
The blackness of Darkness shows the Horror of their Punishment, and it being
reserved Jude 13.
for them shows the certainty of it: As their Deeds have been deeds of
Darkness, Works of Darkness, and some of them have wrought Wickedness in
secret, or in darkness, so their Punishment shall be Darkness, never to have
the least Glimpse of external, nor internal, nor eternal Light, any more for
ever.

Eleventhly, The Torment of the Damned is and will be intolerable, because it
will be for ever and ever, the Eternity Torments of the wicked Eternal.
of their Misery is that which above all things renders it amazing, it is called
in my Text unquenchable Fire: O how astonishing is this! all the Tears of those
miserable Wretches can never quench one spark of the fire; no, no, if they
could weep a Sea of Brinish Tears, or a Sea of Blood, it could not allay or
extinguish the least spark of divine Wrath. God will never reverse the dismal
sentence: How often does our Savior say, there the Worm dies not, and the
Fire is not quenched: Sure he Mark 9.
repeats it so often, as I hinted before, because the Heart of Man is ready to
question the Truth thereof. Wicked men are not willing to believe it, but they
shall find it to be true to their endless Sorrow at last: Ah Sirs, the Thoughts
of this drives them into the greatest Horror imaginable; if Pain and Anguish be
never so extreme, yet if there is Grounds to hope and believe it will be but
short, that affords some Ease, some Relief; but when there is no hope, but they
must bear it as long as they live, (though they may live ten, twenty or thirty
years) the Thoughts of this is intolerable. What then shall we say of the
Torments of the Damned, which as they are far beyond all pain and misery that
ever mortal felt on Earth, so they will abide to the days of Eternity; should
one of you be cast into a Fire, a fierce Fire, and it was possible that your
Body might lie therein, burning, and broiling, and you not be able to dye, for
an hundred years, would not the Thoughts of such Punishment be exceeding
frightful and tormenting; but alas, alas! what is an hundred years to Eternity,
if after ten hundred thousand million of years are run out in Hell, the damned
might hope their Torments would be over, it would relieve them, but when so
long a time (comparatively) is gone, they shall not be one moment nearer the
end of their Sorrow and Misery: If one sand of the Sea shore was removed, and
but one in a year, yet should that be done or continued every year, until all
the sands on the Sea-shoar were removed, (though it would be a long time first)
yet they would be all removed at last: And had the Damned but so much hope,
that after so long a time as that would amount to, their Torments would have an
end, it would revive their Spirits. O this word Eternity, Eternity, is most
amazing to wicked men! besides, as in Pleasures, Joy and Delights, time seems
to slide away in a silent and insensible manner, so in horrid Pain and Misery
the days seem long and tedious, every minute is accounted; so that the
Consideration of this must needs make their Eternity, if it were possible, a
double Eternity, nay, many Eternities; for one hour under the greatest
Extremities of Misery seems ten times, nay, an hundred times longer than an
hours time in the Enjoyment of the sweetest Delight and Pleasure. An Eternity
of Joy is long in respect of Duration, but seems short (says a worthy Divine)
in respect of Apprehension. So on the other hand, say I, an Eternity of Pain,
Torment and Misery, is long in respect of Duration, but seems much longer in
respect of Apprehension.

Quest. But shall there not be an end of the Torments of the Damned? will
infinite Goodness be so severe with his offending Creatures? can this stand
consistent with the Sweetness of his Nature and infinite mercy?

Answ. I Answer, there is a Perfection in every one of Gods divine Attributes;
as his Love is infinite to such who are his Elect ones, who do believe in him,
honor and obey him, so is his Hatred infinite to all those who despise, hate
and dishonor him.

2. God will be sure glorify his Veracity, or the Truth of his Threatening: He
that has said, the righteous shall be saved with an everlasting Salvation, or
shall have eternal Life, has said, that the wicked shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power: They are 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9.
tormented day and night for ever and ever. Now since God has Decreed and
denounced eternal punpishment to obstinate sinners, it is sufficient to
satisfy all Doubts about the Justice of it. Let God be true, and every man a
Liar; for divine Justice and Wrath is the Correspondence of his Will, Actions,
and Holiness of his Nature to the damned: 'As divine Love and Goodness is to
such who are saved; we may therefore, says one, as easily conceive there is no
God, as that God is unjust, because absolute Rectitude is an inseparable
perfection of his Nature;' is God unrighteous who takes Vengance? God forbid.
Romans 3 5. 6.


3. Sin deserves no less than an infinite and an eternal punishment, therefore
unless the Damned could give an infinite Satisfaction by suffering, they must
suffer eternally, for they must lie in Prison until they have paid the
uttermost farthing: But alas, how should they make full payment to Gods Justice
who run continually into Debt, more and more! for the Damned in Hell do not
cease sinning, they will sin to Eternity, and therefore must suffer to Eternity.

4. Nay, they will sin with the greatest Fury and Madness against God, when
they come to be under the greatest sense of Despair imaginable; they will sin
then like as the Devils do now, and will for ever, when they see they are
deprived of all good, and only possess what is evil: O how will they hate God,
blaspheme his holy Name for evermore! the blessed God is the Object of their
Curses and eternal Aversation; in Hell is weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
'Extream Sorrow and extreme Fury, Despair and Rage (says one) are proper
Passions of lost Souls; their Enmity against God is direct and explicit, the
Fever is heightened into a Frenzy. If their Rage could extend to him, and their
Power equal to their desire, they would dethrone the most High; Hatred takes
pleasure in Revenge.' It Is said of the Worshippers of the Beast, that they
gnawed their Tongues for pain, and Blasphemed the God of Heaven Rev. 16. 10. 11.
because of their pain: These Torments and Blasphemies of the Damned are
clearly represented by these cursed impenitent Idolaters.

'If a Criminal were justly condemned to a severe Punishment, and should
contumeliously, with the greatest Fury reproach the Prince by whose Authority
he was condemned, could it be expected there should be a mitigation of the
severity of the Sentence?' How then should the righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth reverse or mitigate the Sentence against the Damned, who blaspheme his
holy Majesty, and if they were able to effect as they are malicious to desire,
would destroy his very being, and execute that on him which he in Justice
inflicts on them?

5. To have to the Application: The infinite Guilt that cleaves to sin, and the
Consideration that they continually add more Guilt upon their own Heads,
requires a proportion in punishment, as the Evil of sin exceeds our Thoughts:
The Majesty of God being infinite, consequently the punishment of it will be
infinite, and beyond our Conceptions; it will be a letting out of his infinite
Wrath and utter extent of his power, therefore unto the Wicked is reserved the
blackness of Darkness for ever.

APPLICATION.

From hence we may infer, how great Evil there is in sin; O sin is the Plague
of all Plagues! who can conceive how detestable Sin the greatest evil.
a thing is sin in the sight of God, since He who is so gracious, merciful and
compassionate a God, should throw millions of Men and Women in his Wrath into
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

2. This also shows the woeful Depravation of Mankind, what Darkness, Ignorance
and Folly is in their Minds and Hearts, that choose Sin, when told not only how
hateful it is to God, but what intolerable and durable Torments it does expose
them unto: One would think that a person that hears these things should never
indulge his vicious Appetite any more, nor lay his Reins loose on the neck of
his Lust, but it is more marvelous to see or hear that he who believes the
Scripture, and doubts not of the Truth of Hell Torments, should yet
notwithstanding lead an ungodly Life; what believe there is such Torments
prepared for all impenitent Persons, and yet not turn to God by Jesus Christ!

3. From hence also we may infer, how necessary it is that Ministers open the
Torments of Hell, seeing Jesus Christ so often in the Gospel threatens all
Hypocrites and Unbelievers therewith: They that say it is legal Preaching, to
preach such a Doctrine as this, know not what they say; will they magnify
their Wisdom above the Wisdom of Jesus Christ, and the first and great
Preachers of the Gospel of Peace, who said, we knowing therefore the Terror of
God, persuade Men; that is, to believe in Christ, and to live godly Lives, that
so they may never 2 Cor. 5, 11.
feel Gods eternal Wrath; the Hearts of Men can more easily conceive of the
Torments of Hell than of the Joys of Heaven.

And as it may be of use by way of Information, so also by way of Terror, and
that to many sorts of Persons.

1. Tremble ye wordly Professors, who have earthly Spirits, that set your
Hearts on things below, and neither cloth the Naked, nor feed the Hungry, Weep
and howl for the misery that shall come upon you, -- ye have heaped Treasure
together against the last day; Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3.
how will your Folly gall your Consciences when you lie in Hell Torments!
whilst you heap up Gold and Silver in your Bags and Chests, you heap up Wrath
against the last day: Remember what Christ says unto you, And these shall go
away into everlasting Mat. 25. 46.
punishment. What will your Profession signify, if you love the World above
God, which be sure you do, if you see a Brother or Sister in want, and do not
give them such things that they need: Remember Mr. Child, I have made this
World (says he) my God.

2. Tremble you proud and vainglorious Persons: Pride, cries poor Mr. Child,
has undone me; The Proud and all that do wickedly Mal. 4. 1, 2.
shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up. Will you glory
in your Riches, Honors, Gifts, Knowledge, or any thing you have? will you not
be reclaimed to throw off your Godprovoking Fashions, whatsoever comes of it,
but plead to uphold your Lusts and Vanity, though the Name of God be dishonored,
and Religion brought into Contempt, and the Godly grieved.

3. Tremble you vain young Men and Women, who forget your Creator in the days
of your Youth, that secretly resolve your own Hearts shall choose your ways;
who will feed your carnal Appetites and wanton Desires, and will run on in
wicked Courses, let Ministers say what they will, Godly Parents say what they
will, yet you will swear, lie, be drunk, commit Uncleanness. O know, as you
feed your Lusts here, and that burns in you, so shall Hell feed on you, and
that fire like Chaff burn you up hereafter: Will a few merry Hours with your
filthy Companions make a compensation for the loss of your precious and
immortal Souls? Are you willing to suffer the Wrath of God for ever, rather
than to forgo your vain and wicked Courses?

4. Tremble ye that harbor Atheistical Thoughts in your Hearts, and are ready
to think or hope there is no God: O how soon may you feel him within you, by
his terrible Wrath! as Mr. Child in bitterness of Soul cried out.

5. Tremble ye Liars, that love to make a lie, for you shall have your portion
in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
Rev. 21. 8.


6. Tremble ye who are light and frothy persons also, you that are Back-biters,
Busie-bodys, that vilify and reproach the Servants of God out of Malice and
Prejudice, you will be as Chaff that shall burn in Hell for ever.

7. Tremble all ye that slight Christ and his Gospel, and neglect those
convictions you have either of Sin or Duty, and that slight all serious
thoughts of Eternity, or how things will go with you in another World, and who
stiffle your Consciences, or turn a deaf ear to it is rebukes, God may awaken
you er'e long in his Wrath, and tear you to pieces when there is none to
deliver you.

8. Tremble all ye Hypocrites, whose Hearts condemn you for harboring some Sin
or another in your bosoms, who are not what you seem to be, but strive to cover
your vileness under a cloak of a visible Profession: Fearfulness will soon
surprise you: Who amongst us shall dwell with devouring fire? Isa. 33. 14.
who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burning? Hell is that place that
is prepared for Hypocrites and Unbelievers: It seems by the Mat. 24. 51.
word of our Blessed Savior, that they above all are in a dangerous Estate,
and shall not escape eternal burning. Luke 12. 45.


9. Tremble ye Apostates, ye who have backsliden from God. O fear, lest God let
out his Wrath upon you here, and it burn within you, whilst you are alive in
the body; and if it prove a final Apostasy, Woe be to you as ever you were born!
then there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for
of Judgment, and fiery indignation that shall devour the adversaries.

Exhort. O Repent, Repent, haste to Christ, believe on him. Heb. 10. 27.


1. Motive. The God of mercy exercises much Patience toward poor Sinners, O
how does he wait, O how willing is he they should be saved, and not come into
the place of Torment.

2. He tells you what your End will be, if you believe not, if you accept not
his Son, fly not for Refuge to take hold of Jesus Christ; if ye believe not in
Christ, ye shall dye in your sins; that is, you shall be damned for ever: He
that believes and is baptized Joh. 8. 24.
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. He sets out the
Torments of the damned by the most amazing figures, Mark 16. 16.
to move upon men's Spirits, and work upon their Minds, so that they being
deterred form evil Practices may flee from the Wrath Heb. 6. 18.
to come, by laying hold on the hope set before them; he gives warning before
he strikes, tells you of your danger; Except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish; he that believes on the son has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see Life, but the Joh. 3. 36.
Wrath of God abides on him; the wicked shall be turned into Hell, Psa. 9. 17.
with all the Nations that forget God: You may know how it will go with you at
the last day, if you hear but Gods warning-pieces in his Word: Know ye not the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers,
nor effeminate Persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves,
nor Drunkards, nor Extortioners; etc. Compared with Rev. 21. 8.

3. God calls, nay cries to you sinners, O ye simple ones, why Prove. 1. 26, 27.
will ye love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge! turn ye at my reproof, and
behold I will pour out my spirit upon you, etc.

4. He gives sinners time and space to repent, or a day of Grace. O now
unexcusable will he leave every ungodly man at the last day! their destruction
shall appear to be of themselves; be sure God will be clear when he judges,
none shall have any thing to charge him with, all mouths shall be stopped. The
man That wanted the Wedding Garment was speechless.

5. God has sent his Son to die for Sinners: God so loved the Joh. 3. 16.
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

6. He sends his Ministers to call you, to invite you, who tell you all things
are now ready: Sinners, will your sinful Honors, Mat. 22. 7.
Riches or Pleasures, make a reparation for the loss of a Christ, the loss of
Heaven, and loss of your own souls? Take two or three Directions. 1. Seek the
Kingdom of Heaven first, before all things. 2. Take notice, this is the day of
your Visitation, know now the Directions.
things that belong to your peace, before they are hid from your Eyes: Behold
now is the accepted time, etc. 3. Close with Christ whilst the Spirit strives
with thee, and before Conscience is feared, or let out against thee, to tear
thee into pieces. 4. Attend carefully upon the means of Grace, and know
assuredly that the Wages of Sin is eternal Death, even everlasting burnings,
therefore renounce it with the greatest abhorrence; know all the Pleasures and
Honors of this Life are but the Elements of carnal felicity, and according to
the Judgment of Reason and sense would any one choose the enjoyment of the
greatest Pleasures for a day, and afterward be satisfied to suffer the most
exquisite Torments for a year? much more folly and madness it is for momentary
brutish delights to incurr the fiery. Indignation of God for ever.


1. One word to you that are Believers, and I have done. Comfort to Believers.
O bless God for Jesus Christ, who has born the wrath of God for you, and in
your stead, that you might never seel the bitterness of it, even Jesus who
delivered us from wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.


2. Admire the distinguishing Grace and special Love of God: We love him,
because he first loved us: It was his Love that overcame you. The mere fear of
Hell is not sufficient to Convert the Souls of men, though it may stop them in
their way, and prevent great Abominations in the gross acts thereof, yet does
not, cannot renew their Nature, regenerate and make holy their hearts and
lives; that Religion that is the mere effect of fear will be according to the
nature of its principle, even legal, wavering and inconstant; yet the fear of
Hell may awaken the sinner, and in some sense prepare for Grace: When the Soul
is stormed by the terror of Wrath, and the fear of Hell has made a breach,
Divine Grace enters, but it is the Love of God and hopes of Heaven that works
spiritual affections, (as the Obedience that flows therefrom is Evangelical,
free and voluntary, from the entire consent of the Soul) and are abiding.

3. Be content with your Condition, though poor in this World, remember Lazarus,
how much better was his state than the Rich Glutton's? O do not envy the wicked
that are Rich, they will pay dear for their Wealth when they come to Hell,
which they with greedy covetous minds heap up. I remember a Passage which is
related in History: A General with an Army passing through another Princes
Country, gave strict Order that no Person should offer to touch the least
thing which belonged to the Inhabitants; but nevertheless one Soldier as they
were upon their March, stole a Bunch of Grapes, which the General being
informed of, gave Order that he should immediately be put to Death; as he was
going to Execution, he fell a eating his Grapes, and some Persons looking
greedily on him, he observing them, said, Do not envy me my Grapes, for they
cost me dear, they cost me my Life.

4. Let it appear to all that you do love Jesus Christ, and prefer the honor
of God and his interest above all things in this World; let the main end and
design of your Souls in desiring Grace, Gifts, Knowledge, etc. and in all you
act and do in his Service, be, that you may advance his Glory.

Sirs, the time is near when it will be known who are Christ's Wheat, true
Christians, and who are not; but let all that are but Chaff tremble, for Hell
is prepared for them: He will gather the Wheat into his garner, but the Chaff
he will burn up with unquenchable fire.

FINIS.
THE BLESSEDNESS OF Christ's Sheep: OR, No final Falling from a State of true
Grace. DEMONSTRATED, In Several SERMONS, lately Preached, and now for general
Good Published. Wherein all the grand Objections usually brought against the
Saints final Perseverance, are fully answered.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Heb. 10. 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto Perdition: but of them
that believe, to the saving of the Soul. London, Printed in the Year, 1694.

THE BLESSEDNESS OF Christ's Sheep, etc.
JOHN X. 27, 28. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon. 1. Preached Feb. 5. 169 1/^.
BELOVED, these Words are the Words of our Blessed Savior: and they contain no
small Comfort to all true Believers, who are the Sheep and Lambs of Jesus
Christ. My main Purpose or Intention, is to speak to the 28 th Verse, and to
defend the sweet and comfortable Doctrine of the Saints final Perseverance; but
shall begin with the 27 th Verse, viz. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them,
and they follow me.

In our Text are two Parts. Parts of the Text.
1. Something Implied, viz. Christ is a Shepherd, and that he has a People
that are his Sheep. 2. Something that is Expressed, viz. That all such who are
his Sheep, hear his Voice, and do follow him.


You have in the Words, 1. The Property of Christ's Sheep. 2. Their Security,
and happy State and Condition. 1. Their Character or Property, viz. They hear
his Voice, and do follow him. 2. Their Security, and happy State and Condition.
1. He knows them, that is, he approves of them. 2. He gives to them Eternal
Life. 3. They are in his Hand, and shall never perish.


Our Savior in this Chapter calls himself the Shepherd of the Sheep, yea, the
Good Shepherd, Ver. 11. I am the Good Shepherd: the Good Shepherd gives his
Life for the Sheep.

Now if it be demanded who are the Sheep of Christ? I answer, All that the
Father has given to him, and that believe in him.

Christ's Sheep may be considered as his two manner of ways.

1. Decretively. See Ver. 16. And other Sheep I have, which are not of this
Fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice. The Lord Jesus
means the Gentiles, these he calls his Sheep by virtue of God's Eternal
Election, Them also I must bring; They are given unto me; and all that the
Father has given me, shall come unto me. I lay down my Life for them, or in
their stead, that they John 6. 37.
might not perish. I therefore (as if he should so say) must bring them, call
them, renew or regenerate them: The Covenant I have made with my Father is
such, that it cannot be broken; the Purpose, Counsel, and Promises of God shall
stand. This agrees with that Word of the Holy God to St. Paul, Be not afraid,
but speak, and hold not thy peace: For I am with thee, and no Man shall set on
Acts 18. 9, 10.
thee to hurt thee; for I have much People in this City. They are called the
Lord's People, though then in a state of Darkness and Unbelief; decretively, or
according to his Eternal Purpose, they were his.

2. Actually, or such who are already brought in, or who do believe, and are
visibly of his Fold.

The Doctrine I shall prosecute, shall be drawn as comporting with this latter
Exposition.

Doct. 1. All true Believers are the Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ, and he is
their Shepherd; they hear his Voice, and follow him.

Two things I shall (God assisting) do.

Before I raise any other Point of Doctrine, in prosecuting this,

I shall, 1. Open or explain this Proposition. 2. Apply it.

In speaking to the first, I shall observe this Method.

First, I shall explain the Proposition. 1. I shall show you in what respect
they may be said to be his Sheep. 2. Show what is meant by Christ's Voice. 3.
What by hearing of his Voice. 4. What by his knowing of them. 5. Give you some
of the Characters of Christ's Sheep; and show how they follow him. 6. Show what
a kind of Shepherd Christ is.


First, They are his Sheep by Choice, or by virtue of Election. Those that are
Christ's, are not only his Sheep, but his Spouse also, according Believers
Christ's Sheep by Choice.
to another Scripture-Metaphor; and therefore it is reasonable they should be
his own free Choice, and such as he can and does dearly love; not only such as
the Father loved, but he himself also loved: all that were Elected from
Everlasting, were beloved by the Father, and the Son, from Everlasting, with a
Purpose of Grace and Favor, or Love of Benevolence. The Sign and Fruit of
Christ's Love to his Sheep, is the Choice he has made of them; Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained that you should go and bring
forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain, John 15. 16. This Christ
mentions here, as an Argument of his greatest Love; and therefore he does not
refer to that Choice of them as Apostles, for so was Judas chosen, who was not
comprehended in God's Eternal Election; I speak not of you all, I know whom I
have chosen, John 15. 18. Judas was chosen to the Apostleship, but was not
chosen to Eternal Life; he was a Devil, and therefore not to be one of Christ's
Sheep: Have I not chosen you Twelve, and one of you is a Devil?

Christ has no Sheep, but such that he was pleased to choose, or make choice of
for his own; and he knows them, before they know him, as the Apostle speaks,
The Lord knows them that are his; 2 Timothy 2. 19.
that is, all such that he has chosen according to the Decree of Eternal
Election.

Secondly, Christ's Sheep are his, by virtue of the Father's free Donation. By
Donation.
They are all given unto him; I pray not for the World, but for them thou have
given me. I have manifested thy Name to the Men which thou gave me out of the
World: thine they were, and thou Joh. 17. 9. Joh. 17. 6.
gave them me. They were given to Christ to be his Sheep, to be his Spouse,
and Members of his Mystical Body. Behold, I and the Children thou have given
me, are for Signs and Wonders in Israel. Isa. 8. 18.


Thirdly, They are Christ's Sheep by Purchase: He bought them all, and that too
at a dear Price. He paid heartily for them, every By Purchase.
Sheep cost one and the same Price, even the meanest, poorest, and weakest of
them, cost more than ten thousand Millions; nay, that which was in value more
than ten thousand Worlds: Ye are not 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
your own, but you are bought with a Price. We had sold our selves to other
Masters, and they had possession of us. I am carnal, says Paul, sold under
Sin. He was formerly sold, and was hardly yet Romans 7. 14. Isa. 50. 1.
got out of the Tyrant's Hand. Behold, for your Iniquities have you sold your
selves; but ye shall be redeemed without Money. We were all sold to Sin, sold
to Satan, and there was no ways to redeem us from the Wrath of God, without a
great Ransom; Justice will have a satisfactory Price: And since corruptible
things, as Silver and Gold, will not do it, no nor a thousand Rams, nor ten
thousand Rivers of Oil, nor the Fruit of the Body, which could not make
Atonement for the Sin of the Soul, Christ must come to the Price proposed to
him, and demanded of him, if he will purchase these Sheep, and that was his own
precious Blood. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to the Flock over
which the 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, that ye feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own Blood. I lay down my Life for Acts 20. 28.
my Sheep. This was the Price, so dearly did Christ buy his Sheep. And this
Day, Beloved, the Tokens of this Price, or Sacred Signs or Symbols of this
Purchase is to be set before your Eyes: pray remember that Believers are
Christ's Sheep by Purchase.

Fourthly, Believers are Christ's Sheep by Renovation, or Transformation. In
this lies a great Mystery, they had not once a Sheeplike By Renovation.
Nature, but by Grace their swinish and evil Qualities are changed: he has
infused new and holy Dispositions into them. So that in this respect Jesus
Christ excels all other Shepherds, for they cannot turn Swine, Bears, or
Tigers, into Sheep; but the Lord Jesus, by the Holy Ghost, makes such to become
his Sheep, or to have Sheep-like Natures and Dispositions, that were before as
vile, filthy, and abominable as the worst of Sinners: the Holy Ghost compares
them before Grace and Regeneration, to Dogs, Swine, etc. they having like evil
Qualities with those unclean and filthy Creatures: Such were some of you. What
a kind of such were they? Why, 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.
Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Reviiers, Extortioners, Effeminate, etc. But ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, (that is, by the Power of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God.
Christ has not one Sheep, but what he has made so to be: He, as God, made
them at first, and they having lost their first Excellent and Holy Nature, he
new makes them, forms them again, or transforms them into his own holy, humble,
meek, and gentle Nature. This People have I formed for my self, they shall show
forth my Praise.

We are created in Christ Jesus unto good Works; and thus they Ephesians. 2. 10.
may be said to be his Sheep.

Fifthly, Believers are Christ's Sheep, by a Holy Covenant or Contract made
with the Father; and by virtue of this Covenant they were By Holy Covenant and
Contract.
given to him. By virtue of this Covenant he died for them; by virtue of this
Covenant they became his, and he calls them, renews them, and changes them; He
shall see his Seed. It was by the Blood of this Covenant the Great Shepherd of
the Sheep was raised from the Dead; that they might be raised, quickened, and
Heb. 13. 21.
justified. By virtue of this Covenant he gathers them, and carries them in his
Arms, and lays the young and tender Ones in his Bosom; and gently leads such
that are with Young, Isa. 40. 11. By virtue of this Covenant he puts his Fear
into their Hearts, that they may not depart from him. Jer. 31. 33.


Christ as Mediator in this Covenant, is God's Servant, and undertakes the
Office of Shepherd, to take care of, feed, heal, and preserve all those who
were given to him by the Father.

Sixthly, Believers are Christ's Sheep by Conquest. They were fallen into the
Enemy's Hand; in the Hands and under the Power of By Conquest.
most cruel Tyrants, who designed to tear them in pieces and devour them: They
were in Satan's Hand, and under the Power of Sin; and were mere Bondslaves,
and in fearful slavery to these Enemies, having their Eyes put out, their
Fleece torn off, or stripped of their Robes, being dangerously wounded. And
although Jesus Christ, to redeem them from Wrath and Misery, laid down a great
Price (as you heard before) to satisfy God's Justice; yet, alas, Satan takes no
notice of that, they were in his Hand; who like a strong Man armed, keeps the
Soul, and had Power over them: therefore Jesus Christ puts forth his Almighty
Hand to vanquish and subdue this cruel Foe, and thereby redeems and rescues all
his Sheep out of Slavery and Bondage; by which means they come to be his by a
blessed Conquest of their Enemies, and by overcoming them; for he subdues their
Hearts bends and subjects their rebellious Wills by the Power of Divine Grace,
before he can have one of them: All the Sheep of Christ yield themselves up to
him, as being conquered by him; overcome by his Love, and the Power of his
Spirit. This brings me to the next thing.

Seventhly, and lastly, Believers are Christ's Sheep by virtue of a By a holy
Resignation.
holy Resignation of themselves to him. They have chosen him to be their
Shepherd: other Sheep cannot make choice of their Shepherd, but Christ's Sheep
can do this, their Eyes being enlightened to see the Excellency of Christ, the
Greatness of his Love, and what he has suffered and undergone for them; they
commit their Souls to his care and keeping, that he may watch over them, feed
and lead them: They gave themselves first unto the Lord, and unto us by the 2
Cor. 8. 5.
Will of God.

First, They gave themselves unto the Lord, (by the Power of his Spirit) to be
his, and no more their own, but to be his People, his Spouse, his Sheep; and
then gave themselves to his Church, to be of his Flock. Christ has no Member,
no Sheep of his visible Church or Fold on Farth, but such who know him; I am
known of mine. They are not ignorant Persons, or such who are unable to give
themselves up to him. Others are not required to give them: No, no; they must
be able to give or resign themselves to him, (as being overcome by his Love)
and thus they become his Sheep also.

Secondly, I shall show you what is meant by Christ's Voice.

There is a Fourfold Voice of Jesus Christ which his Sheep hear. 1. The Voice
of his Word. 2. The Voice of his Spirit. 3. The Voice of his Holy Doctrine. 4.
The Voice of his Rod.


First. Christ's Sheep hear the Voice of his Word. The Holy Scripture is
Christ's Word, and therefore the Voice of Christ, and this Voice his Sheep
hear: They give full credit to the Truth of the Sacred Scriptures, they believe
they are of Divine Authority: All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and
is profitable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. They are none
of Christ's Sheep that do not, will not hear this Voice of Christ; that is, do
not believe the Truth of the Sacred Scriptures, do not hear nor regard what
they speak, but magnify unwritten Traditions above the Word of God, or the
Light of Natural Conscience. The Sheep of Christ hear Christ's Voice in the
Ministry of his Word, they attend upon the preaching of the Gospel, and look
upon the Word delivered in Christ's Name, by his faithful Ministers, to be the
Voice of Christ unto them: But how, or after what manner Christ's Sheep do hear
his Voice, viz. the Voice of his Word, I shall open under the third Head.

Secondly, There is the Voice of Christ's Spirit; and this Voice of his his
Sheep hear also, and indeed none but they. Sirs, this is that Voice of Christ
which does the Work, and that which discovers who are his Sheep. The Voice of
Christ's Word, without the Spirit, is not sufficient; the Word will not make
Sinners hear, though it be spoken a thousand times over, except the Spirit's
Voice do accompany it: I shall therefore open to you the Nature of this Voice
of Christ, I mean, the Voice of his Spirit.

1. It Is an awakening Voice: Sinners are asleep, yea, in a dead Sleep, and
sleep they will till they hear this Voice. The powerful Voice of Christ
awakened dead Lazarus after he had lain in the Grave four days: And it must be
the like Voice that does awaken the sleepy and dead Sinner; Wherefore he says,
Awake thou Ephesians. 5. 14.
that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Life. It Is
sad to see what a multitude of poor People sit, day by day, under the hearing
of the Word, and yet remain in their Sins: they are asleep, the Word does not
awaken them; but when the Spirit's Voice is heard, when that works with the
Word, they are quickly roused up out of that dead Sleep in which they lay.

2. The Voice of Christ's Spirit, is a convincing Voice. Come, John 4. 29.
see a Man that told me all things that ever I did: The Spirit of Christ
reached her Heart, convinced her what a vile Sinner she was: We do not read of
many things Christ told her she had done, but that he she had then was not her
Husband, ver. 18. so that she lived in Adultery with him. But now as soon as
the Spirit convinced her of this one Sin, she is convinced of all her other
abominable Evils; and therefore cries out, Come, see a Man that told me all
things that ever I did; Is not this the Christ? Intimating, none but Christ can
make the Evil of Men's Hearts and Lives appear unto them: So it is none but the
Holy Spirit can pierce the Soul, or convince the Sinner thoroughly of his Sin
and Misery, and discover the Vileness of their Hearts and States unto them;
They were pricked in their Hearts, Acts 2. 37.
and said, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Is there any hope that such
Sinners as we may be forgiven, and be saved? Verily, we were guilty concerning
our Brother, (said Joseph's Brethren;) God's Spirit now convinced their
Consciences, and brought their Sin to remembrance. So there are none that hear
the Voice of the Spirit, but their Sin appears presently before their Eyes;
their Sin is aggravated on their Consciences, and is most hateful and odious to
them.

3. Christ's Voice is a Soul quickening Voice. Verily, verily I say John 5. 25.
unto you, The Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. The Voice of Christ does not
only cause the Ear to hear, but the Heart to hear also. All Mankind naturally
are dead in a spiritual Sense, they have no divine nor spiritual Life in them.
Man is not by Original Sin, or by Nature, only wounded or maimed, but dead: The
Holy Ghost does not make use of an improper Metaphor. We by Nature were as
truly and really in a spiritual Sense dead; that is, had no more Life,
spiritual Life, Motion, Heat, Feeling, or Strength in us, than a dead Man has
natural Life, Motion, Heat, Feeling, or Strength in him: but when the Soul
hears the spiritual and powerful Voice of Christ, it is immediately quickened, a
Principle of divine Life is infused; You has he quickened, that were dead Ephesians.
2. 1.
in Sins and Trespasses. Thus the Greatness of Christ's Power toward Sinners
appears, that were dead, or destitute of a Principle of spiritual Life. Those
that assert the Power of the Creature, or that every Man is put into a Capacity
to be saved if he will, certainly do not consider this; lay this to heart,
ponder on this, viz. That all Mankind, before Grace is infused into the Soul,
are dead: What short of Almighty Power can raise the Dead to Life? Power is not
in the Dead to quicken himself; nor can dead Lazarus resist that Principle of
Life infused into him: it is not what the Sinner, but what Christ the Savior
will; and he quickens not all, but whom he will; For as the Father raises up
the Dead, and quickneth John 5. 21.
them; even so the Son quickneth whom he will: It Is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows Mercy.

4. Christ's Voice by his Spirit, is a Soul-humbling and a Self-abasing Voice:
They that hear his Voice, are straitway brought to his Feet, loathing and
abhorring themselves. The Voice of Christ has the same Effect on the Soul, as
the sight of God in Christ: I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear; but
now mine Eye Job 42. 5, 6.
sees thee: Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. After
Paul had heard the Voice of Christ, saying, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou
me? how humble was he; though called to be an Apostle, yet esteemed himself
less than the least of all Saints: Now to be less than the least, is to be
nothing. Man before Grace, or before he comes to hear the Voice of Christ, is a
proud Creature; but Grace humbles him to such a degree, that he is little, nay
nothing in his own Eyes.

5. Christ's Voice is a Soul-regenerating Voice. His Voice is powerful, and
shakes the old Foundation down, all former Hopes and fleshly Confidence is
gone: It was the Voice of the Spirit that first made us, and made this World;
By the Word of God were all things made and created: And it is his Voice that
creates us again, or that renews us, or forms his Sacred Image in us. He that
commanded by his Voice Light to shine out of Darkness, does but speak the word,
and so shines into our Hearts; and thereby transforms us, and gives us the
Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Christ.

6. It Is a Sin-killing Voice: It lays the old Man a bleeding, (as it were) the
Spirit destroys the Body and Power of Sin, it breaks down all the strong Holds
of Sin. Christ slays this Enemy by the Sword that goes out of his Mouth, that
is, by his Word, through the Operations of the Spirit: If ye live after the
Flesh, ye shall die; Romans 8. 13.
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live.
It Is not enough to forbear the acting of Sin, but we must kill and crucify it;
and this we cannot do without the powerful assistance and help of the Spirit.

7. It Is a Soul-strengthning Voice. As Sin dies, Grace lives, and the Soul
receives strength: Faith is the Life and Strength of the Soul; and this Life
and Strength we receive by the Holy Spirit.

8. It Is a comforting Voice. It Is by the Spirit God speaks Peace to the Soul:
He will speak Peace unto his People, and unto his Saints. Psalm. 85. 8. Hos. 2.
14.
I will speak comfortably to her, I will speak to her Heart: None can speak to
the Heart but God, by his Spirit; it is the Holy Ghost that is the Comforter:
And after the Sinner has been deeply wounded in the true sense of Sin, and is
dejected, grieved, and sorely troubled, then the Spirit comes with its sweet,
still, and comforting Voice, and revives the drooping Soul. To comfort the
Conscience, Luther says, is as great a Work as to make the World.

1. Now the Spirit speaks Comfort to the distressed Conscience through the
Blood of Christ; that is, by showing the Soul that Christ died in its stead,
and bore the Wrath that was due to us, having fully satisfied God's Justice,
and answered all the Demands and Requirements of the Law, being made a Curse
for us, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through
Christ Jesus, that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith.
Gal. 3. 14.
The Blood of Christ speaks, it has a Voice in it, it speaks good things, yea,
better things than the Blood of Abel. But it never speaks Comfort to the Soul,
till the Spirit applies it and sprinkleth it upon Heb. 12. 24.
the Heart: O what Peace and Comfort then does the Spirit speak to a wounded
Spirit!

2. The Spirit speaks Comfort to the Soul, by applying the Promises of Pardon
and Peace unto us, causing our Souls to take hold of them, and to cleave to God
in them: This Promise is mine, God has fastened and fixed it on my Heart,
says a Believer.

3. By opening the Greatness and Preciousness of Christ's Love to us: because
he has loved us with an everlasting Love; therefore with loving Kindness has
he drawn us, and helped us to believe and to receive him.

4. The Spirit speaks Comfort to Believers, by opening unto them, the Nature
and Excellency of the Covenant of Grace which is ordered in all things, and
sure, being confirmed by the Oath of 2 Samuel 23. 6.
God, etc.

5. By showing them the Power, Mercy, and Faithfulness of God, etc. O, Sirs, no
Voice like the Voice of the Spirit: happy is that Soul which hears this Voice;
and it is this Voice of Christ that all his Sheep hear.

Thirdly, There is also the Voice of Christ's Doctrine: I mean, the true
Evangelical Doctrine of the Gospel. The true Faith of the Gospel, or the sacred
Doctrine thereof, is the Voice of Christ, which his Sheep will hear: And they
will not hear the Voice of Strangers, they will not hear the Voice of false
Teachers, or their pernicious Doctrine; they know not the Voice of Strangers,
they can distinguish between Christ's Voice, Christ's Doctrine, and the
Doctrine of false Prophets, and false Teachers: they know not the Voice of
Strangers, that is, they approve not of their Doctrine; but they know, they
approve of Christ's Doctrine; though never so hard, never so difficult, and
never so unpleasant to others, yet it is approved of by them; it is easy and
pleasant to them that are Christ's Sheep.

They hear what Christ has said, they hear Christ's Voice, i. e. the Doctrine
he taught; This is my beloved Son (says the Father) in whom I am well pleased,
hear him.

1. Not Moses; Moses is not our Shepherd, our Guide, our Lawgiver: We are not
his Disciples, his Sheep; No, no, but we are Christ's Sheep, Christ's
Disciples: The Jews said, they were Moses 's Disciples.

2. They hear Christ's Voice, not the Pope's, not the Voice of Antichrist.

3. They hear Christ's Voice; not the Voice of the Light of Nature only, or the
teaching of Natural Conscience: though, it is true, they hear and follow that
Light, yet they know the Light that is in all Men, which is in Pagans, Turks
and Heathens, is not the Voice of Christ as he is Mediator, and the great
Shepherd of the Sheep.

4. They hear Christ's Voice, follow his Voice, not the Voice of General
Councils and National Synods; they will no further hear any, than they hear and
adhere to the Voice and Doctrine of Jesus Christ.

2 dly, They will not receive or embrace any Capital Errors; they will not hear
the Voice of Strangers, but keep to all the Essentials of Christ's Doctrine of
the Principles of true Religion.

Particularly,

1. They believe the Holy Scripture is of Divine Authority, and that it is the
only Rule of Faith and Practice.

2. They steadfastly believe the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, that there are
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Son, 1 John 5. 7.
and the Holy Spirit; and that these three are one; One in Essence, yet three
Persons or Subsistences.

3. They steadfastly believe the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity, or have a right
Faith about the Person of Christ, not doubting but that he is God by Nature,
the most High God, coeternal and coequal with the Father and the Holy Ghost;
abominating the Doctrine of Arius, who asserted he was not of the same
Substance of the Father, but rather a created Spirit, the first and chief
Spirit or Angel God created.

And the Doctrine of Socinians, who affirmed, He is a mere Man, and had no
Pre-existence before he was Conceived and Born of the Virgin.

They abominate that Voice or Doctrine of Eutychians, who maintain, that the
Matter of Christ's Flesh was from Heaven, or that it was a Conversion of the
Deity of the second Person of the Trinity into Flesh, and that he partook not
of the Nature of the Virgin.

They abominate their Doctrine, who declare, that Christ does consist of one
Nature only; and those who affirm that the Light that is in all Men (which is
but an inward Quality created of God, with which the Soul of Mankind is
naturally endued) is the only Christ of God; they know these are Strangers, and
the Voice of Strangers they will not hear.

4. They hear and steadfastly believe, and receive the Doctrine of Christ's
Headship over the Church.

5. The Doctrine of Satisfaction by Christ, in his Expiation of Sin, and of
Justification by his Righteousness imputed, as it is received by Faith alone,
without inherent Righteousness wrought in us, or good Works done by us.

6. The Doctrine of Regeneration, the Resurrection of the Body, and of the
Eternal Judgment, and World to come.

In all these Respects they hear Christ's Voice, i. e. his Doctrine, and in all
other respects so far as they receive Light and Knowledge touching any one, or
all the blessed Truths and Ordinances of the Gospel.

Fourthly, There is the Voice of Christ's Rod also, which his Sheep hear; The
Lord's Voice cries to the City, and the Man of Wisdom Mich. 6. 9.
shall see thy Name: hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. When Christ's
Sheep will not hear as they ought the soft and sweet Voice of God's Word, he
speaks to them by the Voice of his Rod, by Afflictions and sharp Rebukes, which
by his Providence he brings upon them: And though others cannot hear so as to
understand this Voice of Christ, yet his Sheep do, they see his Name, and hear
the Rod, and know whose Voice it is, and to what End it is appointed; but this I
shall not insist further upon here.

I should now come to show you how Christ's Sheep hear his Voice, but that must
be for the next time.

APPLICATION.

1. Bless God you have Christ's Voice, Christ's Word sounding in your Ears;
Blessed are they that know the joyful Sound, for they shall Psalm. 89. 15.
walk in the Light of thy Countenance, O Lord. It is not all they that hear the
joyful Sound, but only such that know it, with an experimental Knowledge, who
have felt the Divine Power of it on their Souls.

2. Rest not therefore upon a bare hearing of the Word of Christ; take heed
that the Gospel comes not to you in Word only, but in Power also.

3. Labor to hear the Voice of Christ's Spirit in and with the Word, or you
are undone for ever.

JOHN X. 27. My Sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me.
Sermon. 2. Preached Feb. 12. 1693-4.
DOCT. All true Believers are the Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ, they hear his
Voice, and they follow him.

Beloved, we have showed you in what respects Believers are said to be Christ's
Sheep, and what is meant by his Voice, which his Sheep, or such who belong unto
him, do and will hear.

Thirdly, I shall now proceed to the next general Head of Discourse propounded
to you.

I am to show you how Christ's Sheep hear his Voice, his Word, How Christ's
Sheep do hear his Voice.
his Holy Doctrine.

They hear Christ's Voice, his Word and Doctrine, understandingly; He that
hears the Word, and understands it, etc. Some, tho they hear it, yet they
are ignorant, and know not the Nature, Mat. 13. 23.
Power, and divine Excellency of it. The sacred Scripture is as a sealed Book
to some that are learned with Humane Arts and Sciences; they see but the
outside of the Book (as it were); and others they are ignorant Persons, neither
have Humane nor Divine Teachings: then he opened their Understandings, that
they might understand Luke 24. 45.
the Scriptures. See how Christ does honor the holy Scriptures: He did not
open their Understanding without the Scriptures, he sends them to that because
they testify of him; but he knew the Scripture would not sufficiently give them
the knowledge of himself, without the Influence and Illumination of his Spirit.
Sirs, they hear Christ's Voice aright, who are taught of God, and by his
Spirit, to understand his Word. Some Men are so far cheated by the Devil, that
they cry up the Light of natural Conscience, and magnify that above the Holy
Scripture. He persuades them to cast away the Scriptures as a dead Letter, in
expectation of the Spirit's Teachings; whereas the Spirit teaches by, not
without, nor contrary to the Sacred Scripture. The Word of Christ is full of
Mystery; its holy and sublime Doctrine is not easily understood, nor can it be
without the Spirit helps the Understanding. In a right and saving manner it is
given to Christ's Sheep to understand the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and to others it is not given.

2. Christ's Sheep hear his Voice with Affection: They like, love, and approve
of his Word and Doctrine, it is sweet to them; Thy Word is very pure, therefore
thy Servant loves it. They know that Psalm 119. 140.
there is no Falsehood in it, it is pure from all Mixture, there is exact Purity
and Holiness in it; which makes unsanctified Persons to like it not, but either
disbelieve it, or else despise and hate it: But a godly Man loves it upon the
account of its Purity, in that it promotes nothing but Holiness both in Heart
and Life. The Word of the Lord is right; and all his Works are done in Truth.
Therefore Psalm. 33. 4. Psalm. 119. 128.
I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right; and hate every
false Way. I do not reject such things that my carnal Reason cannot comprehend,
or such as are opposite to the Lusts and Corruptions of my Heart, or worldly
Interest; but I approve of all things that come out of thy Mouth. Some Men do
not receive the Truth in the love of it, and therefore are given up to believe
a Lie, or to strong Delusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.


3. They hear Christ's Voice with Attention; they hear it diligently. He says,
Hearken diligently unto me; and they with the greatest care do so. Thus Mary
heard Christ's Voice; she gave such attention to his Word and Doctrine, that
she left all her secular Concerns to attend upon him, though her Sister was
offended with her. And thus Lydia heard the Word of Christ, Whose Heart the
Lord Acts 16. 14.
opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. None can
hear with attention, but such whose Hearts the Lord does open; and none can
open the Heart, and cause the Soul to hear that is dead, but Christ only.

4. They hear Christ's Voice believingly. Others hear it, but do not believe
it: Who has believed our Report? and to whom has the Arm Isa. 53. 1. John 3.
3.
of the Lord been revealed? Christ says, Except a Man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. But O how few steadfastly give credit to this Doctrine:
certainly, if Sinners did believe this but with the same Humane Faith with
which they believe many other Things and Reports, it would make them tremble;
but Christ's Sheep, or all gracious Persons, give full credit to whatsoever he
has said, and that not only with an Humane Faith, but with a Divine Faith
also, or Faith of the Operation of God. The Man believed the Word that Jesus
had spoken unto him. John 4. 50.


The great Doctrine of the Gospel, is a Doctrine of Faith; it is to believe: He
that works not, but believes on him that justifies Romans 4. 5.
the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. Mankind are generally for
doing to be justified; they will not be persuaded that all is done already for
them, and that they are only to believe and be justified: but thus Christ's
Sheep hear his Voice.

5. Christ's Sheep hear his Voice tremblingly, with great Fear, holy Awe, and
Reverence. Thus good King Josias heard the Word of 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Isa. 66. 2.
God; his Heart was tender, and he trembled: and says the Lord, To this Man
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and that
trembles at my Word. They know it is God's Word, Christ's Word, who has all
Power in Heaven and Earth, Who is the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power. Power goes along with
Christ's Voice, to awe all their Hearts that are gracious: My Psalm. 119. 161.
Heart stands in awe of thy Word, says David.

6. Christ's Sheep hear Christ's Word universally, even all that he says unto
them; Him shall ye hear in whatsoever he shall say unto Acts 3. 23.
you. And those who do not thus hear this great Prophet, shall be destroyed
from among the People. Some will hear Christ's Word which they like of; but if
any part of his Doctrine suits not their carnal Hearts or Interest, that they
will not hear, nor comply with: but Believers are for hearing the hardest
things that are contained in Christ's Word; they approve of every thing, as you
heard before.

7. They hear Christ's Voice with Retention; they hear and keep his Word; they
lay it up in their Hearts, as it is said of the Blessed Virgin: They will not
lose it, and therefore, with David, Psalm. 119. 11.
hide Christ's Word in their Hearts.

8. They hear his Voice always constantly unto the End; they will attend unto
his Word and Doctrine as long as they live: let what will come, they are not
offended, as the stony-ground Hearers Mat. 13.
are said to be.

9. And lastly, They hear Christ's Voice only, his Voice and none else: They
will not hear the Voice of a Stranger; that is, they will not receive damnable
Errors, they know the Voice of Deceivers; nor will they receive a Mixture in
Doctrine, nor in God's Worship: they will not join Christ and Moses together,
Works and Faith together, Christ's Righteousness and their own together,
Christ's Institutions and the Inventions and Traditions of Men together.

Quest. May not Believers, who are Christ's Sheep, be beguiled, so as to
receive some capital Errors, or an Error in some fundamental Point?

Answ. 1. No doubt but they may be seduced; I mean, a particular Sheep, or
Saint, may be grievously corrupted in his Judgment.

2. But if a Believer be drawn away, or seduced, he shall, if sincere, if an
Elect Person, be restored again; for it is impossible any of them should
finally be deceived: If it were possible they should Mat. 24. 24.
deceive the very Elect; but that cannot be.

Quest. Why are false Teachers called Strangers?

Answ. 1. Because a Stranger is one that we know not; so a false Teacher is one
that knows not Christ, nor his true and saving Doctrine, they are not
acquainted with him, are not brought into Union with Christ, nor have Communion
with him.

2. They are Strangers to the Life and Power of true Religion and Godliness.

3. The Saints also know them not, they approve not of them, nor of the
Doctrine they preach; they can discern between Truth and Error, by the
Anointing they have received.

4. A Stranger is one that is not a constant dweller in one Place: so false
Prophets, and false Teachers, are not fixed long in one Opinion. Her Ways,
says Solomon, are moveable, speaking of the false Church, or adulterous Woman:
many of these are one day for one thing, for one Error, and another day for
another; this shows they are false Teachers, or Strangers to the Truth, they
know it not.

5. They are called Strangers, because they publish strange Doctrine: Be not
carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines. The Doctrine of Christ is one
and the same, being immutable, can suffer Heb. 13. 3.
no Change or Alteration; but these bring in a new Doctrine, not known in the
Primitive Days, not taught by Christ or his Apostles, nor received in the
purest Times of the Gospel before Corruptions crept into the Church.

They will not hear the Voice of Strangers, or the Doctrine of false Teachers.

1. Not but that they may occasionally hear such preach; yet if they know they
are Deceivers, they will not so much as hear them; neither ought they, but to
shun them as such who have Plague-Sores upon them; yet they may hear and read
their Books, to know the better their cursed Principles and Errors.

2. Therefore they do not so hear them, as to like and approve of their
Doctrine, as I said before.

3. They will then be sure not so to hear them, as to receive and embrace their
pernicious Principles, unless lamentably deluded; which as you heard they may
be, through the subtilty of Satan, and the craftiness of his Emissaries, for
some time, if they do not watch and take the better care.

APPLICATION.

Caution. To you that are Believers, beware lest you are led away by the Error
of the Wicked; be sure that you are not corrupted in any main or fundamental
Truth.

First. O labor to maintain and abide firm in the Doctrine of the Blessed
Trinity: God has revealed or made known himself as three in one, and therefore
as such to be worshipped. Look what way God has manifested his Being and
Properties unto us in his Holy Word: Our Worship consists in a due
application of our Soul unto him, according to that Revelation of himself. And
that there are three distinct Persons, subsisting in the same infinitely holy
One undivided Essence, as manifested in his Word, is most evident; and those
Persons are so distinct in their peculiar Subsistence, that distinct Actings
and Operations are ascribed unto them.

The Father knows the Son, and loves him; and the Son sees, knows, and
loves the Father. In these mutual Actings, says Reverend Dr. Owen, one Person
is the Object of the Knowledge and Love of the other. The Father loves the Son,
and has given all things into his Hand. No Man knows the Son, but the
Father; John 5. 35. Mat. 11. 27.
neither knows any Man the Father, save the Son. No Man knows the Divine
Essence, or Eternal Generation of the Son, but the Father: Nor no Man knows
the Essence or Counsels of the Father, or Dispensations of the Gospel, save the
Son: Or, as Calvin says, The Son is said to know the Father, as he is the
lively and express Image of his Person.

This mutual Knowledge and Love of the Father and Son, is expressed at large in
Prove. 8. 22.

And they are Absolute, Infinite, Natural and Necessary unto the Being and
Blessedness of God. So the Holy Spirit is the mutual Love of the Father, and
the Son, knowing them as he is known, and searching the deep Things of God.
"And, says the Doctor, Dr. Owen.
in these mutual and internal and external Actings of themselves, consists much
of the infinite Blessedness of the Holy God. Again, 2. there are distinct
Actings of the several Persons in the Godhead, which are voluntary, or Effects
of Will and Choice, and not natural or necessary; and these are of two sorts,
such as respect one another: for there are external Acts of one Person toward
another; but then the Person that is the Object of these Actings, is not
considered absolutely as a Divine Person, but with respect unto some peculiar
Dispensation and Condescension. So the Father gives, sends, commands the Son,
as he had condescended to take our Nature upon him, and to be the Mediator
between God and Man. So the Father and the Son do send the Spirit, as he
condescended in a special manner to the Office of being the Sanctifier and
Comforter of the Church. Now these are free and voluntary Acts, depending upon
the sovereign Will, Counsel, and Pleasure of God, and might not have been
without the least diminution of his Eternal Blessedness."

Although this is such a Mystery, that it is beyond our Capacities fully to
comprehend it, yet there are, as appears by what has been said, clear
Scripture-Demonstrations, that in the Deity there is a plurality of distinct
Persons, which might further be evinced, as the Learned have showed.

1. A Being that stands under diverse mutual Relations, eternally John 1. 14,
18. 1 John 1. 22. Heb. 1. 5, 6. Gal. 4. 6.
and unalterably fixed, that one cannot be the other, must admit of such a
Consideration of Existence. But thus it is here, God the Father eternally
begets, and never can be begotten; the Son is eternally and unchangeably
begotten, and can never beget the Father; also the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son, and neither Father nor Son can proceed from the Holy Ghost.

2. Where one does as it were command, and another obey; one sends, and another
is sent, there must needs be a personal distinction Joh. 8. 20. and 10. 17, 18.
John 20. 21. Luke 10. 22. Acts 20. 28. John 5. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
between each other: But, as it was before showed, the Father does as it were
command and send the Son, not himself; the Son is held forth as obeying, not
commanding or sending the Father.

3. Where there is something done by one, that is not done by another; that
argues the Persons are distinct one from the other. But thus it is in respect
of the Deity, there is something done by the Son, that is not done by the
Father: The Son assumed Man's Nature, the Father did not this; the Son in that
Nature died, and satisfied for our Sins by the Sacrifice of himself; the Father
did not this: The Holy Ghost is sent by the Father and the Son, Psalm. 2. 8.
Heb. 10. 9. Heb. 1. 8, 9. Isa. 61. 1.
he does not send the Father nor the Son.

4. Where there is a distinct mutual Converse, in which one speaks of himself
to another, and of a third, there is the formality of three Persons; but in the
Deity there is such a Converse.

5 Where there is an Image one of another, there is such a Distinction one from
another, that one is not the other in that respect; but in the Deity there is
an Image one of another. The Mystery is most manifest from express Scripture.
It is a received Rule that cannot be contracted, That things alike are not 2
Cor. 4. 4. Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3.
the same, in that respect wherein they are alike. Dr. Chauncy.

Secondly, Also labor to abide firm in the Faith concerning the Person of
Jesus Christ, who is both God and Man, the Eternal God; not God by Office, but
God by Nature, the most High God who made Heaven and Earth, and yet truly Man,
taking our Nature into a mystical Union with his Holy Deity, being made like
unto us in all things, Sin only excepted; and thus both God and Man in one
Person.

1 st. It is requisite that he should be God.

1. Because none can satisfy for Sin but he that is God; no Creature, though
never so Holy, could do it, because Sin has an infinite demerit in it; being
against an infinite God, it therefore deserves everlasting Punishment. From
hence it appears, that the Satisfaction for our Sins must be infinitely
meritorious, otherwise it could not satisfy the infinite Justice and Wrath of
God. Now from the Dignity of Christ's Person, he being God as well as Acts 20.
28. Heb. 9. 14.
Man, his Obedience and Suffering has an infinite Worth in it.

2. No mere Creature was able to abide and overcome infinite Wrath, or the
Punishment due to us for our Sins; therefore he must be God, that so he might
bear the Burden of Divine Anger in his Flesh, the Godhead upholding and
sustaining his Humane Nature, under his bloody Agony and fearful Anguish and
Suffering on the Tree, when God the Father was withdrawn from him, and the
Pangs of Hell took hold of him.

3. That he might overcome and vanquish all the Enemies of our Souls, as Sin,
Satan, Death, and Hell. Had he not been God, he could not have raised himself
from the Dead; from whence rises the Spring of our Regeneration to a State of
Grace here, and our Resurrection to a State of Glory at the last Day hereafter.

2 dly. He must be Man; because he must die, which the Godhead could not do;
yea, he must be Man in our Nature, that he might satisfy the Justice of God for
us, because the Righteousness of God requires, that the same Nature which had
sinned, should make a full Compensation to the Law of God and infinite Justice.
O take heed no Man shakes your Faith in this great Article of the Christian
Religion.

3 dly. Take heed also that you abide steadfast in the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction, which depends on the former. Such who deny Christ's Deity, must
disown that plenary Satisfaction he gave to the Law and Justice of God. Beware
of Socinianism, Quakerism, etc. and all such like Errors.

4 thly. Take heed, there are some who tell you, Christ has fully satisfied for
the Breach of the Law of the first Covenant, for the Sins of the whole World;
so that all Men are cured of that Sickness, and delivered from that Curse, and
put into a Capacity to be saved, if they will but exercise the Power of their
own Will and Abilities; and that Men have power to believe and be regenerated,
that sit under the preaching of the Gospel; and if they answer and discharge
their part in Salvation, Christ's Death will become effectual to them, it being
but on this Condition that Christ Jesus died to save Men, provided they answer
those Terms the Gospel offers: Whereas it is evident, that Christ is not the End
of the Law, as touching Righteousness to any Man, but only to such as believe,
(I speak of the Adult); and the Gospel is not our Sickness, but our Cure; that
condemns not, but as the healing Remedy is rejected, and the Curse of the Law
abides upon all Unbelievers. And it is also as evident, that Man by Nature is
dead in Sin, and must by an almighty and irresistible Power be quickened; which
is done by the infusion of a Principle of Divine Life. Faith is God's Gift, and
not the Condition of the Covenant of Grace; it is a Branch, or part of that
Grace promised therein, upon the Condition of Christ's Satisfaction, not the
Condition to be performed by the Creature, which procures the Blessings
purchased; therefore no Condition then in order and connection in the Promises,
that God will enable all his Elect to perform, by bestowing that Blessing upon
them freely by his own Grace. The whole of our Salvation is by Christ; It is by
Faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end the Promise might be sure to all
the Seed; and all boasting might be excluded. Romans 4. 16.
And it is not an uncertain Salvation, that depends upon the doubtful and
depraved Will of Man; but it is well ordered in all things, and sure, by the
infinite Grace, Wisdom, and Power of God. Nor did Christ die only for our Good
who are saved, but in our stead also; so that Eternal Life comes to us in a way
of Justice and Righteousness, as well as in a way of Mercy and Goodness. God
was not rendered only reconcilable by the Death of his Son, which the Creature
is to make effectual on his part, but he is absolutely reconciled: For if when
we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more
being now reconciled, Romans 5. 10.
we shall be saved by his Life.

5 thly. There are others also that affirm, that Jesus Christ as Mediator, gave
to God a valuable Consideration, or Recompense, The new Doctrine, or rather new
Gospel.
that he might justly wave, and not execute the Law of perfect Obedience; and
by his Merits purchased a new and milder Law of Grace: so that Christ's
Righteousness has only purchased the removing the Law of Works from being a
Covenant of Life; and that our Right to Salvation, the Favor of God, and Peace
of Conscience, does depend upon our Obedience to the Gospel, which Christ has
purchased, should be accepted for our Righteousness, by which we must be
justified and judged: and that Faith in its whole latitude, is our believing
and obeying the Gospel, or new Law, that by this we are made partakers of the
Benefits of Christ, he having merited this Grant, or Law, That they who obey
him sincerely should be saved; and that he is justified so far, and so long as
he answers the Condition of this new Law of Grace.

Now we, and all sound Protestants, in opposition to this, affirm, That Jesus
Christ as the Head, Surety, and Representative of all the Elect, did fulfill or
satisfy for the Law of Works, bearing the Curse of the Law for us, and in our
stead; and by his Holy Life, etc. purchased for us that Life which the Law
promised to him, that continued to do all things that were written therein, and
by the Supereminency of his Obedience, Additions of Blessedness unto Life; and
that his Obedience and Righteousness, whereby he fulfilled the Law, is imputed
to Believers for their Justification, by which God grants them pardon of Sin,
and a Grant of Eternal Life, and that by Christ's Righteousness, thus imputed,
Believers stand perfectly justified and delivered from the Curse of the Law,
and are certainly entitled to Eternal Life; and that Faith is a relying on
Christ, and trusting in him and his Righteousness and Merits only for Salvation.

6 thly. Therefore be sure also you hear Christ's Voice, and adhere to his
Doctrine about Justification, through his perfect and complete Righteousness
alone, imputed unto all them that do believe in him, without Works done by us,
or Holiness wrought in us; I mean, our Faith and sincere Obedience, is not the
Matter of our Justification before God, nor any part of it, but the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ only, in his perfect conformity to the Law of God
in his Life, and by dying on the Cross as our Surety and blessed
Representative: Yet know, we constantly affirm, That that Faith which unites us
to Christ, in whom we are justified, does purify both the Heart and Life; and
though inherent Grace, Holiness, and good Works, do not justify our Persons
before God, yet they do justify our Faith, and declare us to be in a justified
State before Men, and to our own Consciences also, as the Apostle James shows;
and that that Faith that is not attended with good Fruits, is dead, as the Body
without the Spirit is dead.

Pray remember that you have been often taught, that Faith it self does not
justify us in God's sight, as an Habit, or Act, or in respect of the Product of
it, but only objectively, i. e. in respect of the Object it does apprehend,
apply and take hold of.

O Sirs, take heed ye are not deceived; may be ye look upon the Lives and
Conversations of Men, and you think they are good Men, holy Men; yet for all
this examine the Doctrine they preach: for an evil and corrupt Doctrine may be
as pernicious and damnable as an evil Conversation. But there were false
Prophets also among the People, even as there shall be (...) Teachers among
you, who shall privily 2 Pet. 2. 2.
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift Destruction.

7 thly, Be wary also, lest you are carried away with the Error of the Wicked,
to doubt of, or deny the Resurrection of the Body: If once you come to deny the
Resurrection, your State is dangerous, for that is a capital Error: If the Dead
rise not, then 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14, 15.
is not Christ risen; and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain,
and your Faith is also vain. Yea, and we are found false Witnesses of God,
because we testified of God that he raised up Christ; whom he raised not up, if
so be that the Dead rise not. It must be the same Body, not another; for if not
the same, it will be no Resurrection, but a new Creation; and if not the same
Body, but another, then it will not be that Body that suffered for Christ that
shall be glorified, nor that Body that sinned against God and Christ that shall
be punished, but an innocent Body, a Body that never sinned.

Be sure labor to hold the Head, and be established in all the fundamental
Truths of the Gospel, they are not many.

1. Your Souls are in danger of being corrupted; we have sly and crafty
Deceivers among us in these Days.

2. Many thousands (we have cause to fear) are already poisoned with most
pernicious Notions, and Soul-destructive Errors, who are in danger of perishing
this way to Eternity, yet seem sober, holy, and devout Persons.

3. Let it be your care to fit under the Ministry of such Men who preach
Christ, Christ only; or wholly seek to exalt Christ, and the Free Grace of God
by Jesus Christ. Take heed who you hear, and take heed what you hear, and how
you hear: Therefore watch, and remember (says Paul) that by the Acts 20. 31.
space of three Years, I ceased not to warn every one Night and Day with Tears.
He was afraid of those grievous Wolves that would enter in among them, not
sparing the Flock. You hear that Christ's Sheep hear his Voice; let it appear
you are his Sheep, by having this Character, namely, in that you hear his
Doctrine, and will not hear the Voice of Strangers.

But, O rest not in a bare hearing the Voice of Christ, nor in the knowledge of
saving Truth; get it not only into your Heads, but into your Hearts. He that
has truly received Christ's Doctrine, or rightly hears his Voice, brings forth
good Fruit; he feels the Power of his Word upon his own Heart: Knowledge without
Grace will stand you in no stead. A good Doctrine, and much Head-Knowledg, and
great Gifts, without Love, Humility, and a Godly Life, signifies nothing:
Knowledge puffs up, but Love edifies.

I shall add no more at this Time.

JOHN X. 27. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
Sermon. 3.
DOCT. 1. All true Believers are the Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ; they hear
his Voice, and they follow him.

I have showed you what is meant by hearing of Christ's Voice.

Fourthly, I am now to speak to the next thing proposed, or Head of Discourse,
which is the fourth General,

I know them, etc.

1 st, In speaking to this, I shall show you, 1. In what respect Christ knows
his Sheep. 2. What a kind of Knowledge he has of them. 3. Show what Comfort
does and may arise unto them hereby.


1. Christ knows them as they are his Father's Choice. All Christ's Sheep are
chosen Sheep, such as the Father has picked out of the common Lump of Mankind,
or out of the great Flock of fallen Man; thus Jesus Christ knows them, and as
they are his own Choice also, for the Father and the Son agreed both in the
Choice of the Elect. If you know these things, happy are ye if you do them. I
John 13. 17, 18.
speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen. Not only to Apostleship, but
to Eternal Life; for Judas was chosen to be an Apostle, but he was not in the
Election of Grace.

2. Christ knows them as they are the special Purchase of his own Blood. He
knows whom he died for, and in the room and stead of; he knows what Sheep he
has bought and paid so dear for: The Foundation of God stands sure; the Lord
knows them that are 2 Timothy 2. 19.
his. There is a certain Number who are built upon a Rock, upon a sure
Foundation; these are sealed and confirmed by God's Eternal Decree of Election,
and are the Price therefore of Christ's special Purchase, and as such he knows
them from all others in the World.

3. He knows them as such, who have and do experience the Effects of his Death.
He sees and knows they are his Sheep, as they have his Mark, his Image formed
in them: for like as other Shepherds know their Sheep by the Mark they have
upon them, so (to speak after the manner of Men) Jesus Christ may in this
respect be said to know his Sheep, his Saints and People; Surely they are my
People, Children that will not lie: so he was their Savior. I know Isa. 63. 8.
these are my People, I cannot but own them, they will keep my Covenant: I have
renewed them, and they abide faithful to me, and will not deal falsely with me.
In another place he says, Their Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
Spot is not the Spot of my Children. These I know are none of my Sheep, their
Spot, their Sin, their Iniquity are not such as are in my People; not Sins of
Infirmity or common Frailties, but they have a contagious Spot upon them; they
have none of my Image, my Mark, etc.

4. Christ knows his Sheep with a Knowledge of Approbation; I know them, that
is, I approve of them, I like them well, I esteem them, and accept of their
Persons and their Services.

5. Christ may be said to know his Sheep also, with a Knowledge of Love and
Affection. He knows them as to delight in them, they have his Heart: I am the
good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, and am John 10. 14, 15.
known of mine. As the Father knows me, even so I know the Father; and I lay
down my Life for the Sheep. As this mutual Knowledge between the Father and the
Son, was joined with perfect Love and Delight; so is Christ's Knowledge of his
Sheep: And this he himself also here expresses, by saying, I lay down my Life
for the Sheep; which shows not only the Sincerity, but also the Degree of his
Love unto his Saints: So that if we can believe that God the Father loved
Christ, his only begotten Son, we may also believe that both Father and Son
love those who are really the Sheep of Jesus Christ; the Love that Christ has
unto his People, is as true, certain, and abiding, as the Father's Love to
Christ, or Christ's Love unto the Father.

2 dly, I shall show you what a kind of Knowledge Christ has of his Saints.

1. Christ knows them by Name. As it is said of Moses, so it may be said of
every true Believer; Yet thou have said, I know thee Exodus 33. 12.
by Name. Even in like manner in this Chapter, the Lord Jesus shows us that the
true Shepherd calls his Sheep by Name, and leads John 10. 3.
them out; this denotes the knowledge he has of them particularly.

2. Christ knows their Hearts, as he testifies to the seven Churches in Asia;
And all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches Rev. 2. 23.
the Reins and Hearts, etc. This shows he is the most High God; For who knows
the Heart but God himself? This Jehovah glories in, as his own absolute
Prerogative, it being out of the reach of any Creature; I the Lord search the
Heart, I try the Reins. Jer. 17. 10.
Moreover it is said of Jesus Christ, That he needed not that any should testify
of Man, for he knew what was in Man. He needs not any to bring him
Information concerning the Principles, Ends, Joh. 2. 25.
Aims, Purposes, and Tempers of Men; and therefore he knows his Sheep, his
Saints, that they are sincere or upright-hearted Ones; he knows them from
Hypocrites, from the Goats, from the foolish Virgins.

3. Christ knows where they live, in what Land, City, Town, or Family. I know
thy Works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's Rev. 2. 13.
Seat is. He knows the Place where they dwell, and how they behave themselves.

4. He knows their Works. How many times does he express this, in the second
and third Chapters of the Revelations, even in the beginning of every Epistle
to the seven Churches, I know thy Works, whether they proceed from a renewed
Nature, from a Principle of Divine Grace or Spiritual Life, or not; whether
from Faith, or not; whether right Gospel-Works of Obedience, or not; he has a
Knowledge of Comprehension or Understanding of all. But,

5. He knows his Sheep, his Saints, with a Knowledge of Approbation, as I hinted
before.

6. Christ knows their Faith, the Quality and Quantity of it, that it is true
Faith, unfeigned Faith, the Faith of the Operation of God, or of his own
Spirit. But there are some of you that believe Joh. 6. 64.
not; for Jesus knew from the beginning, who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. Though Faith be an inward secret Act of the Soul, yet
Christ knows it, he knows who has it wrought in them, and also though it be
never so small, even as a Grain of Mustard Seed; whether it be weak or strong,
great or little, growing or decaying, he knows it.

7. Christ knows the Love of his People, whether they love him in Sincerity;
both the Truth of their Love, and the Degree of their Love: Jesus says unto
Simon Peter, Simon, Son of Jonas, love John 21. 15.
thou me more than these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I
love thee. And as he knows whether they love him above all or not, so he knows
whether they love one another or no; whether it be with a pure Heart,
fervently, and in sincerity, Christ knows it: whether it be a Love in Words, or
with the Tongue only, or in Deed and in Truth.

8. He knows the Humility of his Saints, whether they are clothed with it or
not. Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the Lowly; but the Proud
he knows afar off. He is far off from them, though he knows such; but he is
near unto humble Souls, he dwells with them.

9. He knows the Patience of each of his People, under all their Sufferings,
Losses and Disappointments they meet with in this World: I know thy Works, and
thy Labor, and thy Patience, etc. Rev. 2. 2.
He knows how they carry it under the Rod of Afflictions, which will work for
the good of all that are patiently exercised thereby. In a word, Christ knows
every Grace of the Spirit in the Souls of his People, and whether they are in
Exercise or not.

10. He knows the Works and Actions of his Saints, and of every one of them
particularly: I know thy Works. And again he says, I know thy Works. (1.) He
knows what our Lives are, whether we walk circumspectly, or not; whether we
make Conscience in all we do, and walk uprightly, or not. He knew Abraham, that
he would fear and serve him, and command his Children and Household to keep his
Commandments also. He knew that Noah was only Righteous in that Generation. He
knows our up-rising and our down-lying, whether we begin the Day with him, and
end the Day with him or not. (2.) He does not only know all our Works and
Actions, whether Natural, Moral or Spiritual; but also the Manner of our
Actions, how we perform all our Duties toward God and toward Men. (3.) He
knows with what Hearts we act; whether with Zeal, Life and Power, or not;
whether we stir up our selves in Duty to take hold of him, or perform Duties of
Obedience but with a cold and lukewarm Heart. He knows with what Hearts we
hear, read, pray, meditate, give to the Poor; in all these Respects he knows
his Sheep. (4.) He knows the Principle from whence we act, the Means we use,
the Works we do, and the End we propound to our selves in all our Actions;
whether we aim at his Glory, or seek our selves, self-Profit, self-Honour,
self-Applause; all is known to him. (5.) He knows what we have been, and what
we now are; what we have done, and what we do, and will do hereafter: nothing
is hid from him.


11. He knows our Carriage and Behavior in our Families, in our own Houses,
and what our Behavior is in the House and Church of God; whether we know our
Places and our Duty, in the Station where we are set. He knows and will judge
between Cattle Ezekiel. 34. 17.
and Cattle, betwixt the fat and the lean Sheep; if any oppress his Brother, or
if the Strong and Rich neglect or wrong the poor and weak Ones of his Flock, he
knows it. He knows whether we make his Word our Rule in all Cases, and do not
offend nor grieve each other: And if any be offended with their Brother, he
knows whether they proceed against him according to the Directions he has left
us to walk by. Mat. 18.


12. Christ knows all our Sorrows, Troubles, and Afflictions. And the Lord
said, I have surely seen the Affliction of my People Exodus 3. 7.
which are in Egypt, and have heard their Cry, by reason of their Taskmaster,
for I KNOW their Sorrow.

13. He knows our Wants, Temptations, Tears, and Poverty: I know thy Works,
Tribulation and Poverty. If we are Poor externally, Rev. 2. 9.
and in Want, he knows it; or spiritually Poor, he knows it.

In a word, whether we are living or dying Christians, hot or cold, growing or
decaying, he knows it.

APPLICATION.

Infer. 1. We may from hence infer, That Jesus Christ is God. This clearly
demonstrates the Deity of the Lord Jesus, whose Eyes are said to be as a Flame
of Fire, even of a piercing and penetrating Rev. 1. 14.
Nature, to comfort and refresh the Sincere, and to burn up and consume all
others that are not upright with God.

Exhort. 1. Be exhorted you that are Church Members, to look to it; Christ
knows and takes notice of you all: He knows you (as you have heard) by Name,
and where you dwell; your Hearts, Thoughts and Inclinations he knows, whether
you are praying Men and Women or not; and also how you perform it, and when you
neglect it.

2. Your Excuses, Pretenses, about omission of Duties in your Families, Closets
or Churches, are before his Eyes, and known to him.

3. Your Ways in trading, buying, selling, building, planting, eating, drinking
and sleeping, all is known to Christ; what you do for his poor Saints and
People, what you do to encourage and further his Interest in the World; when
you give, and what you give, and how, or with what End and Aim, all is known to
him.

4. He knows and takes notice of your Garbs and Dresses which you wear; whether
such as he in his Word directs you to put on, or not; whether modest or
immodest, like the wanton Ones of the World, and according to the former Lusts
in your Ignorance, and not as becoming Men or Women professing Godliness.

5. He knows your Behavior in all Relations you stand in one to another, as
Husbands to Wives, or Wives to Husbands; Parents to Children, or Children to
Parents; Masters to Servants, or Servants to Masters: Whether Husbands love
their Wives, and Wives love and obey their Husbands: Whether Parents bring up
their Children in the Fear and Nurture of the Lord, and train them up in the
Way in which they should go, praying for them, not provoking them to Wrath, by
being harsh and bitter toward them, but setting a good Example before them in
all things: As also how Children carry it to their Parents in honoring them,
and obeying them in all things in the Lord; all is took notice of by Jesus
Christ.

6. He knows how Ministers carry it to his People in the discharge of their
Work and Office; whether they preach the Word 1 Timothy 4. 13.
in Season, and out of Season, giving themselves to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine; and study to show themselves approved 2 Timothy 2. 15.
unto God, as Workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of
Truth.

He knows whether they took the Care of the Flock, of a ready Mind, or for
filthy Lucre sake; and whether they preach Christ or themselves, seeking to
exalt Jesus Christ alone, or but in part, and rendering him to be but an
imperfect Savior; whether they ascribe all to him, or not some things of
Salvation to the Creature, and so open a Door for Men to sacrifice to their own
Nets and Drags.

7. Sirs, remember that Christ is not a careless Spectator, he knows you that
are Members, and takes notice how you behave your selves to his Ministers;
whether you show due Respect to them, and honor them as Ambassadors of Christ,
or as such who personate their great Lord and Master; for if you dishonor,
slight and despise them, Christ takes it as a Dishonor, a slighting and
despising of him: He knows whether you obey them that are over you in the Lord,
or not; but rather contemn, resist, or spurn at their Authority, and seek
Occasion to quarrel with them, wounding, afflicting, and grieving their
Spirits, and weakening their Hands and their Hearts: He knows whether you
discharge your Duties to them, in administering and communicating all good
things to them; providing a cheerful and comfortable Maintenance for them, and
not leaving them to encounter with the perplexing Cares, Wants and Necessities
of this Life.

8. Christ knows his Sheep, so as to weigh their Actions, their Spirits, their
Graces, and their Duties: He ponders every Step they take, and observes every
Word of their Mouths, and Thought of their Hearts. The Lord is a God of
Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed. 1 Samuel 2. 3.


9. Christ knows whether you are sincere or not, upright or not, regenerate or
not; whether you are the same at Home as Abroad, in the Closet as in the
Church, or not.

10. Moreover consider the Effects of Christ's Knowledge; he knows such whose
Hearts are sound, so as to approve, love, protect, feed, comfort, and refresh
them; and such that are unsound, so as to disown, reject, and condemn them.

11. He knows the Humble, so as to exalt them; and the Proud, so as to abase
them: He knows and beholds all of us, at all times, either to accuse, or to
clear us; to condemn, or to justify us.

Exam. Examine your selves; in vain it is to go about to hide or cover any
thing, seeing Christ knows all we do; there is no way to hide your Sin from
him. O search and try your selves, your Hearts, your States and Conditions,
lest you are deceived, and conclude, you are Rich, and increased with Goods,
etc. this was Laodicea's Misery.

Terror. Tremble at the Thoughts of doing one unbecoming Thing, or speaking one
unbecoming Word. O Lord, said David, thou have searched me, and known me. Thou
know my down sitting, and my uprising; Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and art acquainted with all my Thoughts: For there is not a Word in my Tongue,
but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether.

O what Terror is here for ungodly Men, that commit horrid Wickedness in
secret, and say in their Hearts, No Eye sees us! O let them know, that all
their filthy and abominable Deeds of Darkness, are done in the plain and open
view, and sight of the great God, and Jesus Christ; and that he keeps a Record
of all their cursed Works, Oaths, and ungodly Words, and will lay them all
before them at the last Day: For he knows vain Men: he sees Wickedness also;
will he not then consider it? Men know but Job 11. 11.
little of God, and therefore are very unfit Judges of all his Counsels,
Decrees and Actions: yet God knows Man exactly, and all his Vanity, Falsehood
and Folly; let him never so carefully strive to cover and hide his Wickedness
under Deceit, or a Cloak of Religion, he sees it, it is a Knowledge by sight,
therefore most easily and clearly known. God does not know Men's Sins by
hearsay; No, no, he sees it, beholds it with open Face; he is by when they
commit it: They can commit no Sin out of his sight, nor do that which he
knows not; though they are ready to say, How does God know? Job. 22. 13.
Thick Clouds are a Covering to him that he sees it not. Carnal Men frame
Conceptions of God like themselves; Thou thoughtest that I Psalm. 50. 21.
was altogether such an one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them
in order before thine Eyes; that is, thy Sins, and secret Works of Darkness. He
considers it, Will he not consider it?

Many Men know much of their own Wickedness, and of the Wickedness of others;
but they lay it not to Heart, they do not consider it: But God knows and
sees Wickedness after another rate; He considers, observes it, and weighs the
Nature of the Crime, and the Aggravations of it, the vile Purposes, End and
Intention of the Person doing it; and how it is done wilfully against Light,
and the clear Convictions of his own Conscience: He weighs the Nature of
their Wickedness as in Balances; as it is said of Belshazzar, Thou art weighed
in the Balance, and art found Dan. 5. 27.
wanting; thy horrid Pride, filthy Lusts, Counsels, Policies, and all the
Contrivances of thy Heart and Government are weighed. The Ways of Man are
before the Lord; and he pondereth all his Paths; He puts them into a Balance,
and does not only see them, but consider them, ponder and weigh them.

Consol. Lastly, This may be also Matter of Comfort and Consolation to all the
Sheep of Jesus Christ, or holy and sincere Children of God. Christ knows you; I
know my Sheep. Job was glad that God knew him; Thou know I am not wicked. He
does not Job 10. 7.
say, thou know I am not a Sinner, a Man of any Infirmities; No, but not an
ungodly Sinner, an Hypocrite, one that lives in Sin, loves Sin, makes a Trade
of Sin, as wicked Men do. It Is no matter how Job or Paul are censured,
reproached or condemned by Men, whilst they had the Testimony of their
Consciences touching their Sincerity: My Integrity, says Job, I hold fast, I
will not let it go: mine own Heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. And
Job 27. 6.
says holy Paul, Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Consciences, 2
Cor. 1. 12.
that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the
Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World. The consideration of
this, that their own Hearts cleared and did acquit them of all those foul
charges of Friends and false Brethren; and also that God knows that they are
what they profess themselves to be; O this was matter of great Comfort to them,
and may be so to all sincere and gracious Christians. Christ knows our Fears,
our Straits, our Temptations, our Wants, and all the Wrongs and Injuries we
have sustained: Is not this matter of Consolation? O poor drooping Saint, lift
up thy dejected Spirit; All thy Wants are in Christ's sight, he sees the Place
where every Sheep and Lamb of his dwells, and what their Wants are: And his
Love, Bowels, Care and Compassion is infinite; he that laid down his Life for
his Sheep, for this and that poor afflicted, tempted, and dejected Soul, will
not he, think you, seeing he knows your Condition, supply, support, strengthen,
heal, feed, and comfort you, whosoever you are, if one of his Sheep? He that
spared not Romans 8. 32.
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? He that has given himself, shed his own precious
Blood for us, will not deny us a little Bread to feed our Souls, nor Balm to
heal them; nor any Comfort he sees good, will he deny or withhold from us: He
that gave the greater, will not stick to give the less.

2. Christ knows whatsoever you have done for his Glory; and he is not
unrighteous, to forget your Work and Labor of Love, which Heb. 6. 10.
ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and
do minister. You have forgot what you gave to such and such poor Saints, may be
ten, twenty, or thirty Years ago; yea but Christ has not forgot it. True,
there is no Work of ours that deserves any thing from the Hands of Christ, in
point of Merit; yet what though, Rewards of Grace (as I have often told you)
will exceed all Rewards of Merit: A Cup of cold Water shall have a Reward of
Grace; the Gift of a Penny given in love to Christ, when thou caust give no
more, shall have a glorious Reward at the great Day. As I once told you of a
King, who meeting with a Baker's Boy, as he was carrying Bread into the Town,
(he being very hungry, and lost his Nobles, having been a hunting) desired the
Boy to give him a Penny Loaf; which he readily did: And for this the King
knighted the Boy, and gave a yearly Estate to him and his Heirs for ever. O
Sirs, Christ's Rewards of Grace and Favor will exceed all that we conceive or
can comprehend, though we deserve nothing.

3. Nay, Christ knowing our good Intention, and what we would do had we Power,
or were we able to do it, he will reward that, accept of that, as if we
actually had done it; as in David's Case, who had it in his Heart to build
God's Temple, though God would not have him to do it, yet did accept it as if
he had done it.

4. Christ also knowing what we have suffered for his Name's sake, though we
have forgot it, yet he will remember it at the great Day.

JOHN X. 27. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
Sermon. IV.
BELOVED, I have showed you what a kind of Knowledge Jesus Christ has of all his
Sheep.

Fifthly, I shall now proceed to the fifth General Head, and give some of the
Characters or Properties of the Sheep of Christ. But before I do this, I shall
show you why the Saints are compared to Sheep.

1. First it is from their clean and mild Nature. Wicked Men, Why Believers are
compared to Sheep.
from the consideration of their filthy and ravenous Nature, are contrariwise
compared to Lions, Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, Swine, and the like.

But now God's People have (through the Operation of Divine Grace) their
unclean and filthy Nature changed; that brutish, perverse and swinish
Disposition which they brought into the World with them, is gone: Such were
some of you, but you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified
in the Name of 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Sheep are of a clean Nature,
they like not to wallow in the Mire as Swine do: So the Saints have a clean and
holy Nature wrought in their Souls, or spiritual Habits infused through the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, having obtained a true Righteousness, in which they
stand justified, and appear without Spot before God, even in the perfect
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is counted to them for Righteousness to
their Justification, and are sanctified through the Spirit of Holiness.

2. Sheep are a harmless and innocent sort of Creatures; not crafty like the
Fox, nor devouring like the Lion. So the Saints are harmless and innocent, they
seek the Hurt of no Man, but desire to live peaceably in the Land, and not like
Romish Wolves, who delight in nothing more than in Blood and Rapine: They are
like unto their Master, (or ought so to be) i. e. holy, harmless, etc. They are
simple concerning Evil, Children in Malice, though Men in Understanding: They
are not like the ungodly ones of the World, 1 Cor. 14. 20.
who are full of Wrath, Hatred and Revenge; they are so far from this, that if
they arrive at their true Character, they will speak Evil of no Man, but pray
for their Enemies, and for such that hate them.

3. Sheep are patient under Suffering: In this they strive to imitate their
Blessed Savior also, who was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter; and as a Sheep is
dumb before the Shearer, so he opened not his Mouth. Isa. 53. 7.
How patiently did the poor Martyrs go to the Stake; they strove not with their
Persecutors, nor made resistance: And when they suffer from the immediate Hand
of God, they are patient as David was, and open not their Mouths, because the
Lord has Psalm. 39. 9. Levit. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
done it: Like Aaron who held his peace, and patiently bore the heavy Hand of
God, when his two Sons were devoured with Fire before his Eyes.

4. Believers may be compared to Sheep from their Profitableness to others. We
all know that Sheep are very profitable Creatures many ways, enriching and
making Land fat; as also for Clothing, and for Meat: How excellent is the Flesh
of Sheep for Food? So God's People are useful and profitable. The Lips of the
Righteous feed many, by their wise and pious Discourse, Counsels, and Divine
Comfort, which they often communicate to many distressed and disconsolate
Souls: They are the Salt of the Earth, the Light of the World; and what a
profitable thing is Salt to us, is Light to us? Even so in many respects the
Godly, in a spiritual Sense, are alike useful, and have been in their
respective Generations in this World.

What a blessing was Lot to Sodom whilst he was among them! the Fire could not
seize upon that wicked City until he left it: Haste thee, escape thither, (said
the Angel) for I cannot do any thing Genesis 19. 22.
until thou be come thither. What Profit did Laban receive by Jacob! what a
Blessing was he unto him! the like Blessing was Joseph to his Master. The Godly
are like Sheep, the Interest of those Lands, Nations, Cities and Families where
they dwell.

The Saints are profitable to others many ways. (1.) By that heavenly Doctrine
they maintain and hold forth. (2.) By the fervent and profitable Prayers they
make and send up to God on all Occasions. (3.) By that holy and good Example
which they set for all those they converse with, and live among. (4.) And at
their death, by Martyrdom, great Profit has been received; from whence the
Proverb rose, That the Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the Church.
Believers bring Glory to God, and Profit unto Men.


5. Sheep are tractable and obedient, being ready to follow their Shepherd
whithersoever he goes. It is the Custom in some Countries for the Shepherd in
leading the Sheep, to go out before them; to which practice our Savior does
here allude: So Believers are obedient to Jesus Christ, they are tractable, and
learn to follow him; My Sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me. Thou shall
guide Psalm. 73. 24.
me (says David) by thy Counsel. Christ's Precepts are the Saints Directory,
and his Practice their Pattern. Hence Paul exhorted the Corinthians, to follow
him as he followed Christ. Ministers are to be followed and imitated, no
further than they follow and imitate Jesus Christ.

6. Sheep love to feed in green Pastures; in clean and wholesome Fields or
Medows. So do the Saints and People of God love sound and wholesome Truths, good
Doctrine, Food that is fit and proper for their precious Souls; they must not,
will not feed in the Soul-rotting Pastures of Men's Inventions, nor on the
corrupt Glosses of cloudy Doctors that lived in the dark Times of the Church.
The Spouse from hence enquires of Christ where he Cant. 1. 7.
feeds, and where he makes his Flock to rest at Noon? that is, where his
Blessed Gospel is truly preached, and his Holy Ordinances are duly and in a
right manner administered. And he directs her to go forth by the Footsteps of
the Flock, and to feed her Kids besides the Cant. 1. 8.
Shepherds Tents; that is, to follow the Doctrine and Example of the Primitive
Church, which only is our Rule and Pattern in all Gospel Worship.

7. Sheep are incident to diverse Diseases; many of them are weak and feeble,
sick and distempered, and therefore must by their Shepherd be strengthened and
healed, with much care, skill, and faithfulness: So are Christ's Sheep, his
Saints, subject also to manifold spiritual Diseases, Weaknesses, Temptations
and Afflictions, which of old moved the Almighty to great Compassion, and
sorely to rebuke the Shepherds of Israel, for their Cruelty and great Remisness
toward his Flock: The diseased have ye not strengthened; Ezekiel. 34.
neither have ye healed that which was sick, etc. And therefore the great
Shepherd says, he would take the Work into his own Hand: I will bind up that
which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick. Some of God's People
are attended with one spiritual Disease, and others with another: Some with a
spiritual consumption of their Graces, decline in their Faith, Zeal, Patience,
brotherly Love, Charity, etc. Others are afflicted with the Timpany of Pride;
some with the Fever of Passion, etc. Which were it not for the care and
faithfulness of their Shepherd, would prove fatal to them.

8. Sheep are subject to go astray; So are the Saints to go astray from Christ,
and to wander from his Precepts: I have gone astray (says David) like a lost
Sheep; seek thy Servant. Psalm. 119. 176.


9. Sheep also are subject to take Soil and Filth, and therefore have need of
washing: Even so likewise the Sheep of Jesus Christ are subject to contract
fresh Guilt and Pollution on their own Souls and Consciences, Sin being of a
polluting and defiling Nature; and therefore David cried out to his Blessed
Shepherd to be washed: Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and
I shall be whiter than Snow. O cleanse my filthy and leprous Soul in the Psalm.
51. 7.
Fountain of thy Son's Blood, signified by those Ceremonial Washings under the
Law. If I wash thee not, (says Christ to Peter) thou have no part with me.
John 13.


10. Sheep love to feed and lie down together; Nay, it is a difficult thing to
scatter, sever, or divide them from each other; and if by Dogs or Wolves, etc.
they should be scattered, they will quickly get together again; and such that
straggle behind, the Shepherd fears are not well. So the Saints and Sheep of
Christ dearly love to assemble together; and it is an Argument that such are
diseased, or sickly, who forsake the assembling themselves with the rest of the
Flock; Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, Mal. 3. 16.
Psalm. 119. 74.
etc. They that fear thee, (says David) will be glad when they see me, because
I hoped in thy Word. I can tell them that which will cause their Souls to
rejoice; I have been afflicted, and tempted, and yet have been succored and
relieved by the Lord, because I hoped in his Word: So that none of them that
meet with like Perplexities, need to fear or doubt of God's gracious Help and
Support. Sirs, if wicked Men, like Dogs, Wolves, or Lions, do endeavor to
scatter Christ's Sheep by Persecution, etc. they will soon get together again:
And being let go, they went to their own Company again. Acts 4. 23.


11. Sheep need a shady Place when the Sun shines hot at Noon: which is a great
refreshment to them, where they chew their Cud; and being secured from the
scorching heat, they with the greater alacrity return to their Pasture. In this
also the Saints may be compared unto Sheep; for evident it is, Believers do
need a shady Place, a Place of Refreshment to rest in and under, in the time of
the great heat of Temptation, Affliction, and Persecution: And at such Seasons
the Lord Jesus has a Place of sweet Repose for them; In me you shall have
Peace: in the World you shall have John 16. 33. Psalm. 57. 1.
Tribulation. Under the shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until these
Calamities be overpast. Hence also Jesus Christ is said to be as the Shadow of
a great Rock in a weary Land; or in a dry Isa. 32. 2.
and scorching Country, which, metonymically, is called a weary Land, because
it makes the People weary that abide therein. Christ refreshes his Sheep under
his own gracious Protection, in time of the hottest Persecution, etc. and
affords them relief by his own Presence, and precious Promises: And when they
return out of those Afflictions, with what joy do they feed in their Pastures,
calling to mind and meditating upon those blessed Experiences they had of his
Goodness in those hot and scorching Times.

12. Sheep will live where greater Cattle cannot, even upon very hard and
barren Commons, where the Grass is exceeding short, and be very well contented
with it, nay, thrive upon it. So will the Faithful in Jesus Christ live, where
and when the carnal Professor cannot, even in a Time of Want and Scarcity, when
the great and tall Cedars whose Hearts are not upright with God, fall away, and
their Spirits die in them. A poor Believer can live by Faith on the Promises of
God, when he cannot see by an Eye of Sense how he should subsist, yet does then
trust on God's Providence, who cares for him; and he is contented and well
satisfied with those hard Pastures the Lord is pleased to put him into:
Although Hab. 3. 17, 18.
the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be on the Vines; the
Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat; the Flocks
shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stall: Yet
will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation.

13. Among a Flock of Sheep are oftentimes some Goats, who feed with them, and
lie down together. So in Christ's Flock are some evil and corrupt Members, such
who are none of his Sheep, but Hypocrites, though they seem to feed and have
Communion together; and these also are called Goats by the great Shepherd.
Matthew. 25.


14. Sheep are very fruitful, and do multiply in a little time exceedingly,
though many of them may be killed by Butchers. The Saints may be compared to
Sheep also in this respect, for they from a few have often increased to a very
great Multitude. How few were the Number of Christ's Sheep at the time of his
Ascension, yet in a little space we read, that their Number was five Thousand;
And though the Heathen Butchers killed many Thousands, yet how wonderfully did
they increase! which was mavelous in the Eyes of their Enemies. The like may
be noted in these Days among us in England; what a few were they of the
Baptized Churches, and other Dissenters, not many Years ago, and to what a
Multitude are they risen now? Also the Saints grow in Grace, they are fruitful,
bearing Twins, and none barren among them.

15. Sheep are sometimes separated from the Goats, for some special Occasion
known to the Shepherd. Even so at the last Day shall all the Sincere and truly
Godly be separated from unsound and unsanctified Ones, by our Lord Jesus the
great Shepherd: Before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he will separate
them one Mat. 25. 32, 33.
from another, as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats: And he will set
the Sheep at his right Hand, and the Goats on his left Hand.

Secondly, To proceed: Tho I have already clearly opened the Properties or
Characters of the Sheep of Christ, in speaking to several Parts of my Text, yet
I shall in a summary way, here add some few Particulars further upon this
Account, which may serve by way of Trial to all of us.

First, The first distinguishing Character of them is, They hear Christ's Voice.

What is meant by his Voice, and how they do hear it, we have showed.

Secondly, Christ's Sheep have passed through a great Change, a glorious,
internal and visible Change. They are converted Persons, renewed or regenerated
by Divine Grace: They were once like other Men and Women, and had no Sheep-like
Nature, (as you have heard) but rather the same filthy, unclean, and brutish
Nature of Swine, etc. which is in all ungodly Ones.

1. It is a real Change from Nature to Grace; it is not a seeming, a nominal, or
notional, but a true and real Change; they have a new Heart, a new Spirit, a
new Nature created in them; they are become new Creatures: all real Operations
of the Spirit suppose some real Form; a real Habit is infused, from whence they
act, which works in them a ready Inclination, Disposition, and sweet Propensity
to do that which is truly and spiritually Good.

2. And this is common to all the Sheep of Jesus Christ; in this respect they
are all alike, having all obtained the same precious Faith, as to the Quality
of it: As all Wolves have the Nature of Wolves, and all Swine the Nature of
Swine, and all Sheep have the Nature of Sheep; so all the Saints and Children
of God have the Nature of Saints; all Believers and Sheep of Jesus Christ have
one holy Nature.

3. It is a Nature and Disposition quite contrary to that which was in them
formerly: It Is a mighty Change, as when a Wolf is made a Lamb, the " Wolfish
Nature (as one observes) is lost, and the Lamb-like Nature is introduced. By
Corruption Man was Carnal and Brutish, but by the new Creation he is Spiritual
and Divine; by Corruption he has the Image of the Devil, by this he is
restored to the Image of God; by that he had the Seeds of all Villainies, by
this the Seed of all Graces." He was an Enemy to God, nay, had Enmity in his
Heart against God; but now he loves God, loves Christ, loves Holiness, loves
the Ways of God, and People of God.

4. It is an universal Change, a Change of the whole Heart; as when a Child is
formed in the Womb, it has all the Parts, Nature does not fashion one Part and
leave another imperfect: So the Holy Spirit forms every Part of the new
Creature in the Soul of the Regenerate. This Habit is but one, it is an entire
Rectitude in all the Faculties, and an universal Principle of inclining
Charnock.
and disposing to that which is good and well-pleasing to God: there is a
Divine Light in the Understanding, by which the Soul sees God to be its chief
Good, and owns and looks upon him as such. There is a Change in the Will, that
consents and chooses God as such; there is a Change in the Affections. There is
no true Draught of the Image of God in us, unless there be a Rectitude of
Affection and Disposition: There is therefore a conformity of Affections to
God, they love God, and love as God loves, and hate as God hates; they hate
Evil, because of that inward Filthiness that is in it, and love Grace and
Virtue, because of its pure and native Beauty and Excellency: therefore it is
from hence the Soul comes to take delight in God.

5. It changes not the Heart only, but the whole Life also; The Life which I
now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of Gal. 2. 20.
God. Such live no longer to themselves, but to God; their Tongues speak for
God, their Ears hear for God, their Hands work for God; their Actions are Holy,
Just and Good. There is a Change of Company also, a Change of Labor, of
Endeavor; and their whole End, Aim and Design, is to glorify God: Heavenly
Things are preferred by them before earthly Things; they chiefly seek the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness. They do not pursue the World as they did,
nor fashion themselves according to the former Lusts and the Course of this
World; nor pray as they did, nor hear as they did, nor give Alms as they did:
No, no, they do all things from another Principle, from another End, and with
other Zeal, Endeavors, and Diligence.

Thirdly, Christ's Sheep will feed in Christ's Pasture, in their own Pasture,
where they are put by him; not but that they may, for good Reasons, be removed
into another Pasture, but they will not (unless under strong Temptation) break
down the Hedge or Fold where they were put, and run away; No, no, but are
contented with that Food, that Pasture God affords them, though there may be
some more Fat and Rich than theirs. Some Sheep when they grow wanton, are
unruly, and will break into other Men's Ground; so there are some Professors,
some Church Members that rend themselves away from their own Flock and Fold, in
a disorderly manner; "Which (as a Reverend Minister shows) is an abominable
Evil, and a shame to them: this destroys the Relation of Pastor and People, for
what may be done by one Individual, may be done by all; and (says he) what
Liberty belongs to the Sheep, belongs also to that particular Shepherd who has
the Charge of them much more; it is a breaking Covenant with Christ and the
Congregation, and therefore a great Immorality: it is a Schism, if there be any
such thing in the World; it is a despising the Government of the Church; and
there is as much reason a Person should come in when he pleases, without asking
Consent, as to depart when he pleases: It is also very evil and unkind in
another Church to receive such a One, as not doing as they would be dealt with.
Such a Practice can issue in nothing but in the Breach and Confusion of all
particular Churches: It tends (says he) to Anarchy, putting an Arbitrary Power
in every Member, and breaks all Bonds of Love, and raises the greatest
Animosities between Brethren and Churches." The truth is, how can another
Shepherd justify such an Act to the great Shepherd of the Sheep; I mean, to
take into his Fold his Neighbor's Sheep, without Christ's Order and Authority?

Fourthly, Christ's Sheep will, and do follow him; and this our Christ's Sheep
do follow him.
Blessed Savior lays down as an undoubted Character of all that are his.

They follow his Example, his Steps. The good Shepherd when he puts forth
his own Sheep, he goes before them, and the Joh. 10. 4.
Sheep follow him. Jesus Christ has gone before his Sheep in his Obedience to
the Father, leaving us an Example that we should follow 1 Pet. 2. 21.
his Steps.

1. They follow his Steps in Humility: He bids us to learn of him upon this
Account; Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Mat. 11. 29.
Heart. How did Christ deny himself? in taking our Nature upon him: In this
ought his Sheep to follow him; Let the same Mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus. O let the same humble Spirit, Phil. 2. 5.
and self-denying Temper be in you, which was in him; Who being in the Form of
God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, and made himself of no
reputation, but took upon him the Form of a Servant, etc. Saints are, or ought
to be, of a humble Frame, having mutual Love, and a condescending Spirit, even
to them that are in the lowest and meanest Condition, bearing with the Weak,
and not exalting themselves, nor offending one another in any thing that is
indifferent in its own Nature: I become all things to all, that I might gain
some.

2. Christ's Sheep do follow him in Love, and bowels of Compassion: Be ye
followers of God, as dear Children; and walk in love, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.
as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us. By this all Men
may know we are his Disciples, even when we have this Mark of his Sheep,
namely, that we love one another. Husbands are exhorted to love their Wives, as
Christ also loved his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25.
and gave himself for it; even with a sincere, pure, ardent and constant
Affection. And thus ought all Christians to love each other also, being united
as Brethren together, and Members of the same Body of which Christ is the Head.
He that loves not his Brother, is in Darkness, he is none of Christ's Sheep.
He that 1. Joh. 2. 6.
says he abides in the Light, ought also to walk even as he walked, and love
as he loved.

3. They follow him in Holiness. But as he that has called you is holy, so be
ye holy in all manner of Conversation: Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I
am holy. God the Father is holy, and Christ is holy: He was holy, harmless, and
undefiled, separated from Sinners. Therefore in this we should follow him in
the whole Course 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Heb. 7. 26.
of our Lives, and in the several parts of our Conversations. All those who are
his Sheep, they are such who are sanctified Persons, who laying aside all
filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, (they go on) 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God.

4. They follow the Example of Christ, their holy Shepherd, in Obedience.
Though he was a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the Heb. 5. 8, 9.
things he suffered: And being made perfect, he became the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all them that obey him. Christ's Meat and Drink was to do the Will
of him that sent him; and thus we ought to follow him; it ought to be our Joy,
our Delight, to do his Will, and attend on his Work: And this Mark have all
Christ's Sheep, i. e. they keep Christ's Word; If a Man love me, he will keep
my Word. And again, He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is
that loves me: Not he that has the knowledge of John 14. 11.
them; it is possible Men may have Christ's Commandments in their Heads, and in
their Mouths, may know which they are, but they may not do them: It is he that
does his Word, that does his Sayings; that keeps his Commandments, that loves
him; Ye John 15. 14.
are my Friends, if you do whatsoever I command you. This is a Mark of Christ's
Sheep, of one of Christ's Friends, or of a sincere Christian and follower of
him: He will be obedient to Christ, not in some things only, but in every thing
that he requires or enjoins him to do in his Word.

5. They follow Christ in the hardest things, in such things that seem grievous
to the Flesh. Like as Abraham, when he was commanded Genesis 22. 2, 3.
to offer up his Son, his only Son, his only Son Isaac whom he loved, went
presently about it, he made no pause, did not consult with Flesh and Blood: And
Abraham rose up early in the Morning, etc. with an intention to do this hard
Work. And now says the Lord, I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not Verse 12.
withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me. God knew it before, tho he speaks
here after the manner of Men: but he would have Abraham to know it, and all Men
to know that this is a Mark of one that fears him, that loves him, viz. he
will do any thing God requires of him, even sacrifice up all that is near and
dear to him, when called for. O see how obedient Christ was to the Father; The
Lord God has opened mine Ear, and I was not rebellious, Isa. 50. 5, 6.
neither turned away my back. I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to
them that plucked off the Hair; I hid not my Face from Shame and Spitting. This
was hard Work, yet Christ readily passed through it; He became obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross, the worst of Deaths, exceeding ten thousand
Deaths, considering what he felt and did undergo for us.

6. They follow Christ whithersoever he goes. Some will not do this; they may
go a great way after the Lord Jesus, but then make a halt, and give over
following of him. Some are like Orpah, who kissed her Mother-in-Law, and
departed from her, but Ruth 1. 14, 15, 16.
Ruth clave unto her. Even so such who are sincere Christians, they keep
following of Christ, when others leave him and cleave to the World, to their
Lusts, to their cursed Idolatry; but these say to Jesus Christ, as Ruth to
Naomi, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following of thee; for
whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: Thy People
shall be my People, and thy God my God. Those that are wise Virgins, or the
Sheep of Christ, the Holy Ghost gives us their Character; These are they which
were Rev. 14. 4.
not defiled with Women, for they are Virgins; these are they which follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goes, etc. They will not follow God and Baal, Christ and
Antichrist; receive Christ's Institutions, and Rome's vile Idolatry and
Superstitions; or follow some Precepts of Christ, and reject others: No, no,
they follow him in all his holy Laws, keeping close in all things to the Rules
of his Worship, both in Doctrine, Discipline, and Conversation; in all Duties
of Religion, both Natural and Supernatural, whether toward God, or toward
Men. They are like unto Joshua and Caleb, they follow Christ fully; But my
Servant Caleb, because he had another Spirit Number. 14. 24.
with him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the good Land, and
his Seed shall possess it. He followed God when others forsook him, being not
acted by that evil Spirit of Cowardice, slavish Fear and Unbelief which ruled
in others, but was a Man of another Temper, i. e. Courageous, Faithful,
Obedient; as it is said of the Righteous, he was bold as a Lion; and
universally, through all Difficulties, Deaths and Dangers, followed God: And thus
do all the true Sheep of Christ follow him.

7. They follow Christ in sincerity, not for Loaves, etc.

8. They follow Christ constantly to the End, and faint not. We read of some
that followed our Blessed Savior for some time, but then they were offended at
his Doctrine; From that time many Joh. 6. 66.
of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. This showed they were
not his Sheep or Disciples indeed, for these returned no more; they, it is
evident, drew back to Perdition. A godly Man may, under a Temptation, seem to
faint and draw back, as Peter did, but he returns by Repentance and follows
Christ again. We are not (says Paul) of them who draw back unto Perdition, but
Heb. 10. 39.
of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. The Sheep of Christ hold on
their way, they having clean Hands, grow stronger and stronger, they can never
perish; therefore shall follow Christ always, or persevere in well-doing to the
End of their Days. The good Ground brought forth Fruit unto Eternal Life: such
who fall away were not sincere and honest-hearted Ones, but are either like
Mat. 13.
the stony or thorny ground Hearers.

Fifthly Christ's Sheep have his Character by which they are known. Christ's
Sheep have his Mark on them. Ezekiel. 9. 4.
Men mark their Sheep so; we read in the Revelations, that the Servants of God
were sealed; they were marked in their right Hands, and in their Foreheads,
etc. God gave a Charge of old, to set a Mark upon the Men that sighed and
mourned for all the Abominations that were committed in the Land. Merchants,
and others, commonly set a Mark upon their Goods, by which they lay claim to
them, and know them: So Christ sets his Mark, his Seal, upon all his Saints. By
their Father's Mark on their right Hand, some understand the Heart: A Mark in
the Hand is a secret Mark.

1. No doubt the Mark of Christ's Sheep, is the Mark of Regeneration, or that
holy Image of God which is stamped upon them all, as I hinted at first: And if
Christ sees not this Mark on the Soul, he will not own that Man or Woman
actually to be his.

2. The Holy Spirit is expressly called the Seal with which every true Believer
is sealed: Also after that ye believed ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
Promise. Which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the praise of his
Glory. And again he says, Grieve not the holy Spirit, by which you Ephesians. 4. 30.
are sealed unto the Day of Redemption. Whosoever has the Spirit of Christ in
them, or has received the saving Graces thereof, are Christ's Sheep, they have
his Mark; these he will own, and say, (where ever he find this Seal) this Man
and this Woman is mine. And on the other hand; Now if any Man has not the
Spirit Romans 8. 9.
of Christ, he is none of his; he is none of his Sheep, he has no special
Interest in him. Remember the Spirit of Christ, true Grace, Faith, Love
Humility, etc. is the Ear-mark of Christ's Sheep.

3. And why may not inward Sincerity be Christ's Mark also? for that I am sure
does distinguish them from all others, from Hypocrites, and all unsound and
false-hearted Professors whatsoever.

2 dly, The Mark in their Foreheads is seen by all; that may denote their holy
Carriage, Behavior, and Deportment in this World, to all that behold them.

1. It may show that they hate Idolatry, and all false Worship.

2. It may signify their holy Conversation; for Holiness is written, as it
were, in legible Characters, on all their Foreheads: There is not one of
Christ's Sheep without this Mark; for without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord. This shows who they are, and Heb. 12. 14.
whither they are going, and to what Country they do belong.

Sixthly, Christ's Sheep follow the Footsteps of the Flock, i. e. Christ's
Sheep follow the Footsteps of the Flock.
the Primitive Church, in Church-Constitution, Doctrine and Discipline. They
contend for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and keep the
Ordinances as they were at first given forth; they are for no mixture in
Doctrine nor Discipline; be sure before Jude 3. 1 Cor. 11. 2.
all things, they keep pure the Doctrine of Justification, and do not join Work
and Grace together: Their great care is to exalt the free Grace of God, and
abase the Creature, accounting all their own inherent Righteousness as Dung, or
Dogs-meat, in comparison Phil. 3. 8, 9.
of Christ, and the Righteousness of Christ.

Seventhly, They love to drink in pure Crystal, soft and gentle Streams. Sheep
do not love to drink of muddy, rough and raging Rivers: No more do Christ's
Sheep; He makes me to lie down in green Pastures; he leads me beside the
still Waters. They will not Psalm. 23. 2, 3.
forsake the Waters of Shiloah that run softly, and drink of the proud,
swelling, and troublesome Rivers of Babylon, Tygris, and Euphrates. They like
the Teachings of God's Spirit in the meanest Instrument, tho such who are
despised and contemned of Men, better than the highest Elegance, and lostiest
Rhetoric of all the Cicero's and Plato's of the World. What are the artificial
Flourishes of Demosthenes, or exact Method of Aristotle and Galen, or all
humane Curiosities or itch of Words, to the Teachings of the Holy Ghost? Paul
spoke not in the Wisdom of this World, or with the enticing Words of Man's
Wisdom, but in the Demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power. These Waters
Believers choose and love to drink of. 1 Cor. 2. 4.
I am afraid some Men are more nice in studying Words than Matter, to affect
the Ear rather than to work upon the Heart of their Hearers. Though Humane
Learning is not to be despised, yet no doubt Dr. Carlton was in the right,
"That a Layman that has the Spirit of God, is better able to judge of spiritual
Things, than a Man in Ecclesiastical Function, destitute of the Spirit of God."
Infelix est sapientia extra Verbum Dei sapere, says Justin Martyr.

Our Annotators say well, viz. "1. Ministers ought to speak Intelligibly, so as
the People may understand."

"2. That they speak gravely and decently; all other study of Words and Phrases
in a Divine, (say they) is but Folly and Vanity."

Eighthly, and Lastly, Christ's Sheep do rely upon the Care and Faithfulness
of their Shepherd. They know on whom they have Christ's Sheep trust in the
Faithfulness of their Shepherd.
believed, and can and do venture their Souls on him, knowing he will keep that
which they have committed to his Charge: They depend on Christ, rest on Christ,
believe in Christ, rely on his Word and Promises for all things they need:
They can say with David, The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want, neither any
thing Psalm. 23. 1, 2.
for this Life, which is really necessary, nor for the Life which is to come:
They leave the Alimighty to choose for them, knowing they are not competent
Judges, as touching what is best for themselves: Though he slay me, (says Job)
yet will I trust in him; Let God do what he will with me, yet I will rest upon
him; my hope Job 13. 15.
shall be in him, and I will not be offended if I have Poverty, Sickness,
Persecution, Reproaches, or whatsoever else: I know, says a true Christian,
God sees it good for me, and I will not murmur nor complain.

APPLICATION.

1. We may infer from hence, that Christ has but a few Sheep, but a few
Followers: O what a small Number have these Characters upon them!

2. It may be for Lamentation. Cyprian brings in the Devil triumphing over
Jesus Christ, after this sort: "As for my Followers, I never died for them as
Christ did for his; I never promised them so great Rewards as Christ has done
to his, and yet I have more Followers than he, and they do more for me than his
do for him."

O how blind and deceived are poor Sinners, that they choose to follow Satan
rather Jesus Christ! What a great Multitude has the Devil! his Flock is a
mighty Flock, Christ's Flock is a little Flock: Fear not, little Flock, it is
your Father's good Luke 12. 32.
Pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Every Saint shall have a Kingdom, a Crown;
this is Christ's Promise to all his Sheep, and yet how few are they that cleave
to him, that believe in him, and follow him!

3. By what you have heard, you may try your selves: O see, have you these
Characters, these Marks of Christ's Sheep? certainly if so, you have no cause
to doubt but your State is happy; if not, labor for them.

4. The way to be one of Christ's Sheep, is to believe, and to pass under the
New Birth.

JOHN X. 27. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
Sermon. V.
THE last Day I showed you who are the Sheep of Jesus Christ, by giving you the
several Characters and Marks of them.

Sixthly, I shall now proceed to the last General Head, viz. 1. Show you, What
a kind of Shepherd Christ is. 2. What those Pastures are where he feeds them.
3. What a Fold he has for his Sheep.


First. Jesus Christ is a chosen Shepherd. No Man has a right to Christ a
chosen Shepherd. Isa. 43. 10. Isa. 42. 1.
be a Shepherd, but he that is first chosen by the Owner of the Sheep. Christ
is called the Elect of God; My Servant whom I have chosen. Again, Behold my
Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights. He was
foreordained, in the Decree, Design and Purpose of God, to be our Redeemer;
and as a Shepherd, to take care of, feed, heal, nay, to die for the Sheep.

Secondly. And as he was chosen, so he was called also to this Work and Office.
For as the Apostle speaks concerning Christ's Priesthood, A called Shepherd.
or touching that Office, so I may say of this, No Man takes this Honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5. 4.
He did not intrude himself upon this Service, but he had a lawful Call unto
it; the Father called him, and sent him into the World, to keep, feed, and save
his Sheep. This shows the wonderful Love of the Father, he is the first and
principal Author of our Salvation: All things are of God, who has reconciled
us unto himself by Jesus Christ. All the spiritual Blessings we have by Christ,
spring 2 Cor. 5. 18.
from the Father; the Father is held forth as the first Cause, first Mover and
Contriver of all spiritual Mercies for us: The Father also fitted and qualified
him, or put him into a Capacity to accomplish this Work and Office; he prepared
him a Body, that so he might die for his Sheep.

Thirdly. Jesus Christ is a kind, loving and compassionate Shepherd. Christ a
compassionate Shepherd.
What Shepherd ever loved his Sheep as Christ loved his? The greatness of his
Love, bowels of Affection and Compassion, appears,

1. By his coming so far (as it is from Heaven to the Earth) to seek them; For
the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost. Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10.
Luke reads it, To seek and to save that which was lost. My People have been
lost Sheep, Jer. 50. 6. (1.) We were all lost in the first Adam, not one Sheep
but was lost; and had not Christ came to seek and save us, we had been all lost
for ever. (2.) We were all lost, not only by Original, but also by our own
actual Sin: All we like Sheep have gone astray; we have turned Isa. 53. 6.
every one of us to his own evil way. We were all gone out of the way, gone far
from God, and without all hope or possibility of returning, had not Christ came
to seek us; For we were all as Sheep 1 Pet. 2. 25.
going astray, but are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.
(3.) They also, by the Grace of God, at length came to see that they were lost;
they are lost in themselves, and in their own sight. Jesus sent forth and
commanded them, saying, Go not in the Mat. 10. 5, 6.
way of the Gentiles, etc. but go rather to the lost Sheep of the House of
Israel. The whole House of Israel was lost, but there were but a few of them
that saw their lost State.


2. The Bowels and Compassion of Christ to his Sheep, chiefly appears by his
dying for them. He laid down his Life for the Sheep; none could show greater
Love than this: As the Father knows me, even so I know the Father; and I lay
down my Life for John 10. 15.
the Sheep.

3. His great Love and Affection to his Sheep, is manifested by his care to
gather them; He shall gather the Lambs with his Arms, Isa. 40. 11.
and carry them in his Bosom. Gathering implies, bringing them Home unto
himself by the Arm of his Power, or by the effectual Operation of his Word and
Spirit. To whom has the Arm of the Isa. 53. 1.
Lord been revealed? Or, who has felt and experienced the powerful Influences
of his Spirit, and saving Grace thereof, on their Souls? This must be before
any poor Sinners are gathered or brought home to God. Jesus Christ must rescue
them out of the Mouth of the Lion, and Paw of the Bear, as David did his Sheep,
who was a Type of him. We were all once in Satan's Hand, 1 Samuel 17. 34, 35.
that hungry Lion had us in his Teeth, and was going to tear us to pieces, but
then comes our Blessed Shepherd and delivers us. None but he whose Power is
Infinite could gather us, or bring us home to God, such a miserable State were
we in.

4. Christ's Love is further expressed, by that affecting Metaphor, Luke 15. 6.
He goes after the lost Sheep, leaves the rest in the Wilderness, and never
gives over until he has found it; And when he has found it, he lays it on
his Shoulders, rejoicing. O my Friends, how great is the Love of Christ to one
poor, lost, and undone Sinner? He will not lose one that his Father has given
him: No, no, though it be but one individual Soul that is missing, yet he will
go after that, seek that, leave all the rest to look after that one poor Sheep;
and when he has found it, he sees it cannot go, it has no strength, therefore
he lays it upon his Shoulders. Sinners, Christ must lay hold of you, and take
you up, and lay you on his Shoulders, and carry you home if ever you are saved.
It is upon Christ's Shoulders, Christ's Power, that every Elect Soul is brought
home; it is not on the Power of their Will, their Strength, their Faith; no, but
on Christ's Shoulders. Moreover, it is said, He rejoiced, and calls upon all
his Friends (the blessed Angels and Saints) to rejoice with him, for I have
found my lost Verse 7.
Sheep. This shows his wonderful Love to poor, undone, and lost Sinners that
are his Sheep, whatever it costs him, whatever Pains, Labor, or Charge, home
he will bring them, saved they must and shall be. I have other Sheep (says he)
that are not of this Fold, John 10. 16.
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice.

5. His Love to his Sheep, to his Saints, also appears in his laying them in
his Bosom, in his Heart. O how near and dear is every believing Soul to Jesus
Christ! It Is a Metaphor taken from a Father or tender Mother, that hugs an only
Child in his or her Arms, and lays it in their Bosom, knowing not how to
express the Greatness of their Affections. Christ himself is said to lie in the
Bosom of the Father; which denotes how he is beloved by him, how near and dear
he is to him: Even so this discovers his great Affections to his People.

6. He also makes his Love manifest to them, by his gentle leading of them: He
shall gently lead them that are with young. He will not Isa. 40. 11.
lead them faster than they are able to go, or lay more upon them than they can
bear; nay, he gives Strength to them, and supports their Souls under all their
Troubles and Sorrows. Jacob was a compassionate Shepherd; If I over-drive them,
(says he) all the Genesis 33. 13.
Flock will die. Christ had many things to tell his Disciples, but they were
not able to bear them: He lets out or discovers his precious Truth to his
People, according as he knows they are able to receive it and take it in: You
shall not have harder Things, Trials, Temptations nor Afflictions, than your
strength is. There 1 Cor. 10. 13.
has no Temptation taken you, but what is common to Man: and God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able; but will with
the Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it.

7. His infinite Love and Bowels are made known also to his Sheep by his
feeding them, as well as it is by his leading them. He feeds them with choice
Food, he gives them his own Flesh to eat, and his own precious Blood to drink,
knowing that except he does this, they must perish for ever: This was that
strange Doctrine in the Eyes of the Jews, which they could not receive nor
understand.

8. Also by his healing of his Sheep with his own Stripes. But he was wounded
for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastisement of
our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes we are healed. What Shepherd ever
thus loved his Sheep, even to be wounded and bruised for them, to heal them of
their Wounds with his own Stripes? But this Jesus Christ does.

9. By this washing them also in the same precious Blood: Nothing could purge
away the Filth and Guilt of our polluted Souls, but Christ's Blood; and if he
wash us not, we have no part with him: He has loved us, and washed us from our
Sins in his own Blood. This Love is wonderful Love, amazing Love, exceeding all
Love. Rev. 1. 3.
O in what a Stream, in what a Fountain are the Sheep of Christ washed! Think
upon it, our Pollution was great, but Christ has washed us. God sent his Son
to take away our Sin, and it must be done this way; It is the Blood of Jesus
Christ his Son that cleanses 1 John 1. 7.
us from all Sin.

Fourthly. Jesus Christ is the good Shepherd. I am the good Shepherd; the good
Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep. Our Lord Christ the good Shepherd.
Jesus shows in this that he excels all Shepherds: Some Shepherds have ventured
their Lives, hazarded their Lives for their John 10. 11.
Sheep; yet it was more than was required of them, for the Life of a Man is
much more valuable than the Life of a Beast: But no doubt our Savior refers to
his great Work and Office as Mediator, and as the Messiah that was to come, who
was to be cut off, not for himself, for his own Sins, but for the Sins of the
Elect, or Dan. 9. 26.
die for his Sheep: It was required of him, the Father gave him commandment to
lay down his Life; and he did it actually, freely, willingly; nay, he came on
purpose into this World to do it, and therefore he is the good Shepherd.

Fifthly. Jesus Christ is a Wise Shepherd, a knowing Shepherd; I know my Sheep:
this I have already spoken to. Jesus Christ a wise Shepherd.


1. He knows and sees all his Sheep at once, with one look of his Eye, in all
the Nations of the Earth, let them dwell where they will, though never so far
asunder or remote.

2. He is so wise, that he knows in what Condition they are, and what Condition
is best for them; whether Poverty or Riches, Sickness or Health, Liberty or
Bonds, Peace or Trouble, Honor or Disgrace, Strength or Weakness, either a fat
or a lean Pasture, Loss or Gain, Cold or Heat, whether a North or a South Wind.

3. He is wise to protect us, wise to conduct us, to feed us, wise to fold us,
wise to heal us, and wise to save us.

Sixthly. Christ is the chief and great Shepherd of the Sheep. And when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Christ is a great
Shepherd.
Glory. And again, the Holy Ghost calls him in another place, the great
Shepherd: Now the God of Peace, that brought from the 1 Pet. 5. 4. Heb. 13. 20.
Dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, etc.

Jesus Christ may be called the chief and great Shepherd.

1. Because he entered into Covenant with the Father, as the great Surety of
all the Sheep; by which he came under a legal Obligation to pay the just Debts,
and to answer for the Defaults of all his Elect: And then and thereby he
undertook to bring in and gather all the Sheep to God by the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant; by which Transaction he made our Peace, and reconciled
Heb. 13. 20.
us unto the Father.

2. Because he actually bought all the Sheep, in pursuit of the said glorious
Covenant-Transactions, by the Price of his own Blood, that so he might unite
them all unto himself in one Body. Acts 20. 27, 28.


3. He may be called the chief and great Shepherd, because all the Sheep, or
Elect of God, are given into his Hand, to keep, take care of, feed, heel,
protect and preserve to Eternal Life. And this great Work and Office he has
undertaken, and does and will perform with all Faithfulness, being every ways
fitted, endeared and qualified, as Mediator and universal Shepherd and Head, to
discharge it.

4. Because it is he that calls them, that justifies them, that sanctifies them,
and presents them all faultless and without Spot before the Father.

5. Because he is exalted in Glory and Dignity, not only as the Head, Lord, and
Sovereign of all the Sheep, but also as the Prince of all Pastors and
subordinate Shepherds that ever were, are, or shall be; from whom they all
receive their Power and Authority as his Deputies, to take care of and watch
over each part and parcel of his Flock committed to their respective Charge.
Jesus Christ is not only above all Shepherds, all Ministers, but they do all in
his Name, and must at the last Day be accountable to him for their
Administrations.

6. He is the great Shepherd of the Sheep, a mighty Shepherd, if we consider
the greatness of the Flock, which he has not only received the Care and Charge
of, but they are all his own Sheep. If a Shepherd had under his Care 100000
Sheep, and all his own, would not every body call him a great Shepherd? Now
though Christ's Flock is called a little Flock comparatively, yet the Number of
all his Sheep, all his Elect, is very great: we read of ten thousands of his
Saints, and a Number that no Man can number, they are all his; and therefore a
great Shepherd.

7. He is great in Riches, having a multitude of rich and choice Pastors,
enough to feed Millions of Sheep here on Earth: And though his Flock will
increase e're long, when the Fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and his
ancient Flock, I mean, the Seed of Abraham now scattered, be gathered, and all
brought into one Fold, yet he has Pastures for them all. Moreover, he has
prepared a glorious and rich Fold for them Above, which is Heaven it self, that
is the Fold into which all his Flock shall be put for ever and ever.

8. Lastly, He is great in Power: No Shepherd has such Power to defend,
protect, preserve and save his Flock like to him. None are able to pluck one
Sheep out of his Hand, as I shall prove and demonstrate when I come to speak to
the next part of my Text. Another Shepherd, for want of Power, may lose his
Sheep, the Wolf or Lion may come and tear them in pieces, and rob him of them:
But no Enemy, neither Sin nor Satan, nor the World, can rend his Sheep from
him; he has Power over all Adversaries, and can subdue them with much case at
his Pleasure; therefore he is the great Shepherd.

Seventhly. Jesus Christ is a watchful Shepherd. This is one Property Christ a
watchful Shepherd. Luke 2. 8.
of a good Shepherd: And there were Shepherds in the Field watching over their
Flock by night, etc.

Christ knows his Sheep are subject to sleep, and so lie open to many Dangers,
therefore he watches over them. He is always awake, he that keeps Israel,
neither slumbereth nor sleeps; He will not suffer thy Foot to be removed: he
that keeps thee will not Psalm. 121. 3, 4, 5.
slumber. Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. The
Lord is thy Keeper, thy Shade upon thy right Hand. The Sheep of Christ are in
danger by Sin, by Satan, by Temptation, by Wolves, by a deceitful Heart, by
inward Corruption, by false and self-seeking Teachers, whose Design is to make
a Prey of his Flock; therefore he watches them like a Vineyard of red Wine: I
the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I Isa. 27.
3.
will keep it Night and Day. I will, as if he should say, protect my Church, my
Vineyard, my Flock, from all Assaults of its Enemies; neither Men, nor Devils
shall spoil, ruin, or hurt my People.

And that he may secure his Flock, 1. He discovers by his Word, the Subtilty,
Craft and Devices of their Enemies, and their Danger thereby. 2. By his Spirit
also, through its quickening Operations, he awakens them when their Enemies are
upon them; and that shows he is a watchful and a wakeful Shepherd. 3. He also
by his Providence shows he is awake, and strives to awaken his People also.


And this he does several manner of ways. 1. By Wars, Perplexities, and
Distress of Nations. 2. By Famine and Pestilence. 3. By strange Signs,
Prodigies, and fearful Earthquakes in diverse Places. 4. By the awakning
Providence of sudden and unusual Deaths, snatching away one Man here, and
another there, to keep the rest awake. 5. By letting out Symptoms of his
Displeasure, by distressing the Consciences of some, by fearful Horror and
Desperation; as in Spira and Child's Cases; to awaken others, and to deter them
from like Evils. 6. He also imploys his Ministers to rouse them up; they, as
his Substitutes, are made Watchmen, to give his People, his Saints, his Flock,
warning of approaching Dangers.


2 dly. Christ knows that his Flock is not only subject to sleep, but also to
go astray, and therefore he watches over them.

1. Because he sees our Enemies watch against us to ensnare, to catch, and to
ruin us; Deliver thy self as a Roe from the Hand of Prove. 6.
the Hunter, and as a Bird from the Hand of the Fowler.

Satan is a subtle Fowler, a crafty Enemy; and is also clothed with great
Power. He is compared to a Serpent, to show his Subtilty; and to a Lion, which
denotes his Strength and devouring Nature.

2. Jesus Christ watches his Sheep, that he may give them those Mercies they
need in the proper season of them: He knows when and how to give us that Good
he himself has promised. Sometimes he watches over his People, to chasten, to
afflict and punish them with the Rod, when he sees there is need of it: He lets
out his Dog, (as I may so say, like as a Shepherd does upon unruly Sheep) when
his Calls will not do, will not reclaim them and reduce them to an orderly and
diligent walk. But then at another time, he watches over them, to bestow his
Favors and Blessing upon them: And it shall come to pass, that like as I have
watched Jer. 31. 23.
over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to overthrow, and to destroy,
and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to plant, says the
Lord. Though there is no Change in God, but he does all things according to the
Counsel of his own Will and Eternal Purpose, yet there is a Change of his
providential Dispensations. God here speaks after the manner of Men; and as he
is diligent to afflict for Disobedience, so he is likewise as diligent upon a
Reformation, to distribute his Blessings, when he sees it will make for his
Glory and his Peoples Good.

Seventhly, and lastly, Christ is a living Shepherd. Other Shepherds Christ is
a living Shepherd.
die and leave their Sheep, and know not what Evil may befall them after their
departure: But Jesus Christ never dies; I am he that was dead, and am alive;
and behold, I live for evermore. He Rev. 1. 18.
ever lives to feed, to heal, guide, protect, and save his People; He ever
lives to make Intercession for us. In this does the Safety, Happiness and
Comfort of Believers lie: Christ is always the same, he changes not; and is
such a Shepherd, that his Sheep cannot lose; Death has no more power over him,
Death cannot deprive them of this Shepherd.

1. O happy Saints, blessed Sheep: O love your Shepherd, trust in your
Shepherd; say with David, The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall Psalm. 23. 1.
not want.

2. Be ruled, led and guided by your Shepherd; and be content with that Pasture
into which he has put you, and with such Commons he is pleased to afford you.

3. How does this reprehend such who repine, murmur, and are carried away with
slavish and distrustful Fear? O what a shame is it to be afraid, when you have
such a Friend, such a Keeper, such a Shepherd to protect, feed, and keep you?
But to proceed.

Secondly, What Pastures does Christ feed his Sheep in? What or which What
Christ Pastures are.
are his Pastures?

First. I answer; His Word, this is one of his Pastures, and a fat Christ's
Word one of the Pastures where his Sheep feed. Psalm. 119. 103.
one it is, yea, a most choice and rich Pasture; here is precious feeding: Some
(like David) can relish God's Word, and find it sweeter than Honey; How sweet
are thy Words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth. The Study,
Meditation, and Obedience of God's Word, yields more Satisfaction, Joy and
Delight, than any worldly Men find in their earthly Profits or sensual
Pleasures. If you cannot find it thus, it is because you have lost your
spiritual Appetites, you do not hunger after heavenly Food, nor see the Worth
nor Want of it: Thy Words (says Jeremiah) were found, and I did eat them; and
thy Word was unto me the joy and Jer. 15. 16.
rejoicing of my Heart.

Beloved, there is a twofold tasting of the Word.

(1.) Some taste it, but digest it not; they have an Apprehension, and bear
Reception of it, and no more: The news of a Savior, and deliverance from
Wrath, seems desirable to them; they like the Promises of the Word, and flatter
themselves with a false Hope of Pardon, by giving a bare Credit to the Truth of
the Gospel in the declaration of it.

(2.) But there is a farther and better tasting than this; a tasting by a
special Application, and a saving relishing of the Word of God; and not the
promissory Part only, but the preceptory Part thereof also: These like and love
the Word, because of the Purity of it. Others have a common, but not a special
Faith; the Jews seemed to rejoice in John's Doctrine, but did not receive it
John 5. 35.
into their Understanding, and sincerely subject to the Life and Power of it.

(1.) The Word of God feeds the Souls of Believers with saving Knowledge, the
Doctrine of Free Grace, of Justification, Adoption, Pardon of Sin, and free
access to the Father, which shows it to be a sat and blessed Pasture; and thus
it feeds their Understanding.

(2.) It feeds and raises their Affections also in Love to Christ, and desire
after him, to hear what God is to them, and Christ is to them; what a Covenant
is made with Christ for them, what Promises are made to them, what Love the
Lord Jesus has to them, and what Grace is purchased, laid, and treasured up in
Christ for them; what Care he has of them, and what Glory he has prepared for
them.

(3.) They receive the Word they assent to the Truth of it and f^el a so the
Power thereof inclining, bowing and subjecting their Wills to a holy, ready,
and hearty Consent thereunto, in a way of universal Obedience to what is
required of them.

(4.) It feeds their Faith also, and every Grace of the Spirit in their Souls;
it increases their Faith in Christ, and their Love to Christ, whilst they
meditate thereon, and believe with an unfeigned Faith the Veracity of God's
Word, and apply the Promises and Blessings thereof, which are purchased by
Jesus Christ now, is to eat and digest the Word.

Secondly. The Ordinances of Christ may be said to be another Christ's
Ordinances a rich Pasture. Cant. 1. 7.
Pasture where his Sheep do feed. The Spouse no doubt enquired after this
Pasture; Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, etc. where
thy Holy Ordinances are truly administered.

1. The Ordinance of Preaching, or Administration of the Gospel, is a rich
Pasture, especially when it is preached powerfully by the Influence and
Demonstration of the Spirit; the opening and explaining the Word of the Gospel,
is like the opening the Pasture-Gate, and so letting the Sheep into it. Did not
our Hearts burn within Luke 24. 32.
us, while he talked with us, and opened the Scriptures? It Is like the opening
of the Box of precious Ointment, causing a sweet Perfume in the Soul, like as
Mary's did in the House. The Work of the Ministry is to open the Scripture;
Understand thou what thou read? says Philip. The Eunuch answered, How
can I, unless Acts 8. 30, 31.
some Man should guide me? He might have added, some skilful Man. Alas, some
are unlearned, unexperienced and ignorant Preachers, they know not the Lord
themselves, they never learned of the Father, but want the Teachings of the
Holy Spirit: They understand not the Scripture, the Holy Bible is a sealed Book
to them, notwithstanding all their Humane Literature and Knowledge of the
Tongues, with their Arts and Sciences.

The preaching the Gospel, is the feeding of the Soul. But O what care should
be taken, that nothing is delivered by the Preacher but sound Doctrine; not to
feed the People with airy and empty Notions, corrupt and poisonous Doctrine;
for that is to destroy the Sheep, especially such that are weak in Knowledge,
and cannot quickly discern Truth from Error.

They are not to feed the Flock with Humane Traditions, nor with their own
Dreams. Simon, Son of Jonas, love thou me? John 21. 15.
Feed my Sheep: Not with good Doctrine only, but good Discipline also, and with
an holy and good Example: Good Government is precious Food to the Sheep and
Lambs of Jesus Christ.

2. The Holy Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, is another part of
this blessed Pasture: And such are ill Sheep that will not feed where the
Shepherd wills them, or like not a Pasture of his choosing. With what gladness
did those Saints at Jerusalem, Acts 2. 4.
when they received the Word, yield themselves up to Holy Baptism? The Eunuch
also found that Ordinance (he meeting with Acts 8. 39.
Christ in it) very sweet; and therefore when baptized, he went away rejoicing.
The Mystery of the Gospel is preached or held forth in a lively Figure in
Baptism to the very sight of the natural Eye; which being understood, conveys
much Light and Knowledge to the Understanding.

It shows that Christ was dead, buried, and rose again for our Justification.

Tilenus his disput. p. 886, 887.
1 st, "Baptism (says the Learned Tilenus) is the first Sacrament of the New
Testament, instituted by Christ; in which there is an exact Analogy between the
Sign and the Thing signified. The outward Rite in Baptism is threefold." "1.
Immersion into the Water. "2. Abiding under the Water. "3. A Resurrection out
of the Water.


" Baptism precious Soul-Food.
The Form of Baptism, (says he) to wit, External and Essential, is no other
than the Analogical Proportion which the Sign keeps with the Thing signified
thereby. The plunging into the Water, (says he) holds forth to us that
horrible Gulf of Divine Justice, in which Christ for our sakes, for a while
was in a manner swallowed up: abiding under the Water, (how little time soever)
denotes his descent into Grave.
Hell, even the deepest of Lifelessness: and lying in the sealed or guarded
Sepulcher, he was accounted as one dead. Rising out of the Water, holds forth
to us in a lively Similitude, that Conquest which this dead Man got over
Death." And (says the same worthy Author) so dipping into the Water, in a most
lively "Similitude, sets forth the Mortification of the old Man; and rising out
of the Water, the Vivification of the new Man; it being meet that we, being
baptized into his Death, and buried with him, should rise also with him, and go
on in a new Life." The Apostle clearly confirms the same great Truths; Romans 6.
3, 4.
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the
Father; even so we also should walk in newness of Life. We have Fellowship with
Christ in his Death in Baptism, or the Efficacy of his Death evidenced to us,
as the outward Symbol of it is held forth in the external Administration of it:
For as Christ died for Sin, so we are hereby obliged to die to Sin; and as he
rose again from the Dead, so we ought (as we covenant in this Ordinance) to
walk in newness of Life. Dr. Cave says, "In Immerging there are in a manner
threefold Acts, The putting the Person into the Water, his abiding under the
Water, and his rising up again; thereby representing Christ's Death, Burial,
and Resurrection; and our Conformity thereunto in our dying to Sin, and the
destruction of its Power, and our resurrection to a new course of Life." O
learn what your Baptism holds forth, and what you are taught thereby, and
promised therein, and live accordingly. Brethren, you will find blessed Food in
this Ordinance for your Souls; and if you experience the Things signified
thereby, happy are you; if not, in vain were you baptized.

The Lord's Supper precious Soul-Food.
2 dly, What sweet Food, or how good a Pasture is the Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper, to a hungry Soul who longs after the Bread of Life, and Communion with
Christ. A Crucified Christ is the Bread of Life; and by Faith in this Ordinance
we feed on this Bread; it feeds and strengthens our Faith, and also our Love to
the Lord Jesus: Who can forbear to love that Christ, who poured forth his
precious Blood for us? He was made a Curse for us, by hanging on the Tree, and
bearing our Sins.

When you take this Bread, and this Cup, you declare you take and accept of
Christ as the only Food of your Souls; and that way of Salvation God has been
graciously pleased to find out: and when you eat the Bread, and drink of the
Cup, you show that you feed alone upon him, and that he is your Savior.
Indeed, Christ does in effect say to you, Soul, take all this, in token that I
have satisfied the Justice of God for thy Sins, I have made thy Peace; take
this Bread, and this Cup as a Pledge of it, and of my Eternal Love to thee, and
as a Token that all thy Sins are forgiven, and that thou art mine also. (1.) By
this Ordinance we learn, and clearly see, the horible Evil of Sin, the cursed
Nature of Sin, in that nothing could atone for it, nor satisfy the Law and
Justice of God, but the precious Blood of the Son of God himself. (2.) Here
likewise we see that infinite Love of the Father, in giving of Christ to die
for us; He spared not his own Romans 8. 32.
Son, but delivered him up for us all. (3) Here also we perceive the wonderful
Love of Jesus Christ, who willingly laid down his Life for us. (4.) Moreover,
here we see how we come to be saved, or the Way of Life; and that it is only by
a Sacrifice, and that by the Sacrifice of Christ himself alone. (5.) Here we
see our near Union with Christ, and blessed Union one with another, as the
Bread and Wine is turned into Nourishment; the first is held forth: and as many
Corns of Wheat do make one Loas, so we being many Members, are but one Body;
and therein the latter Union is held forth also, I mean, our Union one with
another.

Thirdly. The Ordinance of Prayer, is also as a Pasture for Christ's Sheep to
feed in. If we pray in Faith, we receive what we desire Prayer a rich
Soul-Pasture.
and stand in need of: That Soul that goes to God in Christ's Name believingly,
never comes away empty handed. We have not, sam. 4. 3.
because we ask not; or else ask amiss, that we may consume it on our Lusts, to
please the Flesh, and gratify our Carnal Appetites, and so an evil End spoils
good Means: So long (said a good Woman in distress) as I have a praying Heart,
God will have a helping Hand. It argues we have not hungry Souls, if we have
not praying Souls. You may as well live without eating, as spiritually live
without praying; and as it is a sign you are not well when you cannot eat, so
it is a sign your Souls are not well when you cannot pray: And as it is a sign
the Body is faint, when the Breath is short, or breaths not freely so it is a
sign of a faint and languishing Christian, when his Prayers are short, or prays
not freely. He that believes savingly, will pray servently. He that thrives not
in this Pasture, will thrive in none. As be cannot live naturally that breaths
not, no more can that Soul live spiritually that prays not. He that casts off
Prayer, casts off God. No wonder God withholds Mercies from us, when we
restrain Prayer from him. Pure Prayer is only pleasing to a pure God: our
Prayers must be directed to the right Object; O thou that hear Prayer, to
Psalm. 65. 2.
thee shall all Men come. We must always direct our Prayers to God, but must
not forget to come unto him by Jesus Christ; and we must see to the Matter of
it, as well as the Object: If we ask not that which is lawful, our Prayers must
needs be unlawful; as it is a Sin to do any thing God commands not, so it is a
Sin to ask any thing God allows not.

We must also be right in the Manner, as well as in the Matter of our Prayer:
When our Spirit prays not, our Hand receives not.

And we must, if we would thrive in this Pasture, also see that our End be
right: Our great End should be, that our Prayer may be accepted, and God may be
glorified.

The first thing we should ask in Prayer is, that the Name of God may be
hallowed.

O Soul, haste into this Pasture: Whatsoever ye ask, says Christ, John 14. 13.
in my Name, I will do it, that the Father may be glorified.

To pray in Christ's Name, 1. Is to know we come to have this Privilege to draw
near to God, only by Christ, i. e. through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh;
he has purchased us this Liberty. 2. It Is to pray in his Strength, i. e. by
the Spirit, which he has procured for us, and given to us. 3. It Is to pray in
the Virtue of Christ's Mediation: Whatsoever we ask on Earth, Christ obtains
for us in Heaven. 4. To ask in Christ's Name, is to ask for his Sake, for his
Worthiness: It Is not what our Deservings are, but what Christ's Merits are.


Fourthly. The Promises of God are another Pasture, where the Sheep The
Promises are a rich Pasture for Christ's Sheep.
of Christ do daily feed. The Promises of God are of a Soul-fastening, and
Soul-strengthning Nature: But there is no feeding here, without believing. A
Sheep may as well feed on Grass, without Teeth, as a Christian can feed on the
Promises without Faith. The Reason why the Soul cannot get into this rich
Common, or rather fat Meadow, is, because he cannot get over the Slough of
Unbelief. Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds Mat. 4.
4.
out of the Mouth of God. He can feed his People, and support them by a Word of
Promise, when their Bread fails: Nor must we take unlawful Means to supply
our Necessities, nor distrust the Care and Providence of God, tho we do not see
which way we shall subsist: Trust in the Lord, and do good, so thou shall dwell
in the Psalm. 37. 3.
Land, and verily thou shall be fed. We must depend upon the Providence and
Promise of God, for Supplies both of Body and Soul: The young Lions lack, and
suffer Hunger; yet they that seek Psalm. 34. 10.
the Lord shall not want any good thing. We must let God judge and choose for us;
it is better for us sometimes to want, than to abound: There are Promises (as I
have sometimes showed you) that answer every Condition we can be in.

Fifthly. The Providence of God, and the Saints Experience, are another The
Providence of God, and the Saints Experiences, a Soulfatning Pasture. Psalm.
37. 35.
Pasture for Christ's Sheep. How often have they been fed this way? I have been
young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed
begging Bread. This was more especially David's Experience, and under that
Dispensation, when the Promises of God were of temporal Blessings; ours under
the Gospel are better: Or else take it thus, Not begging in vain. If they are
such Children that walk in the Steps of their godly Parents, or not so begging
as to be forsaken, it cannot intend any kind of asking, or begging; for David
himself desired and received Relief from others. Nothing does more clearly
relieve and feed our Souls under 1 Samuel 21. 3. and 25. 8.
Trouble and Distress, than those Experiences we have formerly had of God's
special Providence and Goodness to us, or how he helped his People in their
Extremities in the days of old. O my Psalm. 42. 6.
God, my Soul is cast down within me; therefore I will remember thee from the
Land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the Hill Mizar. He would call to
mind how God had helped him formerly, when pursued by Saul, or distressed by
Absalom; and the way his drooping Spirits were revived. He that delivered me
(says he) 1 Samuel 13. 37.
from the Paw of the Bear, and Paw of the Lion, will deliver me from this
uncircumcised Philistine. All Power is given into Christ's Hand, he is the
great disposer of all things; therefore be sure he will order every thing for
the Good of his Church. If not a Hair of our Heads shall fall without the
Providence of God, we may conclude he will be concerned for us in greater
Matters: And if he provide for Sparrows, he will provide and take care of his
own Children.

The Covenant of Grace, the Love of Christ, and that Relation we stand in to
him, must needs give us ground to believe he will, in his most wise Providence,
order all things for our Good, besides the express Promises he has made upon
that Account. Does he hold us in his Hand, carry us in his Bosom, nay, engrave
us on his Heart, and will he forsake us? O this cannot be.

Has he took the Charge of his Sheep, and will he leave them to Lions, or
Wolves, to be torn to pieces? Or shall Sin or the Devil pull Limb from Limb,
and he look on? But I must not further enlarge here.

Quest. What is the Nature of that Food which Jesus Christ feeds his Sheep with?

1. I answer in the Negative; It is not surfeiting Food: some Pastures are
naught, they will rot the Sheep; but Christ feeds not his People in such
Pastures.

2. It Is not forbidden Food; he has prohibited us to follow a Multitude to do
Evil, to walk in the Way of the Heathen, or after the Course of this World, or
according to the former Lusts in our Ignorance, and not to touch, taste, nor
handle of the Traditions and Doctrines of Men; but he allows us his own Word
and Ordinances.

1. It Is costly Food, Pastures that were purchased by our Shepherd at a dear
Price.

2. It Is sweet and pleasant Food; More to be desired than Gold; yea, than much
fine Gold: sweeter also than Honey, or the Honeycomb. Psalm. 19. 10.


3. It Is Soul-satisfying Food; he satisfies every hungry Soul: I will
abundantly bless her Provision, and satisfy her Poor with Bread. Psalm. 132. 15.
Wicked Men eat that which satisfies not: what is all the Trash of this World,
but mere Husks, Ashes, and Gravel-stones?

4. It Is strengthening Food; it strengthens the Soul, and strengthens the Graces
of the Spirit in the Soul.

5. It Is chearing, comforting, and reviving Food, as I might show you, but must
not enlarge.

6. It Is living Food, it is Bread of Life; such who feed on it shall never die:
it gives Life, and it continues and increases Life, and will feed the Soul up
unto everlasting Life.

7. It is Soul-fatning Food: Eat you that which is good, and let your Soul
delight it self in fatness. O this Food, these Gospel-Pastures Isa. 55. 2.
fatten the Soul, when they meet with God, enjoy God in his Ordinances; when
they have Communion with him, and when they find their Sins and Corruptions
wither and die, and Grace grow and flourish in their Souls' when they thrive in
Holiness, in Faith, Love, Patience, and Humility, etc.

What Christ's Folds are.
Quest. What is Christ's Fold?

Answ. He has a twofold Fold.

1. His Church is his Fold; Christ built it himself, and it is a Fold the Enemy
cannot destroy, he has set it upon a Rock.

2. Heaven is Christ's Fold.

Quest. What is the Fence of Christ's Fold (or Church) here on Earth?

Answ. I answer, It is threefold.

1. The Fence may be said to be, that Holy and Primitive Constitution, Order
and Ordinances which Christ has appointed.

2. That Sacred Covenant Believers enter into, when they are admitted Members.

3. The Holy Discipline, Order and Government Christ has ordained and left in
the Gospel.

APPLICATION.

We infer from hence, that Believers are in a most happy Condition, they having
such a Shepherd and such Pastures to feed in. Which will further appear, if we
consider these things following.

1. They are Pastures that will feed Multitudes; nay, they cannot be
over-stock'd, Christ's Pastures cannot be eaten up.

2. Christ's Pastures are always Good, always Rich, as good in Winter as
Summer; and so are not other Pastures.

3. So well fenced about, that the Walls cannot by Men nor Devils be broken
down. God secures his People and Gospel by his own Almighty Power and
Providence; he is a Wall of Fire round about: besides, his Angels encamp about
them that fear him also.

4. Christ's Pastures have most precious Water in them; There is a River that
makes glad the City of God, etc. He feeds me in green Psalm. 23. 2.
Pastures, and leads me besides the still Waters. The Holy Spirit, and Graces
of the Spirit, may be here intended. 1. Water has a cooling Nature, it allays
Thirst; so these Waters cool the Fire of Lust, and every evil Passion, and
allay that inordinate Thirst after the things of this World. 2. Some Waters are
of a purging Quality; these Waters also purge the Soul of all evil and nauseous
Humors. 3. Water makes fruitful; it makes Pastures fruitful, and the Sheep
also: So these Sacred Waters make the Word and Ordinances fruitful, and the
Saints fruitful likewise. 4. Waters soften; so these Waters soften the Heart
and make it tender. 5. Waters have a cleansing Virtue: So have these Divine
Waters; the Spirit, and Graces of the Spirit, cleanse the Soul of all Filth and
Pollution of Flesh and Spirit. 6. Water has a healing Property: The Spiritual
Waters heal, they are beyond all Waters, exceed all Waters. For, 1. These
Waters never fail; other Waters may be dried up. He that drinks of the Water I
shall give him, shall never thirst; but Joh. 4. 14.
the Waters that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of living Water,
springing up unto Everlasting Life. 2. These are Waters of Life; he that
receives the Holy Spirit, shall live for ever. 3. These are still Waters, not
rough boisterous Streams; they may be called still Waters in respect of their
Effects. 1. They will keep such that drink of them, in God's Bounds, and cause
them to rest in quiet where he has placed them. 2. They make a still and quiet
Soul, a still and quiet Family, a still and quiet Church, when all drink of
these Waters; nay, a still and quiet Nation: they allay all Feuds and undue
Heats among Christians that partake of them. These Waters quiet the Conscience
under the Accusations of the Law; quiet the Conscience under Satan's
Temptations. Thou art a Sinner, says Satan, and thy Sins are committed with
great Aggravations; thou deservest Wrath, and Divine Vengeance: But no sooner
does the Soul drink of these Waters, but it is quieted; the Spirit by Faith
shows the dejected Person that Christ has born the Wrath of God, and
reconciled him to the Father. 3. They quiet Believers under Affliction, in
Times of Want and Poverty, and under National Fears and Disquietments. And, 4.
In a Time of Sickness, and at the Hour of Death. 1. By evidencing to the Soul,
that the Covenant is well-ordered in all things, and sure. 2. That the Promises
of God are firm, and cannot be broken. 3. That the Love of God is Everlasting,
and nothing can separate them from it. 4. That the Faithfulness of God, and his
Almighty Power, is engaged to preserve them, and keep them unto Salvation.





1. Exhortation. If Christ feeds us in such Pastures, and gives us such Waters,
labor, O ye Saints, to be thankful. What Praise does this call for! even holy
and thankful Lips and Lives.

2. Labor to glorify this God, this Savior; strive to bring forth Fruit to
him: Herein, says Christ, is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much
Fruit, so shall you be my Disciples. Joh. 15. 8.


3. Take heed you do not straggle from the Fold of Christ, or refuse the
Conduct and Guidance of your Blessed Shepherd.

4. Terror. Woe to them that do annoy, disturb or disquiet Christ's Flock,
Christ's Sheep; or any manner of way seek to scatter or divide them, so that
they cannot comfortably feed and lie down together.

5. Sinners, will you not enquire where Christ feeds? Remember his Direction;
Go forth by the Footsteps of the Flock. Cant. 1. 8.


6. What comfort is here for you that are the Sheep and Lambs of Christ! How
safe are you in the Hand of such a Shepherd!

So much at this Time, and for the first part of my Text, viz. the 27 th Verse.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon. VI.
I Closed with the 27 th Verse the last Day; and shall now come to the great
Subject, which at first I told you I should (God assisting) endeavor to
demonstrate and fully prove:

Namely, The final Perseverance of the Saints of God, or Sheep of Jesus Christ.

But that we may the more orderly proceed, we shall first consider again the
Parts of our Text. Parts of the Text.
1. You have an Account of a Gift given, which is expressed, Life. 2. The
Nature of that Life explained, Eternal Life. 3. The Donor, or whose Gift it is,
viz. Jesus Christ's. 4. To whom the Gift is given, namely, to his Sheep. 5. The
Certainty of their possession of it, They shall never perish, neither shall any
Man pluck them out of my Hand.


Some read it, neither shall any; and from the Greek word (...), The Term
explained.
it may be better so rendered, viz. [any]; that is, any Enemy, neither Sin nor
World, Men nor Devils, Things present nor Things to come; let all Enemies do
what they can, I have them in my Hand, in my Power, in my keeping; as if our
Blessed Lord should say, And I will hold them fast, and they shall be preserved
through Faith by my Power, and the Power of my Father who gave them me, unto
Everlasting Life, and perish they shall not.

1. I give them Eternal Life: I now give it to them in the Seed thereof. Those
that Christ gives saving Grace unto, he gives Eternal Life unto. I give them
the promise of it, and when they die, they shall have the actual possession
thereof.

2. They shall never perish, that is, eternally perish; they shall not die the
second Death, or be cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. They
shall not come into Condemnation, or be eternally damned, as all Unbelievers
shall be.

3. Neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand: No doubt by the Hand of
Christ, is meant his Power, his Protection; the Lord's Hand is not shortened
that it cannot save; he is able to save, it is in his Power to save.

They were delivered into Christ's Hand by that Holy Covenant or Compact made
with the Father before the World began. And when they believe, (or by that
Grace which he infuses into them) he then takes actual and fast hold of them;
and there he will keep them, and never let his hold go.

They come therefore into Christ's Hand, upon the same Considerations by which
they came to be his Sheep; which (as I have already opened) was seven manner of
ways, viz. 1. By Election. 2. By that holy Covenant or Compact made between the
Father and the Son. 3. By the Father's free Donation they were given into his
Hand, delivered to him by the Father. 4. By Purchase he bought them, and so
they came into his Hand. 5. By Regeneration or Transformation he has wrought
his Image upon them, and so brought them into his Hand. 6. By Conquest, he
fought for them, and conquered their Enemies, and subdued their own filthy and
rebellious Hearts, and so they came into his Hand. 7. They by a holy
Resignation of themselves, (as being overcome by his Divine Grace) yielded
themselves up into his Hands. So that he has a sevenfold hold of them.


Secondly, Their being in Christ's Hand, denotes

1. His personal possession of them, he being now entered upon the actual
Administration of his Pastoral Office.

2. It denotes the present actual Charge he has taken of them, he having
gathered and brought them home to his own Fold, and put them into his own
Pasture.

3. It denotes also their great Safety and blessed Security, he being, as
Mediator, every way invested, qualified, and endowed with Power and Authority
to keep them; having received all Grace, yea, the Fullness of Grace from the
Father, as well as an express Command to supply all their Wants and
Necessities, to subdue all their Enemies, and to preserve them unto Eternal
Life. So much shall serve us to the Explanation of the Terms of our Text.

I shall only observe three Propositions from hence. Doct. 1. Everlasting Life
is a free Gift, or Salvation is wholly by Grace; it is only of God, and the
Gift of Jesus Christ. Doct. 2. The Saints of God are committed into the Hand of
Christ, he has the Care and Charge of them. Doct. 3. All the Saints, all
Believers, or Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ, have Everlasting Life given to
them; and they shall, every Soul of them, be saved, and none of them so fall
away as eternally to perish.


I shall speak to the first and last of these Propositions, in which the Second
will be comprehended.

In opening the first, I shall, 1. Show what is meant by Eternal Life. 2. Show
how it appears that Salvation is a free Gift, or wholly by Grace. 3. Show why
Salvation, or Everlasting Life, is a free Gift, or by Grace only. 4. Show why
Christ does, and will give Eternal Life unto his Sheep. 5. And lastly, I shall
briefly apply it.


1. Quest. What is meant by Eternal Life?

A threefold Life of Man.
Answ. There is a threefold Life of Man.

1. The Life of the Body, which is a natural Life, or the Life of Nature: In
him we live, move, and have our Being. Neither count I my Life dear to me, so
that I might finish my Course with Joy. He gives to all Life, etc. Acts 20.
24. Acts 17. 25.
All have this Life; Sinners as well as Saints have a natural Life.

2. There is a Spiritual Life, which is the Life of the Soul, the Life of a
Saint, or of the New Creature; this is the Life of Grace. Gal. 2. 20.
I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me; and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the
Son of God, etc. The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God; and they that
hear, shall live; that is, their John 5. 25.
Souls shall live, or be quickened and raised to a State of spiritual Life.

3. Eternal Life, that is properly the Life of Glory, or the Life of the other
World, that Life which the glorified Saints possess above: The Wages of Sin is
Death; but the Gift of God is Eternal Romans 6. 23.
Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Object. But Christ says, I give them Eternal Life; He speaks in the Present
Tense.

Answ. 1. I answer; you heard before that true and saving Grace is the Seed of
Eternal Life, or the Seed of Glory to come, as Glory is the Harvest of Grace.

2. Spiritual Life is the earnest of Eternal Life. Now every Believer has
received the Spirit, which is the Earnest of their Eternal Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
Inheritance: And thus they have it, as a Man that purchases an Inheritance, he
gives Earnest for it; and no sooner that is done, but he cries, such a House,
or such Land, is mine; it is his by virtue of the Earnest given, though he has
not yet the actual possession of it: so it is here.

3. Christ gives his Saints Eternal Life. Now because he gives them a sure
Title to it, he makes them a Deed of Gift of it; or seals unto them a Right,
and legal Conveyance of it, as firm as the Law and Ordinance of Heaven. Now
when a Person has a true Right and Title, or Deed of Gift, made and sealed to
him of such or such an Estate, he may say he has the Estate, it is his own. And
thus Believers have Everlasting Life, or the Eternal Inheritance, i. e. they
have a true Right and Title of it sealed to them here by the Holy Spirit: After
that ye believed, you were sealed with the Spirit of Promise, which is the
Earnest of the Saints Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Heb. 11. 1.
etc. Faith is the Evidence of things not seen.

4. The Spirit of God, who is that Principle of Divine Life in the Soul of
Believers, is Eternal. Christ is in us; every Believer has Christ in
possession, and Christ is Eternal Life; and therefore he that has the Son,
has Everlasting Life: These things have Joh 3. 36.
I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may
know you have Eternal Life, etc. Jesus Christ being in us 1 John 5. 13.
here, is more to us than the Hope of Glory, for he is Eternal Life 1 John 5.
11, 20.
; and the Soul of a Child of God, shall never lose nor be dispossessed of
Christ, no not by Death it self, therefore may be said to have Eternal Life.
They have Eternal Life abiding in them, because they have the Spirit abiding in
them; But the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of living
Water, springing up unto Everlasting Joh. 4. 14.
Life.

Query. Methinks I hear some doubting Soul say, O that I could but experience
this Spiritual Life to be in me! How may I know I am made alive, and have
Eternal Life given to me?

1. In answer to such it is necessary to consider, that all Adam's Posterity by
Nature are spiritually dead in Sin, or under a Privation of the Life of God,
until spiritually quickened and made alive by Jesus Christ.

2. Now as natural Death is made use of by the Spirit of God, to show what
spiritual Death is; so also natural Life is tropically made use of, to
demonstrate and discover spiritual Life.

A Man naturally dead,

1. Is cold; all Heat is gone, if long dead. So all unregenerate Persons are
spiritually Cold, or without any Divine Heat or Warmth in their Spirits; that
Principle of internal Life Man had before he fell, being lost and gone, he is
cold as a Stone God ward, or in a spiritual Sense.

2. A Man naturally dead cannot move, all power of Motion and Activity, or all
vital Actings are gone also. So in Men spiritually dead, there is a Disability
or Impotency unto all spiritual things to be performed in a spiritual manner;
they can perform or act spiritually no Act of Life, or do any thing that is
absolutely accepted of him: The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; it is not
Romans 8. 7, 8.
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. -- So then they that are in
the Flesh cannot please God.

3. A Man naturally dead cannot breath nor speak, no more can carnal Men: Men
spiritually dead breath forth their Desires in Prayer to God, they have no
Tongue to speak for God, or to pray to God acceptably; all they do is dead
Service, all their Prayers and Works, are dead Prayers, dead Works, because
performed from Persons spiritually dead, and not from a Principle of Divine
Life.

4. A dead Man cannot feel, see, nor hear: No more can such who are dead in Sin,
they cannot feel spiritually, they have a heavy Burden, a mighty Weight of Sin,
Guilt and Wrath lying upon them, but feel it not: They are grievously wounded,
but feel no pain, do not cry out; think they are well, and all nothing: They
cannot see spiritual Objects, nor spiritual Things. These Dead see not Jesus
Christ, see not his Beauty, his Glory; neither the Want of him, nor the Worth
of him; the Eye of their Understanding is darkened, they have no Faith, which is
the Eye of the new Creature: Nor can they hear in a spiritual Sense, until,
like dead Lazarus, they hear Christ's voice by his Spirit, and are made alive.

5. The Beauty of the Dead is gone, Death is ghastly; so is the spiritual Beauty
of the Soul gone, of those who lie dead in Sin and Trespasses.

6. The Bodies of those who are naturally dead, are fit for nothing, they soon
stink, and therefore must be buried and put under the Ground, being loathsome,
etc. So ungodly Persons who are spiritually dead, are loathsome in God's sight,
as filthy Carrion, or a stinking Sepulcher is in ours, and are fit for nothing
but to cast into Hell, as abominable and hateful to the Holy Jehovah.

1. By these things therefore you may know, whether you are How to know we are
spiritually alive.
spiritually alive, or not; for if so, you are quickened and made alive by the
Operations of the Spirit, and there is a Principle of Divine Life infused into
your Souls: So that from a holy and new Nature, you can and do breath forth
your Desires freely and frequently to God, and see the excellency of spiritual
Objects and Things; Christ is must precious and lovely in your sight: Your Eyes
see, and your Ears hear, and you have spiritual feeling, and you can and do act
and move; that is, believe, repent, and obey God, with great Activity, and a
strong Propensity, or gracious Inclinations of Heart: There is also much of the
Beauty of Holiness shining forth in your Lives.

2. This also by the way may serve to detect that Doctrine some, nay too many
maintain, of the Power of the Creature: Arminianism detected.
Alas, alas, what can the Dead do! For evident it is, that those who are thus
dead, have no Principle or first Power of living unto God, or to perform any
Duty to be accepted of him: It is with them, as to all Acts and Ends of
spiritual Life, as with the Body, as to the Acts and Ends of natural Life, when
the Soul is departed from it; or else God would never say they are dead, call
them dead. Does God make use of an improper Metaphor? Dare they affirm that? It
must be so, if Man naturally be not dead, but wounded, in a spiritual Sense
only. True, a wicked Man is naturally alive, and his Soul is in his Body, and
he is endowed with Understanding, Will and Affection, and may perform many
Duties God requires of him: But what of this? for in spiritual Life the Holy
Ghost is unto the Soul, what the Soul is unto the Body, in respect of natural
Life, namely, the quickening Principle. And (as a Learned Author well observes)
to deny such a quickening Dr. Owen.
Principle of spiritual Life, superadded unto us by the Grace of Christ,
distinct and separate from the natural Faculties of the Soul, is upon the
Matter to renounce the whole Gospel: It is all one as to deny that Adam was
created in the Image of God, which he lost, and that we are renewed unto the
Image of God by Jesus Christ.

2 dly. They may also as well assert, Man has a creating Power; for
Regeneration is called the New Creature, which is created 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 1.
18, 19, 20.
in us after the Image of God, according to his own glorious Power.

3 dly. Therefore whatsoever Sinners act in spiritual Things, by their
Understanding, Will or Affections, that are not renewed, they do it naturally,
and not spiritually, and are therefore called dead Works. We may also from
hence infer, what a mighty Blessing and Favor it is to be made spiritually
alive. How should such admire God, and his Free Grace in Jesus Christ; for as
they have an internal holy Life, so they shall never die, but have eternal
Life; nay, that this Eternal Life is begun in them here: I give them Eternal
Life.

But to proceed.

Secondly. I am to show how Salvation, or Everlasting Life is a free Salvation
a free Gift.
Gift, or by Grace only.

1. Life and Salvation is of Grace in opposition to Nature, we have it not as
the Product of Nature: Which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. To Joh. 1. 13.
be born, signifies to receive a Principle of Life; and those that are the
Children of God, have not that spiritual Life that is in them, from the Motions
or Powers of Nature; not from the Power of Man's Will, nor from their fleshly
or natural Parts and Abilities, however improved.

2. Life and Salvation is wholly of Grace, or a free Gift, in opposition to
Merit; we cannot purchase or procure it by our Acts of Obedience: By Grace are
ye saved through Faith, and that not Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Tit. 3. 5.
of your selves; it is the Gift of God: not of Works, etc. Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us. Not
the desert of our Works, let them be what they will, either before or after
Grace, but from God's own sovereign Mercy and Goodness, whose Bowels yerned
toward his Elect in Misery: For the Wages of Sin is Death; but the Gift of
God is Eternal Romans 6. 23.
Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Death Natural, Death Spiritual, and Death
Eternal, are the Wages and Desert of Sin: And who will deny a Servant his
Wages? Wicked Men are the Servants of Sin, and they shall have their Wages. But
though Death is the Wages or Merit of Sin, yet Eternal Life is not the Wages of
our good Works; no, but the Gift of God, through the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ: It is not by our Works, or for our Worthiness. The Apostle, as our
Annotators note, varies the Phrase, on purpose to show that Salvation is wholly
of God's Grace, and not of our own Merits: It Is of Grace, or the Gift of God
through Jesus Christ, that is, through his Merits, De gratia and libero
arbitrio, says Augustine.

3. Life and Salvation is by Grace only, or the free Gift of God, in opposition
to the Law: The Law could not give Life, that could not save us: For had there
been a Law given that could have given Gal. 3. 21.
Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law. The Law requires
perfect Obedience, and lays every one under the Curse, that continues not in
all things that is written therein to do them. Gal. 2. 10.
Therefore no Life by the Law; that being weak through the Flesh, Man could not
perfectly fulfill it, and so could have no Life by it. Romans 8. 3.


4. Life and Salvation is the free Gift of God, in opposition to any acceptable
Service done for it, by us; as some times great Gifts are bestowed on Persons
for the sake of some small Service performed for them: But it is not so here,
though Salvation be a Reward of Grace, yet it is not given for the sake of any
acceptable Service done by us; we know that a small Matter sometimes purchases
that which is of great Value; but nothing we do, or can do, can purchase Life
and Salvation for our Souls. True, Eternal Life is a Purchase, it is a Reward
of Merit; but O mistake me not, it is not of our purchasing, it is no Reward
for any Work done by us, but it is the Purchase of Jesus Christ, the Reward of
his Work, by his fulfilling of the Righteousness of the Law for us in our
Nature, in his holy and spotless Life, and by his satisfying the Justice of God
for our breaking and violating of his Holy Law, which he did by the painful and
cursed Death of his Cross: For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the Flesh, Romans 8. 3.
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned
Sin in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. That the Righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, that is, in our Head, Surety, and
Representative; for though we in our Persons were utterly unable to do it, yet
Christ having done it in our Behalf, and Nature, it is accepted, as if we had
done it our selves, Christ's Righteousness and Obedience being imputed to us
who do believe: so that what he did and suffered, is accounted unto us as if we
had done and suffered it; yet it was Christ that purchased Life, not we; he
purchased, and we possess; he is the Redeemer, Romans 3. 24, 25.
we are the Redeemed; he merited all, and we have all freely of Grace through
his Merits, or through that Redemption that is in his Blood.

5. Life and Salvation is a free Gift, or of Grace only, does appear yet
further, because the Foundation thereof laid from before all Worlds, in God's
eternal Election, was the Spring of it; and this was alone of God's own free
Grace: There is a Remnant according Romans 11. 6.
to the Election of Grace. And if it be of Grace, then it is no more of Works,
otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of Works, then it is no more of
Grace, otherwise Works are no more Works.

This Opposition or Contrariety is not only between Grace and legal Works, but
between Grace and all manner of Works whatsoever; because it lies betwixt the
Nature of Grace and Works, they are repugnant or contrary the one to the other,
they can no more be the Causes or Motive of any one Action, than one individual
thing can be White and Black in the same part, as a worthy Writer notes. Men
are not elected partly of Grace and partly of Works foreseen, but wholly of
Grace; nothing but an Act of God's Sovereign Grace was the Cause and Motive of
it.

6. Life and Salvation is a free Gift, or by Grace only, because the Glorious
Covenant between the Father and the Son, made and entered into before the World
began, was alone of God's Grace, of his infinite Grace and Favor: God was at
liberty (who foreseeing Man's Fall and horrible Transgression, he having
forfeited all those Blessings bestowed originally upon him) whether he would or
would not afford him any Help or Relief, but might have justly and utterly
rejected the whole Race of Mankind, as he rejected all the Angels that sinned,
or kept not their first Estate.

Did Man, fallen Man, deserve this Love, this Favor, who was become an Enemy
to God? Was there any thing in Man that could be a Motive to move the Almighty
to enter into this Covenant, to save so vile a Creature, such a poor and
despicable a Creature as Man became by his Sins, the Visage of his very Soul
being now loathsome, deformed, and abominable in the sight of God, God's holy
Image being utterly defaced, and all his Beauty gone, being besmeared and
covered all over with noisome Filthiness and Pollution, filled with Enmity and
Hatred against God; dethroning his blessed Creator, and setting up the Devil in
his Place; subjecting himself to that implacable Enemy of his, and casting off
his most holy and gracious Sovereign from whence he received his Breath and
Being.

Nay, and in respect of God himself, it must needs appear to be wholly of
Grace; could Redemption of Man add any thing to the essential Glory of God? Did
he stand in need of Man to make him more happy or glorious in himself, who
being an independent Being, had been eternally happy in the Enjoyment of
himself, had Man never been made, or had he left him under Wrath and Misery? Or
was he obliged to save us, and that he might do it, to send his own Son to die,
and be made a Curse for us? Or could he not have created other Creatures to
have showed forth his glorious Perfections? Or why might he not have sent his
Son to have taken hold of the Nature of Angels to have redeemed them, (who were
his Creatures as well as fallen Man, and more glorious too than Man before they
fell) and let Man have perished for ever, and not have entered into such a
Covenant of Grace with his own Son on his Behalf?

7. Life and Salvation therefore is a free Gift; it is wholly of Grace, because
we could not have obtained it unless God sent his Son out of his own Bosom to
effect it. The giving of Christ, and the Father's sending of him into the
World, is nothing but an Act of his own free Grace: God so loved the World,
that he gave his only Joh. 3. 16.
begotten Son, etc.

8. Because Everlasting Life is by Christ alone, nor could we have had it,
except he died: I am (...) the Truth, and the Life; no Man John 14. 3, 4, 5.
can come unto the Father but by (...) is by Faith, that it might be by Grace.
But after that the (...) and Love of God our Savior Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7.
appeared: Not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, but according to
his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost: Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ; That being
justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs, according to the Hope of
Eternal Life.

Thus if we consider the Rise, the Spring, the Motive, and the Author of
Everlasting Life, all appears fully to be of God's Grace alone; but should we
proceed a little further as to the Means and Application of the Remedy, in
order to interest in this Salvation, that is all of Free Grace also.

1. We are called and quickened by God's special Grace, according to his
Eternal Purpose in Jesus Christ: No Man could quicken himself. All rational
Arguments, without Divine Influence, or an Almighty Power, will not bring our
Souls into a State of Life. See how Paul ascribes his Conversion and special
Vocation Gal. 1. 15, 16.
to God's Grace; But when it pleased God who separated me from the Womb, and
called me by his Grace, to reveal his Son in me, etc. Special Vocation is of
God's Free Grace, who has saved us, and 2 Timothy 1. 9.
called us with an Holy Calling; not according to our Works, but according to
his own Purpose and Grace which was given to us in Christ Jesus before the
World begun. We are quickened, renewed, or regenerated by Grace, through the
Operations of the Holy Ghost.

2. Adoption is of Grace; Having predestined us unto the Adoption Ephesians. 1. 5.
of Children, to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace. As the Purpose was free,
so is the Execution free also: That the Purpose of Romans 9. 11.
God, according to election might stand; not of Works, but of him that calls.
To them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, etc. The Privilege Joh. 1. 12.
of being Sons and Daughters of God, is freely given to us, through Jesus
Christ: It Is through Christ, for that we might become Sons he became a Servant,
and died the cursed Death of the Cross for us, to redeem them that were under
the Law, that we might Gal. 4. 5.
receive the Adoption of Sons.

3. Justification is wholly of Grace: Being justified freely by his Romans 3. 24.
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, without Works. Now to
him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, Romans 4.
5.
his Faith is counted for Righteousness: It Is not because we are righteous in
our selves, therefore we are justified; no but being justified by the
Righteousness of Christ, we are declared righteous in him; and this is wholly
by God's free Grace.

4. Faith is a Grace, or a Gift freely given to all that believe: To you it is
given in behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but to Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians.
2. 8.
suffer for his sake. For by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the Gift of God.

5. Repentance is of Grace: Him has God exalted with his right Acts 5. 31.
Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, etc. God in
the New Covenant promises to take away the Heart of Stone, and to give a Heart
of Flesh; that is, a broken, tender, and Ezekiel. 36. 26. 2 Timothy 3. 26.
a repenting Heart. If God peradventure will give them Repentance to the
acknowledging the Truth. If God will give them a Power and an Heart to repent,
it is his own free and gracious Gift to poor Sinners.

6. Forgiveness of Sin is also freely given of God; it is of Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 3. 25.


So that it appears Eternal Life, from the first to the last, is wholly of
Grace, both the Author of it, the Means of it, and the End thereof, all is of
Grace: Heaven it self is the Gift of Grace; Fear not, little Flock; it is your
Father's good Pleasure to give you the Luke 12. 32. Rev. 2. 10.
Kingdom. The Crown of Glory is the Gift of Christ: Be thou faithful unto
Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Take the Water of Life freely; buy
Wine and Milk, without Money, and without Price. Salvation was contrived by
Infinite Grace, and all Isa. 55. 1, 2.
things that do concur or accompany it are freely given: Bread of Life, and
Water of Life, is freely given; A new Heart will I give them, and a new Spirit
will I put into them. To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven, etc.

Thirdly, To proceed to the Grounds of the Point, I shall give Why Salvation is
of Grace.
you the Reasons why Eternal Life is the Gift of Christ, or of the free Grace
of God.

1. It is because Sin and Death cannot be removed out of the Way to Life, but
only by Jesus Christ, and so by Grace only. The Law of God is broke, and
Justice calls for Wrath and Vengeance to be executed upon the Transgressor.
Justice must be satisfied, but Man cannot make a Compensation for the Violation
of God's Holy Law, nor will God acquit the Sinner unless that be done; the Law
is but an Impression of God's Holy Nature, it resulted not from a bare Act of
his Sovereignty, but from his Holiness and perfect Rectitude of his blessed
Nature. If Man could have attained to Life by any Works of Obedience done by
him, Christ died in vain; and if it had consisted with the Wisdom and Holiness
of God to have accepted of imperfect Obedience, provided it had been sincere,
he could at first have given Man such a Law, and so have saved the Life of his
Son. For any therefore to affirm that God accepts sinful Man for the sake of
his imperfect (though sincere) Obedience, it is to assert, in effect, that he
accepted of some sinful and polluted Acts as a Recompense and Satisfaction for
other sinful Acts and Deeds of Darkness; for all our best Services are unclean
in themselves. Paul accounted all his own Righteousness but Dung, etc. Besides,
the Obedience under the Gospel which God requires, is to be performed in the
highest perfection imaginable; Be ye Perfect, as your Father in Heaven is
Perfect. Mat. 5. 48.
The Law of the Gospel is the same in Nature with the Moral Law, therefore (if
it may be called a Law) it is a perfect Law; we are still commanded to love the
Lord our God with all our Hearts, with all our Souls, and with all our
Strength; yea, and to live and sin not. Little Children, these things write I
unto you, that ye sin not. Our Faith, 1 John 2. 1.
Love, and Patience, etc. ought to be perfect; the Law or Commands of the
Gospel know no Bounds nor Limits; Until we all Ephesians. 4. 13.
come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the Fullness of Christ. It would
therefore be a Work becoming the New-Lawyers to show where the Commands lie in
the Gospel, that God's Law only requires sincere Obedience unto; the Law
certainly loses no part of its Sanction by the Gospel, that is as Holy, Just
and Good as ever, and a perpetual Rule of Life and Obedience: "Therefore (as a
reverend Person Notes) Mr. J. C.
either the Gospel-Law, or Law of Faith, must require Perfection of Obedience
in these Duties, or some other Divine Law, or else God would become an indulger
of Sin, by Law: if it be by another Law, viz. the Moral, that requires perfect
Obedience, and this sincere only, then these Laws differ but in Degree, not in
Specie or Kind; because both require the same Duties or Works; and so this
Gospel-Law would be no distinct Law, but only the Measure of sincere Obedience
would receive a new use; which we own it has, to wit, to be an Index and Mark
of our Justification, tho we cannot own that use of its giving Right," etc. But
to proceed, (says he) "a distinct Law they must hold, or quit their Cause, or
this Foundation of it; for the Text sets the Law of Faith down as an opposite
Law to that of Works, and that they hold. Then if it be a perfect Law,
requiring perfect Obedience, there is no possibility of Justification in this
Life. Poppius the Arminian grants the Conclusion, that our Obedience must be
consummate before our Assurance; and others distinguish between a complete and
partial Justification, the former is not, they say, until the Day of Judgment.
But this is not all the Difficulty, for it is the adding a Load to a Burden: Is
this Gospel, to a Man that is unable to perform the least part of the Moral
Law, to tell him, that God, or the Mediator, requires perfect Obedience to it
for the future, and another too? Or is this Gospel, to say, you shall perish
eternally, and have the Fire of Hell seven times heated, if you obey not this
Gospel? It Is indeed a conditional Hell, but it is more dreadful than the Fire
of Hell; and the Condition is more impossible, because we have less power to
shun this Difficulty of two perfect Laws. Mr. Bull owns no other perfect Law
but this Gospel, since Man fell: but by shunning one Difficulty, he falls into
two as great; (1.) Then the Moral Law is abrogated, besides the falsness of the
Doctrine it self; for it is impossible that should cease to be our Duty, to
love God with all our Heart and Soul. What Advantage brings Christ's Death, to
abrogate one perfect Law, and establish another? here is little Gospel. A
second Difficulty is, we must either say Christ has purchased to us Pardon for
Sins against the Gospel-Law, or none at all, but that one Sin of Adam's, if the
Moral Law be abrogated; after the Fall we never sinned against any Law but the
Gospel, for we were under no other Law according to him," etc.

The Sum of that I drive at is this, viz. There is a necessity we must be
justified and saved by Grace only, because we cannot be saved by a Law of
Obedience, but by Christ and Grace alone: If we sly not to Christ by trusting,
believing, and depending on him, and the Grace of God in him, who has
satisfied the Justice and Law of God for us, and brought in Everlasting
Righteousness, the Law of God will cut us down and throw us into Hell for ever.

2. It is by Grace alone that we are saved, because all boasting is excluded,
and cause of boasting. And this is the Design of God in the Gospel. viz. That
Man might not have whereof to glory, but in the Lord alone: Nor could this be
done any other way, but by his contriving our Salvation to be wholly by his own
free Grace. Where is boasting then? it is excluded; by what Law? of Works; nay,
but by the Law of Faith, not of Works, lest any Man should boast. Romans 4. 3, 24.


3. It is only by Grace that we are saved, or Eternal Life is the free Gift of
God, and Gift of Christ; because he will have all the Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
Glory of it: God will not give the Glory of our Salvation unto others. Having
predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Ephesians. 1. 5, 6.
Christ according to the good Pleasure of his Will, to the Praise of the Glory
of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved.

4. It is by Grace only because God would magnify his Son, by whose
Righteousness and Obedience imputed to us, we are justified and saved: and it
is to this end I say, that God might exalt Jesus Christ; his Design was, to
magnify Christ in our Salvation, and to abase Man: Thou have given him Power
over all Flesh, that he Joh. 17. 2.
should give Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him.

5. And lastly, It is by Grace, because God would have Salvation sure to all
Believers: Therefore it is of Faith that it might be Romans 4. 16.
by Grace, to the end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed, etc. If
Salvation were by our Works and Obedience, it might be very uncertain; or if
the whole of our Happiness and Eternal Life be not in Christ's Hand, but that
it depends on the Will of Man, or on the condition of our Faith and Holiness,
or in the improvement of our Abilities; and it is possible that we may, or may
not answer the Condition thereof; it might so fall out, that not one Soul might
be saved: Besides, should it be so, those that are saved, would then have
something to glory in, or boast of in the Great Day: They in effect may thank
themselves, and admire their own Wisdom, Care and Industry, that brought them
to Heaven.

Fourthly, Why does and will Christ give Eternal Life to all his Sheep, to all
his Saints?

Answ. 1. Because Eternal Life was purchased for them by his Death: But by his
own Blood he entered once into the Holy Place, having Heb. 9. 12.
obtained Eternal Redemption for us.

2. Because all that are given unto Christ, are ordained unto Acts 13. 48.
Everlasting Life.

3. Because Christ was sent into the World to this End, to give Life unto them:
I am come that ye might have Life, and that ye might Joh. 10. 10 Luke 1. 77.
have it much more abundantly. It was that he might give his People the
Knowledge of Salvation, and save them from their Sins.

4. Because Life is given to Christ to this End, viz. to communicate it to all
his Elect: he is made a quickening Spirit, that he might quicken all his; As in
Adam all die, so all that are in Christ shall live, Spiritually here, and
Eternally hereafter: Because I live, ye shall live also. John. 14. 19.


5. Because all his Elect were quickened together with him virtually, Col. 2. 13.
when he rose from the Dead: yea and also virtually they entered into Heaven
with him; for he ascended as their Head and blessed Representative.

6. Because Eternal Life was promised to them in Christ before 2 Timothy 1. 9.
the World began; and they have many firm and sure Promises made of it to them
since also.

7. Because they are united to him, and Christ has prayed, That they may all
be made perfect in one; and he has prayed that John 17. 22, 23.
they may have Eternal Life. Now Union with Christ gives right to Glory; a
whole Christ shall be glorified, and not a part only.

Quest. What does Eternal Life import?

Answ. I answer, It does import a Deliverance from all Evil, present and to
come, and a full and perfect possession and enjoyment of all true spiritual and
everlasting Good and Glory above.

Quest. But does not this seem to diminish or lessen the Glory of God the
Father, to assert, That it is Christ that gives Eternal Life? etc.

Answ. No, not in the least, for all things are of God and through Jesus
Christ; All things are of God, who has reconciled us 2 Cor. 5. 18.
unto himself by Jesus Christ. It is God that has reconciled us unto himself;
it is by Christ we are reconciled, his Blood being the Price of our
Reconciliation; God the Father gave Christ for us, and also gives him to us:
And this is the Will of him that sent me, that Joh. 6. 40.
every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have Everlasting Life;
and I will raise him up at the last Day. And thou have given Joh. 17. 3.
him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as thou
have given him. It is the Father that gave Christ the Power (as Mediator) to
give Eternal Life unto his Sheep.

APPLICATION.

First. This may serve to reprehend those that would not have Salvation to be
wholly of Grace; it clearly condemns Free Will; Free Will detected and confuted.
for if it be only by God's Grace, it is not at all of Man's Will. They, it is
true, do acknowledge the Contrivance of our Salvation to be of God's Grace
alone, or the Effects of his great Love, and his sending of Christ into the
World to be an Act of Infinite Grace, but withal deny Regeneration and
effectual Vocation, to be wholly the Effects of God's special and
distinguishing Love; but do affirm, that Grace which those Men have who perish
at last, would have been sufficient to have renewed them, had they improved it.
They assert, that all Men have Power to believe, and that that Grace which God
affords to Men to save them, it is in the preaching of the Word, or consists
in no more than Moral Swasions, Arguments, or Excitements, in a rational way.
But whether this Light, Power, or Moral Grace, (as they call it) be Natural or
Supernatural, Mediate or Immediate, they do not seem well to accord about it.
Some of them (as one observes) say, the Power of Natural Reason, or the
Exercise of Human Credence, is sufficient to a Man, being convinced of the
Truth of the Gospel, or of the Declaration of God's Love and Grace in Christ,
so that he may believe as easily as to believe any other Matter upon infallible
Testimony. Others call it a Gift, or the Light of the Spirit, which all Men
have; yet if thoroughly examined, it is no more than a Natural Gift, Light or
Ability: That it is the special Grace of God, or Illumination of the Holy
Spirit, is not granted, but denied by these Men, it being no other Grace or
Power, than is afforded equally to those who perish, as to such who are saved.
It is not such Grace or Operations of the Spirit that infuses holy Habits,
which determines the Will, or inclines it to Good, but such Excitements that
only awaken and rouse its Native Power; it is such Grace that the Will may
receive, or refuse the whole Efficacy of it; (so far as I can gather) it lies
not in its own Nature, nor from the effectual Operations of God's Spirit, but
from the Will of Man.

Now how contrary this is to the Truth of the Gospel, and all the Experiences
of renewed and gracious Persons, I leave to their considerations: yet to detect
and condemn these Notions, I shall add a word or two before I conclude.

1. Can a dead Man quicken himself, or be raised to Life, without a vital
Principle be infused into him? Will Moral Swasions bring a dead Man to Life?

2. Has Man a Power, naturally in him, exceeding the Power of Satan? Or is he
stronger than that strong Man armed? Or are not all Men naturally under the
Power of the Prince of Darkness, he taking them Captive at his Will? Let this
be considered, for seeing 2 Timothy 2, 26.
God's Word does positively declare this to be the State of all Men by Nature,
i. e. that they are under Satan's Power; what signifies that which they affirm?
Will Satan be persuaded to release and Mat. 12. 29. Mark 3. 27. Luke 11. 21.
Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20.
let go his Captives, which he holds down in strong Bonds and Chains? Or does
not our Savior expressly intimate, he will keep all his Goods in security until
a stronger than he comes, and binds him, and devests him of his Power?

3. Is not Faith said to be the Gift of God; and not only so, but that we
believe according to the working of God's Almighty Power, and after the same
manner that he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead?

4. Is not the Carnal Mind enmity against God, having in it an utter Averseness
and Moral Impotency to do that which is spiritually Good? for it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can Romans 8. 7.
be.

5. Does not the Scripture say, that those who are born again, Joh. 1. 12, 2,
13.
are not born of the Will of Man, but of God? And again, it is said, of his own
Will begat he us. And if so, is not the Creature as Jam. 1. 18.
passive in Regeneration, as the Child is in Generation? God does not work on
the Soul absolutely of his Will, according to these Men, but waits to see what
Man's Will will do, all depends on Man's-Will. Grace with them neither works
Physically nor Irresistibly; and that God cannot, or does not, by any Divine
Operations of unwilling make the Will of Man willing; for after all God does,
the Will has power and oftentimes does resist it and render all God does of
none effect.

"Now (as a reverend Person well observes) Mr. C.
according to these Men's Doctrine, as the Power for these great Concerns of
Salvation is not in God, or his special Grace, so neither is the Act from him:
that which gives or work the Act, determines the Will, or causes it to
determine it self; but the Lord, by his Grace, brings it only to the Will's
choice, and leaves it to do as it list --. The Lord by his Power works not the
Will to turn to God, to love God, to embrace Christ, to yield to the Spirit,
but leaves it indifferent to turn to God, or against him; to love God, or to
hate him; to embrace Christ, or reject him; to yield to the Spirit, or resist
him. It must be left indifferent as to either: Grace turns not the Scales, but
leaves the Will an equal poise that the Will of Man, not the Grace of God may
have the casting weight; if Grace should weigh it down, the Liberty of the
Will, they say, would be violated and in nature destroyed."

Is this the Doctrine of general Love which they will have to be in God to
Mankind? viz. Has the Lord left it indifferent in his Eternal Purpose, whether
any should be saved, or no? For if the Will complies not, God will not bend it,
or bring it, by irresistible Grace, in a Physical Way, to a Compliance: and
though Christ, in redemption, according to them, died for all, yet he has left
it indifferent whether any should be actually redeemed, or no; for the depraved
Will of Man determines the whole Event of all that which Christ has done, and
the Gospel, or the Spirit does do: and if some Men were not better natured, and
more considerate than others, Christ might have died in vain. And it follows
also that such who are saved, have more cause to admire their Wills compliance
in believing, than to exalt and admire the free Grace of God, if what they say
be true. Alas, this general Love of God they talk of, (that is but an
indifferent respect to all or any, for all are beloved alike, or else God is a
respecter of Persons, they say) ends in Love or Hatred, as the Sinner's Will
determines it: If the Will accepts, chooses and yields to Christ, then the
Person is beloved and chosen by Him; but if the Will refuses, (as the Will of
every Mortal might, as well as one, according to their Notion) then he is
hated: Whatever particular Love they ascribe to God, it is no other than what
rises or is occasioned from the Sinner's Love to him. God foresaw that such and
such Persons would believe and love him, therefore purposed to save them: he
foresaw that they would embrace, choose, and love Christ, therefore he loved
them and chose them to Eternal Life; provided they continue their Good-liking
and Affections to God unto the End. How they will be able to deliver themselves
from these and such like Consequents from attending their Notions, I see not.
The Apostle says, We love him, because he first loved us; and that 1 John 4. 19.
we have not chosen him, but he has chosen us: But certainly if these Men
consider their Principles, when they speak of particular Persons, they must
say, he did not love us first, but we loved him; and that he did not chose us
first, but we chose him. And thus the Doctrine of God's Free Grace is trampled
upon; but let God be true, and every Man a Liar.

Object. But does not this Doctrine of special Grace, render God unmerciful,
because he does not give that Grace unto all Men that is effectual to their
Salvation?

Answ. I answer, We do not deny that God gives that Grace to all, which they
say is sufficient or effectual to save all; our Doctrine robs no Man of that
Power they have but we do deny that common Light, Grace, and Abilities are
sufficient to save any one Soul: And if this be true, it follows that they
render God more unmerciful than they are aware of, in that they will not have
God to afford such Grace that is sufficient, viz. Special Grace to any at all.
Certainly if God was not more merciful to them that assert this Doctrine, than
their Notions import, or did not their Experiences contradict their Principles,
it would be impossible one of them should be saved: For will mere moral Swasive
Grace, (which leaves Salvation to the choice of Man's depraved and unrenewed
Will, whether it will turn to God or no, believe in Christ or no) save one
Soul? which they say is all the Grace God vouchsafes to any. So that by their
Doctrine, none can be saved, but all must unavoidably perish.

Besides, how unjust do they render God to be, seeing he, as they say, gave
Christ to die for all Men, with an intention to save them, and this without any
desert of Man, which is the greater Gift; and yet he denies the Gospel to the
greatest part of the World, nay and effectual Grace to many (nay to all,
according to them) that attend upon the Administration thereof, seeing he could
as easily bend or incline the Wills (if he please) of such who do not believe,
as he does theirs that do believe. Strange! did Christ spill his Blood for the
greatest part of Mankind in vain? nay, die in their stead for them, that he
foreknew would reject him, and believe not? Did he give Millions for them to
redeem them, and deny one Pound to make that Redemption effectual to them, in
order to give them a Right to it, and Interest in it? What! give them the
greater, and deny them the lesser Gift? But how contrary is this to what Paul
says, If when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to Romans 5. 10.
God by the Death of his Son; much more being now reconciled, we shall be saved
by his Life: And again says, He that spared not his own Chap. 8. 32.
Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall not he freely give us all
things?

Secondly. If Life Spiritual and Eternal be by Grace, or if it is given freely
by Jesus Christ; Then all that have not this Gift given to them, Life given,
Grace given, are spiritually dead: and if they die naturally before it is given
to them, they must perish for ever, or die eternally.

Thirdly. We may also infer, That all that would have Everlasting Life, must
come to Jesus Christ, seeing it is his Gift: Ye will not not come to me, that
ye might have Life. Thou have the Words of Joh. 5. 40. Joh. 6. 68. Joh. 4. 10.
Eternal Life. Sinners, you must believe in, rely upon, or fly unto Christ if
you would be saved: If thou know the Gift of God, and who it is that says,
Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee
living Water. O know where this Life is, how it is given, and do not neglect
the time; Christ is now giving forth this Gift, this is the time: Behold, now
is the Day 2 Cor. 6. 2. Isa. 55. 3.
of Salvation. Hear, and your Souls shall live. It Is but asking Life, and thou
shall have it; thou must believe, etc. O seek and cry to God for Life, haste to
Christ. Were there an earthly Crown, or many Thousands of Pounds to be freely
given, what running and striving would there be! every Body would make haste,
and be early at the Door, they would not neglect the Time. But alas, what are
all Riches, all Crowns, or all Kingdoms here below to Eternal Life. So much for
this Time.

JOHN X. 28. And I give them-Eternal Life, and they shall never, perish.
Sermon. VII.
DOCT. 3. All the Saints of God, all Believers, or Sheep and Lambs of Jesus
Christ, shall be saved, and none of them shall so fall away as eternally to
perish.

Beloved, in speaking unto this Point of Doctrine, I shall only do two things.
I. Endeavor to confirm and prove the Truth of the Proposition. II. Answer all
the Objections that are usually brought against the Doctrine of the Saints
final Perseverance.


First, But before I enter upon the Proof and Confirmation of this great
Gospel Truth, let me hint a word or two to explain who we mean by the Saints of
God.

Secondly, I shall show you, by way of Premise, that the Saints, or Sheep of
Christ may fall, yea, fall from Grace; and also how far they may fall: and then
proceed to demonstrate the Truth of the Proposition, and prove, That they
cannot fall finally, so as eternally to perish.

1. Those that I call the Saints of God, or Sheep of Christ, are those who are
elected or chosen in Jesus Christ unto Salvation.

2. And such who are elected, are they who are redeemed and purchased by the
Blood of Christ, or those whom he died for, or in the stead of.

3. By the Saints, I mean, those who are effectually called, regenerated,
justified, sanctified, and adopted; these are the Sheep of Christ that shall
never perish, but have Everlasting Life. They are not all such that are of his
Fold or Church on Earth, not all the Members of the visible Church, but all the
Members of the invisible Church, or mystical Body of Christ.

Secondly, I shall show you how far the Saints may fall.

1 st. They may, if they take not heed, fall into great Evils, nay Saints may
fall into great and grievous Evils.
into most of the worst and abominable Sins any Mortals do commit and are
overcome by.

Noah was a Saint of God, yet he fell grievously by drinking too much Wine:
Noah began to be an Husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard, and he drank of the
Wine and was drunken. Though it Genesis 9. 19, 20.
might be partly through Ignorance of the Nature of the Fruit of the Grape, yet
no doubt, by the pleasantness of the Liquor, and Corruption and Infirmity of
the Flesh he was overcome.

Lot was a Saint of God, a righteous and just Man, yet he fell worse; not only
by Drunkenness, but also by committing Incest with his two Daughters. What are
the best of Men, when God leaves them to themselves.

Jacob also, no doubt, greatly sinned and fell, when he told his Father he was
Esau, his Firstborn.

How lamentably did David sin and fall, who was a Man after God's own Heart,
save in the Case of Bathsheba the Wife of Vriah.

Peter fell likewise, and that grievously too, not only in denying of his
blessed Master, but also by Cursing and Swearing, that he did not know him.

Many more sad Instances I might add of this Nature, but that I love not to
rake into the Sores of God's sincere Servants. No doubt the Falls and grievous
Sins of the Holy Saints of God, are by the Spirit left on Record for blessed
Ends and Purposes.

(1.) To show what need the best of Men and Women have to pray, and stand upon
their Watch at all times. (2.) To discover the Strength of Indwelling Sin, or
the natural Corruptions of the Hearts of such who are truly gracious; and the
absolute Necessity there is for all to depend upon the Divine Help and
Assistance of God under Temptations. (3.) That no true Christian that is
suffered to fall into Sin, should despair of the pardoning Grace of God.
2 dly. The Saints of God, or true Believers, may fall from Saints may fall
from Degrees in Grace.
Grace, (as well as into great and immoral Evils, and Acts of Wickedness) I
mean, they may fall from Degrees of Grace, or decay in Grace, lose the Strength
and Power of Divine Grace, as to the Acts and Exercise thereof. They may decay
in Faith, in Love, in Humility, Patience, Hope, etc. Yet nevertheless I have
Rev. 2. 4.
somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first Love. Love may cool in
the best of Saints, though it shall never be quite extinguished, for nothing
can utterly quench it. How low was the Faith of Christ's Disciples, when they
said, We trusted that it had Luke 24. 21.
been he that should have redeemed Israel. Job also intimates, that his Hope
was cut off: He has destroyed me on every side, and I am gone, Job 19. 10.
and mine Hope has he removed like a Tree. There are Weaknesses in the
Strongest, and Imperfections may come upon those who are perfect, as Mr. Caryl
notes; Ebbings after the greatest Flowings, and Declinings after the greatest
Heights of Graces, and gracious Actings: My Days are spent without Hope. David
also said, I shall Job 7. 6.
one day fall by the Hand of Saul, so low was his Faith.

3 dly. God's Saints may also fall from the true Doctrine of the Saints may
fall from the Doctrine of Grace. Gal. 5. 4.
Gospel, which is called a falling from Grace: Christ is become of no effect
unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from Grace:
that is, such who seek or desire to be justified by a Law, any Law of
Obedience, or by their own Righteousness, for the End of Christ's Death, and
the Gospel, is to cast away Man's own Righteousness in point of Justification,
and to supply us with the Suretiship-Righteousness of Jesus Christ: and such
who seek to be justified any other way, are fallen from Grace, they renounce
the Free Grace of God exhibited in the Gospel. The Apostle does not here refer
to a State of Grace, but to the Doctrine or Gospel of Grace, in which is
manifest the free Love of God in offering Christ to Sinners for Righteousness
and Life.

4 thly. True Believers, or the Sheep of Jesus Christ, may fall Saints may fall
from the Profession of Faith.
from the public Profession of the Faith, from a visible owning and
maintaining their Testimony to Christ and his Gospel, through slavish Fear.
Thus not only Peter, but all the other Disciples fell also, they all forsook
their Blessed Master, when he was apprehended and led away as a Sheep to the
Slaughter; then all the Disciples forsook him. All these Disciples had promised
him, that Mat. 26. 56.
they would not forsake him; but when the Trial comes, not one of them stands,
they shrunk from professing themselves to be his Disciples and Followers: But
they recovered this Fall, and after Christ's Resurrection made a glorious
profession of him and his Gospel unto the Death.

5 thly. The Saints of God may fall, so as to break all their Bones, and
grievously to wound their own Consciences: O Lord, Saints may fall and break
all their Bones. Psalm. 6. 2, 3.
heal me, for my Bones are vexed. My Soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord,
how long? My Pain and Anguish is bitter by the Burden of my Sin and Sense of
thy Anger. Again, he says, My Strength fails, because of mine Iniquities;
and my Bones are consumed. Psalm. 31. 10. Psalm 38. 8.
I am feeble and sore broken. Elsewhere he speaks, as if all his Bones were
broken, all his Strength was gone: Bones, we know, are the Strength of the
Body, from thence the Metaphor seems to be taken. Now that is a grievous Fall,
which breaks all the Bones.

6 thly. The Saints, or Sheep of Christ, may so fall, or to such Saints may be
without any Light.
a degree lose the exercise of their Faith and Hope in God, as to be deprived
of the Light of God's Countenance, and the Joy of his Salvation; Restore to me
the Joy of thy Salvation: Nay, may wholly be in Darkness for a time, or have no
Light: Psalm. 50. 12. Job 19. 11. Psalm. 88. 5, 6.
He has kindled his Wrath against me; and he counts me to him as one of his
Enemies. I am gone, ver. 10. I am a lost Man, as if he should say, Thou have
laid me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps. Free among the Dead, like
the slain that lie in the Grave, whom thou remembrest no more; and they are cut
off from thy Hand. -- That walk in Darkness, and have no Light. I do not say
that Desertion is always the Fruit and Punishment of Sin, though sometimes it
is; Isa. 50. 10.
yet it is always occasioned through the decay or want of the Exercise of
Grace, or through God's withdrawing his sweet Presence and Influences of his
Spirit from the Soul.

It may not be amiss here, before I proceed, to answer a Question that some
perhaps may have in their Thoughts to propound, viz. What are the Causes that
sometimes the Saints fall so far as has been hinted?

Answ. The Grounds or Causes of their falling may be diverse.

1. It is through the Remainders of Corruption, or Indwelling The Causes of the
grievous Falls of God's Elect Ones.
Sin, that abide in all Believers. The chiefest Saints of God are but renewed
in part: Though they are renewed in every Part, there is a Law in the Members
that wars against the Law of the Mind: But I see another Law in my Members,
warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law
of Sin, which Romans 7. 23, 24.
is in my Members. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body
of Sin and Death? These two Laws are in all true Believers, or in all
regenerate Persons, and they are directly contrary the one to the other; and by
reason of this, there is continual War and Combating between them: And evident
it is, through the Power or Policy of the fleshly Part, the Godly are sometimes
overcome, not only by common Failings, but fall into great Transgressions also.
Our chief Enemies are those of our own House; the Devil could do us little hurt
from without, had he not such a strong Party for him, and siding with him in
our own Bowels, or within us. This inbred Enemy always lies in wait to betray
us; and if we take not the more care, will prevail against us, and at one time
or another trip up our Heels, especially that Sin which does chiefly beset us;
most Christians having their Constitution-Sin, though no godly Man has a
beloved Sin: yea, the Seed of all Sin still remains in our base Hearts, and
hence it is our Danger is great which appears may be not so clearly, till the
Providence of God brings us unto such a State, Occasion or Company, whereby
Satan has an Opportunity to excite and stir up, or draw forth that Sin or evil
Seed into act that lies hid within us.

2. The Cause of those Evils, or grievous Falls that some Christians have and
do sustain, are from Satan; who is not only a malicious Enemy, but a strong and
cruel Enemy also: Hence called, A roaring Lion, going about and seeking whom he
may devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
He is very diligent to observe the natural Inclinations of all Christians, and
watches the fittest Opportunity to make his Onsets: As when David neglected
the proper Work and Business God by his Providence called him unto, The time
when Kings go forth to battle, 2 Samuel 11. 1.
he sent Jo^b, and tarried at home himself; and then the Enemy set upon him; he
being a walking on the Roof of his House, spied a Woman washing her self, which
produced his fearful Fall. Let Christians take heed they are not out of such
Employment that God calls them to, and not put an Opportunity into Satan's
Hand, by excess of Eating, Drinking, or Idleness, or by gadding or gazing
Abroad, like Dinah, Jacob's Daughter; and beware how they neglect any spiritual
Duty, in the way of which God has promised to keep our Souls.

3. The Falls of the Saints may be occasioned by reason of the weakness of
their Grace: Faith may be but small, or not in Exercise and so the Hope and
Trust of the Soul may fa^l. If the Anchor has not good and firm hold, but
should slip, the Ship is in danger; so it is here, Hope is the Anchor of the
Soul, it should be therefore both sure and steadfast: O ye of little Faith,
wherefore did you doubt? Christians are in no small danger if their Faith be
Mat. 6. 30. and 8. 25, 26.
not strong: Faith is the Shield by which we should quench all the siery Darts
of the Wicked. The Apostle alludes to those violent Ephesians. 6. 16.
Temptations, by which Satan strives to inflame Men's Lusts; but right skill to
use the Shield of Faith, will soon quench all those Darts of Temptations. A
Shield is to desend every part of the Body, and will, if rightly used. So by
Faith a Christian is enabled, when in the true Exercise thereof, to preserve
his whole Soul from Evil; but let this Shield go, and Satan quickly prevails:
If Satan can persuade a Man there is no such Evil in Sin as God's Word
declares, or that it is no great matter, it is no wonder he is overcome.

4. They sometimes fall, by reason of their own fleshly Confidence, or trusting
in their own Strength: Though all deny thee, yet will not I. Nay, Peter said
unto him, Though I should die with thee, Mat. 26. 35.
yet I will not deny thee. O how dangerous a thing is it to glory in our own
Abilities, or trust in Self-confidence! What little knowledge have we of our own
Hearts! It was but a few Hours after this, but Peter denied our Savior, and
swore he did not know him. When Men have not their whole dependence on the
Grace and Power of God, he oft-times leaves them, that they may see without him
they can do nothing: And whenever God withdraws his Divine Assistance from a
Person, or leaves him to himself, he falls immediately as Peter did.

5. The Falls of the Saints, may be through the Ensnarements and Vainglory of
this wicked World. Hezekiah fell this way; his Heart was lifted up with Pride
in beholding all his Glory and Riches, which he showed to the Princes of the
King of Babylon, in a vainglorious manner: He showed them all the House of his
precious things, the Silver, and the Gold, and the Spices, and the precious
Ointments, 2 King. 20. 13.
and all the House of his Armor, and all that was found in his Treasures;
there was nothing in his House, nor in all his Dominions, that Hezekiah showed
them not. This was his Sin and Fall; this provoked God against him: And Isaiah
said unto Hezekiah, Hear Ver. 16, 17, 18.
the Word of the Lord. Behold, the Days come, that all that is in thine House,
and that which thy Fathers have laid up in Store to this Day, shall be carried
into Babylon; nothing shall be left, says the Lord. And of thy Sons that shall
issue from thee, which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall
be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon.

6. Sometimes they fall by the Subtilty of Deceivers, who lie in wait to
corrupt their Minds, and poison their Souls with their abominable Errors. Hence
the Apostle Peter cautions the Saints, to take heed, lest they being led away
by the Error of the Wicked, fall from 2 Pet. 3. 17.
their own stedfastness.

7. Many times they fall through slavish Fear, in the Time of Persecution. Many
gracious Christians have wanted Courage in that Hour, and have been prevailed
with too far to a sinful Compliance with the Lusts and Wills of their
Adversaries, by reason of their cruel Threats and bloody Edicts; who have
nevertheless afterward been restored again by Repentance, as Peter was.

8. Some fall through their Remisness in Duty, or being off their Watch. There
is no great fear of falling, if Christians always stand with their Swords in
their Hands, and having all their Armor on; Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18.
watching thereunto with all Perseverance. The VVitch told the wicked Person
(as the Story goes) that employed her to do Mischief to a godly Neighbor of
his, That she could not touch him, because he was always either Reading,
Praying, or Meditating, or to that effect. No Evil, no Sin nor Devil need that
Man fear, that is always careful in the true and faithful discharge of his Duty
to God. If we are asleep, or slothful, it is no marvel that Satan prevails, and
wounds our Souls. How easy was it for the Philistines to cut off Sampson's
Hair, and bind him, when he was asleep? or Jael to strike a Nail through
Sisera's Head, he being asleep? Judge. 4. 21.


9. And lastly, They may sometimes also fall, by having a greater dependence on
that Grace they have already received, or on the Grace that is in them, than on
that Grace which is in Christ Jesus; we stand not by virtue of that Grace that
is in our Cisterns, but by the Grace that is in God's Fountain: When the Grace
already received fails us, that Grace that is in Christ shall supply us, if we
by Faith depend upon him; Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace that
is in Christ Jesus. How is that done? Why, 2 Timothy 2. 1.
to have our whole dependence upon Christ, who as he is our Head and Mediator,
has received the Spirit without measure, to the end he might communicate
thereof to all his Members: It Is of his John 1. 16.
Fullness that all we receive, and Grace for Grace. But it is not all let out at
one time, we have not all our Riches put into our own Hands; No, no, God will
not trust it in our own keeping, but it is put into the Hands, or committed to
the keeping of our Blessed Trustee, who will give forth Grace unto us as we
want it: But my God shall supply all your Need, according to his Riches in
Glory, Phil. 4. 19.
by Christ Jesus. Some poor Saints cannot live longer than they see their own
Wells are full of Water; they live more, alas, by Sense than by Faith: but if
all their Hope and Comfort lies in the Grace they have already received, it is
no wonder if they soon fall, as being worsted. Let us make some Improvement of
this.

APPLICATION.

First. From hence we may infer, what the Reason is we have so many Cautions,
or Take-heeds, in the Holy Scriptures, and anticipate a grand Objection that is
brought against the Doctrine of the Saints final Perseverance: No marvel that
we have so many Warnings given us, seeing our Danger is so great, or that the
Saints may fall so foully. Watch and pray always. What I say unto Matthew. 26.
Mark 13. 37. 1 Cor. 16. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6.
one, I say unto all, Watch. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit your
selves like Men, be strong. Be sober, and watch unto Prayer. But let us not
sleep as others do, but let us watch and be sober. Take heed unto your selves.
Deuteronomy. 4. 9, 15.
And again, Only take heed, and keep thy Soul diligently, etc. Luke 15. 15.
Mark 13. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Heb. 3. 12.
Take heed, and beware of Covetousness. Again, Take heed that no Man deceive
you, etc. Take heed, behold, I have told you all things, etc. He that thinks
he stands, let him take heed lest he fall. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be
in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God. And
a multitude more of like Cautions.

2 dly. There is another Reason also for these Take-heeds.

1. Because the Evil of the Sins of God's People are so great, God is
grievously dishonored by the Falls and gross Enormities of his Saints. How did
David's Sin provoke God, and cause the Enemy to blaspheme him and despise his
holy Israel! They are as Wounds he receives in the House of his Friend. Hence
he cries out, O do not this abominable thing which I hate. Jer. 44. 4.


2. The Sins and Falls of God's People, hinder the spreading and blessed
Promulgation of the Gospel. It makes the Souls of those who stand fast to
mourn, and the Hearts of the Wicked to rejoice, and to insult over them who
always watch for their halting.

3 dly. Another Reason of these Cautions may be, because there are many false
Professors in Churches who may fall finally: therefore from these and other
Reasons it appears.

1. That there may be great need of, and good reason wherefore, God gives such
Cautions in his Word, though his Elect Ones cannot fall finally.

2. We may also infer from hence, that the Reason why some fall quite away, is,
because their Hearts were never upright with God.

3. From hence we may likewise be stirred up to consider and examine our Hearts
about our Sincerity; for if not, we may fall away and rise no more.

7. Let us bewail our selves upon the account of Indwelling Sin, for oft-times
it wounds our Souls, it breaks our Bones, destroys our Peace, spoils our
Communion with the Father and the Son, and brings Fears and Doubts upon us
about our State, when we are overcome thereby, covering us with Clouds and
Darkness.

8. This may be of use also by way of Exhortation, to arm our selves, and to
stand upon our Guard, and to resist Satan steadfastly in the Faith, our Life
being a Life of Warfare: Let us show our selves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ,
and make a resistance of Sin and Satan, whilst there is Life in our Bodies, or
Blood in our Veins.

9. It may teach us also to be aware of Deceivers, since they some times trip
up the Heels of many of God's poor Saints.

10. It must needs administer great Succor to such Saints who have fallen, I
mean, to Backsliders, and keep them from utter Despair; for though they fall,
they shall rise again, as the truly Godly (of whose Falls we read of in the
Scripture) always did. Where do we meet with one Godly Person, that the Lord
declares so to be, who fell and rose no more? Or that there is no ground left
in the Word for us to believe they were saved?

11. Lastly, It may serve to discover the infinite Grace of God in Christ, who
has secured the standing of his own faithful Ones; they are in Christ's Hand,
and cannot be plucked out, nor perish, let all Enemies do what they can; as I
shall now in the next place come to demonstrate, and fully prove, according to
my Promise, and the Proposition I have raised, viz.

The grand Doctrine opened.
That all the Saints of God, or Sheep of Jesus Christ, shall be saved, and none
of them shall so fall away as eternally to perish. The first Argument taken
from Election.
The Truth of this Point I shall prove by diverse Arguments and Scriptures.

And my first Argument shall be taken from Eternal Election, which depends
wholly upon the Absolute Sovereignty of God, who has Power over all his
Creatures, and may do with his own as it seems good in his Eternal Wisdom,
and good Pleasure of his Will.

I shall premise one or two things before I proceed to confirm this Argument.

1. That God set up Jesus Christ as Mediator from Everlasting, as the Head and
Spring of our Election; therefore it is said, We were chosen in him before the
Foundation of the World. Ephesians. 1. 4.
It was the only Act of Love, and Free Grace of the Father, therefore not to be
ascribed to the Merits of Jesus Christ: For though Christ has merited our
Salvation, yet he did not procure or merit our Election; for Christ himself was
the Fruit of this Eternal Blessing and Privilege, it being then the sole Act of
God's Sovereign Grace and Love. It follows,

2. That all the Ways which were ordered in the Wisdom of God, for the
accomplishing the Ends of Election, are of the Father's appointment also; for
whatsoever Christ has done in working out of our Redemption, it was according
to the Purpose and Determinate Counsel of his own Will and Sovereign Goodness.
Jesus Christ was first chosen, or elected, by the Father, as Head and Mediator,
and only Foundation to bear up the whole Building, which the Almighty designed
to raise: The Father's Love, did precede Christ's glorious Mission; therefore
he was only of the Father's Designation; Who verily was foreordained before
the Foundation of the World, but was made manifest in these last Days. 1 Pet.
1. 19.
Christ was first chosen as the Wellhead of Grace and Glory, and then others
were chosen in him, by and through whom they should be redeemed and raised to a
State of Grace and Holiness here, and to Eternal Happiness in Heaven hereafter:
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image
of his Son, that he might be the Firstborn among many Brethren. Romans 8. 29.
To the Image of his Son, that is, to Christ's likeness as Mediator, and taking
our Nature; not to Christ barely considered as God, for as Christ is God, he is
no where says to be the Firstborn among many Brethren. Now this Conformity
being absolutely designed in Election, Christ, in the Contrivance and Intention
of the Father, was the first Exemplar and Copy of it, or the main Center, to
which all must be brought that were given unto him; the Father setting him up,
and electing him as Head of all that should be saved, or as the glorious
Bridegroom, and therefore it was requisite he should be consulted about those
who were to be the Members of his Body, and his own blessed Spouse for ever:
And since Christ was also to suffer and undergo such Pain and Sorrow in the
purchasing and redeeming of them, it was necessary he should not only freely
assent and consent in the Choice of them, but also be certain of the obtaining
and securing them all to and for himself for ever, and not run the Hazard of
enjoying or not enjoying of them; which must follow he did, if the Doctrine of
some Men of dark Minds were true.

To proceed, it may not be amiss to consider what is contained The first
Argument explained.
in the Bowels of my first Argument, viz. that there is a peculiar People, or
some certain Persons (as personally considered) of the lost Children of the
first Adam, who are Elected or Chosen of God, in Christ, from all Eternity, of
his own Sovereign Grace and good Pleasure, ordained unto Everlasting Life; and
that this Decree of Election does prevent their final falling, or make it
impossible that any of them should ever so apostatize as eternally to perish.

The Argument being thus fairly stated, it calls upon me to do two things.

First, To prove that there is such a particular and personal Election of a
peculiar People of the lost Sons of Adam.

Secondly, To show how this prevents their final falling, and makes it
impossible that any of them should ever so apostatize as eternally to perish.

A little to open the first of these.

1. I say of peculiar Persons, which denotes it belonging to them only and to
none else; others are passed by, or not afforded by any such Divine Act of
Grace the like Privilege: they are God's Jewels, or his peculiar Treasure,
though until called and cleansed, or Mal. 3. 17.
their inward Filth and Pollution purged away, they cannot be delighted in by
him, or be beloved with a Love of Complacency; though from Eternity God did
love all his, with a Love of good Will, purpose of Grace and of Benevolence.

I say personally Elected; that is, the Objects of this Grace, or of this
Election were singled out and pitched upon by Name; not with respect had to
such or such Qualifications foreseen in them, they being repenting, believing,
and holy Persons, but chosen in Christ, the Head of Election, that they should
believe, should repent, and should be Holy and without blame before him in
Love. They Ephesians. 1. 4.
are chosen that they may be Holy; not because they were Holy, or God foresaw
they would be Holy.

I say, they were ordained to Everlasting Life. Now to predestinate, decree, or
ordain, denotes the same thing, and signifies the absolute Purpose of God to
bring them into a State of Grace here, through Jesus Christ, and to Eternal
Glory and Happiness here-after: Hence it is said, As many as were ordained to
Eternal Life, Acts 13. 48.
believed, or appointed; and he that ordered or ordained the End, ordained the
Means also, and so prepared them for Everlasting Life.

They were chosen in Christ; in the Mediator, in their Blessed Head, that their
standing might be secured through their Union with him, and his Righteousness
being imputed to them, according to God's Eternal Purpose.

2. And further, to make good the first Part of what I have Particular Election
proved.
laid down, viz. That there is such a particular Election; what lies more clear
in the Word of God, and the Election of Jacob, I shall here first mention, as a
full Proof of what I say; For the Romans 9. 11.
Children being not yet Born, neither having done Good or Evil, that the
Purpose of God, according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him
that calls. Here the Apostle designedly or on purpose confirms, not only the
Doctrine of Personal Election, but also that of Preterition, of a passing by,
or rejection of the other; and all resulting from the Eternal Purpose and Good
Pleasure of God's Will; As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated. Romans 9. 13.
The main scope of Paul in this place is to show, that God has not cast off
all Israel, that is, those who are the true Israel, or such who are the
Children of the Promise, or that do belong to Christ according to the Election
of Grace; see 5, 6, 7, 8 Verses: therefore they that run the Love of God and
Election here spoken of, to the Posterity of Jacob, and Reprobation to the
Posterity of Esau, and will not have it to be understood of their particular
Persons, do palpably abuse the sacred Text and Drift of the Holy Ghost. Now
that all Men may know that Election does run to, or take hold of particular
Persons, and that not for any foreseen Faith or Holiness in them, Paul says,
The Children being not yet born, neither having done Good or Evil. And
therefore adds, not of Works, that is, of foreseen Worthiness or Desert in
Jacob, but that the Purpose of God, according to Election might stand, (that
is, stand firm as an Act of God's Sovereign Love and Grace only) and abide a
blessed Truth against all the Opposition and Cavils of cloudy Minds. I might
have mentioned Abraham, Isaac, Moses, David, and others; also Jeremiah, of whom
God says, Before I Jer. 1. 5.
formed thee in the Belly, I knew thee; that is, I knew thee to be one of them
that I had chosen and given to my Son, or one of mine Elect Ones; and I
sanctified and ordained thee a Prophet.

Moreover, in the New Testament we find, that our Savior calls his Disciples
by Name, and tells them, That he knew whom he had John 13. 18.
chosen, excluding Judas; he must therefore intend their Eternal Election, for
as I said before, Judas was chosen to the Apostleship: also Paul by Name, Jesus
Christ declares (to Ananias) was a chosen Vessel, not only as an Apostle, but
one also comprehended in the Election of Grace. Do but observe the Nature of
his Conversion, and what he was before and when called by the special Grace of
God. Moreover of this number and sort, were those that the Lord speaks of in
Elias's Time which Paul mentions, I have reserved Romans 11. 4.
to my self seven thousand Men who have not bowed the Knee to Baal. Though it
is a certain Number put for an uncertain as to us, yet all their particular
Persons were chosen, and known to God; Even so at this present Time also there
is a Remnant, according Verse 5.
to the Election of Grace. God had some particular Persons then whom he had
from everlasting elected, and so he has now; According as he has chosen us in
him before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in Love: Us, as such and such particular Persons, not such of
such and such Qualification, viz. as being Believers, obedient and holy
Persons; No, no, but that they might believe, etc. Election will produce Faith:
it is, because they are elected that they do believe; But ye believe John 10.
26.
not, because ye are not of my Sheep as I said unto you; that is, not such as
were ordained to believe, and ordained to Eternal Life. And as many as were
ordained unto Eternal Life, believed: As it was Acts 13. 48. Acts 18. 10.
hinted before, Christ has elect Persons, or Sheep, that yet believe not; I
have much People (says he to Paul) in this City.

Unto these Testimonies I shall add one or two more; as that of Paul, touching
the Saints at Thessalonica; Knowing, Brethren beloved, your Election: For our
Gospel came not to you in Word only, but 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5.
also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, etc. By the evident Operations of God's
Spirit, the Apostle knew they were elected: We cannot know our Election, but by
special Vocation, or as it is manifest in the Fruits and Effects of it. There
is a Knowledge of Things, (as our Annotators note on this place) a priori, when
we argue from the Cause to the Effect: So a posteriori, when we argue from the
Effect to the Cause. Now what is Election, but a choosing some out of others?
Thus the Angels that stand were 1 Timothy 5. 21.
elected, and the rest were left to the Power they had, or passed by, or
reprobated. Peter also confirms the Doctrine of personal Election, calling the
Persons to whom he wrote his Epistle, Elect according to 1 Pet. 1. 2.
the foreknowledg of God, or his Eternal Purpose; and therefore were separated
unto God by special Grace, or effectual Calling; through sanctification of the
Spirit to Obedience, etc. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are concerned in our
Salvation; the Father elects, this is principally ascribed to the first Person
in the Godhead; the Son purchases, he redeems; and the Holy Spirit renews,
calls, and sanctifies. Now the Purchase of the Son extends no further than the
Election of the Father; nor the Sanctification of the Spirit, further than the
Purchase or Redemption of the Son: Sanctification here, takes in the whole Work
of the Holy Spirit in Regeneration and actual Holiness, to the final sitting
and making the Soul meet for the Eternal Inheritance.

So much shall serve to prove that there is an Election of particular Persons.

Object. But may be some will Object, If this be so, what need If I am Elected,
I shall be saved; if not, I shall be damned.
any Man concern himself about his Salvation, as to seek it or labor after it:
for if he be elected, he shall be saved; but if not, let him do what he can, he
cannot be saved, he cannot frustrate God's Decree, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of his Mouth?

Answ. 1. I answer, All Mankind are under the strongest Obligation This grand
objection answered.
imaginable to God, as he is their Creator, and they his Creatures; as he is
their only Lord and Supreme Governor, they are bound to fear him, and obey his
Laws, let him do what he will with them. Is not that a base and for did
Principle in a Servant or Subject, to do nothing but for mere Self-profit and
Advantage?

2. Paul was certain of a Crown of Life, yet knew it was his Duty to press
toward the Mark for the Prize of the High Calling of Phil. 3. 14.
God in Christ Jesus, and to keep down his Body. He strove as strenuously
against Sin, as if Salvation could be merited by so doing; so that his Election
took him not off from a diligent Care in use of Means, in order to his
attaining to Eternal Happiness.

3. God has as well ordained the Means, as the End, as I newly told you; both
are appointed of God, and equally under his absolute Decree: Men are not
elected to Salvation, but also to Sanctification and Holiness.

4. "We are not to look upon the Decree of God (as a Reverend Minister well
observes) Mr. Mead.
for a Rule of Life, but the Word of the Gospel; secret things belong to God,
etc. The Decree can neither be a Rule of Life, nor Ground of Hope, but the
Precept and the Promise," etc. He that leads an ungodly Life, and pursues his
filthy Lusts, may assure himself, so living and dying, he shall be damned for
ever: He that believes not in Christ, but rejects him, and despises all the
Offers of his Grace to the End of his Life, no Decree can save him; therefore
if he will go on in Sin presumptuously, let him take what will follow. On the
other hand, he that does believe in Christ, and conforms to the Holy Gospel,
need not doubt of Salvation, no Decree can hinder him of Salvation. Men ought
to endeavor to believe and repent, and close with Christ upon a Peradventure;
If God peradventure will 2 Timothy 2. 25.
give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth.

5. Because God has absolutely determined the Time of thy Life, or how long
thou shall live: And there it a Time thou can not pass; Will thou therefore
forbear eating, or use of Physic, to preserve thy Life, and say, If I eat not,
I shall live my appointed Time? What signify Means of Medicines, I will take no
Physic, no Potion? for it the Time is come God has set in his Eternal Decree,
I shall die, nothing can save my Life: Would not all think you were under a
fearful Temptation and Delusion of the Devil?

6. Did not God absolutely tell Paul, that he had given him the Acts 28. 22, 23.
Lives of all that were with him in the Ship, and that none of them should
perish? Yet he said, Unless these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved.
Whosoever therefore that does neglect the Means Verse. 31.
God has appointed, in order to the obtaining the End, let it be what it will,
does but tempt God, and comply with the Devil, let his Pretense be what it will.

7. No Decree of God necessitates Men to sin: for though the Free Grace of God
is the absolute Cause of Election, and no foreseen Jude 4.
Faith or Holiness; yet foreseen Wickedness, Unbelief and Disobedience, is the
procuring Cause of the Reprobation and of the Damnation of them that perish: O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy Hos. 13. 9.
self, but in me is thy help.

8. Were any ever damned that did what they could in the use of all Means under
the Light of the Gospel, to be saved? Brethren, God (may justly and) will
condemn Men for their not improving their one Talent. Nor will it be a good
Plea for such to say, I Mat. 25. 27.
knew thou were an hard Man, reaping where thou have not sown, etc. Thus some
Men seem to charge God, I am not Elected. There is an Election of Grace, of
special and distinguishing Grace, and Man has no Power in his own Will; and
God does not give me Power to believe, and will he damn me? Does he expect to
reap where he has not sown, and gather where he has not stromed? Such shall
have no Excuse, as our Savior shows, at the Great Day. The Lord of that
Servant shows, the Fault lay in his own Sloth and Annotators.
Wickedness; and his dread of his Lord's Severity, (as our Annotators note) was
but a frivolous Pretense and unreasonable Excuse; for if he had feared any such
thing, he should have done what he could; he should have put out his Money to
the Exchange, and then he should have received his own with increase. Thus God
may as justly another Day reply upon those who think to excuse their lewd and
wicked Lives, their unbelief and contempt of his Word, from their not being
Elected, and not having Power of themselves to believe and repent, not
receiving his efficacious Grace; O ye wicked and slothful Wretches. May he not
say, did ye suspect or fear you were not elected? Why did you not then give all
diligence to attend upon the Means, and to make your Calling sure, as all they
do that are elected? Do you plead the Power of your own Wills, to repent one
while, and that you wanted Power at another time, and that I gave you not my
special Grace? But had you not Power to keep from Taverns and Alehouses, to
keep from Lying, Stealing, Swearing, and other profane Deeds of Darkness? Had
you not Power to read, to hear my Word, to pray? If you had done your uttermost
in improving of the Talent I gave you, would I have been wanting to you? But
since you did not that, why should I trust you with more? Brethren, are these
Men's Eyes Evil, because God's Eye is Good? Is he unjust in giving effectual
Grace to some, because he does not bestow it upon all? Had he not took hold of
a few, the whole Lump of Mankind would have destroyed themselves, and none
would have been saved. Was God unjust in electing some of the Angels, because
he passed by others of them?

9. In the Day of Judgment, God will be just, and all Men's Mouths shall be
stopped: This you may assure your selves of, He Psalm. 51. 4.
will be justified when he judges, and clear when he condemns: He that had not
on the Wedding Garment, was speechless. God will not then proceed with Men upon
Election and Reprobation, but upon their believing, or not believing: He will
render to every Man according Romans 2. 7, 8.
to their Works. All Men's Mouths shall be stopped, and every Man's Conscience
witness against him. Alas, Men do not act or exercise that humane Faith in
respect of the Report of the Gospel, which they do in respect of other matters
and things that are made known to them, or do not bring forth the Fruit of such
an historical Faith. But so much to this Objection.

Now I should come to the second thing, viz. to show how Election does tend to
prove and fully demonstrate the happy State of all Christ's Sheep, or that it
is impossible they should, any one of them, so fall away as eternally to
perish. But that must be the Work of the next Day.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon VIII.
MY Brethren, I am upon proving the Truth of the Proposition, or Point of
Doctrine that I have raised from our Text, viz.

That all the Saints of God, Believers, or Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ,
shall be saved; and that none of them shall so fall away as eternally to
perish.

My first Argument to do this, was taken from Eternal Election. In speaking to
which I told you I should,

First, Prove that there is an Election of particular Persons; and that I have
done with, and now shall proceed to the next thing.

Secondly, I shall show, that the Nature of Election is such, that it secures
all that are in it from final Falling; or fully serves to demonstrate, they
must and shall all eternally be saved.

And to make this good;

1 st. It is because Election is Absolute, not a Conditional Election, First
Arg. The Election of Grace proves that the Saints cannot finally fall.
depending on the Obedience or good Behavior of the Creature. The Decree of
God on his part is irrevocable; God will not go back from his Purpose to save
his People, nor shall their Unworthiness or Miscarriages make it void: it is
the high, unalterable, and supreme Law of Heaven; therefore it is said to be,
according to his Eternal Purpose and Counsel. His Counsel and Thoughts of his
Heart shall stand for ever. It Is that that all subordinate Means must terminate
in, and all inferious Administrations must be accommodated thereunto, the
Salvation of the Elect being the grand Design of God, whereby to exalt and
magnify his highest Glory; that should his glorious Contrivance, and no less
gracious Purpose and Designment herein miscarry, nothing in Heaven or Earth
could countervail the Damage: therefore it could not stand consistent with his
Wisdom, either to revoke it, or leave it at an Uncertainty, or obnoxious to
Disappointment; which he Mr. Cole.
must needs do, if it was possible any of the Elect should perish; or that it
should be laid upon the Foundation of the wavering Principles, and uncertain
Will and Obedience of the Creature. Now the best Constitutions, States and
Kingdoms upon Earth, are liable to Mutation, and Men's Decrees and Purposes,
however Absolute designed, may fail, their Minds may alter, or they may see
cause to change their Counsels, not being able to foresee future Events, or
what Inconveniences might arise; or some after them may arise, who may carry on
a different Interest, or Enemies may invade them, conquer them, and spoil all
their Designs and Purposes.

But it is not so here, God foresaw all future Events, his Mind alters not; he
is of one Mind, and who can turn him? And none Job 23. 13.
can hinder him in the accomplishing of his own Eternal Purpose; For the Lord
of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it? etc. Declaring from the
Beginning, and from Ancient Times. -- My Counsel Isa. 14. 27. Isa. 46. 10, 11.
shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure. -- Yea, I have spoken it, I will
bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it. The Thoughts of his
Heart shall stand to all Generations; therefore their standing is firm who are
elected, and none of them shall perish. The Decree and Purpose of God of
Election, is as absolute as that of Day and Night, Winter and Summer; or that
of God's not destroying the World again by Water; or that of God's Decree and
Purpose, of sending Christ into the World to die for our Sins.

2 dly. It is, because they are chosen or elected in Christ, in an Ephesians. 1. 4.
immutable, an unchangeable, and an Eternal Head. What was the Reason Adam
stood not, notwithstanding his Power and Abilities were such? Why he stood not
in Christ, was not fixed on Christ; but all true Believers are in Christ,
chosen in him, he is the Head of the Eternal Election, as Mediator. In Election
he is to be considered as the Head; and all the Father has given him, as the
Members of his Body, chosen in him, and united to him: Therefore their standing
in Christ, by virtue of Election, is like that of the Election of their Head.
Now can Christ cease being an Elect Head? Every one will say, No, that is
impossible: No more can they cease from being Elect Members. This of Election
in Christ, presupposes an Union; and there was a decretive Union from
Eternity, and that influenced their actual Union in Time: and as certainly as
Christ died, rose again, and ascended, (in the fullness of Time) who was
decretively a Lamb stain before the Foundation of the World, so will God's
Decree of Election in Christ as certainly bring in all the Elect into actual
Union with Christ, and carry them all to Heaven, (whither their Head, as the
Forerunner Heb. 6. 20.
for us, is already entered) as sure as he is now there. But you will hear more
of this when I come to speak of that Argument, simply taken from their Union
with Christ.

3 dly. That the Saints of God, or Sheep of Jesus Christ, by virtue of their
Election, cannot fall away so as to perish for ever, does appear evident from
one or two express Scriptures; see Romans 8. 28. We know all things work together
for Good to them that love God, who are the Called according to his Purpose.
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image
of his Son, that he might be the Firstborn among many Brethren. Moreover whom
he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. See here, and I
beseech you consider it, and weigh it well, for this Text is enough to convince
(one would think) all the Opposers of this glorious Truth in the World, or
silence them for ever: The Apostle begins the Happiness and eternal Salvation
of all that shall be saved, and the certainty of it in Election, Whom he did
foreknow; that is, whom he in his good Pleasure did pitch upon, or think good
to give to his Son, to be his Spouse, or Members of his Mystical Body; he also
did predestinate them, and all them, them, and none but them; he elected,
chose, or appointed them, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that is, in
Holiness, etc. but more of that by and by: and whom he so predestined, or
elected, he called, and them he justified, and them and every one of them he
glorified, or will so call, justify and glorify. This is that place of
Scripture which is called by some, the Golden Chain, by others the Chain of
Salvation; and it may very well be so called: nothing can be more clear than
this, viz. That those who are elected, shall be called, justified, and be all
as certainly glorified. It Is not in the Power of all the Enemies of the Soul to
break this Chain, one part is so linked to the other; it begins in Election,
and ends in Glorification: So that our Election is a forcible Argument to prove
there is no final falling for any one of the Sheep of Jesus Christ.

4 thly. It is because the Means is ordained by the unalterable Decree of God,
as well as the End: True, we grant, Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord:
And it is he that indureth to the Heb. 12. 14. Mat. 24. 13. Romans 8. 13. Romans 2.
7. Ephesians. 1. 4.
End that shall be saved; or such only that mortify the Deeds of the Body; or,
Who by continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality;
Eternal Life. But, pray Brethren, consider that God has ordained all his Elect
Ones, to be holy, and without blame before him in love; or as Paul, in that to
the Romans before mentioned, to be conformed to the Image of his Son. Grace
shall be given to them to renew them, and to carry on, and finally at last
perfect Holiness in them: For we are his Workmanship, created Ephesians. 2. 10.
in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. No Man can do good Works, until created and formed by the Lord:
This People have I formed for my Isa. 43. 21.
self, they shall show forth my Praise. They shall bring forth Fruit to the
praise of his Glory; see that emphatical Text, John 15. 16. Ye have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should bring forth Fruit,
and that your Fruit should remain: Not only ordained to Eternal Life, as the
End of their Election, but also ordained to bring forth Fruit, as the Way and
Means of obtaining it: Nay more, that they shall persevere in bringing forth
Fruit; that your Fruit should remain.

(1.) They shall not cease bearing Fruit, because united to such a Root, a Root
that has so much Sap in it, or grafted into such an Olive Tree: and they shall
be made Partakers of the Fatness thereof; Romans 11. 17. John 14. 19.
Because I live, ye shall live also. Because their Root lives, they shall live;
or because their Head lives, they shall live. Christ is the Head of Election,
the Head of his Mystical Body, and of every Member of it; a Head of Influence,
and he lives: therefore they that are his true Branches, or his Members,
according to Election, shall live also; they shall live a Life of Holiness, the
Life of Grace here, and the Life of Glory hereafter.

(2.) They shall bring forth Fruit, because the Holy Spirit is given to them,
and shall remain in them for ever: This Water will make them fruitful; They
spread forth their Root by a River, and John 14. 16.
shall not see when Heat comes; but their Leaf shall be green, and shall not
be careful in the Year of Drought, neither shall cease from Jer. 17. 8.
yielding Fruit. Now if this be so, if they are elected to use the Means, or
ordained to be Holy; if it is the absolute Decree of God, that they shall hold
on their way, and are united to such a Head, that their Fruit shall remain, and
they shall not cease Job 17. 9.
yielding Fruit, then they cannot finally fall away, Election secures them,
they shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life: But all this is true,
therefore they cannot perish.

5 thly. I argue from the Nature of the Election of the Blessed Angels: All the
Angels that stand were elected, and it was this that secures them and preserves
them from falling: Those that fell were not elected; and as evident it is, not
one of the Elect Angels are fallen, nor can fall. I marvel any thinking
Christians should doubt of Election, as it results from the absolute
Sovereignty of God's Grace, or good Pleasure of his Will, since God by Election
took hold of some of the Angels, as well as some of the lost Sons and Daughters
of Adam. Was God unjust, because he did not secure, by his unchangeable Decree,
the standing of all the Angels, but left some of them, and only fixed upon so
many as he in his own Wisdom thought good? They may as well charge this upon
the Divine Majesty of God, as so to charge the Doctrine of particular Election
of lost Sinners. Brethren, Though Christ is not a Redeemer of Angels, the Elect
Angels needing none, yet he is the Head of Angels, and a Confirmer of them; He
is the Head of Principalities and Powers: by him, and for him were all things
created that are in Heaven, that are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether
Col. 1. 16.
they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; all things were
created by him, and for him. Christ is God, and he is the preserver of the
Elect Angels; they are committed to him, and under his Power, and he upholds
them, though he never died for them; and shall we think he will not preserve
his Elect Saints, or that their Election should not as absolutely secure them,
for whom he as their blessed Lord and Head died, and to whom he is a Redeemer,
as the Elect Angels to whom he is only a Confirmer? And ye are complete in him,
who is the Head of Principalities and Powers: Col. 2. 10.
Ye are complete, fully complete; ye stand in him, in his Righteousness,
complete, who is your Head, and shall be preserved in him, in whom you are
elected to everlasting Life.

6 thly. Because they are chosen to Salvation, that is, to enjoy and possess
Salvation; if they have it not, the Decree of God is frustrated: but his
Eternal Decrees are as firm as Mountains of Brass. If the Decree of God, in
appointing his Elect to Salvation, be frustrated or made void, either it is
done by himself, or by others. Now it cannot be made void by himself, because
it is an absolute Decree, his Mind alters not, and none else are able to do it:
And as to the Slips and Miscarriages of the Elect themselves, God foresaw all
their Evils from Everlasting, and as that hindered not their Election, so
besure it shall neeer turn them out of it. But we are bound to give Thanks
always to God for you, Brethren, because 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, etc. From the beginning,
that is, from before the World began, or from Eternity; for the absolute
Decrees of God, according to his Eternal Counsel, are from Everlasting. After
the Apostle had showed these Saints that there would come a falling away from
the Faith, and that many would be deceived and damned for ever, to comfort and
encourage them against the fear of final Apostasy, he brings this in the 13 th
Verse, But we are bound to give Thanks for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord,
etc. You need not fear, as if he should say, of being deceived, or of perishing
by dangerous Errors, or otherwise.

1. Because you are beloved of the Lord.

2. And also are elected to Salvation; and because beloved, therefore elected:
Whomsoever God does absolutely appoint to this or that End, he will assist or
enable to do whatsoever Means is necessary in order to that End. Now the Elect
are chosen to Salvation, to inherit Eternal Life; if therefore any of them miss
of it, his Decree and Purpose is frustrated, which cannot be. We have another
Isa. 46. 10.
Text of the like Nature with this; For God has not appointed us to Wrath, but
to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. From 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.
hence the Apostle argues, that they needed not to doubt of their Salvation:
and by what preceeds, it appears, that Election is a great Motive to Holiness;
as when a Man that is sure of the Victory will fight courageously, Let us who
are of the Day, or Children of Light, not of Night, nor of Darkness, be sober,
putting on the Breastplate of Faith and Love; for God has not appointed us to
Wrath, etc. Children of the Night shall perish, but none of the Children of the
Light ever shall. The Apostle ascends to the original Cause of it, which is
God's absolute Decree of Election; Salvation would wholly else depend upon the
uncertainty of Man's Will, and not upon the immutable and unchangeable Will and
Purpose of God. Th^^ is more than appointing the Means, it is an appointing the
Persons, not appointed to Salvation upon the foresight of Man's Faith, because
Faith is the Gift of God, and proceeds from his Counsel, that is appointed too:
else a Man may say, that I might be saved, I must thank God; but that I am
saved, I must thank my self, because it was left to the liberty of my own Will
whether I would believe, and be saved, or no. Two things are necessary in our
Salvation; (1.) The Merits of Christ's Blood: (2.) Faith to apply it; by which
God's Image is restored to us, and preserved in us: and both these we have by
his own free Grace, through Christ Jesus, as the Fruit of his electing Love.

7 thly. It does further plainly appear, that Election does eternally secure
all Christ's Sheep, all true Believers, from final Falling, or everlasting
Ruin, from the words of our Blessed Lord himself; For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show Mat. 24. 24.
great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they should
deceive the very Elect. Now is it not easy for any Man from hence to draw an
Argument, that the Elect cannot fall finally away, so as to perish? for if it
is so, that they cannot be deceived, i. e. finally, or take in damnable Errors,
so as to perish, of which our Savior speaks; for the Elect have otherwise in a
great measure, and in many things (I mean some of them) been deceived; but it
is impossible they should be so deceived as to be damned. And if this be
granted, then Election secures them, they cannot finally fall. If they might
perish eternally, they might be deceived with damnable Heresies, and bring upon
themselves swift and utter Destruction; but they cannot be so deceived, because
they are the Elect, therefore they ca^nnot fall away so as to perish.

Arg. If the Election of Grace be absolute, as the Decree of The general
Argument.
Day and Night, or as that of Christ dying for our Sins: If we are elected in
Christ as the Head, we being all Members, given to him to make up his Mystical
Body; if those that are elected, shall be called, justified, and glorified; if
the Means, as well as the End, be under God's absolute Decree and Purpose; if
our Election does as absolutely secure us from final Apostasy, as the Election
of the Holy Angels does secure them; if we are elected to Salvation; if it be
impossible for any of the Elect to be finally deceived; then none of them, none
of the Elect, or no Sheep or Lambs of Jesus Christ, can so fall away as to
perish eternally: but all this is true, therefore none of them can so perish.

So much shall suffice as to the first Argument, to prove the Saints final
Perseverance.

Secondly, My next Argument shall be taken from the Nature of 2 d. Arg. Saints
cannot finally fall, taken from the nature of God's Love to them. Jer. 31. 3.
God's Infinite Love to all his Saints: The Love of the Father, and Love of the
Son does secure them from perishing; it is wonderful, it passes all
Understanding: It is because God's Love is set upon them; and it is such a
Love, What a Love?

1. I answer, it is an Everlasting Love: The Lord appeared of old unto me,
saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an Everlasting Love, etc. It is a Love from
Everlasting, therefore it must be a first Love, an early Love; and because he
loved them from Eternity, he elected them from Eternity.

2. It is a firm Love a strong Love, an endeared Love, nay, an inconceivable
Love: I in them, and thou in me; and that the World may know that thou have
sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved John 17. 23.
me: A Love of the same Nature, of the same Quality. O! what is the Nature of
that Love the Father has to Jesus Christ? Who can conceive of it, much less
express it? It is impossible for us to comprehend how firm, strong and
endearing it is; but thus he loves all his Elect Ones: Christ as Mediator is
the Object of the Father's Love, so are all his Members: The same Love that is
let out to the Head, as to the Nature of it, is let out to his Mystical Body,
and to every particular Member thereof.

3. The Father's Love is a Love of Delight: He is said to love others with a
Love of Pity, but he loves his Saints with a Love of Complacency: He will
rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his Zeph. 3. 17
Love; he will rejoice over thee with singing. He takes delight and
satisfaction in his Love; not in our Love to him, but in his Love to us. Again,
it is said, As the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so Isa. 62. 5.
shall thy God rejoice over thee.

4. The Love of the Father is an inseparable Love, nothing can separate his
Love from his Elect; like as nothing could separate his Love from his own Son,
so nothing can separate his Love from his Saints: For I am persuaded, that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Romans 8. 38, 39.
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate
us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. I am fully assured,
as some read it, not by any special Revelation, Annotat. on 2 Cor. 4. 13.
but by the same Spirit of Faith which is common to all Believers, neither fear
of Death, nor hope of Life; nor shall the Devils be able, or evil Angels,
though they are Principalities or Powers, though of that Rank, or according to
others, (who by Principalities understand the wicked Potentates of the Earth)
nor shall cruel Persecutors be able, nor shall Things present, whatever
Temptations, Miseries or Afflictions which you now lie under, or may hereafter
meet with; neither height of Honor, or Spiritual or Civil Advancement, nor
depth of worldly Disgrace, or Abasement, or the deepest of Spiritual Desertion
that can befall them, nor any other Creature or Thing, shall be able to separate
us (who believe, or are united to Christ) from the Love of God, which is in
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Arg. That which no Power of Earth or Hell, no Potentate, no Enemy no Friend,
or no thing whatsoever is or shall be able to do or effect, cannot be done, or
it is impossible it should be done. But no Power of Earth or Hell, no
Potentate, no Enemy, no Friend, or nothing whatsoever, is able, or shall be
able to separate true Believers from the Love of God, which is in Jesus Christ
our Lord: Therefore it is impossible any such should fall so away as eternally
to perish.

Object. But stay, say some, your Argument is not good; for Sin may separate
them from the Love of God: We grant indeed from what the Apostle says, that
nothing else can do it, but Sin may; for your Iniquities have separated between
you and your God.

Answ. I answer, It is a mistake, Sin cannot separate them who Isa. 59. 2.
are his beloved Ones from his Love; the Scripture mentioned, proves not that
such who are true Believers may be separated from God's Love, or that Sin can
finally separate them from their God: therefore consider,

1. That I deny not but Sin may separate such from God, who are his People only
by visible Profession, or only his in an externally legal Covenant, as the
whole House of Israel at that Time was, when the Prophet uttered those
Expressions: and it has separated them, and the greatest part of them, I mean,
for ever; for the Jews, for the Sin of Unbelief, and rejecting of Christ, were
utterly cast off.

2. Sin may also separate God's Elect Ones from his sensible, sweet, and
comfortable Presence; for a time God may hide his Face from his dearest
Children, or bring them into great Afflictions.

3. Israel, when in the Babylonian Captivity, was said to be separated from
God, because they were separated from his Temple and visible Worship, where he
promised them his Presence. But it does not follow from hence, Sin can ever
finally separate God, and his Love, which is eternal and abiding, from those he
has chosen in Jesus Christ.

To make it appear yet more fully, that Sin cannot separate them from the Love
of God for ever, consider,

First, That though it is true, as I have before showed, that God's Beloved
Ones may grievously sin against him, yet they cannot sin away his Love and
Affection. And to make this appear, hear what God himself says; If his
Children for sake my Law, and Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32.
walk not in my Judgments; -- If they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: What then, will he take away his Loving Kindness from them, and
cast them off for ever? O no, Then will I visit their Transgression with the
Rod, and their Iniquities with Stripes; nevertheless my loving Kindness will I
not utterly take from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail; my Covenant I
will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my Mouth.

Object. This is spoken of Christ, My Loving Kindness I will not utterly take
from him, etc.

Answ. 1. I grant that it is spoken of Christ, but not of Christ personally,
but Christ mystically considered: Did Christ personally ever forsake God's Law?
Besides, does not God say, his Children?

2. Christ and Believers are considered as one, in regard of their mystical
Union with him.

3. Does the Covenant of Grace made with Christ, respect his Person only? Or
does it not refer to all that are in him, or given to him, or all his true
spiritual Seed? But to put it out of doubt, read the next Words, and tremble,
whoever you be that assert, that the Elect may perish for ever: Once have I
sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie to David. Well, what is that which
God has sworn by his Holiness, and will not lie to do for David, the true
David, that is his own beloved Son? pray read the 36 th verse, His Seed shall
endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me. His Seed, that is, all
those that are given to him, or that are the Children of the Promise, such who
are renewed by his Grace, or born of him by his Spirit, these are his Seed, and
all these shall endure for ever: And to make it good, God has sworn to Christ
as Mediator, by his Holiness, they shall endure, that is, remain his Children
for ever, or abide in his Covenant to Eternity, and therefore they cannot be
separated from his Love by Sin. Now dare any go about, through their great
Ignorance, to charge God with Perjury? O let them dread the Consequents of
their evil Opinion.

Object. Those of the Seed of Christ, or Believers who sin, and afterward do
humble themselves, we grant, shall endure, or be restored; and they are such
that the Spirit of God speaks of in that Psalm you mentioned.

Answ. In answer to this, Brethren, pray consider, that God has promised Grace
to all his Children that fall into Sin, to humble Ezekiel. 36. 26.
them: Repentance is in the Covenant of Grace; a broken and tender Heart he
will give them, not only at first when they believe, but afterward, when
through Temptations and humane Frailties they are overtaken and sin against
him; it is not a Repentance of their own getting, whereby to oblige God to
return again to them. But pray see what he says to his beloved Ones, For I will
not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the Spirit shall fail
before me, and the Souls that I have made. For the Iniquity Isa. 57. 16, 17.
of his Covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; and he went on frowardly in
the Way of his Heart. Well, and what will God do with him now, he has sinned,
and that grievously too, and God has afflicted him as sorely, smote him in his
Wrath; or, as a Father seems to do when his Child that has grievously offended
him, but he is not humbled, he repents not, but goes on frowardly under the
Rod: shall he perish? stay a little, see what God says, verse 18. I have seen
his Ways, and will heal him: although I might justly destroy him, (as if God
should say) and leave him to perish, yet of my mere Mercy, and for my own Name
sake, I will pity him, I will give him Repentance; I will heal him, he shall
mourn for his Sins, and I will restore Comfort to him, and to his Mourners.
Alas, till God turn us, we turn not; therefore a godly Man says, with poor
Ephraim, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God.
Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after Jer. 31. 18, 19.
that I was instructed, I smote on my Thigh. After God has graciously touched
our Hearts, convinced us of our Sins, or changed our Minds, we repent, and
alter our Practices; and God will give Grace thus to do. He remembers his
Covenant and his Oath to our David, etc. I create the Fruits of the Lips;
Peace, Peace, Isa. 57. 19.
to him that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord; I will heal
him. I will in a wonderful manner, and by my own Grace and Almighty Power, do
all, and have all the Praise to my self.

Object. But may be the Persons you speak of, were a praying People, they were
found in their pious Duties, and so their Sins were forgiven, and they healed.

Answ. How fain would some Men eclipse the Free Grace of God, and find
something in the Creature to oblige God to give the Mercy promised.

1. I deny not but God will be sought unto for all the good Things promised to
Believers; But who is it that puts it into our Hearts to seek him, or helps and
influences our Spirits to pray unto him? We know not what we should pray for as
we ought; but the Romans 8. 26.
Spirit makes intercession for us with Groanings that cannot be uttered.

2. Yet nevertheless, see what God says of the People before mentioned; But
thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou have Isa. 43.
been weary of me, O Israel, ver. 22. Thou have not brought me the small Cattle
of thy Burnt-offerings; neither have thou honored me with thy Sacrifices. I
have not caused thee to serve with an Offering, nor wearied thee with Incense,
ver. 23. Thou have bought me no sweet Cane with Money, neither have thou filled
me with the Fat of thy Sacrifices; but thou have made me to serve with thy
Sins, and wearied me with thine Iniquities, ver. 24. See now what a People
these were, they had not so much as done the least things commanded, had not
brought the small Cattle for a Sacrifice, nor did they pray, nor seek the Face
of God: Yet that God may magnify his Grace, see what he speaks in the next
Words, I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgression for mine own sake,
and will not remember thy Sins. Nothing you see, can take off God's Love from
his Covenant-Children; nothing is done by our own Merits, or for the sake or
worth of our Duty, but all wholly of his own Mercy and Goodness.

Secondly, To make it further manifest that the Sins of Believers cannot
separate them from the Love of God, is evident; because Jesus Christ has fully
satisfied his Justice for all their Sins, he has paid all their Debts; Wrath
and Divine Vengeance cannot hurt the Elect of God, in whose stead Christ died:
Should their Sins work their Ruin, and destroy their Souls, it would follow
that Christ made no perfect Compensation for them; if he has, it would be
injustice in God, should he let out his vindictive Wrath against them for their
Sins: Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, etc. All we like
Sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord
has laid on him the Iniquities Isa. 53. 4, 5.
of us all.

Thirdly, Because they have an Advocate with the Father. Christ pleads the
Merits of his own Blood, the Satisfaction he has made for their Sins. My
little Children, these things write I unto you that 1 John 2. 1.
you sin not. O take heed you sin not; do not grieve your Father, offend your
God; you know how hateful Sin is to him, as if he Ver. 2.
should so say: But if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous. Saints should neither presume to sin, nor despair if
overtaken thereby.

Fourthly, Because Christ prayed in the Days of his Flesh, that the Father
would keep them that he had given him in the World from the Evil thereof,
though not from every Evil. I dare not say John 17. 15.
that; because whatever Christ prayed for, it was granted; and yet we see the
best of Saints do sin: But he prayed that they might not fall so, sin so, as to
perish in their sin, or sin unto Death; therefore their Sins shall never damn
them.

Fifthly, Their Sins cannot separate them so from the Love of God; as that he
should cast them off for ever; because a broken Heart, and pardon of Sin, is
contained in the Covenant of Grace: I will be merciful unto their
Unrighteousness; and their Sins and Iniquities I will remember no more. Though
they will be sick; Heb. 10. 16, 17. and 8. 12.
none can live and sin not; yet they have a Physician that can and will heal
them. The Covenant has a healing Antidote in it for every spiritual Malady of
the Soul of a poor dejected Believer: And because God has promised to give
Repentance to his Israel, Sin not being actually forgiven without Repentance,
or before Repentance, therefore God will give Repentance to all his Children;
he will look upon them as Christ looked upon Peter, and then they shall, and do
weep as he did, bitterly. Nay, Brethren, Jesus Christ is exalted on high to
this very End: Him has God exalted with his Act. 5. 31.
right Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance unto Israel, and
forgiveness of Sins: That is, to cover, to conquer and subdue all their
Corruptions, and to supply their Wants, and to protect and defend them from all
Enemies, and eternally to save their Souls: For which End he had his Name given
him; And thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from
their Mat. 1. 21.
Sins; from the Guilt of them, the Power of them, and the Punishment of them.
Also therefore Sin cannot separate them from God's Love, and ruin their
precious Souls.

Sixthly. No Sin can destroy the Soul, nor separate it from God, but such Sins
only that have dominion, that rule and reign in Men and Women, such that the
Sinner loves and allows in himself: Nay, all unrenewed Persons are Servants of
Sin; but no Sin reigns in a true Believer, he loves no Sin, allows of no Sin,
therefore cannot commit Sin: Sin shall not, cannot reign in them; for Sin shall
Romans 6. 14.
not have Dominion over you; for you are not under the Law, but under Grace.
Grace will prevent it, the Covenant of Grace, and the Influences of Grace, and
the Promises of Grace. The Law commands, but gives no Power to obey; but Power
to subdue Sin goes along with the Gospel: the Law is the Strength of Sin, but
the Gospel is the Death of it.

Object. But for all this, good Men may be overcome, and backslide from God,
and God may leave them and love them no more.

Answ. 1. I answer, They may be overcome for a Time, or worsted in the
Conflict, but they shall not finally be overcome; though they fall, they shall
rise again: And as it is said, A Troop Psalm. 37. 24. Genesis 49. 19. Romans 8. 37.
Mich. 7. 8.
shall overcome Gad, but Gad shall overcome at last; so it may be said of every
Believer. Hence the Apostle says, We are more than Conquerors, through him that
loves us. Rejoice not over me, O mine Enemy; when I fall, I shall rise.

2. Though they backslide from God for a time, yet he will recover them again:
I will heal their Backslidings, and will love them freely. See here, that
God's People by their Backslidings, do not Hos. 14. 4.
lose his choice Love and Affections: No, no, he will love them still, and that
freely too; and will not rest till he heals them of that Sickness, which is the
worst they can relapse into.

3. The Elect are another sort, they are not of them that backslide so, that
God's Soul takes no pleasure in them: But we are not of them who draw back unto
Perdition, but of them that believe to the Heb. 10. 39.
Salvation of the Soul. There are some that so draw back, after they have made
a high Profession of the Gospel; but Christ's Sheep are not Sons of Perdition,
but Sons of Faith, or true and sincere Believers, they cannot so sin, so
apostatize: because the Seed remains in them, they cannot commit Sin; they
cannot sin as others 1 John 3. 9.
do, not so as to lose God's Love, or not sin unto Death; therefore cannot
perish: They went out from us, but they were not of us; 1 John 2. 19.
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, etc.
They were not such that had real Union with Christ, the true Anointing was not
in them, they were not of Christ's Sheep, not sincere Believers, not Elect
Ones. From hence let me draw this Argument;

Arg. 2. All those that sin, cannot separate from the Love of God in Christ,
nor eternally destroy, nothing can, but they shall be certainly saved: but Sin
cannot separate true Believers, or the Sheep of Christ, from the Love of God in
Christ, nor eternally destroy them: therefore nothing can, but they shall
certainly be saved.

Object. But does not this give encouragement to Believers to sin, and so a
Licentious Doctrine?

Answ. 1. The Apostle answers this very Objection, to anticipate such a sort of
Men that were in his Days, which we meet with in these of ours: What shall we
say then? shall we continue in Sin that Romans 6. 1, 2.
Grace may abound? God forbid. He having largely, in the foregoing Chapters,
proved the Doctrine I am upon, viz. That Salvation is alone by Christ, by the
Free Grace of God in him, that our Justification is by the Righteousness of
Christ imputed, and no other way: And that Everlasting Life is sure and certain
to all the Seed, to all in Christ, or to all who do believe in him; and he
shows, that where Sin abounded, Grace has much more abounded: Particularly in
the precedent Verse, he asserts, That as Sin has Romans 5. 21.
reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto
Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. From hence he raises this Objection, to
anticipate carnal and blind Mortals, who see no further, and answers it with,
God forbid; how shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein?

2. Let me tell you, that they who leave Sin, refrain from Sin, upon no higher,
better, or more noble Principles, than the fear of Wrath, or eternal perishing,
or only act from slavish Fear, have doubtless not one Dram of true Grace in
them.

Brethren, to abstain from Sin, to strive against Sin, to resist Temptations,
and to be found in all Duties of Obedience and Holiness, lies in high, sublime
and evangelical Principles, and from such Motives that have greater Force and
Power on the Soul, than the fear of Wrath or Hell can have. As, 1. Says a
Believer, Is Sin hateful to God? does God's Soul From what Principles Believers
resist Sin, dare not sin.
loath it, is it abominable to him, and shall it not be so to me, but shall I
sin? God forbid. 2. Has Sin pierced my dear Redeemer? Was it the Spear that
let out his Heart's Blood, that wounded and tore him to pieces, that made him
sweat great Drops of Blood, that let out Divine Wrath upon him, and made him a
Curse for me, and shall I sin, and wound him again? God forbid. 3. Did Christ
die for me to redeem me? did he stand in my stead, and bear mine Iniquities,
and shall I sin? God forbid. 4. Has God bestowed such Grace upon me, as to
love me from Everlasting, to choose me, to redeem me, to renew me; and all to
this End, that I should be to the Praise of his Glory, and bring forth the
Fruits of Holiness, and not sin against him; and shall I sin? God forbid. 5.
Has God raised me from the lowest Hell, and set me on High; made me his own
Child, and espoused me to his Blessed Son? Has he set a Crown upon my Head,
and put Chains better than those of Gold about my Neck? Has he clothed me with
a Robe that shines like the Light, and sparkles beyond all precious Stones? Has
he given the Flesh of his Son to me for Food, and his precious Blood to me to
drink, and shall I sin against him? God forbid. 6. Has God given me himself,
given me a Taste how good he is? Has he allowed me to have free access to the
Throne of Grace, and to have Communion with himself, and with his Son, and
shall I sin against him? God forbid. 7. Has God given me his Holy Spirit to
destroy the Body of Sin, and do I confess my self dead to Sin; and as being
dead, have I been buried with Christ in Baptism, and shall I live in Sin? God
forbid. 8. Have I seen, and do know the detestable Nature of Sin, how evil a
thing Sin is, and am by the Graces of the Spirit completely armed to oppose,
resist, and overcome Sin, and all the Enemies of my Soul; and shall I commit
Sin, and cowardly yield to the Temptations of Satan, and acquit the Field to
the Reproach and Disgrace of my Blessed Lord and Captain of my Salvation, and
destroy mine own Soul that Christ has done so much to save; and shall I sin?
God forbid. 9. Am I an Heir of Heaven, an Heir of Glory, and have the blessed
Angels to minister to me, and to wait upon, and to protect me who also observe
how I behave my self; and shall I sin? God forbid. 10. If I sin, live in Sin,
make a trade of Sin, it will appear I hate God, resist his Will, contemn his
Authority, cast Dung in his Face, grieve his good Spirit, and put the Devil
into the very Throne of God; and shall I live in Sin? God forbid.


Brethren, here is the principal and the grand Motive to keep you from Sin: it
is from these and suchlike Grounds that we should not sin against God.

But I cannot further now enlarge; I should have spoken of the Nature of
Christ's Love, and have shown how that keeps the Saints from Sin, and falling,
so as not to perish: but I Will proceed no further at this time.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon IX.
BRETHREN, the last Day I was upon the second Argument, to prove, That all true
Believers shall certainly be saved, and none of them shall ever so fall away as
eternally to perish: Which was taken from the Nature of the infinite and
unchangeable Love of God the Father.

Thirdly, I shall now proceed to the third Argument, taken from the Nature of
the Love of Jesus Christ the Son; and show you 3d. Arg. Taken from the Nature
of Christ's Love.
that his Love secures the standing of all his Sheep, or all the Elect Ones of
God, unto Everlasting Life.

First, The Love of Christ is an early Love; He loved us from everlasting The
Love of Christ is an early Love. Prove. 8. 23 v. 30, 31.
: I was set up from Everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was. --
Then I was with him, as one brought up with him; and I was daily his delight,
rejoicing in the habitable Part of his Earth, and my delights were with the
Sons of Men. It appears it was not only an early Love, but a Love also of
Complacency, a Love of A Love of Complacency.
Delight.

Secondly, Christ's Love to his Elect, is a wonderful Love.

1. If we consider the Person loving, viz. the Son of God, the Christ loves his
People with a wonderful Love.
Prince of the Kings of the Earth.

2. If we consider the Persons beloved, in their natural and fallen State; for,
when such, he set his Heart upon them: When they lay in their Blood, it was
then he passed by and loved us: Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon
thee, behold, thy Time was the Time of Ezekiel. 16. 8.
Love, and I spread my Skirt over thee, and covered thy Nakedness, etc. We were
his Enemies, traitorous Enemies, vile Rebels to him, having abominable Enmity
against him in our Hearts. Romans 8. 7.


3. Consider the wonderful Achievements his Love put upon him to undertake,
and the wonderful Effects thereof.

(1.) Even to become a wonderful Surety for us, and to pay a wonderful Debt.

(2.) To leave wonderful Glory, even to come from Heaven, where he lay in the
Bosom of the Father, and to come to the Earth, to dunghill Earth.

(3.) If we consider his wonderful Condescension and Abasement: he became Man,
who thought it not robbery to be equal with God; yet made himself of no
reputation, and took unto him the Form of a Phil. 2. 7, 8.
Servant. He became wonderful Poor, who was wonderful Rich, yea, amazingly
Rich, Heaven and Earth, and all things in it, being his own; yet was born of a
Poor Virgin, who doubtless had little or no Money to accommodate her, or to
defray the Charges of a Lying-In at the Inn; and therefore they turned her into
the Stable, where she was delivered of our Blessed Savior, and laid Luke 2. 7.
him in a Manger. O what wonderful Abasement was this! Moreover, he also had no
Money to pay the Tax that was laid upon him, therefore sends Peter to the Sea
to take a piece of Money Mat. 17. 27.
out of the Mouth of a certain Fish. He had no House of his own to dwell in, no
not a poor Cottage: The Foxes of the Earth, said he, have Holes, and the Birds
of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has no where to lay his Head. --
Also when in his greatest Mat. 8. 20.
Pomp on Earth he rode but on an Ass, and that not his own neither, but he
borrowed it. Moreover the good Women ministered John 12. 14.
Relief to him, he had not to supply his own Necessities; he was poor in his
Life, poor in his Death, standing charged with the Debts of many thousands, the
least not owing less than ten thousand Talents; which could he not have paid
and satisfied for, he must have lain in Prison for ever. O what a Charge of
Guilt was laid upon him! Does Sin render a Man miserable? does one Sin charged
on a Person, render him poor? How poor then was he for a Time, that stood
charged with all the Sins of his Elect? He was for saken of all his Friends on
Earth in his greatest Distress, and by his Father in Heaven; he was Poor and
Miserable in the Sight of all that saw him; they pulled off his Hair, spit in
his Face, crowned him with Thorns, stripped off his Garment: and all this for
the sake of his Sheep, or for his Elect.

(4.) If we consider the wonderful and amazing Wrath he bore, what a Curse he
was made for us; the wonderful Horror, Pain, and Anguish he felt; the wonderful
Sweat he sustained, which were great Drops of Blood; the wonderful Passion and
Sufferings on the Cross he endured: He loved us, and washed us from our Sins
Rev. 1. 5.
in his own Blood He loved his Sheep, his People, his Spouse, as himself, above
himself: Mary loved him so as to wash his Feet with her Tears; but he loved
Mary so, and all his Elect Ones, as to wash their Souls in his own most
precious Blood. Jacob loved Benjamin, David loved Absalom; but David said,
Jonathan's Love to him was wonderful, passing the Love of Women. But what is a
Bubble to the Ocean! a Spark of Fire to a Furnace! or a finite Love to an
infinite Love! What is all Love to Christ's Love?

(5.) Christ's Love to his Sheep, to his Elect, is wonderful; because it
passes knowledge: That ye may know the Love of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 19.
that passes Knowledge. 1. It passes the Knowledge of the Natural Man. What can
he, with all his natural and acquired Parts find out, as to the greatness and
wonderfulness of Christ's Love? 2. It passes the Knowledge of the Moral Man.
What can the Natural or the Moral Philosopher do, as to the comprehending,
finding out, or demonstrating the Nature of Christ's Love? Can he sound the
Depth of the Sea? Can he measure the Breadth of the Heavens? Can he account the
Length of Eternity? Besides, here is a Height that their Art discovers not; the
Mathematics teaches not this Mystery: That ye may be able to comprehend Ephesians.
3. 18, 19.
with all Saints, what is the Breadth and Length, the Depth and Height, and to
know the Love of Christ that passes Knowledge. 3. It passes the Knowledge of
the Spiritual Man; he cannot arrive to a full and perfect understanding of it.
4. Nay it passes the Knowledge of the Holy Angels; their Wisdom and
Understanding no doubt is wonderful; but here they are at a loss, they stand in
amaze, looking into, and admiring with astonishment, this Love, to see him that
is God become Man, to save such a Vile and Sinful Creature; to love and delight
in him that was so great an Enemy. 5. It is wonderful, because a whole Eternity
will be but little enough to let out to Believers the Love of Christ. It will
never be fully known, it cannot be comprehended; all above, and all below, are
at a loss, they are all at a nonpluss, and astonished at it.


Thirdly, Christ's Love therefore to his Sheep, to his Saints, is Christ's Love
to his People, an immense or infinite Love.
an immense, incomprehensible, or an infinite Love; as the Wrath and Anger of
God, and the Lamb, when kindled and let out, is inconceivable, so is his
precious Love to his People: this Breadth, Length, Depth and Height, doubtless
refers to the unsearchable Greatness and Immensity of God. Can thou find out
the Almighty Job 11. 7. Romans 11. 33.
to perfection? Can thou come to the uttermost of what God is? Can thou
find out the inmost Recesles or Secrets of God's Heart, of Christ's Heart? Have
thou seen what is laid up in the inner Chambers of his Spirit? then thou may
know his Love; for it is like himself, God is Love, Love is his very Nature: It
is as high 1 John 4. 8.
as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper than Hell, what can thou know? longer
than the Earth, broader than the Sea. Many Wits, as Job 11. 8, 9.
one notes, run Riot in Geometrical Notions about Moral Dimensions; and whereas
Naturalists give us but three Dimensions of a Body, Longitude, Latitude, and
Profundity, the Love of Christ (Brethren) has Altitude added, which is a
Fourth. Doubtless all these Dimensions are mentioned, only to set forth the
Immensity of Christ's Love.

1. Christ's Love is broad, enough to spread over and cover, like a Mantle, all
the Sins of his Elect, and also to hide them from Satan's Rage and Fury. His
Love is long enough to reach us with his Arm of Affections, wherever we are,
or whatever our Wants be. Christ's Love is deep enough to find us out, and
relieve us under all depths of Afflictions, Despondency or Distress, of what
sort soever. Christ's Love has a Height in it, enough to defend us, like a high
Wall, against all the Assaults of those Enemies that are in high Places, and
above us; we cannot see them: As-Satan is a Spirit, he has the Advantage of us;
such is his Nature, Ephesians. 6. 12. and 2, 2, 3.
he is said to be in high Places; he is the Prince of the Power of the Air. But
God is above him, Christ is in a higher Sphere, his Love has a Height in it;
so that neither Height nor Depth can separate us from his Love, as well as it
cannot separate us from the Love of the Father.

2. Christ's Love is an infinite or an immense Love, as appears, because it is
without beginning, it is from Eternity, before ever the Earth was. That which
was before the World was, is without beginning: but the Love of Christ to his
Elect was before the World was, even from Everlasting. Yea, I have loved thee
with an Jer. 31. 3.
everlasting Love.

3. Christ's Love to his Sheep, to his Saints, is an infinite or immense Love;
does appear, because his Love to them is as that Love the Father has to him:
As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Though [as] may not be a Note
of Comparison in Joh. 15. 9.
every Sense, yet it does signify the Truth, Firmness, and Greatnese of
Christ's Love: The Father loves Christ with an eternal, immense, immutable,
constant, free, full, and perfect Love; so does Jesus Christ love every one of
his Elect Ones. Again, says Christ to his Father, that the World may know that
thou have loved them, as thou have loved me: He would have all know how he
loves John 17. 23.
his People, or such that were given to him.

4. It appears to be an infinite Love, because it cannot be found out, defined
or comprehended, it passing all Understanding; as also by the glorious and
amazing Effects thereof, which are apparent to all.

5. Because it is without ending: all those that Jesus Christ does love, or
has set his special Affections upon, he loves to the End; Joh. 13. 1.
his Love is not only from Everlasting, but also to Everlasting; he abides in
his Love, notwithstanding all the Weakness, Frailties or Decays of Love in his
People toward him: He heals, and with a Nevertheless will heal their Back
slidings, and love them freely.

Fourthly, The Love of Jesus Christ to his Saints is a Conjugal Love; it is an
Espousal Love Though I purpose to speak to the Nature Christ's Love is a
Conjugal Love.
of that blessed and mystical Union which is betwixt Christ and every Believer
under a distinct Argument, yet let it be considered here, that the
consideration that Christ's Love is such, as that he does espouse every Godly
Soul, and marry it to himself; this must needs be one of the highest Arguments
that can be produced to prove their final Perseverance; because Espousal Love
is the Sweetest, the Firmest, and most abiding Love, especially the Love of
Christ's Espousal: I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea Hos. 2. 19, 20.
, I will betroth thee unto me in Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in loving
Kindness, and in Mercy. I will even betroth thee unto me in Faithfulness, and
thou shall know the Lord.

What words can more fully express the Firmness of this Marriage-Contract, or
Espousal Love of Christ to his true Israel? This Conjugal Love of Christ is
that never-exhausted Fountain of all our spiritual and eternal Comforts; all
Mercies, like Streams which never fail, flow to all Believers, from hence. Can
a Man show greater Love to a Woman, than to espouse her to be his Wife? This is
beyond the Love of Parents to Children: Christ bestows himself on us, and all
he has; nay, and that he might do this, he bought or purchases us: Christ
bought his Spouse; none ever gave such a vast Sum for a Wife as Jesus Christ
has done; and shall any think he will lose her after all this, if he is able
to help it? How can that enter into any Man's Thoughts? Will a faithful
Husband, a tender Husband, suffer his most dear and beloved Wife, that he has
such Affection to, to be torn from him, and be abused and pulled into pieces,
and he look on? If he has Power in his Hand, will he not rescue her, nay, die
upon the Spot before he will see this done? But alas, ala, what is the Love of
any mortal Man, to his Spouse, to his Wife, when compared with the Love of
Christ to his Saints, who loved his Church, and gave himself for her; and whose
Love is as you have heard, so wonderful, infinite, and inconceivable? Moreover
I hope none doubt of his Power. Others may see their Wives ravished and torn in
pieces before their Eyes, and cannot help it, they are not able to help and
save them: but Christ wants no Power, as he wants no Wisdom, Care, or
Affections. Now what are the Enemies, the most dangerous Enemies of the Spouse
of Christ? Is not Sin the chief, Sin, the World, the Devil, etc. Will he then,
think you, let Sin prevail, Satan prevail, so far as to deflour, murder and
destroy that precious Soul he thus loves, and has espoused to himself? Those
who assert final falling from a State of true Grace, must say he does thus,
viz. He suffers Sin to destroy his Spouse, even to put out the Eyes, deflour,
strip, wound, and murder the Soul he has espoused, whilst he stands by and
looks on, and can, but will not help nor deliver her, because the Soul is
bliaded by some Lusts, or drawn away by an Enemy; therefore they say he will
not. He that can believe such a Doctrine, let him. But,

Fifthly, Christ Love has an attracting and a retaining Quality in it: It
draws the Soul to Christ, and it keeps it close with Christ, Christ's Love an
attracting Love.
when it has received and embraced him; it draws, nay, constrains the Soul to
love Christ; We love him, because he first loved us. And no Man or Woman that
loves Christ sincerely, but they hate Sin: it constrains the Soul to return
Love for Love. Christ's Love is like Elijah's Garment that he cast upon Elisha,
who immediately run after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my Father
and Mother, and then I will follow thee. And be said, Go 1 King. 19. 19, 20.
back, what have I done unto thee? Thus does Christ's Love to the Soul in all
that feel its Influences, they follow him, cleave to him, and also keep with
him: for like as the Fear of God, so the Love of God is put into our Hearts,
(if we are sincere Christians) and we shall not, cannot finally depart from him.

Sixthly, Christ's Love is a free Love; as nothing did purchase A free Love.
it, so nothing can nor shall lose or forfeit it: I will love them freely.

From the whole I infer, -- If the Love of Jesus Christ is an early Love, a
Love of Complacency; if it be a wonderful and amazing The General Argument.
Love; if it be an immense, infinite, and incomprehensible Love; if it is a
conjugal Love, an attracting and retaining Love, a free and abiding Love, which
he has to every Believer; then he will not ever let go that hold he has of
every one of them, so as to suffer them to fall from him, as eternally to
perish: But such is the Nature of the Love of Jesus Christ; therefore he will
never so let go that hold he has of every Believer, as to suffer them to fall
so as eternally to perish.

Brethren, such is the Love of Christ to his Saints, as that he Christ's
special Love Tokens.
gives them special Tokens and Assurance of his Eternal Favor.

Some of them are these following. 1. He calls them with an effectual and
special Calling. 2. He renews them, and stamps his own Image upon them. Romans 8.
29. Ezekiel. 36. 26.
3. He puts his Holy Spirit into them. 4. He justifies them freely by his own
Grace, giving them his own Robe of Righteousness, which is beyond a Garment of
Cloth Isa. 59. 5. Chapter 6. 10.
of Gold. 5. He sanctifies them, and endows them with Power to mortify Romans 6.
14.
Sin; and when they fall, he helps them up again by his right Hand. 6. He seals
his Love to them with the Kisses of his Mouth, or by Cant. 1. 1, 2. Psalm. 91.
11.
his most sure and precious Promises. 7. He commands his Holy Angels to attend
them, and to administer to them, and keep them in all his Ways. 8. He leads,
feeds and preserves them, under all Trouble, Temptation and Afflictions, and
sympathizes with them. 9. He sets them as a Seal upon his Heart, as a Seal upon
his Arm; Cant. 8. 6.
they are engraven on the Palms of his Hands; he has sworn that his loving
Kindness shall never be taken away from them. As I have sworn that the Waters
of Noah should no more go over the Earth, so have I sworn that I will not be
wroth with thee. -- For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed;
but my Kindness shall not depart from thee, etc. Isa. 54. 10.
10. He puts his Law into their Hearts, that none of their Feet should slide.
Psalm. 37. 31.



APPLICATION.

First, 1st. Exhort.
To close with this; O see, you that are Believers, that you strive after the
Knowledge of Christ's Love.

Motives.

1. It is the highest Ingratitude not to desire after the Knowledge of such
Love: Shall a Beggar be beloved by a Prince, and she not be affected with it,
nor inquire after it?

2. Because you are the Objects of this Love, of this Affection; does it not
seem an amazing Consideration to you? May be you cannot soon believe it; because
you see no worth in your selves. Ah, says the Soul, Christ loves me thus!
What, such a poor sorry and filthy Wretch! Wonder O Heavens, be astonished O
Earth! The more you know it, the more you will love your Blessed Savior. He
loved me not a righteous Person, but me a Sinner, a loathsome Sinner, when in my
Blood and Filth.

3. This will make you little in your own Eyes; the more we know of God, and of
Christ, and of his Love, the more we shall loath and abhor our selves. O that
ever I should grieve him Joh 42. 5.
as I have done! How did the sense of God's Love and Goodness to David humble
him: Who am I, O Lord, and what is mine 1 Chronicles. 17. 16.
House, that thou have brought me hitherto? And yet is this a small thing in
thine Eyes, O God, for thou have spoken of thy Servant's House for a great
while to come, and have regarded me according to the Estate of a Man of high
Degree, O Lord. Thus may every Believer say. The Love of Christ will have the
like Effect on our Souls, as the Knowledge of David's Love to Abigail, when he
sent Messengers to her to make her his Wife, and raise her to his Throne: Let
me (says she) be a Servant, to wash the Feet of the Servants of 1 Samuel 25. 41.
my Lord.

4. The Knowledge of Christ's Love, will beget greater and stronger Love in our
Souls to him: Love begets Love, but not till it is known. O taste, Sinners,
of this Love: had you but a Taste, how would your Hearts be enflamed in Love to
Jesus Christ. And as to you Saints,

5. The more you know of Christ's Love, the more your Hearts will die (and your
Love cool) to all earthly things.

6. The more you know of Christ's Love, the more firmly you will be fixed and
settled in his Truth, and be delivered from Fears and Doubts about your
standing. Alas, it is not Sin, nor Satan, nor Hell, nor Death, that can deprive
your Souls of Christ's Love, if you are his. If Satan says, Thou art a vile
Sinner, and lays before thee the Baseness of thy Heart; tell him, Christ's Love
passes Knowledge. Does he say, that thou will fall one time or another? Tell
him, Christ loved thee not for thy Righteousness; and his Love that is so
infinite, will never suffer thee to fall and rise no more.

7. The Knowledge of Christ's Love will make us to speak well of God, and
Christ, and his Ways, at all times; still we shall say, the Love of God, and
Jesus Christ, is the same, all is in Love; whom I love, I rebuke and chasten:
Christ's Love known and experienced, Rev. 3. 19.
will be a Cordial to bear thee up to the end of thy Days.

8. This will set your Souls at liberty, and bring you out of the Spirit of
Bondage, and make you to run after him: But it is Cant. 1. 4.
not the knowing of Christ's Love in any degree, but to that degree that
passes Knowledge; a Love that cannot fail which will do this.

9. The Knowledge of Christ's Love will make you cling and cleave to him: Christ
is the Loadstone, and our Soul the Needle; and now our Soul having touched him,
it makes to the Center; and though you may, like the Needle, tremble for a
Time, yet you are hastening to him, and never will rest till you come to him
whom your Souls love.

10. The more you know of him, and of his Love, the more will be your inward
Joy and Peace: For this is the Way to be filled with all the Fullness of God,
and to know the Love of Christ Ephesians. 3. 19.
which passes Knowledge, that you may be filled with all the Fullness of God.

Secondly, This may reprehend and sharply reprove, such Christians that doubt
of the Love of Christ; especially those who affirm, that justified and
sanctified Persons may for ever lose his Love and perish; for this renders his
Love mutable and changeable, according as the Love of Mortals change one
toward another.

Thirdly, and lastly, What Comfort and Consolation does this afford to all true
Christians?

But I must proceed to the next Argument, to prove, That Saints shall not,
cannot finally fall so as to perish.

Fourthly, Christ's Sheep, his Saints, shall never so fall, as finally The
fourth A (...) taken from the Nature of the Covenant of Grace.
and eternally to perish, I shall in the next place prove, and that from the
Nature of the Covenant of Grace.

First. Because it is a Covenant of Grace: We do not stand in this Covenant, as
Adam stood in the first Covenant.

And now that it is a Covenant of Grace, will appear, if we consider with whom
this Covenant was primarily made; and that was with Jesus Christ, it was made
between God in the Person Isa. 53. 10, 11. Zech. 6. 12, 13.
of the Father, and Man in the Person of Christ. Our Lord Jesus was constituted
in this Covenant, the great Head, Representative, and blessed Surety, for and
in behalf of all the Father gave unto him. Adam had no Surety that undertook
for him in the first Covenant, as a Covenanting Hand, but was entrusted with
all his Riches, all being put into his own Hand, which he soon by his Sin lost,
and undid himself and all his Posterity, whom he was set up as the common Head
and Representative of. God foresecing this, he would not enter into a Covenant
any more with Man, his Credit being for ever lost: And since he lost all when
he had Power to stand, there was no likelihood or possibility of his standing,
after he had deprived himself of his Power of doing good, being depraved in all
the Faculties of his Soul. Therefore Christ was set up, set up from
Everlasting, by the Holy God, (who foresaw all things before they came to pass)
as the Head and Surety of the New Covenant, (called the New Covenant, in
respect had to the time of the Revelation of it to Mankind, it being not known
until Man had broke the first Covenant): now Christ undertook in the Covenant
of Grace for all the Elect, he personating them, when the Father and he entered
into that glorious Compact or Covenant-Transactions, we having not then an
actual Being, he represented all that were given to him out of the lost Lump of
fallen Man; and undertook, as Mediator, to make up that Breach that was between
God and Man; and by his perfect Obedience to merit for them Everlasting Life,
and to bring them all to Glory. This being so, nothing can more fully
demonstrate the Certainty of their Salvation, and the Impossibility of any of
their perishing; for they for whom Jesus Christ did undertake this great and
glorious Work, even all the Elect Seed, were put into his Hand by the Tenor of
this Covenant, to work out Life and Salvation for them, and to die in the room
and stead of them; thereby to bear that Wrath and Curse that they otherwise
must have suffered, born and endured for ever. Now in this Covenant, Eternal
Life comes to us primarily by God's Free Grace, in his finding out, parting
with, and accepting of his own Son to be our Savior and Surety. And secondly,
by virtue of what Christ has done, and did undertake to do and suffer for all
that should be saved, they cannot perish: I have found David my Servant; with
my Holy Spirit have I anointed him. -- My Mercy will I keep with him for
evermore, Psalm. 89. 20. Verse 28, 29.
and my Covenant shall stand fast in him. His Seed also will I make to endure
for ever. His Seed, that is, all that are the Product of his Spirit, or are
quickened and renewed by him. This is the Nature of the Covenant of Grace,
Christ is their Root and Head, their Spirit of Life is in him, and it is
derived from him in Regeneration, in a spiritual way, as our natural Life was
in, and derived to us from the first Adam by Generation, in a natural way. My
Brethren, pray do not mistake about the Nature and Tenor of this great and
glorious Covenant: The Father, we say, enters into a Covenant with his Son, and
promises Eternal Life unto him, and to all his Elect Seed, upon the
consideration of what he, I mean our Blessed Savior, was to perform in respect
of those federal Conditions proposed to him, which he did then undertake on
Man's behalf, or such of Mankind that God did intend to save. And the Father
that accepted of him, and sent him into the World, and gave him his Sheep, does
look to him as to the final and complete Accomplishment of all things, that
were either to be done for them, or wrought and done in them, in order to the
Everlasting Salvation of their Souls. And this Christ engaged to do, and took
them into his Hands in this Covenant to effect; which is clearly signified in
my Text, together with a full Assurance unto us, that he will do it in spite of
Sin, Devil, World, and all Enemies; Neither shall any pluck them out of my
Hand. Our Blessed Savior further says, All that the Father has given me,
shall come unto me; and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
For John 6. 37, 38, 39.
I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that
sent me. And this is the Father's Will that sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last Day.
This was the Covenant between them both, this is his Father's Will, that none,
no not one, no nothing of them that were given to him, neither their Souls nor
Bodies, should be lost, but all must be saved, he having engaged and promised
to fulfill and accomplish the Father's Will herein. O happy Believers! you are
not left to your own Covenanting with God, to the Power of your own Wills; nor
do you stand upon your own Legs, but you are in God's Covenant, in Christ's
Covenant; you are committed into Christ's Hand to keep, you stand upon your
Surety's Engagements, his Undertakings; God looks to him, and expects that he
gives a good Account of all his Sheep at the last Day; and Christ is able and
faithful: He says, Them I must bring; I have struck Hands with my Father, I
have covenanted and promised to die for them, and to call, renew, and eternally
to save them; and they shall never perish. This being all true, what is become
of the Doctrine (or rather of the gross Error) of a final falling from a State
of true Grace?

Secondly, To proceed a little further: Jesus Christ, by virtue of this
Covenant, and in pursuance of that great Work he undertook, did not only die to
satisfy for the Sins of his People, but also purchased or procured thereby a
gracious conveyance of the Holy Spirit, and the saving Graces and Influences
thereof, to change their Hearts, bend and subject their Wills, and graciously
to renew and convert their Souls unto God, which God foresaw otherwise could
never be done, and also to carry on that good Work in them until they come to
Glory: And this indeed he was obliged to perform, according to the Tenor of
this Covenant. And hence it is that Paul says, Being confident of this very
thing, that he which Phil. 1. 6.
has begun a good Work in you, will perform it until the Day of Christ; or
until the Day of your Death he will perform it; which denotes his
Covenant-undertaking, he having obliged or bound himself as our Surety to do
it. It is not said he will perfect, or finish it, but he will perform it. Had
not the Apostle referred to that Obligation in the Covenant of Grace which he
laid himself under, the other Expression had been as proper, i. e. to say, he
will perform it. He is faithful, and cannot fail in doing and performing what
he has made a Bargain, or covenanted to do: As we say, when a faithful and
responsible Person has covenanted to do this or that, though the Work be great
and difficult, and much Opposition lies in his way, yet he will do it, he will
perform what he has undertaken. Hence David says, I will cry unto God most
High; unto Psalm. 57. 2.
God that performs all things for me: To God most high that is able to do it,
let Sin, Men and Devils, do what they can to hinder him. This is further
confirmed by the Prophet; Lord, thou will ordain Isa. 26. 12.
Peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our Works in us: All is the
Effects of thy Grace, according to thy glorious Covenant. Hence also the
Apostle says, For it is God that works in you, both to will Phil. 2. 13.
and to do of his own good Pleasure. No Man can choose that which is savingly
Good, much less perform it, until his Will is graciously renewed: My People
shall be willing in the Day of my Power. This Psalm. 110. 3.
being so, how contrary is this Doctrine to that which some Men maintain
concerning the Power of the Creature, or Power of Man's depraved Will, the
purport of which leaves the Salvation of every Soul at the greatest Uncertainty
imaginable? They tell you Christ died for all Men, that is, for their Good, and
satisfied for their Sins, against the first Covenant, for all Men; and that all
are put into a Capacity to be saved, if they will believe, repent, and continue
in believing and in well-doing to the End: they clearly intimate, that
whatsoever the Decree or Purpose of God is, and whatsoever the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace is, yet all is at the determination of Man's own Will,
whether any one will be saved or not, God affording him only strong moral
Persuasions, Reasons, Motives, and Subjective Considerations thereunto, which
may, or may not incline, excite or prevail with him to believe and obey the
Gospel, and perform the procuring Conditions of Life and Salvation; or they may
not incline, excite or prevail with any one Soul: they do not, will not say,
that Christ is under an Obligation, by virtue of the Covenant made with the
Father, to afford effectual Grace, special Aid, internal Strength to any, in
order to bring them over unto God; but that it is left to the Creature, and
that he needs no such supernatural or irresistible Grace to work upon him:
Which does, (1.) Evidently tend to ascribe the whole Glory of our Regeneration
and Perseverance in Grace unto Man, and not to the Grace of God: for that Act
of our Wills on this Supposition whereby we convert unto God, is merely an Act
of our own, and not of the special Grace of God. This is clear; for if the Act
it self were of effectual Grace, then would it not be in the Power of the Will
to hinder it, as a late Reverend Minister notes. Dr. Owen.
Also (2.) it would and must follow, that this would leave Regeneration and
Salvation absolutely uncertain, (notwithstanding the Purpose of God, the
Covenant of Grace, the Undertaking and Death of Christ) whether ever any one in
all the World should be saved, or no, as I hinted before: for when God has
done all, Christ has done all that he is concerned in, or is to do on his
part, it is absolutely in the Power of the Will of Man, whether it shall be
effectual, or not; which is directly contrary to the Covenant, Promise and Oath
of God unto Jesus Christ: (3.) It is also contrary, as you have heard, unto
express Texts of Scripture, wherein effectual Conversion, and final
Perseverance is wholly ascribed unto the special Grace of God, as the immediate
Effect thereof; God works in us to will and to do. The Act therefore it self
in our Conversion, is of God's Operation; and though we will our selves, yet it
is he who causes us to will, by working in us to will and to do But if the Act
of our Will in Believing and Obedience, in our Conversion and Perseverance, be
not the effect of God's special Grace in us, then God does not work in us, both
to will and to do of his own good Pleasure.


Thirdly. The Covenant of Grace secures all Christ's Sheep, all his Saints,
from falling away so as eternally to perish, because the Covenant of Grace is
an Everlasting Covenant, well ordered in all ^ Sam. 23. 5.
things and sure: Not only well ordered in all things for the Glory of God, in
all his blessed Attributes, but also for the Happiness, Safety and Security of
all their Souls that the Father gave unto Jesus Christ.

1. It is well ordered for our Good, in that Christ has pacified the Wrath of
God thereby for us. Christ has, by the Blood of his Covenant, made up that
great Breach that was between God and us. So that now God says unto his People,
Fury is not in me. See what Paul says, When we were Enemies, Isa. 27.
we were reconciled unto God by the Death of his Son: And by his Spirit he
reconciles us, he slays and subdues the Enmity that naturally was in our Hearts
against God. Christ in this Covenant (it is so well ordered) is that blessed
Days-man that lays his Hand upon both, he brings God to Man, and Man to God: We
were the Children of Wrath, and under the Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Gal. 3. 4, 25.
Curse of the Law; but by the Grace of this well-ordered Covenant, we were made
the Children of God, and delivered from the Curse of the Law: Christ has
delivered us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.

We had lost the Image of God; but by this Covenant it is restored to us again,
and so that we shall not lose it any more for ever. We were dead, blind, naked,
in Bonds and in Prison, but by the Grace of God in this Covenant we are
quickened, our Eyes Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. Ephesians. 1. 18. Zech. 9. 11.
are enlightened, and we have our naked Souls clothed; yea, and are brought out
of Prison, and all our Wounds are healed. We were guilty and filthy Creatures;
but by this Covenant are justified and sanctified, being actually acquitted,
and through Faith pronounced Righteous, in the perfect Righteousness of Christ;
and all our Sins pardoned; and are sanctified, purged and washed by Faith in
his Blood, and shall not come into Condemnation: There Romans 8. 1.
is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; they shall
never perish: If there is no Condemnation to them, there is no possibility of
their final falling.

Well, but what are the Characters of those happy Souls? why, they are such,
says the Apostle, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.
Moreover, see this more fully confirmed by Christ himself; Verily, verily I say
unto you, he that hears my Words, and believes on him that sent me, has
Everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
Death to Life: He is passed out of a state of Death to a state of Spiritual
Life; he has Eternal Life in the Seed of it in him; he has a sure and certain
Right and Title to Everlasting Life; he shall not be deprived of it by any
Enemy whatsoever: so much do these words of our Blessed Savior imply. Now what
daring Men are they who say, they may come into Condemnation that do believe?
Will they gainsay and contradict the Lord of Life and Glory?

3 dly. It is a well-ordered and sure Covenant, because it is made in and with
our blessed Surety, as before I showed you: God treats with us, trades again
with us, gives forth his Heavenly Treasure to us; but all is upon the Credit
and Security of Jesus Christ, who is become the Surety of this Covenant. Now we
may have what we need, come when we will in his Name, he is engaged to God the
Father for us; Christ was made a Surety of a better Covenant. Heb. 7. 22.
When God saw Man undone, run out of all, and no trusting him any more, Christ
stepped in and undertook for us, and put his Hand to the Covenant, and brings
himself under an Obligation for us.

Quest. Is Christ a Surety to God for us, or of us to God?

An. I answer; God on his part had no need of a Surety to undertake for him; he
never failed nor broke at first with Man, it was Man that broke and failed in
his Covenant with God. "But we on all Accounts (says Dr. Owen) Dr. Owen on
Heb. 2. 22. p. 223.
stand in need of such a Surety for us, or on our behalf: Neither without the
interposition of such a Surety, (says he) could any Covenant between God and
us be firm and stable, or an Everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and
sure."

4 thly. Because this Covenant is made upon the unchangeable Decree and Counsel
of God: My Covenant I will not break; nor alter Ps. 89. 34.
the thing that is gone out of my Mouth. If you can break my Covenant of the
Day and Night, then may also my Covenant be broken with David. Now Christ and
his Seed, his Elect, are but one Party in this Covenant; J^^. 33. 20, 21.
it was made with him, and with us in him, before the World began. See Paul;
Who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling; not according to our
Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the World began. It was made as firm to us in Christ who do
believe, as it was made to him, and only made with him for us; to this End,
even to secure Eternal Life for us, that we might not lose it: and it is as
firm by the Decree and Counsel of God, as the Covenant of Day and Night. And
thus it is of Grace alone; the Reason of which the Apostle gives us; Therefore
it is of Faith, that it might be of Romans 4. 16.
Grace, to the end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed. Pray observe it
well.

5 thly. This Covenant is sure to all the Elect, and gives them an Assurance of
Everlasting Life; because the execution of it is put into the Hands of the Holy
Spirit, the Holy Ghost is to see that all the Legacies left in Christ's last
Will and Testament, are given to all Believers; all Covenant-Blessings shall
therefore be faithfully bestowed upon them of which final Perseverance in Grace
and Holiness is none of the least: Christ's Will runs, none of them shall
perish; and it is the Father's Will, that none that he has given to his Son
should be lost. Now the Spirit of God cannot fail, it is his Work to
regenerate, sanctify and preserve, and to make meet all the Saints of God for
the Eternal Inheritance; therefore they cannot perish.

6 thly. The Covenant is firm and sure, and does secure all Christ's Sheep unto
Eternal Life, appears further, because it is confirmed by the highest Witnesses
in Heaven and Earth. (1.) The Father, (2.) the Son, (3.) the Holy Spirit, and
all those wonderful Miracles that were wrought: this was one End of that mighty
Testimony, viz. That all the Father has given to Christ, or all that believe
in him, may assuredly know they shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life.

7 thly. This Covenant makes all the Blessings thereof sure to all Believers,
because it is confirmed and ratified by the Blood of the Testator Jesus Christ:
That Covenant that is confirmed and ratified by Christ's Blood, must needs be
sure to all the Seed, and secure all Blessings in it to them. We have also as a
Sign and Token of this Confirmation of the New Covenant, the Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper; This is the Blood of the New Covenant that is shed for you, to
make Peace for you, to procure Justification, Reconciliation, pardon of Sin,
and Eternal Life for you: it is sealed to you by the Spirit through my Blood;
take, eat this, and drink this in token of it, as an Assurance of it.

8 thly. The Covenant of Grace does secure the standing of Christ's Sheep, or
preserve all Believers to Everlasting Life, because of the Promise and Oath of
God. We have,

(1.) The Promise of God to Christ; He shall see his Seed. And Isa. 53. 10.
Psalm. 89. 28, 29.
again, His Seed shall endure for ever. How can that be, if any one that is
begotten by Christ's Word and Spirit may perish?

(2.) The Promises also are as made to us in Christ. This was Abraham's Title
to the Blessings of the Covenant: To Abraham Gal. 3. 16, 29.
and to his Seed were the Promises made; that is, to Christ and to all
Believers in Christ. For all the Promises of God in Jesus Christ, are not 2
Cor. 1. 20.
Yea and Nay, but Yea and Amen, to the Glory of God the Father: From the Father
through the Merits of Christ, and the Application of the Holy Spirit. Nay, God
that cannot lie, promised them to us in Christ before all Worlds: See Paul, In
hope of Eternal Tit. 1. 2.
Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World began. If Believers
do perish, what will become of the Promises of God, nay, of the Oath of God?
For when God made Promise to Abraham, Heb. 6. 13, 17, 18.
because he could swear by no greater, he swore by himself, etc. Wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the immutability of
his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled
for Refuge to lay hold on the Hope set before us. This Promise and Oath of God,
does respect the Salvation of all the Elect, or all that are Believers, who are
the Heirs of the Promises. O let any take heed how they affirm, that any one of
these may perish, since God's Oath is passed that they shall not; and it is to
this end that all of them might have strong Consolation.

9 thly. I might proceed to show you that the Covenant of Grace does preserve
all the Sheep of Christ to Eternal Life, and shows us, that it is impossible
that any of them should so fall away, as eternally to perish, because they in
this Covenant have received the Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Chapter 4. 30.
Earnest of the Inheritance, and by the same Spirit it is sealed to them also.
But I shall pass by that, having elsewhere spoken fully to it.

10 thly, and Lastly, This Covenant prevents the Saints final falling, because
it is an absolute Covenant which can never be broken, but stands as firm as
their Eternal Rock. See what the Prophet speaks, it is as absolute as the
Covenant God made with Noah: For this is as the Water of Noah unto me; for as I
have sworn the Isa. 54. 9, 10.
Waters of Noah shall no more go over the Earth, so I have sworn that I will
not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the Mountains shall depart, and
the Hills be removed, but my loving Kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither [mark it] the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord that has
Mercy on thee. And now this Covenant is made with every Sheep and Lamb of Jesus
Christ, as it appears by what the same Prophet speaks, Incline your Ear, and
come unto me; hear, and your Souls shall live; and I will make an Isa. 55. 3.
Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David: that is, then
you shall be brought actually into the Bonds of this Covenant, which is the
Work of the Spirit; for who else can make the Dead to hear and live? So this
Covenant secures you to Eternal Life.

Let me sum up the whole of this Argument. (1.) If the New Covenant be a
Covenant of Grace, and not of The general Argument.
Works; if it be not according to the first Covenant that was made with Adam,
but of a quite contrary Nature. (2.) If it be made with Christ for all his
Elect, and in him with them, before the World began. (3.) If Christ is the
Surety of the Covenant, and has engaged or obliged himself in this Covenant to
the Father, to perform all the federal Conditions proposed to him, and
undertaken by him on their behalf, namely to work out perfect Righteousness
according as the Law requires, (of all that can be justified with God) and to
die in their room, to satisfy for their Breach of the Law, and to quicken,
renew, sanctify and preserve them all unto Eternal Life. (4.) If it be an
everlasting Covenant, well ordered in all things, and sure, for the Salvation
of all that are given unto him, it being made upon the unchangeable Decree and
Counsel of God. (5.) If the Execution of all things that are required of
Believers, in order to their Interest in this Covenant, and their perseverance
to the End, be put into the Hands of the Holy Ghost to work in them, and for
them. (6.) If the Covenant is confirmed by such infallible Witness; if it be
ratified and confirmed by the Blood of Christ. (7.) If it is also confirmed by
God's Promise and Holy Oath. (8.) If the Earnest of Salvation is given to them.
(9.) And they are sealed unto the Day of Redemption by the Holy Spirit. (10.)
And if it is an absolute Covenant like that of Noah: Then they all, and every
one of them, shall certainly be saved, and none of them can fall away so as
eternally to perish. But all this is true, and evidently so, therefore they
shall all be saved.


No more at this Time.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon X.
BRETHREN, I am upon the Proof and Demonstration of the Doctrine which I raised
from our Text, ( viz.) That none of the Sheep of Christ, or Saints of God, can
so fall away as eternally to perish.

The last time I spoke to the fourth Argument, which was taken from the Nature
of the Covenant of Grace.

I shall proceed to the next Argument.

Fifthly, They who are the Sheep of Christ, Believers in Christ, 5th. Arg.
Taken from their being the Children of God.
or his Elect Ones, cannot finally fall away, because they are the Children of
God, begotten of God, and born of God.

Two things I shall do in prosecuting this Argument. First, Prove that all
Believers are begotten and born of God. Secondly, Show you how it does appear
from hence that they can never finally fall away, and eternally perish.


First, That they are begotten of God, appears from several Scriptures; Of his
own Will beg at he us with the Word of Truth, etc. Jam. 1. 18.
Merely by his own Grace, as the original Cause; with the Word by the Spirit,
as the instrumental Means. Spiritual Generation is the Work of God, the Product
of the Will of God, and not of the Will of Man: Which were born not of Blood,
nor of the Will of the Joh. 1. 13.
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. Not of Blood, as in natural
Generation, or not of the Blood of Abraham; Grace and Regeneration being not
the Product of the State or Faith of believing Parents: This was the carnal
Boast of the Jews, We have Abraham to our Father. Not of the Power of Man's
Will, that cannot Mat. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
produce the New Creature in himself, nor in a Child or Brother: If it was in
the Power of a godly Man or godly Minister to convert or to regenerate his
Child, his Wife, or his Brother, would he let them perish? But alas, alas, this
is out of Man's reach, out of his Power, he cannot renew himself: A Child may
as easily beget it self in the Womb before it self was, as a Man can form
Christ in his own Soul, or regenerate himself; it is God that does it, the Holy
Spirit begets us: Except a Man be born of Water and of the John 3. 5.
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and every one that loves him 1 John 5. 1.
that begets, loves him also that is begotten of him. Whosoever has that
efficacious Soul, uniting Soul, transforming Soul, renewing Sinkilling Grace of
Faith, is born of God. It Is not a bare believing Jesus is the Christ, no, but
such a Faith that works by Love, or the Faith of God's Elect; For ye are all
the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ. Faith, saving Faith, the Faith of
the Operation Gal. 3. 26.
of God, produces this glorious Effect, through the Spirit, in the Soul. From
all which Scriptures it evidently appears, that all Believers, all the Saints
are the Children of God, begotten, and born of God.

Quest. Well what of this? (some perhaps may say) How does this prove they
cannot fall away so as to perish?

2 dly. I answer, This is my second Work, and you will soon see how forcible
the Argument is from hence to prove, that none of them can perish. See what our
Blessed Savior says, That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that which
is born of the Spirit is John 3. 6.
Spirit. That which is born of corrupt Nature, or is the Product of the Flesh,
is Flesh, or of the same Nature of that which did beget it: As it is said of
Adam, he begat a Son in his own likeness; Genesis 5. 3.
that is, a depraved, sinful and mortal Child: The Flesh brings forth Effects
proportionable to the Cause. It Is thus in the first Birth: But if by Flesh you
will have our Savior intend the product of Man's natural Abilities, or the
Effects of the highest Improvements of his natural Light, Understanding, Will,
etc. why then it follows still, that a Man purely natural can produce nothing
but natural Operations; for nothing in operation exceeds the Virtue or
Excellency of that Cause which influenceth it: So that no Man can by his
Abilities, however improved, produce any divine or spiritual Operation; and
this shows that Man must be born of the Spirit, that becomes or is made truly
spiritual and sit for the Kingdom of Heaven. And says our Savior, what is
born of the Spirit, is Spirit, or is of the same Nature with the Holy Spirit;
that is, Spiritual, Holy, Immortal; since every Creature begets its own
Nature, Qualities, and Image: Such as is the Cause, such is the Effect. Thus it
is in Generation, and thus it is in Regeneration; it must be from a Divine,
from a spiritual Cause, and not a Natural, that the Image of God is formed in
the Soul. The Flesh cannot bring forth an Heavenly Babe: Can Corruption produce
or be the Cause of Regeneration? Can a Worm, or an Ant bring forth a Man,
sooner than Flesh? Or can any Man under Heaven beget, or form, and bring forth
the New Creature in the Soul; which is called the forming of Christ, or the
Image of God in us? But now pray consider, that such as is the Nature or
Quality of the Begetter, such is the Nature of that which is begotten of him;
therefore since the New Creature is begotten by the Holy Spirit, it must
partake of the Nature of the Spirit. Christ says, it is Spirit, it is
spiritual, immortal or incorruptible. Hence the Apostle Peter says, Believers
partake of the Divine Nature; Whereby are given unto us exceeding great 2 Pet.
1. 4.
and precious Promises, that by these we might be partakers of the Divine
Nature. Every Child of God is begotten by the Spirit through the Promise, as
Isaac was: I will come, and Sarah shall have a Son. Gal. 4. 23.
Compare this with that in 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible
Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God that lives and abides for
ever. Pray observe it, which lives and abides for ever. Mortal Seed in
Generation begets and brings forth a mortal Babe, a corruptible Child; but
the Word and Spirit of God, begets and brings forth an immortal or an
incorruptible Babe: Such is the Babe of Grace, or Child of God; I speak of the
New Creature, or the regenerated Part in Man.

From hence let me draw this Argument, viz.

Arg. 1. That which is begotten and born of, and is brought forth by the Spirit
of God, or of immortal and incorruptible Seed, is an immortal or incorruptible
Babe: But the New Creature in the Soul of the Regenerate, is begotten and born
of, or brought forth by the Spirit of God; therefore the New Creature in the
Soul of the Regenerate is an immortal or an incorruptible Babe.

Now if it be immortal or incorruptible, it can never die, but lives and
abides for ever; and this the Apostle shows and affirms: Therefore it is
impossible such should fall away, or suffer a Spiritual Death here, or an
Eternal Death in Hell hereafter.

2 dly, My second Argument from hence is this, Because the Child of a natural
Parent cannot cease to be his Child whilst he lives, or Life abides in him;
this every Man must grant: True, he may prove a Rebellious and a Disobedient
Child, but still he is his Child, and the Man that begat him is his Father,
that Relation cannot be lost; nay, and that Nature which the Child derived from
his Father, continues, and must continue, he is of his Flesh and Blood still.
Even so it is here, and impossible it is that it should be otherwise, that Man
or Woman, whose Soul is begotten and born of God, cannot cease to be a Child of
God, though he may prove disobedient to his Heavenly Father, and grieve and
dishonor him, but yet nevertheless he is a Child of God still: and God who by
his Spirit in a spiritual manner begot him, is his Father; and that blessed
Relation continues; and that holy Nature or Seed of Grace which he derived from
God, continues and must abide also in him, as long as that Life he has in him,
as a Child of God, does remain; and that Life is, as I have proved by the
former Argument, Eternal or Immortal.

3 dly, Besides I have made it most evident by my former Arguments, that God in
the Covenant of Grace, and through the Suretiship of Jesus Christ, has
provided that his Children shall never so rebel against him, as finally to
depart: I will put my Fear Jer. 32. 40. Chapter 3. 14.
into their Hearts, and they shall not depart from me. Though they may be
backsliding Children, yet God says, he is married to them, which denotes that
intimate Union there is between the Lord Jesus and them, according to another
Metaphor.

4 thly. None of those who were truly Regenerate, or indeed the Children of
God, as being begotten and born of him, though some of them grievously sinned
against him, were ever cast out so as to cease to be God's Children. Where is
he that can contradict this, by showing some that were indeed Children begotten
of God, who have by their Disobedience ceased from being his Children, or never
were restored after they sinned and fell? Who fell worse than David and Peter?
I have before clearly proved, though they may sin, and fall, yet they shall
rise again.

Arg. 2. If all those that were the Children of God, who sinned, were restored,
and not one Instance can be given of any one of this sort, i. e. that were
truly regenerated, that sinned, fell, and rose no more; then none of the true
Children of God can so sin, so fall, as eternally to perish. But all those that
were the Children of God, who sinned, were restored; and not one Instance can
be given of any one of this sort, i. e. that were truly regenerated, that
sinned, and fell, and rose no more; therefore none of the true Children of God
can so sin, so fall, as eternally to perish.

5 thly. Those that are the Children of God, begotten by him, cannot sin, so as
eternally to perish and lose. Eternal Life; because all that are his Children,
are Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. This I grant is not always true
of the Children of earthly Parents, or earthly Princes, for they are oft-times
disinherited; but it is otherwise here, they are all born Heirs, their being
regenerated and united to Christ, gives them a sure and undoubted Right and
Title to Eternal Life. The Holy Ghost positively asserts this very thing; And
if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. Romans 8. 17.


6 thly. It is because the Children of God are the Seed of Christ, which the
Father said Christ should see; He shall see his Seed: Nay, the Father assured
him, that his Seed should endure for ever. Isa. 53. Psalm. 89. 29.
And they are all given to him, and Christ will say at the last Day, Lo here am
I, and the Children that thou have given me, none of them are lost.

7 thly. I argue yet further upon this Argument, from that blessed How
Believers may be said not to commit Sin.
Text in the first Epistle of John; Whosoever is born of God, does not commit
Sin, for the Seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God. I am very much mistaken if I have not my 1 John 3. 9.
Argument here in express Terms: Evident it is, the Apostle means not, that
they do not sin at all; that is evident because he elsewhere says, If we say we
have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth 1 John 1. 8.
is not in us. James also says, in many things we offend all; neither is there,
as Solomon declares, a just Man upon the Earth that does Eccles. 7. 20.
Good, and sins not. Therefore that is not the sense of the Text, I will
give you my understanding of it.

1. So far as he is born of God, he does not commit Sin, or so he sins not;
that is, the New Creature does not sin, that never yields to Sin, but evermore
wars against it, and resists it: This is that which Paul calls the Law of his
Mind, it is the renewed or Romans 7. 25.
regenerated Part, or it is that which is born of God, that lusts against the
Flesh, or wars against it.

2. He does not, nay, he cannot sin as others do: this appears by that I
mentioned last, because of that new Nature or blessed Seed he has received.

3. He cannot live in a Course of Sin, or make a Trade of Sins He cannot live
in a custom of Sinning, because all evil Habits are broken by Divine Grace in
him. That Man that lives in any way of Sin, the old Habit of Lying, Pride,
Lusts, Drunkenness, Covetousness, or any other Sin being not broken, is not
born of God; for it is impossible a Child of God should so sin, i. e. live in a
course and practice of committing of known Sins, or in a constant and continual
omission of known Duties: Though he may fall into gross Sins, as David and
other Children of God did, yet they continue not in a Course of such Sins that
once possibly they were overcome by; nay, be sure they set a greater Watch
against such Sins, and hate them rather more than all other Sins, because
thereby they greatly dishonored God, and wounded their own Souls.

4. Therefore Sin is not his Way, or Walk; he does not commit Sin, as to walk
after it; he walks not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. He may step into
the Way of Sin, but he Romans 8. 1.
soon steps out of it again, whereas others walk in that Way every Day; it is
the high Way, the common Road of the Ungodly.

5. He does not commit Sin with Liking, Allowance, and Love. Though the fleshly
Part may like, love, and allow of it, yet he finds another Part in him that
hates it: What I hate, that do I. And hence it is the Apostle says, It is not
I that does it, but Sin Romans 7. 15.
that dwells in me. I am against it, Grace has the upper Hand in my Soul: I am
for the Law of God, I give my Voice for Christ; I, that is my renewed part,
that is the I he speaks of.

6. He cannot sin unto Death; sin so as to fall, finally fall, and perish for
ever. It Is evident that this is intended here, though there may be a Truth in
the other respects. If any Man see his 1 John 5. 16.
Brother sin a Sin which is not unto Death, he shall ask, and he shall give him
Life for them that sin not unto Death. There is a Sin unto Death; I do not say
he shall pray for it. The Elect sin, but not unto Death; there is Pardon for
all their Sins; if they ask, their Sins shall be forgiven them: but there is a
Sin unto Death, a falling into Heresy or Debauchery, or such an Apostasy that
shall never be forgiven; but thus they cannot commit Sin that are born of God,
so as to perish. Which indeed the Apostle in the same Chapter shows to be his
meaning, All Unrighteousness is Sin; and V. 16, 17.
there is a Sin not unto Death. [Mind his next words] We know that whosoever is
born of God, sins not. He clearly shows us what he intends by sinning not,
namely, he sins not unto Death; but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself that the Wicked one touches him not: This is the great Happiness and
Advantage of the Children Ver. 18.
of God, who partake of his Holy Nature, they are furnished with a
self-preserving Principle; the Seed remains, they shall never lose their New
Nature, therefore cannot sin unto Death: For whatsoever is born of God,
overcomes the World; the World in all 1 John 5. 4.
its Snares, Sins, Allurements and Temptations whatsoever; that is, they shall
at last overcome, Because he that is in them, is stronger 1 John 4. 4.
than he that is in the World.

6 thly, The very Relation of Children secures them, and fully shows they
cannot, shall not sin, fall, and perish for ever: for what Father, a dear and
tender Father will suffer any one of his Children to be torn into Pieces (and
cruelly devoured) before his Face, if he be able to preserve and deliver it? Or
should he suffer it, would not all say that he was a cruel and unmerciful
Father, one that had no Love, no natural Affections to his poor Child? If
therefore any one Child of God falls into the Enemy's Hand, I mean, into Sin's
Hand, or Satan's Hand, and is torn into pieces, or is destroyed and ruined for
ever; it must be, (1.) Either for want of Love in God to that poor Child of
his: (2.) Or else for want of Power and Ability in God, he being not strong or
able enough to save his distressed Child out of the Hands of those cruel
Enemies. Or, (3.) For want of Care and Watchfulness in God, from whence the
Enemy took an Advantage, and destroyed his Child that was begotten and born of
him.


Now it cannot be that God wants Love to all, or any one of his Children; we
have showed you, that he loves them with an everlasting, infinite, and
inconceivable Love, such a Love as nothing can separate his Children from it:
and to say he either wants Power to save them, or Care and Faithfulness, is
Blasphemy. O what is the Love, the Care and Faithfulness of God? Besides, he
has committed them into Christ's Hand, to keep and preserve them, as my Text
holds forth: And can any think that Christ has not received a Charge to keep
them from the Danger of Sin, that they be not finally lost thereby, as well as
from any other Enemy? Or do you think Christ will fail in his Care and
Faithfulness, who is their great Shepherd, Sponsor, Surety, or Trustee?
Moreover, if he should (as I shall hereafter show you) lose one Child, he loses
one of the Members of his own Mystical Body.

Now from the whole, let me draw this general Argument; and so conclude with
this: (1.) If every true Believer is begotten and born of God: The general
Argument.
(2.) If they partake of his Holy and Divine Nature: (3.) If Children cannot
cease being Children, or that Relation continues as long as Life continues,
however disobedient the Child may be; and if it be thus with the Children of
God, who are begot and born of him, or by his Spirit, that they cannot cease
being his Children, nor lose that Divine Nature they derived from him in
Regeneration: (4.) If God has provided so well for his own Children in the
Covenant, that they shall not depart from him: (5.) If no Child that was born
of God, did ever perish that we read of: (6.) If they are the Children of God,
or Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ:


(7.) If they cannot sin unto Death: Then no true Believer can so sin and fall
away as eternally to perish.

But all these things affirmed, are true, certainly true; therefore no true
Believer can so sin and fall away as eternally to perish.

Brethren, I shall apply this, and pass to the sixth Argument.

APPLICATION.

Infer. 1. From hence we infer, that those Men who affirm that such who are the
Children of God, begotten and born of the Spirit, may perish, are strangely
beclouded; for they must suppose that a Child may utterly lose the Nature and
Relation of a Child, and degenerate so far, as to become a Dog, a Swine, etc.
which is impossible in Nature, and much more in Grace: for as none but the
Almighty Power of the Infinite God could change the Soul; so it is impossible
for any Diabolical Power to turn or change that Holy Nature again; and that not
only because the Divine Nature and Image of God is such in self, but also by
reason of the Design and Purpose of God, in and by Jesus Christ in our
Restoration, that being such, that it cannot be lost any more without the
highest dishonor to God, and a frustration of his Eternal Purpose and Counsel,
which was to destroy the Works of the Devil. If any should object, that Adam
had the Image of God in him before he fell, and lost it. I answer, He was the
Son of God by Creation only, not by Grace; he was not begotten by the Holy
Spirit, nor did he stand as we do, in Christ.

Infer. 2. This may also therefore inform all Believers, that they are in a
most happy and safe Condition, because they are born of God, and brought by
Grace and Regeneration into an unchangeble State.

Exhort. O see that you are the Children of God, begotten of God; for if so,
though you are but Babes, yet you are out of Eternal Danger.

Let me give you, Brethren, here a few Marks or Characters of Babes in Christ,
or of a Child of God.

1. Babes have all the Parts and Lineaments of a Man, if it be a perfect Birth:
So a Babe in Christ has all the Essentials of a true Christian; he has all
the Parts and Lineaments of the New Creature. There is a Formation of God's
Image, or a gracious Work of the Spirit in every Faculty of the Soul, and a
partaking of every Grace; though at the first forming it is not come to full
Growth and Perfection: there is not only Light in the Understanding,
Convictions in the Conscience, but the Will is subjected to the Will of God,
and Power of Divine Grace; and the Affections are renewed and changed also to
love, as God loves; and to hate, as God hates.

2. A Babe partakes of the Nature of the Father that begot him: So does a Child
of God partake of his Divine Nature; he is after God created in Righteousness
and true Holiness. That which is Ephesians. 4. 24. John 3. 6.
born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

3. It is observed, that Babes come into the World crying: So a Babe in Christ,
or one born again, comes into a State of Grace praying; Behold he prays. And
though it be not universally true in Nature, Acts 9.
yet it is so in Grace, always so; he that prays not, is not renewed, nor born
again.

4. A Babe or Child newborn, desires the Milk of its Mother's Breast: So such
who are born of God, desire after the sincere Milk of the Word, or the heavenly
and pure Doctrine of the Gospel, that they 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
may grow thereby.

5. A dear Child loves and honors his Father who begot him: So every true
Child of God does love and honor God: If I be a Father, where is mine Honor?
Mal. 1. 6.


6. A Child is grieved when the Father is offended, and will take care that he
does not displease him, if a dear Child: So does every Child of God mourn when
God is offended; and also takes special care and heed he displeases him not.

7. A dear Child loves all his Brethren and Sisters: So every one that is born
of God, does not only love him that begat, but also all those 1 John 5. 1.
who are begotten of him.

8. A dear Child will strive to follow and imitate his Father in all his
Virtues: So a Child of God follows God, imitates God in all his imitable
Perfections; Be ye followers of God as dear Children. Ephesians. 5. 1.


3. Reproof. How does this tend to reprehend the Enemies of God's People, who
abuse, reproach, backbite, nay, persecute them? How will they stand in the
Judgment-Day, when Christ will say, what ye did to this and that Child of mine,
you did it unto me? He that touches you, (says Jehovah) touches the Apple
Zech. 2. 8.
of my Eye.

4. This greatly raises the Honor of Believers: What greater Dignity can be
conferred on us, than to be begotten and born of God? This is more than to be
Adopted Sons, we are born of God, partake of his Divine Nature: Behold what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God -- 1 John 3. 1, 2.
Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, etc. If David thought it no small Honor
to be the Son-in-Law to an Earthly King; what an Honor has God conferred upon
his Saints!

5. And lastly, You that are Saints, read your Privilege, If Children, then
Heirs.

But no more at this Time.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon XI.
I Closed last Day with the fifth Argument.

Sixthly, I shall now proceed to my next Argument, to prove, That none of
Christ's Sheep can so fall away as eternally to perish. And that shall be taken
from the Nature of that Divine, Spiritual and The Sixth Argument taken from the
Soul's Union with Christ.
Mystical Union that there is between every true Believer, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

By the way;

Let it be considered, that this Union by the in-dwelling of the Holy Spirit,
is not a Personal Union, that is impossible; he does not assume our Nature, and
so prevent our Personality, which (as one observes) would make us one Person
with himself: But he dwells in our Persons, keeping his own, and leaving us our
Dr. Owen.
Personality indefinitely distinct: But it is a Spiritual Union, a Mysterious
and Mystical Union, more to be admired, than undertaken fully to be defined by
any Man under Heaven. Many Debates there have been about this Union amongst
Learned Men, some carry it too high, and some too low; for though it be not a
Personal Union, yet it is more than a Union in Love and Affection, or in
Principle, in Design and Interest, which may be between one Friend and another.

First, It is such a strong Union intensively, that Christ and a regenerate Man
become one Spirit: He that is joined unto the Lord, is 1 Cor. 6. 17.
one Spirit: One Spirit (says Reverend Charnock) as if they had but one Soul
in two Bodies. What the Spirit does in Christ, it does also in a Believer,
according to the Capacity of the Soul: The same Spirit which was the immediate
Conveyer of Grace to the Humane Nature of Christ, is so to us; Christ has an
Essential Holiness in respect of his Godhead, but a Derivative Holiness as Man:
and this Derivative Holiness proceeded from the Spirit's dwelling in him
without measure, which we have in our Measures: And by virtue of this Union, by
the same Spirit whereby we become one Spirit with Christ; not only that Grace
which is in us, and in the greatest Apostle, is the same; but that Grace which
is in us, and in our Blessed Mediator the Man Christ Jesus, are of the same
Nature and Original: As the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Stars, are
the same, but they differ in Degrees, not essentially. And as we say of Souls,
Animae sunt pares dignitate, says Charnock; though the Actions are not the
same, because of the indisposition of the Organs, and the predominancy of some
particular Humor. It Is the same Spirit in Christ and a Believer, as it is the
same Soul in dignity, which is in an Infant and a Man of most refined Parts. It
is more here, for it is the same Spirit in respect of his Person, which makes
Christ very near of Kin to us; this Spirit must either desert Christ or us,
before this Union can be dissolved: Not Christ, for he had it in the World not
in Measures, and he is yet anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows:
Not us, because the Promise of Christ cannot be broken. This being the
Top-stone of the Comfort of Believers, in sending this Comforter that he may
abide with us for ever. Evident it is, that it is such a Union that Believers
are said to partake of the Divine Nature; that the Holy Spirit is promised to
them, and in a spiritual manner is united to them, and dwells and abides in
them, and that for ever, cannot be denied. Christ shows us, that this Union
arises from our spiritual eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood: He
that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. But
when some were offended, and could not Joh. 6. 56.
see how this could be, he said unto them, ver. 63. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing; (it is not such eating as the
Idolatrous Papists dream of) it is by the Holy Spirit, by the indwelling of the
quickening Spirit, whereby we have a real participation of Christ: He is in us
by his Spirit, (as a Vital Principle, changing our Hearts, and working in us
his own Holy Image, infusing Gracious Dispositions and Sacred Habits in the
Soul) and we are in him by Faith, in a gracious, hidden, and mystical manner;
and this Union cannot be dissolved.

Secondly, This Union must needs be most intimate, near and strong, if we
consider by what Metaphors it is set forth in God's Word.

1. It is a Marriage-Union; like as a Man and his Wife are said to be one
Flesh, so he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. No Man ever hated his
own Flesh, but nourished and cherished it as the Lord the Church. He that
loves his Wife, loves himself; a Man and his Wife is but one Mystical Self:
and what is in Nature as to the Perfection of it, is much more eminently in
Christ. Now since God has fitted to our Nature a Care of our Body, this Care
be sure is much more in Christ, when the Apostle shows what the Love of the
Husband should be unto the Wife; and that a Man leaves both Father and Mother,
and cleaves to his Wife; and they two shall be one Flesh: Says he, This is a
great Mystery; but I speak Ephesians. 5. 31, 32.
concerning Christ and his Church; or of Christ and every believing Soul. The
Union between Husband and Wife is near; ay but Death dissolves this Union,
because they can be united, or be one no longer than both live: But Christ
lives for ever, and the Soul of a Believer lives for ever: Nay, Believers have
Eternal Life in them, and they shall never die; therefore it follows this Union
abides for ever: He has betrothed his Saints, his Spouse unto himself for
ever. And can any then dissolve this Marriage-Contract and Conjugal Union? Is
Christ able to preserve his Souse, or the Soul that is united unto him? Is it
in the Power of his Hands? Pray, Brethren, consider it well. Will any of you
that have a Spouse, a Wife that you dearly love, suffer her to be torn into
pieces, and basely murdered before your Eyes, if you could prevent it? And do
any think that Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, Power over Sin,
the World, the Devil, yea, over Hell and Death; will he, I say, ever suffer his
Spouse to be destroyed and murdered by Sin, World, or Devil? Strange! did he
die for her, and has he married her, and made her one Spirit with himself; and
will he leave her to conflict, to fight and war with an Enemy that he knows is
too strong and mighty for her, and not come in, rush in to her assistance, to
save and rescue her from such bloody, cruel, and barbarous Enemies? No doubt
but he will rise up with Indignation and Jealousy, to save every Soul that is
so related and united to him.

Thirdly, This Spiritual Union between Christ and every believing Soul, is set
forth by that near and intimate Union which there is between the Natural Body
and every Member thereof: The Head and Members make but one Body; even so
Christ is the Head of his Saints, and they being many, are all Members of that
one Body. Christ and all Believers make but one Mystical Christ: Even as the
Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that 1 Cor. 12. 12.
one Body, being many, are one Body; so is Christ, that is, Christ Mystical.
Now this Relation of Head and Members, I say, holds forth this Spiritual Union
between Christ and every Believer: We are Members of his Body, of his Flesh,
and of his Bone. And it is Ephesians. 5. 30.
from their Head, Jesus Christ, that every Member receives Divine and Saving
Influences of Life, Strength, Government and Guidance, as the Apostle shows;
From whom the whole Body fitly joined together and compacted, by that which
every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the
edifying of it self in Love. Our Union with Christ brings us into a fixed
Settlement, and secures us from all Fears or danger of miscarrying, let all
Enemies do what they can. Can the Members be lost that have such a Head? Our
Union with Christ cannot consist in the communication of any thing unto us as
Members from him the Head: But it must be in that which constitutes him and us
in this Relation, (says a Reverend Minister) he is our Head antecedently in
order of Nature, to any communication of Grace from him as a Head, yet not
antecedent to our Union it self. Herein then consists the Union of Head and
Members; that tho they are many, and have many Offices, Places, and
Dependencies, yet there is but one living, quickening Soul in Head and Members:
The same Life that is in the Head, is in the Body and in every Member thereof
in particular; and he that offers Violence to one Member, offers Violence to
the Body and the Head also: And as one living Soul makes the natural Head and
Members to be but one Man, one Body; so one quickening Spirit dwelling in
Christ, and in his Members, gives them their Mystical Union, and makes them but
one Body: As the first Man Adam was made a living Soul, so the last 1 Cor. 15.
45.
Man Adam was made a quickening Spirit. It is he that quickens by his Spirit, or
conveys a vital Principle to all his, by which they live spiritually, as from
Adam all his live naturally: Because I live, ye shall live also. So long as
there is Life in Christ the Head, there shall be Life in the Members; because
that Life that is communicated to the Head without measure as Mediator, was to
this very End, that it might be communicated to every believing Soul that is
united to him.

Now then if it be thus, if this be the Nature of the Soul's Union with Jesus
Christ, that it is set out and opened to us by the Union that there is between
the Body natural and its Members; then I infer,

1. That by the Life that is in the Head, the Members live; and because of that
Life that is in him, they cannot die: it was by that Spirit that is in him that
we were first quickened; and Life is in us, and shall be continued to us.

2. I also infer, That if Christ be able, or can do it, he will prevent his
losing of any one of his Members: And for any one to say it is not in his
Power, is Blasphemy; and to say he can, and will not, is a like Evil to assert,
because it renders Christ less tender and careful of his Spiritual Members,
than we are of the Members of our Natural Body. Which of us would suffer his
Hand or Foot to be torn from us, nay, a Toe or Finger, if we could prevent it?

3. Furthermore I infer, That all the Members of Christ's Mystical Body, as
they were all given to him, so they are all known by him; they are so many
Members numerically, and no more, as it is in the Body natural. In God's Book
are all his Members written, as David speaks of the Members of his Body; which
some Ps. 139. 16.
conclude refers to Christ chiefly, and to the Members of his Mystical Body.

4. I infer, That if Jesus Christ loses one Member of his Mystical Body, then
his Body will be an imperfect Body, a maimed Body; for so we know it is in the
natural Body, though the loss be but of one of the least Members thereof.

3 dly, The Union between Christ and Believers, is set forth by the Union of a
Tree and its Branches: Thou being a wild Olive Tree, Romans 11. 17.
were grafted in amongst them, and with them partakest of the Root and Fatness
of the Olive Tree. Now the Branches have a close and near Union with the Tree;
and being grafted into it, partake of the Juice and Fatness of the Root, the
Tree and Branches being nourished thereby: There is the same fructifying and
fatning Virtue in the one that is in the other, only with this difference, in
the Root and Tree it is originally, in the Boughs or Branches by way of
Communication. This is brought by the Holy Ghost to open the Union of Christ
and his Saints, both he and they are partakers of the same Fruit-bearing
Spirit; he that dwells in them, dwells in him also, only it is in him (as to
them) originally, in them by communication from him. Take a Cyon, a Plant, a
Graft, fix it Dr. Owen.
to the Tree with all the Art you can, and bind it on as close as possible, yet
it is not united to the Tree, until the Sap that is in the Tree be communicated
to it; which Communication states the Union: Even so and in like manner let a
Man be bound to Jesus Christ by all Bonds of visible Profession imaginable; yet
unless the Holy Spirit be in him to unite him to Christ, unless he has that
Divine Sap and Life communicated to him, he has no real Union with him.

Object. But does not our Savior say, Every Branch in me that bears not
Fruit, he takes away. And again, If a Man abides not Joh. 15. 2, 6.
in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered, and Men gather them and
cast them into the Fire, and they are burned. Does not this prove, that such
who have real Union with Christ may eternally perish?

Answ. I know this is brought as a grand Proof for final falling away: But to
give an answer hereunto.

1. Some tell you that there is no need to translate the words so, but that it
may as well be translated, Every Branch not bringing forth Fruit in me; that
is, that have not real Union in me: For though there can be no true Fruit
brought forth without real and saving Union with Christ, yet Men may bring
forth some kind of Fruit, and such that looks like good Fruit; it is called
Fruit: He may pray, hear the Word, and lead an honest, moral, and sober Life;
yea, and give to the Poor, and yet not bring forth this Fruit in Christ, or
from a real Union he has with him: for all Acts of an External Profession in
Religion, may be brought forth without any Divine Principle of Grace, or being
rooted and grafted into Christ by the Holy Ghost; and such a one the good
Husbandman will discover, for this Man's Fruit will not continue, but wither;
Having not root in himself, but endures for a while: for when Tribulation and
Mat: 13. 21.
Persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended. Evident it
is, that all that received the Seed into good Ground, or were sincere
Christians, brought forth Fruit to Everlasting Life, though not all the like
Quantity. But,

2. Let it be considered, that there is a twofold being in Christ spoken of in
God's Word; as Christ also is compared to a Vine under a twofold Consideration.

(1.) There is a Spiritual, Real and Invisible being in Christ, by Faith and
the indwelling of the Holy Spirit; and these are grafted into Christ the Vine,
spiritually considered, and so have that true Union with him of which we speak.

(2.) There is also an External or Visible being in Christ, by an outward
profession: Hence those that are baptized in his Name, are said to be baptized
into Christ. Paul says of some, that they were in Christ before me. How did he
know who were savingly, invisibly in Christ? No doubt he speaks of their
visible being in him, by that Profession they made of the Gospel, and by their
being baptized; and in this respect Vine is to be taken for the Church, which
sometimes bears Christ's Name. Now evident it is, many that thus are in Christ,
that is, by a Profession and Sacramental Implantation, may bring forth some
sort of Fruit for a while; but for want of a real Union with Christ, they
having not a Supply of Grace, and Divine Sap from the Root, they abide not in
Christ, that is, in a visible Profession, but are cast forth as withered
Branches, and at last will be cast into the Fire. But now whosoever brings
forth true Spiritual Fruit, who is visibly in Christ the Vine, him will God
purge that he may bring forth more Fruit. And that this is the true meaning of
this Text, is plain, if we consider what Christ says of all his Elect Ones,
(as hinted to you before) viz. That he had not only chosen them, but ordained
them, that they John 15. 16.
should go and bring forth Fruit, and that their Fruit shall remain: And this
he speaks to his Disciples soon after in this very Chapter, to comfort them,
lest they might fear miscarrying, and become like such who are withered
Branches. And this is sufficient to remove this Objection.

Thirdly, The Union of the Soul with Christ, as to the excellent, firm, and
abiding Nature thereof, is further demonstrated and strengthened, by the
consideration of the Union of Christ to the Father, and them, as it is
expressed by our blessed Lord; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
perfect in One, (...), into one: First, the Father in Christ, the Fullness of
the Godhead being in him bodily; then, Christ in Believers: so that from that
fullness of Grace, Strength, etc. that the Father communicated to the Son as
Mediator, by virtue of his Union with him, (and which is communicable to us)
all his Members do receive from Christ by virtue of their Union with him. Our
Lord prayed, in Verse 20, That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, etc. Now though it be hard to
understand the Nature of this Union in some Respects, yet this is easy to
comprehend, viz. that the Union between the Father and Christ is an inseparable
Union, it is an abiding Union, or it is a Union that cannot be dissolved. Why
then let us consider, since Christ prayed the Father, and was heard herein,
that all that the Father had given him, might be one, as He and the Father was
one: What can be a greater Argument to prove, that that Union which is between
Christ and Believers is an inseparable, an abiding, and an undissolvable Union?
The Union here does not respect that Essential Union that is between the Father
and the Son, but in respect of Christ, as he is our Head and Mediator; in which
respect the Father poured into him of his abundant Fullness, that so we having a
firm, perfect, and settled Union with him, might in a glorious manner receive
from him, and be supplied with all things we need. And Christ being the Medium
of our Union with God, both the Father's Union with Christ, and Christ's Union
with us, are for the final Perfection, and completing that Glorious Work he
has begun in the Souls of his People, until we all come to be with him where
he is, and behold his Glory. If therefore we consider the Nature of this Union,
and the Prayer of Christ, that it might be perfected and abide undissolvable,
it must follow that it is impossible for any Soul that is thus united to the
Lord Jesus, ever so to fall away as eternally to perish.

Fourthly, By this Spiritual Union with Christ, we partake of his Blessed Image
or Divine Nature: So that the Head and Members are of one kind, and not like
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, a Head of Gold, and a Belly and Thighs of Brass, and
Legs of Iron, and Feet and Toes, part of Iron and part of Clay: This would be
to make the Mystical Body of Christ a Monster, an Immortal Head, an
Incorruptible Head, and a Mortal Body and Members, that may corrupt, putrify
and become loathsome. No, this cannot be; such as is the Head (as to Nature and
Quality) such is the Body, and every Member in particular, a living Head and
living Members; a Head of pure Gold, and Members of pure Gold; also a Head that
cannot die, and therefore the Members cannot die. For,

Fifthly, It is a Vital Union, as you have heard, that is to say, the same Life
that is in Christ, is in all Believers: And as it is in the natural Body, the
Members have not only Life in the Head, but Life in themselves also; and so
long as there is Life in the Head, there shall be Life in the Members, so it is
here: And this must therefore be for ever; for by the same parity of Reason
that one Member may die or corrupt, the whole Body may die and corrupt also.
But Christ is our Life, and the Spirit, which is the Bond of this Union,
communicates Life to every Soul in whom he resides and dwells; and the Holy
Spirit has taken up his abode in Believers for ever: He that has the Spirit,
has the Son; and he that has the Son, has Life. -- I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in Gal. 2. 20, 21.
me. From hence I argue;

Arg. 1. If he that believes in Christ, or that has Union with Christ, is a
Part or Limb of Christ Mystical; then not one Soul that believes in Christ, and
has real Union with him, can eternally perish. Shall a Member of Christ perish
or be torn from his Body! Brethren, was it Christ's Natural Body only that was
concerned in that Prophecy, A Bone of him shall not be broken? Or did Christ
John 19. 36.
take more care of the Members of his Natural Body, than of the Members of his
Mystical Body?

Arg. 2. If Christ's Love to, and Care of the Members of his Mystical Body, be
greater than any Man's Love to, or Care of the Members of his Natural Body can
be; then not one of Christ's Sheep or Saints can eternally perish: But his Love
to, and Care of the Members of his Mystical Body is far greater than theirs can
be; therefore it follows, no Believer can ever perish.

Arg. 3. If the Union between Christ and Believers be a Marriage-Union, and
that those that Christ does espouse, and bring into that Relation to himself,
he does espouse for ever; if it is a Union like that Union that is between God
the Father, and Christ as Mediator; if it be an indissolvable Union, a Union
which God nor Christ will ever break, nor Sin, Satan, nor no Enemy can ever
break; then not one Soul that is truly and really united to Christ, can ever so
fall away as eternally to perish. But all this we have proved to be true,
therefore not one Soul that has true and real Union with Christ, can fall away
so as eternally to perish.

Arg. 4. If the Love of God, and the Love of Christ abides firm for ever to
every Soul that has Union with Christ, which is the Spring, efficient and
moving Cause of this Union; then not one of them who have Union with Christ can
perish. But we have proved that the Love of the Father and Son abides firm for
ever to every Soul that has Union with Christ; therefore not one of them can
perish for ever.

Arg. 5. If Christ died, rose again, and ascended into Heaven, as the Head and
Representative of all those that were given unto him, and have Union with him,
then, as sure as he is now in Heaven, they shall every Soul of them come
thither: But this hereafter I shall fully prove, and clearly (God assisting)
make appear when I come to speak to the next General Argument.

Arg. 6. If the Union between Christ and Believers is so strong and firm a
Union intensively, that Christ and they become one Spirit so, that as if there
was but one Spirit in Christ and in them; or what the Spirit is to Christ, and
does to Christ as Mediator without measure, he is to every Believer, and does
for every Believer in measure, according to each Believer's Necessity and
Capacity; then this Union secures every Believer from falling so, as to perish
for ever. But this we have proved is so; the Spirit must either desert Christ
(as you heard) or them, if ever the Union be broken; not Christ, that all will
say is impossible; not Believers, because of the blessed Union they have with
him; and also, because Christ has promised that the Spirit shall abide in them
for ever. Nay, this is also the absolute Promise of the Father to the Son in
the Covenant of Grace: And as for me, this Isa. 29. 21.
is my Covenant with them, says Jehovah, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my
Words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out
of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed, from
henceforth and for ever.

Arg. 7. By virtue of this Sacred Union, because Christ lives, the Saints (or
those that have Union with him) shall live also, (which Blessing besides he has
by a positive Promise assured them of;) then no Soul that has real Union with
him can perish: But this our Blessed Savior does assert; Because I live, ye
shall live also; John 14. 19.
that is, the Life of Grace here, and the Life of Glory hereafter.

Arg. 8. If there is no Condemnation to such who are in Jesus Christ, or have
Union with him: if they have Everlasting Life, Romans 8. 1.
because they have Union with the Son, and are passed from Death John 3. 36.
to Life, and shall not come into Condemnation; then this Sacred Union secures
and saves all that are united to Christ from falling John 5. 24.
away so as eternally to perish. But that all this is true, we have proved, and
it is in plain words asserted by the Holy Ghost: therefore this Sacred Union
secures and saves them all from eternal perishing.

Arg. 9. If Christ in us is a certain and sure Ground of the Hope of Glory, and
that Hope is the Anchor of the Soul both sure Col. 1. 27. Heb. 6. 18. 19, 20.
and steadfast, that cannot be lost; then Union with Christ gives all such an
assurance of Salvation; and that none of them that have Union with Christ, or
have Christ in them, can eternally perish. But that this is so, the Holy Ghost
does positively assert; therefore none of them can so perish.

Arg. 10. Lastly, If Faith in the Habit of it, through which by the Spirit we
come to have this Actual Union with Christ, can never be lost, or shall not
fail, then none that have Union with Christ shall ever perish. But that Faith
in the Habit of it cannot be lost, or shall not fail, our Savior affirms it,
being one part of his Prayer when on Earth, and no doubt it is part of his
Intercession now in Heaven; I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not:
Luke 22. 32.
And he never asked any thing of the Father but it was granted him; And I know
thou hear me always: Therefore they can never John 11. 42.
perish.

I might add here that Communion which flows necessarily from this Union, which
affords a strong Argument for the Saints final Perseverance: Union cannot be
without Communion, for whilst the Members are united to a living Head, there
will be (as one Charnock.
observes) an Influx of Animal Spirits whereby they shall partake of Life and
Motion: and though a Believer, I grant, may lose the sensible Experience of
Communion with Christ, yet the Spirit from their Mystical Head, will be working
in them, providing for them, and standing by them.

To conclude with this Argument, I argue,

(1.) If our Union be by the Indwelling of the Holy Spirit. (2.) If our Union
with Christ be a Conjugal Union, a Marriage-Union. (3.) If it be as near a
Union as is between the Body, the Members of the Natural Body. (4.) If it be
such a Union as is between the Tree and the Branches. (5.) If it be such a
Union as is between the Father and Son, as Christ is Mediator. (6.) If it be a
Union of Spirits, as if but one Soul was in two Bodies. (7.) If it be such a
Union, that Believers partake of the Divine Nature. (8.) If it be a Vital
Union. (9.) If it be such a Union that cannot be dissolved by all the Powers of
Darkness, the Seed of Grace remaining: Then it is impossible for any Believer
that has Union with Christ to perish Eternally. But all these things are true;
therefore no true Believer can Eternally perish.

APPLICATION.

First, These things being so, we may infer, that our Union with Christ is a
most glorious Spring of the greatest Comfort to Believers imaginable.

1. From hence, Brethren, comes in your Actual Justification: No Man is
personally justified, before he receives Christ by Faith, before he has actual
Union with him: But every Soul that is in Christ, is actually justified and
discharged from all the Guilt of his Sins, and stands in Christ complete in his
perfect Righteousness, without Spot, before the Throne of God.

2. Such are made near and dear to Christ: O how near is the Wife to the
Husband, or the Members to the Body! even so near and dear is every Soul that
has actual Union with Christ unto him.

3. From hence flows our Communion with Christ; for by virtue of our Union we
come to have our Natures changed: It is hereby that we come to behold, as in a
Glass, the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. It is impossible that a brutish and swinish Creature, as
all unrenewed Men and Women are, should have Communion with the Holy God, or
with the Holy and Blessed Jesus. What Fellowship has Righteousness with
Unrighteousness? Or 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15.
what Communion has Light with Darkness? Or what Concord has Christ with
Belial? If we would have Communion with Christ, we must be Holy, and touch not
the unclean thing: And impossible it is that we should be Holy, until we come
to have Union with Jesus Christ, by which means we come to partake of his pure
Nature, and have the evil Habits of our vile and filthy Hearts and Souls
changed. The Tree must be first made good, and then the Fruit will be good. Man
naturally is united to the Devil, and to his own Sin and Iniquity, and has
Enmity in his Heart against God: The Prince of Darkness is the Head of this
dark and wicked World. The Understandings, Wills and Affections of all Men are
under diabolical Influence, ever since Adam betrayed us into the Enemies Hands;
and abide so, until that Union be dissolved by the Power of Divine Grace, and
the Soul united by the Spirit unto Jesus Christ. We are united to the first
Adam by a Likeness of Nature; and how can we be united to the Second without a
Principle of Life, by which another, a new Nature is formed in us? We were
united to the First by a living Soul; and we must be united to the other by a
quickening Spirit. By Nature Man is dead in Sins and Trespasses; and how can he
have Communion with a living Christ without a Principle of Life? Would any go
about to join a stinking Carcass to the Holy Jesus? Would not any think it a
great Plague to him, if he had a dead and rotten Carcass united to him? O
remember it is from your Union with Christ, your Communion with him follows,
yea, and your Communion with the Saints too; you can take no delight in
Heavenly Company, nor Heavenly Things, without an Heavenly Heart.

3. By this Union you that are Believers come to have interest in, and a right
unto all things Jesus Christ has purchased by his Death; nor shall any ever
have any share or part in all those Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, except
they obtain this Union: As the Cyon cannot partake of the Sap and Fatness of
the Olive Tree without it is grafted into the Stock, no more can we partake of
the Fatness and glorious Fullness of the true Olive Jesus Christ, unless we are
grafted into him by Faith, and have the Indwellings of the Spirit; and then all
things that Christ merited for us, and are laid up in him for us, are ours.

4. It is by virtue of this Union that we have, and may expect a Supply of all
Grace according to our Wants and Necessities: Like as the Wife needs not to
fear Want if it be in her Husband's Hand, (provided he be a loving and faithful
Husband) and that by reason of that Union she has with him, and that Relation
she stands in unto him. Christ is a Head of Influence to thee, O Believer; Thou
hold the Head, from whence all the Body Col. 2. 19.
by Joints and Bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together,
increases with the Increase of God.

5. This also shows us, that we shall be fruitful to Christ, because we are
united to him, have Union with him: We are married to him, that we should bring
forth Fruit unto God; even all the Fruits Romans 7. 4.
of Holiness and good Works, yea, such Works and good Fruit as is acceptable to
God: And that because we are accepted in Christ, our Persons are first accepted
as Abel's was, and then our Sacrifices or Performances. The good Lord help you
to weigh well, and seriously ponder these things.

6. Terror. One word to you Sinners, which will be first by way of Terror. What
will you do that have not yet obtained Union with Christ? Tremble, for your
State is deplorable! All that are not united to Christ, stand united to dead
Adam, condemned Adam, lost Adam; and if you die before you obtain Union with
Jesus Christ, you are lost for ever, nay, you are (as you heard just now)
united to your Sin, and to the Devil; all your Sins stand charged upon you, and
cleave to you.

But may be you will say, Is there no Hope, no Help for us?

Answ. God forbid; Jesus Christ is tendered to Sinners as Sinners: And those
that have now Union with him, once were in your State and Condition; but know
this, you must labor after Divine Grace, and come to this resolve, viz. to
break your Affinity with Sin. While you see not your Folly in keeping your
Agreement and Affinity with Hell, there is but little Hope: O throw down your
Arms, fight against God no more; when once you come to hate your old Lovers,
and are resolved to leave them, forgo them, and seek after this Union with
Christ, there is ground to hope you are not far from the Kingdom of Heaven.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon XI.
BRETHREN, I am upon the Proof and Demonstration of the last Proposition or
Point of Doctrine raised from these words, viz.

That none of the Sheep of Christ, or Saints of God, can so sin and fall away
as eternally to perish, but that they shall all certainly be saved.

The last Time I was upon the Sixth general Argument, which was taken from the
Nature of that sacred, high, and sublime Union which is between Christ and
every true Believer.

I shall proceed to the next Argument.

Seventhly, The Argument which I shall now insist on and produce The seventh
Argument taken from the Death of Christ.
further, to prove this great and comfortable Doctrine, shall be taken from the
Death of Jesus Christ: For it is indeed, I find, that great Argument the
Apostle makes use of to prove the final Perseverance of the Saints, or Elect of
God. See Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect?
It is God that justifies. Who can implead such, or put in an Accusation
against them, that shall be heard, admitted, or allowed at God's Bar? He brings
in four or five Reasons why none can. (1.) From their Election; they are God's
Elect. (2.) Their Justification; they are actually justified, they are
acquitted, declared Righteous in Christ, and that by God himself: It is God
that justifies. If the Supreme Judge, he whom they have offended, does acquit
and discharge them, who shall bring in any Accusation against them? To which he
adds, ver. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died. Such a One
(as our Annotators note) may throw down the Gauntlet, and challenge all the
Enemies in the World; let Conscience, carnal Reason, the Law, Sin, Hell, the
Flesh and Devils, bring forth all they can say, and show what they can do, yet
after all they cannot bring under Condemnation that Soul; all that they can do
will fail to condemn those that Christ died for. The (3.) Reason is, because
it is Christ that died; because he died for them, that is, in their stead or
room. Should one be condemned for High Treason against the King's Person, and
he should accept of another, who is his Surety, to die for him; whose Death,
according to the Constitution of the Kingdom, and Laws thereof, would every way
serve and answer for the Offense of the guilty Criminal; and yet the King
should afterward take the Offender, and hang him for that very Offense for
which his Surety was put to Death; would not all cry out and say, it was a
piece of great Injustice? Even so here, should God condemn and cast into Hell
one Soul for whom, or in the room and stead of whom Christ died, would it not
be great Injustice in God? O shall not the Judge and King of Heaven and Earth do
right?

Brethren, It was God himself who substituted his own Son to die instead of the
Elect, and to that End, that they should not die or perish for ever. But it may
be some will object,

Object. It is granted that Christ died for us, and satisfied for all Sins we
committed before Grace, before we were called; or for all Sins against the Law:
But if we believe not, or sin after Grace and Conversion, we may be condemned
for ever.

Answ. I answer; Do not these Men think that Christ did not die for Sins
committed against the Gospel, and for the Sin of Unbelief, even for all such
Sins that a Believer does commit after Grace and Regeneration, as well as Sins
against the Law, or Sins committed before they were renewed? Alas, how long do
some of God's Elect Ones continue in a State of Unbelief, and refuse the Offers
of the Gospel, before they do believe and close with Christ? Why now, if Christ
did not die for those Sins, (which were committed against the Gospel) as also
for the Sins they do commit after they are in a State of Grace, there is not
one Soul can be saved, because without shedding of Blood there is no remission;
Heb. 9. 22.
that is, without the shedding of Christ's Blood: It is the Blood of 1 John 1.
11.
Jesus Christ his Son, that cleanses us from all Sin. Christ satisfied the
Justice of God for all the Sins a Child of God has, does, or ever shall commit
against him, Original and Actual, from the Day of his Birth, unto the Day of
his Death. So that if a Believer perishes for any Sin or Sins, he perishes for
that Sin or Sins for which Christ died, and suffered for in his stead.

Object. I like not, say some, your Notion, viz. That Christ died in our stead
or room: For though he died for our good, yet not in our stead, I doubt of
that: And if you can make it appear that he so died for us as you affirm,
namely, in the room or stead of all his Elect, then your Argument is not to be
answered.

Answ. I answer; That Jesus Christ did not suffer Death for our Good only, but
in our room or stead, also I shall prove and make clearly to appear.

1. This Notion (if you will so call it) of Christ dying for us, must denote
his dying in our stead; because it is so always generally taken, when one
Person is said to die for another, one is condemned, and another dies for him,
that is, in his Room, to save the guilty Person from Death. And should not this
be granted, we should be all confounded, and not know either what Men or the
Scripture means, when they say, such a Man, such a Person, died for another, or
for others, when the Person for whom that great Love and Favor was showed to,
was as a Criminal, and condemned to die; which moved his Friend or Surety to
step in and suffer the Penalty for him, or in his stead. Now it was so here, we
were all Criminals, guilty of the highest Treason against the God of Heaven;
and were by the holy Law of our offended Sovereign, condemned to die, and to
bear Eternal Wrath; and our Blessed Savior was chosen in our room, and given
up as an Act of the Father's Infinite Love and Favor (and as an Act of no less
Love, Favor and Compassion in Christ) to die for us, and to satisfy Divine
Justice for us, or to bear the Punishment we were to have born, and must (had
not he born it for us) for ever.

2. Is it not plainly foretold, that the Messiah should be cut off, Dan. 9. 26.
but not for himself? Now since he had no Sin of his own, and yet was cut off
for Sin, it follows, he was put in our Place, and stood charged with our Guilt
or Debt, and so was penally cut off; he was cut off for us, to save us from
Divine Wrath and Vengeance: It was not for himself, it was not for the fallen
Angels; it was therefore for us, that we might not die, but live eternally.

3. Pray, Brethren, see what our Savior says upon this Account; Greater Love
has no Man than this, that a Man lay down his John 15. 13.
Life for his Friends. Can this Expression intend any thing more or less, than
in the room or stead of his Friend, or die for them? Thus Christ died. Even the
Just for the Unjust; the Just in the place or 1 Pet. 3. 18.
stead of the Unjust, or us the guilty Persons. Hereby perceive we the Love of
God; Because he laid down his Life for us, we ought to lay down our Life for
the Brethren. These Texts fully prove the Notion; He that lays down his Life
for his Brother, or dies for the Brethren, dies in their stead to save them
from Death, as some have done: For scarcely for a righteous Man will one die;
yet peradventure Romans 5. 7.
for a good Man some would even dare to die. But God commends his Love
toward (...), in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. Now then
seeing Christ underwent Death, and bore that Punishment that was due for Sins,
and there being no Cause in himself why he should suffer that Pain and Penalty,
it unavoidably follows, that it was because he stood in our Place charged with
our Offenses.

4. Again, it must be thus taken and understood, because it is said, The Lord
laid on him the Iniquity of us all: Our Sins were made Isa. 53. 6, 7.
to meet in him -- He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for
our Iniquities. It was not by Christ's praying and interceding to the Father
for us to forgive us our Iniquities; No, no, that was not enough, it was his
dying for them: He bore our Sins in his own Body on the Tree. He prayed again
and again, but that Cup could not pass by; if we are delivered and saved from
our Sins, he must die, nay his Soul must be made an Offering for Sin.

5. That Christ died in our stead, will further appear, because he was made Sin
for us, that knew no Sin. He bore the Sins of 2 Cor. 5. 21. Isa. 53. 12.
many, that is, the Punishment of them. Our Sins were charged upon him, though
he had no Sin of his own in a moral Sense, but was pure from all Iniquity; yet
in a judicial Sense he was made Sin, as he was constituted and put in the
Sinner's Place, dying and making Satisfaction in our stead, as our blessed Head
and Surety. And how frivolous is the Cavil of the Socinians, who would have it
be understood, where it is said, Christ was made Sin, that he was accounted a
Sinner by wicked Men. This cannot be the meaning of the Place, because as he
was made Sin for us that knew no Sin, so it was that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. Do wicked Men account Believers to be made the
Righteousness of God in him? Or does not God look upon us, or count us in him
so to be?

6. But why is it said by the Holy Ghost, But when the fullness of Time was
come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under Gal. 4. 4, 5.
the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law? etc. Had he not stood in our
Law-place, why is it thus expressed? Certainly God saw it necessary to
substitute him, and to accept of him in our stead; and therefore he was made
under the Law, i. e. he was obliged to keep the Law perfectly for us, God
requiring that of us in order to Justification, which we being fallen, were not
able to do, therefore he did it for us, and in our Nature; being made of a
Woman, he took our Nature upon him, and suffered Death, making a full and
complete Satisfaction for our Breach thereof; whose Sufferings and Obedience,
upon the account of his being God as well as Man, had an infinite Worth and
Merit in them. And if this which the Apostle says in this place, does not
prove that he suffered in our room, I must confess I know nothing of this great
Gospel-Mystery.

7. That he suffered, not only for our Good or Profit, but also in our room and
stead, does further appear, because it is said, He Romans 4. 24.
died for our Sins; Who was delivered for our Offenses, and rose again for our
Justification. "This Particle, says a Learned Man, Mr. F. Dr. Owen shows the
same, and many others.
joined with an Accusative, does generally signify the impulsive Cause, and not
final, Mat. 10. 22. and 13. 5. and 14. 9. John 20. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 11. And
particularly when it is used in reference to Sufferings, it has that
signification and no other; see Levit. 26. 18, 28. Deuteronomy. 28. 11. 2 Kings 23.
26. Jer. 13. 22. John 10. 32. In all these Places it necessarily signifies the
Meritorious and Impulsive Cause, and nowise the Final; for our Offenses must
needs be understood, that our Offenses were the Meritorious and Impulsive Cause
of Christ's Sufferings. Another Particle the Holy Ghost uses, is (...), Romans
6. 8. For when we were without strength, Christ died for the Ungodly. He spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. I lay down my Life for my
Sheep. This is my Body that is given for you. Romans 8. 32. John 10. 15. Luke 22.
19.
Now the Particle (...), among other Significations (says he) that it has,
signifies sometimes the Impulsive Cause, Phil. 2. 13. Ephesians. 5. 16. Romans 15.
9. Sometimes the Substitution of one in the room of another, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Philem. v. 13. (...), Demost. Ego pro te molam, Terent. Particularly when the
Sufferings of one for another is expressed by it, it always signifies the
Substitution of one in the place of another. Whenever it is used to imply one's
dying for another, it signifies the dying in his stead; even as the Son of Man
came to give his Life a Ransom for many, repeated again, Mark 10. 45. This
Preposition, (says he) whenever applied to Persons or Things, it always imports
a substituting of one in the room of another." So that from the whole we may
confidently conclude, that Christ did not only suffer for our Good, but in our
room.

8. Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many. Now to bear Heb. 9. 28.
Sin, usually in Scripture Phrase, is to bear the Punishment of Sin, Levit. 5.
1. and 7. 8. Numb. 14. 33. He has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows.
For the Transgression of my People was be stricken. Which clearly shows the
Ground and Cause of his Suffering, and Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6, 8.
not the Issue and the Event.

9. If all the other pretended Grounds and Causes are frivolous and vain, that
Men bring of Christ's dying for us, suffering for us, besides this of dying in
our stead or room; then that is the proper and only meaning thereof: but all
other pretended Grounds are vain and frivolous. How idle is it for any to say,
He died only to remove or take away the rigid Law of Works, and to merit a
milder Law of Grace? Which seems to imply, as if God repented he ever gave the
Law of perfect Obedience: Or as if God could allow of Sin; or else, as if the
Law of perfect Obedience did not result from his Holy Nature, but that he might
have given a Law at first, like their new Law of Grace: Or according to others,
that he died to fulfill and take away the Ceremonial Law, and to be a Pattern of
Abasement, Humility, and Self-denial. Now had that been, could not God have
substituted Peter to have been such a Pattern as well as his own Son, and set
him up as an Example; or else some other most choice and renowned Saint or
Prophet; or have caused and Angel to be incarnate to have done it, that we
might have followed his Steps? And how vain is that which some of the Arminians
assert, viz. That he died to satisfy for Original Sin, or for the Breach of the
first Covenant, and to purchase Salvation upon the Condition of Repentance,
Faith and Obedience, or to merit God's Acceptance of the Creature's Faith,
Love, Holiness, and sincere Obedience, instead of perfect Obedience to the Law
of Works, so that God is become reconcilable through Christ's Death? But that
he may be actually reconciled, lies wholly upon the Creature as his part; and
thus he died for the Good of all Men, but not in the place or stead of any one.
Now by this Notion, Salvation is principally wrought out by the Creature, God
having put Man into a Condition or Capacity to work it out for himself: And
according to this Notion Man may or may not be saved, God having left the whole
of Salvation, in order to the making Christ's Death to become effectual, to the
Will of Man. So that Man's Will, as I before intimated, determines the Case,
whether Christ's Death shall effect any Eternal Blessing unto Sinners in
general, or to any one Sinner in particular, or not. God (as one of them once
preached) puts Man into a Capacity to work and to do, but works not in any the
Will or the Deed of his own good Pleasure. Now how false and frivolous all
these pretended Grounds or Designs of Christ's Death are, I have already showed.

Arg. 1. And from the first Argument taken from the Death of Christ, I argue
thus; All those that Jesus Christ died in the room or stead of shall never die
or eternally perish. But Christ died in the room or stead of all his Elect, or
all such who believe and are his Sheep; therefore not one of them shall die, or
eternally perish.

Arg. 2. If Christ died for all the Sins of his Elect, both before Grace, or
before they are called; and for those committed after Grace, or after they are
called, so that they might not be condemned for any of them; then none of them
can eternally perish. But this I have proved; therefore none of them shall ever
eternally perish.

Secondly, The Death of Christ does deliver every true Believer Christ has
delivered all Believers from Condemnation.
from Eternal Wrath and Condemnation, I prove thus; Because the Sufferings of
Christ, or the Sacrifice of Christ, is imputed to them, or is accounted to them
that do believe: This follows from what I said last, He took our Sins upon
himself, and satisfied for them, as if he had actually sinned, and freely of
his own Grace gives us the Benefit of his Suffering, as if we had actually
suffered; our Sin was imputed to him, that his Righteousness and Obedience
might be imputed to us, even both that which is called his Active and Passive
Obedience. Sin was imputed to Christ, yea, every Sin we have, or ever shall
commit; so that in Christ we have born already all that Vindictive Wrath and
Vengeance of God that was due to them, according to his Holy Law and Threatening
denounced against us. Christ and his Elect are as one Person, or as one entire
Corporation; and what he did, was as if every one that he represents had done
it. The Sufferings of our Savior was in lieu of the Life of the Sinner; the
Just for the Unjust. By his 1 Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 53. 5.
Stripes we were healed: And that by God's charging our Sin judicially upon
him, he as our Surety standing in our room. He was (as the Apostle says) made
Sin for us that knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him.

Arg. 3. If Christ has born all that Vindictive Wrath that was due to his
Elect for their Sins, then not one of them can eternally perish. But Christ
has born all that Vindictive Wrath that was due to his Elect for their Sins;
therefore not one of them can eternally perish.

The Justice of God has nothing to lay to the Charge of God's Elect, because
it is Christ that died; he whose Death has an infinite Worth and Satisfaction
in it: this is the Apostle's very Argument; If God's Justice is satisfied, and
his Wrath appeased in Christ's Death; if our blessed Jonah's being thrown into
the Sea of Divine Wrath, has made so sweet a Calm, that God declares in him,
i. e. in his Son, he is well-pleased, and that Fury is not in him now no more
for ever toward Believers; who can or shall Isa. 27. 4.
then condemn them? Jesus Christ has turned away God's Anger, by impairing of
his Right and Sovereignty, without derogation from his Perfections: So that now
he can and does receive us who believe, into his Eternal Love and Favor,
through the Death of his own Son; it being the Judgment of God, that they who
sin are Romans 1. 32.
worthy of Death. But that Death which Sin incurred, and the Sinner deserved,
Christ has endured for his Elect, and delivered them for ever from the Pain
and Punishment thereof, and stand acquitted of and justified from for ever.

Thirdly, It is because Jesus Christ who was the Antitype of the Christ the
Antitype of the Scapegoat, and carried away our Sins. Levit. 16. 21, 22.
Scapegoat, has carried away all our Sins who do believe: The killed Goat
made the Atonement for the Sins of all God's Israel; and because one Goat could
not prefigure the whole of Christ's Undertaking, therefore there were two Goats
appointed: And Aaron shall lay both his Hands upon the Head of the live Goat,
and confess over him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all
their Transgressions in all their Sins, putting them upon the Head of the Goat,
and shall send him away by the Hand of a fit Person into the Wilderness. And
the Goat shall bear upon him all their Iniquities unto a Land not inhabited,
etc.

Brethren, pray observe, here is mention four times of all the Sins of the
Children of Israel, all their Iniquities, all their Transgressions, all their
Sins. And again, the Goat shall bear upon him all their Iniquities. The Goat
was a Type of Christ, to show that not one Sin of a Child of God shall ever be
laid upon him, charged upon him, because Christ had them all laid upon him: and
he has carried them all away, all their Sins, great Sins as well as smaller
Sins; Sins before Grace and after Grace were all laid upon Jesus Christ; yea,
Sins of all sorts, Sins of Commission and Sins of Omission; no Sin could be
expiated without the Death and Blood of Christ: Also a full and free Confession
was to be made upon the Head of the Scapegoat of all Sins. Brethren, as the
smallest Sins needed such a Sacrifice, such an Atonement, namely, the Death of
Christ, so the greatest Sins were not excluded from that Atonement and blessed
Benefit of his Death.

Moreover, the Scapegoat carried all their Sins away into the Wilderness, or
into an unknown Land, or into a Land of Forgetfulness, never to be remembered
any more; this has our Lord Jesus done: Christ has put away Sin, and put it
away for ever, and that by the Sacrifice of himself once for all: He has laid
on him the Heb. 9. 26.
Iniquities of us all; and also all our Iniquities. He could not be supposed to
have suffered for our Sins, if our Sins, respecting the Guilt of them, were not
laid upon him, or charged upon him, and imputed to him: his Sufferings
otherwise would have been Arbitrary and Unjust, had he not been substituted by
the Father, and called forth as our Surety, (nor could his Death been accepted)
the Law no where condemning or punishing any one who in a Lawsense is an
innocent Person.

He was made Sin, without knowing Sin: He knew the Guilt by Imputation, but he
knew not Sin any otherwise, neither Original nor Actual; He was born without
Sin, and lived without Sin, in his Mouth was found no Guile: yet he had our
Sins upon him, and carried them away; he being the Antitype of the slain Goat,
satisfied for all our Sins; and as he is the Antitype of the live Goat, he has
born them away for ever.

Arg. 4. If any one Sin of the Children of God shall ever be charged upon them
as to that Vindictive Wrath that is due to Sin, so that they may come under
Eternal Condemnation of it; then has not Christ born all their Sins, nor
carried them away into the Land of Forgetfulness. But Christ has born all
their Sins, and carried away all their Iniquities, as he is the Antitype of the
slain and living Goat; therefore their Sins shall never be charged upon them,
as to the Vindictive Wrath that is due to them; so that they can never come
under Eternal Condemnation. Christ by his Death has delivered us from the
Curse of the Law.


Fourthly, None of Christ's Sheep, or no Believer, can fall so as eternally to
perish, upon the Consideration of the Death of Christ.

1. Because Christ has by his Death delivered them from the Curse of the Law,
as well as from the Guilt of Sin; the Law is the Strength of Sin, it is by that
Sin condemns the Sinner: The Law lays every Man under the Wrath and Curse of
God; and unless it be answered, God might be said to change his Will should he
justify any Man; nay, it would seem to reflect upon his Holiness: the Precepts
must perfectly be kept by Man, or his Surety; the Breach we had made of it by
Sin must be satisfied, for, both these Jesus Christ has done, not for himself;
he needed not to have come to keep the Law to justify himself, for as God he is
infinite Holy; but as Mediator he did this for us, he obtained a perfect Robe
or Righteousness to give away and put on us; He has brought in everlasting
Righteousness, and made an end of Sin. How made an Dan. 9.
end of Sin? Not that there shall be no Sin any more in the World; No, but he
has made an end of the condemning Power of it; the strength it had to kill and
damn the Soul is took away for ever from all that believe, from all that he
has put his Righteousness upon. God's justice being satisfied, we are
furnished with an exact and complete Righteousness, that shall last for ever;
it is an Everlasting Righteousness that every Believer has in Christ. Who
therefore shall condemn? Christ has delivered us from the Curse of the Gal. 3.
4. 5.
Law, being made a Curse for us. Sin is our Sickness, Sin is that by which we
stand charged, and the Law condemns us, pronounces a Curse against us; but
Christ has cured us of this Sickness, and delivered us from this Curse: As it
is written, Cursed is every one Gal. 3. 13.
that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law, to
do them. Till we believed, we lay under that fearful Curse; but from this we
are discharged, and Christ has undergone that great Curse for us, and there is
no other Curse can come on Believers; all separation from God and Wrath is by
the Curse of Law: but this is ended and gone for ever to every one that
believes. Nothing therefore now can separate them from God, the Curse is taken
away, and the Blessing is put on us.

2. From hence it appears that the Veracity of God is engaged to acquit all
them that believe in Christ, as his Justice is obliged to leave Sinners under
the Curse of the Law that believe not, because nothing but a perfect
Righteousness can deliver from the Curse thereof.

3. Moreover, God is obliged, upon the account of his Covenant with his Son for
us, to discharge us for ever, because Christ has fully performed all things as
the federal Conditions of our Restoration and Deliverance from Sin, and the
Curse of the Law, which he covenanted to do.

Arg. 5. All that are delivered from the Curse of the Law, and to whom there
remains no more any legal and just Cause in God of Wrath and Separation from
him unto their Eternal Condemnation, cannot eternally perish. But all that
believe in Christ are delivered from the Curse of the Law, and to them there
remains no more any legal and just Cause in God of Wrath and Separation from
him unto their eternal Condemnation: therefore no Believer shall eternally
perish.

Fifthly, Christ dying for our Sins, was a full and complete Payment Christ
has born all God's Vindictive Wrath due to Believers.
of all our Debts, which bound us over to Death and Condemnation; we owed ten
thousand Talents, and Christ our Surety was charged with it, even with all we
owed to Justice; and by his Death he paid the uttermost Farthing: Now the
Principal and the Surety are legally and judicially one Person; so that in
Christ we paid all, though it was God and not we that found out the Surety, and
paid himself with his own Money; and therefore we are acquitted in a way of
Sovereign Grace; we have it in a way of Mercy, though in a way of Righteousness
also: That Romans 3. 23, 24, 25, 26.
God might be Just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

From whence I argue;

Arg. 6. All those for whom Christ has paid all their Debts, or made a full
Compensation for, shall never perish. But Christ has paid all the Debts of
Believers, or made a full Compensation for them; therefore they shall never
perish.

Would it not be looked upon as an Act of Injustice in a Creditor to arrest and
throw a poor Debtor into Prison for those Debts his Surety paid for him, and
laid down every Farthing of his Money? Now then say I, either some of the Sins
of Believers, or some of their Debts Jesus Christ did not die for, pay, or
satisfy for, or else all must conclude it is impossible (because God is Just)
any one of them should perish.

Now who is it that dares to affirm, that Christ did not die and satisfy for
all the Sins of Believers, or for his Elect Ones? If we 1 John 1. 9.
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. He will not exact from us the Satisfaction
which he has accepted in the Atonement of his own Son our Surety, and in his
own way applied; God will not require double Payment.

Sixthly, From the Death of Christ I further argue; No Believer can eternally
perish, because his Death was the highest and greatest Expression and
Demonstration of Divine Love, both in the Father and Son. Now say I, (as I
hinted once before) He that gave the great Gift, will not deny the lesser: Sure
if God gave his Son to die for our Sins, he will give us Grace to resist Sin,
to mortify Sin, and will also pardon all our Sins: And if Christ died for us,
spilt his Blood for us, he will pray for us, he will not refuse to intercede
for us, that our Faith may not fail, or we lose the Benefit and Blessings
purchased for us by his Death.

He that would not pray for his Friend, or for his Neighbor, will not die for
him: But on the other Hand, if he yields himself up to die for him, he will
pray for him. Christ died for his Sheep, he will therefore both feed them, heal
their Diseases, and preserve them, that they may not be devoured by any Enemy
whatsoever; neither by Sin, nor the Devil, etc. See Romans 5. 10. Romans 8. 32.

Seventhly, Jesus Christ by his Death purchased Grace, and all Christ by his
Death purchased Grace for us.
things his Saints need or shall need, in order to make them meet for Glory;
therefore they shall not perish. Do they need Faith, need Patience, need Power
against Sin, need Pardon, need Purging, etc. all these things, and whatsoever
else they stand in need of, they shall have: My God shall supply all your need
according to Phil. 4. 19.
his Riches in Glory, by Jesus Christ. All Grace is in Christ, as the Fruit of
his purchase; And of his Fullness all we receive, and Joh. 1. 14, 16.
Grace for Grace: And this is to show forth the Riches of God's Glory. Will he
lose his Glory? Shall Satan insult over the Majesty of Heaven after this
manner, viz. Lo, here is one of them for whom thou gave thy Son to die, whom
thou have left to me, and I have destroyed him for ever? Will God, think you,
suffer this, since his main Design in the Gift of Christ, is the Glory of his
own Rich and Sovereign Grace? Nay, and after he has with such large Expense of
rich Treasure, and such Pains restored his lost Image to a poor Believer, will
he suffer Sin and Satan utterly to deface it again whilst he looks on? Our
Opposites are Men for Natural Reason. Now Sirs, what think you of this; is
there any reason for you to believe God will suffer either of these things to
be done?

Eighthly, The Death of Christ preserves all Believers to Everlasting Life,
because he has by one Offering perfected for ever them Heb. 10. 14.
that are sanctified. Christ as the Effects of his Death, before he has done,
will bring all for whom he was a Sacrifice to Heaven: Justification in the
Perfection of it shall be continued, Sanctification shall be completed, our
Interest in him shall not be lost: Can any think that Christ will not maintain
Life in that Soul which he made alive by his own Death?

Arg. 7. If therefore Christ's Blood was not shed for none in vain, but that he
shall have his whole Purchase; then none of his Sheep or Elect Ones shall ever
perish. But Christ's Blood was shed for none in vain; therefore he shall have
his full Purchase, none of his Elect shall perish.

No Man would lay down a Sum more in value than a whole Kingdom, but would
first see himself sure of it, upon laying down that Price: the Father's
Covenant and Promise also made all the Elect certain of Eternal Life upon
Christ's dying for them. Besides,

Beloved, the Sacrifice of Christ unites all the Holy Attributes together to
secure a Believer's Interest; Justice and Mercy are both agreed in Christ, they
meet together, and kiss each other, yea, and join Hands to help and save every
Believer. The Floodgates of Mercy are opened, and the Fire of Divine Wrath
confined in its Flames, or rather quenched by the Streams of Christ's Blood,
that Mercy might flow down to us abundantly: Christ's Blood has eternal Virtue
in it, it is called the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, therefore extends
to the Expiation of Sins to come, as well as what are already past. Christ's
Death has glorious Effects, as the Apostle shows: For if the Blood of Bulls
and Goats, and Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the Flesh; how much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through
the Eternal Spirit offered himself to God, purge your Consciences from dead
Works to serve the living God? To talk of Christ's Death, and see no Effects of
it, alas, what is that? All that Christ died for, shall see and feel too its
Glorious Effects and Operations upon their Souls and Consciences; though the
Sacrifice be over, the Virtue and excellent Causality of it abides for ever.

Ninthly, Christ by his Death redeemeth his People from all Iniquity, and this
was his End in dying. What signifies such a Christ by his Death redeemeth us
from all Sin.
Redemption, that leaves a poor Slave in his Chains and Irons, without
procuring a Release for him? In this lies the Glory of our Redemption by
Christ; it is not only from the Curse of the Law, and Wrath of God, but from a
vain Conversation also: See the Apostle's Words; Who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us Tit. 2. 14.
from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good
Works. If this was his End and Design in his Death; do any think he will see
himself frustrated in it? Shall any Enemy of the Soul bring Christ under a
Disappointment? Compare this with 1 Pes. 1. 17, 18, 19.

Tenthly, and Lastly, Jesus Christ has by his Death purchased Eternal
Redemption, or Everlasting Life, for all his Sheep; and by his Spirit has also
given to them the Earnest of it; therefore his Death preserves them to
Salvation: In whom ye also trusted after Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation: in whom also after
ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the
Earnest of our Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession,
unto the Praise of his Glory.

Now I should come to speak more particularly to the Effects of the Death of
Christ, and enlarge upon some things that I have but a little touched upon; but
that I must leave until the next Time, and shall only speak something by way of
Improvement of this Argument.

APPLICATION.

First. To you that are Believers: O praise and bless God for a Crucified
Savior. What in Heaven and Earth is cause of greater Wonder and Admiration!
Christ's Death is the meritorious Cause of all Spiritual and Eternal Joy and
Comfort; all Grace flows out of the Wounds the Spear and Nail^ made in his
Blessed Body, and from the Death and Pangs his Soul underwent. Nothing is a
greater Evidence of Christ's Love to us, than the Death of his Cross.

2. Apply his Blood, draw Virtue from his Blood, fly to his Death; see how that
stands to save thee from the Justice and Wrath of God: in his Death is thy Hope
and Succor, when pursued by Satan, and under all Temptations.

3. Triumph in the Cross of Christ; thou, O Child of God, wast crucified with
Christ, thy Sins were punished in him, and thou art acquitted in him, and
raised in him. O labor to know Christ and him crucified; Labor to know him
and the Power Phil. 3. 10, 11, 12.
of his Death, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, etc.

4. And as to you Sinners, is not here Ground of Hope for you? Christ died for
the chiefest of Sinners; And whosoever believes John 3. 16.
in him shall not perish, but have everlasting Life. But woe to such who slight
this bleeding Savior, that sin because Grace has abounded, or that make the
Death of Christ an Encouragement to them to continue in Sin. Tush, say some,
trouble not your self with me, Christ died for Sinners. O Souls, will you
crucify Christ again? I tell you, if you do not feel the Effects of his Death,
in vain is all your present Hope.

5. This may serve also to detect such, and severely to reprehend Assertors of
General Redemption reprehended.
them that say, Christ died to save all, or for all, and every Man and Woman in
the World. Brethren, if he died for all, that is, in the Stead and Room of all,
then all shall be saved; God will not condemn such whom Christ laid down his
Life for, or in the place or stead of, as I have proved from God's Word. But
further, to detect this Error of General Redemption,

1. Consider, that Redemption is a Word easy to understand; it is the saving of
a Person, that is in Slavery or Captivity, commonly procured or obtained by a
Price paid, or a Ransom: but if the Person is indeed redeemed, he is set at
Liberty. To say a Man is redeemed, and yet left in Chains and strong Bonds, out
of which he cannot come, unless the Redeemer break those Chains and Bonds to
pieces, is to speak untruly, or in plain English, a Lie. Now are all Men
redeemed? Redemption cannot be more universal than it is in Matter of Fact. If
ten Men were in Slavery in Argiers, and a Sum of Money was paid to redeem them,
and yet after all, care is not taken to make that Ransom to be effectual for
their Redemption, but six or seven of them are left in Captivity; can any Man
say all the ten were redeemed out of that Slavery and Thraldom wherein they are
held? Even so it is here; for Men to say, that the Redemption by Christ is for
all the World, and yet the greatest part of Mankind lie in Bonds, under the
Power of Sin and Satan, and have not the Death of Christ made effectual to
them, is a great Mistake, and indeed not true as to Matter of Fact.

2. Are we redeemed only from the Curse of the Law, and from the Wrath of God;
and are we not also redeemed from Sin, and from being under the Power of Satan?
That Redemption that is by Christ, is (you hear) from all Iniquity; and are all
so redeemed? The Apostle Peter says, Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from a vain Conversation,
1 Pet. 1. 18.
but with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, etc. So many as are, and shall be
redeemed from all Iniquity, from a vain Conversation or whom Christ has
redeemed from the Power of Satan, he setting them at Liberty who naturally are
bound, and bringing them out of the Prisonhouse, so many, and no more, did he
die for; and no further does Redemption by Christ extend.

3. If there are many left in the Enemies Hand, and under their Power, and
eternally perish, then there is no general or universal Redemption; but there
are Multitudes so left, and perish.

4. That Grace, Love, and blessed Price that does not procure Universal
Salvation, is not, cannot be an Universal Redemption. But God never showed such
Grace and Love by the Price of Christ's Blood that does procure Universal
Salvation; therefore there is no Universal Redemption: for that Price or
Payment which does not actually pass or terminate in Salvation, is no
Redemption at all: an Attempt to redeem unless it be effected, is no Redemption.

5. Brethren, is Christ an Universal Savior of the Souls of all Men? Why there
can be no Universal Redemption, unless there be an Universal Redeemer, (as I
said before) but there is no such Universal Redeemer.

Object. We do not plead for an absolute Universal Redemption, but for a
Conditional; and that Condition is to be performed by the Creature, and many
perish because they do not perform it; the Condition is Faith, Regeneration,
Sincere Obedience, and Holiness, etc.

Answ. The Condition they say is Repentance, Faith and Regeneration. Now were
it thus, as these Men affirm, then how is Christ rendered, even more weak and
inconsiderate than any Man of Understanding? For what Man would lay down ten
thousand Pounds to redeem a Captive out of Slavery, when he knew a cruel Tyrant
had him in his Hands and in strong Chains, and would not let him go, nor regard
at all the Sum laid down for his Ransom, there being no treating with him: he'
I take no Price; but unless he is conquered, and the Person redeemed by Power,
the Money is lost. This is the Case, Christ's Blood is the Ransom that was laid
down to satisfy the Law and Justice of God; but all and every Man and Woman in
the World is under the Power of Sin and Satan: and unless Christ delivers the
Soul out of the Hands of these Enemies by the Power of his own Arm, his Blood
would be of none Effect to redeem any one Soul. Therefore God by this
Conditional Universal Redemption, rather seems to mock Men, according to these
Men's Notion; for this is the purport of it, You are redeemed, Sinner, yea all
of you by Christ's Death, if you can redeem your selves. Do but your part, and
you are redeemed: What is that? Why answer the Conditions, viz. change your own
evil Hearts, make you a new Heart, believe in Christ; get out of Satan's
Chains; raise your selves from the Dead, and you shall be redeemed. Is this
possible? Strange! does the Righteous God make that the Condition of Salvation
on the Creature's Part, which he knew the Creature was no more able to do than
to give sight to the Blind, or raise the Dead?

2. Besides, it renders Christ to be but a Conditional Redeemer, could the
Creature answer the Condition; yea, and it puts Christ but into a possibility
also of being a Redeemer, (as one well observes) he is not actually so whilst
he stands under that Conditionality; Examen confectionis pacificae.
for the Conditionality does not only lie upon the Person to be redeemed, so
that he cannot be a redeemed One, till the Condition is performed: But it puts
also a Bar to the Purchaser, he cannot in any good sense be called the Redeemer
of such a Person, 'till the Person has performed the Condition. As for
Example, if I lay down an hundred Pounds for the Redemption of a Person in
Slavery, upon this Condition that he yield to serve me seven Years after, I
must have his Consent to these Terms before I can redeem him; and therefore
upon this Condition I am certainly suspended from being a Redeemer, and am no
Redeemer to the said Person, if he refuse the Terms; all that I have done is
but a Proffer of Terms. Hence (says the said Reverend Author) for Christ to be
a Conditional Universal Redeemer, is a Contradiction; for it is to be but a
Redeemer of some that perform the Condition, and no Redeemer to them who do not.

6. To which let me add, this Notion of Conditional Redemption, renders
Salvation not to be freely of God's Grace, no not the very Purchase it self;
because in the Design of it, it was not to be had without the Creatures Money,
I mean without his answering the Condition of Repentance, Faith, Regeneration,
and final Perseverance, etc. which to do, they deny Christ's purchased Grace
and Power for all or any one; or has he promised to perform it for them, or to
work it in them? No, but it is that which absolutely the Creature must find
Power, Strength, and Skill to do, or perish for ever, the Redemption being
intended for him on no other Terms: all depends on the Will of Man, it is as
Man's Will determines it.

7. Moreover, who can suppose Christ would shed his Blood, and lay down such an
infinite Sum, to redeem such whom he knew would not answer those Conditions
propounded? Nay, and which is worse, to lay down his Life to redeem Multitudes
upon such Conditions, which he knew they were no more able to perform, than to
create a World? Can this stand consistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of Jesus
Christ? This Assertion of theirs (says the same Author) is as if they should
say, A. B. purchased an Estate for me, and in my Name, upon Condition that I
should take up the Monument and carry it over the Bridge.

8. All those that have Redemption, or that Christ died to redeem, have or
shall have remission of Sin: But the greatest part of Men have not, nor ever
shall have remission of Sin, therefore Christ did not die for the greatest part
of the World; Redemption and Forgiveness of Sins is of equal extent.

9. Again, I might argue thus; Those that Christ did not pray for, he did not
die for; those that he never would put up one Prayer, one Sigh to the Father
for, certainly he never purchased Remission of Sins and Eternal Life for: I
pray for them, I pray not Joh. 17. 9.
for the World; but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Now
it is easy to know what World it was Christ prayed not for; namely, those that
were not given to him by the Father; for all that were of the World, that did
belong to the Election of Grace, though then under the Power of Sin and
Unbelief, he did pray for: Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall Ver. 20.
believe on me through their Words: the Elect, whilst Sinners, may be called
the World as well as any others.

10. If Christ died for all, he intended to save all: But Christ did not intend
to save all; therefore he did not die for all. Strange! will any say our Lord
Jesus did that which was contrary to his Purpose and Intertion? And if it was
his Intention to save all, who could frustrate him in it? Why then are not all
saved? Sirs, the Death of Christ cannot extend to the Salvation of any one
Soul, further than the Intention and Purpose of God, or the Election of the
Father, and Application of the Holy Spirit.

11. Those that Christ died for, he purchased Grace for, Remission of Sin for;
and all things in order to make the Redemption of his Blood effectual unto, he
purposed to bestow the lesser Grace and Gift upon them, as well as the greater.
Would a Man give a Million to purchase such an Estate for a Man, and will he
refuse to part with five Pounds in order to have it made sure to him for whom
he laid down so great a Sum?

12. That Purchase of Remission of Sin, and Salvation, that Examen confectionis
pacificae.
leaves Men under a Certainty of Damnation, is not esteemed Redemption at all;
but a Purchase of Remission and Salvation, upon the Condition these Men talk
of, leaves most under a Certainty of Damnation, because it is an impossible
Condition in respect of Man, he being dead in Sins and Trespasses, therefore
cannot perform it; and also in respect of Christ, because he never purchased
Grace for them to enable them to perform that Condition.

13. If the Death and Resurrection of Christ shall have its proper Effect, to
the Eternal Salvation of all them for whom he died; as a Corn of Wheat that
falls into the Ground, or is sown in the Earth, in that respect has its
Effect; then all for whom he died shall be saved: But his Death, etc. shall
have like Effect; see his own Words, And Jesus answered them, saying, The Hour
is come that the Son of Man should be glorified. Verily verily I say unto you,
John 12. 23, 24.
Except a Corn of Wheat fall into the Ground, and die, it abides alone; but if
it die, it brings forth much Fruit. See here, all that are and shall be
saved, our Lord ascribes unto his Death as the absolute Effect thereof; all
his Elect being virtually in him, as all the Increase virtually is in that one
Corn of Wheat that is sown into the Earth, that is produced by it.

See Reverend Dr. Chauncy, Dr. Chauncy in his Treatise of the Doctrine of
Godliness, p. 203, 204.
"If (says he) there be the same Eternal and Unchangeable Cause of Redemption,
as of Application, as to the same Persons; then whosoever is redeemed, shall
have Redemption applied, and be saved eternally: But there is the same Eternal
and Unchangeable Cause of both; Ergo."

"3. All that are redeemed, must be saved; or if they be not saved, the Reason
is from the Insufficiency of his Redemption: and whatsoever is not efficient,
is not sufficient to attain the End, either from want of Virtue in the Thing,
or Will in the Efficient. Now if Christ's Intention were to redeem all, he
intended that which he could not do; if he intended not to redeem all, whatever
the simple Virtue of his Obedience might have done, had it had an Intention of
the Agent annexed to it; yet having it not, it is limited by it, and becomes
insufficient."

"4. If the Death of Christ be sufficient to redeem all, and all are not
actually redeemed, so as to be saved, it is Nonsense to talk of Universal
Redemption; for an Universal Redemption, without Universal Salvation, is an
Absurdity of the first Rate."

"5. If Christ's Death be universally sufficient, then it is irresistible in
attaining its End; and if so, Man's Will cannot hinder it. But these Men that
hold Universal Redemption, will say, That notwithstanding this Redemption, some
Men will not be saved; therefore this Redemption is not sufficient to save all,
for it seems it does not conquer every Man's Will, so as to make him willing to
be saved: and it seems by them, Christ is such a Redeemer as cannot save whom
he will; and therefore not being an Alsufficient Redeemer, cannot be a
sufficient Redeemer to save all."

"6. He that died to redeem all, died instead of all. But Christ did not die in
the room or stead of all. The Major wants no Proof, and all Opposition to
Christ dying in our stead, is but a mere Wrangle: And that Point is yielded of
late by our soberest and most Learned Vniversalists. I proceed to the Minor;
Christ did not die in the stead or room of all; for if so, in what Christ
suffered in their stead that are not saved, he was injured: To pay this or that
Man's Money, and be accepted and taken Debtor and Paymaster in his stead, and
yet for all this if the Man is not discharged, nor one Farthing of his Debt,
both Christ and the Sinner must needs be fallaciously and injuriously dealt
with."

"7. It is not fit Christ should die for all, seeing his Father elected not
all, and gave not all to him; for Christ to redeem more, were to disobey his
Father's Will, and not to do it. If any say God elected all, it is most absurd
to talk of choosing some from among many others. When a Man takes the whole
Number, this is no Election: or if any say that Election is Conditional,
provided a Man will, this also is no Election; for if Election be upon the
Condition of Man's free Will, one Man is not chosen and not another; but all
have equal previous Designation to the End, and so there is no Election at all."

"8. All that Christ shed his Blood for, he loved with a Conjugal Love; and
therefore must be married to them in Application, and they must necessarily be
saved." Ephesians. 5. 25.


"9. The Works peculiarly ascribed to each Person, according to their Divine
Order and Manner of working, are of equal Extent; whom the Father elects, the
Son redeems, and the Holy Ghost sanctifies." Joh. 17. 19, 20. and 10. 11. and
16. 13, 14.


Thus far the Reverend Dr. Isaac Chauncy.

I might add diverse other Arguments against this pretended Universal
Redemption, but because what I have already said under this Argument taken from
the Death of Christ, does so fully overthrow such a pretended conditional
Universal Redemption, I shall say no more unto it.

Object. But does not the Scripture say, that Christ died for all, and for the
whole World, and for every Man?

Answ. 1. It cannot be taken for every Individual Man and Woman in the World,
for the Reasons we have given.

2. It is evident by All, that the word World, does in many places only intend
some of all sorts, by a Synecdoche, a part being put for the whole: As it is
said, All Judea and Jerusalem, and all the Regions round about Jordan, went out
to be baptized of John. Mat. 3. 5, 6. Joh. 3. 26. John 12. 32. 1 Cor. 12. 7.
Behold the same baptizeth, (speaking of Christ) and all Men come to him.
Again, Christ says, When I am lifted up, I will draw all Men to me. Also Paul
says, That the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit
withal. Has every Man and Woman in the World the Holy Ghost in them, and the
eminent Gifts thereof? The Apostle says, That every Creature of God is good,
and nothing to be 1 Timothy 4. 4.
refused; that is to say, every Creature of God is good for Food. Now, pray,
are not these words to be taken with restriction? Are not Toads and Snakes, and
a multitude of other Creatures and Things the Creatures of God, and are they
therefore good for Food, or intended here?

I even wonder to see how Men run into Mistakes, through ignorance of some
Texts of Scripture; As Mr. Joshua Exel lately, and A Minister in Glostershire,
as I am told, of the Presbyterian Persuasion.
very confidently and boldly has asserted in print, That John the Baptist did
certainly baptize all universally, even both Men, Women, and Children; because
the Text says, That all Judea, Jerusalem, and all the Regions round about
Jordan, went out and were baptized of him; which I have answered, and showed
his weakness in asserting any such thing from thence: [ All] there, no doubt,
intends but a Part, and may be not the 20 th Part of all the People of Judea
and Jerusalem neither. Also how have some pleaded for eating of Blood from
hence, which is the Life of the Creature; which was forbid to the whole World
in Shem, Hani, and Japhet, after the Genesis 9. 4. To eat Blood, the Life of the
Creature, unlawful.
Flood, and before any Ceremonial Law was given forth; yea, and as soon as the
Flesh of any Creature was given to Man to eat, (or he was allowed to eat the
Flesh thereof); as also Blood is positively forbidden as Fornication and
Pollution of Idols in the New Testament, Acts 15. 20, 29. Alas, how easy are
Men led to abuse the Sacred Scriptures, to favor an Opinion they have
received, for want of farther light. And as to the word World, it is evident
that does not sometimes extend to all universally, but to a part. Moreover, all
that are in Unbelief, or that believe not, though some of them may be given to
Christ, yet they are (as I hinted before) as much the World as other ungodly
Ones, until called out of it: I have chosen you out of the World. From hence it
appears they were in, and of the World before, else they could not be said to
be chosen and called out of the World. Now it was for this World Christ died,
even all the ungodly World that were given to him and for all and every one of
them, and no more, upon a Spiritual Account, viz. to save them, or die in their
stead. Yet,

3. Christ is said to take away the Sin of the World: What World Joh. 1. 29.
is that which Christ takes away the Sin of? I affirm, there is not one Sin
taken away from the World, nor one in the World, but only of such that Believe,
(of the Adult): all Unbelievers are under the Guilt and Punishment of Original
Sin, and Death is to such a Fruit of the Curse still, which God denounced
against Adam, etc.

4 In one sense he may be said to buy or save the whole World, i. e.
externally; for it was by Christ's Mediation and Death this World was saved
(and all in it) from perishing immediately upon the Sin and Fall of Man: all
live, move, and have their being in him as God, and through him as Mediator; he
is in this respect the Savior of all Men; but especially, or with an especial
and eternal 1 Timothy 4. 10.
Salvation, he saves none but them that do believe.

So much shall serve as to this Objection, and at this Time.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon XIII.
BELOVED, the last Day I was upon that Grand Argument, to prove, That none of
Christ's Sheep can fall away, so as eternally to perish, ( viz.) taken from the
Death of Christ.

I showed you that Christ died in their stead; he bore all that Vindictive
Wrath that was due to them for their Sins, so that they might never bear it, or
suffer in Hell.

I shall now proceed.

Eighthly, My next Argument shall be taken from the Effects of Christ's Death
and Resurrection. Though I have spoken something The Eighth Argument taken from
the Effects of Christ's Death and Resurrection.
already touching the Effects of the Death of Christ, yet I shall, before I
pass it, add something further to it.

First, We have showed you, that the appeasing of God's Wrath was the Effects
of the Death of Christ; he put an end to all Vindictive Wrath and Vengeance
that was due to all Believers or Elect Ones: The Pangs of Hell due to us,
seized upon him, and he bore it in our stead upon the Cross: He was delivered
for our Offense, and rose again for our Justification. Now when Christ was
discharged, all his Elect were virtually discharged also, because he suffered
and rose again as a public Person, representing all that were given to him by
the Father: those things which he did in his own Person in this respect, we are
said to do together with him. Brethren, the benefit of his Performances does
redound unto us; we are said to die with him, and to be quickened together with
him, and entered Romans 6. 5, 6. Col. 2. 12, 13.
into the Holy Place with him; the whole Victory over Sin and Death being
obtained, and the Quarrel removed; the condemning Power of Sin being destroyed:
all things about making an end of Sin are done and passed through. Now what
says the Apostle, He that is dead, has ceased from Sin. Well, what of this?
Likewise, 1 Pet. 4. 1.
says he, Reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto Sin; but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Knowing that Christ being Romans 6. 10,
11.
raised from the Dead, dies no more; Death has no more Power over him. Now
this being done by us, and for us in our Head, can we henceforth die any more?
Shall Eternal Death have Dominion over us? No, no, we are to reckon our selves
to be as absolutely freed and discharged from Sin and Eternal Death, as Christ
is discharged and freed from Death, and dies no more: And this comes to us as
the Effects of his Death, by his suffering for us, and in our room. If one died
for all, then were all dead, (that is, all 1 Cor. 5. 15.
those for whom he died) they were dead, and died likewise with him their
Sponsor, and are delivered from the Curse due for Sin; so that we now might and
shall live to him that died for us, and rose again. This was the End of his
Death, and is or will be the Effect thereof on all for whom he died.

Secondly, Reconciliation, from hence it does appear is also another
Reconciliation the Effect of Christ's Death. Ephesians. 2. 16.
Effect of Christ's Death. The Design of God was to bring us to Happiness; and
this he does as the Effects of the Death of his own Son the Lord Jesus, who
has made our Peace by the Blood of his Cross. He has reconciled both Jews and
Gentiles to God in one Body, having slain the Enmity thereby. Divine Justice,
you heard the last Day, has nothing to charge upon God's Elect, because it is
Christ that died. Romans 8. 34.


1. Observe; Christ's Death has reconciled God to us: When we were Enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. Romans 5. 10.


2. And then also, as an Effect and Fruit of his Death, he having obtained the
Spirit for us, we are actually reconciled to God: And thus our Days-man lays
his Hands upon both; he brings God to us, and us to God; he is not the Mediator
of one, but God is one: There is one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Jesus.

3. Therefore as the Effects of Christ's Death and Resurrection, Reconciliation
is made with God for us, and that for ever: it is not a Peace made for such a
time, or for so long, but for ever, so that there shall never be any
destructive Breach any more, no more War between God and Believers; let Sin and
Satan do what they can, they cannot break this League of Peace and Amity. It Is
not a Peace upon Condition that we are to keep, and may break it; No, no, the
Peace was made by Christ, and he that made it, maintains it, as he sits upon
the Throne: He it was that made it as he is a Priest, and he maintains it as he
is a King upon the Throne; Zech. 6. 13.
he will never suffer Sin to get such Head in us, that we shall cast off God
any more, or violate our Covenant with him, nor will he suffer Satan to do it;
therefore they who are reconciled, shall never perish, no not one of the Elect
of God.

Thirdly, The Gift of the Holy Spirit is another Effect of the Death of Christ:
This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are Witnesses. Acts 2. 32, 33.
And having received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed
forth this, which ye now see and hear. The Father promised unto his Son upon
his dying for us, that the Holy Spirit should be given to all his Seed: I will
pour my Spirit upon thy Seed. Isa. 44. 3.
Indeed, Christ receiving the Holy Spirit without measure for us, in his own
Person as Mediator, antecedent to our believing, is the fullest Security to us
imaginable: We are blessed with all spiritual Blessings in Christ, that is, in
him as our Head. And although Christ received the Spirit before he suffered,
yet it was upon the account of his Sufferings; the Father trusted his Son, took
his Son's Word, and gave him part of his Wages from the beginuing: for all the
Saints under the Old Testament, had the Spirit upon no other Account than as we
have it, namely, as the Fruits and Effects of Christ's Death and Purchase who
was to die.

Now, Brethren, pray consider what the Work of the Holy Spirit is, which is
promised to abide with the Saints and Seed of Christ for ever.

1. His Work is at first to quicken them: You has he quickened.

2. To renew, to regenerate, to sanctify them; this is the Work and Office of
the Spirit: I will sprinkle clean Water upon Ezekiel. 36. 25. Romans 15. 16. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
you, and ye shall be clean from all your Filthiness. And hence the Gentiles
are said to be sanctified by the Holy Ghost. But pray take notice of this, the
Rock in the Wilderness was first smitten before Water gushed forth. So Christ
was first smitten, first crucified, then the Spirit like Water was poured
forth: It is, Sirs, wholly the Effects and Fruits of his Death.

3. It is the Work of the Spirit to cause us to walk in God's Ways, and to keep
his Statutes: I will put my Spirit within you, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do
them. We should not do this were it not for the Spirit; we could not keep God's
Precepts, nor walk in his Paths, but God puts his Spirit into us that we shall
not depart from him; that is, we shall not finally apostatize from him, but
shall keep his Precepts to the End.

4. It is the Work of the Spirit to help us to pray, and breathe forth our
Desires to God: We know not how to pray, but as the Spirit Romans 8. 26.
helps our Infirmities, and makes intercession for us with Groans that cannot
be uttered. Christ having redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, it is, that
this Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles: And because ye are Sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba,
Father. Gal. 4. 5, 6.


5. The Office and Work of the Holy Spirit, is to enable us to mortify Sin:
Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall
live. And hence it is also that Sin shall not have Dominion over them; and
therefore Believers cannot perish, they having such a Helper: He destroys all
that Dominion Sin and Satan had in them, and Power over them: The Spirit
utterly spoils Satan's Kingdom in them, Because greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the World, says John, speaking to the Saints. This is 1 John 4. 4.
such a Helper that can never be worsted.

6. It is hereby we perform all our Holy Duties: By the Spirit Ministers preach
to profit, and Hearers hear to their profit; hereby we read to profit, and sing
God's Praise to our profit and sweet comfort: for as we pray with the Spirit,
so we sing with the Spirit; and the same Measure, the same Fillings of the
Spirit that enable us to do the one, enable us to do the other. By the Spirit
we are also helped to meditate on God, and on his Word; and hereby our
Meditations of him are sweet to our Souls.

7. It Is by the Spirit we resist and repel Satan's Temptations: Or if he does
at any time worst us, the Spirit will help us up again.

8. It is the Holy Spirit that does confirm and establish us in the Truth.

9. In a word, All Grace is from the Spirit; and it is by the Aid and
Assistance of the Spirit, that we are enabled to exercise that Grace: for as he
first formed the Habit in our Souls, so it is he helps us to do the Act also,
or that does influence us in the Exercise thereof.

10. The Holy Spirit is also the Earnest of the Saints Inheritance: Ephesians. 1. 13.
It Is given to them as an Earnest of that Glory they shall one Day absolutely
be possessed of: It Is given to assure them, that as certainly as they have
received the Holy Spirit here, and he is in them, so certain it is that they
shall be saved, or have the Eternal Inheritance. True, I have mentioned this
two or three times already, yet it is of so great Importance, I cannot pass it
by here: It is no small Matter that God gives us, when he gives the Holy Spirit
to us; for as he is that Principle of Life in us, so he gives us a full
Assurance of Eternal Life hereafter: and it is upon this Earnest-Money a Saint
may be said to live, whilst in this World; nay, and it will defray all his
Charge, and supply all his Need and manifold Wants, as long as he lives upon
the Earth, even until he comes to the full possession of his Inheritance above.

11. And as the Spirit is the Earnest of Glory, or of Everlasting Life, so he
is also the Witness of God in our Souls; yea, such a Witness, whose Testimony
every Christian may trust to, and rest upon: The Spirit it self bears witness
with our Spirit, that we are Romans 8. 16.
the Children of God. It witnesses to us our Adoption, that we are Children,
and so Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. There is a twofold
Witness of the Spirit. (1.) The Spirit witnesses by a direct Act, we taking
hold of Christ, and of the Promise: Says the Spirit to the Soul, I testify
that Christ and Eternal Life is yours; you believe, and therefore you have
Christ, and shall be saved. (2.) There is the witnessing of the Spirit by a
reflex Act: A Man finds such and such gracious Effects of Divine Grace upon his
Soul, and by these the Holy Spirit testifies he is gracious. One that loves
God, that hates Sin, is changed, renewed, lives a godly Life; therefore is in
Christ Jesus, and shall be saved.


12. It is also by the Holy Spirit that Believers are sealed unto the Day of
Redemption. Also after that ye believed, ye were sealed Ephesians. 1. 14. and 4. 30.
with that Holy Spirit of Promise. Strange! Can these fall away? Can such
perish that have received the Earnest of Heaven, and have the Witness of the
Spirit, and have it sealed to them? No, no, God has put his Seal, or Mark,
upon them; he by his Seal has secured them to and for himself: and all this is
the Effects of Christ's Death and Resurrection.

13. The Spirit also thus purchased by Christ's Death, and given as the Fruits
and Effects thereof to Believers, the Promise of the Father is, that it shall
abide with them for ever; it is the great Promise made to Christ in the
Covenant; My Spirit which is upon thee -- shall not depart from thee, nor from
thy Seed, henceforth and for ever: See the Words, Isa. 59. 21. there is the
Promise of the Father; it is an absolute Promise, and it runs thus, it shall be
in Christ and in his Seed, henceforth and for ever. The Spirit is called the
Promise of the Father. Also we have a Promise of the constant abiding of the
Spirit in all Believers, made by Christ, the second Person in the Trinity; he
told his Disciples, The Spirit of Truth, the Comforter should abide with them,
and be in them forever. Unto John 14.
these, add the Testimony of the Holy Ghost himself; for it is he that does in
the Word assure us of his own abiding with us; he has chosen our Souls to be
his own Temple and Habitation for ever; and also assures us, That all the
Promises are in Christ, yea and amen, to the Glory of God. So that we have this
great Truth sealed and confirmed to us by the Three that bear witness in Heaven.

Fourthly, Pardon of Sin is another Effect and Fruit of the Death of Christ, In
whom we have Redemption through his Blood, that is, as Col. 1. 14.
the Effects of his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sin. True, Jesus Christ
satisfied God's Justice for our Sins, he paid our Debts, it is not Remission
without a Satisfaction, but yet we are freely forgiven; we have it of God's
Free Grace, but it is through the Blood of Christ; Remission of our Sins
follows Redemption, as the necessary Effects thereof. Christ has procured this
Favor and Blessing for us, and Gospel-Remission or Pardon of Sin is for ever:
I will remember their Sins no more, they are blotted out for ever; he has cast
our Sins into the Depth of the Sea, put them behind his Back; yea, he has put
them far away from him, as the East is from the West.

Fifthly, Adoption is the Fruit and Effect of Christ's Death; He has redeemed
us from the Curse of the Law, that we might receive Gal. 4. 5.
the Adoption of Sons. God takes us through Christ, or by virtue of Christ's
Death, into the Relation of Sons; which Privilege we have for ever, we shall
never cease being Sons and Daughters of God.

Sixthly, Free Access to the Throne of Grace, or unto the Father, is the Effect
of Christ's Death: Having therefore, Brethren, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Reader, these
things were enlarged upon when this Sermon was preached, which I am forced to
leave out here.
boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living
Way, which he has consecrated for us through the Vail, that is to say, his
Flesh, Christ's Blood: His Death opened this Way, it is by him we have access
to the Throne of Grace.

Seventhly, Another Fruit and Effect of the Death of Christ, is, Redemption
from all Iniquity: He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, etc. Tit. 2. 14. Therefore this Glorious Effect his Death shall have
upon all Redeemed Ones; it was not to redeem only from the Curse of the Law, as
some talk, but from the Guilt, Pollution, Power and Punishment of Sin;
therefore Believers shall never perish.

Eighthly, Justification is also another Effect of the Death and Resurrection
of Christ; which is to acquit, absolve, and to pronounce us Righteous in God's
Sight; God accepting us Righteous by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
which is ever the same. Now Christ's Death being the Meritorious Cause thereof,
we are said to be justified by his Blood, Romans 5. 9. And pray see the Apostle's
Argument from hence; Much more then being now justified by his Blood, we shall
be saved from Wrath through him: It is more to be reconciled and justified,
than it is to be saved; such are justified, and Christ's Blood having done the
former, will much more effect the latter: those that Christ justifies, he will
glorify; nay, and his Death and Resurrection cannot be without this Effect: And
by him all that believe are justified from all things, etc. The Word Acts 13.
39.
Justified is opposed to Condemnation; those that are justified, are justified
for ever. Justification is not a gradual Act, as Sanctification is; it results
not as the Fruits of our Repentance, or inherent Holiness, but as the Fruits of
Christ's Death and Merits; it is never less nor more: as our Holiness cannot
add any thing to it, so the Sins and Infirmities of true Believers, cannot
diminish any thing from it; there may be additions to our inherent
Sanctification, but not to our Justification: Christ rose again for our
Justification. I may also challenge all the Men in the World to prove, that any
Man that was justified in the sight of God, did ever fall away and come under
Condemnation.

Ninthly, Sanctification is another Effect of the Death of Christ: You may
again read that Text, Heb. 9. 13, 14. Christ died not only to justify
Believers, but to sanctify them also.

Object. But some may say, A Man may be sanctified, and yet be defiled again:
We read of some that escaped the Pollution of the World through the Knowledge of
Christ, yet were again entangled and overcome. 2 Pet. 2. 20.


Answ. 1. If any sincere Christian be defiled again, through any Sin or
Corruption, they shall be washed and cleansed again.

2. Those that Peter speaks of, were such that only had escaped gross Pollution
through the common Operations of the Spirit; it appears, their swinish Nature
was never changed: he therefore says, It is happened to them according to the
true Proverb, The Dog it Ver. 22.
turned to his Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
Mire. Such therefore never were sanctified in Heart, they never experienced the
Effects of Christ's Blood, not that Soul-purifying Virtue that is in it; they
were cleansed from gross Idolatry, through the Knowledge of Christ, and also
from some gross Acts of Profaneness; they had obtained a reformed, but no
renewed Life of Grace and Holiness; therefore such fall into Sin again, and are
so overcome, that the latter End is worse with them than the Beginning. As to
true Believers, see what the Apostle says; For by one Offering he has
perfected for ever them that are Heb. 10. 14.
sanctified. By this one Offering our Lord Jesus has procured our
Sanctification perpetually to be continued; the Death of Christ has special
influence unto the mortification of Sin: in the Death of the Cross, Our Old Man
is crucified, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed: Sin is mortified, and we
are sanctified by virtue of the Death of Christ; and we hereby through his
Grace come to be planted into the Likeness of his Death. And as Paul Romans 6. 5.
in another place says, Being made conformable unto his Death: This Phil. 3.
10, 11, 12.
Conformity is not in our Natural Death, or in our being put to death for him;
but Christ dying for our Sins is the procuring Cause of our dying to Sin:
therefore we must look for the Death of our Sins in the Death of Christ, as the
proper Effect thereof. Virtue goes from the Death of Christ, to the subduing
and destroying of Sin; his Death was not only a Passive Example, but is
accompanied with Power, conforming and changing us into his Likeness: It Is the
great Ordinance of God to this very End, it is by a fellowship or participation
in his suffering; we are never made conformable to the Death of Christ, till we
die to Sin: the Death of Christ was designed to be the Death of Sin. And as
certain as Christ died for the Sins of all the Elect, so certain it is they
shall all, first or last, feel the powerful Effects thereof in the Death of
their Sins. The Corn fell into the Ground and died, and shall produce all the
Increase that virtually was hid in it: Christ is our Life, the Spring, Fountain
and Cause of it; therefore we have nothing but what we derive from him.

Object. He is, say some, the Author of Life; and as he taught the Way of Life,
so he is our Life.

Answ. He is our Life as he is our Head; and it would be but a sorry Head that
should only teach the Feet to go, or the Members to act and move, without
communicating Strength unto them, and to the whole Body. Christ, Brethren, is
an Head of Influence; and in these spiritual Influences, or Life, that Strength
which he communicates to us, does consist in the killing of Sin: He loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of Water, that he might present it to Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but
that it should be Holy and without Blame. And if this was his End in his Death,
be sure his Death shall perfectly effect this glorious Work in the End upon
every Soul of his.

Tenthly, and lastly, Glorification is also an Effect of the Death of Christ;
it is the Fruit of his Suffering, it was by his own Blood he entered as our Head
and Representative once into the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption
for us. The Crown of Heb. 9. 12.
Glory is the Purchase of his Blood: and as sure as his Righteousness, his Holy
Life and Obedience, and Meritorious Death carried him to the Father, and set
him down at the right Hand of the Majesty on high; so will his Merits as
certainly bring all the true Heirs to that Glory above, where the Forerunner
is for us already entered: For it became him for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things, in bringing many Sons to Glory, to make the Captain of
their Salvation perfect through Sufferings. First he brings those Sons into a
State of Grace, as the Effects of his Death and Resurrection, and unto a State
of Glory: And whom he justified, them also he Romans 8. 30.
glorified.

I shall draw up the Sum of this Argument: If such are the certain The general
Argument.
Fruits and Effects of Christ's Death; (1.) If it has appeased the Wrath of
God for all that are in him: (2.) If it has made their Peace, and for ever
reconciled them unto God: (3.) If the Holy Spirit is purchased, and procured as
the Effects of his Death for them, by which they are renewed, quickened and
helped to mortify Sin; and is to them an Earnest, a Witness, and Seal of
Everlasting Life, and shall abide with them for ever: (4.) If Justification is
the Effect of Christ's Death, and they are for ever acquitted from all Sin, and
accepted as Righteous in Christ's Righteousness: (5.) If all that believe in
him are sanctified, as the Effects of his Death, and shall be perfected for
ever: (6.) If Pardon of Sin is an Effect also of Christ's Death, and all
Believers have and shall have their Sins forgiven for ever, or remembered no
more: (7.) If they are adopted Sons and Daughters to God, as the Effect of
Christ's Death: (8.) And also if Glorification is an Effect of his Death; and
as certain as is the Cause, the Effect will be; or as sure as Christ is
glorified in Heaven, all that are his Members shall be glorified. Then it is
impossible that any one of them should so fall away as eternally to perish: But
all these things are true, and none dare to deny them so to be, therefore they
cannot fall, so as eternally to perish.

I shall apply this, and come to the next Argument.

APPLICATION.

First, To Sinners.

1. Has the Death of Christ such Virtue in it, even to renew, quicken,
regenerate all that believe in him? Is God through the Death of his Son
reconciled, and shall all that take hold of him be justified? etc. O then,
Sinners, look up unto him and never cease looking, until you find the Effects
of his Death in your own Souls.

Object. 1. But alas, Sir, I am a vile and abominable Sinner.

Answ. Well, notwithstanding that, yet there is Virtue enough in Christ to save
you.

Object. 2. But I have been a Drunkard, a Swearer, an Adulterer, a Thief.

Answ. So had some of those Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of
you, but you are sanctified, but you are justified.

Object. 3. But I have been an Old Sinner.

Answ. Well, let it be so, yet but a Sinner, and Christ died for Sinners, for
the chief of Sinners, therefore there is hope for you; nay, if you can believe,
and apply the Virtue of Christ's Blood, you shall find Mercy.

Object. 4. But I fear Christ did not die for me.

Answ. 1. If he died for the Chief of Sinners, why not for thee? And if those
that crucified him found Mercy, why not thee?

2. Thou have as much ground to believe that Christ died for thee, as any
ungodly Person has that dwells on the Face of the whole Earth. Sinner, look
up. Nay,

3. Thou have as much ground to believe that Christ died for thee, as any of
those had once who now feel the Effects of his Death.

4. Did ever any Sinner throw himself at his Feet as a poor lost and undone
Creature, and take hold of him, that was rejected?

Query. What is the first Effect of Christ's Death?

Answ. The first Effect of Christ's Death in the Soul, is Life; Life is
infused: And if thou have a vital Principle in thee, thou will cry out under
the Sense of thy Sin. Thrust a Sword into a dead Man's Bowels, and he will not
stir nor cry out. Sin is in wicked Men, like a Sword in the Sides of such as
are dead; but as soon as Life is infused, there will be Sense, and a crying
out. Now when they heard this they were pricked in the Heart, and said unto
Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, What shall we do? Some of Acts 2. 37.
these had been the Murderers of the Lord of Life and Glory, yet they found
Mercy.

2 dly. Another Effect is this, viz. You will perceive a mighty Famine in your
Soul, as it was with the Prodigal Son; all your old Hopes of Heaven will be
gone, Poverty of Spirit will overtake you: An awakned wounded Sinner despairs
of all Supplies or Help in himself; he is distressed with pinching Hunger, and
so flies home to his Father: (1.) Yet may not get Power over Sin presently.
(2.) But O he trembles at the Thoughts of God's Justice, by beholding the Spear
in Christ's Side. (3.) He throws down his Weapons as being conquered and
overcome, and resolves to do as the four Lepers did, 2 Kings 7. 3, 4, 8, 9.
(4.) He sees nothing but Death if he abides where he is, and believes not: And
if he returns to his old Course, he sees he must die; and therefore ventures to
throw his Soul upon Christ, or ventures himself on Christ, and lies at the Feet
of Christ, and says, If I perish, I perish, I can but die; and if he will
pardon me, heal me, and have compassion on me, I shall live. O Sinners, that
you could but do thus.

Secondly, We may infer from hence, that it is in vain for any Person to talk
of Christ's Death, or to say Christ died for Sinners, nay, for the whole World,
and therefore for me, unless they come to feel the Virtue and blessed Effects
of his Death on their own Souls. O see you rest not, without finding the Power
of the Death of Christ. Sirs, though the Sacrifice is over, yet the Virtue and
excellent Causality of it remains; and not only to justify and absolve a
believing Sinner, but also to quicken, regenerate, and to sanctify and make him
Holy also. Therefore labor to know and experience the Power of Christ's Death.

Thirdly, From hence also we may infer, that this is the only Way to know
Christ died for us; namely, when we find the Effects of his Death, that we die
to Sin, that the Body of Sin is crucified in us with him. Has the Life of your
Sins been let out? O see to this you that prosess the Gospel.

Fourthly, This shows us also what a dangerous thing it is for any to build
their Faith upon the general Love of God to Mankind. What say some? I believe
Christ died for me, because he died for all; and because for all, therefore for
me. Brethren, I am afraid this is the ruin of many Souls, because it may be but
a false Faith that those poor Creatures have, they may not experience the
Effects of Christ's Death; may be it is not pressed upon their Consciences, but
this of Christ dying for all, they think is enough. Now pray consider, and O
that all such mistaken Persons would consider it also;

1. That a general Faith, viz. to believe that Christ died for all, gives no
Man any particular saving Interest in Christ's Death: for if it did, then every
Man that so believes, has a saving Interest in his Death. But thousands
perhaps so believe, and yet are as vile and ungodly People as any in the World:
Therefore to build on that general Faith, without a particular Application of
the Promise, or Promises of God, and experiencing the Effects of Christ's
Death, is a false Faith, and deceives the Soul.

2. That that Faith which a Man may have, that may leave such that have it and
trust in it, under the Power of Sin, is a false Faith, and will deceive the
Soul: but Men may have that Faith, namely, believe Christ died for all, and
therefore for them, and yet be under the Power of Sin; therefore that may be a
false Faith.

3. That Faith that does not change the Heart, purify the Heart, is a false
Faith: But many that believe Christ died for all, and therefore for them, have
that Faith, and yet it does not change their Hearts, purify their Hearts;
therefore it is a false Faith.

4. From hence I argue, that it follows undeniably, that all those People that
believe Christ died for all, must come to a particular Application of Christ's
Blood, and not trust to that general Application; they must feel the Effects of
Christ's Death upon their own Souls, or else they are undone: nor do I doubt in
the least but many of them of that Judgment do so, diverse of them being as
gracious Christians as any others; and have Experiences that clearly contradict
their own Principles.

Fifthly, and Lastly, Here is Comfort for Believers. O see what the Death of
Christ has and will effect for you, and in you. 1. God's Wrath is appeased in
him toward you. 2. Justice is satisfied in him toward you. 3. The Law is
silenced. 4. Peace and Pardon procured. 5. Life is infused. 6. The Guilt,
Power, Pollution and Punishment of Sin, removed and gone for ever. 7. You are
justified. 8. Satan is conquered. 9. The World is overcome, you are and shall
be sanctified, and Heaven is opened; you are in Christ's Hand, and shall not
perish, but have Everlasting Life.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon XIV.
BRETHREN, there are but two Arguments more that I intend to insist upon, for
the farther Proof and Demonstration of the Saints final Perseverance; or to
prove, That none of the Saints or Sheep of Christ, can so sin and fall away as
eternally to perish.

I spoke the last Day to the Effects of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: I might proceed to speak to the Intercession of Christ also, but I
shall take that in the Arguments I shall next enter upon.

9th Arg. taken from their being in the Hand of the Father, and in Christ's
Hand.
Ninthly, The Saints are in the Hand of the Father, and in the Hand of the Son
considered as Mediator.

And from hence I shall prove, That it is impossible they should so fall away
as eternally to perish.

First, I shall show you in what respect they may be said to be in the Hand of
the Father; and what is meant by his Hand, and how that does secure them.
Secondly, Show you what is meant by their being in the Hand of the Son; and
show you how that may be said also to secure their firm standing, and tends to
their final Perseverance. Thirdly, Show you in what respect they may be said to
be in Christ's Hand.
First, By the Hand of the Father, does intend his Power: Isa 9. 1.
Behold, the Lord's Hand is not shortened that he cannot save: As if God should
say, I am not grown weaker than formerly, I am God Almighty still, and as
Omnipotent as ever. Hand here, and so in my Text, by a Synecdoche, is put for
Strength or Power. So also Isa. 50. 2. Is my Hand shortened at all that it
cannot redeem? or have I not Power to deliver? Behold, at my Rebuke I dry up
the Sea, I make the Rivers a Wilderness, etc. Read the next Words following my
Text, My Father which gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able to
pluck them out of my Father's Hand.

Secondly, By the Hand of the Father may denote God's Eternal Purpose, or his
Counsel; for Hand sometimes is put for the Purpose or Counsel of God: Act. 4.
28.
To do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined to do. And if it may thus
be taken here, then this may be the Sense of it, viz. All the Elect, all the
Sheep and Lambs of Christ are, by God's Eternal Purpose and Counsel, ordained
to Eternal Life, and none can pluck them out of his Election, or change his
Purpose: For like as the Death of Christ was determined by the Hand or Counsel
of God, so were the Effects thereof, I mean, what Persons should be saved
thereby, even all and every one of them that he had given unto his Son as he is
Mediator. The Design and Purpose of God, by Jesus Christ, was to save all the
Elect; and the End and Design of Christ's Death cannot be frustrated, they are
in God's Hand, that is, it is his Purpose and Counsel to save them; and his
Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure.

1. All the Counsels of God then from Eternity, and all his Promises and
Declarations that hold forth those Counsels, having a special Relation to
Christ's dying for his People, and their actual Salvation, must and shall have
their absolute Accomplishment; for the End of a thing is that for which the
thing it self is: And had it not been for that, the thing had never been at
all, it being that the chief Agent principally aimed at, and purposed to bring
about.

2. Therefore the Salvation of Christ's Saints must be certain, from the
consideration of the Immutability of God, in which the Perfection of his Divine
Nature shines forth, and requires a correspondent Affection of all the
Internal and External Acts of his Mind and Will.

3. From his Sovereignty, in making good and executing all his Purposes, which
will not admit of any Mixtures of Consults as among Men, (the Lord may do what
he will with his Creatures, we are but as Clay in his Hand; and such as he will
make Vessels of Honor, who shall contradict him or resist his Will?) Shall any
change God's Mind, or render his Thoughts liable to Alteration? Also is it not
from his Sovereign and Distinguishing Grace to some, that makes the Apostle
break out, O the depth of the Riches both of Romans 11. 33.
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his
Ways past finding out!

4. If we consider how his absolute Purposes does excite his Omnipotency to the
actual accomplishing of them, who can once suppose any one Believer should
miscarry! The Lord of Hosts has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so
shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed so shall it stand. As God is able
to do whatsoever Isa. 14. 24.
he has purposed, so we may assure our selves there is nothing that shall fail
which is according to his determinate Counsel; He is of one Mind, and who can
turn him?

5. And what Folly and unreasonable Incredulity is it once to imagine, there
should be any manner of suspending the Acts and Purposes of the Will of God,
upon any actings of the Creatures whatsoever, seeing it cannot be done without
subjecting Eternity to Time, and the Will of Man to the Will of God, or the
First Cause to the Second, the Lord to the Servant?

6. Now then seeing God has taken the Salvation of his Elect into his own
Hand, Power, and Eternal Purpose, and has been at such vast Expense of Rich
Treasure, in order to the accomplishing of his great Design herein, who can
imagine that any one of his Saints should miss of Everlasting Life? Suppose a
Prince should have a wonderful Project in Hand, which he carries on with the
Advice of his Council, to make so many of his Subjects that his Love and
Affections are let out upon, Great and Happy on Earth; and in doing of which,
should expend all, or the greatest part of his own Riches, nay, sacrifice his
own Son; Would he, after all, (if he could help it) suffer his Design to
miscarry in the Advancement of any one of them? Or should a most wise and
cunning Artist, contrive a curious Piece of Workmanship, which might cost him
thousands, it being his whole Work, and taking up all his Time, for forty or
fifty Years, to bring it to Perfection; suppose it be a rare Piece of
Clock-work, would he suffer any one part of it to be disjointed from the rest
by an Enemy, whilst he looked on, if he could prevent it, or were it in the
Power of his Hand? Alas, what are all the r^rest, the richest or most curious
Things in Nature, that are or ever have been in the World, to this Work of God
in the Redemption and Salvation of his Chosen Ones? What Treasure has he
spent, (as I may say)? Has it not cost him the parting with the Pearl of great
Price, even the breaking of it into pieces, that so he might enrich and make
great and glorious every one of his Elect? Nay, and after he has curiously
formed his own Image upon each of their Souls, to the Joy and Wonder of the
Holy Angels, and to the Perplexity and Sorrow of Devils, and this as the
Contrivance of his Eternal Council; will he, after all, think you, suffer Satan
to deface this his Image in the Souls of any one of them, and so spoil and
bring to naught part of that glorious, expensive, and curious Piece of his own
Workmanship, which was the absolute Result of his Council to complete and
deliver from miscarrying from all Eternity? Now then seeing that all the Elect,
or all true Believers, are thus in the Father's Hand, viz. put under his
Absolute and Eternal Decree and Purpose, to save, through Jesus Christ, what
can obstruct or hinder this God from effecting of his own Glorious Design
herein? To talk of Conditional Purposes concerning Perseverance, says Dr.
Owen, are either impossible, implying Contradictions, or ludicrous, even to an
unfitness for a Stage. See the 29 th Verse, My Father that gave them me, is
greater than all; and none can pluck them out of my Father's Hand.

My Father, as if Christ should say, is equally concerned with me about my
Saints Perservation, and final Perseverance; and they are in his Hand, he has
put them into his own Power, and he is greater than all, he is greater than me
as I am Mediator, tho as God I and my Father are one; tho he has put them into
my Hand, as I am Mediator and their Surety, yet he has not let go his own hold
of them, he will see not one of them be lost for whom I lay down my Life. If
any would get them out of my Father's Hand, it must be against his Will, his
Purpose, his Decree, and they must do it by Force, by Violence, they must pluck
them or rend them out of my Father's Hand: Mind the word pluck twice mentioned;
Neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand; and none is able to pluck them out
of my Father's Hand. Not that any are able to pluck them out of the Hand of
Christ as Mediator: But our Savior adds that, in this 29 th Verse, as a
farther Confirmation, and as an assurance of their safe standing. Who is too
strong for Omnipotence it self? Can any bring his Counsel to naught, or destroy
such that he holds in the Hand of his Eternal Decree, in the Hand of his
Everlasting Love and Affection, and also in the Hand of his amazing,
inconceivable and irresistible Power? That Enemy that will destroy one Saint,
must be a Match for the Infinite God, and overcome him, and rob him of his
chiefest Treasure, or of his precious Jewels. O who dares to say this can be
done! Well then, assure your selves, that not one Sheep of Christ can perish:
Sin must be stronger than God if it destroys one of the Elect; and Satan more
mighty, greater in Power than God: which to think is Blasphemy. Why should our
Savior here add, My Father is greater than all, were it not to signify the
impossibility of their perishing, or to show how impossible it is that any
Enemy should destroy them?

Thirdly, By their being in the Father's Hand, may be meant Jesus Christ, who
is called the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; 1 Cor. 1. 18.
because by and through him, God exerts his Power, or his Strength to save; or
the Glory of his Power is manifested, as well as of all his other Attributes.
Sin seemed to eclipse the Power of God in saving his People, because Divine
Power could not save in a way of Omnipotence, to the Impeachment of his Justice
and Holiness; but in Christ Justice and Holiness is as much magnified as Mercy
and Goodness; and thereby so too, that the Power of God might shine forth in
its full Glory: Father, glorify thy Name, says John 11. 28.
Christ. Then came a Voice from Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and
will glorify it: Thy Name, that is, however thou art made known, or glorify all
thy Glorious Attributes. Almighty Power was seen in creating the World; and
also as it wrought in conjuction with Divine Justice, it shone forth in casting
the Angels out of Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise; as also in the Flames of
Sodom: And as Divine Power joined with Divine Mercy and Goodness, it shone
forth in saving the Israelites at the Red Sea. But the Strength and Glory of
every Attribute never shone forth in their equal brightness and splendor, as
all are united and in conjunction together, and meet in sweet Harmony, as they
do in the saving of Man by Jesus Christ; so that Jesus Christ may be well
called the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. Christ is the firstborn of
every Creature: Col. 1. 15.
And as the First born is the Strength of the Parent, so is Christ the Strength
of God. The transcendent Excellencies and Glories of the Divine Being, that
were scattered (as it were) in the Creation, are all united and gathered in
Christ; that like as when a bundle of Rods united and bound up together cannot
be broke, or as so united are very strong, so God in Christ shines forth, as
having all his Glorious Perfections united in one; and in this sense Believers
may be said to be in the Father's Hand, and so that none can pluck them out,
God hereby appearing in his united Strength. And thus Christ may be said to be,
that Branch that God has made Psalm. 8^. 15.
strong for himself. And again, The Man of thy right Hand, the Son of Man whom
thou have made strong for thy self, in whom thou show the greatness of thy
Power to save, or to manifest his Almighty Power by. O what a Hand is the Hand
of God in Christ! Who can pull one Soul out of the Father's Hand, or out of
Christ, who is the Father's Hand of Power to save all his Elect? Believers are
in Christ's Hand, and Christ is the Father's Hand, yea the Father's Right Hand:
the Power and Glory of all the Divine Attributes are united together in Christ;
herein they show the Perfection of their Strength, and are all exerted in the
Salvation of every Believer; therefore it is impossible one of them should
perish. In the uniting of all the Attributes of God together does the strength
of God appear to save. And in this respect Believers are in God's Hand, God is
concerned to see the Salvation of his People perfected by Christ as Mediator;
who is, as so considered, his Right Hand, or the Greatness of his Power, or the
Perfection of his Power and Strength.

Secondly, To proceed; as they are in the Father's Hand, so he has, you heard,
put them into Christ's Hand as their great Sponsor, Mediator and Surety; and
that before the World began, in that Covenant and Blessed Compact the Father
and Son entered into, in order to the Eternal Salvation of all his Saints: And
the Holy God has fixed on such Ways and Means, and in such manner, that the
Thing designed cannot miscarry. Men indeed may miss of their Ends they aim at;
but what is directly in the Hand of God, and is put by him into the Hand of his
Son, to effect and finally to accomplish, shall never miscarry, it being, as I
have told you, done according to his Eternal Counsel. God's Absolute Purpose
shall stand, let it be what it will; much more that Grand Purpose and Design of
his, of saving all true Believers by Jesus Christ.

First, There is a proof of it already as to Matter of Fact: Many thousands of
the Souls of his Elect are gone to Heaven, in spite of Sin, Hell, Death, World
and Devils.

Secondly, In the Salvation of Believers by Christ, all Interests concerned are
secured. (1.) God is Just, and herein he declares his Justice with a Witness.
And, (2.) Yet the Sinner is justified. (3.) Vengeance has to the full took
hold of Sin. And yet, (4.) Mercy is magnified to the highest Degree in saving
the Sinner: Justice is satisfied, and yet the Sinner is forgiven. (5.) The Law
of God has its full and just Sanction; and the Violence offered to it is
retrieved. (6.) And Jesus Christ who did all this, in beholding his Seed and
Fruit of his Soul, and their Eternal Blessedness secured for ever, is well
pleased and fully satisfied.


Thirdly, The way of accomplishing this Design, is such as will certainly
compass the End, Divine Power being engaged in it, which rests not in the
least on the Concourse or Compliance of any frustrable Instruments; nay every
Attribute being hereby magnified, they join hand in hand for the effecting of
it.

Fourthly, No Power can supersede God's Decree, nor obstruct Jesus Christ in
his completing the Whole of his Work: I will work, and who shall let? And
again it is said, He shall bring forth Isa. 42. 3. and 53. 10.
Judgment unto Victory. He shall not fail nor be discouraged: The Pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his Hand. And seeing then that the Final
Accomplishment of the Salvation of every Believer is put into Christ's Hand,
for a farther Demonstration how this tends to secure them all from Danger, and
to preserve them to Eternal Life,

Take here a short Induction of Particulars.

1. Consider the Nature of that Covenant, by virtue of which all the Elect are
put into Christ's Hand: It is a Covenant made and entered into by the Son as
Mediator with the Father; not only to redeem and purchase Life for them, and to
infuse Life in them, but to preserve them in a State of Life, so that none of
God's Covenant-Children might depart from him any more for ever, which the
first Covenant failed in; and therefore God found fault with that or rather
with them with whom it was made, who failed in continuing their Obedience
thereunto, but sinned, and fell from God. Now say I, God to prevent the like
again, has entered into a New Covenant with his Son for us, which is so well
ordered in all things, and sure, as that not one Soul shall ever eternally
miscarry that is comprehended therein. O remember that this Covenant was the
Result of Infinite Wisdom, as well as it resulted from inconceivable Love and
Goodness in God; and it was to frustrate and destroy the Works of the Devil for
ever, so that he might never have Cause to insult over the Majesty of God, in
getting out of his Hand one Soul that he designed in his Eternal Counsel to
make happy, and save for ever.

2. Consider, Jesus Christ to this End, in this Covenant, has took all that
the Father gave unto him into his Hand as their Surety. Pray consider, all
Believers are thus in the Hand of Christ: Hence he is called the Surety of a
better Covenant. He is their great Sponsor; Heb. 9. 22.
if any be lost, he must answer for them. Let me read that Text in 1 Kings 20.
I shall only allude to it to clear up this Matter the better to weak
Capacities; Thy Servant went out into the midst of the Battle, and behold, a
Man turned aside, and brought a Man unto 1 King. 20. 39.
me, and said, Keep this Man: if by any means he be missing, then shall thy
Life go for his Life. I know this was spoken by the Prophet parabolically, yet
it may serve to show you the Nature of Suretiship, where one engages for
another, or for others. Thus Judah became Surety to his Father for Benjamin; I
will be Surety for him; of my Hand shall thou require him: if I bring him not
unto Genesis 43 9.
thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever. Reuben
also became Surety for Benjamin; And Reuben spoke unto his Genesis 42. 37.
Father, saying, Slay my two Sons if I bring him not to thee, and deliver him
into thy Hand. This was more indeed than was required of him, or that his
Father Jacob could accept of without Sin, had he failed. But O see the Nature
of Suretiship; Jesus Christ has taken all his Saints into his Hand, as their
Surety to the Father; and God has accepted him in this Case, and looks for
them all at his Hand; the Father substituted him, not to be a Shepherd only,
but a Surety also.

3. And let it be considered, that Jesus Christ became not our Surety to pay
our Debts, or to satisfy for our Sins which we stood charged with before our
Conversion, but also for all our Sins after we believe: his Blood was a plenary
Satisfaction for all; so that Christ says (as it were) to the Father, as Judah
to Jacob, I thy Servant am become Surety for these, and every one of these that
thou have given to me; and if I bring them not to thee, and set them not before
thee in Heaven, then let me bear the blame for ever. Or he may say, as Paul
speaks concerning his Son Onesimus; If he has wronged thee, or owes thee
ought, put that on my Account. Philem. 18, 19.
I Paul have written it with my own Hand, I will repay it, etc. Thus Christ may
say, Father, charge the Sins, the Debts that my Saints have, and shall commit,
to me, I will be accountable for them: And indeed he has already done it, once
for all; and not only so, but to bring them all to Heaven, and this in a most
high and sublime Covenant and Holy Compact he made with the Father before the
World began: therefore not one Soul of them can perish.

4. Consider also, that in pursuit of this Covenant and Suretiship, Jesus
Christ has suffered Death, spilt his own precious Blood, which the Father does
accept of as their full Discharge: and shall any once suppose that one Soul of
his People for whom he thus struck Hands and died for, and took into his Care
and Charge, shall eternally miscarry?

5. Consider, that as they are in Christ's Hands, and he has suffered Death
for them, and in their stead, so also, that the Merits of his Blood might
become effectual to them, he is every ways fitted, endowed and qualified with
all things whatsoever that is necessary, in order to his actual Discharge of
this great Trust he has taken upon him. (1.) He has received the Spirit
without measure, to the end he might have that and all Grace that is needful,
to communicate to every one of his Saints as he sees necessary for them; and it
is laid up in his Hand, not given all at once to them; but they shall have all
their Wants supplied according to his Riches in Glory. (2.) He has Wisdom
enough also, for he is Wisdom it self. Phil. 4. 19.
(3.) He is clothed with Power also; he is a Savior, a great One: Pray hear
what he himself says; I that speak in Righteousness, Isa 63. 1.
mighty to save. All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18, 19.
etc. He cannot fail for want of Power as Mediator, let the States or Straits
of any Soul of his, be what they will, or of any that rely upon him or come
unto him; Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God
by him. Nay, and this Power is Heb. 7. 25.
given to him to this very end, namely, not only to quicken and renew them, but
also to perfect Holiness in them, and to bring them to Heaven at last: As thou
have given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as
many as thou have given him. Joh. 17. 2.



6. Consider the strict Charge the Father has given to Christ, as he has put
all Believers into his Hand. (1.) A Charge to redeem them; he laid down his
Life as the Father commanded him. (2.) See that in Isa. 49. 9. That thou may
say to the Prisoners, Go forth; and to them that are in Darkness, Show your
selves. He had a Charge to call his Elect out of the Grave of Sin, and to knock
off their Fetters, to open their Eyes, and to heal their Wounds. (3.) He has a
Charge to lead them: For he that has Mercy on them shall lead them, even by
the Spring of the Waters shall he guide Isa. 49. 10.
them. Christ has the Conduct of these redeemed Captives, which we have fully
proved by his being called a Shepherd. (4.) He has received a Charge to
receive all the Father has given him; and those that come unto him, he says,
he will in no Joh. 6. 37.
wise cast out. And this he does not only out of his own Affections and B. wels
to all such poor Sinners, but also as in discharge of his Office as all are put
into his Hand. (5.) He has received also a Charge to perfect that good Work
that he has begun in them: The bruised Reea shall he not break, Mat. 12. 20.
and the smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he has brought forth Judgment
unto Victory. He will carry on that Work in the Soul till it i completed; He
shall do this, says the Father, this is part of his Work and Office which he
has accepted of: And our Savior takes notice of this thing as his Father's
Will and Charge given unto him; And this is the Father's Will that sent me,
that of John 6. 39.
all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last Day. My Father sent me to cherish and take care of the
poorest and weakest Soul that he has given me, and to see that none of them be
lost; I must, as if he should say, strengthen their Faith, subdue their
Corruptions, and never leave them till I present them all before my Father,
without Spot, at the last Day. (6) He must give an Account of them also at the
last Day, and he will present them all without Blame before the Father, in
Love, and say, Behold, here am I, and the Children which thou gave me, none
of them are lost.


7. Consider in what Relation all Believers stand unto him in, as well as he
has them in his Hand, they are his Brethren, nay more, his Seed, his
Offspring, his own Children begotten, and born of his own Spirit; they are the
Members of his own mystical Body, his own Spouse, yea, of his Body, of his
Flesh, and of his Bone: and will not this, think you, greatly move him, excite
and stir up his tender Heart to hold them fast in his Hand, and keep them from
perishing?

8. Consider his Faithfulness; is it looked upon as one of the worst Blots any
Mortal can have upon him, to betray his Trust, or not to discharge it with all
care and faithfulness, especially where the Life of a Person is concerned? And
shall not our Lord Jesus faithfully discharge his Trust? Will he fail any poor
Believer under Temptation, or leave him to the Power of Sin and Satan, when the
Life of the Soul is concerned? O what is the Natural Life of the Body, to the
Eternal Life of the Soul? Now are all the Godly put into Christ's Hand, and
has he accepted of this Trust, viz. to keep all the Father has given him unto
Everlasting Life, and not suffer the Soul of any one to be lost, and will he
not be faithful? O how faithful has he been to the Father in all things, and
to the Souls of those that are already safely landed on the other side of the
Grace; and will he not be as faithful to all that yet remain in this lower
World? Alas, he knows how weak and frail we are, and that without him we can do
nothing: He is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able; and will also with the Temptation make way for our 1 Cor. 10. 13.
escape, that we may be able to bear it. For in that himself has suffered
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted: He has Heb. 2. 18.
a Fellow-feeling of our Infirmities, and has Compassion of the Heb. 5. 1, 2.
Ignorant, and such that are out of the Way.

9. Consider of the Greatness of that Love he has to all that are in his Hand,
or are committed to his Charge, which I have already spoken unto.

10. Consider what he says in my Text, take notice of his Resolution, and
Purpose of his Soul; Neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.

Quest. What is meant by any?

Answ. The World shall not, the Devil shall not, the Flesh shall not, Sin shall
not, Temptation shall not, Prosperity shall not, Adversity shall not, Death
shall not; no Enemy whatsoever shall be able to pluck them out of my Hand, viz.

1. They shall not break that Union there is between me and them, but it shall
abide indissolvable for ever.

2. None shall be able to remove my Love from them; I will love them still,
love them to the end.

3. None shall cause me to cast them off, or throw them out of the Covenant
into which I have brought them.

4. Neither shall any be able to do it; they shall not be able by Force to do
it, nor by Flattery to do it, I will keep them, and safely protect them: The
Enemy will attempt to do it, (as if our Savior should say) they will strive,
they will pluck and pull, and do what they can to get them out of my Hand; but,
says he, they shall not do it: Reproaches, Persecution, Poverty, Hunger,
Nakedness, Peril nor Sword, these, nor any of these, shall ever be able to
pluck them out of my Hand.

Thirdly, I shall now show you in what respect, the Saints may In what respect
the Saints are said to be in Christ's Hand.
be said to be in the Hand of Christ, or under what considerations.

I showed you at first, in opening our Text, that he has a sevenfold hold of
them, which is held forth in part in the Sacred Scripture, by several Tropical
Allusions.

1. They are (as you have heard again and again) in his Hand, by virtue of his
Covenant which he made with the Father; so that they are in his Hand, As when a
Man makes a Bargain to do such or such a piece of Work, which he ingageth and
promises he will go through with, and will not cease until he has perfected
it. Now upon this Account we say, that Work is in his Hand: And thus Christ
has undertaken the Work of our Salvation; we, and that Work of Grace in us are
in his Hand, and he will perform it, and perfect it before he has done.

2. God the Father has given us into Christ's Hand, we are in his Hand by the
Father's gracious Resignation; and he has accepted of the Trust, Care and
Charge of us, as our only Sponsor and Blessed Trustee, to pay our Debts and
supply all our Wants.

3. We are in Christ's Hand, as Sheep are in the Hand of a Shepherd, to feed,
lead, and preserve us, and defend us from all Enemies.

4. As a Bride is in the Hand of the Bridegroom, to love, comfort, cherish, and
delight in us; even so Believers are in Christ's Hand.

5. We are in his Hand, as a blind Man is put into the Hand and Care of a
faithful Guide, to lead, protect, and save in the midst of all Dangers; and he
has promised to guide us by his Spirit into all Truth: And I will bring the
Blind by a Way that they Joh. 16. 13.
knew not, I will lead them in Paths that they have not known: I will Isa. 42.
16.
make Darkness Light before them, and crooked things straight. These things
will I do unto them, and not forsake them.

6. They are in his Hand, as little Babes are in the Hand of a tender Mother or
faithful Nurse, to feed and preserve, bear up in his Arms, and protect from all
Dangers.

7. They are in Christ's Hand, as Subjects are in the Hand of a faithful
Sovereign; yea, such Subjects that are his own Children and beloved Favorites,
that he keeps company with, and delights to honor.

8. They are in Christ's Hand, as a Patient is in the Hands of a wise, able,
and faithful Physician, whom he has undertaken to cure of all Diseases
whatsoever.

9. As a Garden is in the Hand, and under the Care of a skilful and painful
Gardener, who is to plant it, to weed it, to water it, and to watch it Day and
Night; or as a Vineyard is in the Hand of a Vine-dresser.

10. They are in his Hand, as a Ship sent out to Sea in a Storm between Rocks
and Sands, which is committed into the Hand of a skilful Pilot to steer and
preserve from Danger.

But pray observe, Christ exceeds all Covenant-Servants; they may be
unfaithful, or negligent, or want Wisdom or Power to do what they undertake;
but in none of these things he can, nor will fail: he exceeds all Shepherds;
they may lose a Sheep, do what they can, a Lion may tear it from them; but so
they cannot from Christ, as I formerly showed you. He exceeds all Bridegrooms;
others may cool in their Affections, or want Wisdom, or Wealth to enrich, or
Power to save their Spouse; but so does not Jesus Christ to his People that he
has betrothed unto himself. He exceeds all Physicians; others may not know the
Cause of some Distempers, nor how to cure them, or may want Care or Tenderness:
but so does not Jesus Christ, he knows the Causes of all our Sicknesses, and
wants no Skill, Care, nor Tenderness, in order to heal all his Children,
whatever their Diseases may be. He exceeds all Guides; they may let go their
hold, or gaze about and let the Blind fall into a Pit and perish: But so will
not he, he holds them fast, and will not let his hold go, he has faster hold
of us than we have of him: When David's hold was near gone, and his Steps well
nigh slipped, yet nevertheless (says he) I am continually with thee, thou have
holden me by my right Hand. Christ exceeds Psalm. 73. 2, 23.
all Mothers; Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her Womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the Palms of my Hands, thy Walls are
continually before me. Christ exceeds all Isa. 49. 13, 16.
Kings on Earth; for he to make his Subjects Rich, became poor himself. Others
may take an Offense against their very Favorites, though Children, and turn
them out of all Places of Honor, and utterly degrade them: But so will not he.
Christ exceeds all Gardiners or Vine-dressers; a Drought may come and spoil a
Garden or Vineyard, let the Dresser do what he can; or through his carelessness
Weeds may overrun and utterly spoil it: But he has promised to prevent the
Danger of Drought; his People shall then Jer. 17. 8.
not cease bearing Fruit, Sin shall not have dominion over them; those Weeds
shall never spoil his Garden. Christ exceeds all Earthly Pilots; they may lose
a Ship in a Storm let them do what they can, it may be drove either upon Rocks
or Sands: But Jesus Christ has the command of the Wind, the Winds and Sea obey
him; he can lay any Storm that may arise in the Soul at his Pleasure, and save
from all Rocks of Presumption, or Sands of Despair. O happy Soul that art in
Christ's Hand, be thou whosoever thou will!

11. Believers are in Christ's Hand as an Inheritance or Habitation, which he
has bought and purchased for himself, and has taken actual possession of: or
as Jewels or choice Treasure is in the Hand of the Owner; even so are the
Saints in Christ's Hand. Brethren, what will not a Man do to keep and preserve
his Right, or his Riches? True, Thieves may notwithstanding get all he has
from him, or Fire may consume it, or by Injustice it may be torn away; but
Christ's Riches, his Inheritance, his Jewels, which are his People, who are to
him of an inestimable Value, there is no Theft, no Fire, or no Violence that
any can use, can deprive him of the least part of; I mean, of the poorest or
meanest Saint.

12. The Saints are in Christ's Hand, as a curious Piece of Workmanship cast in
a rare Mold by a skilful Artist is in his Hand, which has cost him vast
Treasure, Time and Pains, which is not fully completed, nor can any do it in
all the World but himself alone: Even thus, I say, are all Believers in
Christ's Hand, who has cast them into the Mold of his own Likeness, whom he,
as the great spiritual Artist, after infinite Cost, Time, Wisdom and Labor,
has renewed or regenerated; and none can finish or make up that Work begun in
them, but himself only; nor is it by the Father put into any other Hand, but
into his alone to do it. And as the finishing any curious Piece of Workmanship
is counted no small part of the Curiosity or Art, so it is here, the perfecting
of the Saints is no small part of the Workmanship of God: And shall Christ
leave that to the Wisdom of Man to do, or shall he suffer the loss of all his
Travels, Cost and Time? For if the Work be not perfected, all is lost that ever
Christ did. O think on this, you that are such rare Artists, as to venture to
take Christ's Work out of his Hand, or that say it is the Work of the Creature;
for that is the Purport of your Doctrine.

13. They are in Christ's Hand as a great Victory is in the Hands of a
prevailing Conqueror, who has brought the Strength of his Enemies down, and
there remains only some scattered Forces who lurk in Holes, which he is also
concerned to root out, and finally to subdue; and should he not pursue his
Conquests, (for alas, they may get Head again) all his Pains and Expense of
Treasure would prove in vain: Thus I say the Soul of every Believer is in
Christ's Hand, the Body and Power of Sin is destroyed, and there only abides in
them some remainders of Corruption, which none but he by his Spirit can finally
vanquish, overcome, and root out for ever: And should he not pursue his
Victory, all he has done will prove fruitless and in vain; therefore be sure
he will never cease, until he has brought all his Foes, not only under his
Foot, but destroyed them for ever more.

14. They are in Christ's Hand, as a poor Orphan is in the Hand of his
Guardian, who commits himself wholly to his Care, Faithfulness and Compassion,
whilst in nonage, not being able to help himself or shift for himself: Thus, I
say, Believers are in the Hand of Jesus Christ, they are as poor helpless
Orphans, under-Age, and have every one of them chosen him to be the only
Guardian and Trustee of their Souls, or have wholly committed themselves to his
Care by a holy Resignation of themselves to him, to be his and no more their
own for ever; and will not he be faithful, think you, to every one of them,
especially considering they did it also at his Command, and by the Influence of
his Spirit? Will he betray his Trust, who has taken them into his House, and
under his own Conduct, or leave them to shift for themselves? They first gave
themselves to the Lord, and unto us by 2 Cor. 8. 5. Psa. 10. 14.
the Will of God. And as David says, The Poor commits himself unto thee;
thou are the helper of the Fatherless. He yields himself up to thee, Himself,
his Matter, his Cause: And what, says he further, Thou shall keep them, O Lord;
thou shall preserve them from Psalm. 12. 7.
this Generation, and for ever. He tells us in the 5 th verse, who they Verse 5.
are, even the Poor and Needy. Brethren, this lays a great Obligation upon a
Guardian when he sees what a Child, or any Person has done in choosing him, in
confiding in his Fidelity, and putting his whole Trust and Dependence in him.
What Man that has a Principle of Honesty or of Morality, will deceive or fail
such a One, after he has taken the sole Care and Charge of him? And shall
Christ be more unfaithful to the Souls of his People? God forbid.

From the whole I infer.

(1.) If all Believers are in the Father's Hand, or under his Eternal The
general Argument.
Purpose and Counsel to save: (2.) If God's Purposes are Immutable: (3.) If he
has not left it to any mixtures of Counsels; if he is Omnipotent, and can and
will bring all his Absolute Purposes to pass: (4.) If it be folly to imagine
any of his Purposes should be subjected to the Will of Man: (5.) If Christ be
the right Hand of God, or in whom all his Attributes are united to the
Perfection of his Power to save Believers: (6.) If Christ also has them all in
his Hand, as God's faithful Servant, and as their Surety or Trustee: (7.) If
many of them are gone to Heaven already: (8.) If all Interests concerned in our
Salvation are well pleased in Christ's Undertaking: (9.) If the Glory of every
one of the Divine Attributes are raised in the Salvation of each Believer:
(10.) If Christ has received a Charge to keep every one of them, and to lose
none, as he has promised to do: (11.) If Christ is every ways fitted to supply
his Saints with all things they need or can need: And (12.) If they are all in
Christ's Hand, in all those respects I have mentioned; then it is impossible
any one of them should so fall away as eternally to perish. But all this is
undeniably true; therefore not one of them can so fall away as eternally to
perish.

I should make some Improvement of this, but having but one Argument to add to
prove the Proposition, I shall leave the Application to the last, wherein I
shall show you how Christ does preserve his Saints in a way of Holiness and
Obedience unto Eternal Life.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon XV.
BRETHREN, though I hope I have sufficiently, through Divine Assistance, proved
the Proposition, i. e. That none of the Saints can so full away as eternally to
perish: Yet I shall add one General Argument more, and then come to the
Application, and answer such Objections which I have not as yet met with.

Tenthly, That the Saints of God, or every true Believer, shall persevere or
hold out to the End, and obtain Everlasting Life, will appear from the Nature
of true and saving Grace. That therefore which I shall in the last place do,
shall be to demonstrate that true Grace, though never so weak and small, even
like a Grain of Mustard Seed, yet it shall be preserved in the Soul, and at
last become victorious. See Matthew. 12. 20. A bruised Reed shall he not break,
and smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he has brought forth Judgment to
Victory. Hierom, as I find him quoted by a Learned Author, thinks, that our
Savior alludes to a Musical Instrument, made of a Reed which Shepherds used to
have, which when it was bruised, sounded ill, and therefore it is flung away.
But the Lord Jesus Christ will not cast away a poor Soul (says that Worthy
Person) although he cannot make so good Music in God's Ear as others, or
answer not the breathing of the Spirit with that Life and Vigor, but he will
take Pains with them and mend them; who in a spiritual sense are like a bruised
Reed, broken and bruised under the sense of their Sins, Weaknesses and
Unworthinesses. Smoking Flax, or a little Flax that has a Spark of Fire
kindled in it; or a Wick of Candle, wherein there is not only no Profit, but
some Trouble and Noisomness. Tho the Soul is noisome, by reason of the stench of
its Corruption, yet he will not blow out that expiring Fire which smoaks; and
though no Fire is seen, yet there is Fire in it, and it is kindled by the Lord,
and for some great and good Design. By the Spark of Fire in the Flax (let our
Savior refer to what he pleases) is meant, no doubt, Divine Grace in the Soul
of a poor, weak, and desponding Christian, and this Christ will not quench;
that is, he will tenderly cherish it, and cause it to kindle more and more,
until he makes it flame forth and burn clearly: And he will heal, cure, and
strengthen the bruised Reed; that is, he will never cease until the Soul does
obtain a perfect Victory over Sin, Satan, the Flesh, the World, and over all
Enemies. Grace shall prevail over Corruption, though there seems more Smoke
than Fire, more Sin than Grace, more Weakness than Strength, more Darkness than
Light, more Fear than Faith, yet Grace shall be victorious; Grace is that
Principle of Life in the Soul, the Law of God written in the Heart, which shall
never finally be obliterated any more, or God's Image, that shall not utterly
be defaced. Again, Grace as the Seed of Glory, shall abide in the Soul in
spite of all the Opposition Hell can make.

And this I shall endeavor to prove, and fully demonstrate: First, From the
Nature of Grace it self. Secondly, In respect of the Fountain from whence it
does proceed, i. e. the Blessed God and Father of Mercy. Thirdly, From Christ
the Purchaser, and more immediate Author, the Beginner and Finisher of it in
the Soul; he is the Alpha and Omega of Grace.


First, From the Nature of Grace it self.

1. Let us consider unto what it is compared, even to a small Seed, to a Grain
of Mustard Seed, Mat. 13. 31.
which becomes, after it is sown, a great Tree: Mat. 17. 20.
If ye have Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, ye shall say unto this Mountain,
Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be
impossible unto you. The Mountain of Guilt, of Pollution, of Corruption, of
Opposition, shall be removed out of the way of that Person sooner or later,
that has never so small a Measure of Grace, such is the Nature of it: I do not
judge that our Savior chiefly refers here to the Faith of Miracles; but our
late Annotator, no doubt, is right: Contin. of Mr. Pool 's Annotat.
"I take the plain sense of the Text to be this, (says he) that there is
nothing which may tend to the Glory of God, or to our Good, but may be obtained
of God, by a firm exercise of Faith in him. Whether our Savior speaks here
of a Faith of Miracles, or no, I will not determine; I rather think that he
speaks here of any true Faith," etc. A weak Faith put into exercise shall
prevail and overcome at last: This is the Victory that overcomes the World,
even our Faith: 1 John 5. 4.
it does and shall overcome in every Soul at last. This Seed I have proved
already does remain, it can never be rooted out of the good Ground: where it
was received Mat. 13.
into honest Hearts, it brought forth Fruit unto Everlasting Life.

2. Grace in the Soul is compared to a Well of living Water: The Water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a Well of living Water, Joh. 4. 14.
springing up unto Everlasting Life. Grace in the Soul, is like a Well that
has a never-sailing Spring at the bottom. Grace proceeds from the Spring or
Well of Salvation, which continually supplies the Soul until it comes to
Heaven. We have a glorious Figure of this in the Water that gushed out of the
Rock smitten in the Wilderness, that never ceased following the Israelites
until they came to Canaan. True, this Water may not rise up always alike, but
may sometimes be low like our Rivers, it may have its Ebbs as well as its
Flows; but when it is a very low Tide, it risen again, and may be by degrees
higher than ever it was before: They shall Hos. 14. 7.
revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the Scent thereof shall be as the
Wine of Lebanon.

3. Grace is compared to Leaven, which a Woman hid in three Mat. 13. 33. Grace
compared to Leaven.
Measures of Meal, till the whole was leavened, the whole Soul. Grace is of a
diffusive Quality. It works also like Leaven gradually, it diffuseth it self
first into the Understanding, and leavens that with blessed Gospel Light: It
also diffuseth it self into the Will, and bows and subjecteth that to the Power
of Divine Truth, and to a full Acceptance of Jesus Christ, choosing him, and
relying upon him for Righteousness and Eternal Life: It also diffuseth it self
into the Affections of the Soul, and then the whole is leavened. It leavens, or
makes gracious every Faculty of the Soul, and all its Powers, the Body and all
its Members: Grace, like Leaven, makes the Creature a new Lump, and of the same
Nature with it self, Holy, Spiritual, Heavenly, etc. Leaven is a quickening
thing; so Grace through the Spirit, is the quickening Principle in the Soul.
Grace, when received, will, like Leaven, do its Work, and never cease till all
is in a spiritual manner leavened therewith.

4. Grace is also compared by the Spirit of God to Fire. Grace compared to Fire.
(1.) It Is a Divine Spark that God kindles in the Soul, which he takes pains
to do of his own abundant Goodness. (2.) And as he will not quench it himself,
as you heard, so none else can: And if it cannot be put out, then be sure it
will burn; it is the Nature of Fire to seize on whatsoever is combustible. Now
Sin is that proper Fuel which Grace will never cease consuming, until it has
quite brought it (as it were) to Ashes. (3.) Jesus Christ came on purpose from
Heaven to kindle this Fire, to burn up Sin, and all Corruptions in the Souls of
his People: And can any think it is in the Power of Satan, by his Temptations,
to quench it for ever, and so frustrate his gracious Design? If the Devil could
not quench it when it was but a small Spark, like smoking Flax, when it was
first kindled in the Soul, how should he be able to do it then when it has got
a greater head? All know it is much easier to put out and get the mastery of a
Fire at first kindling, than it is afterward: Yet mistake me not, I do not say
that this Divine Fire burns always alike in the Soul; No, Satan and Corruption
may damp and lessen its burning: but what tho? for notwithstanding the
Operations of Grace may be interrupted by the Law in the Members, the Flesh
lusting and warring against the Spirit; and it may suffer an Eclipse, and a
poor Christian may lose the sense and feeling Influences of it at some times,
as to the comforting Operations thereof, yet the Habit of Grace can never be
lost.


5. The Spirit of Grace is a Vital Principle; it is the Life of Grace is a
Vital Principle.
the Believer, or of the Soul of a Child of God: Nay, and this Life is Eternal,
it is in them an Eternal Vital Principle, as I have proved since I was upon
this Text; therefore Grace through the Spirit, prevents their eternal
perishing; those that have the Spirit in them, and Grace in them, have Christ
and Everlasting Life in them. Moreover, should any say that Grace is not
immutable in it self, yet say I, with relation it stands in unto Christ, (viz.
having a Spring at the bottom) it is an abiding Principle, it will and must
live: Moreover, it is a powerful and permanent Principle; Greater is he that is
in us, than he that is in the World, that is, 1 John
the Holy Spirit in the Graces, and blessed Influences thereof. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, because you are not under the Law, Romans 6. 14.
but under Grace.

6. Grace is a holy and sanctifying Principle, it resists Sin, and purges
the Conscience; It teaches us to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, to
live soberly, godly and righteously in this present Tit. 2. 12.
World.

7. Why is Grace called saving, if Men may have it and yet True Grace is of a
saving Nature.
perish? Certainly that Grace that a Man may have, and be damned, is not saving
Grace.

Secondly, Grace shall abide in the Souls of Believers, in respect of the
Fountain of it from whence it proceeds, namely, the Holy God.

Grace the Offspring of Heaven.
1. Grace, as I may say, is the Offspring of Heaven: And what does God love on
Earth, above his own Grace in the Souls of his People? It Is God's Gift, though
it be Christ's Merit. And as Reverend Charnock notes; "Grace has great Allies;
the greatest Power that ever yet acted upon the Stage of the World, had a Hand
in the birth of it. Should we see all the States of the World engaged in
bringing a Person to a Kingdom, and maintaining therein his Right, we could not
rationally think that there were any likelihood they should be baffled in it.
The Trinity (says he) sat in Consultation about Grace: Genesis 1. 26.
For if there were such a Solemn Convention held about the first creating of
Man, much more about the new and better creating of him, and raising him
somewhat above the State of Man; the Father decrees it, the Son purchases it,
the Spirit infuseth it: The Father appoints the Garrison, what Grace should be
in every Soul; Christ raises this Force, and the Spirit conducts it; the
Trinity has a hand in maintaining it: and all this is but the carrying on the
New Creature. The Father is said to beget us, John 1. 13. and we are said to be
the Seed of Christ, Isa. 53. 10. and born of the Spirit, John 3. 6. therefore
that which has so strong a Relation and Allies, cannot be lost." Thus Charnock.

God the Father is the Foundation of Grace.
2. The Father is the Root and Foundation of Grace, as it is the Effect of his
free Love and Favor; and every Grace is part of the Divine Nature, in it there
is an imitation of one or other of the Divine Attributes, and it exemplifies
the Divine Perfections in its Operations: The Design of God in infusing of his
Grace into our Souls, is to show forth his Virtues, or his Praise and Glory, in
all the Parts of it, and does glorify one or another Attribute of God. 1 Pet.
2. 9.


Grace God's Workmanship in the Soul.
3. What is Grace, and the Work of Grace in the Soul, but God's Workmanship,
which as you have heard, he has showed much Skill and heavenly Wisdom about,
and also has been at more Cost to effect in us, than in making the World; he
will not therefore suffer that Work to be marred and brought to naught: We are
his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good Works. Did Ephesians. 2. 10.
he give his Son, purchase Grace; and will not the same Love engage his Power
to preserve and perfect it in us?

The Power of God concerned to preserve Grace in us.
4. And since God's Power is concerned in preserving Grace in us, and us in a
State of Grace; can it be thought that Satan, that strong Man armed, when he
had full possession of the Soul, and also had so strong a Party in us on his
Side, and yet could not prevent an overthrow, he being vanquished and turned
out, should ever get possession again, especially since now the Soul is so well
armed, and has the strongest Party on its Side against him; besides such
wonderful Allies to stand by it to oppose its Enemies, and to aid and assist it
against him and all his Abetters? If Grace, when a Babe, gave Satan such a
fatal Defeat and Overthrow, certainly now it has got such strength in the
Soul, it will never be overcome by him: We are kept by the Power of God through
Faith unto 1 Pet. 1. 5.
Salvation. And Christ has prayed that our Faith fail not, and was heard
therein. Brethren, is the Power of the Omnipotent God limited to a Faith of the
Creature's getting, and to his Care in securing? If so, it is as much as to
say, the Nurse will keep the Child in her Hand, if it does not get out of it
and stray away from her. We say God keeps us by his Power through Faith,
because he has ordained Faith and Holiness to be the Means (which he by his
Power will maintain in us) as well as Happiness, or the Salvation of our Souls
to be the End.

The Promises of God secures Grace in us.
5. God has promised to help us, to uphold us, to strengthen us, and to
preserve us unto the End: Psalm. 37. 23, 24.
The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord; and he delights in his Way.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him
with his Hand. If he falls into Sin, into Temptation or Affliction, the Lord
will not leave him, but help him up, and bring him out of all his Distresses:
He has promised, never to leave us nor forsake us: He has also promised to be
our God and our Guide, even unto Death; and has assured us, That the Righteous
shall hold on their Ways; and he that has clean Hands shall grow stronger and
stronger; and to put his Fear into our Hearts, that we shall not depart from
him. Again, the Apostle asserts, That he that has begun a^ Phil. 1. 6.
good Work in us, will perform it to the Day of Christ.

It cannot stand consistent with the Wisdom of God, and all other Attributes,
to let Grace utterly fail in us.
6. In a word, it cannot stand consistent with the Wisdom, Love, Faithfulness,
Holiness, nor the Glory of God, to suffer any of his own Children, and redeemed
Ones, to be pulled away from him by Sin, Satan, the Flesh, or this World, or
any Enemy whatsoever, and Grace to come to nothing in them.

1. Can it stand consistent with his Wisdom, to suffer his own Eternal Counsel
to be frustrated? Or has any Man the true Grace of God, and yet not as the
Result of God's Purpose from Eternity? If so, how comes it to pass that Paul
tells the Saints, That they were saved, and called with an holy Calling; not
according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was 2 Timothy 1. 9.
given us in Christ before the World began? Can it stand consistent with Divine
Wisdom, to let Satan insult over God himself, and boast after this manner; Thou
have sent thy Son to die for these Persons; thou have renewed them by thy
Grace, and made them thy own Children, and espoused them to thy own Son, and
this according to the greatness of thy Love and thy Purpose, before all Worlds;
and did it also to destroy and bring to naught my Design and laborious Work
in seeking to devour them; but see how thou art defeated and frustrated in all
thou have done: I have tempted them to Sin, I have again deceived their Souls,
and set thee against them; and thy Design in saving of these, is by me made of
none effect; I have turned those Saints into Swine, and robbed them of all that
Grace and rich Treasure thou gave to them, notwithstanding thou had put
them into the Hand of thy own Son to preserve and keep?

2. Can it stand consistent with his tender Love, to leave his Saints in the
midst of so many cruel Enemies, who are unable to save themselves (as poor
Babes of two or ten Days old) out of their Hands, and yet suffer them by Sin
and Satan to be torn to pieces, whilst he stands by and looks on; and yet they
are such that are his own Children, begotten and born of him by his Spirit? Or
shall his Love be so great in begetting Grace, or in infusing Grace, and no
more Love showed in keeping and preserving that Grace in their Souls? What!
purchase such Riches for them by the Blood of his Son, and let them be robbed
of it all in a Moment?

3. Can it stand consistent with the Faithfulness of God, who has said, I will
help thee, I will uphold thee by the right Hand of my Righteousness; and I will
not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou art able, etc. The Work I have
begun in thee, I will perform to the Day of Christ; and as thy Day is, thy
Strength shall be; and yet notwithstanding all this, will leave them, and let
their Grace wither and come to nothing, and Sin and Temptations be too hard and
strong for them, and so cast them off for ever?

4. Can it stand consistent with his Holiness, to let his precious Grace, which
is an Impression of his own Image and Likeness in the Soul, be blotted, blurred
and defaced for ever; this Likeness being a Likeness unto him in that most high
and beloved Perfection of his Nature, viz. his Holiness, which Work on the Soul
is curiously wrought by his own Spirit, and more valued by him, than ten
thousand Worlds; will he, I say, neglect that which is so dear and like unto
him, and suffer it to be crushed under the Foot of filthy Corruption by the
Lusts of his implacable Enemy?

5. Can it stand consistent with the Honor of God's most Sovereign Majesty, to
let Grace be destroyed and come to nothing in the Soul, whose End in all he
does is principally to advance his own Glory? What is it, I pray you, that
tends more to bring Honor to God in the World, than that Grace which he has
infused into the Hearts of his People? If Sin brings the greatest Dishonor to
him, then certainly Grace brings the greatest Honor to him, which strives to
root out and utterly to destroy Sin, so that God and Jesus Christ might reign
alone in the Soul. If a King has but one special Favorite that asserts and
maintains his Right, and seeks to uphold his Throne, be sure he will, if
possible, preserve him, and suffer none to undermine and supplant that
Favorite, so as to root him out of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, In regard had to Jesus Christ, who is the Purchaser and Christ is the
Purchaser, the Author and finisher of Grace.
immediate Author of Grace, I further argue; Grace shall at last become
Victorious, or never finally be suppressed in the Hearts of Believers.

1. Christ by his Death purchased that Grace which every true Christian is
possessed of: He died to redeem us from all Iniquity, and Tit. 2. 14.
to purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. It is upon
the Account of his Death, as the Effects of his Death, the Spirit and the
Graces of the Spirit are shed abroad in our Hearts: Therefore being by the
right Hand of God exalted, and having received Acts 2. 33.
of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this which you
see and hear. Certainly if he purchased us, and Grace for us, when we were his
Enemies, he will preserve it in us since we are actually now reconciled to him.
Shall he be at the expense of his Blood to buy it, (as one notes) and spare his
Power to secure it? Charnock.


2. Christ was manifest to take away Sin, to dispossess Satan, and will he let
Satan take Possession again? He came to destroy the 1 John 3. 5, 8.
Works of the Devil? And what are Satan's Works but Sin? Will not Christ
accomplish that which he came into the World to do?

3. He is called the Author and Finisher of our Faith: If this be so, we may
assure our selves he will perfect it; he that begins Heb. 12. 2.
it, will end it; he has not left it to another after he has begun the Work
of Faith, to finish it: No, no, he still keeps it in his own Hand, and he will
see it done.

4. It is for the Honor of Christ, that Grace lives and is strengthened in his
People: Wherefore also we pray for you, that our God would account you worthy
of this Calling, and fulfill all the good Pleasure of his Will, and the Work of
Faith with Power. Part of the good Pleasure of the Will of God had been
fulfilled in them; they were called, justified, adopted, and the Work of
Sanctification was begun; and Paul prays, that with Power it might be
completed, and then shows us how it tends to the Glory of Christ to have this
done; That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be Verse 12.
glorified, and you in him according to the Grace of our God and the Lord Jesus
Christ. Brethren, the Glory of Christ, and the final Salvation of the Saints,
are wrapped up together; Grace tends to Christ's Glory here, and to his Eternal
Praise and Glory hereafter.

5. Jesus Christ's Work, now he is in Heaven, is to intercede The Intercession
of Christ, secures the Saints in a State of Grace.
for his Saints: And be sure as he prayed when on Earth that the Faith of his
Peter's might not fail, so he makes the like Intercession for them in Heaven.
Hence the Intercession of Christ is part of the Saints Holy Triumph, in that of
Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather
that is risen again, who also makes Intercession for us.

Now the Intercession of Christ has great Power and Prevalency in it, in order
to our final Perseverance in Grace. 1. Because he pleads continually with God
the Virtue of his own Merits: what he has purchased for us, he intercedes for;
but he purchased Grace for us, and he prays for the final continuation of it in
us; therefore it shall abide in us to the End. 2. By his Intercession, he
prevails with God that we may be delivered from all our Spiritual Enemies, that
they may never have Power over us, of whom Sin is the chief: That which Christ
intercedes for, he is heard and accepted in; but he intercedes that we may be
kept and delivered from the Power and eternal Punishment of Sin, therefore Sin
shall never have Power to condemn us. 3. He intercedes that our Prayers may be
heard, and that we may be helped to pray; and part of our Prayer is that Sin
may not have Power over us to condemn us; therefore Sin never shall so condemn
us, because Christ causes our Prayers, with the Incense of his own
Intercession, to come up as a sweet Savor in the Nostrils of God. 4. Christ
intercedes that all our Sins may be pardoned and covered: If any Man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father. He 1 John 2. 2.
carries this Cause for us in the Court of Heaven; therefore our Sins shall
never work our Ruin. 5. It is by his Intercession we come to the Throne of
Grace with boldness; Christ our Friend and High Priest appearing Heb. 7. 25.
Heb. 10. 21, 22.
evermore in the Presence of God for us. 6. And also it is through Christ's
Intercession that all our Good Works and Holy Services are accepted of God.


So much shall serve to the tenth and last Argument; And from hence I argue,

If Grace, though never so weak, shall be victorious; if Grace be The general
Argument.
such a Blessed Principle, such a Spark that Sin nor Satan cannot quench, such a
Seed that no Enemy can get out of the Ground of our Hearts; if Grace through
the Spirit is Life, Eternal Life in the Soul; if Grace be the Darling of
Heaven, has such great and Almighty Allies; if the whole Trinity sat in
Council about the Birth of Grace, or the Way of its infusion into the Soul; if
it be the Gift of the Father's Free Love, and a part of his Holy Nature; if it
be wrought in us to show forth his Praise; if Grace be God's great and glorious
Workmanship; if the Power of God be engaged to preserve it in us; if God has
promised to maintain its Life in us; if it cannot stand consistent with God's
Wisdom, Love, Faithfulness and Holiness, to let it be totally overcome and
vanquished in the Souls of his Elect; if Christ purchased Grace for us; if he
was manifest to take away Sin; if Christ be the Author and Finisher of Grace in
the Soul; if the Life of Grace tends so much to the Honor of Christ; if
Christ's Work now in Heaven is to interceed for the continuation of Grace in
us, that it may never fail in the Seed or Habit of it; Then no true Believer
can fall so from Grace, as eternally to perish. But all this is true; therefore
no Believer can so fall from Grace as eternally to perish.

APPLICATION.

First, Of Information.

1. First from the whole we may learn, that the State of Believers, through the
Redemption by Jesus Christ, is far better than Adam's was by Creation: for
though we have no natural and inherent Power of our own, yet we have a
supernatural Power engaged to help and uphold us; we are kept by the Power of
God. He stood by the Strength of Nature, and Power of Free Will, before the
Fall: We by the Strength of Grace, and Power of the Mediator, who has a Charge
to uphold us in a State of Grace, which was not allowed to Adam, nor the
Angels; we have not only the Word of Grace to encourage us, but also the Power
of Grace to establish us. Adam stood by his own Original Righteousness; our
standing is by the Suretiship, Righteousness and Undertakings of Jesus Christ:
Who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. Adam's Life was in himself, our Life is 1 Cor. 1. 30.
hid in Christ; and so out of the Power of our worst Enemies to come at it, or
deprive us of it: and as Adam and all his were condemned, so Christ and all his
are justified.

2. It may inform us, that such who make a Profession of Religion, without
attaining to a State of true Grace and real Union with Christ, are in danger of
eternal Ruin, notwithstanding whatsoever their Knowledge, Gifts and common
Improvements may be, and their Hopes thereupon; and that they are of this sort
that frequently fall away and perish in their Sins: which if well weighed, may
put every Professor into serious Thoughts, and upon a through Work of
Self-examination about their present Condition; and therefore in this respect,
there is need enough of those Cautions and Take-heeds in the Scripture, Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. How many are there who do but
think they stand, or that their State is safe and good, when in truth they are
in no better Condition than the Foolish Virgins, or the thorny and stony-ground
Professors? Mat. 13.


3. It also may inform us, that all those that shall be saved, are such who
take care to make their Calling and Election sure. It is a palpable
Demonstration, that they are under strong Delusion, who suppose Election only
refers to the End, and not to the Means; or that Men that are elected, shall be
saved, let them live how they please: No, no, the Case is quite otherwise; we
are elected to be Holy, as well as to be Happy; the whole Design of God herein,
being to make us Holy, and also to preserve us in a Way and State of Holiness:
Therefore if thou do begin well, have obtained true Grace, and do continue
in a Way of welldoing; or do bring forth good Fruit, and do not waver nor
faint in thy Mind, it may be an Evidence, that thy State is Good, and that thou
art one of Christ's Sheep, who follow him constantly, and wilt so follow him
unto the End.

Secondly, This may be Matter of great Comfort to weak Believers, and such who
may be under spiritual Deadness, and feel Corruption too strong for them. O do
not be discouraged, the weakest Grace gives a deadly wound to Sin, and a good
ground of Hope thy State is safe: your Names are written in Heaven, which is,
as our Savior notes, the greatest Cause of Joy; which Luke 10. 20.
it could not be if their Names might be blotted out again. It Is no wonder Sin
is in thee, and makes thee mourn, when it made Paul to cry out, O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me Romans 7. 24.
from this Body of Sin and Death! It Is one thing to have the Law of Sin in our
Members, and to have Sin in our Conversations; and another thing to have it
reign in us, or to have it in our Affections. Soul, remember that weak Grace,
weak Faith, shall become victorious: Thou have Grace enough in thy Head, though
thou have but little in thy Hand. O cry to God, be much in Prayer that God
would give thee more Grace, and supply thy Wants, and quicken and revive thy
Soul, as he has promised. A weak Faith renders the Soul as perfectly justified
in Christ, as the strongest Faith any Man has whosoever he be; and gives a
Title to Eternal Life: he that had but a weak or a dim Eye, that looked up unto
the Brazen Serpent, was as well healed, as he that had a strong Sight or good
Eyes.

2. This Doctrine yields much Comfort to the strongest Saint also; for if he
that has never so strong and lively Faith, might fall finally away and perish,
what would Regeneration, Justification, Adoption, etc. signify to him? Would
not his Spirits droop, and his Fears torment him! But here, by virtue of the
Doctrine of final Perseverance, is Comfort both for the Weak and Strong, both
have equal Interest in Christ, in God's Love, in the Covenant; both are
elected, both are in Christ's Hand. Such who have now a strong Faith, had once
but a weak Faith; it was but a little Seed once: and Christ's Charge extends to
those that are weak, He carries the Lambs in his Arms: and the Stock in
Christ's Hand is sure, and his Promise of supply shall not fail; and the Isa.
40. 11.
Strong cannot stand of themselves.

Thirdly, Caution. Judge not of the Truth of thy Grace by the weakness of it; a
little Gold, a Dram is Gold as well as a great Wedg.

2. Let not this encourage thee to be negligent or remiss in Duty: God has
promised thee Victory, but thou must sight: Grace Tit. 2. 11, 12.
teaches us to deny all Ungodliness. He that is not under the Influence of
Grace, never had the Truth of it in him.

Fourthly, Always consider this in thy Heart, that thy standing is by Grace,
and that thou art in Christ's Hand: O depend on him for all, and fly to him for
whatsoever thou do need.

JOHN X. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand.
Sermon XVI.
BRETHREN, I closed the last Time with the Consirmation of the Doctrine which I
have for several days been upon. I shall now proceed to consider of the
Objections, and give an Answer to them that are usually brought against this
great and comfortable Doctrine of the Saints final Perseverance. Several of
which I have answered already, (as I met with them occasionally, under diverse
of those Arguments I have spoken to in clearing up the Truth of the
Proposition); therefore shall labor to answer such that remain, which take as
they here follow.

Object. 1. If Christ did not die for all, how could the Birth of our How could
the Birth of Christ be cause of Joy to all People, answered.
Savior be said to be Matter of Joy unto all People? And the Angel said unto
them, Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great Joy, which shall
be to all People; For unto you is born this Day, in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Answ. 1. I answer; All People does not intend every individual Person; to all
People, that is, the good News is not to you only, but to both Jews and
Gentiles. I have showed you before that [all], and [every], and [whole World],
is taken in many places of Holy Scripture with restriction, and takes in but a
part; as on the contrary, when the Universality of the Subject is intended, it
is expressed by singular; If a Man die, shall he live again? Which refers to
every Man. He that believes shall be saved; it signifies all that so do. So, I
will pour out of my Spirit upon ALL Flesh, Joel 2. 28.
as you have it in Joel; that is, upon Persons of every Age, Sex, and Degree;
upon Young, Old, Masters, Servants, Sons and Daughters: so it may be taken
here, and in several other places; as that in 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all
Men saved, etc. that is, Kings as well as Peasants, Noble as well as Ignoble,
Rich as well as Poor, Gentiles as well as Jews, or some of all sorts. The
Gospel is said to be preached in Paul's Time to every Creature under Heaven,
Col. 1. 23.
whereas it reached then but to a small part of the World, one great part not
being at that time known or found out (as one well observes).

2. Was the Birth of Christ Matter of Joy in the Effects of it to Judas, and to
the unbelieving Jews, and to many more?

3. I argue thus; If the Birth and Death of Christ was cause of greatest Joy to
all Persons, individually considered, it must be thus either in respect of the
Design, Purpose and Intention of God, because of such Joy unto them, or else in
respect of the certain Effects of his Birth and Death: But (1.) Who will say
that God, according to his Eternal Purpose and Design, did intend it for the
Salvation of every individual Person? None can be so weak sure to assert that;
for who shall resist God's Will, or withstand God's absolute Design, Purpose
and Intention? Christ must accomplish or effect the Salvation of all, if in
that sense it was Matter or Cause of Joy unto all, or that he died for all, or
that God would have all, that is, every individual Man and Woman in the World
saved. (2.) And as to the Effects of the Death of Christ, it is evident quite
otherwise, for Multitudes have no saving Benefit thereby: Therefore it follows
clearly, that that is not the sense of the Text nor Mind of the Spirit of God;
though in some sense the Birth and Death of Christ was Cause of Joy to all,
since every one received all that Good thereby whatsoever it is they are
possessed of.

4. Did not Simeon by the Holy Ghost say, that this Child (speaking of Christ)
is set for the Fall, and rising again of many in Israel? Luke 2. 34.
Unto some the word is a Savor of Death unto Death, and Christ a Stone of
stumbling; the Reason is, because they that believe in him shall be saved, and
they that believe not shall be Mark 16. 16.
damned. We freely grant the intervening of Men's Unbelief, Malice and
Opposition to Christ and his Gospel, is the proximate meritorious Cause of the
Fall and Ruin of any Soul.

5. Also it is said, Every Man shall have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4. 5. which can
refer to none but to good Men, or godly Men only: So it is said, God is the
Father of all; One God and Father of all, Ephesians. 4. 6. Yet as Mr. Cole observes
on that place, the Devil is the Father of the greatest part of the World.
Christ is said to reconcile all things to himself, whether they be things in
Earth or things in Heaven, Col 1. 20. Yet what a multitude are not, nor ever
shall be reconciled to him. [All] certainly intends none but the Elect: So it
is said, it is written in the Prophets, they shall all be taught of God, John
6. 45. It respects only Believers, or God's New-Covenant-Children. Now seeing
the word [all] and [every] in many Places, refers only to the Elect, and is
taken with such Restriction, why should it be taken Universally here, and in
those other Places mentioned, especially considering the Arguments I have laid
down to prove that Christ did not die for any but those that were given to him
by the Father; we having also proved he died in their stead, for whom he
suffered Death, so that they might never die Eternally?

Object. 2. If there be such a Decree of Election, and that none shall be saved
but those that God has ordained to Eternal Life, what need Men seek after or
regard the Salvation of their Souls?

Answ. This Objection we have largely answered under our first Argument, to
prove the Saints final Perseverance, taken from the Sea p. 174. 175. of this
Treatise.
Election of Grace, to which I refer you.

Object. 3. This Doctrine of Election and Final Perseverance, tends to make Men
loose and remiss in the Service of God.

Answ. 1. What can be a greater Mistake? Do the certain Doctrine of Election
and Perseverance, opens no Door to Sin.
Grounds of Hope of obtaining the Victory, tend to make a Soldier remiss and
careless when engaged in the Battle? Or do they not much more animate him to
fight courageously?

2. Shall a Child be taken off from his Duty, or be remiss in serving his
Father, because his Father tells him he shall never be disinherited?

3. Did not Christ know that the Angels had Charge over him, yet was he less
careful of his own Preservation? And did not Paul assure all that were in the
Ship with him, that they should all be saved; yet did that take him off from
pressing Care and Diligence on the Mariners?

4. That God who has ordained the End, I tell you again, has also ordained
the Means; Without Holiness no Man shall see ^^b. 12. 14.
the Lord. We are chosen in Christ, that we may be holy, and without blame
before him in Love. Nor can any ever come to any wellgrounded Ephesians. 1. 4.
hope he shall be saved, or know he is elected, unless he is holy, heavenly,
spiritual, watchful and diligent in all Gospel-Duties, which is the Fruits and
Effects of Election.

5. The Decree of Election considered absolutely in it self, without respect
had unto its Effects, is no part of God's revealed Will; that is, it is not
revealed, that this Man is, and that Man is not Elected: This therefore can be
made neither Argument nor Objection, about any thing wherein Faith and
Obedience are concerned.

6. The Sovereign and ever-to-be-adored Grace and distinguishing Love of God,
is laid down in the Word of God, to be the greatest Motive to Holiness
imaginable: Who makes thee to differ from another? O that God should open my
Eyes, call me by his 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Grace! may a Believer say, Shall I sin against him, because his Grace so
abounds to me? God forbid. If God has elected me, I may live in Sin, walk as I
list, is the Language rather of a Devil than of a Man, much less of a Saint. I
speak the more to this, because I would show you that are Believers, what
Improvement you ought to make of God's Free Grace and Love to you: Put on
therefore (as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved) Bowels of Mercies, Col. 3. 12.
Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering; forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another. And as Moses said, Consider what great
things God has done for you.

Object. 4. If I shall persevere to the End, what need is there of those
Take-heeds in the Scripture? Why are we bid to watch, and take heed lest we
fall?

Answ. This is all one with the former, besides I answered it largely when I
first entered upon my Work; but yet let me add a word or two further.

1. A Child of God may sin and fall grievously, and greatly dishonor God, and
bring Reproach on the Gospel, which may tend to grieve some, and harden others;
nay, he may lose his Comfort and Joy of God's Salvation, therefore has need to
watch. Satan is a strong, a vigilant and cunning Enemy: O see what Reasons you
have from thence to watch and pray.

2. If you grow careless, carnal, or indifferent in the Matters of Religion, it
may be a sign that your Hearts are not right with God: Many of the Members of
the Churches to whom the Epistles were directed, were no more than Professors;
and if so, they were liable to fall away and perish for ever.

Object. 5. But same Branches in the Vine may bear no Fruit, but may be cut off
and wither, etc.

Answ. I have also fully answered this Objection already; see the Argument
taken from our Union with Christ: There is a twofold being in Christ, an
External being in him by a Profession, and a true Spiritual being in him.

Object. 6. If Christ died not for all, what ground have I to believe he died
for me?

Answ. 1. What does it signify to believe Christ died for all, unless thou
find the Effects of his Death in thee? Many thousands shall perish,
notwithstanding Christ died for them in their Judgment that make this
Objection, yea the generality of them for whom he died; therefore unless all
were saved, what Encouragement is there to believe from hence?

2. He that believes, shall be saved: If thou therefore do believe, thou
shall be saved. Is not this a better Ground of Faith, than that of Christ's
dying for all?

3. A bare believing that Christ died for all, I have proved is no Ground of
thy Interest in his Death, for that may be without any Fruits or gracious
Effects.

4. Thou have the same Ground to believe as any have, or as such had who do now
believe before they did believe; or as they had once, who now are in Heaven.

5. Christ died for the chiefest of Sinners; and the Promises of Mercy upon
believing, are made to the vilest Sinners on Earth.

6. Great and black Sinners have found Mercy, and are now in Heaven, even some
of them that put Christ to Death; And is here not Ground of Faith and Hope for
thee?

7. Remember, that if thou believe not, but do continue in thy Sin and
Rebellion against God, thou shall be certainly damned, thy rejecting of Christ
will have that Effect at last upon all Unbelievers. Mark 16. 1^.


8. Moreover, Christ calls to stout-hearted Sinners, such that are far from
Righteousness; He brings his Salvation near to them: He calls Isa. 46. 12.
upon a People not called by his Name: He has received Gifts for the
Rebellious also, that God might dwell among them. And is not here a good Ground
to venture thy Soul upon Jesus Christ, be thou who thou will?

9. No Person is excluded by the Lord that we know of: Can any Man say there is
no Mercy for him, unless he has sinned against the Holy Ghost, which may be
not one in an Age is guilty of? The Nature of which Sin I purpose to open,
after I have closed with this Text. Thy Condemnation, O Sinner, will be of thy
self: God will judge the World in Righteousness: this we are all agreed in, and
set down as an undeniable Article of our Faith. None shall have this to plead
at the last Day, I was not Elected: God will vindicate his Justice and
Righteous Proceedings in the Day of Judgment; and all Mouths shall be then
stopped, and every Man's Conscience be a Witness for, or against him: And
though foreseen Faith and Holiness is not the Cause why any are elected, yet
foreseen Wickedness is the Cause why Men are reprobated: O Israel, thou have
destroyed thy self; but in me is thy help.

Phil^^. 12.
Object. 7. But is it not said, Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling?

Answ. 1. This Text the Papists do abuse as well as the Arminians, who strive
to make Man a Co-worker or a Partner with Christ in our Salvation: But this the
Apostle intends not, because we are saved by Grace. For by Grace are ye saved,
through Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.
and that not of your selves; it is the Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any Man
should boast. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good Works.

2. Whoever it is that brings in this Text as an Objection against the Doctrine
of the Saints Final Perseverance, you may be sure is a corrupt Person in his
Judgment, and one that pleads for a Covenant of Works, or joins the Creature
with Christ as a Co-workein the Salvation of Man. For if it be to be taken in
their sense, then it would follow that Man is his own Savior; for if I procure
my own Salvation by Works, or by working it out for my self, I save my self, or
am my own Savior; or I do appropriate part of it to my self, which is the
worst part of Popery: They say, that Christ's Merits, with their own good
Works, do justify and save them. And what do the Arminians say less, who join
Faith, Inherent Righteousness, and Sincere Obedience, with the Merits of
Christ, both in Justification before God, and in the Salvation of their Souls?
They say, all Men are in a capacity, or have Power to work out their own
Salvation if they will. Mr. William Allen says Romans 4, 5. Allen 's Glass of
Justificat.
on that Text, Romans 4. Now to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness; That they are
the Works of the Law: he does not say, That he that loves not, etc. So that
Love, Gospel-Obedience and Holiness, according to these Men, are not excluded
as the Matter of our Justification before God, but are a part of it: They plead
for Gospel-Works in point of Justification, though not for the Works of the
Law. Pray, what Difference is there between these Men's Doctrine, and that of
the Papists?

But I having lately in my Treatise, called, The Marrow of Justification, so
fully confuted this Grand Error, I shall add no more to it at this Time, but
come to examine the Text.

1. It is evident, that the Persons to whom the Holy Apostle What Work of
Salvation Man cannot work out.
wrote this Epistle, were Saints and Justified Persons, or such who were
quickened, renewed or regenerated by the Holy Spirit. Therefore,

2. Let us consider what Part of Salvation it was which they were required to
work out.

1. They could not appease the Wrath of God, nor satisfy Divine Justice; that
sure was not in their Power to do, nor is it here intended.

2. They could not deliver themselves from the Curse of the Law, because by
their uttermost endeavor they could not arrive to a complete or perfect
Righteousness, nor satisfy for the breach of it, by Original Sin, and by Actual
Sins formerly by them committed.

3. They could not change their own Hearts, or create in themselves a new
Heart, they had no creating Power; certainly they dare not say they had Power,
or were capable to form Christ in their Souls, or restore God's lost Image in
them. Again,

4. They could not raise themselves from the Dead, for they were once dead in
Sins and Trespasses; and sure they will say, that Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.
to raise and quicken the Dead is Christ's Work only: You has he quickened; he
does not say, you have ye quickened.

5. They could not bind the strong Man armed, who formerly had the ruling Power
in them, and in whose Chains and Fetters they were once bound: Will they say,
that all Men have a greater Power in them, than is the Power of Satan, so that
Man may translate himself if he will, out of the Power and Kingdom of Satan,
into the Kingdom of God's dear Son, as all Believers by the irresistible Power
of God are?

6. They could not believe of themselves, because Faith is a Fruit of the
Spirit of God; and it is said expressly, It is not of our selves, but it is the
Gift of God. Now all things are as parts of our Salvation, or appertain
thereunto; and none of all these things can be here meant by the Apostle,
because the Persons to whom he wrote, had all these things worked out for them,
and in them before.

Quest. What Work is it then? What were they to work out?

Answ. I answer; The Apostle means, that good Work of Mortification What Work
it is we are to work out.
of Sin, and all Works that are the Fruits of Faith; that is, they should lead
a Holy and Godly Life, they having received a Principle of Grace from Christ to
this very End, there being a Necessity that the Tree be first made Good, before
the Fruit can be Good; and that a dead Man have a Principle of Life infused
into him, before he can either move or work.

Quest. But can the Creature do these things you mention of himself?

Answ. The Apostle seems very jealous of these Saints, lest they should catch
up some Arminian Notion, (which is too much rooted in Man's corrupt Nature);
and therefore to vanquish Free Will, or the Power of the Creature for ever,
(nay, the Power that is in regenerated Persons) he adds, For it is God that
works in you, both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure; who works in
them powerfully, effectually carrying on the Work through all Difficulties and
Obstacles with victorious Efficacy: God works not only Grace in them at first,
but still by his Spirit, through fresh Supplies, does aid, influence and assist
them, and will until the Work is perfected, or until the Day of Christ. We
cannot mortify Sin, pray, nor do any good Work without the Spirit: If ye
through Phil. 1. 6.
the Spirit, says Paul, do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Romans
8. 13.
So then this is the Sum, In Holiness and all good Works we act and do; But
how? even as we are acted, moved, and influenced of God: It is as when God
acts, works, and moves in us by his Spirit. And as to do all with fear and
trembling; this is only to show how low we should lie at the Foot of God, and
be humble, and not lifted up with Pride, since all our Power and Sufficiency is
of God. But so much to this Text and Objection.

Object. 8. But what say you to that Text in Jer. 22. 24. Though Co^iah the Son
of Jehojakim King of Judah were the Signet upon my right Hand, yet would I
pluck thee thence?

This Place of Scripture is sent me as a grand Objection against Final
Perseverance.

Answ. We must distinguish between one that might be near to God, or as dear as
a Signet on the right Hand, in respect of Place or External Dignity as a King,
and God's bringing him from thence by Temporal Punishment; and one that is a
Signet upon God's right Hand, in respect of Divine Grace and Favor in Jesus
Christ, or as touching his Eternal Election: the latter this Text does not
refer unto.

Object. 9. Is it not said, If ye abide in me, and my Words abide in you? etc.

Answ. The Supposition, If ye do, does not always denote a Possibility that a
Person may not do so. See John 15. 10. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall
abide in my Love, even as I have kept my Father's Commandment, and abide in his
Love. Was it possible for Christ not to abide in his Father's Love? Our Savior
uses these Expressions as an Argument of Comparison.

1. This shows how acceptable Holiness and Obedience is to God.

2. It also implies thus much, i. e. That God has ordained his Saints to
Faith, Love and Obedience, as well as to Eternal Life.

If my Word abide in you, etc. Now elsewhere God says to Christ; And the Words
which I have put into thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of
the Mouth of thy Seed, which are Believers, they shall have his Word abide in
them for ever: The Law of God is in his Heart, none of his Steps shall slide;
it is written in the Hearts of all New-Covenant-Children, that so it might
remain in them for ever.

Observe that Passage of our Savior, Except ye be converted, and Mat. 18. 3.
become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. This
our Lord spoke to his Disciples who were converted, no doubt but they had
passed through the New Birth before that time, yet by reason of Pride that
budded forth afresh in them, they must be humbled again, repent again, or find,
as it were, a second Conversion, or they could not be saved: No Person that
yields to Sin, unless he repents and turns from it, can enter into God's
Kingdom. But does the Words of our Savior signify a Possibility that they
might or might not repent, and so might or might not be saved? No such matter,
but rather the absolute Necessity of Humility, and leaving off every Sin in all
that shall be eternally saved.

Object. 10. But did not some make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience? 1 Timothy 1. 19.


Answ. 1. The Apostle speaks not there of the Grace of Faith, but of the
Doctrine of Faith, particuiarly that part of it concerning the Resurrection of
the Dead, in saying, that it was past already, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.
by which they overthrew the Faith of some.

2. As to a good Conscience, that may refer to a Conscience that does not
accuse; as Paul before his Conversion had a good Conscience: Men and Brethren,
I have lived in all good Conscience Acts 23. 1.
before God, until this Day; I have acted according to my Light, and my Heart
does not reproach me. A Man may have a Moral good Conscience, that never had an
Evangelical good Conscience, I mean, not have his Heart sprinkled with the
Blood of Christ: For that which may in one respect be said to be good, may in
another be said to be evil. Those Persons Paul speaks of might once have Moral
Sincerity, in owning and maintaining of that Truth which now they destroyed,
and also might not live in any gross Immoralities.

3. But should it be an Evangelical good Conscience, and they be sincere
Christians; What of this? May not a true Believer make a Breach upon a good
Conscience, by falling into Temptation? As concerning making Shipwreck, that
says the Text was concerning Faith; and those Persons being delivered to Satan
by Excommunication, it was, that they might not learn to blaspheme, and might
therefore be restored again: and nothing to the contrary does appear it is
evident from the Text, therefore in vain it is brought to prove a final falling
away.

Object. 11. But a Righteous Man may turn from his Righteousness, Ezekiel. 18. 24.
and die in his Sin: And if so, then Believers may fall away finally.

Answ. There is a twofold Righteousness spoken of in the Scriptures. 1 st. A
Moral and Legal Righteousness. 2 dly. A Gospel or Evangelical Righteousness.


1 st. There is a Righteousness that is a Man's own, such as Paul had when a
Pharisee; a Righteousness which arises from a Man's own Reason, Will, and
natural Improvements; or by common Grace, Godly Education, awed by Fear and
legal Terror, and maintained by some failing Spring; which as our Annotators
observe, may easily be dried up; these Righteous Ones may totally and finally
fall away: Pray read Ezekiel. 33. 13. When I say to the Righteous, that he shall
surely live: if he trust to his own Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, all
his Righteousness shall not be remembered: but for his Iniquity that he has
committed, he shall die for it.

Pray observe that here are two things expressed for which he must die: First,
If he trust to his own Righteousness; and secondly, If he turn from his Moral
Righteousness, and committed Iniquity; the first is damning as well as the
second: But if he has a Moral Righteousness, and yet after all does not trust
to it, but flies to the Righteousness of Christ, he shall live; but if he be
Righteous, and trusts to it, he must die in his Sin, as the Righteous Jews
and Pharisees did; who being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, went Romans
10. 3.
about to establish their own Righteousness. Now from hence it appears,
contrary to what our Opponents say, That that Righteousness which these Men
turn from, could not save them; though it is true, it is said, If the wicked
Man turns from his Wickedness he has committed, and does that which is
lawful and right, he shall save his Soul alive. A doing that which is right, is
to renounce all his own Righteousness in point of Justification, and by Faith
to throw himself upon Jesus Christ; and he that does thus, shall save his Soul
alive. Therefore let all Men know that this Text only shows, that a Man that
has attained to no more than to a Moral and Legal Righteousness, must perish as
well as he that turns from it and commits Wickedness.

2 dly Those that have attained to true Gospel or Evangelical Righteousness,
have an Everlasting Righteousness; and if it lasts for ever, they that have
it cannot lose it so as eternally to perish.

Object. 12. It is said that some were twice dead, Jude 12.

Answ. What of this? They were originally dead, dead by Nature, and dead by
their own Actual Sins, and also dead after they seemed to be made alive: There
is a common quicking, as well as special; they had the common Life of Grace, or
that mutual Life that flows from common Quicknings: Others thought them once
alive, and they professed themselves to be alive; but now they became as bad,
nay worse than ever, and so are for ever lost and undone; they falling from
that Grace and Life they once had, their Apostasy rendered them miserable, and
no hopes of renewing them for ever.

Object. 13. But is it not said, God would have all Men saved? 1 Timothy 2. 4.

Answ. 1. God will have all Men saved that believe and accept of Christ, all
that repent: And they that say God would have any others saved, than Believers
or renewed Persons, contradict the Word of God; he will not have impenitent
Persons be saved, such who live in Sin, and die in Sin, but all that turn to
him through Christ: Of all sorts and degrees of Men God would have be saved;
this Doctrine we preach, and they themselves acknowledge, that God would have
none but these be saved; therefore to what End is this Text urged? But though I
have spoken to this Objection already, yet consider,

2. If they will take all Men here for the Universality of Individuals, then I
ask them, (1.) What Act it is of God wherein this his Willingness does consist?
Is it in the Eternal Purpose of his Will that all should be saved? why then is
it not accomplished? Who has resisted his Will? (2.) Or is it an Antecedent
Desire that it should be so, though he fails in the End? Then is the Blessed
God miserable, he being not able to accomplish his Just and Holy Desires. Or,
as Reverend Owen notes, (3.) Is it some Temporary Act of his, whereby he has
declared himself unto them? Then, I say, grant that Salvation is to be had in a
Redeemer, in Jesus Christ, and give me an Instance how God in any Act
whatsoever, (says he) has declared his Mind, and revealed himself to all Men
of all Times and Places, concerning his willingness of their Salvation by Jesus
Christ a Redeemer, and I will never more trouble you in this Cause. Secondly,
Does this Will equally respect the All intended, or does it not? If it does,
why has it not equal Effects toward all? What Reason can be assigned, that
all they whom God equally intended Salvation for by Christ, have it not?
However they who have Salvation, either have it as the Effects of Free Grace,
or of Free Will; Who will assert the latter? Besides, this would follow, i. e.
God will have some Men be saved, to whom he wills not the Means of their
Salvation, for so he does not to one great Part of the World.

But since we have proved that there is not a Sufficiency of Grace granted to
all universally, that is Grace subjective to enable them to believe and change
their Hearts, but to some only, I shall say no more to this; for if it were
sufficient, it would have the same Effect on all as it has on some: that which
is sufficient to such an End, would be made, no doubt, efficient by the Will of
the great Agent, who works all our Works in us, and for us, of his own good
Pleasure, and without whom we can'do nothing.

Object. 14. Well, say some, say what you will, if this Doctrine of Election
and Final Perseverance be true, we see not to what purpose we should preach the
Gospel to Sinners any more, or press Saints to Holiness.

Answ. 1. I am weary of these impertinent Objections: God has ordained the
preaching of the Gospel as the great Ordinance, to call in his Elect, and to
beget Faith in them: It pleased God by the foolishness 1 Cor. 1. 21.
of Preaching to save them that believe: And not only to beget Faith, but also
to strengthen that Faith, and to perfect the Saints more and more in Holiness.
These Men dream of an Election without the Means, and of a Salvation without
Faith and Regeneration, and a preserving Men to Eternal Life without a
Perseverance in Grace and Holiness: It is a Perseverance in well-doing we plead
for, and this we say Christ will, in the use of Means, not without it, enable
all his People to do; he will help them, strengthen them, and keep their Souls
alive. Pray consider the Ways by which Jesus Christ preserves his People unto
Everlasting Life; the Saints are said to be sanctified by the Father, and
preserved Jude 1.
in Jesus Christ.

1. It is in a Way of Holiness: And from fainting, or being weary in
well-doing, he stirs us up by his Spirit to wait upon him, and promises, That
they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their Strength; they shall mount up
with Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be Isa. 40. 31.
weary, walk and not faint; or grow stronger and stronger, both in Faith and
Patience.

2. Christ preserves us in a Way of Perseverance in well-doing, by showing us
our own Weakness, and that without him we can do nothing, but that we must
wholly rely upon him in the Way of our Duties for all things we need.

3. By increasing Grace in us: He by his Word shows, that the Grace we have
already received, is not sufficient to keep us from falling; therefore he stirs
us up to seek to him for more Grace, more Faith, more Patience, more Humility,
more Wisdom, etc.

4. By succouring us under all Temptations: For in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is also able to succor them that are Heb. 2. 18.
tempted. He has purchased Help and Succor for tempted Saints; His Bowels move
him to help us against Sin, and against Satan: He has a soft and tender Heart,
and has a fellow-feeling of our Infirmities, which is a Spring of great
Comfort to tempted Christians.

5. By warning and forewarning us of the Danger we are in by our spiritual
Enemies, and charging us by his Word always to be upon our watch, and not to
sleep as others do.

6. By putting his Fear into our Hearts, that we may not depart from him; that
is, not finally to depart; which he does when at first he infuseth Holy Habits
in us.

7. By his putting upon us that Holy and Spiritual Armor, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. Do these Men think Christ's Soldiers can expect the Victory, and
not fight? or overcome their Enemy, though they throw away their Sword, which
is the Word of God? The Preaching of the Gospel is of wonderful use, to them it
is the Word of Command, their Captain speaks to them thereby, and shows what
they are, and are not to do, and how they should keep their Ranks, and maintain
true Order and Discipline in themselves, Church and Families.

8. By his continual Intercession for them, he prays for us that we may be kept
in the World from the Evil of it, that we may not be finally overcome thereby.

These things being considered, pray, Brethren, remember that as the Saints
cannot perish as Hypocrites and Unbelievers may, so they cannot sin, live in
Sin, and in neglect of Holy Duties continually, as unsound Persons may do.

And now, Brethren, I having answered all the grand Objections that are usually
brought against the Saints final Perseverance, I shall show you some of those
Absurdities which do attend the contrary Doctrine, viz. That Christ died to
save all and every individual Person in the World, and that the Elect may fall
totally and finally away, and perish for ever.

1. It renders the Death of Christ as to its Effects, and the Success thereof,
uncertain, as to the Salvation of any one Person. The Absurdities that attend
the Doctrine of final Apostasy.


2. It does imply a Deficiency in God, or want of good Will in him to prosecute
his Design to perfection in Man's Salvation, they affirming that Christ died
for all, even every individual Traitor, who lies in strong Chains and Fetters
under the Power of Sin and Satan; but he will not break off the cursed Irons,
and bring out of the Prisonhouse but a very few of them only.

3. It would also follow then, that the Purpose of God, yea his Eternal Counsel
in Christ Jesus, may be disappointed, and Eternity be subjected to Time, the
Will of the Creator to the Will of the Creature, the first Cause to the Second;
and all or many of God's Absolute Acts to be suspended unto the actings of
sorry Man, and so the Lord submit to the Servant: Yea, as says a Reverend
Minister, Charnock.
"It sets God at an uncertainty, because it does subject the Grace of God to
the Will of Man: it hangs the Glory of his Grace in all the Motions of it, and
the Efficacy of the Promises upon the slipperiness of Man's Will and
Affections. It makes the Omnipotent Grace of God follow, not precede the
Motions of Man's Will; to be the Lacquey, not the Leader, either in converting
or preserving, which is at best to make the Glory of God's Grace as volatile as
a Feather; at the best, sometimes up, sometimes down; the Soul is this Moment
embraced by the Lord with the dearest Affections, the next cast out as a Vessel
wherein is no Pleasure, and the succeeding Moment admitted to fresh
Communications; this Hour the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the next an Habitation
for Dragons and Satyrs: The Will of Man giving one Time the Key to the Spirit,
the next Time to the Devil."

4. It gives occasion to Man to boast, and so contradicts the whole Design of
God in the Gospel of his own Free Grace, which is to take away for ever any
Cause for the Creature in himself to glory.

5. It brings in that great Absurdity of the Repetition of Regeneration,
whereof there is no mention made in all the Scripture; unless they do believe
all that fall away so as to lose the Seed of Grace, or from being in a State of
Grace, are lost for ever, or fall irrecoverably: but a Repetition of
Regeneration seems to be maintained by one of the chief of them, from Heb. 6.
6. If they fall away, to renew them again, etc. See Dr. Owen, in his Answer to
Mr. John Goodwin, page 114, 115, 116.
It Is impossible, he denies, to renew some to Repentance; but others he would
infer from thence may be renewed. Now a renewing again to Repentance, may be
where the Seed of Grace was never lost, but the Strength and Exercise of it, as
in David's and Peter's Case; therefore it is not a total falling which Believers
are liable to, but a partial only. But to suppose that such who are regenerated
may fall totally, and be renewed again to Repentance, does presuppose a
Repetition of a former Birth, or a second Regeneration. To prove which, these
Men mention that Text, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots. Now evident it is,
that if true Believers may fall totally from Grace, and none of them can be
renewed again, then all such that so fall, sin against the Holy Ghost. But if
they may be renewed again, then there is a repetition of Regeneration. When I
come to speak to that Text in the 6 th of the Hebrews, I hope I shall
sufficiently prove, by the Assistance of God, that those there mentioned, were
not true Believers; as I have proved no true Believer can so fall as to need
another Regeneration, though they may fall as to need a gracious Restoration,
or to be healed of their backsliding: Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation.
Psa. 51. 12.


6. It tends to frustrate the absolute Design of Christ, and his Promise made
to his Saints, or makes it of none Effect; who has said, I give them Eternal
Life, and they shall not perish, (...); not, not perish, as some read it.

7. It renders the Death of Christ in the Effects of it uncertain to any;
Unless they are such who have found out another way of Salvation for some than
for others, for some affirm, that there is an Election of a certain Number, and
they shall infallibly be saved; and there is a way for others to be saved too:
some the King sends his Chariot of Free Grace for, to bring them home to
himself; and others must trudg home on their own Feet, which they may do if
they will: which idle Notion deserves no Breath nor Paper to confute.

8. That a Man may be in God's special Love to Day, and his dear Child, having
his Image stamped upon his Soul, and to morrow be hated by him, and be the
Child of the Devil, and have his Likeness and Image upon him. And from hence it
renders God's Love mutable, and as if he did not foresee all Emergencies from
Eternity. Can these Men fancy infinite Bowels and Affections so unconcerned, as
to let the Apple of his Eye be plucked out, or he be as a careless Spectator,
whilst he is robbed of his precious Jewels by the Powers of Hell; to have the
Delight of his Soul (as reverend Charnock notes) lost like a Tennis Ball
between himself and the Devil.

9. It does cast a Disgrace upon the Wisdom of God, in contriving no better a
way for the Restoration of Man, and his Establishment, but that which depends
wholly upon the voluble and inconstant Temper of the Creatures corrupt Will to
perfect in them.

10. Such who assert that those may eternally perish whom Christ died for, or
in the stead of, seem to charge God with Injustice, as not to acquit those
whose Transgressions are answered for by their Surety; or else that the
Sufferings of Christ were not sufficient to effect a Discharge due to them: Or
does it not insinuate (as one notes) a Deficiency of Power, or want of good
Practical Discourse, page 125.
Will in Christ to prosecute his design to Perfection?

11. It suspends the Virtue and Success of all that Christ has done for Men,
upon some thing to be done by themselves, which Christ is not the doer of; and
consequently, that Men are Principals in procuring their own Salvation: And so
Christ shall have his Thousands, (in truth says he his Nothings) whilst
freedom of Will (or he might have said Free Will) shall have his Ten thousands.
Is this to exalt the Lord alone, or to raise and sing the Praises of our
Beloved David? And further,

12. It would also follow, as he observes, that those who are gone to Heaven,
have nothing more of Christ's to glory in, and to praise him for, than those
who are perished and gone to Hell: For, according to the Principle of General
Redemption, Christ did and does for all alike, and not a Jot more for one Party
than for another. Also, as he notes, it tends to make Men presumptuous and
carnally secure. How many have soothed up themselves in their Impenitency and
hardness of their Hearts, and fenced themselves against the Word, upon this
very Supposition, that Christ died for all, and therefore for them, and why
should not they look to be saved as well as others? To which I might add, their
Notion of that Power which they say is in the Creature to believe, leads Men
out to defer looking out for Salvation: for why may they not delay to do that
to Day, which is in their Power to do to Morrow, and may be perhaps some Years
hence as well as now? But let them and all others know, Christ's Death will
have its Effect on their Hearts, if he died for them, and they must look to him
when he calls, and wait upon him for the moving of his Spirit, in the use of
that Means which he has ordained in order to Faith and Regeneration, and in
the season of it, who says, To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your
Hearts, etc. but the Will, the Deed; they must wait upon the Lord to give unto
them, and work by his Spirit in them.

APPLICATION.

I shall in the lost place make a little Improvement of what I have said, and
so finish with this Text.

1. Inform. This may serve to inform and convince all Persons concerning the
absolute Sovereignty of God. He may save Man if he please, and not Angels; or
may send a Savior for some of the lost Sons of Adam, and not for all; Who
shall say to him, What do thou? If he had vouchsafed a Savior for none of
Adam's Posterity, had he been unjust, any more than he is in casting off for
ever all the fallen Angels?

He called Abraham out of his own Country, and revealed himself to him, and let
others remain then under the Power of Sin, Ignorance and Idolatry, calling them
not.

He revealed himself to Isaac, and rejected Ishmael; he chose Jacob, and
refused Esau; he afterward chose the Children of Israel to be a peculiar
People for himself, and let all other Nations of the Deuteronomy. 7.
Earth abide in Darkness.

And in the Gospel-Days Christ chose a few poor Fishermen, and refused the
Learned and Wise Men after the Flesh: nay, and hid the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven from the Wise and Mat. 11. 25.
Prudent; and all this as an Act alone of his Sovereignty.

And in these days, what Reason can be alleged, why we, and a few Nations
more, have the Knowledge of the Gospel, when the greatest part of the Earth lie
in Popish, Mohammedan, and Pagan Darkness, but that it is his good pleasure so
to do? He has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardens.
Romans 9. 18.


2. Praise God for the Knowledge you have of the Mysteries of Christ, and the
Gospel of Free Grace: Brethren next unto the Grace of God in my Conversion, I
have often said, I do look upon my self bound to admire the Riches of God's
Love and Goodness to me, in opening my Eyes to see those Arminian Errors, which
when I was Young, I had from some Men of corrupt Principles sucked in; nay, and
when I was about 23 Years Old, I wrote a little Book for Children, in which
some of those Errors were vindicated; which after, my Eyes were enlightened, and
the Book with Alterations being again Reprinted, I left out, and now do declare
my dislike of the first Impressions, and do disown what I there asserted: When
I was a Child, I thought as a Child, I understood as a Child, as the Apostle
speaks. And let me entreat you to study the Nature of the Covenant of Grace;
for until I had that opened unto me, I was ignorant of the Mysteries of the
Gospel.

3. O do not forget, that the Design of God in contriving our Salvation in his
Eternal Wisdom by Jesus Christ, was wholly to advance his own Glory, and the
Freeness and Riches of his Grace, and to abase and humble Man unto the Dust;
therefore be sure never err on that Hand: And I think it is not easy for Men
well to err on the other, I mean, in exalting God alone, Christ alone, though I
deny not but that some good Men, who in seeking to advance Free Grace, perhaps
have erred, and taken up some unsound Notions, as that of Actual or Personal
Justification, before Faith and Actual Union with Jesus Christ. O what need
have we to ponder well the Paths of our Feet, and not with Pride to magnify our
selves, or strive to promote any corrupt Notion, under any Pretense whatsoever!
Our Days are Evil, many dangerous Errors abound, and it is cause of greatest
Grief to see what a Generation of Men are risen up of late, who strive to mix
God's pure Gold with their Dross, and his Wine with their Water. Though on the
other Hand, let us bless and praise the Lord for raising up so many brave
Champions in the mean time, of our Brethren of the Congregational Way, to
defend the Gospel of God's Grace, and the Truth as it is in Jesus: Yet I could
wish there was not so much Gall in some of them against us their Brethren, who
in all the great Truths of Christianity are of one Mind and Judgment, and yet
are exposed to Reproach for witnessing to a Truth of Christ that lies as plain
in the Gospel as any one Truth or positive Precept of Christ whatsoever; I
mean, that of Believers Baptism. Why should we be censured for maintaining that
Truth which the Holy Ghost so fully bears witness unto? I long to see more of
the Spirit of Love and Charity; would to God that Chapter, 1 Cor. 13. was more
read and considered.

4. This may also serve to reprehend such who strive to cast Reproach upon this
Holy Doctrine, and such that maintain it as if it tended to encourage People in
Sin, or open a Door to Licentiousness: Let all for ever forbear such
Reflections; Is not this the Purport of that Doctrine which we vindicate?

(1.) That there is wrought and preserved in the Minds and Souls of all
Believers, by the Holy Spirit, a Supernatural Principle of Grace and Holiness,
whereby they are made meet, and enabled to live unto God, and discharge all
Duties of Obedience which he requires of them, and accepts through Christ;
which Principle or Habit of Grace is essentiaily distinct from all Natural
Habits, Intellectual and Moral, however, and by what Means so ever acquired or
improved.

(2.) That the Holy Spirit by his effectual Operations, does enable us,
according as we are required by his immediate Influences, in all Acts of
Obedience; whether internal only in Faith and Love, etc. or External also; even
so, that all the Powers of our Souls, and Members of our Bodies, are or ought
to be in a spiritual manner governed and influenced thereby, and unto all
Duties of Holiness, in our daily walking with God: and that all this is the
Effect of God's Free Grace to us in Jesus Christ, who has communicated of the
Spirit without measure, to our Blessed Head and Mediator, that he may give it
forth to all his Saints that have Union with him, and believe in him.

Brethren, God has circumcised the Hearts of his People, to love him with all
their Souls, and with all their Strength: He writes Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
his Law in our Hearts, as he promised; I will put my Law in their inward
Parts, and write it in their Hearts. This gracious Habit or Jer. 31. 33.
Principle in the Soul, is nothing but a Transcript of the Holy Law of God,
implanted and abiding in our Hearts, whereby we are enabled, with Cheerfulness
and ready Inclination of our Spirits, to act in the Duties of Obedience and
Holiness unto God, as he requires of us: and also our Likeness and Conformity
unto God, does consist herein; I say, it does consist in this Divine and Sacred
Principle, or Spiritual Habit that is infused into the Soul, it is our
Spiritual Life, whereby we live unto God; it is the Foundation and Sum of all
Internal Excellencies; no Works, no Duties, are accepted, where this Principle
is not. It is a Vital Principle of Holiness, and it makes Religion co-natural
to us: Moreover, it is a certain, a permanent, and an abiding Principle; it is
that Seed that remains in Believers, and will have good and spiritual Fruit to
attend it: therefore this Doctrine must needs promote Holiness, that is thus
founded on such a Sacred Principle, and the Motives are every way as strong.

5. It appears, Brethren, that our standing by Grace is most firm and sure, it
is like the standing of those who are in their consummate State in Glory: The
Good Angels, and Blessed Souls above, are confirmed in that State by
superabounding Grace; for by Nature (as one observes) the Angels are mutable:
What was the Reason some of them fell, who beheld the Face of God? The bare
beholding the Face and Glory of God, will not continue one Creature in a happy
State, without an Act of Divine and Confirming Grace; it is a continual
Addition of Grace, and Supplies of Grace, that preserves our Souls in a State
of Life: and to this End are we united to Jesus Christ; I mean to such an Head,
that of and from his Fullness we might have a Communication of Strength, and all
Divine Influences, as our Souls do stand in need.

6. And this being so, labor after the Exercise of Grace, rest not in a small
Degree thereof; the more Grace you have, the more Glory you will bring to God,
and the more easy it will be for you to resist Temptations.

7. The more Grace, also the more Peace: Holiness is that which God calls for;
it is that which becomes his House for ever, and without it no Man shall ever
see the Lord. Therefore let this be the Use of all the Sermons you have heard
from this Text, even to work up your Hearts to Thankfulness, to Holiness, in
all the whole Course of your Lives, and to depend upon Christ alone, into whose
Hand you are committed by the Father, that he would give you fresh Supplies of
Grace, and keep you from falling. To whom, with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be Glory and Praise for ever. Amen.

The Trial of the False Professor: OR, The Danger of Final APOSTASY; Opened in
three SERMONS, preached lately at Horse-lie-down: Wherein the Nature of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is discovered.
HEB. VI. 4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost,
ver 4.
And have tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come,
ver. 5.
If they fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance: seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, ver. 6.

Sermon. 1.
BELOVED, this Place of Holy Scripture was sent to me in Writing some Months
ago, I know not by whom, perhaps by some who hold a Total and Final Apostasy
from Afterward I was informed who it was that sent it to me.
a State of True Grace.

But before I entered upon this Text, I resolved, in the Strength of God, to
endeavor to prove the Impossibility of their final Falling, who are True
Believers, or such who have Real Union with Jesus Christ, which I hope I have
effectually done.

I know that this Text is brought by some to prove, That True Believers may
fall, not only foully, but also finally: Which certainly is a great Mistake,
which I shall endeavor, God assisting, to make appear.

Mr. John Goodwin, speaking of this Place, and that in Heb. 10. Mr. John
Goodwin 's sense of the Subjects (...) meant.
26. If we sin wilfully, etc. says, Evident it is from these two Passages, the
Holy Ghost, after a serious manner, and with a very pathetick and moving sirain
of Speech and Discourse, (scarce the like to be found in all the Scripture)
admonishes those who are at present true Believers, to take heed of relapsing
into the ways of their former Ignorance and Impiety. This Caveat or Admonition
he presses by an Argument of this import, that in case they shall thus
relapse, there will be very little or no hope at all of their Recovery or
Return to the Estate of Faith and Grace, wherein now they stand before the
Faces of such Sayings and Passages as these: rightly understood, and duly
considered, there is no standing for that Doctrine which denies a Possibility,
either of a total or final Defection of the Saints, etc. He add, That the
Supposition or Hypothetical Proposition, If they fall away, does denote here a
Possibility of it: which I will not deny; but that these Persons of which the
Apostle speaks, were true Believers, I see no ground at all to believe, but do
utterly deny it: yet I readily grant, this has always been looked upon as a
very difficult place of Scripture to be rightly understood, I have therefore
consulted the best Authors and Exposuors I could meet with upon it.

1. And I find that some of the Ancients, mistaking the Drift The Sense of some
of the Ancient Fathers of this Text.
and Design of the Holy Ghost herein, would take no Repentance from such who
fell under Temptation in Times of Persecution, especially if they fell into
Idolatry.

2. Nay, such as fell into scandalous Crimes, as Adultery, and the like, they
would not admit by Repentance into the Church, or have Communion any more with
them. And from hence I find that Tertullian reflects upon the Bishop of Rome,
that had admitted an Adulterer upon his Repentance. Also Novatus, as I find him
quoted by a good Author, denied all Hope of Church Pardon unto such Persons
that had fallen into gross Sins, after they had made a Profession of the
Gospel, and that from hence. Which may seem strange, considering that Paul
admitted the incestuous Person upon his Repentance, that being so notorious a
Crime, as most do or can fall into. But no more as to this.

Brethren, before I proceed, let me premise three or four things. 1. That the
Apostasy here spoken of, is not a bare falling into this or that Actual Sin, be
it of whatever Nature it will: For do we not read how grievously some of the
Saints of God sinned and fell, and yet were restored again by Repentance? 2.
Nor is it a partial Apostasy, or a falling upon Temptation or Surprizal, in
Time of Persecution, though it be to the denying of Christ; for did not Peter
so fall, and yet was restored afterward? 3. Neither is it a falling into some
Capital Error, as some of the Corinthians fell, by denying the Resurrection of
the Dead, whom Paul labored to recover: Or like that of the Galatians, who
fell by denying Justification by Faith alone, but mixed Works with God's Free
Grace in that great Point of Faith. 4. Nor is it a falling of Ignorant Persons,
who never made any Profession of Religion; such are not capable so to sin as is
here mentioned, because it is expressly said to be such who were once
enlightened, etc. 5. And lastly; Neither is it a falling away of such who are
justified Persons, or of those who have savingly been enlightened and quickened
by the Spirit of God; for such I have sufficiently proved cannot fall totally
and finally so as to perish. Thus far in the Negative.


But in the Affirmative. 1. This Apostasy is a total and final falling away;
and that because it is said, It is impossible to renew them again unto
Repentance. 2. It does intend, or comprehend, such Persons that have received
the Knowledge of the Truth, or of the Way of Righteousness, according to that in
2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. They are such who have not only been enlightened, but also are
such who had tasted of the Heavenly Gift. 3. Yet never were savingly
illuminated, wrought upon, or regenerated by the Spirit and Grace of God.
Brethren, there are great Seize which Persons may arrive unto, without
one Dram of true saving Grace; as the young Man, also the foolish Virgins, and
those meant by the stony and thorny Ground, Mat. 13.


I shall now come to the Text it self: And, First, Consider the Words, with the
Connection of those things preceding and succeeding Secondly, The Subjects or
Persons spoken of, under their diverse Qualifications. Thirdly, What it is that
is said concerning these Persons.


First, As touching the Connection of the Words with what precedes, it is
evident, that the Hebrew Church, or some among them, had been slow and dull of
hearing, or very ill Proficients in the School of Christ, viz. they had not
attained to that Knowledge and Experience which for the time they had they might
have arrived unto, Chap. 5. 12. They seemed but Infants or Babes in Knowledge,
and had need to be taught again which were the first Principles of the Doctrine
of Christ. And from hence the Apostle acquaints them with the Danger of not
persevering in the Knowledge of Christ, and of not pressing forward, or going on
to Perfection: And also intimates, that this would give just Cause or Ground to
fear, that they were not sincere Christians; and from thence gives them an
Account of those that might sin the Sin against the Holy Ghost, or of the
miserable State and Condition of such who after high Illuminations and great
Knowledge of the Divine Truth, and a Profession of the Gospel, do fall away;
whose Apostasy, though at first it might be but partial, yet might (they not
being truly regenerated) end at last in a total and final falling away: And
that deadness, dullness, and non-proficiency in Godliness, might and would end
(if their Hearts were not right with God) in a final Apostasy: Or, as a worthy
Writer notes, Mr. David Dickson.
he presupposes, "Except they study to make Progress, they shall go backwards;
and that going backwards, tends to Apostasy: And that voluntary and complete
Apostasy from known Truth, does harden the Heart from Repentance, and cutteth
off a Man from Mercy: He accounts our natural Security so great, that there
is need of most fearful Threatenings to awaken us out of it; and that the way to
be freed from final falling, is to make a good Progression." From hence note,

Doct. 1. That the severest Doctrine is not only useful, but exceeding
necessary toward Persons that are observed to be remiss and slothful in their
Profession.

Yet Charity becomes a Minister nevertheless, and not to censure a People from
hence. And this we may gather from what he says, with the Connection of the
Words with what succeeds: But Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you,
and things that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak, ver. 9.

Secondly, We shall consider the Persons here spoken of, under What the Persons
are that the Apostle here intends.
their diverse Qualifications and great Seize, which are fivefold; and yet
notwithstanding all that, they might fall away and perish for ever: and if they
did fall totally, before they were truly regenerated, their Apostasy would be
final; or it would be impossible for them to be renewed again by Repentance,
either to that State in which they were before, or unto a better, from whence
there is no possibility of their final falling.

In this general Description of the Persons here mentioned, let us consider
four or five things more particularly.

1 st. Consider the Apostle's Design, which is to declare or discover the
fearful State and just Judgment of God against the Persons here meant or
intended.

2 dly. That those five Seize he here speaks of, are acquired by some who
had been Professors of the Gospel, and looked upon as eminent Christians, such
that had made a Profession of Repentance from dead Works, and of Faith toward
God, and had been baptized, and owned all other Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ. See ver. 1, 2, 3.

3 dly. That all those high Privileges and Seize, whereof they were made
Partakers by the Gospel, they afterward despised; or, when under their
Apostasy, did contemn: which loudly proclaims their Destruction from God to be
just and deserved.

4 thly. That all their Privileges and Seize, (as Reverend Dr. Owen
observes) do consist in certain Operations of the Holy Ghost, under the
Dispensation of the Gospel; and therefore not such Persons that never professed
it, or had been enlightened thereby.

5 thly. And let it be well and for ever observed, that the Apostle mentions
not one of those special and distinguishing Marks or Characters of true
Believers or Sanctified Christians. As, 1. Here is not a word of the Covenant
of Grace into which they had been received, nothing spoken of the Faith of the
Operation of God in all those five Seize they had arrived at. 2. Not a
word of their having attained to Union with Christ, or of the Implantation of
the Holy Spirit, though they had had some kind of taste thereof. 3. Not a word
of Regeneration; he does not say, It is impossible for such that have been born
of God, begotten of the Spirit: No, no, nothing of that. 4 Here is nothing
spoken of their being justified, or of Justification unto Life. 5. Not a word
in all their fivefold Seize of Sanctification by the Spirit; we read not
of any effectual Calling they had arrived unto. 6. Nothing is mentioned of
their Election, of Adoption, nor of their Love to God or to his poor Saints;
none of these things are expressed or assigned unto them, which do all
appertain to every true Christian.


6 thly. It ought also carefully to be noted, that when the Apostle What things
do accompany Salvation.
comes to speak of his Hope of the Saints to whom he wrote, i. e. that they
were not such, he lays down or describes by way of Intimation, the Characters
of true Believers, by other distinguishing Qualifications: But Beloved, we are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though we
thus speak. Now observe, Heb. 6. 9.
if those Persons he mentions that had been once enlightened, and had tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, etc. had been true Christians; what better things could the
Apostle be persuaded was in these Hebrews than was in them? Are there better
things than Union with Christ, than Justification, than Regeneration, true
Faith, Pardon of Sin, Love to God and to his People, Sanctification of the
Spirit and Adoption? No, no, there are no better things that any Christian can
attain unto in this Life than these. Moreover,

7 thly. The Apostle clearly intimates, that they were such who were like the
Ground which the Rain falls often upon, that nevertheless brings forth Briars and
Thorns, and no good Fruit.

8 thly. There is one thing particularly noted by the Apostle concerning these
Hebrew Christians, which they had, and which the other had not, therefore not
gracious Persons: See ver. 10. For God is not unrighteous, to forget your Work
of Faith and Labor of Love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye
have ministered to the Saints, and do minister.

(1.) This he mentions as a Reason of his good Opinion of them, Love to the
poor Saints, a blessed sign of true Grace.
and why he was so persuaded of them; and which was better than all those high
Seize of which he speaks concerning such that are in danger of Final
Apostasy: Love to the poor Saints in ministering to them for the sake of Christ,
or because they are the Members of his Body, is more than all those five
Seize mentioned in the 4 th, 5 th and 6 th Verses. Now also let it be
considered, that if this Fruit of true and saving Grace, I mean, Charity or
Love to the poor Saints, as such, had been in the Persons he speaks of, who
were in danger of falling finally; how then could this be an Argument of such
Confidence in Paul concerning them, or of Comfort to those Saints he wrote
unto? Alas, what are common Illuminations? What is it to have some transit
taste of the Heavenly Gift, or to be made Partakers of the common Operations of
the Spirit in Convictions of Sin or of Duty, to the Inhabitation of the Spirit,
or unfeigned Love to Christ and to the Children of God? Or what is it to have
some taste of the good Word of God, to a spiritual feeding and digesting it, or
to be affected with the powerful Doctrine of the Gospel in respect of the World
to come; or with the Resurrection of the Dead and last Judgment, to the
gracious Experience of the Power of Christ's Resurrection, and so feel in our
Souls a Discharge from the Judgment of the Great Day, through Faith in Jesus
Christ?

(2.) The Apostle was persuaded concerning these Hebrew Christians, that they
had such things in them that did accompany Salvation; that is, such things that
are inseparable from Salvation; i. e. such who have them shall certainly be
saved. He describes such who are sincere Christians, by the Fruits and Effects
of true Grace, namely, the Work of Faith, and Labor of Love, by which their
Obedience unto God did appear.

1. He notes the Principle from whence they acted in their Duty to God.

2. The Constancy of their Obedience; they continued in bringing forth of that
good Fruit, they had ministered to the Saints, and still did minister to them.

3. He takes notice of the Principle from whence they acted, or did what they
did, viz. they ministered to the Saints in Love to God, and to Jesus Christ; it
was Love showed to his Name.

4. He adds that in their Preservation in their happy State, the Faithfulness
of God: God is not unrighteous to forget your Work of Faith, etc. which
comprehends his Covenant and Promise to them; which for their farther Comfort,
he enlarges upon, ver. 13 to ver. 19. to which he subjoins the Promise and
Oath of God made to all that are sincere Believers, or Heirs of the Promise.

But to proceed, to speak to those five Qualifications or Seize of the
Person she speaks of in our Text, who may fall away and finally perish for ever.

First, The first is their being once enlightened. They might be instructed in
the Doctrine of the Gospel beyond many, or be illuminated, not only by learning
the literal Knowledge of the Gospel, as Men learn Philosophy, but also may
attain to some supernatural Light by the common Illuminations of the Spirit;
and may understand many profound Mysteries of the Gospel: yet remember,
Knowledge puffs up; they might have knowing Heads, but graceless Hearts. Note
from hence,

Doct. 2. That it is a high Privilege and an Attainment for Men to be
enlightened with the Knowledge of the Gospel; yet nevertheless Men may attain to
much Light therein, and yet not be savingly enlightened, but may finally fall
away and perish notwithstanding at last. First, I shall show you what the
common Illuminations of the Spirit are that Men may fall from. Secondly, Shall
show you what the saving and special Illuminations of the Spirit are, and how
they differ.


1 st. Common Enlightnings of the Word and Spirit, may tend The Nature of the
common Illuminations of the Spirit.
to convince the Conscience of a Sinner of Sin.

1. As to the horrid Guilt thereof, as it exposes the Soul to God's Wrath:
Thus was Judas enlightened, his Conscience was convinced that he had betrayed
the Innocent Blood: Thus also Felix was enlightened under Paul's preaching.

2. From these Convictions they may also with much horror confess their Sins:
Cain, Judas, and many others did this.

3. From these Illuminations and Convictions, they may reform their Lives, and
do many things, like as Herod did upon his hearing John the Baptist.

4. Nay, common Illuminations may discover to the Sinner much of that Evil that
there is in Sin, that God abhors it, and that it is contrary to his Nature,
as well as a violation of his Holy Law; and this Light they may receive, from
what God declares concerning Sin, and of his abhorrence of it in his Word, as
also by those fearful Judgments which he inflicteth upon, and pronounces
against such that sin, live in Sin, and make a Trade of it. Likewise by the
Knowledge they may attain concerning Christ's suffering for Sin, and by the
Punishment of the Damned in Hell; and no doubt but the Devils know the great
Evil of Sin in all these respects.

But pray observe, that although these Persons may know that Sin is against
God, contrary to his Holy Nature, and that he does abhor it; yet this Light and
Knowledge they have, never brings them to loath and abhor it in themselves
because of the evil Nature of it, and as it is against God.

2 dly. They also by these common Illuminations, may come to know that God is
Man's chiefest Good: The Heathen found this out by the Light of Nature,
considering in themselves that nothing in this World could satisfy the Soul,
etc. But these Persons attain unto a farther Sight and Knowledge of it, by the
Word, in a supernatural manner; but yet remember that the Light they have,
never leads them to make choice of God as their chiefest Good and only
Happiness.

3 dly. They may attain unto the Knowledge of all the great and essential
Principles of the Christian Religion, and be able to dispute and contend for
them also, against Opposers; nay, may be able Preachers of that Holy Doctrine:
Have we not prophesied in thy Mat. 7. 22.
Name? etc. No doubt but Judas was a great Preacher as well as Peter. Yet
observe, and note it well, they may be utter Strangers to that Grace, Faith,
Love and Regeneration, which they may open, explain, and press upon others.

4 thly. They may know that Christ is a most blessed and precious Object; but
yet never experienced him to be precious above all things to themselves.

5 thly They may know the True Church, and also know what is required of
Persons in order to their becoming Members thereof, namely, Repentance, Faith
and Baptism: Nay, and they may have some kind of Repentance; Judas repented:
Also they may believe; Simon believed: They may have a common Faith, the Faith
of Credence, or an Historical Faith; believe the Report of the Gospel and
Revelation of Christ, and the Sum of the Christian Religion; nay, believe or
receive the Word with some sort of Joy, Mat. 13. 20. Moreover, they may be
baptized and received into the Church, and be looked upon to be true Believers:
But because these things are daily opened to you, I shall not enlarge further
upon them: You that have that excellent Book, called, The Almost Christian, may
see how far a Man may go and be but a false Professor. O take heed you rest not
on any External Knowledge or Revelation of Divine Things. You can talk of
Religion, dispute for those great Points of Faith; you know Truth from Error;
and so you may, and yet perish for ever. Moreover consider, that all
Convictions that end not in Regeneration, or in true Conversion, or that change
not the Heart and Life, will avail you nothing.

Secondly, I shall show you the Nature of True Illuminations, and how the one
differs from the other: it appears by what the Holy Ghost intimates here and in
other places, as well as by all our Experiences, that Light or Illumination is
the first thing God does create in the Souls of all that are renewed; and if it
be but a common Light, the Work that flows therefrom will be but a common Work
of the Spirit; and if that Light that is in Men be Darkness, how great is that
Darkness! Mat. 6. 23.


Now as touching the special and saving Illuminations of the Spirit, they
differ from the common.

1. In respect of Convictions of Sin: Evangelical Illuminations The Nature of
the special Illuminations of the Spirit.
of the Spirit, discover to the Soul its fearful State; not only that Sin is of
a hateful Nature, but that he is condemned as a Person dead in Law, and
trembles at the sight and sense thereof, not knowing but that the Sentence may
be suddenly executed upon him: They were pricked in the Heart, and cried out,
Men and Brethren, Acts 2. 37.
what shall we do? It was their Sin that made them cry out. But pray observe,
that the sight and sense of Sin never breaks the Heart thoroughly and kindly,
till the Soul sees the pardoning Grace of God in Christ. Show a Condemned
Malefactor a Pardon from his Prince, (that was hardened before under the Sense
of the Severity of the Law) O then he is melted and wounded, Goodness and Mercy
overcomes him; so it is with a poor Sinner, when he sees God's Love and Grace
in Christ; or a bleeding Christ, who has born the Punishment due to him for his
Offenses: then he is kindly broken, and mourns that ever he grieved or offended
God; They shall look unto him whom they have pierced, and shall Zech. 12. 20.
Acts 2. 36.
mourn: It was Jesus that you have crucified, the Lord of Life and Glory, whom
God has made both Lord and Christ.

2. Common Convictions reach only to some Sins, perhaps scandalous Sins; they
chiefly, if not only, torment the Conscience, under some awakening Providence,
or under the preaching of Wrath and Judgment; And as he reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance, Acts 24, 25.
and Judgment to come, Felix trembled. Doubtless Felix lived in some gross Sin,
and now his Conscience was awakened, and terrified him for those Evils, he
hearing of the Judgment to come. But special Illuminations in Convictions,
cause the Soul to see all its Sins, its secret Sins, yea, Heart-Evils: Come,
see a Man which Joh. 4. 29.
told me all things that ever I did; Is not this the Christ? Christ's Word laid
all the Evils of the Heart open to her sight. I was, faith David shapen in
Iniquity; and in Sin did my Mother conceive Psalm. 51. 5.
me. All Sin afflicts the Soul, Original Sin as well as Actual Sin.

3. Common Convictions make a Person sensible of the Punishment of Sin, and to
feel the Wrath of God which is due unto him: My Punishment is greater than I
can bear, says Cain. But special Illuminations under Convictions make the Soul
to groan under the Filth and Pollution of Sin; They shall loath themselves for
Ezekiel. 6. 9.
the Evils they have committed. But when is that? Even when they see that I am
(says the Lord) pucified toward them: And ye Ezekiel. 20. 43.
shall remember your Ways, and all your Doings wherein you have been defiled,
and ye shall loath your selves in your own sight. Hence Job cries out, I abhor
my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. Moreover, Job 42. 5. Psalm. 38. 7.
upon this respect it was that David compared his Sin and Pollution to a
loathsome Disease. The one cries out, that he has offended an angry God; this is
the Nature of legal Convictions, such would fain get out of God's Hands, he
flies from him: But the other cries out, I have grieved a Good and Gracious
God, and he flies to him, as the Prodigal did to his loving and compassionate
Father.

4. Common Illuminations in Convictions, lay the Soul half dead, he sees he is
Wounded; but special Illuminations of the Spirit, discover the Soul is quite
Dead: When the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died. The one discovers
that the Person Romans 7. 9.
is a Sinner, but not in a helpless State; for though he sees he is undone by
his Sin and Disobedience, yet he thinks he may rise by his Duties and
Obedience: But a Person truly enlightened, sees he must have a Principle of Life
infused, before he can rise, live, or act; and that all his own Righteousness
he has, or is capable of obtaining, is but as Dung and Filthiness in his sight.

5. Common Illuminations cause a Man to see Sin, as it is a great Evil against
himself; I have killed a Man to my hurt, says one of this sort: But special
Illuminations discover Sin to be the greatest Evil, as it is against God: the
one may know that God hates Sin, but the other is brought to hate it himself,
and because God hates it: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done Psalm.
51. 4.
this Evil in thy sight. O says a poor Believer, what have I done? I have
contemned, despised, and spit in the very Face of God; the one is afraid of
God, but the other fears God; the one is afraid of him because of his Justice,
the other fears God because of his Goodness; They shall fear the Lord and his
Goodness; or shall fear and worship God in Christ, because of his Goodness,
Hos. 3. 5.
Grace and Mercy.

6. Common Illuminations give a Person a sense of Death and Wrath due to Sin;
but special Illuminations give a Man a sense and an effecting sight of the
Death of Christ, and of that Wrath and Curse he has born for him in his stead:
Legal Convictions discovered only to them under the Law (who saw no further)
that the Life of the poor Beasts went for Sin; but Evangelical Convictions show
that nothing can atone for our Sins, and satisfy God's Justice, but the Life of
the Son of God, not the Blood of Bulls or Lambs; no, it must be the Blood of
the Lamb of God.

7. Common Illuminations are a Man's Torment and Affliction, and fain he would
be eased and freed of them, and of the smart thereby; but the special ones tend
to make a Man fear that he is not troubled enough, he would be searched
thoroughly: Search me, Psalm. 139. 23.
and know my Heart; try me, and know my Thoughts; see if there be any evil Way
in me. O lance my Soul, Lord lay open my Sore, let me not be slightly healed:
The one would fain shake the Trouble off, he thinks it is enough, nay, too
much; the other would have it lie faster on: O let not my Sore be skinned over.
The Devils cried, Why do thou torment us before the Time? So unsound Persons
would not be tormented; but Conscience has got hold of them, and they cannot
get out of its Hand. But one truly enlightened, says, with David, I will be
sorry for my Sin; I choose it, I desire it: The one desires to be freed from the
Effects of Sin, from the Pain and Punishment thereof; but the other cries out
to be delivered from the Sin, which is the Cause of all Pain and Punishment:
The one is like the Swine, who likes not the Whip, yet loves the Mire; they
like not the Lash of the Law, but hate to come under the Yoke of the Gospel:
The one cries out for a Plaster to ease his Conscience, may be he is willing
to let some Boughs and Twigs be lop'd off; but the other would have the Ax laid
to the Root of the Tree; he would have the Body of Sin, as well as the
Branches, to be destroyed; he is for cutting off the right Hand, Lusts of
Profit, and for pulling out the right Eye, Lusts of Pleasure: The unsound Soul
is, like Saul, for sparing some of the Fat of the Cattle, and Agag the King, I
mean his chief and beloved Lusts; but a sincere Christian is for yielding up
all to the Sword of the Spirit.

8. Common Enlightnings work Terror, which may be at last drive the Soul
further from God; as it is said of Cain, He went Genesis 4. 16.
out from the Presence of the Lord: But special and saving Convictions, cause
the Soul to draw nearer to God in Jesus Christ: The one is like a Slave under
the Rod, fain would get away from his Master; the other is like a Child under
the Rod, that desires to see and behold his Father's reconciled Face and
Favor. The common Illuminations wound, but the Soul sees not the Way of Cure,
nor will he bear the Instrument which would let out the Life and Power of Sin,
but perhaps catches up some thing or another to apply to his Sore, may be his
changed Life, his Duties and good Deeds: from hence he hopes that his State is
good, he being as he thinks not the Man he once was. But as he who is under
special Illuminations, comes to be wounded, by beholding a bleeding Savior,
which is the alone way of Cure; so he chiefly desires that Faith, that Grace
which will destroy the Life and Power of all Sin, and thoroughly cleanse and
purify his Soul. Brethren, the Spirit of a Sinner may be torn into pieces by
legal Terror, the Heart of Stone may be broken, and yet no Heart of Flesh be
given; the Ground may be plowed up in part, yet the Seed of Grace not sown in
the Heart: Sensuality, says one, may be kept down by a Spirit of Bondage, when
it is not cast out by the Spirit of Adoption: They have the Law to convince
them, but not Grace to renew them; it is not being once enlightened that is
sufficient, unless truly enlightened; it is not great Knowledge, unless it be
sanctified; it is not the fair Fruit of Reformation, nor Oil in the Lamp of the
outward Life and visible Profession of Religion; it is not your seeming pious
Duties nor legal Convictions that discover you to be a true Christian: no,
nothing short of Union with Christ, and Faith that works by Love, avails any
thing. 1 Cor. 7. 10. Gal. 5. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
Neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature.

9. Common or Legal Illuminations doubtless flow from a sense of God's Power,
who is able to punish and reward the Creature according to his Work; not that
they would be like God, but cannot alas get out of the Hand of God: But true
spiritual Enlightnings rise from a sense of God's Holiness, by beholding the
Excellency of it, and seeing a necessity of a Conformity thereunto; the
Convictions of the one at the best is at a stay, they do not grow, however they
never terminate in Conversion; the Effect cannot exceed the Cause, they only
tend to reform the Life, and oft-times such return with the Dog to his Vomit
again: but the Path of the Just, in spiritual Convictions, is as a shining
Light that Prove. 4. 18.
shines more and more to a perfect Day. Spiritual Enlightnings lead the Soul
to Christ; the Spirit in them does not only convince of Sin, but also of
Righteousness; such see all their old Props and Supports to fail them: it is
Christ now, and none but Christ; the World is nothing to them, a Name is of no
worth to them: Knowledge and Gifts without Grace will not satisfy them; they see
the Vanity of the Creature, and the Fullness of the Mediator. Christ is the
chiefest of ten thousand to all such: Others may see some things Christ has
purchased that may affect them; but these see an Excellency in his Person; To
you that believe, he is precious. 1 Pet. 2. 7.
He is an Honor, or honorable: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is
none on Earth that I desire besides thee. These Psalm. 73. 25.
have their Eyes opened to see the Nature of God, the Holiness of the Law, the
Weakness of the Creature, the Sinfulness of Sin, and the Sufficiency of Jesus
Christ. Others are convinced of many Sins, and of some degree of Evil in Sin;
but these see that Sin is exceeding sinful, and that no Sin is so odious as the
Sin of Unbelief, in which respects common Convictions fail. Now considering
what Enlightnings Men may have, and yet not be savingly enlightened, what little
reason is there for any to conclude, that the Persons in our Text were
sanctified, holy, and true Christians, because the Holy Ghost says they were
once enlightened? They may have, or attain unto a great Change, but not a true
and through Change; and they may be such who arrive to Light in spiritual Things
above thousands, nay, may be, exceed many true Christians in Knowledge,
Abilities, Gifts, and in their Lives and Conversations too, in some respects,
and may not doubt of the Goodness of their State, nay and may suffer for
Religion, yea give their Bodies to be burned, and yet be destitute of saving
Grace, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.
or of true Love to God, and therefore not self-condemned Hypocrites, whose
Hearts condemn them, and yet be far from the State of sincere and renewed
Christians.

APPLICATION.

1. O see what Light, what Spiritual Light you have received, and what
Convictions you have had the experience of.

2. Which do you account the greatest Evil, Sin or Suffering, the Torture or
Pain you feel, or the Sin you have committed? Do you groan most under the sense
of Sin, and want of Holiness; or under the presages and fear of Hell and
Damnation? May be you cry out, your State is sad; but what think you of your
Sin which is the Cause of it?

3. Be exhorted to labor after true Spiritual Illuminations, and through
Convictions of Sin.

Motives.

1. Sin will be your Pain and Sorrow, first or last, either here or hereafter.

2. Consider what a good and gracious God you have offended.

3. Without effectual Convictions, there will be no true Conversion; and where
the first is indeed wrought, the last will follow; those that God kills in this
respect, he will make alive.

4. Remember the Word never comes with Power, until Convictions come with
Power, and also abide on the Soul and Conscience of the Sinner.

5. Consider that it is better to be broken in Mercy than in Judgment, better
here than in Hell.

6. Remember that true and through Convictions tend to let out the Life or Power
of your Sin; and consider also what Means of Convictions God is pleased to
afford you.

7. Sinner, Christ was wounded for thy Sin, look up to him; nothing breaks the
Soul rightly, you have heard, but a sight of a broken and crucified Christ.

HEB. VI. 4, 5. For it is impossible for those, etc.
Sermon. II.
I Have closed with the first Qualification or Attainment of these Persons
spoken of in my Text; I shall now proceed to the Second, And have tasted of the
Heavenly Gift.

1. By the Heavenly Gift, some understand the Heavenly Doctrine: What meant by
the Heavenly Gift.
In that sense it may be true, for Herod had some kind of Taste of the Heavenly
Doctrine, which John the Baptist preached; he heard him gladly, or with Joy. As
the Baptism of John is said to be from Heaven, so all the Truths and Ordinances
of the Gospel may be said to be but one entire Heavenly Gift.

2. Others by the Heavenly Gift understand the Holy Ghost, according to that in
Acts 8. 20. Thou have thought the Gift of God may be purchased with Money. So
Acts 10. 45. That on the Gentiles also was poured the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

Quest. But what Gift of the Holy Ghost is it which these Persons are said to
have a taste of?

Answ. 1. The miraculous Operations of the Holy Ghost in the Times of the
Gospel, in the extraordinary Gifts thereof, which are said to come down from
Heaven in a way of Eminency, as Acts 1. 4, 5. and of those Gifts these Persons
might have some taste, either by their receiving those Gifts themselves, (for
that unsound Persons may do, And in thy Name we have cast out Devils: so 1 Cor.
13. 1, 2. And though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and
have not Charity, I am nothing:) or else they may be said to have a taste of
those Gifts, by being wonderfully affected, by beholding the miraculous
Operations of this Heavenly Gift wrought by others.

2. By tasting of the Heavenly Gift, it may refer to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, it may denote their making some trial by Hearing, and diligently
attending on the Doctrine of Salvation; there is a tasting for trial, either to
receive, or refuse, as we commonly do Meats or other things: Every tasting is
not a digesting, Men taste before they eat, and digest food. These Persons may
taste of the Doctrine of Justification, taste of the Heavenly Gift or Doctrine
of God's Free Grace, taste of the Ordinance of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
and seem also to like the Heavenly Gift well in all these and in other
respects, yet may feed all the while on some one Lust or another, on the Love
of this World, or on their carnal and sensual Pleasures; and because they were
never savingly renewed, having no new Nature, they could not feed on spiritual
Things so as to digest them. No doubt it was, or is such a tasting as the full
Stomach takes sometimes of Food, a full Stomach will taste, yet refuse to eat,
they have no Appetite, these being glutted with the Love of other things; the
Heavenly Gift is not so sweet to them, as Food is to an hungry Man.

The Sum then is this, these Persons had, or may have, some Experience of the
Holy Ghost in the miraculous Gifts, either in themselves, or in others, their
Understandings being enlightened, (for it is evident that it is a Taste by
Illuminations, by what we before showed) and they also might taste the Heavenly
Doctrine or Ministration of the Gospel, and might find the Truths, the
Institutions and Worship thereof to be good; they making a trial of it so far
as their carnal and unsanctified Hearts were capable to do; yea they might find
the Ways of God better than once they thought before they were enlightened, and
from thence embraced them to appearance, owned and walked therein for a time.

Doct. 2. That there is a Goodness, and an Excellency in the Heavenly Gift and
Heavenly Doctrine of the Gospel, which such may taste of that never receive the
Truth in the Power and Love thereof.

Doct. 3. That the rejecting, and utter casting off the Gospel, and the
Ordinance and Worship thereof, after some Tastes and Experience of it, is an
high Offense to God, and a fearful Aggravation of Sin, and a certain Presage of
Damnation.

So much as to their second Attainment.

3dly. And were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost. This seems to How some
unrenewed Persons may be said to be partakers of the Holy Ghost.
be more than a bare tasting.

Object. Does not this seem to interfere with your Exposition of the Attainment
you mentioned last?

Answ. 1. To this take Dr. Owen's Answer. "It is (says he) ordinary to have
the same thing twice expressed in various words, to quicken the Sense of them."

"2. The Holy Ghost is mentioned before, as he hints, as the great Gift of the
Gospel Times, as coming down from Heaven; not absolutely, not as unto his
Person, but with respect unto an especial Work, namely, the changing of the
whole State of Religious Worship in the Church of God."

3. But here in these words when it is said, They were made Partakers of the
Holy Ghost, it is spoken chiefly in respect unto external actual Operations.

1. They partake of the Holy Spirit in the common Operations of it themselves;
they tasted the Heavenly Doctrine as it was administered by others, as it is
hinted before: but here is a Reception, or a partaking of the Holy Spirit,
whereby it had some great and visible Operations upon their Hearts and Lives,
though not saving Operations, not such that changed them into a State of Grace.

2. Nay they partake not only of common Gifts, but common Grace also, even such
Grace that does reform their Lives, bridle, restrain, and curb their inordinate
Lusts and Passions; so that through the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, they
esteeming him as their Blessed Savior, they are said to escape the Pollution
of the World, as Peter plainly declares, though afterward they are again 2
Pet. 2. 20.
entangled therein and overcome.

3. They did no doubt by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, leave and forsake
those evil Ways, and profane Courses and Practices in which they lived before:
May be they were gross Idolaters, Adulterers, Blasphemers, etc. but the Spirit
by its common Operations did so far strive and prevail with them, that they
became other Men: As it is said of King Saul, The Spirit of God will 1 Samuel 10.
6, 9.
come upon thee, and thou shall be turned into another Man, but not a new Man;
And God gave him another Heart.

4. These Persons may partake of such Grace which the foolish Virgins had, to
keep their Lamps of Profession burning for a Time.

Doct. 4. The Holy Spirit may be with Persons, nay in them, by his common
Operations, with whom he is not by his gracious Inhabitation; they may partake
of common, but not of saving Grace.

4 thly. The fourth Attainment of these Persons, or these false Professors, is
this, viz. -- And tasted of the good Word of God.

Four things I shall do in speaking unto this. First, Show what is meant by the
Word of God. Secondly, Show why it is called the good Word of God. Thirdly,
Show what a taste an unsound Christian may have of the good Word of God.
Fourthly, And also show what a taste it is that a true Christian has of it.


First, By the Word of God is meant, the Word of the Gospel; Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Again it is Romans 10. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
said, From you sounded out the Word of God, that is, the Gospel of Christ.

Secondly, It is called the good Word of God.

1. Because it brings good News to Sinners, the Tidings it Why the Word of
God is called good.
brings are good and profitable to all that receive it in Truth.

2. Because it is a Declaration of that good and gracious Counsel and Purpose
of God in saving poor Sinners by Jesus Christ: it is Heavenly, Sublime; the
Nature and Glory of God in all his Attributes is made manifest thereby.

3. It is good in the blessed Effects thereof. That which is excellent and
precious in it self, and also does as much good, we esteem very good. Now as
divine Truth is pure, Thy Word is pure, therefore thy Servant loves it; so it
is precious above Gold, in the Effects Ps. 19. 10.
of it on the Heart.

1. It enlightens the Eyes, it illuminates dark Minds, it is a shining Light;
Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Psalm. 119. 105.
Path.

2. It quickens and revives a Soul under Deadness, therefore it is good; Thy
Word has quickened me. Psalm. 119. 50.


3. It is that which inriches the Soul: Let the Word of God dwell in you
richly. We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency Col. 3.
16. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
of the Power may be of God, and not of us. Hence Ministers, by preaching the
Gospel, though they may be externally poor, yet make many spiritually rich.

4. It may be said to be Good, because of the powerful Effects it has on Men's
Souls, where it comes not in Word only. The 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged Sword. It makes
the Dead to live, infusing through the Spirit, Life, and regenerating Grace
into the Hearts of Sinners; it searches and purges out all Corruption; by the
means of it young and old come to have their Hearts and Ways cleansed: Now ye
are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you. Joh. 19. 3.


5. It is our Sword by which we offend and wound our Enemies, and defend our
selves against all their Assaults and Temptations.

6. It is good in respect of that discovery it makes of God, of Reader, these
things were enlarged upon, but I am forced to leave out the Enlargements here.
Jesus Christ, and of Salvation, as also of future Glory; there is contained in
it a Revelation of the Incarnation of the Son of God, with all the Effects of
infinite Wisdom in the glorious Contrivance of our Redemption: What does the
Pagan World understand or know of these things, who have not the good Word of
God with them?

7. It has a comforting, a healing, and strengthening Virtue in it; and it also
preserves from Sin, therefore it is good: Thy Word have I hid in my Heart, that
I might not sin against thee. It gives Psalm. 119. 11.
peace and quiet to a disturbed and distressed Mind, when the Promises are set
home with Power upon the Conscience: How many has that one Word revived, that
have been ready to drop into Hell in the sense of their Sin; Come unto me all
ye that labor and Mat. 11. 28.
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

8. It is our Food, I mean the Food of our Souls; yea, both Milk for Babes, and
strong Meat for Men of riper Age: nay, it is sweet, satisfying and Soul-fatning
Food, therefore it is good.

Sirs, if you have never tasted how good the Word of God is, your State
doubtless is bad; but it is not enough to have a taste of it, but you must feed
upon it: Eat, O Friends; drink, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved.

Thirdly, I shall proceed to show you what a kind of taste an unsound Christian
may have of the Word of God. It is evident, that the Apostle here carefully
keeps himself to such Expressions as we have in the Text, to show he intends
not such Persons, who by Faith truly receive and spiritually feed on Jesus
Christ; therefore it is said, have tasted. True, by tasting sometimes is meant
a spiritual feeding; O taste and see that the Lord is good: Compared with Psalm.
34. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
that in Peter, If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

Brethren, every one that feeds, may be said to taste, though he does more than
taste; but every one that tastes, may not be said to feed; no, nor be said to
love, approve of, nor digest that which he tastes of. Pray remember, to feed
is more than to taste; I did but taste a little Honey, says Jonathan: And it
is said of our Savior, When he had tasted thereof, he would not drink; he Mat.
27. 34.
tasted, but did not drink: So Men may taste, and yet may not eat, not feed
upon that they tasted of.

I shall now come to show you what a taste they may have of the Word of God.

1. As tasting respects Experience, or simple Knowledge of the Truth of a
thing, so these Persons may have a taste, i. e. may have a simple Knowledge or
Experience of the Truth of the Word of the Gospel; they may taste in this
sense, they may believe or be fully convinced in their Consciences by what they
have heard, and have met with by such Operations of the Spirit that have past
upon them, that the Gospel is true, and that Christ is the only Savior, and
that the Institutions and Ordinances of the Gospel are his Blessed
Appointments. Thus many of the Jews tasted of Christ's Word, i. e. They
believed in his Name, when they saw the John 2. 23, 24.
Miracles which he did; But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he
knew all Men: They gave a true Assent to the Proposition of his Word, yet did
not close in with him, they did not consent to receive him, to desire, love and
obey him, they had no Union with him by saving Faith; and the like may be said
of these Persons in our Text.

2. Nay, these Persons finding Jesus Christ to be the true and great Savior,
they may taste the Word, or believe with some kind of Joy, though it be a false
Joy; Who would not be saved, or have Christ as a Savior? This they like, they
would be saved from Hell and Wrath, but do not consider that Christ came to
save his People from their Sins; He will save none who abide in their Sins, who
hold them fast, and resolve not to let them go: Many may taste some sweetness
in hearing of the Power of Christ to save, who go on presumptuously in their
ungodly Practices: It is expressly said, that the stony-ground Hearers received
the Word with joy, they had a taste of it. A common Faith seems to give a Mat.
13. 20.
taste, the Name of a Savior relishes sweet.

3. They may taste of the Promises of the Word, but may not like the Precepts
of it, or what sometimes follows and overtakes such who profess the Gospel; or
may like some Precepts, but not like some others of them; every Word of God
with these is not precious, they cannot deny themselves and follow Christ
whither soever he goes: They are not like David, who says, Every Word of God
is pure, therefore I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea, above Psalm. 119.
127, 128.
fine Gold. Therefore I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be
right; and I hate every false Way.

4. A bare taste or a simple taste of the Word is enough for these; a great
deal of the World may be they think is too little, yet a little Religion, a
little of the Word, short Prayers, and little Preaching will suffice them: A
great Portion is too little for their Children, but Sixpence or a Shilling
they may think is too much for the poor Saints, or a small matter a great deal
to be given to the Children of God. It is evident these Persons gave little or
nothing to the poor Saints, by what the Apostle speaks in the Verses following
our Text, and therefore no sincere Believers: For God is not unrighteous to
forget your Work of Faith and Labor of Love, in that ye have ministered to the
Saints, etc. You, as if he should say, are not of that sort I am a speaking of,
they do not love the Children of God, though they have had a taste of the Word:
This one Virtue, Brethren, is more than all those five Seize mentioned in
my Text, when that which a Man gives is given in love to Christ.

5. Yet this bare taste, as you have heard, might have some Effect upon these
Men's Hearts.

1. They might find some kind of delight in that Knowledge they have of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and might speak in the Commendation and Vindication
thereof. Thus Balaam seemed wonderfully to be affected with the State of
Israel, and with the Tabernacle and Tents of Jacob, yet he loved the Wages of
Unrighteousness.

2. It may work, as you heard last Day, a visible Change in them, such a Power
may go along with that taste; they, like Saul, might become other Men.

3. They might have the same Lamp of Profession with true Christians, and be
taken for real Converts, not known to the Godly but to be such. The wise
Virgins doubtless thought well of the Foolish, they did not know they were
unsound or foolish Ones.

4. Such a Work and Effect the Holy Spirit and tasting of the Word might have,
that they might be full of great Expectation of b^ing embraced by Christ when
he comes, if they fell not away before. It Is said, the foolish Virgins went out
to meet the Bridegroom; they had much Confidence, may be more Confidence (tho
it was Self-confidence) that the Wise, for true Believers may be attended with
many Doubts.

Dr. Owen speaking of this sort mentioned in my Text, says, (and no doubt
says the Truth) "That there is an inferior common Work of the Holy Spirit in
the Dispensation of the Word on many to whom it is preached, causing in them a
great Alteration and Change, as to Light, Knowledge, Abilities, Gifts,
Affections, Life and Conversation, when the Persons so wrought upon are not
quickened, regenerated, or made new Creatures, nor united to Jesus Christ; that
in the Persons thus wrought upon, there is or may be such an Assent, and Light,
and Conviction of the Truth proposed and preached to them, as in its kind is
true, not counterfeit, giving or affording to them a Profession of the Faith."
That is, they are blinded, and know not that they are unsound in the Main,
their Hearts for want of true Light deceive them, as in the Case of the foolish
Virgins; nay, and they may perhaps hold out in their Profession constantly unto
Death; nay, may give their Bodies to be burned. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.
O see, Brethren, that your Faith is the Faith of God's Elect, and that you are
savingly renewed: O look about you since it may be thus. The Doctor adds, "That
among these Persons are oft-times some that are endued with excellent Gifts,
and lovely Parts, Qualifications and Abilities, rendering them very useful to
the Church of God, being Vessels in his House to hold and convey to others the
precious Liquor of the Gospel, though never had their own evil Hearts changed."

To which let me add, they are such, or of this sort of Persons who are liable
to sin the Sin against the Holy Ghost, or so fall, that it may be impossible
for them to be renewed by Repentance: Yet before they so fall, it may not be
impossible for them to become true Converts. The Nature of which Sin against
the Holy Ghost, I purpose to open before I close with this Text.

Fourthly, I shall proceed to show you what a taste of God, and What a kind of
taste a Believer has of God and his Word. Psalm. 42. 2.
of his good Word it is which all true Believers have.

1. It Is a taste that arises from Spiritual Hunger: There is a true sense of
Want, they have a craving Appetite, and nothing but God in Christ can satisfy
their Souls; My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, says David. And
hence it is that they are pronounced blessed; Blessed are they which hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6.
for they shall be filled; not have only a taste, No, no, but they shall be
filled, they shall eat to satisfaction. They see that they want a Righteousness
whereby they may be declared Just and Righteous before God, namely, the
Righteousness of Christ; and also a Righteousness that may declare them to be
righteous before Men, namely, a holy and blameless Life: the one is the
Righteousness of Justification, the other is the Righteousness of
Sanctification. Others may have a taste of both these; they may behold a Worth
in, and a Want of Christ's Righteousness, but do not hunger after it, and so
accept it as a poor hunger-starved Person on Gospel-Terms; and may attain to
some degree of inward as well as outward Sanctification.

2. These therefore taste and eat also, and that too out of pure Necessity: If
I, says the Soul, feed not upon Christ, eat not his Flesh, and drink not his
Blood, I shall perish. Give me Christ or I shall die, is the Voice of this
sort: Others take a taste, as if they cared not whether they eat or eat not.

3. A true Believer does taste, eat, and also digest the Word; it is that which
they live upon, and hereby they come to have Union with Christ by Faith: The
Soul partakes of the Divine Nature. But a common Tasting, or a common Faith, or
a bare Credence of the Truth of the Gospel, does not do this, which the Persons
in our Text only had.

4. The good Word of God is to all true Christians as their necessary Food;
nay, esteemed more, or above their necessary Food, as Job experienced it;
therefore to these the Word, and God in Job 23. 12.
the Word, Christ in the Word, is exceeding sweet: How sweet is Food to a
hungry Person? O says the Soul, the Lord is good, his Word is good, his
Promises and his Ordinances are exceeding good; I can relish the Word of God, I
esteem it above Gold; it is also Ps. 19. 10.
sweeter than Honey, or the Honeycomb; I have an appetite to it: O how love I
thy Law! it is my Meditation all the Day. This discovers Psalm. 110. 97.
to us the goodness of our Condition, when there is nothing that we value or
esteem, love and delight in, above God's Word: Thy Words were found, and I did
eat them, and thy Word was unto me Jer. 15. 16.
the joy and rejoicing of my Heart. He did not taste only, but did eat and
greedily digest the Word also.

4. The Word of God, without the God of the Word, will not satisfy these Men's
Souls; it is not a bare Ordinance, no, no, but they must have God in and with
the Ordinance; it is not the Shell without the Kernel, it is not the Cabinet
without the Jewel; it is not a Lamp without Oil that will satisfy the wise
Virgins; Prayer and Preaching will not do with these, though they pray and hear
every Day, except they meet with God and Christ in those Duties; the Word and
Ordinances without Christ, are but like dry Bread and lean Meat, that have but
little Juice or Nourishment in them; they must be delighted with Fatness,
knowing it is such things God has prepared for them; Eat ye that which is good,
Isa. 55. 2.
and let your Soul delight it self in Fatness; they eat it appears to full
satisfaction. Others labor for that which satisfies not; but of all true
Believers David says, They shall be abundantly satisfied with Psalm. 36. 8.
the fat things of thy House; and thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of
thy Pleasures. And in another place, says he, My Soul Psalm. 63. 5.
shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness; and my Soul shall praise thee
with joyful Lips.

5. That which true Believers taste and eat, is turned into Spiritual
Nourishment in the Heart: And in order to this,

1. There is required a laying up the Word, or hiding of it: Psalm. 119. 11.
Luke 1. 66.
No Nourishment can be had by Food, unless it be received into the Stomach,
where the Cause of Digestion and Communication are fixed: And if the Word be
not received into the Heart by fixed Meditation and Delight, it may affect and
please a Person for a while, but it will not nourish the Soul.

2. Every Physician will tell you, that Food must be mixed and incorporated
with the digestive Humor, Power and Faculty of the Stomach, whereinsoever it
consists, or it will not nourish. Give a Man never so much Food, if there be
any noxious Humor in the Stomach hindering it from mixing with the Power of
Digestion, says a worthy Writer, it will no ways profit the Person: But the
Dr. Owen, p. 50, 51. Heb. 4. 2.
Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. Meat nourishes not without Concoction; so unless the Soul receives
and digests the Word through Faith, so that the Word and the Heart are united
together, all is nothing; but a bare taste will never do this. And,

3. Like as Food when it is well digested is turned into Flesh and Blood, and
Spirits; so where a Person feeds on the Word by Faith, or eats and digests it,
it is turned into a Principle of Life and spiritual Strength: As some Men who
have for want of Food been brought so low and faint, that they were ready to
die away; but by feeding on good Food, and digesting it, soon perceive a
renewing of their Strength, Life and Vigor seems to return to them again; so
by feeding on the Word, the Strength of the Soul abides, it communicates
abiding Strength, Faith and Experience; and it is hereby the Soul grows Day by
Day, and his Love to God is increased, and by the Power of it he walks with God
in Holiness and Lowliness of Mind, and brings forth all the Fruits of the
Spirit, like as the Ground brings forth, by the Showers of Heaven, Heb. 6. 6,
7.
Herbs meet for him by whom it is dressed.

4. These are delighted and cheared by the Word, as in a Banquet of Wine, and
get great Power over their Corruptions: But such a tasting and eating as this,
and such blessed Effects of the Word on the Soul did the Persons never attain
unto, who are said in our Text to have tasted the good Word of God, etc.
Evident it is, that the Apostle clearly notes concerning the Persons in my
Text, that whatsoever taste they might have of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
called the Heavenly Gift, or of the good Word of God, yet they were fruitless
Souls, even like the Earth that the Rain falls upon, and yet brings forth
Briars and Thorns; See ver. 7, 8.

APPLICATION.

1. Learn from hence the deplorable Condition of all such who satisfy
themselves with the mere Notion of Truth and empty Speculations about it,
without getting so much as such a taste of the goodness of the Word, which may
be had by those who are not savingly renewed. How many thousands are there at
this Day, that do not desire so much as a taste of heavenly Things, their
Hearts are so filled and glutted with the things of this World, nay, with their
abominable and filthy Lusts.

2. But for the Lord's Sake take heed you rest not satisfied with a bare taste
of heavenly Things, or with some seeming relish thereof: Such indeed may not be
far from the Kingdom of Heaven: But alas, alas, if they go no further, they
will never come there; and if they totally fall away, their State will be worse
in the end than it was at the beginning; nay, far worse than their Condition
who never were enlightened at all, but remain under the Power of natural
Blindness, etc.

3. You that are Professors, may also, from what has been briefly hinted,
perceive whether you have had a right taste of God, and of his good Word, or
not: Whether you have received Christ, and do live upon the Bread of Life, or
not: Or whether you have by Faith applied the Word, and by Meditation digested
it, or not.

4. Has the Word changed your Hearts? Have you got Power over your Corruptions
and Temptations thereby? Does nothing satisfy your Souls short of God and Jesus
Christ; and it is as well a Likeness to him as an Interest in him? Will not the
Word and Ordinances quiet you, unless you meet with Christ in them?

5. This may be for a use of Terror to such who rest satisfied with the common
Operations of the Word and Spirit of God; they may go far, yet fall away, nay
so fall, as it may be impossible for them ever to be renewed by Repentance. But,

5 thly. I shall now come to the fifth and last Thing or Attainment mentioned
in our Text concerning these Professors who are in danger of Final Apostasy,
And of the Powers of the World to come: They have not only tasted of the good
Word of God, but also of the Powers of the World to come.

Two things I shall propound to do here. 1. Show you what is meant by the World
to come. 2. Show what a kind of taste these Persons may be said to have of it.


1. Some by the World to come assert, is only meant, the Gospel-Church-State,
What is meant by the World to come.
or Spiritual Kingdom of the Messiah, which begun in the Apostles Days: Nay, I
find Reverend Dr. Owen is much of this Persuasion, as you may see in his
Exposition of the first Chapter to the Hebrews; "By the World to come, says
he, the Apostle in this Epistle intends the Days of the Messiah, that being the
usual Name of it in the Church at that time, as the New World which God had
promised to create, whereof these Powers, by Signs, Wonders, and mighty Works
were then wrought by the Holy Ghost, according as it was foretold by the
Prophets that they should be so, Joel 2. Acts 2. These the Persons spoken of,
are supposed to have tasted; either they had been wrought in and by themselves,
or by others in their sight, whereby they had experience of the glorious and
powerful working of the Holy Ghost in the Confirmation of the Gospel. Yea,
(says he) I do judge that they themselves, in their own Persons, were partakers
of these Powers in the Gift of Tongues, and other miraculous Operations, which
was the highest Aggravation possible of their Apostasy." I will not deny this
to be intended by the Powers of the World to come: But this Exposition seems
too much to interfere with the second and third Attainment mentioned of these
Persons: and if this be granted to be intended hereby, yet it must be carried
also further, I mean, to the after-State of Christ's Kingdom; for the Kingdom
that is now expected, and the latter-day-Glory, we all allow to be the Kingdom
of the Messiah: Nor can any doubt of a World yet to come, or glorious visible
Kingdom of Jesus Christ to be set up in the last Days; the Holy Ghost
positively affirming, That the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms
of our Lord, and of his Christ; And Rev. 11. 15.
that when the seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet, and not till then, which
brings in the third and last Woe upon the Antichristian State and Kingdom. Yet I
question not but that the beginning of the Kingdom of the Messiah was in the
Apostles Days, and did commence from the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ,
being ushered in and established with the miraculous Gifts and Operations of
the Holy Spirit: Which wonderful Appearance of God's Power, does no doubt
appertain to the Kingdom of Christ as such: And at the pouring forth of the
latter Rain, we may expect as great, nay a greater miraculous working-Power,
than ever accompanied it to this Day; because the Glory of the latter House
shall exceed the Glory of the former. And there seems to me to be the like
Parity of Reason for those miraculous Operations in the last Days, in order to
the spreading the Gospel over all the World, and the establishment of Christ's
more visible Kingdom, as there was at first; the Appearance of Christ will be
with Power and great Glory.

2. Therefore let it be considered, and not doubted of, but that there is yet a
World to come, and another kind of World than this World is, and a more
glorious Kingdom of Christ than at present we behold: That the World to come
will consist of a new Heaven, and a new Earth, which we look for, as the
Apostle Peter observes, is evident according to God's Promise, this present
World, yea, these Old Heavens and Old Earth shall pass away and be dissolved:
Nevertheless we, according to his Promise, look for a New 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Heaven and New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. It was not then come,
but expected to be revealed in the last Days.

3. It will be a World between this and the ultimate Glory in What is meant by
Christ's delivering up the Kingdom to the Father.
the Kingdom of the Father, I mean, when Christ shall give up his Kingdom to
the Father, that God may be all in all; that is, Christ will yield up his Rule
and Government as Mediator: for his Mediatorial Kingdom shall cease, and the
Kingdom and Glory of God, i. e. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, shall only be
magnified; Christ shall then, as Mediator, no longer sit and rule upon his
Throne, his Work will be done, and the Date of his Commission be expired.

4. Let it also be considered, that the World to come in the Glory of it, shall
not be revealed until this present World passes away, is burnt up and
dissolved, and therefore cannot be expected until the Resurrection of the Just;
For Man lies down and rises not Job 14. 12.
till the Heavens be no more. This the Holy Ghost clearly showed also to John,
And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth; for the first Rev. 21. 1.
Heaven, and the first Earth were passed, and there was no more Sea. And that
the World to come shall begin in its greatest Glory at the Resurrection, does
appear by our Savior's own words; But they Luke 20. 35, 36.
which shall be worthy to obtain that World to come, and the Resurrection from
the Dead, neither marry, nor are given in Marriage: Neither can they die any
more; for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of the
Resurrection. It appears, the World to come, or Kingdom of the Messiah in its
greatest Glory, and the Resurrection, commence together, or at one and the same
time. And this is further confirmed, because in one Place it is said, that
those who follow Christ, and suffer for him, shall be rewarded at the
Resurrection of the Just, as Luke 14. 14. And in another Place it is said, in
the World to come, as Luke 18. 30.

So much shall serve to show you what is meant by the World to come; but before
I speak to that Taste of the Powers of the World to come, which the Persons
spoken of in our Text are said to have, let me add a word or two as touching
the Nature and Glory of the World to come, though we have as yet but only some
dark glimpse of it. But to proceed:

The Nature and Glory of the World to come opened.
1. It shall be a World, not under the Curse of Man's Sin as this World is: The
Earth is under the Curse, Briars and Thorns are the Fruit of the Curse, and all
Creatures groan under the Curse the Sin of Mankind has brought upon them: But
when the new World comes in, there shall be no more Curse; instead of the Rev.
22. 3. Isa. 55. 13.
Thorn shall come up the Fig Tree, and instead of the Briar shall come up the
Myrtle-tree. The Creature groans under the Curse, But it shall be delivered
from the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Children of
God. Envy shall depart from the Creatures, Romans 8. 21.
they shall not tear and devour one another in the World to come, as they do in
this World; see Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. It is in the World to come that all things
shall be restored to that glorious State signified by the Restitution of all
things; Whom the Heavens must receive until the Times of the Restitution of all
things, which God has Acts 3. 21.
spoken by the Mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the World began. That which
all the Prophets have spoken of and expected, shall certainly come or be
fulfilled.

2. The World to come shall be a World without Sin, a Holy World, a Righteous
World: this present World is a wicked World, an ungodly World; but all the
Inhabitants of that World to come shall be Holy, they shall be all filled with
Righteousness: Hence it is Peter says, We, according to his Promise, look for
a new 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

3. The Government of that new World shall be alone in the Hands of the Saints,
no wicked Man shall be in any Place of Power there; no corrupt Judges, nor
Justices, Righteousness shall then bear Rule: The People also shall be all
Righteous, they shall inherit the Land for ever, the Branch of my planting, the
Work of my Hands, Isa. 60. 21.
that I may be glorified. -- The Kingdom and Dominion, and greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of Dan. 7. 27.
the Saints of the most High. Whether they shall have the Kingdom before Christ
comes, or not, I cannot determine, (though I suppose part of this Prophecy will
be fulfilled before then) but besure then they shall have all Kingdoms under
the whole Heavens, Dan. 7. 27.
and the Glory and Greatness of them for ever.

4. The World to come shall be a World without Sorrow, and that is because it
shall be a World without Sin; whilst Sin remains, Sorrow will remain, but then
no more Pain nor Misery shall any of God's Children endure for ever: And God
shall wipe all Tears from all Faces, and there shall be no more Death, neither
Sorrow Rev. 21. 4.
nor crying, neither shall there be any more Pain, for the former things are
passed away. The Inhabitant of that City shall not say, I Isa. 33. 25.
am sick.

5. There shall be no Devil to perplex, to tempt, nor to disturb God's People,
Satan shall be bound; though others think that shall be before this World
begins in the greatest Glory of it.

6. It shall be a World of great and wonderful Light; which may be taken, as I
conceive, both literally and mystically: The Isa. 60. 10.
Sun shall no more be thy Light by Day, neither for Brightness shall the Moon
give Light by Night; but the Lord shall be unto thee an Everlasting Light, and
thy God thy Glory. Compare it with Revelation 22. 4, 5. And there shall be no
Night there, and they need no Candle, neither Light of the Sun, for the Lord
God gives them Light, and they shall reign for ever and ever. God will never
withdraw himself from his People, nor hide his Face in that World, as ofttimes
he does in this.

7. It shall be a joyful World, nothing but Joy and Singing in that World;
those who will not sing now, if Godly, shall sing then: Behold my Servants
shall sing for Joy of Heart; but ye shall Isa. 65. 14.
howl for Vexation of Spirit. The World to come will be a sad and woeful World
to the Ungodly, for there is a World to come for them, I mean, Eternal Misery
in Hell: But Believers shall sing in Jer. 31. 12.
the Heights of Sion, and flow together in the Goodness of the Lord. In the
Heights of Sion, or in the Time of the greatest Glory of the Kingdom of the
Messiah: Moreover it is said, They shall rejoice Isa. 35. 2.
even with joy and singing.

8. They that dwell in the World to come, shall have good and blessed Company,
glorious Company, Christ's Company, and the Company of all his Saints: They
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. Behold,
the Tabernacle of God is Rev. 21. 3.
with Men, and he will dwell with them. He shall come then in the Clouds with
Power and great Glory, and we shall be taken up to meet 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17.
the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. To meet him in the
Air, he does not meet us, we shall not be going up to Heaven, as soon as
raised; no, no, but Christ will come down to us, to dwell and reign with his
Saints on Earth when that World begins: Blessed are the Meek, for they shall
inherit the Earth. He has made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the
Earth. All the Mat. 5. 3. Rev. 5. 10.
Godly are under this Promise, therefore it must refer to the World to come,
and not be fulfilled till the Day of the Resurrection.

9. It will be a World of great Riches, Wealth and Glory; the chief City in
that World, the Walls of it shall be Jaspar, and the City was of pure Gold.
Though this City may be a Figure of the Church, yet no doubt there is more
intended, it is that City Abraham, Isaac and Jacob sought for, that had
Foundations; every Saint in that World shall have a Kingdom, and a Crown of
Glory: though it be all but one Kingdom, yet it shall be as if every one only
possessed it himself; Henceforth there is laid up for 2 Timothy 4. 8.
me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge will give to me in
that Day, and not only to me, but to all them also that love his appearance.
Some Saints have hardly enough Bread to eat in this World, that shall have a
Crown, a Kingdom in the World to come. Hearken my beloved Brethren; Has not
God chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith and Heirs of the Kingdom,
which he has promised Jam. 2. 5.
to them that love him? They shall sit upon Thrones; Know ye not that the
Saints shall judge the World? Even such poor Saints that this World disdains and
do contemn.

10. This World will have an End, and the Time is near; and the other World
will begin in the Glory of it. The World to come, Brethren, that shall never
end, it is an Eternal World; tho the administration of it as in the Hands of
Christ as Mediator, shall cease and have an End, yet the Kingdom and Glory of
the World to come shall never have an End: the Riches of it, the Glory of it,
and the Joys of it, shall abide for ever; it is a Kingdom, and a Crown that
fades not away.

Lastly, It will be a peaceable World; Wars will cease, Jerusalem shall be a
quiet Habitation: Nation shall not rise up against Nation, nor learn War any
more in that World.

I should now come to speak to the second Thing, namely, to show what a taste
it is that the Persons in our Text had or may have of the Powers of the World
to come; but I shall make a little use of this first.

APPLICATION.

1. By way of Reprehension: Brethren, what Fools be they who value this World
above the World come? These are like the vain Frenchman, who said, he would
not part with his part in Paris for a pure in Paradise: Alas, he knew not what
a Place Paradise is. O the Vanity of Men's Minds, how blind and deceived are
poor Mortals!

2. This shows, and clearly may demonstrate, that God's People are Men and
Women of greatest Wisdom, they are not satisfied with corruptible Things; it is
God and his Eternal Riches, Kingdom and Glory their Eyes are set upon: they are
Rich it appears in Reversion, though they have but little now in Possession;
they love Riches, though not the Riches of this World; they shall have one day
rich and immortal Robes, Robes beyond those of beaten Gold: At thy right Hand
did stand the Queen in Gold of Psalm. 45. 9.
Ophir. It is not a few little Houses, no nor earthly Palaces; it is not Bags of
Gold and Silver that can satisfy them; no, no, it is nothing less than a whole
Kingdom and Crown of Glory in the other World; of which they are joint Heirs
with Christ: They Romans 8. Rev. 21.
shall inherit all things, all Riches and Happiness.

The Riches of the World to come opened. Phil. 3. ult.
1. Riches that enrich the Soul, ay and the Body too: the Bodies of the Saints
shall be enriched in the World to come; our vile Body shall be changed and made
like Christ's Glorious Body.

2. They shall have true Riches; the Riches of this World are faise Riches,
deceitful Riches, counterfeit Riches, shadowy Riches; they are but a Figure or
a Shadow of the Riches of the World to come.

3. They have right to incorruptible Riches; not like the Worldings Riches that
canker and corrupt, and the Rust of which will rise up as Witness against them
at the last Day. Jam. 5. 2, 3.


4. They are certain and and abiding Riches; the Riches of this World are
uncertain Riches, they are but for a Moment, and are gone: Charge them that are
in this World, (says the Apostle) that they be not high minded, nor trust in
uncertain Riches, but in the 1 Timothy 6. 17.
living God. O how poor and miserable are some Men who are rich in this World!

5. The Riches of the World to come, are Soul-satisfying Riches: Gold and
Silver satisfy not, but Believers shall see God in the other World, have a
glorious Vision of God; they shall be like him, for they shall see him as he
is. Nothing but a Possession of 1 John 3. 2, 3.
God, and a Likeness unto him, will satisfy a gracious Soul: I shall be
satisfied, says David, when I awake in thy Likeness: I shall not Psa. 17. ult.
be fully satisfied until then, (as if he should say) but then I shall be
satisfied to the full indeed. What is there more for a Man to desire than God?
They that have God for their Portion, may say with Jacob, that they have all.

6. The Riches of the other World are had without Care, without Perplexity:
Alas, Cares and Snares attend the Riches of this World; there is Pains in
getting them, and Cares in keeping them, and Fears of losing them, and these
things eat out the sweetness that seems to be in them: but as there will be no
Cares in keeping of the Riches of the World to come, so there will be no fear
of losing them.

7. The Riches of the World to come will be the Perfection of Riches. No Man
can be perfectly rich here; tho he has some Riches, yet he has not all
Riches; and though he be rich in some things, yet he is not rich in all things;
and though he be rich externally, and for a time rich, yet he may be
spiritually poor: But they that attain to the Riches of the World to come, are
every ways rich, perfectly rich, rich in the Body, and rich in the Soul; they
are such Riches that Christ and the Angels do possess.

Secondly, The Honors of the World to come.
The Honors of the World to come will be great, far surpassing all the Honors
of this present evil World.

1. It Is no small Honor to be the Sons of God; now are we the Sons of God:
This is a Privilege that appertains to the present Spiritual Kingdom of Christ;
but it does not appear what we shall be; that is the Time of the manifestation
of the Sons of God: then Christ will honor his Saints, and God will honor
them: If any Man serves me, him, says our Savior, will my Father honor. Mat.
12.


2. Will it not be an Honor to be crowned with a Crown of Glory? Glory, Honor
and Immortality is the Portion of all who by well-doing seek it.

3. Will it not be a great Honor to judge the World, yea, to judge the fallen
Angels?

4. Will it not be an high Honor to be the Lamb's glorious Bride, to be the
Spouse of the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, to have the Attendance of the
Holy Angels, and to have the Wicked to bow down to your very Feet and lick up
the Dust?

5. Will it not be a great Honor to sit with Christ on the Throne? Besides, it
will be Eternal or Everlasting Honor, it will abide for ever.

Thirdly, The Joys and Pleasures of the World to come.
The Pleasures of the World to come will be transcendent Pleasures, far
surpassing all the vain and carnal Pleasures of this present World.

1. I once told you when I was speaking of Eternal Joys, that the Pleasures of
the World to come will not only delight the Soul, but the Body too; though not
carnal sensual Pleasures, yet the glorified Bodies of the Saints shall be
filled with Delight and Pleasure, as well as their Spirits, you may be sure,
and that in a wonderful manner.

2. The Joys of the World to come will be the Fullness of Joy and Delights: Thou
shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy Pleasures. Psalm. 36. 8.
Rivers of Pleasures denote fullness, Pleasures to full satisfaction: all the
Pleasures of this present World are but a Shadow of the Pleasures of Heaven,
and of the World to come; and though these satisfy not, yet those will satisfy
the Soul.

3. They are Pleasures for evermore; we shall swim in Pleasures in that World.
Thou will show me the Way of Life; in thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at
thy right Hand are Pleasures for Psa. 16. 11.
ever more.

4. The Joys and Pleasures of the World to come will be so sweet, that, as Mr.
Caryl says, a whole Eternity will seem to be but as a Moment.

5. They will be Pleasures without Pain, without a Sting: O what a Sting have
some Men found to be in, or to attend their carnal Pleasures! Here are Sorrows
cleaving to Men as well as Joy; Pain and Misery, as well as Delights and
Pleasure: but in the World to come there will be all Sweet, and no Bitter; all
Pleasure, and no Pain; all Joy, and no Sorrow.

6. Is God able, think you, to delight, to rejoice, and to fill the Souls of
his Saints with Joy and Pleasure? Be sure then he will do it: God's Love is
such, so infinite, so inconceivable to his Children, that he will fill them
with the fullest Joys imaginable: Will not earthly Parents make the Lives of
their Children as sweet and happy as they can? They are called Joys unspeakable
and full of Glory: All the lawful Pleasures of this World are, Brethren, but a
Figure or Shadow of them: The Eye has not seen, nor Ear 1 Cor. 2. 9.
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive the things
that God has prepared for those that love him. The Eye has seen much, and the
Ear has heard of more than the Eye ever saw, and the Heart conceives of more
than ever the Ear heard; but the Heart cannot conceive how sweet the Joys of
Christ's Kingdom will be, or comprehend how transcendent the Joys of Heaven are.

7. The Pleasures of the World to come, are the Effects of God's infinite Love
and Goodness, according to the Perfection thereof: And as none know the Power
of God's Anger and Wrath in Hell, that is let out against ungodly Sinners that
hate him; so none know the Power of his Infinite Love, Grace and Goodness, let
out in Heaven to delight and ravish the Hearts of all them that love and serve
him.

8. The Pleasures of the World to come never will cease indeed, no shorter a
Time than an endless Eternity can serve to let out the infinite Goodness of the
Eternal Deity, and those varieties of Joys and Delights that flow and will flow
like Rivers from him: as none can imagine what the Nature of that personal
Communion which the Saints shall have with Christ will be, so also they will be
Eternal; Eternal Joys, says one, are the longest, and yet the shortest.
Longest in respect of Duration, yet the shortest in respect of Apprehension. An
Eternity of Joy will seem to us no more tedious than one Minute or small
Moment, 'twis be so full of Joy and Pleasure: it is such Satisfaction that breed
no wearisomness, it does not ^loy nor glut the Soul; we living at the
Fountainhead of Joy and Comfort, in immediate Communion with Christ, our
Delights will renew as much as continue. They are certainly blind or unthinking
Persons that do not see how the Deity or Holy God delights in Varieties; it may
easily be discerned, by beholding the different Varieties of Creatures, Faces,
Colors, or varieties of things to delight all our Senses here in this World. O
no doubt, the Joys and Varieties of the World to come, will be Wonderful, and
take up a whole Eternity for God to let out; Joys will be as it were every day
fresh, and renewed upon us.

From hence says a beloved Writer, fresh Appetite, and fullness of
Satisfaction, are perpetually interchangeable, the Joys are so many, the Years
seem so few. Eternity of Joys makes Eternity but as a Moment, as eternal Pain
and Torment makes every Moment seem an Eternity.

These things being so, O who would not desire an Interest in Christ! O happy,
happy Believer, what a Choice have thou made!

Exhortation. Sinner, what say thou? come seek a Portion, a Part in the World
to come: you are very busy to get a Part or Portion in this present evil World;
Alas, alas, what good can all these thing do you, and how long can you keep
them? Come be persuaded to seek this better Country; Christ has redeemed us
from this present evil World, and has purchased for us another World, even
this World to come; Will you seek it? You may have a share and part in the
World to come.

Quest. You will say, which Way, or how may we get a part in it?

Answ. I answer, You must marry the Prince and Heir of that How to have
Interest in the World to come.
World, and so you shall have a Portion in it, and a true Title to it; you must
by Faith espouse Jesus Christ, there is no other way to have an Interest in the
World to come. Sinners, you may gain the World to come, and save your Souls;
but whilst you seek to gain this present evil World, you may lose your Souls:
What will it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Also
you may have an Assurance of the World to come: O strive Mat. 16. 26.
to make it your own peculiar Inheritance, take hold of the Foretop of Time.
Now I may say Time is, hereafter it may be said Time was; and then Time is past
and lost for ever. Remember that in this World, while you are here, the World
to come in the Glory of it, will be got or lost for ever; if you obtain Grace,
you shall have Glory; but if you have no Grace in this World, no Glory you are
like to have in the World to come.

Lastly, Remember this World is near at an End, it is ready to pass away; and
the World to come in the Glory of it is just about to begin, it is not far off:
He that testifies these things, says, Rev. 22. 20.
Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

HEB. VI. 4, 5. And of the Powers of the World to come.
Sermon. III.
THE last time I spoke of the World to come, and of the Powers of it; especially
of the Powers, Glory, and Pleasures of the World to come, respecting the State
of the Saints therein. I shall now proceed to show you, what a kind of taste of
the Powers of the World to come, the Persons mentioned in our Text may be said
to have, which is the next thing propounded to be done under this Head.

Secondly, The Persons here meant, I have proved are not true and sincere
Believers, though such who come very near unto such, being almost Christians.
Now the last Qualification or Attainment they are said to arrive unto, is this,
Of tasting of the Powers of the World to come.

First, I shall show you what may be meant by the Powers of the World to come.

Secondly, Show what a kind of taste they may have of those Powers, etc.

1. By the Powers of the World to come, (of which they are said to have a
taste) I understand are meant the Glorious Effects of God's mighty Power, that
was and shall be further exerted in bringing in the Kingdom of the Messiah,
first in those miraculous Operations which (being to assure us of the certainty
of the new World) were wrought before these Men's Eyes.

2. The Powers of the World to come, do doubtless consist also in the
dissolving of this present World, and all the States and Kingdoms of the Earth.
Thou have of old laid the Foundation of the Earth; and though the Heavens are
the Work of thy Hands, they shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea all of
them shall wax old like a Garment; as a Vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed: compared with 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13. The mighty Power
of God shall be put forth in dissolving this old World.

3. And not only so, but also that God by his Almighty Power will bring in and
establish the Kingdom of the Messiah in the Glory of it; for as the dissolving
of the old World appertains to the Power of the great God, so does also his
bringing in, according to his mighty Power, the new Heavens and the new Earth:
The Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent Heat; and the Earth and the Things therein shall be burned up. 2
Pet. 3. 10.
And all this is but to make way for the World to come, or for the new Heavens
and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

4. The Resurrection of the Dead also appertains to the Powers of the World to
come, and in it lies no small part of God's mighty Power neither; Who shall
change our vile Body, that it may fashioned like unto his own glorious Body,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things to
himself. Phil. 3. 21.


5. The Power of the last Judgment and definitive Sentence, together with the
eternal Punishment of wicked Men and Devils, may also be here intended; Who
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord,
and the Glory of his Power. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.


6. Moreover, the exerting of God's mighty Power, the Power of his Grace,
Divine Love and Goodness in his glorifying of the Saints, may be meant also
here by the Powers of the World to come; When he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and admired in Verse. 10.
all them that believe. For as the letting out of the Power of his Wrath and
Vengeance in the World to come upon the Wicked, as was hinted before, may
hereby be comprehended, so likewise the letting out of the Power of his Love
and Goodness on the Godly.

Secondly, I shall show you now what a kind of taste the Persons in our Text
may be said to have had of the Powers of the World What a taste of the World to
come a false Professor may have.
to come.

1. They had, or might have, a taste of the Truth and Certainty of the World to
come, which they clearly saw confirmed by those miraculous Operations in the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and wonderful Works that were wrought by the
Apostles, nay which perhaps some of them had Power to do themselves; for many
shall say at the last Day, Have we not prophesied in thy Mat. 7. 22.
Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful
Works? To whom Christ will say, I profess I never knew you; depart from me ye
that work Iniquity. No doubt but as Saul and Balaam prophesied, so Judas might
as well as the other Apostles cast out Devils, and do other wonderful Works.

2. And as by those miraculous Operations they might have a taste of the Powers
of Christ's Kingdom as it began then, so this might cause them steadfastly to
believe the Truth of the Powers of the World to come, in the future State and
Glory thereof: Many Persons do not firmly believe this, and therefore regard
not how they live here in this present World, but say, let us eat and drink,
Isa. 22. 13.
for to Morrow we shall die. So also in another Place by the same Prophet it is
said, Come, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we will Isa. 56. 12.
fill our selves with strong Drink, and to Morrow shall be as this Day, and
much more abundant. These ungodly Wretches fear nothing of those Judgments that
are come, but lay their Hearts loose upon the Neck of their Lusts: But the
enlightened Persons in our Text did believe, or give steadfast Credit to the
Truth of that future State, both of the Resurrection and Judgment-Day, even of
that Day of Reckoning, when Sinners shall be punished for all their abominable
Wickedness; they believed God's Word, and the Revelation thereof, touching what
will come upon the Ungodly in the World to come, and so are said to taste of
the Powers of it: and this Persons may do and yet perish.

3. They might not only have a taste of the World to come, by a common Faith,
or by giving steadfast Credence to the Truth and Certainty of it, but might also
be under great Convictions of the Evil of Sin, knowing that all the Sweet
thereof will be turned into Bitter, and that Sin in the World to come will be
punished, and the Sinner condemned to Everlasting Burning, and that God will
reward every Man according to his Deeds; and might know also, that some shall
find greater Condemnation, or a hotter Hell than others, more intolerable Pain
in that Day. As, (1.) All such who draw others into Sin, whether it be
Drunkenness, Pride, Theft, Uncleanness, etc. (2.) All such who sin after strong
Convictions and great Illuminations, or that sin against Light and Knowledge.
(3.) Such who have been often reproved, and yet live in their wicked Practices,
and harden their Hearts; let Ministers and godly Parents say what they will,
they regard it not. (4.) Such who have greater Means of Grace than others, or
who live under an awakening and powerful Ministry, and yet go on in their Sins,
in Pride, Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. (5.) Such who sin under
Judgments, or when God's Hand is lifted up, and his Wrath poured out upon Men
for their Abominations, and greater Wrath denounced and ready to break forth.
(6.) Such who sin boldly, impudently, in the Face of the Sun; Show their Sin as
Sodom, and hide it not. (7.) Such who expose the Holy Name of God which they
profess, to Reproach, and harden the wicked World in their Sins, and open the
Mouths of many to blaspheme God, and speak evil of his Ways and People. (8.)
Such who delight in Sin, or take pleasure in their Wickedness; do boast and
glory in that which is their shame. (9.) Such who despise and contemn Jesus
Christ and his Ministers in their Hearts, and wilfully cast off all Counsel.
(10.) All th^se who abuse God's Patience, Goodness, and Long-suffering; and
make that an encouragement to them to continue in their evil Ways, which should
lead them to Repentance; and Romans 2. 4.
may be, hate, reproach and persecute the People of God; nay, and are guilty of
Blood, crucifying Christ afresh in his Members. Now I say they might be
convinced of all these, and many more great Aggravations of Sin; and yet after
such a taste, fall away themselves, and become as bad as the worst of them I
have mentioned.


4. They might have a taste of the terrifying Powers of the World to come; even
such a taste as Felix had, who trembled Acts 24. 25.
when he heard Paul preach of Hell, Wrath, or of Judgment to come. This I find
our late Annotators intimate to be meant hereby: "Some of them (say they) were
affected with the powerful Doctrines of the Gospel concerning the Final
Judgment, as their Natural Conscience was wrought on by the Spirit in the Word;
they felt it as if it were begun in them, the Sparkles of God's Wrath having
set their Consciences in a light Flame for their Sins." This is a tasting of
the Powers of the World to come with a Witness.

5. They may taste of the constraining Powers of the World to come; so that
their Consciences might curb them, and put a Bridle on their Lusts, so that
they might not run into Sin as others do: the fear and dread of another World
keeps them in awe, and restrains them for a time from committing any open or
secret Acts of Wickedness; and by the Power of this constraining Grace they
might, as you have heard, reform their Lives as to become other Men and Women.

6. Moreover, as the Powers of the World to come may refer to the Everlasting
Joy and Comfort of the Saints, they might also have some seeming taste of the
sweetness thereof, I mean, they might have a sight and sense of that happy
State the Righteous shall be in in the World to come; and they finding Christ
to be a Redeemer, and that he came to save Sinners from Wrath, and to purchase
Everlasting Blessedness, may have some hope of Interest in that Redemption from
Wrath, and of being made happy eternally in the World to come: they might
promise to themselves a part in the first Resurrection, and their Hopes herein
might be as a sweet taste of the Joys and Consolations of that Day. Mr. David
Dickson speaking of this Passage, says, They may taste of the Powers of the
World to come, that is, says he, in contemplation of the Blessedness promised
to the Saints in Heaven; and have a natural desire of it, as Balaam desired to
die the Death of the Righteous. Thus many of the Jews rejoiced in John's
Doctrine: He was a burning and shining Light; and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice Joh. 5. 35.
in his Light: It was but a taste of Joy, it did not continue, it was but for a
Season.

1. It is but a Taste or Savor that arises from an enlightened Conscience, not
from a renewed Heart.

2. It is not a taste that makes them out of love with this World, or to be
weary of it, or to die to it: though they seem taken with the Thoughts of the
World to come, yet they value this World, no doubt, too highly; it is this World
that is in their Hearts.

3. It is not a taste of the World to come that changes them into a meet and
sit State to be partakers of the Glory and Blessedness of it, as the Saints are
said to be giving Thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints Col. 1. 12.
in Light. It Is not a bare taste can do this, no, nothing but a through change
of Nature, or a spiritual receiving and feeding by Faith on Jesus Christ.

4. It was not such a tasting of the Powers of the World to come that made them
long for it, and to seek it with the full bent of their Wills, and urgency of
their Affections, and to contemn all the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this
present evil World for Heb. 11. 13.
it; as Moses and all the Holy Patriarchs did: For they that saw such things,
declare plainly they seek a Country; and confessed they were Strangers and
Pilgrims on the Earth. Ver. 13, 14.


5. It was a tasting not a feeding on Jesus Christ, and a digesting of his
Word; they come not to experience the Powers of the World to come were begun in
them, setting them against Sin, Satan, and this World.

6. And lastly, It was a tasting, but no saving Relish, no Soulcraving after a
true Interest in the Glory of the World to come; they did not find the Power of
the Resurrection and last Judgment in themselves: And that tasting that does
not secure the Soul against a total and final Apostasy, as Union with Christ
does, is not to be valued or accounted of.

APPLICATION.

1. I told you, Brethren, at first, that touching these Persons Seize,
here is nothing spoken of Union with Christ, of the Faith of God's Elect, of
Regeneration, Love to God and to his People, nothing of Adoption, Justification
nor Sanctification, and so nothing that is pecusiar to a true Christian,
nothing of those things that accompany Salvation.

2. It appears they are like the Ground, that often receives the Rain that falls
upon it, and yet bears or brings forth Briars and Thorns, therefore they are
nigh unto cursing, whose End is to be burned; and this the Apostle hints of
them in Verse. 7, 8.

3. This informs us that Men may go a great way in a visible Profession of the
Gospel, by common Influences of the Spirit, and Light improved by natural
Powers, and yet be in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity.

4. O bless God for the least degree of saving Grace: Have you love to God, to
his poor Saints? Do you minister unto them for Christ's Sake? then have you
obtained to a higher degree of Attainment than those ever had, and no cause to
fear your spiritual State and Condition.

Thus I have passed through the second thing I first propounded to speak unto,
namely, What those Seize are that are spoken of the Persons in our Text.
I shall now come to the last thing, to show you what is spoken of them.

Thirdly, What is spoken of these Persons, consists of two Parts. 1. That they
may fall away. 2. That it is upon their so falling away, impossible for them to
be renewed by Repentance.


It is the last of these I purpose to speak of, viz That it is impossible How
it is impossible for these to be renewed unto Repentance. Heb. 6. 6.
to renew them again unto Repentance; either to such a Repentance they once
had, or to true, saving, and Evangelical Repentance: The Reason is by the Holy
Ghost added; Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to open shame.

1. It is not doubtless impossible, in respect of God's Absolute Power, had he
not limited himself by an unchangeable Decree: But if he has determined to
deny Grace, and all saving Influences of his Spirit, to these Apostates, that
makes it impossible for them ever to be renewed; which shows us that the Power
to change the Heart is not in the Creature, it is God's Work on the Soul, it is
he that stamps his own Image upon us; and if he withdraws the Influences of his
Holy Spirit from Men, or refuses to give Grace to them, in order to bring them
to Repentance, and to believe in Christ, they must perish. Now God will not
afford these Persons that so fall away, the Assistance of his Spirit, in order
to the working the great Work of Faith in them; therefore it is impossible for
them to be renewed. "He says not (says one) Dickson.
it is impossible they should be saved, but that it is impossible they should
be renewed unto Repentance; these Apostates Salvation is impossible, because
their Repentance is impossible." He that never repents, can never be saved;
for he that repents not, shall not have Remission of Sin: and if the Holy
Spirit be utterly withdrawn from Men, it is impossible they should ever be
renewed to Repentance.

2. The Persons therefore here intended, do not repent, cannot repent,
Repentance is hid from their Eyes; they never endeavor after Repentance, they
are left to hardness of Heart, and to final Impenitency by the Lord, as a just
Judgment for their horrid Evil and cursed Apostasy: possibly they may fall
under Terror and Despair, yet never desire or look after Repentance on God's
Terms. Brethren, it is not impossible for the greatest Sinner in the World to
be renewed, that has not sinned against the Holy Ghost, or whom God has not
wholly given up to blindness of Mind, and to hardness of Heart: All manner of
Sins and Blasphemy against the Father and the Sun, shall be forgiven unto Men;
but the Blasphemy against Mat. 12. 31.
the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto Men. And all Unrighteousness is Sin,
and there is a Sin unto Death.

3. God leaves these Persons for ever, he utterly casts them off: And woe unto
them (says he) when I depart: And may say unto them, and much more, as he said
once unto Ephraim, Ephraim is joined unto Idols, let him alone. He commands his
Ministers to let them alone, and not stri^e with them reprove not exhort them
any more. He says unto Conscience, Let them alone, check, curb, reitrain nor
rebuke them any more. He says unto his Spirit, Let them alone, move them, or
excite them to perform Religious Duties no more, strive with them no more for
ever; No Doctrine, no Word, no Rod, no Affliction or Judgment shall do them
good any more for ever. This Spiritual Judgment is the worst of all Judgments,
and so makes it impossible for them ever to be renewed unto Repentance; for
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall Heb. 10. 26, 27.
devour the Adversaries.

4. God puts an end unto all expectation concerning them; he looks for no more
Good from them, he exercises no more Care about them, no more Labor, Pains nor
Patience toward them; God affords no more Means of Grace for their Conversion,
Repentance is hid from their Eyes; he says, Let this Ground lie barren for
ever, it shall never be plowed, sowed, nor watered any more for ever: He looks
for no more Fruit, he will not dress it nor dung it any more; his Sun shall
shine upon it no more, nor shall the Rain fall upon it from Heaven any more: woe
unto such Souls God says to them, as Christ said when he cursed the barren
Fig Tree, Never Fruit grow on you any more.

5. God in Judgment and Wrath gives these up to a reprobate Sense, to hardness
of Heart, to blindness of Mind, and to a seared Conscience; and they become
notoriously Wicked, being filled with Rage and Madness, full of Envy and Malice
against God, and against Christ, and against all that fear God.

6. And usually they are left in severity to their sensual Lusts, and become
notoriously Wicked and Profane, nay rather worse than the worst of Carnal
Persons that never were enlightened at all. And so he gave them up to their own
Hearts Lusts, and they walked Ps. 81. 12.
in their own Counsel: They are left, or given up unto Satan, to be led, acted
and influenced by him; and are commonly also carried away into pernicious
Errors and Delusions, even to believe a Lie, that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12.
so they may be damned, because they received not the Truth in the Love of it,
that they might be saved: And many times they become Persecutors of God's
People, reproaching, vilifying and contemning all Religion.

Quest. What a kind of Sin is the Sin against the Holy Ghost? And what sort of
Persons are they who may sin this Sin?

Answ. 1. I shall show you, first in the Negative, what a Sin it is not;
Namely, all Sin or Sins whatsoever that any carnal Person, What is not the Sin
against the Holy Ghost.
who to this Day abode under the Power of Natural Ignorance, and never was
enlightened by any Operations of the Spirit, commits; for such cannot commit the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, it being positively said, That they are such who
were once enlightened.

2. It is not every Sin which is against Light and Knowledge: for no doubt but
David and Peter sinned against Knowledge, and the Light of their own
Consciences, and after they had been enlightened, yet were recovered and renewed
unto Repentance.

3. The Sin against the Holy Ghost, is not every Sin that is committed against
the Holy Ghost; for he that grieves the Holy Spirit, and that quenches the
Holy Spirit, sins against the Holy Spirit; nay, all wicked Men who sit under
the Preaching of the Gospel, no doubt, sin against the Spirit whilst they
resist the Strivings and Motions thereof.

4. It is not any heinous and abominable Sin, as Whoredom, Perjury, Murder, no
not Self-Murder; not the murdering of the Saints of God nor putting Christ
himself to Death by wicked Hands, or the murdering of the Lord of Life and
Glory. Paul was guilty of the Blood of Stephen; and many of the Jews were
pardoned who might have a Hand in the barbarous Murder of the Son of God.

5. It is not every wilful and presumptuous Sin; for multitudes of wicked
ignorant Persons so sin daily, for whom there is Mercy and Pardon upon
Repentance, though they have a Whore's Forehead, Jer. 3. 3.
and refuse to be ashamed.

6. It is not every degree of Apostasy or Backsliding from God: A true Child of
God may be guilty of a partial Apostasy; for thus Israel sinned and fell from
God, nay, backslid so far, as to turn to cursed Idolatry, yet God offered them
Pardon: Return, backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine
Anger to fall upon Jer. 3. 12.
you; for I am merciful, says the Lord, etc.

7. Nay, I will not say that every malicious Sin against God's People is the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, when Men hate the Saints for their Religion and
Goodness; though it be one of the highest Degrees of Wickedness, because
therein their hatred against God himself is manifested: But what may not a Man
do that is acted and influenced by the Devil in the Times of his Ignorance?

8. It is not the Sin of Unbelief, though that be a damning Sin, yea [the
damning Sin] as it is a Sin against the Remedy God has provided, and against
the highest manifestation of God's Goodness, and against the highest Testimony
and Witness: yet many that thus sin, nay continue at present in and under the
Power of Unbelief, may come to see their horrid Evil, and by the Grace of God
may believe, and be forgiven this as well as other Sins.

Lastly, I have showed you that no true Believer can commit this Sin; He that
is born of God, cannot commit Sin, viz. he cannot sin unto Death. So much in
the Negative, what Sin the Sin against 1 John 3. 9.
the Holy Ghost is not.

Secondly, I shall show you, in the Affirmative, according to that What the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is.
Light I have, what Sin this Sin is, or open the Nature thereof, and what sort
of Persons they are who do or may commit it.

1. The Persons that may commit the Sin against the Holy Ghost, our Text
informs us, are such who have been once enlightened, and that have attained to
the Knowledge of the Truth, or true way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, and have
had such a kind of Taste of the Heavenly Gift, and of the good Word of God, and
Powers of the World to come, more or less, of which I have showed: they have
received the Gifts and common Graces of the Spirit.

2. And also have escaped the Corruptions of the World, through the Knowledge of
Jesus Christ, or attained to a great Reformation of Life in so much that they
were looked upon as 2 Pet. 2. 20.
Saints and eminent Christians, many of them being Professors of the Gospel,
and might be great Preachers thereof: Tho it seems that others who never
professed the Gospel, were and may be guilty of committing of this Sin, as
those Jews no doubt were, who said, our Blessed Savior did cast out Devils by
Beelzebub the Mat. 12.
Prince of Devils.

3. It is a sinning wilfully, after a Person has received the Knowledge of the
Truth, or Gospel of Christ; For if we sin wilfully after we have received the
Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Heb. 10. 26.
Sacrifice for Sin. Though every wilful sinning is not this Sin, yet every one
that is guilty thereof, does sin wilfully, and that in the highest degree. Pray
note it, it is a wilful casting off and forsaking the Truth of God, and an utter
deserting the Church and People of God, nay, a wilful rejecting the Truth which
they before had embraced, and tasted some sweetness in, opposing and
contradicting that which the Holy Spirit testifies to their Consciences is the
Truth of Christ; therefore they wilfully reject the Motions of the Holy Ghost,
nay contemn the Operations thereof.

4. And as it is a rejecting of the Motions and Operations of the Holy Spirit,
after those Illuminations they had received, so also it is done maliciously, or
from Spite and Malice; And has done Despite unto the Spirit of Grace: They
wilfully desert the Assemblies Heb. 10. 29.
of God's Church and People, and esteem the Blood of Christ (whereby he was
consecrated a Sacrifice unto God, or (as some) whereby they thought once they
had been sanctified) an unholy Thing, and accounting the Motions of the Holy
Spirit, and his Operations, a mere Delusion of the Devil: And thus some of the
Pharisees sinned. Christ healed one possessed of an unclean Spirit, a Work
wrought by the Power of the Holy Ghost; they imputed it to the Devil, saying,
This Fellow casts out Devils by the Prince of Devils. This was a wilful Sin,
and done no doubt in Malice, and Mat. 12. 22, 24.
against the Convictions of their own Consciences: for they could not certainly
but know, that he was the Son of God by the wonderful Works he did. See ver.
31, 32. Upon this our Savior does intimate, that they were guilty of sinning
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that shall never be forgiven unto Men.

5. It is a treading under Foot the Son of God, contemning and vilifying him,
as these Pharisees seemed to do; and which, as it is thought by many, Julian
the Apostate was guilty of, who in difdain, when he was wounded, threw his
Blood up toward Heaven, crying, Thou Galilean thou have overcome me, or to
that purpose; he in reproach and hatred, seemed to call Christ a Galilean,
would not call him by any one of his own proper Names.

6. And lastly, It does consist in a fatal and utter renunciation of the
Christian Religion, and all the Institutions, Doctrines and Principles thereof,
and a turning to Judaism or Idolatry, or else to perfect Atheism, and all this,
as Dr. Owen signifies, with an avowed and professed Enmity to Christ and
Christianity, and therefore not without the highest Reproach and Contempt
imaginable, against the Person of Christ, as well as against the Gospel,
embracing the Love of Sin, or of the Riches and Honors of this present evil
World, valuing their Lusts above the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. We have, as if
they should say, tasted of the Spirit, and of heavenly Things, and do disclaim
him and them, and witness against him, and by that Experience we have had, do
disown all that pretended Good that some boast of (...) be in their Divine
Things, and contemn that Spirit they glory in and are led by.

APPLICATION.

First, Take heed of those Sins that tend or lead to this unpardonable Sin.

1. Take heed of a malicious Thought against the Holy Ghost; don't think it is
the Devil that disquiets and disturbs you about Sin, Wrath and Hell; you
convicted Sinners look to it, that you charge not these Convictions you have of
the Evil of your Sin upon Satan. He you may be sure will not trouble you for
your Sins, but let you go on peaceably in your wicked Ways; though when you are
awakened, he may persuade you that there is no Mercy for you. Doubts and
desparing Thoughts commonly rise from Satan, but not Sorrow and Grief for Sin:
No, no, that is from your Conscience a it is influenced by the Holy Ghost.

2. Beware of harboring a malicious Thought of Religion, or of praying by the
Holy Spirit; as I heard lately or a wicked Man, who hearing a Minister pray in
a most excellent manner, that said, How does the Devil help him? or to that
effect; O this is dangerous?

3. Take heed of blasphemous Words against the Holy Spirit: Will any dare to
say, that the Devil is in God's People, that they are so resolute in their
Ways, and will not conform to the National Church?

4. Beware, you that make a Profession of Religion, and that have been
enlightened, how you fall away and turn again to Folly, and to your sinful
Practices; for this is the high Way to the unpardonable Sin, or Sin unto Death;
you know not but that a partial Apostasy may end in a total one at last.

5. Above all things, look to it that you rest not on a common Work of the
Spirit, without a real Work of Faith and Regeneration: Rest on nothing short of
Christ, neither on Reformation, Duties, nor inherent Grace, for it is dangerous
so to do.

Quest. But why is it impossible for these to be renewed unto Repentance?

Answ. 1. It is because the Decree is gone out against them, God will not renew
them, and none else can.

2. More directly and immediately it is, because the Holy Ghost has utterly
forsaken them, and withdrawn all his Operations from them for ever, whose work
it is alone to renew and work Repentance in the Hearts of Sinners: Men cannot
repent, when the Holy Spirit has utterly left them; no, nor have any desire to
repent: think of this you that magnify the Will of Man.

O Sinners, love the Holy Spirit, cherish the Motions thereof, and do not
grieve him, nor resist his Motions and Operations.

Secondly, By way of Consolation to Believers.

1. Here is still comfort for you that are the Children of God, born of God,
you cannot sin this Sin, you cannot sin unto Death, the Seed remains in you:
you mourn that you cannot repent as you would do; your Hearts are tender, you
need not fear your Condition. Do you fear to offend God, to grieve the Spirit?
O that is a blessed Sign: Do you love God, love his People? do you minister as
you have ministered to the poor Saints?

2. O remember you are in Christ's Hand: We are persuaded better things of you,
and things that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak.

Quest. What things are they that accompany Salvation?

I answer. Union with Christ, Regeneration, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, inherent Holiness and Perseverance in Grace. O see that you
endeavor to make your Calling and Election sure, by adding to your Faith,
Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and unto 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness;
and to Godliness, brotherly Kindness; and to brotherly Kindness, Charity. And
if you do those things (and these things you shall do, if you are true
Believers) you shall never fall; For so an Entrance shall be ministered to you
abundantly, into the Everlasting Verse 11.
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and Holy
Ghost be Glory, Honor, and Praise, for ever. Amen.

HYMNS of PRAISE.
A New Song sing unto the Lord
For mighty Wonders done,
His right Hand, and his glorious Arm,
Has our Salvation won.
Let all poor Sinners taste and try
That thou, O Lord, art good;
Nay let them feed, Lord Christ, on thee,
And wash them in thy Blood:
That they with Saints with one accord,
May joy with Holy Mirth,
Before the Great and Glorious Lord,
And show his Praises forth.
Come Sinners, come, and feed on Christ,
Before that you do die;
Come to the Wedding-Dinner, come;
See here is Variety.
All Good is in the Lord ye need,
Let not a Taste suffice;
But search to find where the Sweetness
Of Gospel-Dainties lies.
Truly enlightened Souls may sing,
Who special Grace receive;
True cause of Joy to such does spring,
Who savingly believe:
Such Souls shall never fall away,
But ever happy be;
Such shall be fed with Christ's own Lambs,
And sing eternally.
BReak forth and sing now, all ye Saints,
Lift up God's Name on high,
In sacred Songs to celebrate
His Praise continually:
Exalt the living God above,
Your standing is most sure;
Thy Mercy, Lord, and tender Love,
Will keep our Souls secure.
When we do fall, Lord, we shall rise
By thy own Blessed Hand;
Thou set'st our Feet upon a Rock,
Where we most safely stand.
With Saints of old we will sing therefore,
And say, Spring up O Well,
And send thy Waters forth for to
Refresh thy Israel.
The Pleasures of the World to come
Let Us taste of every Day,
And long when Jesus on the Throne
Shall the blessed Scepter sway.
What shall we hear, what shall we see,
When raptured in Bliss,
When we with Blessed Jesus be,
What Happiness like this?
We therefore sing the Lamb's sweet Song,
And Him we will adore;
The Day is near when Saints shall be
With him for ever more.
The Great Salvation: OR, The Salvation of the Gospel Great and Glorious.
Delivered in several SERMONS, By BENJ. KEACH.
HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that
heard him?
Sermon 1.
IN the precedent Chapter, the Apostle sets forth the Excellency, Glory and
Dignity of the Person of Jesus Christ.

1. Above Moses and the Prophets, ver. 1, 2, 3. God who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets; Ver. 2.
Has in these last Days spoken to us by Reader, This Treatise is swollen so big
already, that I can give thee little more than the Heads of the Sermons on this
Texts.
his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all Things. Ver. 3. Who being the
Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, and upholding all
things by the Word of his Power, when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat
down on the right Hand of the Majesty on High.

2. Above the Holy Angels: ver. 4. Being made so much better than the Angels,
as he has by Inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than they. Christ does
not only surpass Moses and the Prophets, but also all the Angels of God. 1. In
respect of his being God, of the Substance of the Father, and the express Image
of his Person, the Essential Glory of God shining forth in him. 2. In that he
as God created, and also does uphold the World, and all things in it, by the
Word of his Power. 3. In that he has obtained a more excellent Name than they,
verse 4. 4. In that Angels are required to worship him, ver. 5, 6. 5. In that
Angels are but his Servants, ver. 7, 14. 6. In respect of his Scepter and
Kingdom, ver. 8. 7. In respect of his glorious Exaltations at the Father's
right Hand, ver. 13.


The Apostle having laid down these things so fully and clearly, to illustrate
and confirm the great Doctrine of the Gospel; he in the beginning of this
second Chapter, proceeds to make the necessary Improvement of it: Therefore we
ought to give the more earnest Heed to the Things which we have heard, lest at
any Time we let them slip, ver. 1. For if the Word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, etc. (and from hence he brings the Words in our Text) How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? etc.

The Words contain an Interrogation, which does imply a strong and most
vehement Negation; How shall we escape if we, etc. That is, we cannot escape,
or it is impossible we, or any Persons whatsoever, should escape, if we or they
neglect so great Salvation. Escape what? That is implied here, which is not
expressed, namely, the Wrath of God: How shall we escape the dreadful Judgment
and Indignation of God, or Eternal Damnation in Hell, if we neglect or slight,
despise or reject the Means of this Salvation?

He confirms what he asserts, or aggravates the Greatness of their Sin who do
neglect this Salvation, and the impossibility of such ever to escape God's
Wrath.

1. From the Power and Authority of Christ, who not only wrought this Salvation
out, but only first declared it, or made it known; which first began to be
spoken by the Lord. Which some think may refer to his first declaring of it
from the beginning to Adam upon his Transgression, and to the Fathers under the
Old Testament: But I conceive he means chiefly our Lord's preaching this
Salvation in the Days of his Flesh, when he entered first on his Ministry, as
verse 1. of the first Chapter; God has in these last Days spoken unto us by
his Son.

2. From the confirmation of it, by Signs and Wonders. I shall be very brief in
speaking unto the Terms of our Text.

How shall we escape, avoid, get clear of, or deliver our selves from God's
Wrath and Vengeance.

If we neglect, if we mind other things more than this Salvation, or seem to be
indifferent in and about this great Business, like those that made light of the
Invitation to the Marriage-Supper, Mat. 22. Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

So great Salvation, namely, the Salvation of the Gospel. Great, as it refers
to God, denotes the glorious Perfections of his Nature, the Great God; it
signifies the infinite Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Mercy and Glory of his Majesty.
Great, as it refers to things, may be considered as to the Nature and Quality
of them, as Great Riches, Great Light; as the Sun is called a great Light, that
is, a Glorious Light, excelling all other Natural or Created Lights, or
Artificial Lights. Great Peace have they that love thy Law; that is, Glorious
Peace. So, great Salvation denotes Glorious Salvation, exceeding all Temporal
Salvation. So Great, this [ so] raises the Greatness and Glory of this
Salvation. God so loved the World: So, how? Even so, that it cannot be
conceived, much less expressed. So, this great Salvation is so wonderful, so
amazing, so glorious, and so affecting, it calls for all to admire it, consider
it, embrace it, and by no means to slight or neglect it.

From hence I shall note three Points of Doctrine. Doct. 1. That the Salvation
of the Gospel is a Great and Glorious Salvation. Doct. 2. That the Means of
this Salvation may be neglected. Doct. 3. That all such who do neglect this
Salvation, shall not, cannot escape.


I purpose to speak to all these three Propositions, and shall begin with the
first, namely, That the Salvation of the Gospel is a Great and Glorious
Salvation.

First, I shall prove, and fully (God assisting) demonstrate the Truth of this
Doctrine. Secondly, I shall improve it by way of Application.
First, It is a Great and Glorious Salvation comparatively: or when it is
compared with all other Salvations.

1. That was a Great and Glorious Salvation which God wrought Gospel-Salvation
great Salvation comparatively.
for Israel at the Red Sea. But what a Salvation was that? Who were they saved
from? It was from Pharaoh, a bloody and cruel Persecutor: but this is from
Satan and all cruel Enemies of our Souls.

2. That was from the Wrath of Men; this is from the fearful Psa. 91. 11.
Wrath of God, which none are able to conceive of: according to thy Fear, so is
thy Wrath.

3. That was a Salvation of the natural Lives of the Children of Israel; this a
Salvation of our Immortal Souls and Bodies too for ever.

4. That was a Type of this Salvation, a Shadow of it: and as far as the
Substance exceeds the Shadow of a Thing, so far does this Salvation exceed that
and all other Salvations.

5. That was a Temporal Salvation, this is an Eternal Salvation. Now that
Salvation at the Red Sea being one of the greatest Temporal Salvations that
ever was wrought, I need not mention any other. Israel had many great
Salvations wrought for them afterward, and so have many of the Saints had
great Salvations and Deliverances wrought for them in the Times of the Gospel.

Nay, we in these Nations have seen and heard of great and wonderful Things
which God has wrought for us, and for our Forefathers. It was a great
Salvation that was wrought in 1588, at the Spanish Invasion, and from the
Powder Plot; and also that in 1688, when We, and the Protestant Interest, were
brought very low, and we could not see which way Relief and Deliverance could
come. But alas, what are all these Salvations to this in my Text? Pray remember
that Gospel-Salvation is Great and Glorious comparatively. But,

Secondly, The Salvation of the Gospel is not only great comparatively,
Gospel-Salvation great in it self.
but also positively: not only in respect of all other Salvations, but also in
regard of it self. And to demonstrate this, consider, that it is great and
glorious in respect of the Time (or rather that Eternity) in which it was
contrived and graciously promised.

This Salvation, Brethren, was contrived and found out by the Wisdom of God,
before the World began. Hence Christ is said to be a Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World; that is, in the Decree, Rev. 13. 8.
Counsel and Purpose of God: Christ was set up from Everlasting as the great
and glorious Mediator and Savior of all that should believe in him, or that
were given unto him by the Father.

The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his Way, before his Works of Prove.
8. 22, 23, 24
old. I was set up from Everlasting, or ever the Earth was. When there were no
Depths, I was brought forth. As these Scriptures prove the Deity and Eternal
Generation of the Son of God; so also there was a Designation of him by the
Father, as Mediator, to be our Savior before all Worlds. Hence God says of
miserable Man, Deliver him from going down into the Pit, I have found a Ransom.
And as it was found out before the beginning of the World, Job 33 24.
or from Eternity, so it was also as early promised to us, as the Elect in
Christ, in hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie Tit. 1. 2.
promised before the World began: Compared with that in Timothy, Who has saved
and called us with an holy Calling; not according to our 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Works, but according to his Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Jesus
Christ before the World began.

God thought of us poor Sinners, and found out this way of Salvation before we
had a Being, yea even from Eternity, foreseeing us fallen in the First Adam,
brought into a deplorable Condition of Wrath and Misery.

Thirdly, The Salvation of the Gospel is great and glorious, in regard
Gospel-Salvation great in respect of that Counsel held in Eternity about it.
of that Counsel that was held before all Worlds about bringing of it in.
Christ the great Savior was delivered up according to the determinate Counsel
of God, Acts 2. 23. Should all the Wise Men and Great Potentates of the Earth
be called together, and sit in Council about the doing of some great and
wonderful thing, which unless it was effected, all the Kingdoms and States of
the Earth would sink and be dissolved, would not all say, that would be an
amazing Thing, and an important Concernment?

Alas! what is a Counsel held by all the wisest Men and greatest Potentates on
Earth, of the highest Concernment here, to that Council held by the Glorious
Trinity in Eternity, about bringing in of this Salvation? O of what Moment is
the Salvation of our Souls? None but the Great God could effect it, it was the
Result of Infinite Wisdom and Counsel. God seemed, Brethren, to call a Council
about the first Creation of Man; Let us make Man after our own Image, etc. But
how much more of the Glory of God's Wisdom, according to his Eternal Purpose,
shines forth, as the Result of that Counsel held about the Restoration of
Fallen Man, than what shone forth in the first Creation of him? And the Counsel
of Peace was between them both; that is, between the Father and Zech. 6. 11.
the Son.

Fourthly, The Salvation of the Gospel is great and glorious in respect It Is a
great Salvation in respect of the Design of it.
of God's Design therein: Which more generally and comprehensibly I may open in
three respects. 1 st. His own Glory in all his Attributes. 2 dly. The
confounding and baffling of Satan, and the utter Destruction of his Kingdom and
Hellish Design. 3 dly. The Eternal Salvation of Man; I mean, all that believe
in Jesus Christ, or are given to him by the Father.


1 st. God before all things hereby designed his own Glory, or to make all the
Perfections of his Holy Nature manifest to the Creature which he had made, and
to open a Way by which each of his Attributes might gloriously appear, and to
vanquish that Cloud that seemed to eclipse their shining.

1. For God's Mercy could not be extended in another Way to the Help and Relief
of Mankind under Wrath and Misery, because Justice was injured, and called for
the Sentence to be executed on us for our Sins.

2. And his Justice could not be executed, but his Mercy and Goodness would
have been brought under Obscurity, and been veiled for ever. And had Mankind
for ever been brought under the just Desert of Sin, God had, it is true,
glorified his Justice; but Mercy is as well a Property of his Blessed Nature as
Justice: and had that been done, how had any of his Creatures known any thing
of his Mercy and Goodness? certainly Mercy had never been manifested at all, no
more than is seen in the casting off the Fallen Angels. God to them appeared
only Just, not Gracious; but in Christ to Mankind, he appears not only Just,
but also Good and Gracious. Yet the Salvation of our Souls could not consist
with the Holiness and Justice of God in a way of Mercy, without a Satisfaction
be made to Divine Justice. Therefore Infinite Wisdom in substituting Jesus
Christ to die in our Nature and Stead, makes God's Justice a full Compensation
for the Wrong and Injury we had done by our Sins and Transgressions; and from
hence it appears that Infinite Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, Power, Mercy and
Goodness, etc. are discovered and magnified equally in God's bringing in this
Great Salvation of the Gospel: and this was, I say, the grand Design of God
herein, by which he removes and solves all those seeming Contradictions and
great Difficulties that appeared in the way of our Eternal Recovery, and
magnifies the entire Glory of God, that seemed to be lost by our Sin, or was
before hid under Obscurity; it is hereby fully repaired, and to the Joy of
Saints and Angels is made known and magnified in Christ. And from hence it is
that the Gospel is called the Wisdom of God; and Christ is also called the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, because 1 Cor. 2. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 24.
in him all the Strength of God, I mean the Power and Glory of all his
Attributes, are joined or united together, and shine in equal Glory in our
Salvation.

But more of this hereafter.

2 dly. Hereby also Satan is overthrown, and his grand Design marred and
frustrated for ever, and his Kingdom spoiled; our Lord Jesus having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a show of Col. 2. 15.
them openly, triumphing over them in it: and this was done by the Death of his
Cross, and by his Resurrection; To this purpose was 1 John 3. 8.
the Son of God manifest, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil.

3 dly. Moreover hereby God designed to make Man, even all that believe in
Christ and embrace this Salvation, happy again, and blessed for ever; nay (as I
shall show you, before I have done with this Text, God assisting me) even to
raise him up into a higher and better State than that was in which he was at
first created.

Fifthly, The Salvation of the Gospel is Great and Glorious, if we
Gospel-Salvation great considering how low Man was fallen, and the
seasonableness of it.
consider how low Man was fallen and sunk by his Transgression, and what kind
of Wrath he was laid under; As also if we consider how helpless he was, having
no Friend nor Brother that could give to God a Ransom for him; no nor could the
Angels of Heaven do it, whose Power is very great: No, no, none but Christ
alone, with his Almighty Arm, could save us from the threatened Wrath and
Vengeance of an angry God. Besides, this Salvation must needs be great and
glorious, if we consider the seasonableness of it; it was a timely Salvation,
it was brought in just as the Hand of Justice was up, and ready to strike the
fatal Stroke. Justice stood (as it were) with his Ax in his Hand to cut off all
our Heads; and Christ to save us, stepped in and laid down (as I may say) his own
Neck, and took the Blow: Or we may conceive that Justice stood with his Spear
in his Hand, ready, as it were, to run it into our Bowels; and Jesus Christ run
in between Divine Wrath and our poor Souls, and cried out, Let thy Spear, O
Justice, be thrust into my Heart, I will die for these condemned and guilty
Wretches. See what Paul says, When we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the Ungodly. So Verse. 8. While we were yet Sinners, Christ died
for us. Romans 5. 6.
Though I deny not but that this Text may refer to the Fullness of Time prefixed
by the Almighty for Christ to come, and take our Nature upon him, and to die in
our room; and that was the due Time, or Time God had appointed: Yet Christ was
as a Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, nay, before the Foundation
thereof. And we may say, that as soon as our first Parents sinned, even then,
and at that very Season, Jesus Christ stepped in, and yielded up himself to God
as a Sacrifice for us: and had he not then been accepted, we had been lost for
ever. O how refreshing, how sweet and how welcome is it to a poor condemned
Criminal, when he is brought to the Place of Execution, to see the Sheriff pull
out an Arrest of Execution, a Reprieve, nay, an absolute Pardon, and tell him,
You have met with a Friend, the King has accepted of one that he ordained and
substituted to be your Surety, and to die for you, and satisfy the Law and
Justice for you; Friend, you are acquitted. Brethren, thus it is here, Christ
offered himself, and the Father accepted him in our stead to die for us, and to
bear that Wrath that was due to us for our Sins; and this he did then, even
when we first sinned in Adam. So that we may say, in due time Christ died for
the Ungodly, just as the Stroke of Wrath and Divine Justice was falling on us,
for it was all one as if he had then actually suffered: And also his Blood was
as efficacious to save and absolve Adam, and all that did believe, and apply
the Virtue thereof, before it was shed, as it is to us who believe in these
latter Times of the World, after it has been shed more than sixteen hundred
Years. Would not such a guilty Malefactor I mentioned, say, O this is a great
Salvation indeed! nay, stand and admire at it, he expecting nothing but Death,
and had none to help him, or afford any hope or relief to him in the least!

APPLICATION.

1. We may from hence infer, God's Love to Mankind is inconceivable; nay, his
Love to sinful Man, to lost Man, rebellious Man: What is Man that thou art
mindful him? such a vile Creature, Job 7. 17.
a Worm, a filthy and loathsome Worm, a cursed Rebel and Traitor against God,
that God should let out his Thoughts from Eternity upon him, when the Sentence
was past against him, and he ready to go down to the Pit of Everlasting Wrath
and Misery; that he should say, Deliver him from going down into the Pit, I
have Job 33. 24.
found a Ransom. It Is not he (that is, Man himself) has found a Ransom: No,
no, I have, says God, found a Ransom; the Just for the Unjust, or in the room
and place of the guilty Sinner. It is not, I have found Man's good Works, Man's
reformed Life, his Repentance, his Faith, his Tears, his sincere Obedience; no,
but it is the Obedience of Christ, the Blood of Christ, the Sacrifice of
Christ, the Merits and Righteousness of Christ, this God has found to be our
Ransom. God has found a full Ransom, a perfect Ransom. God accepted of
Christ's Sacrifice for a Complete Satisfaction; it is more satisfactory than if
we had lain in Hell for ever, for we must always have been paying, but never
could have made Satisfaction. O who could have thought of such a Ransom, of
such a way of Salvation! in this lies the Depth of Divine Wisdom, and the Great
Mystery of the Gospel: How should we adore and admire the Grace of God in Jesus
Christ!

2. To you poor Sinners let me speak one word by way of Exhortation: Did God so
early contrive our Salvation? O then do you set your Hearts on work to seek
this Salvation, I mean, an Interest in it; be early at it, do not defer it: You
young Men, think upon it in the morning of your Days, this Salvation calls for
your utmost diligence to understand and find out; the Gospel is a Mystery, it is
not easily understood. The Preaching of a Crucified Christ is to some Men
Foolishness; but to them that are saved, it is the Power of God. Many stumble
at the Stumbling-stone God has laid in Sion. Christ is to some a
Stumbling-stone, and a Rock of Offense, but take heed he is not so to you.

3. Was there a Council held in Eternity about our Salvation? O then consult
with all Wisdom the grand Design of God herein: It is to exalt his own Glory,
his own Name, his own Free Grace; and this being so, let it be all your care to
advance the Riches of his Grace, and let God be wholly exalted, and do you lie
low at his Feet. O close in with God's Counsel, accept of this way of Life, do
not think there is any other way.

4. And lastly, Consider that the Greatness of God's Mercy and Divine Goodness
to us, was also one grand End and Design in finding out this Salvation: It does
display his unspeakable Love and Bowels toward his poor Creature Man. True, he
had the like regard to his Justice; but his Justice had been magnified in our
Destruction, if his Mercy had never appeared. But that his Mercy might be
manifested, what has he done, his own Son has born our Sins, he has laid the
Hand of his Justice, and let out that Wrath that must have lain upon us for
ever upon his own Son, that Mercy might flow forth to us. This should teach us
to study Acts of Mercy, and contrive that way to be like unto the Holy and
Merciful God: This is that which he requires of us, even to do justly, love
Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon. II.
I AM upon the Proof and Demonstration of the first Point of Doctrine raised
from our Text, viz. That Gospel-Salvation is a Great and Glorious Salvation.

I have spoken to this already under five Considerations.

Sixthly, The Salvation of the Gospel is Great and Glorious, if
Gospel-Salvation great, considering the Persons that brought it about.
we consider the Glory and Greatness of those Persons who sat in Counsel about
bringing of it in, and working of it out for sinful Man. We commonly judge of
the Greatness of the Undertaking, and the Glory of the Work, by considering the
Dignity, Glory, Wisdom, Power and Greatness of the Persons concerned in it.

Now if this Work, I mean the Salvation of sinful Man, had been put into the
Hands of the mighty Angels, and they had called a Council about it, and showed
their uttermost Skill, Wisdom and Power, in order to the actual accomplishment
thereof, would not all say, this must needs be some great and wonderful Work,
or a great Salvation? But alas, they could neither have sound out a way of
Salvation for us, much less have wrought it out: Could they any way have
thought how the Glory of every Attribute of God might have been raised, and
have shone forth in equal Luster? could they have secured the Glory of God's
Justice and Holiness, and have made up the Wrong we had done to God by our Sin,
and so have opened a Way for Mercy and Goodness to run down like a mighty
Stream, and secured the Sanction of the Law, and yet have delivered Man from
the Curse thereof? God must not, will not lose the Glory of any one of his
Attributes, let what will become of the Rebellious Sinner. Alas, they could
never have found out a way whereby the Attributes of Mercy and Justice might
meet together, and Righteousness and Truth kiss each other: the Persons then
who found and wrought out this Salvation, were not the Holy Angels of God; No,
no, none but God himself could do it: The Salvation of Israel is of the Lord;
He is our Psalm. 25. 5.
Savior: How often is this expressed in the Psalms, and in other places of the
Holy Scripture. Salvation is ascribed to the Lord, to him only; yea to his own
Arm, to the greatness of his Power: Therefore my own Arm brought Salvation.

Brethren, each Person in the Trinity has a part in it; the Father Isa. 63. 5.
has his Part, the Son has his Part, and the Holy Ghost has What part of
this Salvation is attributed to God the Father.
his Part also. Remember, that these three are one; though three Persons or
Subsistences, yet but one and the same God, one in Essence, though
distinguished as to their distinct Personalities: the Person of the Father is
not the Person of the Son; the Father took not upon him Flesh and died for our
Sins, but the Son; the Son sent not the Father, but the Father sent the Son:
The Father and the Son do not proceed from the Holy Ghost, but the Holy Ghost
does proceed from them.

But a little to open and insist upon the distinct Parts which each Person
has, and how concerned in the accomplishing of this great Salvation.

1. The Father is held forth in the Scripture, as the Contriver or first Author
of this Salvation: All Things are of God, who has reconciled us unto himself
by Jesus Christ. All Things in and about 2 Cor. 5. 18.
our Salvation are of God the Father, as he is the Fountain and Spring of it:
He has devised means, that his banished might not for ever be expelled from
him. I have found a Ransom: Where did God find it? (says Reverend Caryl)
Certainly in his own Bosom, in his own Heart: Jesus Christ came out of the
Bosom of the Father, there he was, and God found him in and with himself; he
did not find the Ransom by chance, but he found it in his own Wisdom, Love and
Goodness.

2. The Father was injured, his Glory seemed to be eclipsed by Sin, therefore
must be righted, and his Honor repaired; and he sought out the proper way to
do it: I know, as if God should say, how to do the poor Sinner good; I know how
to save him, and do my own Honor, my Justice, Truth and Holiness, no wrong; my
Honor is secured, my Justice is satisfied; and yet the Sinner whom my Heart is
set upon, shall be saved.

3. The Father could only appoint the Terms and Way of our Salvation: Who but
God could tell, or did know what would comport with his Truth and Justice, and
with the Sanction of his Righteous Law and Infinite Holiness? And he saw it did
not comport with his Truth, Justice, Holiness, and Blessed Law, to save Man
merely as an Act of Sovereign Mercy; but it did agree in his Infinite Wisdom to
transfer the Punishment of the Sinner to another, namely, to his own Son, he
taking our Nature on him; who from the Union of the two Natures in one Person,
procured an Infinite Satisfaction, or made a Plenary Compensation for our Sins.

4. God the Father is therefore held forth as the Person who substituted his
own Son as Mediator and Surety in our stead and room, to work out our
Redemption, or this great and glorious Salvation; and to this end prepared him
a Body: A Body have thou prepared me. And the Father is said also to send his
Son: How Heb. 10. 5.
many times does our Blessed Savior ascribe this unto the Father, in the
Gospel recorded by John? I am persuaded not less than forty times: The Father
that sent me, is with me. God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the
World. This is the Will of him that Joh. 3. 17.
sent me.

5. All the Blessings of our Salvation are ascribed to the free Bounty, Mercy,
Love and Goodness of God the Father: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he
has visited and redeemed his People, and has raised up an Horn of Salvation,
etc. And therefore he is styled, The Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort.
Now this 2 Cor. 1. 3.
being so, what an abominable thing is it for the Socinians to say, That the
Doctrine of Satisfaction renders the Son more merciful and kind than the
Father; see Penn's Sandy Foundation shaken: No, this is very unjustly and
unrighteously thrown upon this great Gospel Truth. Certainly it exalts the
Goodness and Mercy of God the Father, far more than their idle and absurd
Notion of God's pardoning Sin in a way of mere Mercy, without a Satisfaction to
his offended Justice; seeing God in a way of Mercy and Divine Goodness, is so
set upon this Work of our Salvation, that though it cost him the Life of his
own Son, yet it shall be done, he will not spare him: He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up Romans 8. 32.
for us all. The Father did not spare him as an Act of his own Love and
Goodness to us; God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son.
Certainly that Person shows greater Love and Joh. 3. 16.
Pity to another, who to save him gives a Million, than he that gives but a
Pound. Must God by these Men be deemed to have no Mercy at all, because he
seeks the Honor of his Justice equally with the Glory of his Mercy? Is he not
Merciful, because he is Just as well as Gracious?

6. Brethren, it was the Father that loved us and chose us in Jesus Christ
before the Foundation of the World, which is the Spring of all Spiritual
Blessings, even of Redemption and Salvation it self.

7. Moreover, the Father is said to raise Jesus Christ from the Dead: Though
the Son being God could raise himself, yet as Mediator, the Power to quicken
whomsoever he will, is said to be given to him by the Father. Besides, it is
the mere Grace and good Pleasure of God the Father, to accept of Christ and his
Obedience for us, and to accept of us in Jesus Christ: Also it is the Father
that blesses us with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus. Ephesians. 1. 3.
Nay, no Man, Christ says, can come unto him, unless it be given by the Father;
that is, Power must be given to him to come. And again he says, No Man can
come unto me, except my Father that sent me draw him. We ought therefore to see
we do not lessen the Glory of God the Father in our Salvation, who is the
Efficient, the Original and moving Cause thereof: My Father (says Christ)
hitherto Joh. 5. 17.
works, and I work.

Brethren, we are not to attribute the Works of Creation and Providence to God
the Father only, for he has a great and glorious Hand in the Work of
Redemption, I may say, to accomplish this Work, even the Salvation of his
Elect; he works hitherto, and Christ also works: which brings me to
consider of the next Person in the Trinity concerned herein.

Secondly, As the Father has, as you have heard, his part in What a Part
Christ has in working out this Salvation.
bringing in the great Salvation of the Gospel, so Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, has his part in working of it out; the Father fixed on him, as the great
Agent, actually to perfect it: he is in such a peculiar manner concerned in it,
that his Name is Savior, his Name shall be called Jesus; Jesus signifies a
Savior: certainly this must needs be a great Salvation, if we consider the
Greatness, Dignity and Glory of his Person, whom God has sent to save us. And
because it is mainly from this Foot of account, that the Apostle in the Text
draws his Inference, and calls Gospe-Salvation Great Salvation, I shall a
little further enlarge upon this particular;

1. Jesus Christ has a great Name given to him, yea, a Name Christ is a great
Savior.
above every Name; that is, he is so highly exalted, (as he is Mediator) that
he is clothed with Power, Glory and Majesty, above all Creatures in Heaven and
Earth; so that all in Heaven Phil. 2. 9.
above, and in Earth beneath, must bow down before him, and adore and worship
him, and be in subjection to him: For unto us a Child is born, a Son is given,
and the Government shall be upon his Isa. 9. 6.
Shoulders; And his Name shall be called Wonderful, etc. This his Name is
according to his Person, he is a wonderful or an admirable Person; Wonderful in
his Incarnation, God man; Wonderful in his Birth, Wonderful in his Life,
Wonderful in his Death; and in the Effects, End and Design of his Death; he is
not only called Wonderful, but also Counselor: Never such a Counselor for
Isa. 6. 9.
Wisdom and Knowledge, for he is the Wisdom of God it self, and the only Wise
God: He is called the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, or the Father of
Eternity, and the Prince of Peace. Moreover, he is called Immanuel, God with
us, God in our Nature; and also called the only begotten Son of God, and the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the
only Potentate; he is called the Desire of all Nations, Elect, Precious: And he
is made so much better than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance obtained a
more excellent Name than they; for unto which of the Angels said he at any
time, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee? He is Heb. 1. 4, 5.
called the one Mediator; time would fail me to speak of all his Names. And,

2. As is his Name, such is his Nature: He is God's Fellow; he is coequal and
coeternal with the Father; he thought it not robbery to be equal with God. O
what a kind of Salvation must this be, that such a Person is sent to work it
out! One clothed with Phil. 2. 6.
such a Name, with such a Nature, with such Glory: He is called a Savior, a
great One; He shall (that is, God shall) send them a Savior, a great One, and
he shall deliver them. He, as he is God-Man, Isa. 19. 20.
is ordained Heir of all Things, and all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to
him; nay, he is the Upholder, the Sustainer or Preserver of the World: he is
not only the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and express Image of his Person,
but he upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power. He is one and the same
God with the Father, the express Character of the Father's Person; so Heb. 1. 3.
that they that see and know him, see and know the Father also. He supports,
sustains, feeds, preserves, governs, throws Joh. 14. 9.
down and raises up, kills and makes alive whom he will; he has the Keys of
Hell and Death. He is the Wonder of Angels, the Consternation and Dread of
Devils, and the Joy and Delight of the Saints; there is not such another Person
in Heaven nor Earth, perfect God, and perfect Man, and yet but one Christ, one
Person: certainly here is some great and wonderful Work to be done, when such a
Person is substituted, ordained and so qualified, and sent into the World to
work out the actual Accomplishment thereof. Nay, God himself, who delights in
him, put the Prophet to propound this Question concerning him; Who is this that
comes from Edom, with died Garments from Bozrah? this that is Isa. 63. 1.
glorious in his Apparel, traveling in the greatness of his Strength? Christ
himself (as I conceive) answers, I that speak in Righteousness, mighty to save.
O happy Mortals, that God has sent us such a Savior, he is mighty to save.

3. Consider also that none but he could save us, procure and work about this
Salvation for us; There was none in Heaven nor Earth Rev. 5. 5.
able nor worthy to open the Book, and loose the Seals thereof, but the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, he has prevailed.

4. Jesus Christ is such an Almighty Savior, that he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come to God by him. He has the Perfection Heb. 7. 25.
of Power with him, he can save to the full, let the State of the Soul that
comes to God by him be whatsoever it will or can be. 1. Though a Man is sunk
down to the very Gates of Hell, under the pressure and sense of God's Wrath. 2.
Though he has the Guilt of Millions of Sins like Mountains of Lead lying upon
him, yet Christ can save him. 3. Though Satan says there is no Hope, and the
Heart of the Sinner joins in with him, and says, there is no Hope, no Pardon,
no Help, no Salvation; hang thy self, drown thy self, says Satan, thou art
damned, there is no Mercy for thee: yet Christ can then save that poor Soul;
and many such he has saved, when but a little before all hope of Relief seemed
to be gone. 4. Though the Devil should raise up all the Force and Powers of
Hell and Darkness against a Person, to destroy him, yet Jesus Christ can save
him; if he will work upon the Soul by stretching forth his Almighty Power,
nothing can obstruct or hinder him.


5. Christ can save from the Sin, from the Guilt, the Filth and Power of it,
and break into pieces all the Bonds, Chains and Fetters of the Enemy; nay, let
the Sins of a Person be never so many, never so great, yet he can save to the
uttermost, though they are such Sinners as Manasseh and Mary Magdalen were;
nay, such that put to death by wicked Hands the Lord of Life and Glory: it is as
easy with him to save great Sinners, as the least, or less guilty Ones; he can
save the stout-hearted, such who are far from Righteousness. Isa. 42. 12.


6. He can save from the Curse of the Law and from the Wrath of God; he is
every ways furnished, fitted and enabled to save.

7. He is a Mighty Savior, and able to save to the uttermost, in that he can
save by himself alone, by his own Power; it is not if we will begin the Work,
if we will do what we can, he can and will save us; no, but he takes the whole
Work of Salvation into his own Hand, he is the Author and Finisher of it, it is
he alone.

7. Moreover, Christ is as willing to save poor lost and undone Sinners, as he
is able; he had his Name given to this end, i. e. because of his Power,
willingness and readiness to save Sinners.

Brethren, this does not only bespeak this to be a great Salvation, but also it
discovers the greatness of God's Love even the greatest Pity, Power and Wisdom
that ever was manifested.

Thirdly, The third Person that is concerned in this Salvation, is The H. Ghost
has his part in working about our Salvation.
the Holy Ghost: The Father chooses, the Son purchases, and the Spirit applies
the Blessings purchased. Salvation is called a Garment; He has clothed me with
the Garments of Salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness.
The Father may be said Isa. 61. 10.
to prepare the Matter which this Robe is made of; the Son wrought it, he made
the Garment, and the Holy Spirit puts it on the Soul; the Garment of Salvation
is Christ's Righteousness. Again, the Father sought out or chose the Bride, the
Son espouses and marries her, but it is the Holy Ghost that inclines her Heart
and stirs up, nay, that causes the Soul to like and to love this Blessed Lover,
and brings it to yield and consent to accept heartily and willingly of Jesus
Christ. We were sick of a fearful and incurable Disease, and the Father found
out the Medicine; the Blood of Christ is that Medicine, and the Holy Spirit
applies it to the Soul. We were in Debt, in Prison, and bound in Fetters and
cruel Chains, and the Father procured a Friend to pay all our Debts; The Son
was this our Friend, who laid down the infinite Sum; and the Holy Spirit knocks
off our Irons, our Fetters and Chains, and brings us out of the Prisonhouse.
The Father loved us, and sent his Son to merit Grace for us; the Son loved us,
and died, and thereby purchased that Grace to be imparted to us; and the Holy
Spirit works that Grace in us. O what is the Nature of this Salvation; how
Great, how Glorious! That the whole Trinity, both the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, are thus employed in and about it, that we might have it made
fure to us for ever.

APPLICATION.

1. Reproof. Woe to such that esteem their own filthy Rags above this Garment of
Salvation, or that seem to set light by it: Has God the Father, Jesus Christ,
and the Holy Ghost, held a Counsel before the World began, about the Salvation
of our Souls; and has each Person of the Blessed Trinity such a Part in order
to the making of it to be effectual to us? And shall any dare to say there is
no need of this Garment? We may work a Robe out of our own Bowels by the
Operations of the Spirit, that will serve to hide our Nakedness, trouble not us
with your old Divinity: We are for rational Religion. He that is Righteous, and
obeys Christ, and leads a Goldly Life, need not doubt of his Salvation: For in
Acts 10.
every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of
him. O how ready are Men to abuse the Scripture! Can any Man think that his own
personal inherent Righteousness, can either justify or save him; or that the
Apostle Peter means any such thing? God may so far accept of a Man in his
Obedience, in which he acts in all Sincerity and Faithfulness to him, as to
hear his Prayers, so as to reveal himself to him in Christ as he did to
Cornelius. But was Cornelius a Believer, and justfied before he heard of Jesus
Christ, and had Faith wrought in his Soul? See how Peter preached Christ for
Life and Salvation to this Man: Notwithstanding all his own Righteousness,
Peter was commanded of God to tell him what he should do that he might be
saved, plainly intimating he did not know the Way, or how to be saved before
Verse 6.
Peter preached Christ to him: He (says the Lord) shall tell thee what thou
ought to do. God calls the Gentiles, or whom he pleases among them, as well
as the Jews; which Peter might not understand before now.
And in verse 43. Peter said, To him (that is, to Jesus Christ) gave all the
Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in him, should
receive remission of Sins. Will any say Cornelius had remission of Sins before
he heard this Sermon, and believed in Jesus Christ? Was not Peter sent to him
(and to those other Gentiles with him) that they might be converted? O take
heed you stumble not at this Stone, lest it fall on you and grind you to Powder.

2. Dare any of you think that this Salvation is but a small Matter, and that
you need not trouble your selves about it? O tremble you who never had one
serious Thought about it to this Day: You have other things to mind, are full
of Business; but, O Sirs, what is of such Moment as this Salvation? Yet
nevertheless some will not spare time to hear it, or to attend upon the Word of
this Salvation: Others will not part with the Love of this World, to have a
Part in it; they value their earthly Riches, Pleasures and Honors, above it;
nay, too many esteem their filthy Lusts more than an Interest in this great
Salvation. But what contempt do such Persons cast upon the great God, who has
manifested such Depths of Divine Wisdom, Grace and Goodness in bringing of it
in, and working of it out for our precious Souls: Did they know what God is,
Christ is, Salvation is, certainly they would change their Opinion, and not a
little blame themselves for their great Folly. Brethren, a true and spiritual
Knowledge of the Great Salvation of the Gospel, makes all the Things of the
World seem little, nay nothing in comparison thereof: All things that Carnal
Men have their Hearts set upon, are poor, thin and beggarly Things, when
compared to Grace here, and Glory hereafter. No sooner had Paul a true sight of
this Great Salvation, but immediately he consulted not with Flesh and Blood.
When the sweetness Gal. 1. 16.
of Christ and Salvation is tasted, and a Soul knows how good and satisfying it
is, every thing that has a Tincture of Flesh and Blood, all carnal Interests,
and fleshly Counsels expire. A full sight of this Salvation seems to make Life
uneasy, and Death desirable: Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in
Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Nothing in this World could be
worth a Thought of his Heart, since his Eyes had seen God's Salvation. Why what
did he see? It was Jesus Christ the Author of Salvation, in whom he knew was
Salvation, and in no other: He that lives so long as to see Christ by an Eye of
Faith to be his Savior, and his Salvation, will be willing to leave this
World, be willing to die, because he then shall die in peace. None can die
happily that have not a sight of this Great Salvation; nor can any have a true
sight of this Salvation, but they only who have by Faith a true sight of the
Blessed Savior. Paul, when he came to the Knowledge of Christ, and of Salvation
by Christ, esteems every thing in the World to be no better than Dung, and
longs to be dissolved, and to be in Christ's Arms, and taste how good Salvation
is in the full possession of it in Heaven.

3. This reproves such who delay seeking after the Knowledge of this Salvation:
If it be so great, it must and ought first of all be regarded: Seek first the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. May be 'ere long you will wish you had
sought after Christ Mat. 6. 33.
and Salvation by him, before all things, when you come to lie upon a sick Bed.
O Sirs, you will need it at last, and may be seek it when too late. Were a poor
condemned Criminal sensible of a Way how to be saved from Death, or that a
Pardon might be had, would he delay the Time, or would he not make it all his
Business with his uttermost Care to seek for a Pardon, lest the Day of his
Execution should come before he has got it? And if so, he knows die he must:
Alas Sirs, what is it to be delivered from Natural Death, to our being
delivered from Eternal Death! The Time when you must die may be near; and if
you have not an Interest in this Salvation when you die Naturally, your Souls
must die Eternally. Pray observe the Argument I am upon to excite and stir up
your Souls to a Holy Diligence, in attending on the Means of this Salvation; it
is the same the Apostle uses, it is called Great Salvation, considering the
Dignity of Christ's Person, who laid down his own Life to purchase it for us;
and also was the first great Minister and Preacher of it, which at first began
to be spoken by the Lord: It was preached by the Lord of Life and Glory, the
great Mediator, Head of all Principalities and Powers; and it is again by one
of his poor Servants this Day offered unto you, in the Name of my Great Master,
therefore refuse it at your Peril: If you receive it, embrace it, you shall be
happy; but if you refuse it, you will be miserable, and at last die in your
Sins.

4. Here is Comfort and Encouragement for the worst of Sinners. Are you such
who are and have been great Sinners? Well, let it be so, yet be not cast down
into utter Despair, for here is a great Savior; you have heard of his mighty
Power and Ability to save; and he says, All that the Father has given to me,
shall come unto me. Ay but you perhaps may say, you know not who they be that
the Father has given to Christ. Well, what of that? Pray mind his next Words,
And he that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6. 37.
Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life. Joh.
3. 15.
Receive this Savior, believe in him, and you shall be saved whosoever you
are: It is not the greatness of your Sins that can hinder or obstruct him from
saving your Souls; though your Sins be as red as Scarlet, or as red as Crimson,
he will wash them all away, and make you as white as Wool, as white as Snow.

5. Also here is good News for poor Sin-sick Sinners, to wounded and lost
Sinners, I mean, such who feel themselves sick, see and feel themselves
wounded, who find they are lost and undone in themselves. O Souls, you are the
Persons the Word of this Salvation is sent to; The Whole need not a Physician,
but such that are sick. I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance. Mat. 9. 12, 13.
Such indeed who are conceited of their own Righteousness, or swelled with a
good Opinion of their own good Works, good Deeds, and good Duties, will not
come to Christ, such think they need no such Physician as Christ is: But you
that see you have no Righteousness of your own, but that all your Righteousness
is as Dung, O look to Christ, come to Christ, hear what he says to such that
are lost, that are under the burden of their Sins, and wounded ones; Come to me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I Mat. 11. 28.
will give you rest.

6. But here is sad News to such who slight this Salvation, and refuse Jesus
Christ, great will their Condemnation be: The Men of Nineveh shall rise up in
judgment with this Generation, and condemn it, because they repented at the
preaching of Jonas; and behold a greater than Jonas is here. The greatness of
this Savior who preaches the Gospel to you, and is come to save you, will
aggravate your Condemnation. What was Jonas to Jesus Christ? Also our Savior
says, The Queen of the South shall rise up in Judgment with this Generation,
and shall condemn it; for she came from the uttermost Parts of the Earth to
hear the Wisdom of Solomon; and behold a greater than Solomon is here. Solomon
was a mighty King, and for Wisdom exceeded all that went before him. But alas,
what was Solomon to Jesus Christ, who is the Wisdom of God it self, and the
express Image of the Father's Person, and the Brightness of his Glory? O know
you, Sinners, this Day, that Jesus Christ, this glorious King, and Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, this mighty Savior is come to your Doors: Behold, I
stand at the Door and knock: Will you not open the Door, nor cry to him to Rev.
3. 20.
help you to open to him, to enable you to believe in him? What do you say,
shall the Son of God stand at your Doors, and you not so much as ask, Who is
there? Who is at my Door? Shall Christ be kept out of your Hearts, and stand at
your Doors, whilst Sin commands the chiefest Room, and has absolute Power over
you, and rules in you? How will you be able to look this Blessed Savior in the
Face another Day? Is he come through a Sea of Blood to offer his Love to you,
and to espouse you unto himself for ever, and will not you be persuaded to
break your League with your old Lovers, who will at last stab you at the very
Heart, and betray your Souls into the Hands of Divine Wrath? Now, they have
done it already: What are your Lovers but your (...), your Pride, your
Earthly-mindedness, your sinful Pleasures, Profits and Honors? O resolve to
desert them, they otherwise will damn your Souls for ever, and expose you to
the Torments of Hellfire: And to deliver you from them, and from that ^rath
which is due to you for them, (I mean, for your Sins) is Christ come, and this
great Savior is offered to you. The Lord help every one of you to consider of
this, and to lay it to Heart.

7. And lastly, Here is Comfort for poor drooping Saints: This Savior is
yours, this mighty Savior, who is able to save to the uttermost, and he will
help you in all your Straits, and supply all your Wants; and he has taken the
Work into his own Hand, and has also begun it, and will perform it, and
finally finish it before Phil. 1. 6.
that he has done; rest therefore upon him.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon. III.
BRETHREN, the last Day I showed you that Gospel-Salvation is Great and Glorious
Salvation, considering the Greatness, Dignity and Glory of the Persons that are
concerned in bringing of it in, and working of it out for us, namely, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: But more particularly upon the
Consideration of the Dignity of the Person of Christ, who is that great Savior
God has sent, who is great in his Name, great in respect of his Person and
Nature, great as to his Commission in his Call, and in respect of those great
and glorious Anointings that were upon him (...) small now proceed.

Seventhly, The Salvation of the Gospel is great, etc. if we consider Great
Salvation in respect of what we are delivered from.
what poor Sinners hereby (...) and delivered from: By this Salvation, those
th^^ believe are delivered from every Evil in this World, and in that which is
to come.

All Evil may be considered under two general Heads. First, That which
corrupts our Nature, both Soul and Body, as to their Being. Secondly, That
which is destructive to our Nature, as to its wellbeing, both Soul and Body.


The first is Sin, the second is Punishment. I purpose to speak briefly to both
these, that so we may the better demonstrate the Greatness of this Salvation.

First, Of the Evil of Sin which all those are and shall be for ever saved and
delivered from, who embrace this Salvation. This I shall speak unto more
generally, and then more particularly.

The Evil of Sin opened.
Brethren, the Evil of Sin comprehends many things, as it respects God, and
is directly against him, his Holy Nature, hateful and loathsome in his sight:
and in respect had to Man, which takes in our first Apostasy from God, the loss
of his Holy and Blessed Image, as also his Love and Favor; and so the Pravity
of all the Powers of our Souls, and Faculties thereof, as the blindness of our
Minds, and Darkness of our Understandings; the Rebellion and Stubbornness of
our Wills, and hardness of our Hearts; the Carnality and Vanity of our
Affections; the horrid Guilt, Pollution and Filthiness that cleaves to the Soul
and Conscience; together with Shame, Bondage, Nakedness, Poverty and Enmity
against God, Slavery to Satan and to this World, having contracted a Likeness
to the Devil, or an Impress of his Image, doing his Will, and serving our own
Lusts: All these, and many other things, comprize the Evil of Sin, from which
by this Salvation we are delivered.

But to speak a little more particularly; let us,

1. Consider the Evil of Sin: As it is contrary to God's most Holy and Pure
Nature, it is that thing which his Soul is said to hate. Would not we be
greatly concerned, if any should do that in our sight and presence, which they
know we hate and abominate?

2. Sin is a Dishonor to God, and it is called a Despising of God: Them that
honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.
1 Samuel 2. 30.
Certainly Sin must needs have a great Evil in it, if it be a despising of God:
if a Man be despised, he thinks himself greatly wronged; loss of Honor is no
small loss.

3. Sin is a crossing of God's Will, acting directly contrary thereunto; nay,
and it is a doing the Will of the Devil: How are you troubled if your Servants
cross your Will in that which is just and right, and wherein your Interest and
Honor lies, and is nearly concerned. Sin is a crossing of the Will of God; not
only when the Sinner does not what God commands to be done, which is a Sin of
Omission, but also in doing that which he has positively forbid, which is a
Sin of Commission.

4. Sin does cast contempt upon God, as when Men sin presumptuously with a high
Hand, as if it were in defiance of Heaven, as if they bid God do his worst,
intimating that they will have their Way, their Wills, their cursed Lusts, or
sinful Pleasures and Profit, let what will come of it.

5. Sin is a renouncing of God's just Authority and Government over us; it is a
breaking his Bonds, and casting his Cords from Psalm. 2. 3.
us. What is the Voice of Sin? God shall not reign over us, we will not be
under his Government, but will live as we list, our Tongues are our own; and
who is Lord over us? Nay, and as Sin does cast off God, and disown him, contemn
him, rebel against him, will not have him reign, but strive to pull him out of
his Throne: So by Sin the Sinner sets up the Devil in God's Place, puts him
into God's Throne. The Heart is the Throne of God, but there the Sinner will
not allow God to rule, God to be, but gives way to Sin, and will sin; and in so
doing he exalts Satan, and puts him into the Government, and subjects to him. O
what is the Evil of Sin?

6. Sin in the Nature of it, is a manifestation of the Sinner's hatred of God:
God declares against Sinners in his Word, as such that hate him; the lesser
Love is accounted a Hatred in the Scripture. But alas, Sinners seem to have no
Love to God at all, they proclaim War against him, even wish there was no God
to control them, to judge them, to punish them, so that they might sin the more
freely, and with the more impudence, if it be possible for them so to do: The
Fool says in his Heart, there is no God. He would have no God, he would be
glad it there was no God; such is his hatred of God. Hence it is said, Visiting
the Iniquity of the Exodus 20. 5.
Fathers on the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me. And again it is said, Should thou love them that hate 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
the Lord? Sin even strikes at God's very Being. Can you think any Person can
have more hatred to you, than to wish you had no Being? nay, would, if he
could, destroy you, and cause you not to be, or deprive you of a King any more
for ever? This seems to be the Voice or Sin naturally in Men's Hearts; therefore
it must needs be a great Evil, they would not have God to be, if they could
bring it about or have their Will; for such as we despise, resist, war against,
we would kill and destroy if we could: Sin would dethrone God, and thrust him
out of the World, it fills the Mind so full of Enmity against him. Romans 8. 7.


2 dly. But in the second place, Sin has not only great Evil in it, as it
against God, but also in respect of our selves: It Is not only (...) our to God
but hurtful to us. No Evil like the Evil of Sin in this (...) also, as will
appear, if we conside^^*

1. It was Sin we lost God's Holy Image in which we were created in our first
Parents. O what a (...) Creature was Man, as he came out of his great Creator's
Hand; there was no Spot, Blemish, nor Stain in him: Man was created in
Righteousness and true Holiness, in that did the Image of God consist. But this
Likeness to God we lost by Sin; and by yielding unto it, and by being overcome
by it, we became like unto the Devil. Naturally all Men bear his Image, even
the Devil's Likeness: Judas was so much like the Devil, that Christ calls him a
Devil; Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil?

2. Sin poisoned our whole Nature, and corrupted all our Faculties.

1. It is compared to the Plague of the Leprosy, it spreads it self over us,
from the Crown of our Heads to the Soles of our Feet; it is more filthy than
the filthiest thing in the World in God's sight: And as all the Faculties of
our Souls were poisoned thereby, so all the Members of our Bodies are defiled
and polluted with it also. Nay, and it is such a kind of Pollution, that
renders the Sinner loathsome to God: God is said to be grieved with Sin, nay
grieved that he made Man; grieved at his Heart, because every Imagination of
the Thought of his Heart was evil continually. God is Genesis 6. 5, 6.
said upon this to repent that he made Man; not that God properly can repent,
it signifies an alienation of God's Heart and Affections from Man for his Sin
and Wickedness, whereby he carries himself toward him as we do when we repent
we have done a thing.

2. It was therefore hereby that we lost God's Love and Favor, and is not that
a dismal and most bitter thing? Man's only Happiness lies in his Likeness to
God, and in the enjoyment of his Love, and the Light of his sweet Countenance:
But this the whole Race of Mankind lost by Original Sin, and instead of his
Love, we were brought under his Wrath. Sin incurred the Wrath and Anger of God:
God is angry with the Wicked every Day. And as we by Sin became Psalm. 7. 11.
Enemies to God, so also hereby God became an Enemy to us: And if we consider
what it cost God, and cost Jesus Christ to make our Peace, or to make up this
Breach, sure we must say, this is a great and wonderful Salvation.

3. Sin is the worst of Evils, it is the Plague of Plagues, it is worse than
any Affliction: Afflictions oft-times bring us nearer unto God, but Sin drives
us further from him. Sin is a departing from God, a leaving and forsaking of
God, a casting of God off; the more we are afflicted, the more we are made
conformable to Jesus Christ. He was afflicted, and a Man of Sorrows; but the
more we sin, the more like we are unto the Devil. Nay, and by Afflictions we
are purged, and are said to partake of the Holiness of God; therefore there is
much Good in Affliction: but Sin has nothing but Evil in it, hurtful Evil,
Soul-defiling, and Souldamning Evil. Sin is the Spring and Cause of all other
Evils, it is the Cause of all Sickness, and of all Sorrow and Misery, nay and
it is the Cause of Death it self: The Wages of Sin is Death; Romans 6. 23. 1 Cor.
15. 56.
nay, the Sting of Death is Sin, that which makes Death so terrible to a wicked
Man.

4. Sin has put Mankind into Satan's Hand, who has laid him in cruel Chains:
Consider what a thing it is to be taken Captive by a grand and merciless
Tyrant: Satan took all Mankind Captive. and holds them still, who are under the
Power of it in Captivity; they are his Bondmen, his Slaves, he takes them
Captive at his Will. Every vicious Habit is a strong Bond or Chain in which
Satan binds his Vassals. All Men naturally are bound down under the Bond of
Ignorance, Unbelief, and Hardness of Heart; such is the Nature of Sin. Christ
came to set at liberty such that were Isa. 61. 1.
bound. I perceive, says Peter, that thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, Acts
8. 23.
and in the Bond of Iniquity. And O what is the Strength of these Bonds? Who
can break them but the Arm of the Omnipotent God? Moreover, these Bonds bind
the Soul unto, and under the Wrath of God. O what a kind of Salvation is it,
that delivers us from Sin, and out of the Power of Satan!

5. Sin has put out the Eyes of all Mankind, and stripped them naked, and
wounded them unto Death: All Men are born blind, the Eyes of our Understanding
naturally are darkened, the State of M^n by Nature is most miserable; it is set
out by a wretched Infant Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5, 6.
cast out in the open Fi^la in its Blood, in the Day of its Nativity, having
none to pity it, to wash it nor swade it at all. We are all naturally most
loathsome, full of filthy S^abs and running Sores, and yet such i^ the Ignorance
and Blindness of the Sinner's Eyes, and unsensibleness of his State, that he
sees it not, feels it not, but thinks all is well with him, and is ready to fly
into that Man's Face, that shall tell him such i^ his Condition.

6. Moreover Sin feeds Men poorly: How do they feed? What is their Table spread
with? Are they served with the Best? They are fed, as it were with Mallows and
Janiper-roots; That, says Caryl, is the Cheer Sin make ^^ them: yea,
Wickedness will be as Gravel in their Teeth, and as Poison in their Bowels.
True, some of them feed their Bodies deliciously every Day; they are full fed,
they have liberal, large and plentiful Tables: But, alas, what have their Souls
to eat? What did the Soul of the Prodigal find? Did he not feed on the Husks
which the Swine did eat? Their Food is and will be Gall and Wormwood; he
feeds on Ashes, says the Prophet: all his Hopes will deceive him, and prove
vain, like the Spider's Web; the Pleasures, Honors, Riches and Comforts of
this Life, are the Food wicked Men live upon; they never tasted in a Spiritual
manner of God, they know not how good he is, nor do they desire to eat that
which is Good: but the Time is coming in which they will desire to taste of
Christ's Supper, and shall not be admitted, because they refused to come to the
Wedding. O what is Sin, and how miserable is the Condition of Sinners? And does
not this s^t forth and tend to demonstrate the greatness of this Salvation,
which delivers us from so great an Evil? He shall save his People from their
Sins. He that understands no Evil in Sin, as Man is fallen from God, has lost
God, the first Cause and chiefest Good, and last End; and being under the Power
of a constant Enmity against him, and in this deplorable Condition, as I have
hinted, will have (as one observes) other apprehension of th^se things when at
last he misses of a Part in this Great Salvation, and when the Means of it
shall not be afforded any more to him for ever. And on the other Hand, he that
comes to see this to be his State, and obtains an Interest in this Salvation,
will say, it is a Great and Glorious Salvation.

Secondly, By this Salvation we are delivered from that which is destructive to
our whole Souls and Bodies.

1. The Sinner by Sin is, as you heard, a Slave, a Captive Sinners are under
God's Curse.
and under Satan's Power, bound in strong Chains, etc. And now let me add, he
is for his Sin cursed by the Lord, and condemned to die by his Righteous Law;
nay the Law lets fly or denounces most bitter Curses against Sin, even against
every Sin, and every Sinner that takes not hold of this Salvation: Cursed is he
that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law, to do
them. Gal. 3. 10.
From this Curse can no Soul be delivered, but by Jesus Christ alone: Is it not
a fearful Thing to be under the Curse of an offended and angry God, whose Wrath
is like Fire that seizes on dry Stubble? But he that believes, or accepts of
the Salvation of the Gospel, is delivered and saved for ever from the Curse of
the Law: Christ Gal. 3. 16.
has delivered us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.

2. Man by Sin is set against himself, his own Conscience wars and sights
against him; and it is also sometimes let out upon him by the Lord to such a
Degree, tormenting him so dreadfully, that he is not able to bear it; hence
some have destroyed themselves: What is more dreadful and amazing, than a
guilty, an accusing and condemning Conscience? Poor Mr. Child found it
intolerable, and many more besides him; it is that Worm that ofttimes begins to
gnaw here, and will (if this Salvation be not took hold of) torment the Soul
for ever: for as in Hell the Fire is not quenched, so the Worm dies not. But
he that receives Jesus Christ, believes in Jesus Christ, and so gets an
Interest in this Salvation, is delivered from the Guilt and the Lashes, the
Accusation and Condemnation of his own Conscience; nay, his own Conscience
speaks Peace to him, and yields him a continual Feast: For our rejoicing is
this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity 2 Cor. 1. 12.
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have
had our Conversation in the World, etc. O how is the Case altered, Conscience
before was a Tormentor, but now is a Comforter; before it spoke nothing but
Terror, but now it speaks nothing but Peace; before it did accuse, but now it
does excuse; before it fed us with Gravel-stones, but now it feeds us with Joy
and sweet Food.

3. The State of the Sinner is very sad, and the Nature of Sin very
destructive, as it exposes the Soul to future Wrath: the Wrath of God remains
upon him that believes not; The Wrath of Romans 1. 18.
God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of
Men. But by this Salvation we are saved from present and from future Wrath
also; this is done by Jesus Christ: Even Jesus who delivered us from Wrath to
come. Wrath to come is far greater than any Wrath Mortal ever felt in this
World: Who knows the Power of thine Anger? even according to thy Fear, so is
thy Wrath. But not one Drop of it shall fall upon that Soul that has Psa. 90.
11.
a Part and Interest in this Salvation: Should God let out but a little of his
Wrath upon a Soul whilst he is in the Body, woe to him, whither shall he fly?
how should he be able to bear it! O it is Heb. 12. ult.
a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. O what a great and
glorious Salvation is this! Suppose a Man was condemned to die for
High Treason, or for some other great Crime, nay to be burned alive, or to be
flead alive, and just as the Sentence was going to be executed upon him, one
should bring him the Tidings, that the King had pardoned his Offense, and
therefore he should not die; would he not look upon this to be a great
Salvation? But, alas, what can reach or be compared to the State of condemned
Sinners? What is it to be thrown into a Fire, or to burn for half an Hour, nay,
to be put into a lingering Fire, to be dying a whole Day, nay, a whole Year, or
if it were possible to be dying forty or fifty Years, to lie burning in Hell to
all Eternity? Every Sinner is condemned by the Law of God to be burned, to be
burned alive in Hell for ever, where the Damned are always dying, but yet
cannot die. If this were well and seriously considered, certainly every one
must acknowledge the Gospel-Salvation to be a Great and Glorious Salvation, that
delivers all that embrace it, from so great a Death as the second Death, or the
Wrath of God in Hell. Brethren, this Salvation does not only free and deliver
the Souls of all that believe from Wrath, from all Wrath and Misery, but the
Bodies also, as I shall show you hereafter before I have done with this Text.
The Body shall be delivered from Sickness, Lameness, Blindness, Poverty,
Hunger, Nakedness, nay, and from Corruption it self, even from whatsoever it
is, that is either grievous or destructive here or hereafter. If a Man be but
delivered from Want, or from Hunger, being almost starved to Death, and ready
to tear his own Flesh to feed himself; or from Nakedness, or from tormenting
Pain, suppose it be but the Extremity of the Toothache, Gout, or tormenting
Pain of the Stone, or from Slavery in Turkey, or from some grievous and cruel
Imprisonment, being in Bonds and Irons, lying in a dark Dungeon among Toads and
Serpents, would he not think it a Great Salvation? Or if People who feel the
bitterness of War, Famine, or Pestilence, were delivered and set at Liberty,
would they not account it a Great Salvation, a Great Deliverance? But what are
all these Salvations to this Great Salvation I am speaking of! What is the
Sickness of the Body, or Death of the Body here, to the Sickness and Death of
Body and Soul for ever? What is an Imprisonment in the worst of Jails, and to
lie in Chains and Irons put upon us by Men like our selves, and to bear their
Wrath for a few Days, to the eternal Prison? What is a dark Dungeon here to the
Blackness of Darkness for ever? What is the Wrath of Man to the Wrath of God,
or Chains of Iron to everlasting Chains of Darkness? What is a little outward
Want or Poverty, to the Want of God's Favor and Love to Eternity, being
separated from his Presence for ever, and to lie in Fire, burning and broiling,
and cannot have so much as one Drop of Water to cool the Tongue; for one Drop
is denied to the Damned in Hell. The rich Glutton when in Hell, begged that
Lazarus might be sent to him and dip the Tip of his Finger in Water to cool his
Luke 16. 24.
Tongue, but it was not granted. Alas, all Miseries here are nothing (as they
pass away in a Moment) when compared unto Eternal Wrath and burning in Hell,
which is the pourings forth of the unspeakable and righteous Vengeance of a
provoked and angry God.

There is no Parallel, nothing to express the Nature of that destructive Evil
that is in Sin; there is nothing left us to illustrate it withal: therefore to
be delivered and saved for ever from the just Punishment and dismal Wrath of
God, must needs be deemed Great Salvation; and the Excellency of it will at
length be known to them who slight and despise it, when they come to fall and
perish under the want of it. He that is delivered from lying in Prison for a
thousand Pound Debt, where he must have lain till Death, having nothing to pay
it, and being fallen into the Hands of Justice it self, but meeting with a
Friend who paid all he owed, he cannot but cry out, O great Love and
Compassion, that would be a Deliverance indeed! But it is nothing to this, we
in a spiritual Sense being delivered from Hell by Jesus Christ, who paid our
Debts for us, each of us owing not less than ten thousand Talents, I mean, so
many Sins, and every Sin a greater Debt than ten thousand Pounds. And this
brings me to the next Demonstration.

Eighthly, The Salvation of the Gospel is a Great and Glorious Gospel-Salvation
is great, in respect of what Christ does and must do, in order to effect it.
Salvation, if we consider the Way and Means by which this Salvation is wrought
out and accomplished for us. It could not be effected, except the Son of God
became Man, or without the Incarnation, Mediation, and bloody Passion of Jesus
Christ. The precious Blood of Christ must be poured forth, or there was no
Salvation, no Deliverance for our Souls; Gold nor Silver could not purchase it,
nor the best of all earthly things: For as much as ye know that you were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from a vain Conversation
received by Tradition from your 1 Pet. 1. 28, 1^.
Fathers, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish
and without sp^t. No such Price would be accepted of God, so precious is the
Redemption of the Soul.

Quest. But may be some may say, Could not the Law effect it? Could not the
keeping the Precepts, the Law of the Ten Commandments do it, nor the Sacrifices
of the Law procure Salvation for us?

Answ. No, it was impossible, the Law requires perfect Righteousness, sinless
Obedience; besides we have broke it, and thereby the whole World is become
guilty before God: And, could the Blood of Beasts, the Blood of Bulls and Goats
take away Sin, or satisfy Divine Justice, and so make an Atonement for our
Iniquities? No, no, For it is not possible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats
should take away Sin. Sin cannot be done away without an infinite Heb. 10. 4.
Price: What Influence could the Blood of Beasts have to take away Sin? being
in their own Nature corporal things, they could not deliver us from the
spiritual Evil of the Soul; nor were they ordained of God to that End and
Purpose, but to point out the great Sacrifice: Besides, says the Text,
Sacrifice and Offerings for Verse 5.
Sin thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me. It must be the Blood
of Christ, whose Sufferings had a satisfactory and inconceivable Worth in them;
For what the Law could not do, in that it was Romans 8. 3.
weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
Flesh and for Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh: Compare this with that Passage of
the Holy Ghost, in Heb. 1. 3. Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power;
when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down on the right Hand of the
Majesty on High He being God as well as Man, or his Humanity being
hypostatically united to his Divine Nature, offered up himself by the Eternal
Spirit a Propitiatory Sacrifice unto God; by which Satisfaction and Merits he
purged, or took away the Guilt and Pollution of Sin, and delivered us from that
just and deserved Wrath that was due unto it, by bearing of it himself in our
Nature and stead; so that God (who was injured, and whose Holy Law was
violated) might be just, or that his Justice might appear, (for he could as
soon cease to be God, as cease to be just) and yet hereby he magnifies his
Mercy also. What can we desire more, than to be delivered from Sin, and purged
from Sin? This was the Way and no other, which the Wisdom of God found out in
Christ; both those Attributes are united: so that Justice, as well as Mercy,
says, Whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, or lays hold of his Righteousness by
Faith, shall be justified, and eternally saved. The Apostle adds his being sat
down on the right Hand of God, to intimate he has made our Peace, obtained
Redemption for us, and brought in by his Obedience, Everlasting Righteousness,
and made an end of Sin; and as a mighty Conqueror, has triumphed, and is gone
to Heaven, and there appears at the Father's right Hand, to plead the Merits of
his own Blessed Sacrifice, and that Atonement he has made for us by his own
Blood on the Tree. O consider what our Salvation cost him, what did he do to
work about this Salvation! Why he,

1. Became Incarnate, or was made Flesh; And the Word was Joh. 1. 14.
made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we behold his Glory as the Glory of the
only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth: Though he was equal with
God (as you lately heard) yet he took on him the form of a Servant.

2. He became poor. Sirs, Jesus Christ who was rich, that he might accomplish
the Salvation of our Souls, became poor; May 2 Cor. 2. 8, 9.
not this affect our Hearts? We must be miserable for ever, or Christ must
become poor, and seem to be miserable for a Time: No Salvation for us, useless
our Blessed Savior does abase himself and take our Nature upon him; For
verily, he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but took on him the Seed of
Abraham. All this Heb. 2. 16.
was, Brethren, to bring this Blessed Salvation to his chosen Ones.

3. He in his humane Nature must be made under the Law, and so become obnoxious
or liable to the Obedience the Law required; yea, he was obliged to keep it
exactly in every part thereof. When the Fullness of time was come, God sent
forth his own Son made of Gal. 4. 4.
a Woman, made under the Law: The Apostle adds the Reason of this, to redeem
them that were under the Law. He thus became, not only bound to do what the Law
required, but to suffer what the Law threatened and (...) on us, who had broke
and violated it, and this in our Nature, or in the same Nature that had sinned,
in which (...) the Justice of God required a Satisfaction for the wrong Sin had
do (...) unto him: Which being impossible for sinful Man (...) and that we
might not be exposed for ever unto the (...) Wrath and Punishment in Hell,
which was due to (...) for us, or in our place, that we through (...)
Obedience, and painful Death and Suffering both in (...) Body, might obtain a
gracious Discharge from Si^, or free Justification unto Life, and a full
deliverance from Wrath and Etern^^ Death.

4. Nay, and as he must di^ if he procures Salvation for us, so by this means
he also was made a Curse for us; for we having broken the Law, (...) under the
Curse of it; the Law lets fly its bitter Curses against very (...) thereof: For
as many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse; and therefore
impossible Gal. 3. 13.
for us to be (...) and saved by it. Whosoever keeps not the Law perfectly,
is cursed; but no Man can keep the Law perfectly, therefore all Man naturally
are cursed, and impossible then to be blessed, until delivered from that Curse:
and this therefore Christ came to do, him has God sent to bless us; which
Blessing we could not have (...) Christ puts himself in our place, and bears
the Curse away from us: Christ has redeemed us Gal. 3. 13.
from the Curse of the Law by being (...) a Curse for us; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that (...) on a Tree. He that was hanged on a Tree under
the Law, was hanged for transgressing of it, and was cursed of God; and when
(...) is said, Christ was made a Curse for us, it signifies his bearing that
Wrath and indignation of God, which was due to us for our Sin: and his he must
do if ever we are justified and eternally ^^ved from that Eternal Wrath and
Vengeance Sin had brought upon every Soul of us.

5. As our Lord Jesus, if he procure Salvation for us, must die, and become a
Curse for us, so he must also raise up himself from the Dead, or be discharged
of the Bonds of Death; he must destroy Death, and be freed out of Prison: He
therefore rose again from the Dead for our Justification. His Discharge was
virtually a Discharge for us, or for all he died for; our Lord Jesus must
subdue all our Enemies, and bring not Death only, but the Devil also, and all
the Powers of Darkness under his Feet, or there could be no Salvation for our
poor Souls: Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood; he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through Death he might
destroy him that had the Power of Heb. 2. 14, 15.
Death, that is, the Devil: And deliver them, who through fear of Death were
all their Lifetime subject to Bondage. Christ and Believers are of one and the
same Nature; they are as it were but one Man, or are so united as to be
considered as one Mystical Body. This was held forth in his Incarnation, in his
assuming our Nature: He took not only an Humane Soul, but our Humane Flesh into
Union with his Divine Nature, that both our Souls and Bodies might be brought
into Union with him, and that our Bodies might also be raised from Death to a
State of Life and Glory at the last Day, and be fashioned like unto his
Glorious Body; Who has abolished Phil. 3. ult.
Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel. Had
not Christ conquered Death, and the Devil who 2 Timothy 1. 10.
had the Power of Death, we had been lost for ever: He has not only taken away
Sin, the Sting of Death, but he has and will be the Death of Death; The last
Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death. 1 Cor. 15. 26.
The Body as well as the Soul is brought into Union with Christ; he is the Head
of the whole Believer, the Body as well as the Soul: Shall I then take the
Members of Christ, and make them the Members of 1 Cor. 6. 15.
an Harlot? Both Body and Spirit are the Lord's, our Body is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost. Ver. 19, 20.


Brethren, what a Conquest has Christ made! how has he subdued all our
Enemies, that so he might work out a full and perfect Victory for us in every
respect: For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must
put on Immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53. So when this Corruptible shall have put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal shall have put on Immortality, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory,
Ver. 54. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? Ver. 55.

6. And lastly, And as Christ must conquer the Devil, the World, Sin, Death and
the Grave, for us, and in our Nature; so he must by his mighty Power destroy
the Devil, and Sin's great Power in us, and vanquish that natural Enmity that
is in our Hearts against God and his Ways, and thereby restore the Image of God
in us which we had lost.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Serin. IV.
Ninthly, GOSPEL-Salvation is great, if we consider the Subject thereof, or
what is delivered and saved for ever, namely, the Souls and Bodies of his
People.

First, The Soul: that is it Jesus Christ came to save, which Salvation great
in respect of the Subjects of it.
is very precious, as I shall show you in a deduction of several Particulars.
Certainly the Salvation of the Soul must needs be a great Salvation: What is it
to save our Estates, our Liberties, our Healths, the Members of our Bodies, our
Eyes, Arms, Legs, or our natural Lives, to the saving of our precious and
immortal Souls? The Soul is more worth than all the World: What shall it profit
Mat. 16. 26.
a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?

1 st. To demonstrate the great Worth, Excellency and Preciousness of the Soul,
consider that it was first formed in the Image of God, in Righteousness and
true Holiness. Our Souls had a glorious Impression of God's Image stamped upon
them in the first Creation, which we lost by Sin and Transgression: But this
Blessed Image is restored again, as you have heard, by the Grace of God in this
Salvation.

1. Pray, Brethren, remember that the Soul of Man is capable of a Divine
Impression, of God's glorious Image; it is made, I mean, of such a Nature, that
it is capable of this great Blessing, therefore to be deemed a very precious
thing; God will not stamp his Image upon low and base Metal, if I may so speak
with reverence.

2. There are three things I find which the great God glories in, as being
peculiar to himself, or his own glorious Prerogative alone; The Burden of the
Word of the Lord for Israel, says the Zech. 12. 1.
Lord, which stretches out the Heavens, and lays the Foundations of the
Earth, and forms the Spirit of Man within him. The first is his stretching
out of the Heavens; O what a great and glorious Work was that! The second is
his laying the Foundation of the Earth, the hanging it upon nothing; what a
wonderful thing is that, considering its great Weight and wonderful Body! The
third is, his forming of our Souls: Certainly the Spirit or Soul of Man is a
glorious thing, that God should account the Creation of it amongst those
chiefest Parts of his admirable Handiwork. Why is not the forming the Blessed
Angels, who are glorious Spirits, rather mentioned? it is worthy of serious
Contemplation: Our Bodies are fearfully and wonderfully made, they are no small
part of God's Wisdom and curious Workmanship, if the Nature and Order of every
Part was considered, as some Artists who study Man's Humane Body will show you:
But what is the Formation and Excellency of our Bodies to our Souls?

3. The Soul is capable of Divine Union with Jesus Christ, through a
Communication of the Holy Spirit, and by Faith of the Operation of God, and
thereby the whole Man partakes of the like Union also; therefore it is a very
precious thing, it is principally the Soul that Jesus Christ does espouse, it
seems to be a proper or fit Match for the Son of God: He that is joined to the
Lord is one Spirit.

4. And it is not only capable of Union, but also of Divine Spiritual Communion,
both with the Father and the Son: That which we have seen and heard, declare we
unto you, that you might have fellowship 1 John 1. 3.
with us; and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. That Communion we have in our Spirits with the Father and the Son, is
by the Holy Ghost, by which we come to have, through his gracious Influences, a
Communication of that which is truly and spiritually Good, according to our
Needs, and to delight, strengthen and rejoice our Hearts: our Souls being
changed into the Life and Likeness of Christ, and walking in the Light of the
Spirit, we have Fellowship one with another; that is, Christ with us, and we
with Christ: for till the Soul is regenerated, it cannot have Fellowship with
the Holy God, for Light cannot have Fellowship with Darkness; it is not earthly
or sensual, but a Divine, Heavenly and Spiritual Communion. O what a precious
thing is the Soul of Man! there is no other Creature that is capable of these
most excellent Privileges save Man; Mankind only of all that dwell on the
Earth: Nor could we have had this Honor and Dignity conferred on us, (we
should not, I mean, been capable Subjects of it) had it not been upon the
Account of the excellent Nature of our Souls.

5. Our Souls are also capable, it appears from hence, of Divine Inspiration:
God in a gracious manner inspires our Spirits with glorious Light and Knowledge;
there is a Light of Acceptance, and a Light of Inspiration: Like as
Astronomers tell us, that the Moon i^ of such a Nature that she is capable, by
the glorious shining and reflection of the Son, to receive Light; and so she
shine, and gives Light to us in the Night: Thus the Moon is a Light of
Acceptance, but it is the Sun that gives Light to her. So a Candle is made
meet to receive Light, but shines not, gives not Light until it is lighted: And
thus also our Spirits are made meet to receive Divine Light from God; The
Spirit of a Man is Job 32. 8.
the Candle of the Lord: but it never shines with any supernatural Light, until
the Lord pleases to light it. There is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of
the Lord gives him Understanding: In Man, that is in every Man, every Man has
a rational Soul in him fit to receive Divine Light and Inspiration, if God
please to inspire him therewith; he has not that saving Knowledge and Light
naturally, no not till he does partake of the Inspiration of the Almighty:
Though Man be endowed with natural Light, Knowledge and Reason, and may
understand in some measure the Parts of Natural Religion, yet that Light is but
Darkness compared to the supernatural Light of Grace, or the saving Knowledge of
God in Christ. All true and spiritual Knowledge and Understanding, is from the
special Inspiration of the Almighty: For what Man knows the things of Man,
save the Spirit of a Man that is in him? even so the 1 Cor. 2. 11.
things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. But though it be thus,
that Man's Spirit, without the Teachings and Inspiration of God's Spirit,
cannot understand nor know the things of God, that is, the Mysteries of the
Gospel, or have the saving Knowledge of Christ, yet there is a Spirit, a Soul in
him that is capable to receive this Light and Revelation of God, when he
pleases to enlighten him therein: therefore I say, the Soul of Man is a very
precious thing, and so tends to greaten the Salvation of the Gospel, by which
it is saved from Hell and Wrath.

6. The Soul is capable of Divine Contemplation, it can muse, The Soul is
capable of Divine Contemplation.
meditate and contemplate upon God the highest and chiefest Being; no other
Creatures on Earth are capable to do this, because they have no rational Souls:
What have some Men found out of the Mysteries of Nature, by means of the
Excellency of the Soul? Nay, and also what Knowledge have they attained of the
God of Nature? as might be demonstrated should I speak of Natural and Moral
Philosophy, etc. though it is true, and I deny it not, but that the knowledge of
these things is acquired in a great measure, yet nevertheless all in the first
place, next unto God, must be attributed to the Excellency of the Soul: I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous are thy Works: and that my Soul
knows right well. Ps. 139. 1
David ascribes that wonderful Knowledge which he had of the Works of Creation,
to his Soul: No doubt he was well skilled in Philosophy, and was a Man greatly
given to Contemplation: My Sub^iance was not hid from thee, when I was made in
secret; and curiously Ver. 15.
wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. How curiously and exquisitely have
thou (as if he should say) composed my Bones, Muscles, Sinews, Veins and
Arteries, in my Mother's Womb, and all the Parts and Members of my Body: And my
Soul contemplates all these things, my Soul knows that thou art a wonderful
working God. O what a precious thing is the Soul of Man! what pity is it that
it should be lost and damned for ever, (and how does this tend to demonstrate
the Glory and Greatness of this Salvation!) for it was under Wrath and the
Curse of God by Sin. Sirs, the Nature of the Soul is such, that it leads a Man
out to behold and magnify God in the Works of Creation and Providence, tho it
want, supernatural Light and Knowledge: But O when it comes to be divinely
inspired, what does it discover through the help of the same Spirit of God in
Christ, and of the Work of Redemption? For all Knowledge to this Knowledge, is
but of little worth: Paul therefore determined to know nothing but Christ and 1
Cor. 2. 1, 2.
him crucified; nay, and accounted all natural Knowledge, Gifts, Wisdom and
Improvements, or whatsoever he once esteemed of, to be but Dung in comparison
of the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord.

7. The Soul is precious does yet further appear, because without Nothing but
God himself can satisfy the Soul.
an enjoyment of God, or a part and interest in him, it can never by happy,
nothing short of God himself can fill its Desires. This some of the Heathens,
by the dim Light of Nature, came to understand; it is restless until it comes
to find God, Rest, Peace and Satisfaction in God, who is the best of Beings,
and our chief Good. The Soul is much like unto Noah's Dove which he sent out of
the Ark, that found no rest for the Sole of her Foot, until she returned unto
him in the Ark: Therefore miserable will all those be that for ever shall one
Day be separated from God, should they meet with no worse Torment than that. A
Man accounts it no small Misery to be deprived of that which he esteems to be
his only Happiness, though he knows he can enjoy it but a short time: Suppose
it be his Riches, his Houses, his Lands, or his Gold and Silver, or his
Pleasures, or his Honors, or his dear Relations, in whom his very Life seems
to bound up; he is upon the loss of that which he esteems so highly of as a
dead Man. Now sure if the Soul is of such an excellent Nature, that no created
Good can fill its Desires, nothing in this World, nothing but God himself, it
must needs be a very precious thing: But so it is; for as Rachel said once to
Jacob her Husband, Give me Children, or I die: So this is the Voice of the Soul
of Man, Give me God, give me Christ, or I die. Nay, to be deprived of God, is
the Death of the Soul; and it was that which brought Death on the Soul of Man
originally; by Sin we were deprived of God, and that was the Death of the Soul:
God is the spiritual Life of the Soul, as in a moral sense the Soul is the
natural Life of the Body; for as the Body is dead without the Soul naturally,
so the Soul is dead without God spiritually. Therefore the Salvation of the
Soul must needs be a great and glorious Salvation, that which brings God again
to the Soul, that which restores God, a lost God to the Soul, that gives Life
to a poor dead Soul and makes it live again, and so be happy again, yea and
that for ever more.

8. The Soul is precious, and a most excellent thing it appears, God's Thoughts
greatly let out about the Soul of Man.
because God's Thoughts are so let out upon it. What care has he taken of the
Soul of Man! How early did he concern himself for the redemption of it! and
what a way did he seek out and contrive to restore it to a state of Peace, Joy
and Happiness again, when he foresaw it brought under Death, Sin and Misery: it
seems to be the Darling of Heaven; as it was formed (as it were) by the Breath
of God, so nothing he thinks too good to impart for its Ransom to redeem it,
nor nothing too precious to feed it, heal it, or comfort it: He gives the Bread
of Heaven, the very Flesh and Blood of his own Son to feed it, the
Righteousness of his own Son to clothe it, the Graces of his own Spirit to deck
and adorn it; nay, and his own Spirit is sent to lead, to guide, protect and
govern it. Certainly these things clearly show and demonstrate its great Worth,
or that it is a most excellent thing in God's sight.

9. The Soul is precious, if we consider what God gave for its Psalm. 49. 8.
Redemption. David says, That the Redemption of the Soul is precious, and
ceases for ever; hard to be obtained, though not impossible; Nothing but
Christ's Blood could redeem the Soul.
nothing but the Blood, the precious Blood of Christ Jesus could redeem it.
Some take Soul there for our Life, but certainly David intends the Redemption
of the Soul from Sin and Wrath. Silver and Gold could not do this, no it must
not be redeemed, it could not be redeemed by corruptible things, not by a
thousand Rams, nor ten thousand Rivers of Oil, nor by our Firstborn; the Mich.
6. 7.
Fruit of the Body could not make an Atonement for the Sin of the Soul: No, no,
it must be the Father's Firstborn, it must be Jesus Christ, the Blood of the
Son of God, or nothing; if Christ die not for the Soul, it must perish for
ever. But rather than the Soul should be lost and undone for ever, God will not
spare his own Son, but deliver him up for us all. Romans 8. 32.


10. The Soul is very precious does appear, because from the The Rage of Satan
to destroy the Soul, shows it is a precious thing.
unwearied Attempts, and restless Endeavors of the Devil to destroy it, all
Satan's grand Rage and Malice is let out against the Soul of Man; had it not
been for our Souls, he would have concerned himself no more to have worked out
our Ruin, than the Ruin of irrational Creatures: But he foresaw the precious
Nature of the Soul of Man, what excellent Faculties it was endowed withal, and
what a glorious Image of God was stamped upon it, and therefore he rages and
foams out his hellish Spite and Malice against us, and all to destroy our
Souls; and this Rage and Fury he continues still against our Souls. O what
Ways, diverse and cunning Stratagems does he use, that so he may spoil the
Happiness, or destroy the Comfort of our Souls: For as it is God's great
Concern to save our Souls, so it is Satan's great Business to damn and destroy
our Souls for ever; and as God contrives Ways and Means to make our Souls happy
for ever, so the Devil contrives Ways and Means to make our Souls miserable for
ever. The Soul is (as I may say) that sweet Morsel Satan hungers after, and
fain would tear in pieces and devour if possible; it is not so much to destroy
our Bodies by natural Death, as our Souls and Bodies by eternal Death. O how
great is that Salvation, that is the Salvation of our precious Souls! God's
Care, Cost and Labor to preserve our Souls, to save our Souls, shows that it
is of great Worth. And it is this that makes Man to differ so much from brutish
Creatures, and to excel all the Works of God in this nether Creation: Had it
not been for our Souls, would God have been any more concerned for us, than for
the Beasts that perish? And was not the Soul, I say, a very excellent and
precious thing, Satan would not make it his greatest Work and Business to
destroy it, as Could a Man gain all the World with the loss of his Soul, his
Loss would be great.
he has always done, and still continues to do.

11. The Soul is very precious does yet further appear, because if a Man could
gain all the World, all the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of the World, with
the loss of his Soul, his Loss would be more than his Gain, yea, infinitely
more; there is nothing that can make a Recompense for the loss of the Soul, as
our Savior clearly shows, Mat. 16. 26. All the World is nothing in Value when
compared with the Soul; therefore it is precious.

12. The Soul is immortal, its Nature is Life, it is no corporal The Soul is
immortal.
Thing, (...) thing, it is not composed of the four Elements as our (...) it
cannot di^, nor be annihilated; it will either (...), Joy and ^lehedness, or
else of Eternal (...): It Is strange to me that any Man should (...) to be
mortal.

(1.) (...) and cast Contempt upon themselves? (...) Mankind of their greatest
Glory, and render Man in (...) above the Beasts that perish; and also they
darken and ^^^^ngely eclipse the Infinite Love and Grace of God in the
Redemption and Restoration of Man.

(2.) And if the Soul be most (...) with the Body, then had we not been
redeemed at all, we ^^d been no more if (...) than the Beasts are; we should
but have (...) been no more, we should have known no more Pain nor Sorrow after
Death.

(3.) Besides, if the Soul was mortal then the same Food that feeds the Body,
^eeds, or might feed the Soul; and the same Balsam that will heal the Sores of
the Body (...) Sores and Wounds of the Soul. I see^ reason who I should not
from their foolish Notion affirm this: Therefore when the (...) sick, they
should send to a Physcian to (...) case of bodily Sickness, and not s^nd (...)
of (...) to apply a spiritual Cordial. What signifies a Spiritual Medicine to a
Corporal Thing? Will preaching the Word seed and relieve a Man that is ready to
perish with external Hunger?

Moreover, (4.) If the Soul be mortal, then that Sword that kills the Body,
also kills the Soul, Man may as well still one as the other: But how contrary
is this to that which our Savior s^ith to his Disciples, And fear not them
which kill the Body and are not able to kill the Soul, but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both Mar. 10. 28.
Soul and Body in Hell. It Is not a Sword, a Spear, nor a Furnace of boiling Oil
that can kill the Soul; Man that way cannot hurt the Soul, it is Sin that
destroys that. Note this well, if Man cannot kill the Soul, it is immortal; but
Man cannot kill the Soul, therefore it is immortal. Is there any Creature or
Thing that is Mortal, which Man cannot kill, or deprive it of Life? Certainly
these Men are strangely misled.

(5.) Besides, did not our Savior say to the Penitent Thief on the Cross, I
say to thee, this Day thou shall be with me in Paradise? Luke 23. 43.
Was the Body of Christ, and the Body of that gracious Person that Day together
in Paradise? Their base abuse of this Text, in reading it falsely, by misplacing
the Stops, will not relieve them; I say to thee this Day; I make thee a Promise
this Day, that thou shall sometime or another be with me in Paradise: thus they
to favor their grand Error misplace the common Point in reading; which should
we allow of, what abominable Abuse might be put upon the Scripture in other
places, even quite to destroy the true Sense, nay and make the Scripture speak
untruly?

(6.) Moreover, does not Paul say, For me to live is Christ, and Phil. 1. 25.
to die is Gain. How could Death be Gain to him, if his Soul was mortal, and
slept with his Body in the Grave? Is Communion with Christ on Earth worth
nothing? Is it Gain to lose that? They know he would no sooner rise from the
Dead if he died presently, than if he lived twenty or thirty Years longer in
the Body: How then could Death be Gain to him? Certainly it would be great Loss
to him, for he would lose all those Years of sweet Joy and Comfort in Communion
with Christ, if he died presently, which he might have should he live twenty or
thirty Years longer in this World.

(7.) To this let me add what Paul affirms in another place; For we know that
if our earthly House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the
Heavens. He does not say, when this earthly House is raised up again, but when
it is dissolved, that is, when the Body lies in its dusty Crumbs, the Soul has
a House in Heaven: Therefore (says he) we are always confident, knowing that
whilst we are at home Verse 6.
in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. Pray what is that which is absent
from the Lord whilst it is at home in the Body, is it not the Soul? And what is
that which is present with the Lord, when it is absent from the Body? Does not
this Place as fully prove the Immortality of the Soul, as if the Apostle should
in plain words say, at Death the Soul (which dwells now in our Body) goes to
Heaven, to dwell in Heaven, it goes to Christ, Heaven is its Home? As soon as
Lazarus died, his Soul was carried into Heaven, signified by Abraham's Bosom;
and as soon as the rich Man died, Luke 16.
his Soul was in Hell: though it is a Parable, yet it clearly teaches us thus
much, (though Parables do not always go on all four, as we use to say).

(8.) To which let me add what Paul further says, For I am in Phil. 1. 23.
a Strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which
is far better. Our Souls at Death depart, and they go to Christ: What is Joy
and Peace in Christ, to Joy, Peace and Consolation with Christ? In the
Resurrection-Day Christ comes to us, we shall meet him in the Air, but at Death
we go to him; the Spirits of all Men go upward, to God that gave them, to be
sent to the Eccles. 12. 7.
Place appointed for them, either to Heaven, or to the Prison of Hell, or Place
of Darkness; in which Prison the Spirits of those Men are now who were once
disobedient (and sinned against God) in the 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.
Days of Noah.

(9.) In the last place, to prove the Soul to be immortal, consider well what
Paul says; I knew a Man in Christ above fourteen Years 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4.
ago, (whether in the Body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the Body, I cannot
tell, God knows) such an one caught up to the third Heaven -- How he was in
Paradise and heard unspeakable Words, which it is not lawful for a Man to
utter. In the third Heaven, or in Paradise for certain he was; but whether
caught up Body and Soul together, or in the Soul only out of the Body, he could
not tell. From whence I argue, that Paul knew that the Soul was capable of
being separated from the Body, and in that separated state capable of the
Divine Ravishments of Heaven, or of the Vision of God, if he had not been of
this Judgment, since he was in the third Heaven, he might be sure he was taken
up in the Body. Besides, do we not read of the Spirits of just Men that are
already made perfect? Heb. 12. 23.


Object. But is it not said that David is not yet ascended into Heaven?

Answ. I answer, Peter there only refers to the Body of David, that is not
ascended, for his Sepulcher is with us to this Day, says he; Acts 2. 29.
and therefore he argues David means Jesus Christ, whose Soul was not left in
Hell, that is, his Body was not left in the Grave, for the Body is often in the
Scripture called by the Name of the Soul. But when we read of the Soul as
distinguished from the Body, and as that which Man cannot kill, it intends the
superior Part of Man, or that which in our common acceptance is called the
Soul, or Spirit of Man; in which the Image of God was chiefly created, and
which is fed with Spiritual Food, and capable of sweet Communion with Jesus
Christ, as you have heard. Now then if the Soul be Immortal, and goes to Hell
or Heaven at Death, I mean to Joy or Sorrow, or to a Prison of Pain and
Darkness, or to a Palace of Joy and Pleasure; O what a great Salvation is
Gospel-Salvation! How soon does eternal Misery or Torment seize upon the
Ungodly; even no sooner do they die but their Souls are in Hell, and no sooner
do Believers die but their Souls are in Paradise: and had not Christ came and
wrought out our Salvation, our Souls must have lain under Wrath and Misery for
ever in an eternal separation from God and all true Joy and Happiness.

O what a fearful and an amazing Loss is the loss of the Soul! Sirs, pray
remember, this Salvation is the Salvation of your precious Souls; thy Soul, O
Sinner, is dearly concerned in it: Our Soul is our All, what have we more? A
Man is never utterly undone till his Soul is utterly lost: if the Soul is
saved, all is saved; but if the Soul is lost, for ever lost, all is lost. But,

2 dly. The loss or losing of the Soul, is the loss of the Body too; that must
have perished for ever with the Body of Beasts, whilst our Souls must have lain
in Torments, had not Christ came to redeem us. Moreover, The Salvation of the
Soul is the Salvation of the Body; Christ came to save both the Soul and Body
too: And hence the Apostle says, Even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of Romans 8. 23.
our Body; that is, for the farther Effects of our Adoption. Now are we the
Sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be; that is, it 1 John 3. 12.
does not appear what we shall be when our Bodies shall be raised. He shall
change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his own Phil. 3. 21.
glorious Body. This Salvation saves not our Souls only from Wrath, but our
Bodies also, they shall rise to Life and Immortality; the Bodies of the Wicked
as well as their Souls shall be cast into Hell, but the Bodies and the Souls of
the Godly shall be glorified in Heaven for ever. O what a grievous thing it is
to think of the loss of the Body, to have the Soul taken away from the Body!
But how sweet is it to think of that Day, when those two old Friends shall meet
together again, and when both shall be delivered from all Evil, from all
Deformity and Pollution, and be glorified, and also shall never part more, or
be separated from each other to the Days of Eternity.

APPLICATION.

1. Reproof to such who despise their own precious Souls: What Fools are they,
who to save their Hutts, lose their Heads; or who to save their Goods in a
fearful Fire, lose their dear Child in the Cradle? As I once told you of a
Woman that did thus, her House was on Fire, and she bestirred her self to get
out her best Goods; and at last when she could go in no more, she rejoiced that
she had saved her Goods; but said one to her, Woman, where is your Child? O my
Child, my Child; then she cried her Child, when it was too late, for that was
burned to Death in the Cradle. Just thus some, to get and save their Goods, to
get the World, lose their Souls. We read of some, who to save their Lives or
their Bodies from being burned to Ashes for Christ, denied Christ; they could
not burn for him: What says our Savior? He that seeks to save his Life, shall
lose it. What Fools are they then who think that way to save their Bodies; for
as they lose their Souls, so they lose their Bodies also: And it is not worse
to have the Body to ^e in Hellfire for ever, than to be burned in Martyrdom,
and be consumed to Ashes in Corporal Fire?

2. Consider, that all such who neglect this great Salvation, slight and
neglect their own precious and immortal Souls: What is the Job 27. 8.
Hope of the Hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? He
makes a bad Market that puts off his Soul at any Price; What shall a Man give
in exchange of his Soul? Jesus Christ, who knew the great worth of it, laid
down a Price of infinite Value to redeem and purchase it. Witches they say sell
their Souls to the Devil out of Malice, to be revenged on some that have
offended them: What a dismal thing is that, how fearful is their State? But
pray, Brethren, what do they lose who sell their Souls to the Devil, as it
were, for the sake of their brutish Lusts, or out of love to Sin? Thus the
Whoremongers and unclean Persons sell their Souls, and Drunkards who will have
their merry Bouts, their Cups and Pots, and silthy Companions, and may be their
Whores too, let what will become of their immortal Souls: others will have
their Pride and haughty Hearts, gay Clothes, and their detestable Dresses,
though their Souls are clothed with Rags, and a crawling Worm knaws on them,
and to Hell must be thrown at last, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is
not quenched. Moreover, the carnal Worldling will be rich, he will lay up Gold
and Silver, he will gain the World though he lose thereby his own Soul. But
remember, Sinners, Christ died for the Soul, this Salvation is the Salvation of
the Soul; and does any wretched Sinner despise his Soul, or is it think you not
worth his Pains to part with his Cups, with his sinful Companions, with his or
her Pride, unlawful Gain, or the love of this World, to save it for ever?

3. How does this tend to reprove such who do expose their precious Souls to
eternal Wrath, for the unjust Gain of Sixpence or a Shilling? Are there not
too many such in the World, who will cheat, lie and defraud their Neighbors
for a small matter of profit? O how dear will they one Day pay for that Gain!

4. How does this reprove likewise such Parents that think they can never do
enough for to enrich their Children, or get them great Portions, and care not
what they eat, drink, wear, or how richly their Bodies are decked and adorned,
but take no care of their immortal Souls, but rather indulge them in their Sins
and vain and wicked Practices, and set also Soul damning Examples continually
before their Eyes?

5. We may also infer from hence, what a mighty Charge, an amazing Charge
Parents have committed to them; as also the Ministers of the Gospel, who are to
take care and watch over the Souls of such who are committed to them, as such
that must one Day give an Account of them.

6. Moreover, woe be to such who deceive and blindly lead the Souls of Men to
destruction, that are so exceeding precious: If the Blind lead the Blind, they
will both fall into the Ditch.

7. Shall I exhort you, Sinners, to look to Christ for the Salvation of your
Souls.

1. He bids you look to him; Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye Ends of the
Earth.

2. Consider, that there is no other way to save your Souls, there is but one
Savior, and one way of Salvation: There is no other Name given under Heaven
whereby we must be saved. He that receives Acts 4. 12.
Christ, believes in Christ, shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be
damned. Mark 16. 16.


3. If Life be more worth than all the World, certainly the Soul is more worth
than ten thousand Worlds. O do not part with it on any Terms, for it cost
Christ dear, the Price of his own Blood; his Heart-Blood was let out to save
our Souls. Alas, there are some nevertheless that are like the false Prophets
of old, who sold the Souls of the People for a handful of Barley, and for a
piece of Bread. Ezekiel. 13. 19.


4. How near may some of you be to Death; and if you have not got an Interest
in Christ before then, what will become of your precious Souls?

5. Will you consider what Means of Grace God is pleased to afford you for the
good of your Souls, and know it is by the preaching of the Gospel that God
commonly saves the Souls of Men, I mean, that it is the Means he uses for the
begetting of Faith: Shall the Word have some good Effect upon your Souls this
Day?

6. Consider, all your Prayers, Tears, Alms-deeds, all Reformation of Life,
Services, Duties and inherent Holiness, cannot save your Souls; no, none but
Christ, nothing but the Merits of Christ, it is his Blood alone that made your
Peace, and must wash away all the Guilt and Filth of your Sins. Your Souls,
your precious Souls, O Sinners, are wounded, polluted, naked; what will you do?
Nothing but Christ's Blood I tell you can heal them; nothing but his Flesh, his
Blood, can feed them; and nothing but his Righteousness can clothe them; and
nothing but the Graces of Christ's Spirit can enrich, can deck and adorn your
Souls; and without Faith you cannot obtain any of those Blessings.

O what shall I say to you, if going down upon my Knees could move you to lay
to Heart what a sad State you are in, who have not received by Faith this
Salvation, and incline you now to believe, I would readily do it; but alas, it
is God's Gift: O look up to him, do what you can, pray and attend on the Word:
What do you say, do you believe that this is a Great Salvation? Will you esteem
it, and look after it above all things in the World? It is, Sirs, that one
thing needful; choose with Mary that good Part that shall never be taken from
you. Shall there be Joy in Heaven this Day? how can you slight such a precious
Soul, and such a precious Savior, who spilt his Blood to save the worst of
Sinners? Will you tread his Blood under your Feet? If so, what will you do at
the Day of Death, and in the Day of Judgment? Should your Souls be lost, there
is no repairing that Loss, no redemption of the Soul out of Hell, no other
Price, no other Savior, no other way; if this be slighted, you must perish.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon. V.
I AM upon the Proof and Demonstration of the greatness of the Salvation of the
Gospel. I closed with the ninth Reason of the Point the last time.

Tenthly, Gospel-Salvation is a great and glorious Salvation, if
Gospel-Salvation great considering what we are raised unto by it.
we consider what such who have interest in it are raised up unto, or do and
shall partake of; I mean, what great Blessings and wonderful Privileges they
are invested with by it.

First, Pardon of Sin: This Blessing have all they that receive it.

1. Consider the Blood of Christ is the way of Gospel-Remission, no Remission
of Sin without the shedding of Blood; there is remission Heb. 9. 22.
of Sin, but no Blood could procure this Remission but the Blood of Christ: he
paid our Debts, in whom we have redemption Col. 1. 14. Pardon of Sin contained
in Gospel-Salvation.
through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins. It was by his offering
himself an Expiatory Sacrifice to God; there is no Salvation without Pardon of
Sin, and no Pardon of Sin without a Compensation be made by Jesus Christ to the
Law and Justice of God.

2. Consider who are pardoned, even all that believe, though they were never
such great Rebels against God; such were Traitors and Enemies once, who are now
forgiven. Here is a Pardon for the vilest Sinner, that sees his horrid Evil and
Rebellion, and takes hold of Jesus Christ, or looks up to him by Faith.

3. Consider the Nature of this Pardon and Gospel-Remission: Such are pardoned
for ever; I will remember their Sins no more, they are blotted out for ever.
God promises to all penitent and believing Sinners, to throw their Sins into
the Depth of the Sea.

4. Consider the Terms of Pardon, it is a free Forgiveness, we having nothing
to pay: God of his mere Grace and Goodness does forgive us through the
Atonement of Christ's Blood freely; Even Isa. 43. 25:
I am he that blotteth out thy Transgression for my own sake, and will not
remember thy Sins: This is spoke to a People that had wearied the Lord with
their Iniquities. O what a glorious Salvation is this, that here is Remission
and free Pardon for rebellious Sinners, such that deserve nothing but Wrath and
Hell!

5. It is a Pardon of all Sins, great and small, Sins of Omission, and Sins of
Commission, Sins of all sorts and sizes.

6. It Is God that blotteth out our Sins; he that can forgive, he whose right it
is to pardon, he against whom we have sinned; and he who when he gives a
Pardon, none can supersede it nor revoke it, let them do what they can.

Secondly, Reconciliation with God is another Blessing of this Salvation: God
does not only forgive us, but he takes us into his Bosom, he is fully
reconciled to us in Jesus Christ; he cries, Fury is not in Isa. 27. 4.
me. Again he says, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. When we
were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son: And none can
make God our Enemy again for ever, if we Romans 5. 10. Romans 8. 39, 40.
are Believers; none can separate us from his Love in Jesus Christ our Lord, as
something ag^ I showed you, no not Sin nor Satan.

Thirdly, By this Salvation we come to have Union with God, Union with God a
Blessing of Gospel-Salvation.
and to be made one Spirit with Jesus Christ: and how great and glorious is
this sa^red Union! but having formerly spoken to it, I shall not say more to it
n^w. Moreover, we are not only brought into a State of Union but are also
admitted to have Communion with the Father, and the Son. Brethren, it is one
thing for a Traitor to be pardoned, and another thing for him to be admitted
into the King's Presence, and to become one of his great Favorites: Truly our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John 1. 3.


Fourthly, By this Salvation also we are justified: Justification is a high
Privilege; By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Let me Acts 13. 39.
show you what it is to be justfied, that so this Salvation may appear the more
great and glorious to you.

1. To be justified, is more than to be pardoned. A Man may be forgiven, and
yet not have the Guilt removed from him, nor The Nature of Justification opened.
be declared Righteous and Innocent. To be justified, is to be pronounced Just
and Righteous in God's Sight, through the perfect Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, or to be actually acquitted upon Trial, or discharged from the Guilt
and Punishment of Sins; not that we are not Sinners in our selves but as Christ
was made Sin for us who knew no Sin (in himself) so we are made the
Righteousness of God in him, who knew no Righteousness in our selves. As our
Sin was imputed unto Christ, so his Righteousness is imputed unto us: God in
Justification deals not with us in a way of Mercy only, (as he does in Pardon
of Sin) but in a way of Justice and Righteousness also; we paid all that was
due to vindictive Wrath and Justice in Jesus Christ, (I mean, Jesus Christ for
us as our Surety has done it).

2. Justification is so great a Blessing, that the Justice of God has nothing
to lay to the Believer's Charge, for Justice as well as Mercy does acquit him.

3. Nor has the Law any thing to lay to the ^^arge of them that God justifies,
Christ in our stead having answered all the Demands thereof, and born the
Penalty it denounces upon the Transgressors of it: Christ has redeemed us from
the Curse of the Gal. 3. 13.
Law, being made a Curse for us.

4. And as the Law can lay nothing to our Charge if God justifies us, so can
none else: Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Romans 8. 32, 33, 34.
God's Elect? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn us? None can implead
such, or put in an Accusation that shall be heard at God's Bar; if it is God
that does acquit us, that justifies us, what signifies any Charge that can be
brought in against us? What though for want of clear Light our Hearts should
condemn us, or wicked Men, or Satan; our Hearts may charge us unjustly and
ignorantly, for want of Light, and wicked Men and Devils maliciously.

5. Moreover, none can condemn such that God justifies, because it is Christ
that died: Has not his Death Worth and Merit enough in it? It is Christ that
died, he who was God as well as Man; our Debt is long ago paid; and when we
believe, we receive an actual Discharge. The Apostle challenges all the Enemies
of our Souls, to come in and see what they can do to condemn a justified
Person; Come World, come Devil, come Law, come Sin, come Conscience, what can
you lay to the Charge of those that Christ died for, and God has actually
acquitted? Bring forth your Plea, your Charge of Eternal Condemnation; Has not
Christ born the Punishment due to these for all their Sins they have, do, or
may commit? Is not his Satisfaction more than enough? Has he not purchased and
merited superabundant Grace? Come says a poor Believer, I will stand Trial
with you now, though I have but one single Plea, It is Jesus Christ that died
for me, and in my room: I appeal to the Great God and Judge of Heaven and Earth,
whether my Plea is not good, and according to Law, and allowable. Sirs, by this
Plea all are silenced and impleaded at once.

6. All that are justified, are complete in Jesus Christ, they are without Spot
before the Throne of God: And ye are complete in Col. 2. 10.
him, which is the Head of Principalities and Powers. Christ's Compleatness and
Perfection, in respect of his Suretiship-Righteousness, being accounted to us,
we are complete touching our Justification; we want nothing, our Garment is
without Hem, and there is no Spot nor Stain in it: Thou art all fair, my Love,
and Cant. 4. 7.
there is no Spot in thee. Behold, thou art fair, my Love, behold thou art
fair. Thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thy Renown went forth among the
Heathen for thy Beauty: for it was perfect, through Ezekiel. 16. 13, 14.
my Comeliness which I had put upon thee, says the Lord.

Quest. Whether is Justification all at once, or a continued Act in God?

Answ. 1. I do not believe it is a divided Act; as it is God's Act, so it is one
Act only: but whether it be one entire Act, or as one transient Act, as if all
were (...) out with a Pen at once, or a continued Act, I shall not determine;
but this I will say, He that God accepts and justifies in Christ, ^one of
his Sins shall ever be charged upon him, as to that (...) Wrath and Vengeance
that is due to them: for as the^e is an Imputation of Righteousness unto us, so
it follows that there is a Non-Imputation of Sin.

2. Justification admits of no Degrees tho it should be thought to be a
continued Act in God; and though in our sight and feeling we may not thus
apprehend it through want of Faith, and by reason of Satan's Temptations, yet
as to the Act it self, we are never less nor more justified, because the Matter
of our Justification, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, is not less or more,
but always the same, and it cannot be lost, as I have proved in this Treatise.
As Christ, Brethren, was justified at his Resurrection from all Sin that was
laid upon him, or which met in him on the Cross, so all Believers are cleansed
and justified from all Guilt, and that for ever; and this Christ pleads in
Heaven for them as often as they sin: By one Offering he has perfected for
ever them that are Heb. 10. 14.
sanctified.

Object. Why does David say, Enter not into Judgment with thy Psa. 143. 2.
Servant O Lord; for in thy sight shall no Flesh living be justified?

Answ. That is in himself, no Man can be justified by his own Righteousness in
God's sight; all must say with Bildad, How can Man be justified with God,
because he has sinned, and daily does Job 25. 4.
Sin? Who dare appear at God's Bar in his own Duties, in his own sincere
Obedience, or in his inherent Holiness? No, every one must fly to God in
Christ, and plead his Justification and Discharge through him alone: No Man
has any thing to recommend him to God in point of Justification in his sight,
nor does he need any other Righteousness to discharge him or to acquit him
before God; yet we as in our selves must ^^y with Job, If I justify my self, my
Job 9. 20.
own Mouth shall condemn me.

7. Such is the blessed State of those who by the Father are justified through
this Salvation, that to them the Apostle affirms there is no Condemnation:
There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans
8. 1.
(1.) He does not say there is nothing in them, which in its own Nature does
not deserve Condemnation. (2.) Nor does he say, a true Believer shall never
condemn himself, pass a Sentence unjustly against himself; for that he may do.
(3.) Neither does he say, Satan shall never condemn him: but let whoever will
condemn such, God will not, Christ will not, and Sin cannot, the Law cannot; no
more can the Devil, nor a Believer's own Heart, I mean, so as to bring him
under Eternal Condemnation.


8. And lastly, All such that are justified, shall be glorified; see Romans 8.
30. O glorious Salvation, that brings in this blessed Privilege! how happy are
all justified Persons!

Fifthly. Adoption appertains to this Salvation: Every Believer is raised also
to this great Privilege, and has this Prerogative, he is made a Son of God, a
Child of God. Adoption is to take such to be Children, that naturally were not,
as a special Act of Grace and Favor: So we who were the Children of Wrath by
Nature, are made or adopted to be the Children of God by Grace through Jesus
Christ. And Christ in working out this Salvation, procured this glorious
Blessing: Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons. To be Kings Gal. 4. 5.
Children is no small Dignity, yea, the Children of the King of Heaven and
Earth: What manner of Love is this that the Father has 1 John 3. 1.
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? Beloved, now are
we the Sons of God, etc. God is not ashamed to be called our God, nay, our
Father. 1. Brethren, this is an honorable Title: What were we once, how low,
base and ignoble, before Grace? 2. This Privilege it appears cost Christ dear.
3. And because we are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Gal. 4. 6.
4. And if we be Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ. 5. Then, Beloved, we also as Children shall be cared for, as Children
be fed, as Children be clothed, as Children also be chastened; God in all
Afflictions deals with us as his Children. Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8.
6. And if Children, we shall be always Children, for we are not only the
Children of God by Adoption, but we are also begotten and born of God, and so
partake of his Divine Nature, which we cannot lose.


Sixthly, By the Grace and Means of this Salvation, we are espoused to Jesus
Christ. O what an Honor and Dignity is this, Believers are the Bride, the
Lamb's Wife! And how is, and shall the Spouse of Christ be clothed? Even in
Gold of Ophir: She shall be brought to the King in Raiment of Needle Work. She
is all glorious Psalm. 45. 9, 10.
within, and she shall be all glorious outwardly in Body too e're long, as well
as she is so now in her Soul and inward Parts. Jesus Christ puts Chains about
the Necks of all that are his, or that he espouses, I mean, those precious
Graces of his Spirit which he has purchased for them; For they shall be an
Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about thy Neck. The Father called
for the best Prove. 1. 9.
Robe to be put upon his Son, as soon as he returned home, and a Ring on his
Finger. The inward Beauty of the Spouse does even Luke 15. 22.
ravish the very Heart of Christ: Thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my
Spouse; thou have ravished my Heart with one of thine Eyes, with the Chain of
thy Neck. With one of thine Eyes: some understand by one of her Eyes, the Eye
of Faith; no doubt that is a precious Grace in Christ's sight. Every Believer
partakes of Grace, and all Spiritual Gifts; every Grace is a glorious Ornament,
and of great Price in the sight of God. This Salvation makes Men and Women
glorious Creatures, new Creatures, every one resembles the Son of a King; they
hereby come to partake of God's Holy Nature: And as the Grace of this Salvation
makes glorious Christians, so it does also make glorious Churches, Candlesticks
of pure Gold.

Seventhly, This Salvation brings Peace with it. Peace is a precious Blessing,
we receive Grace first, and then Peace: My Peace I give unto you, my Peace I
leave with you. The Peace of God is so John 16.
excellent a thing, that it passes all Men's Understanding. What would Spira or
Child have given for true Peace and inward Serenity of Mind? O it is a great
and glorious Salvation! Were these things considered, and could be fully
opened, it would appear more abundantly; true Peace of Conscience is never
known to the Worth of it, but to such who have known the want of it.

Eighthly, I might also speak of Sanctification, which Blessing all they also
partake of that have an Interest in this Salvation: Holiness is an Heaven on
Earth, it is Heaven begun here, and it fits and makes every Believer meet for
that blessed Inheritance of the Saints in Light; the Spirit and Graces of the
Spirit are given to this end, I mean, to make us holy in Heart and Life.

Ninthly, Free access unto the Throne of Grace, is another Blessing and
Privilege which all Believers receive who have a part in this Salvation. Christ
has made the Way easy for us to the Father; it is by a new and living Way
which he has consecrated for us Heb. 10. 20.
through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, or by his Death.

Tenthly, All the Promises of God belong to Believers, and are procured for
them in and by this Salvation: They are great, exceeding great and precious;
there is a Fullness in them: the Promises 2 Pet. 1. 4.
as they are sure in Christ, Yea and Amen in Christ, so they answer every State
and Condition any Believer can be in.

Eleventhly, All the Ordinances of the Gospel belong to this Salvation, and are
no small Privilege; they are as golden Pipes to convey Heavenly Riches, or
Sacred Treasure to our Souls.

Nay, and in the last place, there is a Crown of Glory that every Believer
shall be raised unto, that has a saving Interest in this Salvation; and not
only a Crown, but a Kingdom also. Now is not this a great Salvation, which
raises poor Creatures who were fallen as low as Hell, up to Heaven, and of
being Slaves of Sin and Satan, to be Sons and Daughters of God? It was a great
Salvation that Joseph had when he was brought out of Prison, where he lay in
Irons, to be the chief Ruler under the King in Egypt: And it was a great
Advancement of David from following the Sheep, to sit on a Throne; but nothing
like this of Believers. What is an Earthly Throne to an Heavenly one? He that
overcomes, shall Rev. 3. 21.
sit down with Christ in his Throne, and reign for ever and ever.

APPLICATION.

1. Admire this Salvation, say it is no small thing to have a part in it. I
cannot particularly apply what I have insisted upon: But,

2. Bless God for Jesus Christ. You cannot say that the Salvation he has
wrought is a barren Salvation. O what is and will be the product of it!

3. Particularly, Consider what a Blessing Justification is, and take heed you
are not drawn away nor corrupted about the nature thereof.

4. Be exhorted, you that are Saints, to strive to exercise Faith in respect of
your Justification: Believe the Gospel-Testimony; He that believes is
justified from all things, etc. You have the Word of that God that cannot lie
to assure you of it. Do not judge of your Justification according to the degree
of your Sanctification, as if you were no further justified than you are
sanctified, or that your Sanctification is any Cause of your Justification; nor
do not think you are more justified when you are in a lively frame of Duty,
than at another time when deadness and dullness takes hold of you.

Object. I cannot believe so, as to rise to a full persuasion that I am
justified, and shall be saved, though I can rely upon Christ as a poor Sinner
for my Justification and Eternal Life.

Answ. 1. Well, bless God for that Faith: for a full Assurance does not
appertain to the Essence of true Faith, but it is the highest degree of it; and
no doubt many are gone to Heaven that never attained to that degree of true
Faith.

2. I knew a Godly Minister who told me in his Sickness, a little before he
died, All his Hopes were gone, he could not come to Christ as a Saint, his
Evidences were so clouded; this he uttered with Tears, as I remember, and with
no small grief: He presently broke forth, and said, But, Brother, I can come to
him as a poor, burdened, lost and heavy-laden Sinner, and I am sure he will not
refuse me, or to that purpose. If thou can do so, certainly great Peace will
come in; it is from the weakness of our Faith that a strong and full Persuasion
is wanting: a direct Act of Faith I am persuaded must needs bring in the
greatest Joy and Comfort; a looking for all the signs of true Grace in us,
oft-times confounds a poor Christian. If there is no Sin that thou do allow
thy self in, but do hate Sin as Sin, and love Holiness, and art willing to
follow Christ in all things according to thy Light, and love all the Saints
of God as such, no doubt but thy State is good and safe.

3. But remember, if thou can not come to a satisfaction about what I speak,
in respect of those Signs, yet know, if thou do believe, i. e. rely upon the
Merits and Righteousness of Christ, as a poor Sin-sick Sinner, all may be well.

4. Take heed you do not look for a Righteousness in your selves to recommend
you to God, or to trust in for Justification: Also know that it is not for the
sake of Christ's Merits, or for the sake of his Righteousness that we are
justified, but that it is his Righteousness that is the Matter of our
Justification alone before God, as it is ^puted unto us, and received by Faith.
Christ's Merits render no our Faith and sincere Obedience to be any part of our
Righteous^ess to Justification in God's sight; it is his Righteousness only
which was perfect, and no other Righteousness must thou be fo^nd in, in this
respect, if thou art justified and eternally saved. Though it is true, that Man
that has true Faith, shall find the Effects of it to be such, that it will
cleans^ and purify his Heart and Life; and that Faith that has not such
Effects and good Fruits to accompany it, is a dead Faith, as the Apostle James
shows.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon. VI.
I Closed the last Day with the tenth Demonstration, to prove the Salvation of
the Gospel to be Great and Glorious.

Seventhly, Gospel-Salvation is Great and Glorious, because it is a full, a
complete, and a comprehensible Salvation. That which I intend Gospel-Salvation
great because it is a full and complete Salvation.
hereby is this, viz There are all things contained in this Salvation which our
(...) in order to Grace, and whatsoever is necessary for us here, and eternal
Glory hereafter; it is not a barren, or a partial Salvation, but a fruitful and
complete Salvation: it does not require us to make B^^k, and allow us no Straw;
it does not command us to believe, and give us no Power; it is not like the Law
that commands perfect Righteousness, and condemns all that have it not, but
gives no Strength to perform it. Some there be who seem to preach a strange
Gospel, they tell you what Christ has done, viz that he has died, etc. and
done his part in this Salvation, and lest Sinners to do their part; the Debt is
paid, you may go out of Poison if you will, this they do tell you: But, alas,
alas! the lest Sinner is bound, he is in Chains, under the Power of Sin and
Satan; nay, he is dead, and what can he do? Is his Power greater than the Power
of Satan? Can he translate himself out of the Power of Darkness, into the
Kingdom of God's Son? Can he, Col. 1. 13. 5.
by any Power God has given him, quicken himself, or raise himself from the
Dead? No, no, this is impossible.

But now, say I, Gospel-Salvation is a full and com^^^^ Salvation, what is
needful and absolutely necessary to be done for the Sinner, in order to his
having a saving Interest in it: Jesus Christ will accomplish, nay, and he will
do it himself, he will not ^dmit you to have a Share or a Part in the Salvation
of your own Souls: for as he knows Sinners are not able to do that which must
be done for them, and in them, if they are interested into the Blessings of
this Salvation; so he will have and must have all the Glory and Honor of this
Salvation himself, from the first to the last; Christ has no Partner, no
Competitor in this great Work, I mean, in and about the Salvation of our Souls.

1. Sinners, are you dead, dead in Sins and Trespasses? Christ is come to
quicken you; I am come that you might have Life: There John 10. 10.
is in this Salvation Life for dead Sinners; Christ has a certain Water to
give, that whosoever drinks of it, though he be dead, yet he shall live; that
Water is his Spirit, it is by that by infusing of his Spirit into the dead Soul,
that the Soul comes to be quickened: the Spirit of Christ is his quickening
Voice; The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live. Christ Joh. 5. 25.
is our Life, not only as he purchased Life for us, but as he by his Spirit
infuses it in us. The Spirit is that Vital Principle in us; You has he
quickened, that were dead in Trespasses and Sins. And he puts Ephesians. 2. 1.
forth his Almighty Power to do this, as the Apostle had declared to the Saints
at Ephesus, just in the Verses before in the first Chapter, showing to them
that the same Power is put forth in raising us from a Death in Sin, (or in
working Faith in our Souls) that was wrought in Christ when he was raised from
he Dead; and therefore it is said to be the exceeding Greatness of his Power to
usward, who believe according to the working of his mighty Power, as before.
Can Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20.
any Man do this, can he raise himself? Dead Lazarus might quicken and raise
himself as soon out of the Grave, as a dead Sinner can quicken himself, or
believe of himself: no, Faith is God's Gift, and it is the vital Principle of
our Souls. I wonder what some Men mean, when they say, Sinners must come up to
the Rule of the Promise, before they lay hold of the Promise. Can they quicken
themselves? True, if they can, the Promise runs, Christ will give them Life.
Get Life, create Life in your Souls, and lay hold of the Promise: strange
Notion! I am sure Life must be first in the Soul, before the Soul can do any
thing that is truly and spiritually Good; before Life is infused, there is no
motion toward God, let the Motives be what they will.

2. Sinners are blind, spiritually blind, and it is Jesus Christ must give them
sight; nay, and he in the Work of this Salvation, is anointed Isa. 61. 1.
to open blind Eyes: he is given to be a Light unto the Gentiles, and so to be
God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Spiritual Life and Spiritual Light is
in this Salvation, and both are created in the Soul; nay, when Christ gives us
Life, he gives us Light also.

Object. But it is said, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and
Christ will give thee Light. Ephesians. 5. 14.


Answ. (1.) I answer, That which God commands us to do in one place, he says he
will do for us in another place.

(2.) It does not imply that the Creature can of himself rise from the Dead,
but shows that he must be raised and quickened before he can receive Light from
Christ.

(3.) It shows a necessity of Faith, or that we must believe, and therefore
ought to attend upon the Means of Faith, and look up to God to obtain it: Faith
comes by hearing, that is the way he takes to work it in our Souls.

3. Sinners, have you hard and rocky Hearts, Hearts of Stone, even as hard as
the nether Millstone? Why now God bids you, he commands you to make you a new
Heart. But can you do that? if Christ never gives you Salvation until you
create in your selves a new Heart, and break your stony Hearts into pieces, you
will never have Salvation at all, but must perish for ever; and this Salvation
will be in vain to you, and to all Mortals were it so: But pray observe the
Promise, this Salvation is so full, that it has a new Heart in it; A new Heart
also I will give you, and a new Spirit I will put within you, and I will take
away the stony Heart out of your Ezekiel. 36. 26.
Flesh, and will give you an Heart of Flesh: A new Heart, a holy, a tender and
broken Heart, this God will give: It is not naturally in us, but it is of God's
free Grace given to us: Hence David cried, Create in me a clean Heart, O God,
and renew a right Spirit Psalm. 51.
within me. Thou did, as if he should say, give me a new Heart, but I have
apostatized from thee, and polluted my Soul; O create again a clean Heart in
me, or renew thy Work. Not that he had lost his new Heart, but he would have
God recover him from his Fall, and put him into a holy and spiritual Frame,
which none but he that has an almighty creating Power can do. And if we cannot
quicken our selves from a State of spiritual Deadness, how should poor Sinners
raise themselves from a State of spiritual Death? Sinner, here is Comfort for
thee whose Heart is hard, and thou feel it hard, and that makes thee go
mourning all the Day: behold, in the Salvation of the Gospel, a new Heart, a
Heart of Flesh is promised; it is not you that can make your Heart new: No, no,
it is Jesus Christ that must do it, it is his Work; We are his Workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus to good Works. Ephesians. 2. 10.


4. Is there in the Hearts of Sinners naturally Enmity against God? Christ in
this Salvation takes it away: The carnal Mind is Enmity against God, it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed Romans 8. 7.
can be. See in what a Pickle the Mind and Will of Man naturally is in: What
can a Sinner not do, if the Doctrine of sore Men were true? they can repent,
believe, be regenerated, and what not? But (...) says Paul, their Mind, their
Will is not subject to the Law of God, nor to the Gospel, nor Rule of the
Promise neither, neither indeed can be. Where they put a can, Paul puts a
cannot. So (...) another place he says, But the natural Man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; 1 Cor. 2. 14.
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Here is a
cannot again; it is impossible till the Spirit of God removes that Enmity and
Darkness, and bows and bends the Will to the Will of God, which shall be done
when the Salvation of the Gospel comes with Power to the Soul of a poor Sinner.
It Is Christ that must slay this Enmity, as well as he did that which was
between Jews and Gentiles: He is a Mediator, not only to reconcile God to us,
but us also to God; My People shall be willing in the Day of Ps. 110. 3.
my Power.

5. Sinners, are you polluted, defiled with Sin, and filthy in God's sight? How
will you get rid of this abominable Filth, which renders you loathsome in God's
sight? Can you wash away your Pollution, will Snow-water do it? No, no, For
though thou wash thee with Nitre, and take thee much Soap, yet thine Iniquity
is marked before me, says the Lord. Sin is not easily washed away, the Guilt
of it, nor the Filth of it: This Job well knew, therefore says, If I wash my
self with Snow-water, and my Hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in
the Ditch, and my own Clothes shall abhor me. It Is not Snow-water, nor much
Soap, no nor a Sea of brinish Tears that can wash away the Defilement and Guilt
of Sin that cleaves to the Soul. But, Sinner, in this Salvation there i^ a way
found out to cleanse thy filthy Soul, nay, a Fountain opened for Sin and for
Uncleanness. God, it is true, says, Wash thine Heart Zech. 13. 1. Jer. 4. 14.
from Wickedness, that thou may be saved. So far I d^ny not, as Man is able,
he ought to abstain from Sin, and cleanse himself: But says Christ, If I wash
thee not, thou have no part with me: It Is he, Joh. 13.
it is his Blood that cleanses us from all Sin. This Salvation, Brethren, 1 John 1. 7.
is a full and complete Salvation, it brings every thing with it we need.
Rather than the Stain, the Pollution and Guilt of Sin should abide upon us,
Christ will pour forth his own Blood to wash it away; He has loved us, and
washed us from our Sins in his Rev. 1. 5.
own Blood. He gave himself for his Church to this End, That he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or
Wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it might be Holy and without Blemish.

6. Sinners, are you bound in strong Chains, and in the Prisonhouse? Are you in
the Bonds of Iniquity? How will you do to come out, for you are kept by the
strong Man armed: if you can conquer this strong and cruel Enemy, you may get
out; but are you a Match for Satan? No certainly, none can deliver himself,
none can get out of Satan's Hands, it must be done by one mightier than he.
Well, in this Salvation there is Liberty, Christ is clothed with Power, as you
lately heard; he is anointed to preach the Gospel to the Poor: he is sent to
heal the Brokenhearted, to deliver the Captives, Isa. 61. 1.
and to set at liberty them that were bound. Jesus Christ is stronger than the
strong Man armed; He has taken captive Captivity Luke 4. 18.
himself. O what a blessed, what a great and glorious Salvation is this!

7. Are you poor, and naked, and have nothing to cover your Nakedness but
filthy Rags? Well, be it so, yet this Salvation brings to you a rich and
glorious Robe, viz. Christ's Righteousness, nay change of Raiment; Salvation it
self is called a Garment, and it is by this Salvation also you have the Robe of
Sanctification and Grace wherewith you are clothed: Humility is called a
Garment; I counsel thee to buy of me white Raiment, that thou may Rev. 3. 18.
be clothed, and that the Shame of thy Nakedness appear not.

8. Are you poor hungry Souls, and have no Bread, nothing to eat, but are
forced to feed on Husks, as the poor Prodigal did? Soul, to thy joy, in this
Salvation is Bread of Life for thee; Eat you Isa. 55. 2.
that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in Fatness. The Gospel,
Sirs, provides a Feast of fat things. Have you not read of the Marriage-Supper,
All things are now ready? O what a Banquet does this Salvation make for hungry
Sinners, and such who hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be filled.

9. Are you Thirsty, and have no Water to drink; are all Wells empty, and all
Springs dry? Yet know, O Sinner, here is the Well of Salvation brim full; If
any Man thirst, let him come to John 7. 37, 38.
me and drink.

10. Are you guilty, Sinners, and condemned to die by a Holy and just Law? The
Gospel-Salvation has a full Discharge for you, Christ has died in your stead,
and here is a Pardon, a free Pardon obtained upon his Satisfaction.

11. Or Sinner, do thou want a broken Heart, do thou want a penitent Heart?
in this Salvation Christ has purchased Grace to melt and soften thy Heart; Him
has God exalted at his right Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
Repentance to Israel, and Remission of Sins. Act. 5. 31.


12. Do thou want Faith, or more Faith? It is to be had in this Salvation; To
you it is given in behalf of Christ, not only to believe, etc. Heb. 12. 2.
To believe, Grace to believe is given to poor Sinners; Christ is the Author
and Finisher of our Faith.

13. Do you want Peace? the Gospel is the Gospel of Peace, Christ is the Prince
of Peace; and as he had made Peace for us, so he has promised to all that lay
hold on this Salvation to give them Peace, yea great Peace, not such Peace that
the World gives.

14. Do you want Strength? it is in this Salvation also; In the Lord (that is*
in Christ) shall one say, have I Righteousness and Strength. Nay, you shall be
strengthened according to his glorious Power; Christ is our Strength: as he is
God's Arm of Power, so he is our Arm also; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will
help thee; Isa. 41. 10.
yea, I will uphold thee with the right Hand of my Righteousness.

15. Or do you want Comfort? this Salvation has all Joy and spiritual Comfort
in it: God is called the God of all Comfort and Consolation; but he is so only
to us in Jesus Christ. Christ has procured and sent the Comforter himself to
us, and to abide with us for ever; I will not leave you comfortless, I will
come unto you. John 14. 18.


16. Do you want Weapons and Armor to engage your Enemies? this Salvation
provides these also, see Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13. Christ's Soldiers are armed
completely, yea, they have Armor of Proof put upon them.

17 Do you want a Guide? this Salvation provides you an infallible and faithful
Guide also. (1.) To guide us, we have God's Word, which is that sure Word of
Prophecy, which if you follow, you shall never go astray. (2.) To guide us we
have also the Holy Spirit, and Spirit of Truth; when he is come, he will guide
you John 16. 13.
into all Truth.

18. Or do you want a Shepherd to feed you, a King to rule you, a Priest to
sacrifice and make an Atonement for you, a Prophet to teach you? this Salvation
provides all these for you: Christ is your Shepherd, your Priest, your King,
your Prophet, and excels all that ever bore those Names.

19. Do you want an Husband, would you change your Condition: What say you,
Sinners, particularly you young People, do you desire a good Match, to be well
disposed of in Marriage? O then receive this Salvation, here is a Prince, nay
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, that desires your Love; will you accept
of this Offer? behold, he is now come and knocks at your Doors. O open to him,
say not nay; For this Match being once made between Jesus Christ and your
Souls, this Salvation and all that is contained in it, is yours for ever.

20. Would you be Rich, Great, Honorable, truly Rich and Honorable? here it
is, receive this Salvation, and all these things (as you heard the last Day)
are yours; none so Great, so Rich, nor so Honorable as Believers: The
Righteous is more excellent than Prove. 12. 12. Psalm. 16. 3.
his Neighbor, the Saints are the excellent in all the Earth.

21. Do you want Health, and would you be freed of all your Diseases and
Sickness for ever? Health is in this Salvation, Soulhealth, and that is the
best Health; Christ has born our Sicknesses to cure and heal our Souls.

22. Do you want a great Portion? this is more than all the other God in the
Salvation of the Gospel, is the Portion of Believers.
this Salvation is so comprehensible, that God himself is contained in it: This
Salvation gives us Interest in God, God hereby gives himself to every Believer
to be his Portion, Christ has purchased this Portion for us, he restores to us
a lost God; by this Salvation we come to enjoy God again.

(1.) God is a Portion that will supply all thy Wants.

(2.) A Portion that will content and fully satisfy every Soul that has an
Interest in him.

(3.) A Portion that can never be spent nor wasted.

(4.) A Portion for thy Soul, and a Portion that will last as long as thy Soul
shall last, and that is for ever. Sirs, many have great worldly Portions, but
they are sometimes soon spent, and they become poor and miserable. Some also
have great earthly Portions, bodily Portions, but have no Portion for their
poor Souls: O get God to be your Portion, i. e. believe in Christ, receive by
Faith this Salvation, and God is thy Portion, Christ is thy Portion.

(5.) God is a present Portion, and also a future Portion; you may feed on this
Portion: and the more you live on this Portion, the more you have.

(6.) God is an infinite Portion, an inconceivable Portion; whatsoever is in
God so far as it is communicable, or God sees good to impart of himself to us,
so much of God we shall have: what God i^, and what God has, is a Believer's.

(7.) Sinner, a Portion thou must have, and God too to be thy Portion, or thou
must perish for ever. The loss of God at first was the undoing of all Mankind,
that was our ruin; nor can that Loss be ever repaired until we have God again:
an eternal loss of God will be the Torment and Misery of the Damned.

(8.) The Reason why the Father sent Jesus Christ to work out this Salvation
was, that we might have God to be our God: Brethren, God says to every one of
you that are Believers, as he said to Abraham, Fear not, Abraham, I am thy
Shield, and thy exceeding Genesis 15. 1.
great Reward. Such may say with David, My Flesh and Heart fails Psalm. 73. 26.
but God is the strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever. And with the
Church in the Lamentations, The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul, therefore
will I hope in him. Lam. 3. 24.


(9.) Brethren, God in this Salvation breaks up (as I may say) the Fountain of
the great Depths of his Divine Grace, Love and Goodness: The Passage was stopped
by our Sin, till Christ opened it by shedding his Blood; there was no other way
whereby God might let out of himself in his Eternal Goodness to us, but this
Way only, to the Glory of all his Divine Attributes.

(10.) Hereby we have not only God to be our God, our Portion, but he is so
restored to all that believe, that they shall never lose him again for ever.

(11.) Did we want a Surety, not only to pay our Debts, but also to secure us
in a State of Grace, and to preserve all our Riches for us; this Salvation
provides such a glorious Surety for us: Alas, we are like poor Orphans under
Age whilst in this World, and are not able nor fit to be entrusted with what is
our own, I mean, to have it in our own Hands; therefore we and all our Riches
are put into the Hand of Christ, to keep and improve our Riches for us, and to
give of it forth to us as he in his Wisdom sees best for us. They that slight
this Salvation, slight this Portion, this God, and all true Happiness in him:
in this Salvation, this Portion is offered to you Sinners, God is willing to be
your God, your Friend, your Father and Portion for ever. Here is God in this
Salvation, Christ in this Salvation, the Holy Spirit in this Salvation; God,
and all the Fullness of God; Christ, and all the Riches of Christ; the Holy
Spirit, and all the Graces and Blessings of the Spirit: the Pearl of great
Price is thine, if thou have a Part and Interest in this Salvation. Here is the
Spirit to quicken thee, to renew thee, to sanctify thee, to strengthen thee, to
comfort thee; here is Grace to deck and adorn thee, rich Robes to cover thee,
the Promises to cheer thee, feed and support thee, the Ordinances to feast
thee, and Angels to guard, protect and preserve thee. O what a full, complete
and comprehensible Salvation, Brethren, is the Salvation of the Gospel!

23. And lastly, here is Heaven in this Salvation, Heaven, and all the Glory of
it; here is a Kingdom in this Salvation, a Kingdom of Glory, of Light, of Joy
and Pleasure; here is a Crown that fades not away, in this Salvation, a Crown
and Kingdom for every Christian; therefore this Salvation is great and glorious.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon. VII.
BRETHREN, the last time I showed you that Gospel-Salvation is a great and
glorious Salvation, because it is a full, a perfect and complete Salvation; it
is not a piece or part of our Salvation that Christ worked, and does work out
for us, but it is the whole of it in every part thereof.

Twelfthly, It Is a Great Salvation, in respect of the first and
Gospel-Salvation great in respect of Christ, who was the great Minister of it.
principal Minister, Preacher, and Publisher of it; this is one of the
Apostle's Arguments and Demonstrations in our Text, which at first began to be
spoken by the Lord, etc. Jesus Christ was not only the Savior that God sent,
and the Author and Finisher of this Salvation, but the Revealer, the Minister
or Preacher of it: God who in times past spoke unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, they Heb. 1. 1.
were his Ministers, Has in these last Days spoken to us by his Son, that is,
his Son personally, as he was manifest in the Flesh.

1. His own Son, his only Son, his only begotten Son; he has no other Son
begotten by an eternal Generation but Christ alone.

2. The Father's Heir, The Heir of all things, by whom also he made the World,
who is the express Image of the Father's Person, and the Brightness of his
Glory.

3. He that has the absolute Lordship and Dominion over all Creatures in
Heaven and Earth.

4. Nay, and God the Father also speaks himself in him, in such a sort and
manner as he never before spoke in any Instrument; He has spoken unto us; that
is, the Father in and by the Son, who is in personal Union with himself. O what
a kind of Salvation is this, what a Gospel is this, that is thus revealed, made
known, and published unto us! What Mortal can think to escape that neglects so
great Salvation? What were the Holy Angels who delivered the Law, or what were
the Prophets to this glorious Person, I mean, the Son of God? But at last of
all he sent unto them his Son, saying, They will reverence my Son; sure they
will attend upon his Mat. 21. 37.
Word; Can they forbear honoring and reverencing such a Person? Now I will try
them: as if God should say, they may know the Matter is of great Moment, and I
am in good Earnest, and look for Fruit from them. Sirs, Jesus Christ, by
Calling or Office, when he was upon the Earth, was a Minister, a Preacher: O
what great Condescension was this in him, who is the true and eternal God! and
what an honorable Employment is this! What a high and sublime Office is the
Office of a Gospel-Minister! With what Trembling and Fear ought it to be
undertaken! I come not to be Mat. 20. 28.
ministered to, but to minister; that is, to preach the Gospel, to communicate
heavenly Treasure to the Souls of Men and Women. The Priests under the Law were
God's Ministers. Jesus Christ is God's High Priest, and therefore his chief
Minister; we must receive the Law at his Mouth, at this Priest's Mouth: We have
such Heb. 7. 1, 2.
an High Priest who is set down on the right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the Heavens; a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, etc.
or the true Church, the Church of the Firstborn, which the Jewish Church was
but a Shadow, a Type of: But now Verse 6.
he has obtained a more excellent Ministry, he excel^ all Ministers; all true
Ministers are but his Substitutes, and must one Day be accountable to him; he
is the Great Shepherd, and chief Bishop of our Souls. This is he that speaks
from Heaven, who came from Heaven himself, and received his Doctrine from the
Father, as Mediator, and as the great Minister of Righteousness: O how shall
they escape that refuse such a Preacher, one that speaks from Heaven; Heb.
12. 25.
nay, him that is God over all, blessed for evermore. Where the Word of a King
is, there is Power. Who shall not then attend upon the Word of this King, this
great and mighty Lord? Sinners, with what Awe and holy Trembling should you
attend on the Word of this Salvation, that began first to be spoken by the
Lord? Christ may be said to speak in and by the Prophets, nay, to speak to
Adam: But this speaking doubtless refers to his personal speaking when he was
on Earth. There may be said to be a threefold beginning of the
Gospel-Ministration.

1. In Predictions, by Promises, and by Types.

2. In the immediate Preparation of it, and so it begun in the Ministry of John
the Baptist.

3. In the open, clear, and actual Ministration of it; and thus it begun to be
first spoken by our Lord himself, (upon his Baptism, for then he entered upon
his Ministry) and it was carried on afterward by his Apostles, and other
Ministers that he appointed; and by his Church he daily still does appoint, and
in an ordinary manner authorize Men to preach it. But O how great is this
Salvation, that God should please to send his own Son to preach and publish
this Salvation! Brethren, should a King lay aside his Crown, and throw off his
Princely Robes, and come into the Pulpit and preach the Gospel, would not all
wonder at it, and flock to hear him? David was a King, and yet a Preacher;
Solomon was a King, a mighty King, and yet a Preacher: but what poor and
igneble, low-born Kings, nay, base-born Kings, were they to this King, who is
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? Certainly this is Matter of highest
Concernment, or of greatest Moment of all things in the World, and before all
things to be regarded. Did Christ in Person speak from Heaven to Men on Earth,
and make known to them this Salvation? Moreover, he speaks still, he it is that
speaks to you now, Day by Day, by us his poor Ministers, who may be you are
ready to slight and despise in your Hearts; yet know Christ's faithful
Ministers personate him, they are his Ambassadors, they represent the very
Person of Christ: Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, 2 Cor. 5: 20.
we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. He that hears you,
says Christ, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me. Little Luke 10. 16.
do Sinners think what they do when they sleep under the Word, disregard,
slight and despise the Word of this Salvation in the Mouths of Christ's
Ministers, Christ's Ambassadors. See what Christ himself says, And whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your Words -- shake off the Dust of your Feet.
Verily I say unto Mat. 10. 14, 15.
you, It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day
of Judgment, than for that City. All this is because it is Christ's Word, and
Christ that speaks to you by his Servants; the same Contempt that is showed to
the Ambassadors of an earthly King, is showed to him; and he treats them as if
it were done unto himself. Moreover, the Esteem and Honor that is showed to an
Ambassador in receiving his Word, or in hearkening with awe and respect to what
he says in his Master's Name, is shown to the King. Ministers are not to be
esteemed or had in Honor for their own sakes, but for Christ's sake: But if
you love Christ, honor Christ, you will love and respect his faithful
Servants, and hearken to what they speak unto you in his Name and by his
Authority.

Thirteenthly, The Salvation of the Gospel is great and glorious,
Gospel-Salvation great considering its wonderful Confirmation.
if we consider the wonderful Confirmation and Ratification of it in the Days
of the Gospel in the Primitive Time; Which first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him; God also bearing them
witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will. The Apostle brings this in also as a
farther Demonstration Heb. 2. 3, 4.
of the Greatness of the Salvation of the Gospel, namely, the consideration of
the miraculous confirmation thereof.

God is said to bear witness to the Gospel, and to the Salvation thereof; there
was never such Witness born to any Truth, as is to the Truth of the Gospel.
For, 1. All the Prophets bore witness to it. 2. John the Baptist was sent to
bear witness to it. 3. The Apostles were also Witnesses chosen of God to this
end; nay, and we have the Witness of God himself; And the Father himself that
has sent me, has born witness of me. The Father bore Joh. 5. 37.
witness at our Savior's Baptism, and at the Transfiguration, by a Voice from
Heaven. 4. We have the Witness and Confirmation of the wonderful Miracles that
our Lord wrought: But I have a greater Witness than that of John; for the Works
which the Father has given me to finish, the same do bear witness to me that
the Father has sent me. That Ver. 39.
which was a Witness of Christ's being the true Messiah, was a Witness of the
Salvation he has wrought.


1. He raised the Dead, opened the Eyes of the Blind, even of him that was born
blind; he cast out Devils, he caused the Lame to walk, the Dumb to speak; he
cleansed the Lepers, and healed all manner of Diseases and Sicknesses among the
People, and all to confirm the Truth of this Salvation; no Man ever did such
Works. 2. Moreover, the Holy Ghost was given in a miraculous manner unto the
Apostles and others, they were filled, yea baptized with it, they spoke many
strange Languages; and all this was, (1.) To confirm and fully to prove, that
Christ was the Son of God, and Savior of the World. (2.) To confirm the Truth
of his Doctrine, and every Precept, Ordinance, and Promise thereof. (3.) To
assure all that believe of the certainty of their Eternal Salvation, and that
they should never perish. And also, (4.) To assure all that believe not, that
repent not, but live in Ways of Sin and Wickedness, that they shall all be
damned: It confirms particularly that word, Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise Luke 13. 3, 5. Joh. 3. 3. Joh. 3. 36.
perish; and that word, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God; and that, But he that believes not, the Wrath of God abides on him;
and this in my Text, touching the Impossibility there is for any Man to escape
that neglects this so great Salvation, and whatsoever else is contained in the
New Testament.
3. It was also ratified and confirmed by the Blood of Christ, by his Death,
and by his glorious Resurrection, and by the rending the Vail of the Temple,
and by that great Darkness that was at the time when our Lord gave up the
Ghost, over all the Earth; and by the rising of many of the dead Bodies of the
Saints after his Mat. 27. 51, 52.
Resurrection. Look to it, Sirs, this Salvation must needs be very great that
was thus confirmed.
Fourteenthly, The Gospel-Salvation is great, if we consider with The Salvation
of the Gospel great in that the Angels behold it with admiration.
what amazement the Holy Angels behold it, they are said to look into it: 1
Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you: Searching
what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory
that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but
unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by them
that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven: which things the Angels desire to look into. They look into it with the
greatest diligence, do, as it were, bow down to pry into it; they stand, as it
were, astonished to see the Son of God in Flesh, or having taken Man's Nature
upon him; he that is their mighty Lord and Sovereign, to abase himself to such
a degree, and to die the shameful Death of the Cross, to work out Salvation for
such vile and rebellious Creatures as Mankind are: It Is said, He was seen of
Angels. The Angels knew of Christ's coming, no doubt, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
long before he was manifest in the Flesh. The Angel told Daniel of the seventy
Weeks, and of the cutting off of the Messiah; and the Angels also brought the
first News of his Incarnation and Nativity: but nevertheless with what
Wonderment was he seen of the Angels! The natural Knowledge of the Angels which
we understand not, no doubt is great; but they have also an experimental
Knowledge, they learn of the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. They were
likewise Witnesses of our Savior's Resurrection, Ephesians. 3. 10.
and ministered to him in his bloody Agony: Lo the Salvation of our Souls does
not a little affect the Holy Angels; they see God's Love is more to Mankind,
than it was to those Creatures of their own Nature that fell, I mean, the Evil
Angels. O, my Brethren, shall the Angels look into this Salvation, whom it
concerned not as it does us, (they did not need a Savior to redeem them) and
shall not we look into it, pry into it, and be affected therewithal? Shall all
in Heaven contemplate it, and not we? Is it so great, so glorious, and shall we
not mind it above all things?

Fifteenthly, It is great Salvation, because it is a free Salvation, it
Gospel-Salvation great and glorious, because it is a free Salvation.
is all of Grace; You may have it, Sinners, without Money, and without Price,
Isa. 55. 1. True, some things you must part with, whoever you are, that will
have a part in this Salvation: But what is that? Nothing of any Worth, nothing
that will do you any good: You must part with your Sins, with your filthy
Lusts, with the Love of this World. Christ came to save his People from their
Sins; not in their Sins, no, no. They that will not part with their Iniquities,
with their carnal and sinful Pleasures, Profits and Honors, are never like to
have any Part or Lot in this Matter: Nay, and they must part with all their own
Righteousness too, I mean, in point of Trust and Dependence, and must see that
they have nothing which can recommend them to God, nothing that can justify
them in the sight of God; unless a Man denies himself in all these Respects, he
cannot be Christ's Disciple. But notwithstanding this, yet the Salvation of the
Gospel is free; the worst of Sinners have an Offer of it, they whose Sins are
as red as Scarlet, or as red as Crimson; here is Wine and Milk without Money,
or any Isa. 55. 1, 2.
thing the Creature has to purchase it, or to give for it: it is not to be had
for the sake of any thing done by us, or can be done by us, or wrought in us.
Sinners, the Water of Life is freely tendered to Rev. 22. 17.
every one that thirsts, nay to every one that will, that has a Will inclined
to accept it; if it could not be had unless we first cleansed our selves from
our Sins, or made us a new Heart, it would not be free or alone of Grace, nor
to be had on easy Terms, nay not at all: But you have heard that a new Heart is
one part of this Salvation, it is contained in it; and those that would be
washed, must come to the Fountain of Salvation, they must come to Christ,
believe in Christ, or by Faith apply his Blood to wash and cleanse their
polluted Souls.

Brethren, if there was a Salvation for rich Men only, what would become of the
Poor? But this Salvation is offered unto the Poor as well as unto the Rich;
nay, and they chiefly indeed do receive it, as our Savior testifies. And if it
was a Salvation for Righteous Men only, what would become of ungodly Sinners?
But remember, this Salvation is only for Sinners, I mean, such that see their
Sin, and know the want of a Savior; Christ came not to call the Righteous, but
Sinners to Repentance.

Sixteenthly, In the last place, Gospel-Salvation is a great Salvation,
Salvation Eternal, therefore great.
because it is an eternal Salvation: And being made perfect, he became the
Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. As Christ
brought in an Everlasting Righteousness, so he wrought out an Everlasting
Salvation: Israel shall be saved in the Lord, Isa. 45. 17.
with an Everlasting Salvation; once saved, and for ever saved: For as the
Damnation of all that refuse or neglect this Salvation shall be Eternal, so the
Salvation of all that receive it shall be also Eternal: The Earth shall wax old
like a Garment, and they that dwell Isa. 51. 6.
therein shall die; but my Salvation shall be for ever, and my Righteousness
shall not be abolished.

Thus I have done with the Demonstration of the first Doctrine, which I shall
improve in applying the next Proposition.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon VIII.
Doct. II. THE great Salvation of the Gospel may be neglected. This is implied
in my Text.

How shall we that preached it escape if we neglect it? Or how shall you that
hear it preached escape if you neglect it? First, I shall show you what is
intended by neglecting this Salvation. Secondly, Show you who they are that may
be said to neglect it. Thirdly, Show you from whence it is that some do neglect
it. Fourthly, Show you what a great Sin it is to neglect the Salvation of the
Gospel.


First, To neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, is to neglect the Means of it,
the Way which God has appointed in order to our obtaining an Interest in it.

2. It imports a slighting of it, to omit seeking after the Knowledge of it, or
to take no pains in order to the obtaining the Grace and saving Blessings
thereof.

3. Or to seek Salvation some other ways. But,

Who may be said to neglect this Salvation.
Secondly, Who may be said to neglect it?

Answ. 1. Such who do not think upon this Salvation, they do neglect it: Some
do not regard it at all, it is not in their Minds; they do not trouble their
Thoughts about it, though it be so great. That which a Person thinks not of,
let it be Matter of never so great Moment, be sure he does neglect. Have you,
says a Man to his Friend, done that Business I desired of you? No truly, says
he, I never thought of it; this discovers he has neglected it: So it is here
in respect of this great Salvation.

2. Such neglect the Gospel Salvation, who do not study it, pry into it, and
labor to find out the great Mysteries that lie hid in it. As he that is put
out an Apprentice, to learn some curious Art or Trade, that never studies the
Matter, or pries not into the Mysteries thereof, neglects his Trade: So they
who do not study the Gospel, and the Mysteries of Christ crucified, do neglect
the great Salvation thereof. Paul determined to know nothing amongst the
Learned Corinthians, but Jesus Christ and him crucified; this shows he did not
neglect the Salvation of his own and 1 Cor. 2. 1.
other Men's Souls. Without controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness: 1 Timothy 3. 16.
It Is not easy to understand the Gospel, it is so great a Mystery; if it were
only a Law, with Promises annexed to those who lived up in Obedience to the
Precepts of it, and Threats to such who were disobedient to its Precepts, it
would not be a Mystery; nor would the Learned Greeks have counted the preaching
of such a Gospel to be Foolishness; for such a Gospel comports with Man's
Carnal Reason and with Natural Religion: But to preach Salvation by a Man that
was hanged on a Tree, or by a crucified Savior, that is a Mystery. And hence
it was contemned by the Greeks, they could not understand how they could be
justified by another's Righteousness, or that Christ could satisfy for their
Sins; or how our Sins could be made his, that his Righteousness should be made
ours; this is a Mystery, and this Mystery some People do not, will not study,
and so neglect this Salvation.

3. Such neglect it, that will not hear the Gospel preached, but either lie at
Home, or walk in the Fields, or content themselves to hear Morality or good
Manners only preached, which is all the Salvation too many preach in some
Places: they think they need not trouble themselves about any other Matters of
Religion, but only to do to others as they would be done unto; or to live sober
Lives, and to do justly: This is good, and it is in a right manner held forth
in the Gospel, and preached by such that preach this Salvation: But if this
were all, in vain was it that God sent his Son into the World; nay, if Morality
could save Men's Souls, or any Righteousness of the Creature, or inherent
Holiness, Christ is dead in vain. These Men know not what the Gospel is; and
those who preach no other Gospel than Morality do but go about to make the
People good Heathens; for what is this, but the Religion of the Heathen
Philosophers?

4. Such also neglect this Salvation, who though they come to hear Christ
preached, yet only come out of Formality, Custom or Curiosity, or to divert
themselves; having little else to do, they will go and hear what such or such a
Man will say, it is not to be instructed in the Mysteries of Salvation: nay,
may be some of them may come with a Design to catch up things to improve to the
Reproach of the Minister. Now be sure these Persons are such who neglect the
Salvation of the Gospel.

5. Such likewise who are careless Hearers, who hear as if the things preached
did not concern them, or that sleep under the Word, these also neglect this
Salvation. I have heard of one that would go to the Place of Worship, because
she could sleep sooner and better there than at Home; and no wonder, since the
Devil rocks the Cradle, (as I may say) or has such Influence upon them, and
makes them comply with his Temptations: and you shall have help, no doubt, as
some who have hanged themselves; it has been observed to be strange how they
could do it after such a manner: alas, Satan helped them, he knows how to tie
the Rope, and to choke them too, when they enter upon this Work. Perhaps some
shall have their Thoughts in a wanton manner, run out after this or the other
Object they have before their Eyes, when with Holy Diligence they should attend
upon the Word of this Salvation to the profit of their Souls; or else have
their Hearts and Thoughts run out upon their worldly Affairs; some on their
Riches, Trades, and how to order their Business the Week following, and others
upon their Poverty. All these I must set down as Neglecters of this Great
Salvation.

6. Such who slight or neglect the Convictions of their own Consciences, or
that strive to stifle their Convictions, whilst under the Word, or when gone
from hearing it, like as Felix did when he sent Paul away; the Fire the Word
had kindled in his Conscience, being too hot for him to bear.

7. Such who comply not with the Call of the Word, and Offers of this great
Salvation, but resist and quench the Motions of the Spirit, out of love to
their Lusts, and so reject the Word, like them of old; Lo they reject the Word
of the Lord, and what Wisdom Jer. 8. 9.
is in them? These seem to say in their Hearts, As for the Word spoken in the
Name of the Lord, we will not do it: But we will certainly do Jer. 44. 16.
whatsoever goes out of our Mouths, etc. These also with a witness neglect
this great Salvation.

8. Such who regard not the Time, the Day and proper Season of this Salvation,
do neglect it: Behold, now is the accepted Time; behold, now is the Day of
Salvation. But this is not their Time, they 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2.
delay the great Matters of their Souls, God's Time is not their Time: Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near, says the
Prophet. But they will not do this, they Isa. 55. 5, 6.
think it is too soon, they resolve to take more of the sweet of Sin, and feed
on the Vanities of the World a little longer. God calls now, whilst it is to
Day, To Day if you will hear his Voice; but they will not regard it: Because I
have called, (says the Lord) and Prove. 1. 24, 25.
you refused, I have stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded. -- But ye have
set at naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof; -- I also will
laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes.

9. Such who prefer their sinful and earthly Pleasures, Profits and Honors,
above this Salvation, do also neglect it: It Is said of some of the Pharisees,
that they believed on him, but did not profess him, lest they should be put out
of the Synagogue; for they loved John 12. 42, 43.
the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God. I once told you of a Man who
living a loose and ungodly Life, and was by that means in danger of losing his
Eyesight, insomuch that his Physician told him, He must leave that excess of
Profaneness, or he would be blind; Ah, said he, is it so? Then farewell my
sweet Eyesight, or to that Effect. Just thus do many poor Sinners, they will
not part with their Sins, their sinful Ways, and sinful Companions; for when
they hear what they must do if ever they are saved, namely, believe in Jesus
Christ, repent and turn from all their sinful Courses, they say in their
Hearts, Farewell then Great Salvation; if these things must be done, they will
have none of it. I remember I heard in our Country, when I was young, of a
profane Person, that said in plain words, That he would have his Lusts, his
Pleasures, his merry Bouts, or to that purpose, for it was all the Heaven he
looked for. O how just will it be in God to sentence such to eternal Flames!

10. Such neglect this Salvation, who say in their Hearts to God, Depart from
us, we desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways: They like Job 21. 24.
not, approve not of God, nor of the Ways of God, therefore desire him to
depart; they would not have God come so near them, as to disturb their
Thoughts, nor disquiet their Spirits about their eternal State, therefore they
strive to divert themselves. The Wicked (says the Psalmist) through the Pride
of his Countenance will not seek after God; God is not in all his thoughts: he
will not trouble Psalm. 10. 4.
himself with God, and the things of God, and so neglects this Salvation.

11. Moreover, all such who believe not, give not credit to the Revelation of
the Gospel, they do not believe the Report of it; Lord, says the Prophet, Who
has believed our Report? Though the Report of the Gospel is given out upon the
highest Evidence Isa. 53. 1.
imaginable, yet, Brethren, there is an humane Faith that a Man may attain to
and exercise without Divine and Supernatural Grace, which Men do not exert;
which if they did, it would (were it improved) deter them, and put a stop to
many of their abominable Practices: but as some in other cases say, I will not
believe such or such a thing, though it is confirmed sufficiently; so it is
here, Men will not believe, they will not give Credit to the Report of the
Gospel, it is not agreeable to their carnal Reason: What! believe there is no
Salvation but by the Righteousness of another? How can this be? Can his
Righteousness justify me, be made mine? I believe that if I do live an Honest
Life, and do good to my Neighbors, I shall be saved. Says another, I cannot
believe that all shall be damned unless they are born again, and experience
such a Change as some Ministers talk of; for if it be so, Lord have Mercy upon
us, what will become of the greatest part of the World? Says a third sort, God
is above the Devil, and I cannot believe he will ever suffer Satan to get away
the greatest Number of Mankind. Ay says a fourth sort, we cannot believe that
Sin is so great an Evil, or so great a Matter, or that God will be so severe as
to cast us into Hell for it: What Is Drunkenness? It Is for our Health to be
drunk now and then: and what is simple Fornication? Tush, will God think you
ever cast us into Hell for such small things as these, or throw us into a
Furnace of Fire? It cannot consist with his Mercy and infinite Goodness. Now,
Brethren, as all these Persons neglect this Salvation, so they make God a Liar:
God has said, There is no other Name given under Heaven whereby Acts 4. 12.
we must be saved; no other way but through Christ's Blood, by his Merits and
Righteousness: but they say there is. He also has said, That the Wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and all the Nations Psalm. 9. 17.
that forget God; even whole Nations if they do so: and that no Drunkard,
Fornicator, Proud Person, Unbeliever or Covetous 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Man or Woman, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but contrariwise,
shall have their Portion in the Lake that burns with Rev. 21. 8.
Fire and Brimstone: but they will not believe it. And God says, Except a Man
be born again, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of John 3. 3, 5.
Heaven; but they will not believe it. O what is the Condition of these Men,
Unbelief is the damning Sin in this respect, as well as it is in respect that
it leads Men out to refuse and contemn the Remedy God has appointed, I mean,
the Application of the Blood of Jesus Christ. These perish as the Man did, who
was told of his Danger, but would not believe it till it fell upon him to his
Ruin.

12. Such neglect this great Salvation, who delay the looking after it until
old Age, or till Sickness, or Death comes upon them; How many are there of this
sort? They mind not their Souls, nor Soul-concernments, but think it is time
enough, when they have spent their best Days in the Service of the World, nay,
in the Devil's Service, to look after Religion, or an Interest in Jesus Christ:
these, I say, also are neglecters of this Salvation.

13. All such who make not Religion, or the Salvation of their precious Souls
their chief Business, or Matter of the highest Importance in the World, these
must be set down as neglecters of Gospel-Salvation. Brethren, this is that one
Thing needful, namely, to provide for the Soul in reference to Eternity. This
was that good part Mary chose, that should not be taken from her; she took more
care about the good of her Soul, in attending on Christ's Word, than on any
thing else whatsoever. This should be our general Calling, to which Work we
ought to give up our selves continually, in improving all Seasons and
Opportunities, and in the discharge of all spiritual Duties. O how busy are
some Men, and how wise; nay to get this World, no Time, no Care, no Opportunity
shall be omitted. But they have no regard of this great Concernment, it is not
weighed, nor thought upon by them: yet what can be of like Importance; and what
Fools are they, whose chiefest Care is to live well for one Day, and regard not
what will become of them afterward? Alas, what do the greatest part of Mankind
more than provide for one Day! Nay, should the whole Time of our natural Lives
be seventy Years, it is not as one Hour to Eternity. Now that the Salvation of
our Souls is matter of the highest Moment, will appear many ways. And first by
giving you a summary Account of what I have said. 1. Must not that be of
highest Moment, or ought not the Matters A summary Account of the precedent
Arguments to prove Salvation great.
of that Salvation be our chiefest Business, when all Salvations compared to it
are nothing, or not worth regard? 2. Must not that be Business of the highest
Concernment for us to look after, which God so early, even in Eternity, thought
of and contrived the Way of bringing it in, or for the (...) of, in his
infinite Wisdom? 3. Must not that be minded before all things, that God in
Eternity (as I may so say) held a Council about the actual accomplishment of?
4. Ought not we to look upon that Salvation as matter of the highest
Concernment, which God designed for such great and glorious Ends: As (1.) To
manifest his own Glory; (2.) The utter ruin of Satan's Kingdom; And (3.) to
make us everlastingly happy in the enjoyment of himself? 5. Ought not that
Salvation to be our greatest Business, that raises us up to such a Blessed
State, who were fallen so low, and delivered us from eternal Wrath, just as the
Hand of Justice was up and ready to strike the fatal Blow? 6. That which was so
seasonable, and when all hopes of Relief and Help was gone? 7. Must not we
needs think that Salvation of the highest Moment, that the Son of God himself
came to work out for us, which he and none but he could accomplish; nay, both
the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, the whole Trinity join together, and take
each of them a part to effect and perfect for our Souls? 8. Must not that needs
be our only Business to look after, that Christ shed his most precious Blood to
procure? 9. Ought we not to prefer that Salvation before all things, that
delivers us from the greatest Evil, the Plague of all Plagues? 10. Must not
that Salvation be of the greatest Moment, and preferred above all things in the
World, that is the Salvation of our precious and immortal Souls, nay, of Soul
and Body too, from everlasting Burning and Damnation in Hell? 11. Ought we not
to make that Salvation our chiefest Work, whilst in this World, that raises us
up so high, and makes us so great, honorable and happy for ever, as you have
heard? 12. Must not that Salvation needs be our great and chiefest Business to
mind and seek after, that is so full, so comprehensive, perfect and complete?
13. Must not that Salvation be of highest Moment, that the Son of God in his
own Person, came from Heaven to preach and make known to Men on Earth? 14. Is
not that Salvation of the greatest Concernment for us to give up our selves to
look after, and to be chiefly affected with, which the Holy Angels desire to
pry into, and stand astonished at the thoughts of, it is so great and sublime?
15. Is not that Salvation business of the greatest Moment of all, that is so
great, so sweet, so rich, so admirable, and so free and easy to be obtained?
It Is but looking to Christ, to come to Christ, to rest on Christ; it is but to
take and eat, it is but to drink when we are thirsty, it is without Money and
without Price. 16. And lastly, Ought not that Salvation to be our chiefest
Concernment, that is an eternal and everlasting Salvation; i. e. that such that
obtain it, shall have a Crown of Glory for ever, or be everlastingly saved; and
they that neglect it, shall be everlastingly damned?


Now, Brethren, he that makes this Salvation the least of his Business, does
neglect it, yea, utterly neglect it, let him think what he will. And all that
make not Religion their chiefest Business, who prefer not the Honor of God,
and their own Salvation, before all things, will at one time or another, expose
God's Name to Reproach, and their own Souls at last to eternal Wrath and
Misery. Brethren, does not he neglect his Trade, his Family, etc. that makes it
the least of his worldly Concernments?

Lastly, They neglect this Salvation, that do not look up to God, to give them
the Knowledge of their State, the true sense of Sin, and to reveal Christ to
them, and work Faith in them.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon IX.
THE last time I entered upon the second Doctrine, viz. That the Salvation of the
Gospel may be neglected.

I showed you who they are that may be said to neglect this great Salvation,
that was the second general Head I propounded to do. I shall now proceed,

Thirdly, In the third place I shall show you from whence it is, From whence it
is many People neglect their own Salvation.
or comes to pass, some Persons, nay, so many People in the World do neglect
the Salvation of their own precious Souls.

1. Some are ignorant of the Way of Salvation, and from hence neglect this
Gospel-Salvation: Thus it was with the Jews; For they being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, went about to establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10. 3.
Suppose a Man that is sick were resolved to make use of such or such a Medicine
to cure him of his Disease, which he is told the Nature of, and that it is an
infallible Potion; yet if he knows not how to apply it, he understands not
that: why now from thence he utterly neglects to make use of it at all, but
seeks some other way of Cure. Even so it is here, many hear of Christ, and
Salvation by him, but understand not how to apply his Blood, how to fly to his
Merits and Righteousness, and therefore seek to be saved some other way, and so
neglect the Salvation by Jesus Christ. Or suppose that a Man who is going a
long Journey, yet he knows not the Way, but thinks he is right, and so rides on
boldly, but goes the quite contrary Way, now he neglects the right Way through
Ignorance: even so it is with many blind and deceived Mortals, they think they
have the right and proper Medicine, or are in the right Way to Heaven; and they
go confidently on, take their own Courses, apply their own Antidote, when alas
it is a Counterfeit.

1 st. May be think that is Christ and the true Savior, which is nothing but
the Dictates of natural Conscience. Some suppose the Light of Nature, or a
sober and moral Life, will bring them to Heaven, and eternally save their Souls.

2 dly. Others conclude, their being Protestants, and born of Christian
Parents, and owning the Christian Religion, is sufficient, and that they need
not trouble themselves any further about their Salvation.

3 dly. Mankind generally see not, know not that they are born in Sin, and by
Nature are Children of Wrath; they know not that they are under the Curse of
the Law, and under the Sentence of Eternal Death, being Enemies to God, and
having Enmity in their Carnal Mind against God, and great Mountains of Guilt
lying upon them: I say, thus it is with them, but they know it not. It is with
them as it was with the Church of the Laodiceans; Because thou say I am
Rich, and increased in Goods, and have need of nothing, Rev. 3. 17.
and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. See what a sad State this professing People were in, and yet ignorant of
it; thought they were perfect, as that Man must needs suppose that thinks he
wants nothing; they no more knew their great Danger, than did the old World of
the Flood, and Sodom of those Flames which suddenly consumed them all.

4 thly. Some conclude they believe, and have true Grace; they make a
profession of the Gospel, and have been baptized, having great Gifts and Parts;
and yet for all this never were effectually changed, never obtained the Faith
of God's Elect, but through Ignorance they are persuaded all is well with them,
and so they come not to look out to Christ, but do neglect the Means of
Con^^rsion, by being persuaded they are converted already. Now this Ignorance
may be occasioned several ways.

From whence Ignorance and Blindness of Men proceeds.
(1.) Chiefly it arises from that natural Darkness that is in them, and which
naturally cleaves to all Mankind; Sin has put out the Eyes of our
Understanding. But,

(2.) It may also arise partly from the Ignorance of those blind Guides, whose
Teachings and Doctrine they may (I mean, some of them) sit under; My People are
destroyed for lack of Knowledge: Hos. 4. 6.
and the Cause was, those that taught them caused them to err. If the Blind
lead the Blind, they will both fall into the Ditch. O take heed under what
Ministry you venture your Souls: The Pharisees and Scribes were learned Men,
and some of them great Preachers, but wholly ignorant of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and of Salvation by Jesus Christ: Many, like the false Teachers of old,
Cry, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace.

(3.) Moreover, this Ignorance arises partly from Satan, he has too great an
Influence on the Hearts and dark Minds of Men; But if our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost: In whom the God 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
of this World has blinded the Eyes of those that believe not, lest the Light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto
them. Satan has a mighty Power over sinful Men, by his cunning Devices, to
keep them in Ignorance, and to hinder them from studying, knowing, and
believing the Gospel, and by this Means they neglect this Salvation: Such are
blinded by Satan that believe not; he may persuade them that a general Faith,
or a common Faith, is true Faith, and sufficient, and so he cheats them with a
Counterfeit instead of saving Faith: or Satan blinds Men's Eyes by moving them
to seek Salvation in some other way, than by Christ alone, and by believing in
him, resting, relying and depending on him; like an evil Person who puts a poor
Traveller out of his way, or directs him the direct contrary way, that so he
may be robbed and murdered by him, and by other Thieves that may way-lay him.

2. Some neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, from that inordinate Love they
have to the things of this World: Thus the young Man that came running to
Christ neglected it, he had his Heart so set upon his great Possessions, that
he went away from our Savior sorrowful, and refused the Salvation of his own
Soul; he could not part with the World for a Part in Christ and Eternal Life.
So they that were invited to the Marriage-Supper, out of an inordinate Love to
the things of the World, refused to come: The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
certain King, which made a Marriage Mat. 22. 2, 3.
for his Son, and sent forth his Servants to call them that were bidden; and
they would not come. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his
Farm, another to his Merchandise. This Marriage-Supper Ver. 5.
is this great Salvation; but the things of the World are more valued by most
People than the Salvation of their Souls: Luke says, And he sent forth his
Servants at Supper-time, to say to Luke 14. 17.
them that were bidden, Come, for all things are now ready. Many Persons refuse
to feed on Christ,, they believe not, will not eat of this Supper, will not
feed on a crucified Christ, or eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood by Faith,
through Love to their carnal Pleasures, Honors, and worldly Profits. And they
all began with one consent to make excuse: The first said unto him, I have
bought a Piece of Ground, and I must needs go and see it; I pray thee have me
excused. Ver. 18, 19, 20.
And another said, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them; I
pray thee have me excused. Another said, I have married a Wife, and therefore I
cannot come. Lawful things may be abused, and the Heart so set upon them, that
they drown Men in Perdition and Destruction: Men's Hearts naturally are earthly
and sensual; and as they know not, so they desire not the Knowledge of God and
Jesus Christ, they are satisfied with that Portion they have, this World is for
them; they care not, regard not the things of another Life.

3. Some neglect this Salvation, out of Love to unlawful things: They will feed
on forbidden Fruit, I mean, on their filthy Lusts; they will swear, steal,
whore, be drunk, grind the Face of the Poor, deal unjustly, give way to Pride,
etc. and from hence neglect the Salvation of their Souls. I was lately told of
a gracious Woman living near this City, whose Daughter wore a very high
Head-dress, or that shameful Mode now in fashion, which so grieved the Mother,
that she gave her a rich Ring, upon condition she would leave off that Dress,
or Top-knots: Her Daughter took the Ring, and conformed for a while to her
Mother's just Desire; but it was not long before she gave her the Ring again,
and repented of her Reformation, and got on her old Dresses again. Alas, some
will not leave off and forsake their Lusts for Chains of Gold; they will live
in their Sins, persist on in their ungodly Courses; let what will come, they
matter not who they grieve: they prefer their cursed Lusts and Pleasures above
this Salvation, though it be so great, as you have heard.

4. Moreover, some neglect Salvation, because there is a Cross joined to the
Crown; they must take Christ's Yoke upon them, and be exposed to Reproach for
his sake, and this they cannot endure, the Yoke is uneasy to the Flesh, the
Flesh cannot bear it. No, it is only easy to such whose Hearts are renewed, who
have got a new Nature. The Cross makes many lose the Crown; but, Brethren, had
Jesus Christ refused the Cross, where had we been?

5. Some Persons neglect Salvation, through the treachery and deceitfulness of
their own Hearts: It Is slighted out of an Opinion or Persuasion, that all is
well with them; They believe in Christ, hope in God's Mercy: Christ, say they,
died for Sinners. And thus the Devil, and their own deceived Hearts, cause them
to neglect seeking out after the saving Knowledge of Christ and Salvation by him
on Gospel-Terms; for Sin predominates in them, reigns in them, notwithstanding
all their Hopes and Confidence. What signifies such Faith that does not purify
the Heart and Life, or such Hope? Alas, it will be but like the Spider's Web,
vain Thoughts rest in those, and destroy them; vain in their Rise, vain as to
the Ground they build their Hopes upon; a vain Bottom, vain as to the Motive:
and vain as to the Fruit or Product thereof; they think they have hold of
Salvation, yet are dropping into Hell.

6. Some neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, partly out of servile and slavish
Fear, and partly out of pretended Modesty; they dare not be so bold to take
hold of Christ, or venture their Souls on Christ, because they are so vile,
filthy, and abominable, unless they had something to bring, something to
present to Christ, to render them acceptable or welcome to him; they will not
come, they pretend they dare not come, they cannot think so great Salvation
should be bestowed freely on such as they are: if they could be rid of their
Sins, or wash themselves from their Sins, then they would come; or could they
get themselves some new Clothes, make themselves a new Heart, or get some
inherent Righteousness of their own, then they would come. Sad Case! but it is
no wonder some are carried away with this Delusion, considering what a kind of
Doctrine is preached in these perilous Times. But, Sinner, know thou must come
to Christ to be washed, come as one that sees what need thou have to be put
into the Fountain, which is set open for Sin and Uncleanness; and come as one
naked, that Christ may clothe thee. Christ calls Sinners to him; may be you
will say, What is it to come to Christ? Why, to believe in him, to lay hold by
Faith upon him: And if thou do thus, though thou art never so great a Sinner,
thou shall be saved.

7. Others neglect Gospel-Salvation out of Idleness and cursed Sloth: It Is a
hard thing to enter in at the strait Gate, Self-denial Mat. 7. 13, 14.
is of absolute necessity. O but this is too difficult for this sort, they
cannot pray, read, meditate; they don't love to hear Sermons, they do not care
to put themselves upon Spiritual Duties, as to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, nay,
and to take it by Violence; they can take pains to damn their own Souls, but
cannot, will not take that pains they are enabled to do to save their Souls.
Sirs, Men will not be condemned for not doing that which they had not Power to
do, but for neglecting that which they might have done; their Destruction is of
themselves, though their Salvation is wholly of God, and of the free Grace of
God in Jesus Christ: Have not Men Power to leave all gross Acts of Wickedness,
and to attend upon the Means of Salvation? They who say we put the Creature to
do nothing, falsely charge us; we press Men to leave their wicked Practices upon
a right foot of Account, and to wait upon God in his Blessed Ordinances, which
he has appointed for the begetting of Faith. True, we say a Man cannot change
his own Heart, yet he may leave the gross Acts of Sin; it is one thing to have
the Life reformed, and another to have the Heart renewed: It Is the changing the
vicious Habits, or the Work of Regeneration, which we say must be done by God's
Almighty Power; Grace must be infused into the Soul, which works physically.

8. Moreover, it is through Pride in some that they neglect this great
Salvation; they have such a good Opinion of their own Righteousness, they
cannot see they have any need of the Righteousness of Christ: they are such
that our Savior speaks of; And he spoke a Parable unto certain which trusted
in themselves that Luke 18. 9.
they were Righteous, and despised others. These are so conceited of
themselves, that through pride of what they have got of their own they regard
not an imputed Righteousness to justify them; Man naturally affects to stand
by a Righteousness of his own. Adam was a rich Man, a noble Man, he had enough
of his own to live upon; and his Sons retain a proud Spirit, like some Sons of
a decayed Gentleman: their Father was a Knight, a Lord, and they are great in
their own Conceit, (though their Cloak perhaps is nothing but Patches) they
scorn to beg, or to dig, no they will sooner steal, and stand on the Highway.
Proud Man does thus in a spiritual Sense, he will not beg, he will not go to
Christ's Door for Bread, he will rather steal and rob Christ of his Honor in
their Salvation, by seeking it some other Way, even in an unlawful Way; this is
no better than a spiritual robbing Jesus Christ of having the whole Glory and
Honor of the Salvation of the Soul: and yet they do not enrich themselves
hereby neither, it is but only in conceit; they fancy themselves rich, and
trust in their own Righteousness, as if it were choice Treasure, when it is
nothing but filthy Rags which they pride themselves in and boast of.

11. It is through Unbelief this Salvation is neglected, Men believe not: The
grand Neglect centers here, this is the killing Evil, the Sin of all Sins, the
Plague of all Plagues.

I consider Unbelief in general, not only as it is a non-reception Unbelief the
greatest Sin.
of Christ, not believing in Christ, not accepting of Christ, but as it is a
denying to give Credit to the Revelation of God, and of what he declares in his
Word.

1. They do not believe Salvation ought to be the main Business of their Lives,
which they should regard and seek after above all things, it being the one
thing needful, yea, more than Meat, Drink, Clothes, Wives, Children, Health,
Credit, Riches, Honors, Pleasures, or Life it self.

2. They do not believe that Sin is the greatest Evil, nor that God is Man's
supreme and chiefest Good, wherein his only Happiness lies.

3. They do not believe that such is the Holiness, Justice, Wrath and Severity
of God, that he will throw Sinners into Hell, although he positively declares
in his lord that he will do it, except they believe, repent, and forsake their
abominable Ways; yet they doubt not of their Salvation, though they are perhaps
Swearers, Drunkards, unclean Persons, proud Persons, covetous or perverse
Wretches.

4. They will not believe what the woeful End of all Unbelievers and
Unregenerate Persons will be.

5. They will not believe that they are in a spiritual Sense brought to utter
Beggary, being Sons of a Beggar that spent all he had.

6. They will not believe, though it is told them again and again, that they
are blind, miserable, wretched and naked, and for Rebellion condemned to die,
nay, to be burned for ever: Unbelief was the Cause of Man's Fall at first, he
would not believe God who told him, In the Day he eat of the forbidden Fruit,
he should surely die; No, he rather adhered to the Devil, and gave credit to
the Father of Lies. This also was the grand Cause of the Israelites falling in
the Wilderness; And to whom swear he that Heb. 3. 18, 19. Heb. 4. 1.
they should not enter into his Rest, but to them that believed not? So we see
they could not enter in, because of Unbelief. Let us therefore fear, says the
Apostle. Brethren, there is a notional and practical Unbelief: Some believe
there is a God, but they deny him by their Works; and deny Christ the only
Savior, by cleaving to and trusting in other things for Salvation: They
perhaps think that their good Deeds, their Prayers, their just Dealings, and
sober and moral Lives, will save them. Some are like a poor ignorant Wretch
that I heard of, who being lately sick, and a Christian Neighbor being sent
for to come to him, he asked him some Questions about his Soul, who replied,
that he had been a Sinner; but if God spared him, he hoped to make God amends
for all. Some sin, and commit horrid Evils in the Day, and then pray at Night,
and confess their Sins; and may be drop a few Tears, and that they think cures
all, and makes them as sound again as a Fish, and so go on the next Day in
their old trade of sinning as briskly as before. Some have a humane Faith, an
historical Faith, and from thence do many things, though they do not live up to
that Faith neither, nor improve what Knowledge and Light they have received to
that degree they ought, and so shall be condemned, like as was the Man that
improved not his one Talent. I call it a humane Faith, because it is the Act of
the Creature, by virtue of his natural Powers and Capacity: the Spring and
Motive of their Faith is Humane, therefore their Faith cannot be Divine.

I shall sum up the whole of this Head, and come to the Application. 1. It
appears that the Salvation of the Gospel is neglected by many; through
Ignorance and natural Blindness their Understandings are darkened: And Light
shines in the Darkness, but the Darkness comprehends it not. Men love
Darkness rather than Light, Joh. 1. 5.
Error rather than Truth. If another come in his own Name, him you will
receive. 2. There is a Perverseness and Rebellion in the Will, and hardness in
the Heart: Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life. Joh. 5. 40. Romans 8.
7.
The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. 3. Men are ignorant and unsensible of their States and
Conditions: Are we blind also? We are Abraham 's Seed, was the Plea of old. We
are Christians, the Offspring of Christian People, and good Protestants, is
the Plea now. They are, 4. Ignorant of God's Holiness and Justice, and so trust
in his Mercy, not regarding of his Law and Justice. They are ignorant and
unsensible of that insufficiency there is in themselves, or in any thing they
can do to save their own Souls. 5. It Is through the Ignorance of some of their
Teachers, who preach not the Gospel truly to them. 6. It Is through an
inordinate Love to the things of this World, their Affections are corrupted and
set upon the Creature, upon their Riches, Honors and Pleasures. 7. It Is
through that Love many have to their Sins, and sinful Practices, and sinful
Companions. 8. It Is through the deceitfulness and treachery of their own evil
Hearts. 9. Through slavish Fear, or pretended Modesty, they dare not be so bold
to venture themselves on Christ, being such great Sinners, and having nothing
to present unto him for acceptance. 10. It is from Idleness and spiritual
Sloth. 11. From Unbelief, not giving Credit to the Revelation of God's Word in
many respects, but think to be saved some other ways than by Jesus Christ
alone, or not by him, and nothing else; and conclude something is to be joined
to Christ's Merits and Righteousness, or they cannot be justified nor saved:
and thus this Salvation is neglected; it is upon these, or suchlike
Considerations as these are.


APPLICATION.

1. Tremble you that slight or neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel: Will
you say that Jesus Christ cannot save you, or is not willing to save you?
Certainly those who give way to such Thoughts and Temptations, are sharply to
be reproved.

2. Your Sins and Unbelief is the Cause of your Misery, and if you perish, it
will be the Cause of your Damnation for ever.

3. And to you that are Believers let me speak one Word; Have a care of
Unbelief, beware of unbelieving and desponding Thoughts: Why do you hang down
your Heads?

Object. O the deadness of my Heart! This I know is the Voice and Complaint of
your Souls.

Answ. How came you to know that you are dead? Certainly this is a sign that
there is Life in you. Did ever any Person that was naturally dead, say he was
dead, cold, or unsensible? that is impossible, it is only such who are alive
that thus complain.

Object. O the abundance of Sin that is in me, that afflicts and distresses my
Soul!

Answ. Say you so, is Sin your Sickness, is Sin your Sorrow? Is Sin that which
afflicts, wounds and grieves your Spirit? Then rejoice, this is a good sign.
Would you live and sin not? Do you see a loveliness in Holiness? this is, no
doubt, an Evidence of the Goodness of your Condition, provided you hate it, and
allow not of Sin in you.

Object. But, alas, how little do I mind, and am affected with this great
Salvation!

Answ. Can thou be contented without it, or give over minding it, and trouble
thy self no more about it? Nay, art thou willing to part with that Interest
thou have in Christ, and in this Salvation? I am persuaded you will say No, not
for ten thousand Worlds.

4. Moreover, from hence we may see the Madness and Folly of the generality of
Men who live under the preaching of the Gospel, and yet neglect, Day by Day,
the Means of this so great Salvation; they regard not their chief and main
Business: What Blindness is naturally in Mankind!

But because I shall have occasion to open more particularly the great Evil of
neglecting the Salvation of the Gospel the next time, I shall say no more to it
now.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon X.
I AM upon the Prosecution of the second Proposition I raised from this Text,
viz.

Doct. 2. That the Means of the great Salvation of the Gospel may be neglected.
This is implied in the Words. 1. I showed you the last Day, what the neglecting
of Gospel-Salvation does import. 2. I also showed you who they are that may be
said to neglect it. 3. And likewise from whence it comes to pass that so many
Persons neglect their own Salvation.


I shall now proceed to the last thing proposed to be spoken unto in the
Prosecution of this Proposition. Which is, Fourthly, To show you the great Sin
and Evil of such who do neglect the Means of the Salvation of the Gospel.


First, I shall show you the Greatness of this Sin, in respect of God, or show
what a Dishonor it is to him. Secondly, Demonstrate the Greatness of the Evil
thereof, in respect of the Sinner himself that does neglect it. Thirdly,
Considering by whose Influences and Instigations they do it. Fourthly,
Considering the Vanity of those things for the sake of which this Salvation is
neglected.
First, Such that neglect this Salvation, do cast great Contempt upon God.

1. They cast Contempt upon the Wisdom of God that found it out, and on that
glorious Counsel that was held in Eternity about it. What is it but a breathing
forth of the highest Disdain on the Wisdom of God? What is the Voice of some
Sinners Hearts? We shall be saved tho we go on in our own Ways, God is good,
merciful, etc. This is, as it were, an undervaluing of the glorious and no less
gracious Contrivance of Infinite Wisdom, to seek to be saved some other Way, or
to neglect this Way. Suppose a Prince should hold a Council in order to make a
Company of Rebels happy for ever; not only to pardon them, but to make them
Rich, Noble and Honorable; and he should send them the Offers of this rich
Bounty and Goodness, and they should contemn it, slight it, and wholly neglect
the free acceptance thereof, would not this cast a Slight and Reproach upon
that Prince? And would not all Men say, sure they were mad? Brethren, all
ungodly Men who neglect this Salvation, consult with the Devil, take Counsel of
the Devil, and of their own wicked Hearts, to frustrate, if it were possible,
the Counsel of God. He has ordained the Preaching of the Gospel as the Way to
work Faith in them, and so to give them an Interest in Salvation; but they
slight and neglect attending upon the Word, nay, believe it not, but conspire
against God, and set themselves against the Lord, and against his Christ,
saying, Psalm. 2. 2, 3.
Let us break their Bonds asunder, and cast their Cords from us. Let us cast
away the Offers and Promises of this God, and of this Christ, about Salvation
and an Eternal Kingdom, and those Threatenings of Wrath and Hell, whereby they
would one while allure us to forsake our Sins and beloved Lusts, and at another
time frighten us into Faith and Obedience, and to submit our Necks to his Yoke.
Come, let us slight all those Arguments he uses to win us over to him, yea,
spurn at them, and disregard all the Hopes and Fears these Cords would put us
into, could they get us under their Power. What are all these things but
Fancies, vain Dreams? Tush, our State is good enough, we can repent hereafter:
What is the Gospel but to do as we would be done unto? Let us not trouble our
Heads with any other Notions of Religion. And thus they slight and cast
contempt upon the infinite Wisdom of God, who found out and contrived this way
of Salvation, and by which Ephesians. 3. 10.
his manifold Wisdom is revealed.

2. They also who neglect and slight the Salvation of the Gospel, do cast
Contempt upon the highest Goodness, Love and Mercy that was ever showed to Man:
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him might not perish, but have Everlasting Life. Love, to the
wonderment of Men John 3. 16.
and Angels! Shall such a Marriage be offered by the great King, such a Banquet
be prepared that cost so much, and shall any make light of it, and despise
Infinite Goodness for the sake of their own filthy Lusts, and think they may be
saved some other Way? They thereby render the Holy God cruel to his own Son, in
his giving him up to die, and to become a Sacrifice for Sin.

Brethren, if Salvation be neglected, it is either out of Presumption or
Despair.

(1.) Now such that presumptuously neglect it, seem to magnify God's Mercy in
their own Conceit, being wholly ignorant of his Justice and Holiness, and so
slight the constituted Method of his declared Goodness in Jesus Christ; and so
whilst they seem to magnify God's Mercy, they impair, nay contemn his
Sovereignty, by choosing and prescribing other Ways of God's communicating of
himself to his Creatures, than what he in his Eternal Counsel fixed upon, and
found out.

(2.) If it be neglected through Despair, they cast Contempt upon Christ's
Blood, as if there was not a Sufficiency in it to cleanse and save them from
their Sins; and not only so, but also render God not to be believed, who has
said, There is Life in his Son, and whosoever believes in him shall not perish.
Therefore Despair makes God a Liar, as it is a high degree of Unbelief:
Moreover, it renders God to be cruel to his Creatures; for though they fall
down at his Feet, and humble themselves, yet the Voice of Despair is, God is
only an angry Judge, and clothed with nothing but Wrath and Fury. Nay, and it
casts a disparagement upon the Power and Sufficiency of God to save when he
appears in his full united Strength, for so he does manifest himself in Jesus
Christ. And hereby such seem to intimate, as if a multitude of Sins could throw
God's Mercy into the Depths of the Sea, instead of Mercy's casting our Sins
therein, notwithstanding Justice has received a full Satisfaction for them by
the Hands of our Blessed Savior and Surety.

3. From hence it appears that they who neglect this Salvation through
Unbelief, do cast also Contempt upon God's Power to save, rendering him unable
to do it by his right Hand, even by Jesus Christ: Man is very apt to question
God's Power, like them of old; Can God spread a Table in the Wilderness? All
Distrusts arise from Fears and Jealousy, either of the Strength, or else of the
Faithfulness and Justice of the Object addressed unto in a Time of Distress;
that either the Person is weak and unable to help, or else dishonest and
unjust; and though he has promised to save, to help, yet he will not. Even so
it is here, all they that neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, from Unbelief
and desponding Thoughts, either seem to strip God and Jesus Christ of his Power
to save, or else of his Truth and Faithfulness, who has said, Look unto me,
and be ye saved, all ye Ends of the Earth. And again, He that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out. A convinced Isa. 45. 22. Joh. 6. 37.
Sinner, before he comes to Christ (nay and sometimes afterward too when under
Temptation) is apt to say, Can God pardon my Sins? Can God remit my Sins that
are so great? Pray take notice of two Texts of Scripture, the one respects such
Sinners that are not awakened, and so seem to presume; the other refers to
convinced and awakened Sinners who seem to despair, and yet go on in their Sins.

(1.) Isa. 57. 10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy Way; yet say
thou not, There is no Hope? Thou go on in thy unjust and sinful Ways, till
thou have even wearied thy self, as if the Lord should say, and yet think
thy State good, wilt not say there is no Hope; but contrariwise thou have Hope,
and do conclude all is well: these are bold presumptuous Sinners.

Compare this Text with that in Jer. 2. 25. But thou say, There is no Hope;
No, for I have loved Strangers, and after them I will go. We are very vile, our
Consciences reprove us, convince us of our abominable Evils, but there is no
Hope, God will not pardon us, nor take us into his Favor; therefore we will go
on in our own Ways, and take our swing: These were ashamed of their doings, as
the next Verse shows, and yet not so ashamed as to leave their Sins and Doings,
and to return to the Lord, but doubted of his pardoning Grace. We see, say
some, there is no ground of Hope, there is no help for such as we, our Hearts
are so hard, Corruptions are so strong in us, there is no Salvation for us; we
will therefore take our Course, cleave to our Sins and Lovers, and to our old
Companions; we will even follow our Trades, and pursue the World, and satisfy
our Lusts with Pleasures. Despair sometimes makes Persons desperate; others of
this sort grow melancholy, and ready, through Satan's Temptations, to lay
violent Hands on themselves, when it prevails far upon them. Now these I say do
cast great Reproach upon the Power of God, and his pardoning Grace in Jesus
Christ.

4. Such who believe not but neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, cast contempt
and dishonor on the Truth of God, they do not give credit to what God says in
his Word about Salvation by Jesus Christ, and of that necessity there is of
Faith in him, and Union with him, and of being born again, if ever they are
saved. If ye believe not Joh. 8. 24.
that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins. But the Jews would not believe this.
Hence it is said, He that believes not, makes God a Liar, 1 John 5. 10.
because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son: As such do, who
do not believe the Testimony of any Person, though never so true. And is it not
a horrid Evil to render God a Liar? He says, Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish; and except a Man Luke 13. 35. John 3. 3, 5.
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. But this is not believed by
many Persons, they hope to be saved, though not regenerated.

5. Such who believe not, but neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, yet think to
be saved, go about to cross and contradict the settled Will and Purpose of God;
it is in effect to show a dislike of God's way of Salvation: The Jews are said
not to submit themselves to the Righteousness of God: they magnified their
Wills Romans 10. 3.
above the Will of God, liked not of that way of Salvation that he in his
Eternal Counsel fixed upon; they will be saved by their own Righteousness; that
which God accounts but as filthy Rags, they esteem as a choice Robe. Suppose,
Brethren, there was some other Way to be saved than by Christ, yet is it not
meet that the Creature comply with the Will of his Creator? Shall he rebel
against his Sovereign? Were there two ways to such or such a City, one by Sea,
and the other by Land, and a Prince commands his Servant to go by Sea, and not
by Land, shall he attempt to go by Land, and so cross his Master's Will, and
violate his express Command? But it is not so here, there is but one Way of
Salvation; There is no other Name given under Heaven: therefore such must Acts
4. 12.
needs be more inexcusable, who neglect this Way, and their Condition
dangerous; for let them think what they will, damned they will be at last,
whoever they are that neglect this Salvation. But more of that hereafter.

2 dly. Those that neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, do slight and cast
Contempt on Jesus Christ; they seem to undervalue all that he has done:
certainly that was not worth his coming from Heaven to Earth to effect, that
you do not think worth your while to go a Mile or two to attend upon the Means
of, nor worth setting your Thoughts seriously upon. Was our Salvation so great,
that he parted with his Life to procure it, and is it not worth your parting
with your Sins to have an Interest in it? What is the Voice of the Hearts and
Ways of such Sinners? Do not they reproach the Son of God after this manner,
Why wast thou so unwise to shed thy Blood to purchase Salvation for us? We do
not value it above the Pleasures of the World, we esteem our carnal Delights
and earthly Profits more than that Salvation which thou have wrought.

2. Nay they slight the Person of Christ, who says, Behold me, behold me, look
unto me; Can you see me stand knocking at the Door of your Hearts, and refuse
to let me in? Should one cry out Pity me, pity me, you will break my Heart, if
you do this thing; suppose it be a dear Father or Mother that thus speaks to a
Child that takes evil Courses, and the Child regards not the Cry nor Tears of
its Parent; would not all say, that such a Child contemned his Father? Thus,
Sinners, you will be found contemners and slighters of Jesus Christ one Day, if
you neglect this so great Salvation; he stands ready to embrace you in his
Arms, to espouse your Souls, but you slight and despise him and his precious
Love in your Hearts.

3. Nay such who neglect this Great Salvation, slight the Voice of Christ's
Blood. Sirs, the Blood of Christ cries, his Death has a Voice in it: Has
Christ's Blood been shed to redeem you, to cleanse you from Sin, to save and
sanctify your Souls, and will you not hear the loud Cry thereof? Nay, does not
Christ himself cry to you after this manner, Will thou continue in thy Sin, and
neglect the Salvation I have purchased? What greater Ingratitude, what worse
Indignity can thou cast upon me, and upon that Sacrifice which I have offered
up to make thy Peace, and reconcile thee unto God? After this manner Christ
seems to speak.

4. To neglect this Salvation, is to cross or contradict the grand Design of
God in sending his Son into the World; was it not to exalt Jesus Christ, to
magnify him? Last of all he sent unto them his Mat. 22. 37.
Son, saying, They will reverence my Son. God requires and commands all to
honor his Son, believe in his Son, receive and embrace his Son, subject to his
Authority; to this End he sent him into the World: But how do such seek to
cross the Design of God herein, who prefer their earthly Profits and Pleasures,
nay their sinful Ways and wicked Practices, above Jesus Christ and that
Salvation he has purchased? O how great is the Sin of such who neglect this
Salvation!

5. Hereby also they abuse the matchless Love, the unspeakable Love and Favor
of Jesus Christ; they do not only slight his Person, contemn his Blood, and
cross the Design of the Father, but they also abuse and disdain his precious
Love, which caused him to take upon him the Form of a Servant, and to yield
himself up to the cursed Death of the Cross. Greater Love has no Man than
this, that a Man lay down his Life for his Friend: But Jesus Christ laid John
15. 13. Romans 5. 10.
down his Life for his Enemies; Whilst we were yet Enemies, we were reconciled
unto God by the Death of his Son. And shall Sinners, after the manifestation of
such Love, slight him, and the Salvation wrought by him at such a dear Rate?
Nay, shall Christ's repeated Calls, Wooings, and Entreaties, be not regarded,
who spreads Isa. 65. 2.
forth his Hands all the Day long? Shall any be so ungrateful, so blind, so
rebellious, as to let Christ stand all Night at the Door of their Hearts, even
till his Head is wet with Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night? This
shows the great Evil and Wickedness of Cant. 5. 5.
those who neglect this great Salvation: Does not this tend to expose the Son
of God to shame, to be thus slighted, as if not worth the least regard? Should
a Prince come a thousand Miles to court, or offer his Love to a low, a
contemptible and base-born Damsel, and she should nevertheless slight him, and
give him no entertainment, would not this be deemed an abominable Abuse of his
Love, as well as great Contempt cast upon his Person? Sinners are ready to say,
there is no comeliness in him that we should desire him: but Isa. 53. 2, 3.
alas, it is because they do not know him; they are blind and see him not, it is
the carnal Eye that can see no Beauty in Christ; were the Eyes of their
Understandings opened, they would be of another Opinion concerning him.

6. The Evil in neglecting of this is so great, that it is (as it were) a
piercing of Christ again; nay, and when a poor Sinner is convinced of this
great Iniquity, he cries out, What have I done? Have I not grieved, nay,
wounded afresh my dear Savior, by not believing in him, and not receiving the
great Salvation offered by him? Though I never saw the Person of Christ, yet I
have offered Violence to him in resisting his Authority, despising his Love,
and slighting his Salvation. As a Man is guilty of Treason, by abasing the
Statue or Image of a King, so are Men guilty of the Blood of Christ, and of
trampling upon it, when they count it as a Trifle, or unprofitable to their
Salvation, seeking Life and Salvation some other ways, or are wholly regardless
about it; it is as a Stab at his very Heart, a tearing out (as it were) his
Bowels: he suffered willingly all those great Torments which were inflicted
upon him, to remove from us a necessity of Suffering; had he not stepped in to
bear our Sins, we had been lost for ever. O why then is not he embraced by
Faith that works by Love! It implies a Sinner has no Love to him, no not so
much as to his Sins and Folly; it is a denying the Excellences of Christ, the
Preciousness of Christ: for as Faith accounts all things but Dung in comparison
of Christ, so (as one observes) Unbelief counts Christ but Dung, Union and
Charnock.
Communion with him but Dung, in comparison of this World and the Pleasures of
Sin.

7. Those that neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, thinking to be saved some
other way, do seem to reflect upon, if not despise the Wisdom of Jesus Christ:
Do they not charge him with Folly and Inconsiderateness, in undertaking such a
Task, such a Work, on such hard Terms, when it might be had some other way?
What, suffer such Pain, Sweat, great Drops of Blood, and be nailed to the Cross
to procure Salvation for us, which might be obtained by a sober Life, or by
doing to all as they would be done unto, or by following the Dictates of the
Light of natural Conscience, or by our own Inherent Holiness? What did Jesus
Christ aim at by shedding of his Blood, but the appeasing of God's Wrath, and
the bringing in of an Everlasting Righteousness, and to purchase Grace to
sanctify Men's Souls, and to open the Gates of Heaven, which Divine Justice had
shut and barred up against us? Now certainly those who neglect this Salvation,
do either fancy these Blessings are not worth regard or looking after, or else
they may be procured by some other Way, and on easier Terms, than by Faith in
the Blood of Christ: And is not this to charge our Lord Jesus with Folly; and
with the Greeks of old, to account the Preaching of the Cross Foolishness?

8. They render, it is evident, the shedding of Christ's Blood to be in vain,
who neglect the Means of this Salvation, and so thereby slight the Blessings
which he has purchased: it must be an undervaluing of the price of Redemption;
for that which a Person regards not, though procured at never so dear a rate,
he declares was in vain purchased: this is, with a Witness, therefore, lightly
to esteem of the Rock of their Salvation: it is to stop their Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Ears to the Cry of Christ's Blood. His Blood (as you heard) cries to Sinners
to apply it to their perishing Souls, and to leave their sinful Ways; but they
regard it not, though it seems afresh to stream forth from his Heart in the
Virtue of it, and flows through the Pipes of the Gospel in the Offers of it.
Did not they who refused to come to the Marriage-Supper, declare, that the King
had in vain prepared all those costly Dainties, for let who will come and eat
thereof, they will not? And thus many render the bloody Sacrifice to be offered
up in vain, by neglecting the Salvation offered in the Gospel.

9. Such also who believe not, but reject and turn their Backs upon the
Gospel-Salvation, put Jesus Christ to Grief again: It is Mark 3. 5.
said, He was grieved because of the hardness of their Hearts. So God said, he
was grieved forty Years with those who believed not in the Wilderness. O how
many Years have some of you grieved both the Father and the Son, (to speak
after the manner of Men) and is not this a great Evil? Will you grieve and
weary out the Heart of God, and the Heart of Jesus Christ?

10. It also gives occasion to Satan, to vaunt, boast and triumph over the Son
of God: See, says he, how little these Men and Women, for whom thou gave thy
self to die the Death of the Cross, do mind the Salvation thou have purchased
for them; they like and approve of my Ways and Motions, my Offers, better than
any thing thou have procured for them, and do offer to them. May not Satan
insult after this manner over the Lord of Life and Glory, whilst Sinners close
in with his Temptations, and cleave to their Lusts, earthly Profits and
Pleasures, and neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel?

3 dly. Such who neglect this so great Salvation, offer Violence to the Holy
Ghost.

1. They do resist the Holy Spirit, whom God has sent as his great Messenger,
to influence, enlighten and convince their Hearts and Consciences about the
Worth and Weightiness of this Concern: He will reprove the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of John 16. 8, 9.
Judgment. Of Sin, because they believe not on me. Because they neglect
attending upon the Means of this Salvation, believe not the Necessity there is
of this Savior, nor of Faith in him, and seek it not above all things: Is it a
small Matter to resist the Holy Ghost? O lay it to Heart.

2. They grieve the Holy Spirit also, yea, and hereby tire him out so, that he
at last withdraws his Influences from the Sinner, and will strive with him no
more, like as he did by the World; and if so, the ruin of the Soul will be
unavoidable: for without the Holy Spirit no Man can repent, believe, or be
renewed, be regenerated, and so come to have Interest in this so great
Salvation.

3. Such quench the Spirit who neglect this Salvation, and do not believe; it
is to cast Water on that Divine Spark which the Holy Ghost strives to kindle in
the Soul of a poor Sinner, or to blow out the Candle of the Lord, (so far as
the Sinner is able to do it) whereby Spiritual Light and Knowledge comes to be
let into the Heart.

4. Nay, to neglect this Salvation in the Means of it, is as much as may be to
hinder the Work and Office of the Holy Spirit in and about this Salvation. The
Holy Spirit has more immediately to do with Sinners; his special Work is to
enlighten, to convince of Sin, to work Faith in the Soul, and to renew and
sanctify the polluted Heart; and all that neglect this Salvation, or that
slight those Convictions they have of the Evil of Sin, or Sense of their woeful
Condition, do seek to obstruct the King's great Officer and Messenger in the
discharge of his Office. Look to it, Sinners, for if it be deemed a dangerous
thing to resist a Constable in the exercise of his Office, because he is the
King's Servant, what Danger do you expose your selves to, that oppose,
withstand, and strive to hinder the Spirit in the discharge of his great Work
and Office? It is to contemn the King's Ambassador; the Holy Spirit is sent to
treat with Sinners in Christ's Name, it is hereby Christ himself speaks to them
from Heaven: and they that adhere to the Motions of the Spirit, do adhere to
Jesus Christ; and they that oppose or resist his Motions, do oppose and resist
Christ also. The Holy Spirit is the great Gospel-Blessing promised, to infuse
Grace in the Soul: all Grace is from the Spirit; Sinners cannot believe without
the Holy Spirit, nor love God: The Love of God is shed abroad in the Hearts of
Believers by the Holy Ghost. There is no Regeneration without the Spirit: Those
that are born again are born Romans 5. 5. John 3. 5.
of the Spirit; no Union with Christ without the Spirit, no broken Heart, no
Cries, no Tears that will prevail with God without the help of the Spirit: Such
that will not adhere to his Motions and Influences, say in their Hearts, that
they will not be changed, will not believe nor repent, nor have Christ to be
their Prince and Savior. The Spirit awakens the Conscience, and stirs up Fears
in the Soul, and sets before the Sinner's Eyes, his great Evil, Guilt and
horrid Pollution; therefore if they refuse the Wooings, Entreaties and
Influences of the Spirit, they must perish for ever.

APPLICATION.

1. O let us lament and mourn over all that neglect this so great Salvation:
All Unbelievers and Neglecters of the Means of Salvation, are horridly guilty
before the Lord; it is hereby all their Sins are bound upon their Consciences,
and cleave to them, and are charged upon them, not only Original, but all
actual Sin whatsoever.

2. O infinite Love and Patience! May we not stand amazed, and wonder at the
long-suffering and forbearance of God? O House of David, (says the Prophet) is
it a small thing for you to Isa. 7. 13.
weary Men, but will you weary my God also? What greater Wickedness and
Ingratitude can there be than this? Will you contemn and resist your Savior
and the Holy Ghost? How long shall God wait upon you? Will he always wait to be
gracious? O know that his Mercy will at last be turned into Fury.

3. Unworthy are such to live, to be fed, to be clothed, to be protected and
preserved, that thus despise God's Mercy and sovereign Goodness: Would a Man
feed, clothe, and bestow great Favors on such that despise, slight and contemn
him?

4. What do you think of your selves, Sinners? to you I speak that neglect this
so great Salvation. O this is your Sin, you refuse the only Remedy God has
found out to heal and save your Souls, therefore your Damnation will be just
and deserved with a witness: You love Darkness rather than Light; you contemn
the highest Good, the best of Beings, and the highest Expressions of his Love
and Favor; that God that made you, that Christ that spilt his Blood to redeem
the worst of Sinners, those Bowels that pitied you, you refuse, and resist that
Spirit that would renew you, sanctify you, and make you meet for Heaven, and
all this out of love to your base Lusts, your cruel Enemies that seek to
destroy and murder your precious Souls. Abhor your selves: Alas, Men do not see
what Monsters of Wickedness they are, whilst they neglect this so great
Salvation. You sin, I say, against the Remedy, the costly Remedy, the only
Remedy, against the Remedy that Infinite Wisdom has found out, and Infinite
Goodness has vouchsafed: Yet if you return to God, there is Mercy for you;
say, O Lord, now we see our Sin: O that you could but say so in truth, and fall
down at the feet of God, and say, Thou have overcome us with thy Love.

5. Lastly, Here is Comfort for Believers who have received this so great
Salvation. O bless God for Faith, cherish the Motions of the Holy Spirit that
has broken your Bonds; you prefer Christ, and the Salvation by Christ, before
all things: live worthy of a Part and Interest in this Salvation; you have
Salvation, and shall not lose it. O walk so that you may never lose the Joy of
it; for that you may do, God may hide his Face, Christ may withdraw himself: if
he has done it, enquire when you had him, and consider what you have done that
he hides his Face from you; let the Cause, if it be Sin, be bewailed, and let
the loss of him be more grievous to you, than the loss of Comfort from him, and
be willing to do any thing to enjoy Christ again.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon XI.
I AM upon the second Proposition that is implied in the Text, viz.

Doct. 2. That the Means of the great Salvation of the Gospel may be neglected.

The last Time I showed the great Evil that attended the neglect of
Gospel-Salvation, in respect of God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

Secondly, The second thing proposed was to show you, what a great Evil this is
in respect of the Sinner himself that does neglect it. But before I proceed to
speak to this, let me premise one thing, namely, That we ought first to be
sensible of that Evil which is in this and in all Sin, as it is against God;
for if our Convictions arise not from hence, our Trouble is not right, it flows
not from a true Spring or right Principles: It is not sufficient to see our Sin
and Evil, as it is against our selves, as it hurts and wounds our own Souls,
but chiefly as it is against that God that made us, and sent his Son to redeem
us; or as Sin is loathsome and abominable in his sight, tending to eclipse his
Glory, nay, to dethrone him, and frustrate his gracious Design in our
Redemption, and bring his Honor under contempt. This, I say, should first of
all and chiefly be lamented: Such sin against the Remedy, and highest Goodness,
that neglect this Salvation, and the gracious Operations of the Holy Spirit,
and so rather adhere to Satan than to God. Suppose a Child under the Rod of his
tender Father should cry out, O the Smart, but signify nothing of Sorrow or
Grief in offending his Father, would not that rather aggravate his Guilt, or
could it tend to please his Father, and to cease laying on of more Stripes? But
to come to show you what a great Evil it is to neglect this Salvation in (...)
of the Sinner himself.

1. This Sin, this Unbelief, (...), is the Cause why all Sin remains upon the
Conscience (...) Sinner. True, God has transmitted the Guilt of our (...)
Christ, so that he has satisfied for them; but the Sinner (...) ^eceive this
Atonement, but refuses it, and so his Sin, his Guilt and Pollution remains upon
him, Faith being appointed as the Way of the Application of the Remedy.

2. Nay, Sin does not only remain on such that neglect this Salvation, and
refuse Christ, but this Refusal keeps Sin in its full Strength, and binds all
Sins fast to the Soul: Sin reigns in them and condemns them; and so does the
Law also, which is the Strength of Sin, because they receive not Jesus Christ,
who is the End of the Law, as to its condemning Power, to every one that
believes, but not to them that reject Christ and believe not.

3. Faith unites to a Holy God, and to a Spotless Savior, whereby we come to
have a Righteousness which discharges us from all Sin, and Wrath due to it; and
such are made Holy: But Unbelief continues the Soul in its old Stae, as being
united to the old Adam, condemned Adam; all Men are in the first or second
Adam, in the dead or living Adam: And as is the dead Adam, so are they that are
in him; they are dead, and by the Law condemned, therefore not justified: And
as is the living, so are they that are made alive; they live and are acquitted,
and can die spiritually no more.

4. This Sin, this Neglect is against a Man's own Life and Happiness: Life is
offered to him, but he rejects it, he will not have Life; he has no love to
himself, seeks not the preservation of himself. Mankind naturally have a
special care to preserve themselves, but these choose Death rather than Life,
Sickness rather than Health, Slavery rather than Liberty, Cursing rather than
Blessing.

5. Hereby they deprive themselves of all the saving Benefits of Christ's
Death, for no adult Person has or can have any Interest in the Merits of
Christ without Faith: He that believes not, the Wrath of God remains upon him.
He that believes and is baptized, Joh. 3. 36. Mark 16. 16.
shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. Here is in this
Salvation, Pardon, Peace, Christ and Everlasting Life; but the Sinner contemns
all: My People will have none of me, says the Lord. And this is the Voice of
all that neglect this Salvation, they will not have God, will not have Christ,
will not have Life, such is their Ignorance, and the Enmity that is in their
Hearts against God: These account themselves unworthy of Everlasting Life; and
the Death of Christ will be in vain as to them. Acts 13. 46.


6. Hereby also they show they have no Love nor Pity for their Immortal Souls:
If they loved their Souls, would they not seek the Salvation of them? Nay, they
are cruel to their own Souls: Would not that Man be cruel to his poor Child,
that saw it fall into the (...), and would not endeavor to pluck it ou^; or
(...) it in the Water almost drowned crying out for help, but would not (...)
to save it, nor c^^ for help? O mercil^ss Mortals! What no pit, on your
precious Souls that are so dear and near to you? Will you nor cry to God, to
Jesus Christ, to pull your Souls out of the Fire, or rescue them out of the
Teeth of the devouring Lion? Can there be greater Folly, Madness or Cruelty than
this? O think upon it, you Sinners, that neglect this Salvation.

7. Moreover, their Folly appears further who neglect this Salvation, in that
they refuse a Crown, a Kingdom, and to be Heirs, Heirs of God: They may be
rich, eternally ri^h, yea, great and honorable for ever, but utterly refuse
it. Riches and Honor are Prove. 8. 18. John 12. 26.
with me (says Christ) yea durable Riches and Righteousness. If any Man (says
our Savior) serve me, him will my Father honor.

8. Such that neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, it does vet further appear,
are very cruel to themselves, and therefore guilty of the greatest Folly
imaginable. (Had the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, when they were stung
with fiery Serpents, refused to have looked up to the brazen Serpent that was
lifted up upon the Pole, when they were in tormenting Pain and Anguish, would
it not have showed great Cruelty to themselves, as well as Madness?) Sinners
are wounded, mortally wounded, they are stung with a worse Serpent than those
fiery Serpents: And to look unto Christ by Faith, is the only Cure and Remedy,
or the only way to be healed: and as there is no other way, so this is a
certain and infallible Cure. But Sinners who neglect this Salvation, refuse to
apply this sovereign Balsam to their wounded Souls.

9. Is it not an evil and hurtful thing for a Man to yield himself up to the
Counsel and Conduct of a sworn, cruel, and mortal Enemy, who seeks his Blood,
and will rip up his Bowels, and tear out hi^ very Heart? But thus they do that
neglect this Salvation, they hereby follow the Advice and Counsel of the Devil,
who will devour them as a hungerstarv'd Lion; nay, it is just as if a Man
should throw his dear Child into the Lion's Den to be torn in pieces. Suppose a
Man in Slavery in Turkey, should be told that his Ransom was paid, and he has
the greatest demonstrations given of it imaginable yet he will not believe it,
but says, I will continue here a Slave, and wear these Chains, and be under
Bondage to this cruel Tyrant, though I am told that he will murder me at last;
would not all say, he deserved not to be pitied, especially should he behold
that (...) is redeemed by the Blood of his own gracious Sovereign?

10. Is it not an evil thing, and the greatest madness, at the Instigation of a
bloody and cruel Enemy, for a Man to suffer him to thrust a Sword into his own
Bowels; or when wounded at his Inticements, to refuse to apply such a Plaster
that would certainly cure his Wounds and save his Life? but thus do all they
who neglect this Salvation. Or suppose a Man was almost starved to Death, and
Bread is set before him, nay all choice Varieitie, and he is bid to eat; but
being persuaded by an Enemy (that hates him, and longs to see him dead) not to
eat, but to feed with his Swine on Husks and Grains, would it not be folly with
a witness, should he do so? But thus do all those Persons that neglect this
Salvation, they refuse to eat of the Bread of Life, or to feed on that costly
Supper God has graciously provided for them in the Gospel, and at the Devil's
Inticements feed, as the poor Prodigal did, on Husks which the Swine do eat.

11. Such who neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, do greaten and aggravate
their Sin and Guilt, as our Savior speaks concerning the Jews; If I had not
come and spoken to them, they had not had Sin; but now they have no cloak for
their Sin: that is, they had John 15. 22.
not been guilty of Sin to such a degree, their Sin had not been with such
Aggravations. Therefore those that have the Salvation of the Gospel offered to
them, and they neglect it, or refuse to receive it, shall have the greater
Condemnation; it shall indeed be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, nay
with Pagans and Insidels, than with them in the Day of Judgment.

12. Moreover, since the way of God's glorifying of all his Blessed Attributes
is despised and utterly rejected, by those who neglect this Salvation, all the
Attributes will rise up and plead against such Sinners to condemn them.

1. Divine Wisdom may plead against them, and call for Judgment with the
greatest severity to be executed upon them, because that All the Divine
Attributes plead against such who neglect the Salvation of the Gospel.
way of Salvation which Infinite Wisdom contrived and determined in the Eternal
Council, is rejected, slighted and contemned.

2. The Veracity, or Truth of God, may plead against all Sinners that neglect
this Salvation, because the Sacred Precepts of the Gospel are not obeyed, nor
the Threats feared, nor the faithful Promises thereof believed.

3. Divine Power may rise up and plead against such Sinners, because that
Almighty Arm which is stretched forth in working out this Salvation, is not
took hold of to save them, and therefore it shall be stretched out to destroy
them: Who shall be punished with Everlasting Destruction from the Presence of
God, and from the Glory 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
of his Power. That will be the Time when God will make the Power of his Wrath
and Anger known: Who (says the Psalmist) knows the Power of thine Anger? as is
thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. Psalm. 90. 1.


4. Divine justice may rise up against all those who neglect this Salvation,
and exact the p^iment of all the Debts the Sinner owes and stands charged with,
because the Satisfaction made by Jesus Christ, our blessed Surety, is
contemned, utterly neglected, or not accepted of, they not believing; Faith
being the only way appointed for Interest therein, and for the Benefit thereof.

5. Moreover, Divine Mercy and Goodness will come forth and plead against the
Sinner, and be turned into Fury, since such Infinite Grace and Favor, and
Sovereign Bowels, are not regarded, but utterly slighted and neglected: And woe
be to those that Mercy it self appears against, and calls for execution of
Wrath upon.

6. And the Law also will rise up and condemn all those that neglect this
Salvation, because the only way by which its Glory shines forth, and by which
its Breach is repaired, and its Honor is raised, is slighted: the Law will
break forth with its bitter Curses, and throw the Souls of such into Hell in
sury, who neglect this Salvation.

7. Nay, Jesus Christ himself will also rise up and condemn all neglecters of
this Salvation, because all his Infinite Love and Grace which he has showed,
and Pain and Anguish which he has endured to work it out, is slighted and trod
under-foot; he will change his Lamb like Nature, and appear like a Lion, to
tear all such into pieces. In a word, it puts a Sword, as it were, into the
Hands of all the Attribute, of God, and a Sword into the Hand of the Law of
God, nay into the Hand of Jesus Christ, to cut down and utterly to destroy
their Souls; which Divine Wrath will speedily execute with Vengeance, if they
proceed on in their evil way, and do not embrace this so great Salvation.

8. This is not a Sin against the killing Letter, but against the healing
Spirit; and it is a casting Dirt upon all God's blessed Attributes, as they
display their highest Glory, or are dressed in their richest R^bes, or appear
in their most sublime Perfections. Suppose a Traitor should cast Dirt upon a
Prince, or spit in his Face when he is but in his common Dress, would not that
be deemed an abominable thing? but much more odious, should he do it as he fits
on his Throne, when his Crown is on his Head, and has all his Royal Robes upon
him, and his Scepter in his Hand, and all his Nobles about the Throne. God in
this Salvation appears in his high and sublime Glory, as displaying his highest
Beauty, Splendour, and Honor of all the Perfections of his unwordable and
inconceivable Being, even the Depths of Infinite Wisdom, Justice, Power,
Holiness and Goodness: Therefore woe to those Sinners who slight and neglect
this Salvation.

Thirdly, The third thing that I proposed to speak unto, was to Satan's Work it
is to hinaer Men's Salvation.
show you the greatness of their Sin who neglect this Salvation, with respect
had to him by whose Influences, and at whose Instigations they neglect it, and
that is the Devil. Satan stirs up Men to slight and neglect this so great
Salvation: Is it not sad that Men should adhere to the grand Enemy of their
Souls? If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God
of this World has blinded the Eyes of those that believe not.

Satan acts out of Malice to Mankind, in seeking Ways and Means to blind their
Eyes: He has many Devices whereby he strives to do this, which I shall not now
insist upon; he shows them the Glory of this World, thereby to allure them into
his hungry Jaws, to devour them and destroy their Souls for ever: He has many
Nets spread, and Multitudes are caught by him, either one way or another.

1. Some he deprives of this Salvation, through love of sinful Profits or
worldly Gain: This way he destroyed the young Man mentioned in the Gospel that
came running to Christ; and also Demas who forsook the Gospel, and fell away
for love to the sinful Profit of this evil World. And how many daily, by
Earthlymindedness, and abominable Covetousness, lose this Salvation, through
the Craftiness of the Devil, and the Evil of their own Hearts.

2. Some by sinful Honors: O how many love worldly Grandeur, and a Name among
Men, above the Salvation of their Souls! These are like those jews who are said
to believe on Christ, Joh. 12. 43.
but did not confess him, for fear of being put out of the Synagogue; for they
loved the praise of Men, more than the praise of God.

3. Others by earthly Pleasures and sinful Delights, he catches in his Net and
makes a Prey of.

4. Also Multitudes he destroys, by cursed Errors and damnable Heresies: That
way he deceives them, and robs them of this Salvation, concluding, that those
Principles they have sucked in, are the undoubted Truths of Jesus Christ, and
do not doubt of the Goodness of their Condition.

Fourthly, And lastly, Consider the Vanity of all those things, for the take of
which Men neglect this so great Salvation. What is Sin, the Pleasures of Sin,
or all the R^^hes and Glory of this World, when compared to the Salvation
wrought by Jesus Christ? Sin is the Soul's Sickness, the Scabs and Sores, the
Plague and Poison of the Soul; it is the Sp^wn of the old Serpent, and yet
Sinners lick it up, and esteem it above all that Good that is in God and in
Jesus Christ, and value it more than the Crown of Glory in Heaven. Sin is the
Leprosy and Plague of the Soul; it is compared to the rottenness and stinking
Putre action of a filthy Sepulcher, nay, to the superfluity of Naughtiness: O
that Men should ^am. 1. 21.
neglect so great Salvation, and expose themselves to eternal Flames and Wrath
in Hell, for love to that which the Holy Ghost thus paints out, and discovers
the detestable Nature of!

Besides, how soon are Men deprived of all those things which their deceived
Hearts are set upon; they are not sure of enjoying them one Day, no not for one
Hour! O how soon will all the Reader, (...) these Sermons (...).
seeming Sweet of Sin, and of this World, be turned into Bitter, and all
earthly Joy into Sorrow, all their Pleasures into eternal Pain and Misery! And
O how will they cry out against themselves for slighting the Salvation of their
Souls, for the sake of, and love to these things, when it will be too late!

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon XII.
I Closed the last Day with the second Point of Doctrine, namely, That the great
Salvation of the Gospel may be neglected. I shall now proceed to the third and
last Proposition.

Doct. 3. There is no possibility for such, or any one Soul of them, to escape,
that neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel.

First, I shall show you what it is they cannot escape. Secondly, Why they
cannot escape. Thirdly, When or at what time they shall not escape. Fourthly,
Show why the Gospel has such fearful Comminations and Threatenings contained in
it.
First, They shall not escape the Curse of the Law, (which all ungodly and
unbelieving Sinners lie under); for no Man is, nor can be delivered from the
Curse thereof, but only those who believe in Jesus Christ, and embrace the
Salvation of the Gospel; For Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness, to
every one that Romans 10. 4.
believes: to them that believe, and to every one of them, but not to those
that believe not. Christ has born the Curse of the Law, he by his actual
Obedience fulfilled the Righteousness thereof; and by bearing the Penalty of it
(which our Sins incurred) by his Death, he has delivered all that believe from
the Curse thereof: but the Curse of it remains on all them who receive not
Jesus Christ, it has its full blow and stroke on all Gospel neglecters,
because it is by him and no other ways we can be delivered from the Curse
thereof.

2. Therefore it follows in the second place, that they cannot be delivered
from the Guilt and Punishment of their Sins, their Sins lie upon them, they are
charged upon all that neglect or refuse the Salvation wrought out by Jesus
Christ: It is the Decree of the Eternal God, that all such that believe not
shall bear their own Sins, because they reject Jesus Christ who has born the
Punishment that was due to Sin. Some conceit that they need not this Salvation,
need not the Righteousness of Christ, or Faith in Christ, and this through
Ignorance, concluding their State is good. Jesus said unto them, If ye were
blind, ye should have no Sin: but now ye say, We Joh. 9. 41.
see; therefore your Sin remains. They thought their own Righteousness was
sufficient, and were ignorant of God's Righteousness, and hence the Guilt of
their Sin remains upon them.

3. All those that neglect this so great Salvation, shall not escape the Wrath
of God: This follows as the natural Consequence of the former; Divine Wrath
parsues them, and every Soul of them that believe not, but refuse the Grace of
God offered by Jesus Christ in the Gospel, like as the avenger of Blood pursued
the Man slayer under the Law: The Cities of Refuse were a type of Christ; it is
to him all guilty Sinners must fly, if they escape the Wrath and Vengeance of
God: Divine Justice is only satisfied in Christ; and Sinners for not accepting
and receiving by Faith that Atonement, and pleading that Satisfaction he has
made, Wrath follows them even at their Heels, and will strike them down: He Joh
3. 35.
that believes not, shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him.
Wrath is upon all naturally, we are all by Nature the Children of Wrath, but it
remains no longer upon them that believe, but it abides on such that believe
not.

4. They shall not escape the Damnation of Hell, or everlasting Burning: Our
Savior (speaking to the Scribes and Pharisees) says, How can ye escap^ the
Damnation of Hell? Yet they were a Mat. 23. 33.
People that appeared outwardly righteous to Men, and boasted that they were
not Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or such as Publicans were. But alas, no
Righteousness will carry a Man to Heaven, Luke 18. 11.
but a perfect, complete, sinless Righteousness. Paul was not an Hypocrite, as
some of the Pharisees were, before he believed; yet his Righteousness, tho
according to the Letter of the Law, was such, that few attained unto; As
touching the Righteousness which is of the Phil. 3. 8, 9.
Law, says he, I was blameless: yet he esteemed it but Dung in comparison of
God's Righteousness, and renounced it all in point of Justification, that he
might be found in Christ. And as it is Christ's Righteousness that is our Title
for Heaven, so it is his Death, his bearing the Punishment of Sin, that
delivers us from eternal Damnation in Hell. Hell is a fearful Place, it is made
deep and large; The Fire is not quenched, and the Worm dies not: Mark 3.
and that Place is prepared for all Unbelievers, for all who continue in their
Sins, and under the Power of Unbelief, and neglect this so great Salvation, the
Damnation of which they cannot escape.

Secondly, I shall show you the Reasons why such cannot, shall not escape God's
eternal Wrath, that neglect the Salvation of the Gospel. The Causes and Reasons
why they cannot escape that neglect Gospel-Salvation.


1. It is because this is the way, yea, the only way which Infinite Wisdom has
found out for the Salvation of our Souls: If there is but one way to cure a
Mortal Disease that may seize upon a Person, then if he neglect that one
Remedy, he must die. Sirs, as there is but one way to escape starving, and that
is, to eat; so there is but one way to escape perishing, and that is by
believing, or by feeding on Jesus Christ, or by eating of his Flesh, and
drinking of his Blood. There are many ways to be damned, but there is but one
way to be saved. Verily verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life John 6. 53.
in you. If you neglect this way of Salvation, there is no other way whereby
you can be saved; Neither is there Salvation in any other Acts 4. 12.
, for there is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we must be saved.

2. Such that neglect this Salvation, cannot, shall not escape the Wrath of
God, because it is just and equal that all such Persons who slight and neglect
this Salvation, should be destroyed, and that for ever. (1.) By reason they
neglect an Offer of Pardon and Peace, contrived by the Infinite Wisdom of God,
and it is the highest Demonstration of admirable Mercy and Goodness; therefore
there cannot be a higher Indignity and Contempt cast upon God's Sovereign Grace
and Favor. Many of those Sinners that neglect this Salvation, are so vile and
ungrateful, as not to enquire what this Grace means, nor on what Terms this
Salvation may be had: And is not this in plainness to tell the Holy God, that
they scorn his Love and Goodness, and despise the Offers of Peace and
Reconciliation by Jesus Christ, and fear not what he can do unto them; and so
no less than a trampling the Blood of Christ under their Feet? Let Men deal
thus with their provoked Rulers, or with an earthly Prince, when guilty of
High Treason, and see how unpitied they will die, yea, be drawn, hanged and
quartered. What, guilty of the worst of Treason, and have an Offer of Pardon,
and slight or neglect the suing of it out? How equal and just a thing would it
be that such should die? So it will be here, Brethren, God will not be mocked:
Sinners shall one Day see what it is to neglect the Salvation wrought out by
Jesus Christ, I mean, the Way and Means of the Application thereof; they will
be forced to subscribe to the Righteousness, Justice and Equity of their own
Damnation, in loving and cleaving to their Lusts, and counting their earthly
Riches, Pleasures and Honors, better than Jesus Christ, and a part in this
Salvation. Remember it is the Sinner's own Salvation that he neglects, it is
his own Good, his own Cure, his own Relief, his own Happiness: Can any perish
more justly and deservedly, than such who refuse to be saved, who choose Death
rather than Life, and Darkness rather than Light?

3. They cannot, shall not escape, because it is Salvation in such a way, a way
that cost so dear, even the Blood of the Son of God: Should the King yield up
his own Son as a Sacrifice to answer the Law for a cursed Traitor, and yet he
should despise and slight his Goodness, how would that aggravate his Guilt? O
with what a Price is this Salvation procured, by what a Sacrifice! What Tears
did Christ shed! O what drops of Blood did he sweat! and what Wrath did he
bear! What a Curse did he undergo, to save us from Hell and Death! How can any
think to escape that neglect the Means of this Salvation?

4. Because it is Salvation on such easy Terms as to us; had God offered
Sinners Salvation on hard and difficult Terms, their Sin might not seem to be
attended with such Aggravations. Had God required a thousand Rams, or ten
thousand Rivers of Oil of every Mich. 6.
one that would be saved; or to sacrifice their Sons and Daughters, or their
Firstborn, the Fruit of their Bodies for the Sin of their Souls, this would
seem hard: but none of this God requires of us, it shall not be, must not be
our Son, our Child, our Firstborn, but his Son, the holy Child Jesus, his
Firstborn, that must die or be a Sacrifice for our Sins: it must be my Son, as
if God should say; and all that I require of you, is to apply his Blood, and to
sacrifice your Sins in love to me.

5. That which the Apostle builds the Righteousness of God's proceeding against
such that neglect this Salvation upon, and shows the unavoidableness of their
perishing from, is the greatness of the Salvation it self. Shall God's Justice
be eclipsed, shall his Honor be marred, his Goodness be despised, his Law be
violated, his Holiness stained? it would be thus, should such be saved who
neglect and slight this Salvation: Therefore all such cannot escape his Wrath.

6. The Apostle further argues the impossibility of their escaping who neglect
this great Salvation, from that impossibility there was of their escaping who
refused to hear Moses: For if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
Transgression and Disobedience Heb. 2. 2, 3.
received a just Reward; How shall we escape? etc. It was a just Reward they
received for their Sins and Disobedience: And if so, how shall these escape?
God will render a just Retribution, a righteous and proportionable Punishment,
it will be far worse, or much greater; howbeit, it is against greater Light,
greater Grace, and despising a Person of far greater Honor and Dignity: He
that despised Moses Law, died without Mercy, under two or three Witnesses. Of
how much sorer Punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought Heb. 10. 28, 29.
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Blood of the Son of God? etc. Sirs, to
love Sin, to love this World, or any Person or Thing above Jesus Christ, is in
effect to tread the Son of God under your Feet, it is such an undervaluing and
vilifying of him. God does, as it were, propound the Case to us, he would have
Sinners themselves to be Judges how just their Condemnation will be if they
neglect this Salvation; and also the Nature and Quality, or Degree of it; Of
how much sorer Punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy? etc. God at
the last Day will so justly and righteously proceed against wicked Men, that
their Reward shall be judged reasonable in their own Judgment, and by their own
Consciences.

7. They shall not escape, because Mercy and Grace is sinned against,
principally, by all that neglect this Salvation: Mercy will, as you have heard,
plead against them. And if Mercy be their Enemy, if Goodness it self rise up
against them, where will they find a Friend to appear for them?

8. They shall not escape, because God has absolutely and unavoidably decreed
the Destruction and eternal Damnation of all those that believe not, but
neglect this Salvation: His Decree, his Counsel and Purpose shall stand; He
that believes not, shall be Mark 16. 16.
damned.

9. It is because the Sinner is not able to deliver himself out of God's Hand:
If he escape, it must be from one of these two Considerations. 1. That either
God must change his Purpose, his absolute Decree and Counsel. 2. Or else the
Sinner must get out of God's Hand, and so deliver himself.


Now it is impossible God's Mind should change, or his absolute Decree be made
void; his Decree shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure: God will be
true, and not make himself a Liar to save the guilty Sinner. And that it is
impossible for the Sinner to get out of God's Hands, is evident, because God is
Omnipotency it self: whither can he fly from his Presence? Who can stand before
(or escape) his Indignation? Therefore there is no way for such Nah. 1. 6.
to escape God's Wrath, who neglect this Salvation.

APPLICATION.

1. O bless God for this Salvation, and value it according to the Nature,
Worth, and Greatness of it.

2. Bewail all ungodly Persons, who are found slighters and neglecters of it,
and mourn over them. O how sad is their Condition! May be you have some in your
Families that are Neglecters of it, may be a Wife, a Husband, or Children, that
do not regard it, but are ungodly, and neglect the Means of Grace; how should
what you have heard move you to pity them, to weep over them, to pray for them,
and strive with them.

3. Examine your selves, whether you have not, or do not neglect this
Salvation? Do you make it your chief Business to get an Interest in Christ? Do
you prefer the Means of Salvation above all things in the World? What time do
you take to seek God, to pray to him, to hear his Word? And with what Zeal,
Love, Faith and Diligence do you do all these things? Do you not defer
Soul-Concernments to another time? O see to it, and examine your selves; Do you
not rest upon something or another short of Christ? Does the Power of Grace
appear in your Hearts and Lives?

4. This may teach Believers to bear up under all Trials and Fears: Let what
will come, they are safe who have an Interest in this great Salvation; other
Salvations are nothing to this, and if we should not be saved from the Wrath of
Man, but must lose our Liberty, and be exposed to Death and Dangers here in
this World, yet it will go well with us if this Salvation is ours. Let what
Judgments can come upon the Land, thou have got a sure Sanctuary, God is thy
Help and thy Salvation. Brethren, there are many sad Effects that do attend
those that neglect, continually neglect this Salvation, whilst they are in this
World, as Manifestations of God's Displeasure, As,

1. God withdraws the Influences of his Spirit from them, after they have for a
long time resisted it, in the common Motions thereof, even to such a Degree,
that it shall strive with them no more: thus God dealt with the old World.

2. God gives such up at last to blindness of Mind, so that they in seeing, see
not; and in hearing, hear not, neither do they understand. Mat. 13. 13, 14.
And in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Esaias, By hearing ye shall hear, and
shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive. The Word of
God, if neglected, and not received, that it may become a Savor of Life unto
Life, will become a Savor of Death unto Death, it either softens or hardens
Men's Hearts.

3. God gives them up to their own Hearts Lusts, as God by the Psalmist says,
My People would not hearken to my Voice: and Israel would none of me. So I gave
them up unto their own Hearts Lusts; Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
and they walked in their own Counsels.

4. Nay sometimes God takes away the Gospel from them, as he did from the Jews
that rejected Christ, refused the chief Cornerstone: Therefore I say unto you,
The Kingdom of God shall be taken Mat. 21. 43.
from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the Fruits thereof. What can be
a worse Judgment? this befell that People, and it has not been restored to them
ever since. When God removes the Gospel, it may be long before he lets a People
have it again, nay perhaps never.

5. Moreover, for neglecting the great Salvation, God sometimes brings upon a
People or Nation fearful temporal Judgments, and puts them, it may be, into the
Hands of cruel Enemies: For thus he dealt with the unbelieving Jews, he brought
the Romans in upon them, that burned their City and Temple; so that it is said,
Wrath came upon them to the uttermost. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.


6. God sometimes will not save Persons with Temporal Salvation, because they
neglect Spiritual Salvation, so that they may read their Sin (if the Lord opens
their Eyes) in their Punishment. But it is not God's usual way under this
Dispensation, to inflict Temporal Punishment on such that neglect the Salvation
of the Gospel, but he reserves his Wrath to another World; and therefore let
none think, though they escape his Judgments here, that they shall escape his
Judgments and Wrath hereafter; that they shall not be able to do, as you heard.
But no more at this Time.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon XIII.
I AM upon the third and last Point of Doctrine, which I observed from our Text,
viz. That there is no possibility for such, or any one Soul of them, to escape,
that neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel.

The last Day I showed you, First, What those things are which they shall not
escape. Secondly, Why they cannot, shall not escape, who are guilty of this
Neglect.


Thirdly, I am now to show you, When or at what Times they that neglect
Gospel-Salvation shall not escape.
1. In the Day of common Calamities, and desolating Judgments The Time when
Sinners shall not escape.
that will come upon the Earth; there is, Beloved, a dismal Hour spoken of in
God's Word, that is not yet come, yet no doubt it is very near, in which but a
few shall escape: I am afraid many good Men, who have been remiss and negligent
in and about the great Concerns of Christ, and of their own Souls, shall not
escape; I mean, they may fall in that Hour by Temporal Judgments. God in the
last Days will pour out the Fierceness of his Wrath; For my Determination is to
gather the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to pour upon them mine
Indignation, even all my fierce Anger; for all the Earth shall be devoured with
the Fire of my Zeph. 3. 8.
Jealousy: compared with Nahum 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It will be with the Ungodly
then, as it befell the People of Old, according to the Prophecy of the Prophet
Jeremiah Therefore thus says the Lord, Jer. 11. 11.
Behold, I will bring Evil upon them which they shall not be able to escape;
and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them. Our Savior
alludes to that Time of which I speak, Watch ye therefore and pray always, that
ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these Luke 21. 36.
things that shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of Man. O who shall
stand when God appears in the latter-Day-Judgments which are now just at the
Door? There are a few which he has set his Mark upon, that shall be hid; and
they are such that sigh and mourn for all the Abominations that are committed
in the Land. Ezck. 9. 4.
They of them that escape, shall escape, and they shall be on the Mountains
like Doves of the Valley, every one mourning for his own Iniquities. O what an
amazing Hour will that be, when the seven Vials of God's Wrath shall be poured
out upon the Kingdom of the Beast! the Earthquake is near, look for it, and the
Midnight Cry not far off. Be sure there is such a distressing Hour approaching
upon the World, that those that have, and shall still neglect this Salvation,
when it comes shall not escape.

2. They that neglect this Salvation, shall not escape in the Day of
Conscience; I mean, escape the Torments of an enraged, accusing and condemned
Conscience: and sometimes the Conscience is awakened, and is let out upon the
Sinner here in this World, before the Soul is separated from the Body. How many
through the Guilt of their horrid Sins have been this way tormented: Some Men's
Sins are open beforehand, going before to Judgment; and some 1 Timothy 5. 24.
Men follow after. Some Men's Sins are discovered by themselves, through that
great Guilt that lies upon them; or others discover them, or God himself brings
their Sins to light; and by this means they sometimes pass Judgment upon
themselves, and may be a severe Judgment; or Men pass Judgment upon them; or
perhaps more directly to the Purport of the Holy Ghost in the Text, the Church
passes Judgment, or a righteous and just Church-Censure upon them for their
great Sins. But what a severe Judgment in the day of Conscience did poor Spira
and Child pass upon themselves for their Iniquities? However those cannot
escape who trifle in the matters of Religion, or neglect the great Salvation in
such a time; when God lets Conscience out upon them, their Sorrow and Misery is
very great: and if it be so bitter a thing to fall into our own Hands, I mean
to fall into the Hands of our own Conscience, what a fearful thing is it to
fall into the Hands of the living God? God gives to some Men the Name he gave
to Pashur, even Magor-Missabib, that is, Fear and Terror on all sides; he makes
them a Terror to Jer. 20. 3, 4.
themselves, and to all their Friends, so that they are all afrightned,
reflecting on their sad and miserable Condition, partly by Terror within, and
partly by Judgments without.

3. Those that neglect this Salvation shall not escape at the Hour of Death;
may be some of them may go on quietly in their Sins, and not fall under the
Accusations and Terror of their guilty Consciences: Conscience may be asleep,
or seared with a hot Iron; but at Death, I mean as soon as the Soul departs,
they will be with a witness awakened, and then they shall see they cannot
escape; nay, all hope and possibility of escaping is then gone for ever. True,
many as soon as struck with Death roar out and find no escaping; others may be
God then in his Infinite Mercy may show the way of an escape; but when dead, if
ungodly, if they have neglected this Salvation, they lift up their Eyes in Hell
with the rich Glutton, being in Torment. Remember if Death comes upon you Luke
10. 23.
before you have got an Interest in Christ, or a part in this Salvation, you
cannot then and at that time escape.

4. They shall not escape in the Day of Judgment, in the Day when Christ shall
come. For when they shall cry, Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction comes
upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
Child, and they shall not escape: Tho Sinners escape here in this World, yet
they shall not escape in that day, they shall not be able to deliver themselves
out of God's Hands; nor shall any be able to deliver them. The Wicked shall be
brought forth to the Day of Wrath; Job 21. 30.
they shall not come willingly to Christ's Bar, but they shall be brought
forth, dragged as it were to hear their Sentence, which will be, Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Mat. 25.
Devil and his Angels. If the Righteous scarcely are saved, where shall 1 Pet.
4. 18.
the Ungodly and Sinner appear! they will not be able to stand in the Judgment:
O what Dread and Horror will then seize upon them! they that give the greatest
Diligence, take the greatest Care about the Salvation of their So (...) are
saved with much difficulty: it is a narrow Way and a strait Ga^e that leads to
Life: Through much Tribulation and Temptations we enter into the Kingdom of
God; and if this ^e so, what will become of them in the great Day that have
wholly neglected this great Salvation? If the Righteous be scarcel^ saved, the
Wicked shall certainly perish and be damned.

Quest. What is the Nature of that Wrath which none of them that neglect this
Salvation shall escape?

Answ. I answer, it is great Wrath, Wrath proportioned according What the
Nature of that Wrath is the Wicked shall not escape.
to the Greatness of their Sin: as the Salvation ^^ighted is great Salvation,
so the Wrath that such shall bear will be great Wrath.

1. It is incensed Wrath, therefore great Wrath, such Wrath that has been long
a kindling in the Heart of God for the Abuse of his Mercy and Infinite Goodness:

2. It is intolerable Wrath, therefore great Wrath; the Torment of the Heathen
that never heard of this Salvation shall be more tolerable, more easy to bear,
than the Wrath which is poured out in Hell upon such that neglect the Salvation
wrought by Jesus Christ: Nay, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah
in the day of Judgment than for them.

3. It is infinite Wrath. Who knows the Power of thine Anger? even Psa. 80. 11.
according to thy Fear so is thy Wrath: it bears full Proportion to the Fear of
it; nay, who is able to arrive to the full Sense, Fear and Apprehension of
God's Infinite Wrath? it is inconceivable Wrath: as God's Love and Goodness is
inconceivable, infinite, incomprehensible, which all that love him shall
partake of to Eternity; so on the other hand, his Wrath and vindictive
Vengeance is unexpressible, nay inconceivable, which will be let out upon the
Ungodly. Who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence 2 Thessalonians. 1. ^.
of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. Mark it, from the Glory of his
Power, from the Greatness of God's Power, exalted Power; O it appears to be
amazing Wrath, were this considered well and laid to Heart!

4. It will be unmixt Wrath, or Wrath without Mixture: the Wrath of God that is
let out here in this World is full of Mixture; nay, that which has been let
out upon the Spirits and Consciences of Men has had some mixture in it, some
Ease mixed with Anguish, some mitigation of Pain and Horror, some Mercy mixed
with Misery; but in Hell the Wrath of God is unmixed Wrath, it is all pure
Wrath, nothing but Wrath. The same shall drink of the Wine of God's Wrath,
which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his Rev. 14. 10.
Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, etc.

5. It is fierce Wrath; it is called the fierce Wrath of the Lord, a Metaphor
taken from a fierce and amazing devouring Fire. Sinners are commanded to seek
the Lord before the Decree bring forth, Zeph. 2. 1, 2.
before the Day pass as the Chaff, before the fierce Anger of the Lord come
upon them. I he Heat of Anger, enraged Anger and Fury: Behold, the Day of the
Lord comes, cruel both with Wrath and fierce Anger. Isa. 13. 9.


6. It is irresistible Wrath, no withstanding it, no making Head against it;
Wrath breaks forth against the Sinner like a Giant or mighty Army, that none
can resist nor stand before: Who can stand Nah. 1. 6.
before his Indignation? and who can abide the fierceness of his Anger? his
Fury is poured out like Fire, etc.

7. It is just and deserved Wrath, Wrath that is due to such who slight and
neglect so great Salvation; it is the Wages of Sin, of such Sin, it is their
just Due and Desert, as Wages are due to a Servant. Every one says, Withold
not from the Hireling his Wages. A Servant when he has done his Work must be
paid his Wages, it is right and just that he should have it; so it is Right and
Justice in God thus to reward all those who abuse his Mercy, and neglect his
Salvation, so great Salvation. God will proportionate every Man's Reward
according to the nature and degree of his Sin.

8. It is heavy Wrath, David complained of the Heaviness of his Sin: Alas! it
was no doubt, as Mr. Caryl notes, from the Apprehension of the Anger and Wrath
of God: Mine Iniquities are gone over my Head as a heavy Burden, they are too
heavy for me. I have Psalm. 38. 4.
offended thee, I fear thy Displeasure, my Sin deserves thy Wrath; but tho
there are Mountains of Iniquity upon unconverted Sinners, they feel no Weight,
they make light of it, they sport at it: but when Wrath comes once to be laid
upon them, they will feel how heavy that is; who can bear this Burden, or stand
under this Weight? When Wrath was laid upon our Blessed Savior, how heavy did
he find it? it made him sweat great drops of Blood, it almost crushed him down
unto the Earth: one Sin is heavy, and if God lay the Weight, I mean the Guilt
of it, upon the Soul, it will crush it down to Hell. O then what a Weight will
that be which will lie upon Sinners, when the Burden or Weight of all their
Sins are laid upon them! and none to take that Weight off of them for ever, how
low will it sink them!

9. It is eternal Wrath, everlasting Wrath, Wrath that will never cease; They
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction. He shall 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Rev.
14. 10, 11.
be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of his holy Angels; and
in the presence of the Lamb; and the Sincke of their Torment ascends up for
ever and ever. O what a wosul Condition will all those be in, that God lets out
such Wrath upon! How lamentable is and will be their State, who neglect this so
great Salvation! Can you think of these things you that slight the Offers of
God's Grace in Jesus Christ, and not tremble!

APPLICATION.

1. O what a Mercy have they obtained that are delivered from such Wrath, such
heavy Wrath! As no Man is able to bear the Wrath of God, so no Man is able to
get away from it when it has took hold of him; he cannot escape from that
which he cannot endure. Alas! the Devils themselves shall be tormented with all
Unbelievers, and they cannot escape with all their Powers of Darkness; and
indeed this will add to the Torment of the Wicked, I mean to be yoked in
Hell Torments with such Companions, to be forced to abide for ever with Devils,
who perhaps will add then to their Misery, and aggravate their (...), by
upbraiding them with their Folly in believing him who was (...) Father of Lies,
and to contemn so great Salvation for the sake o^ very Vanity, for the love to
Sin, or love to the transitory Pleasures and Riches of this evil World.

2. We may also from hence see cause to admire the Love of Jesus Christ, who
bore the Wrath of God for us: Certainly had not he had the Power of the Deity
to uphold him, he could not have born that Wrath that was so heavy upon him. O
love and honor this blessed Savior, who has saved you that believe from such
Wrath! His Blood has quenched this flaming Fire, so that you shall never feel
what the Wrath of God is. Brethren, remember we could not be delivered from the
Wrath of God, unless Jesus Christ did bear it in our stead, even Jesus who
delivered us from Wrath to come: 1 Thessalonians. 1.
our Jonas was thrown into the Sea of Wrath to save us from sinking down to the
bottom of eternal Wrath.

3. And may not this stir you up that are ungodly Persons to flee from Wrath to
come? Why do you stand making a Pause as it were? O haste to Jesus Christ, come
to him, for that is the way, and the only way, as you have heard, to be
delivered from Wrath. You know not how near you are to fall under the Wrath of
God, and then it will be too late: God gives you space to repent, and to take
hold of his Salvation; you will, Sinners, have no Excuse, no Plea in the great
Day if you neglect the Day of your Visi^ation, and slight the Offers of God's
Infinite Grace and Favor! Can you bear the Wrath of God? Are you willing to
try how heavy it is? We read of an eternal Weight of Glory, that will be a good
Weight, not 2 Cor. 4. ult.
a burdensome Weight, not an oppressing Weight, it is called a Weight of Glory
because of the Greatness of it, the Excellency of it: But know, as there is a
blessed Weight, or a Weight of Blessedness, so there is a Weight of Misery, or
a miserable Weight; yea, it is such a Weight as will crush the strongest Giant
like a M^th, and break the Bones of the Mighty.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon XIV.
Fourthly, THE last thing I proposed to do, was, To show you why the Gospel is
attended with dreadful Threatenings as well as gracious Promises: And this I
shall, God assisting, speak unto at this time.

1. It may be in regard of him whose Word it is; Where the Word of a King is
(says Solomon) there is Power. Eccl. 8. 4.
Shall not the Majesty of God the great Lawgiver be feared? If I am a Master,
where is my Fear? Mal. 1. 6.
Brethren, awful Threatenings become the Quality and Dignity of Christ's Person.
True, in the Days of his Humiliation, as touching those Personal Injuries and
Wrongs done unto him, he suffered, and threatened not; 1 Pet. 2. 23.
yet nevertheless for the Contempt of his Grace, Salvation, and infinite
Goodness in the Gospel, it is otherwise, he does now pronounce dreadful
Threats: Bring out those mine Enemies that would not have me to reign over
them, and slay them before me. Luke 19. 27.


2. Too great Lenity and Mercy we see among Men, causes Contempt of the Person
of a Prince, it makes impudent Rebels ready to insult over him. And now,
Brethren, because it seems not to please the Wisdom of God, or not to be good
in his sight, who is the great Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, commonly to
inflict Temporal Punishment on Gospel-Slighters and Gospel-Neglecters, but to
reserve their Punishment to another World; shall not he therefore tell them
what they must expect to meet with and undergo hereafter, if they rebel against
him, contemn his Goodness, Clemency and Mercy? Is it meet that the Holy God
should strike before he threatens, or not shoot off his Warning-Piece before he
lets fly his Murdering-Piece? Can that stand consistent with his Infinite
Goodness and Wisdom? Shall he come secretly on his Enemies before he tells them
of their danger? Shall he condemn that in his Creatures which he allows in
himself? Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; and because I will do
thus unto thee, prepare to meet Amos 4. 12.
thy God, O Israel. It is God's good Pleasure, as well as it is the Property of
his merciful Nature, to discover the future Misery of Rebellious Sinners to
them before he brings that Misery and Ruin upon them.

3. Shall the Laws of the Servant be clothed with fearful Combinations and
Threatenings against the Transgressors thereof; and shall the Law of the great
Sovereign (or Gospel of) Jesus Christ himself, have none at all? that might
seem strange indeed, especially considering those that disobey or believe not
the Gospel, shall meet with far greater Punishment. If the Word spoken by
Angels were steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just
Recompense of Reward; How shall we escape? etc. This being so, there is reason
that the Gospel should be accompanied with awful Threats.

4. Because of the greatness of the Sins of such who do refuse, reject, or
neglect the Grace and Mercy of God offered by Jesus Christ: Certainly the Abuse
of the greatest Goodness calls for the severest Denunciation of Divine Wrath
and Vengeance, Man himself being Judge: Of how much sorer Punishment suppose you
shall he be thought worthy? Do you judge, to whom I appeal, what sore, what
bitter, what grievous and unexpressable Wrath and Judgments they deserve, who
conten^n Jesus Christ, or prove Apostates, Revolters, and Backsliders from the
Gospel, and slight his precious Blood, ^^ead under (...) the Son of God? Sure
such deserve worse Punishment than those who (...) against Moses's Law. Now the
greatness of their Sin, who s^i^ht and neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, I
have already opened. O call to mind what you have heard; and you that are
secure Sinners, tremble! What Wisdom do such despise, what Goodness do they
disregard, what infinite Love and Patience do they abuse that neglect this
Salvation? Shall the Sinner cast Di^t in the Face of God, and not be told of
it? Shall he slight an Interest in Christ, and not know it will be his ruin in
another World?

5. Threatenings are contained in the Gospel, to show that God is Just as well
as Gracious. Nay, Brethren, the Justice of God never appeared to that degree to
the Sons of Men, by Moses's Law, or any other way, as it does in the Gospel, in
that Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God is not spared, when he stands as
our Surety in our Law-place to bear our Iniquities: God spared not his own Son,
etc. He did not spare him, as an Act of Love and Mercy, but substituted and
appointed him to be a Sacrifice for us; and he did not spare him, as an Act of
his Justice, when he was so substituted, but he put him to Grief, and made his
Soul an Offering for Sin, the Just for the Unjust: He was made Sin for us, i.
e. a Sacrifice for our Sin: It pleased the Lord to bruise him. This shows that
God is Isa. 53.
just with a witness: there was no other way found out to put away Sin, to
pacify Divine Wrath; and shall the Sinner slight and trample upon the Mercy and
Justice of God, and not be told he shall not escape Divine Vengeance? O,
Sinner, think of it, if God spared not his own Son, who had Sin upon him only
by Imputation, our Sins laid upon him, and none of his own; Can thou think to
escape his dreadful Wrath, who for not accepting of this Atonement, this
Salvation, have all they Sins charged upon thy own Head, and must bear that
vindictive Wrath that was due to thee for them? You that think God is only a
God of Mercy, and Christ only a Lamb, will find your selves at last greatly
deceived, for you will find that God is a just, a severe and Sin-revengeful
Majesty; and especially he will appear so, when he pleads with Sinners for the
abuse of his Mercy; and they will find Jesus Christ like a Lion, who will at
length tear in pieces his Enemies: I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of
the People there was none with me; Isa. 63.
for I will tread them in mine Anger and trample them in my Fury, and their
Blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments and I will stain all my Raiment. O
remember, that the great Day of the Lamb's Wrath will come; he is a King, and
has a Sword as well as a Scepter, a Rod as well as a Crown; he is Just as well
as Good, and therefore it is that the Gospel is clothed with such Threatenings
of Wrath and Divine Vengeance. All the Perfections of the Deity appear, and
shall appear in our Lord Jesus Christ, he being the express Image of the
Father's Person.

2 dly. The Gospel has its Threats as well as its Promises, I might show you,
in regard of Sinners.

1. To awe their rebellious Hearts, that their abominable Sins, Pride and
Arrogance might be curbed, and they not so boldly and impudently go on in their
Disobedience and Contempt of Jesus Christ. Christ to this End, as Dr. Owen
observes, has his Arrows which he lets fly upon his Enemies; some may ^^ick in
their Hearts, and they fall down dead before him, he this way may kill them to
give them Life.

2. That all ungodly Sinners may be left without Excuse, and Jesus Christ be
justified in his righteous Proceedings against them at the last Day. He tells
them beforehand what they must expect and look for; If they repent not, they
shall all likewise perish; Luke 13. 3, 5. Mark 16. 16. John 3. 3, 5. 1 Cor. 6.
10, 11. Rev. 21. 8.
if they believe not, they shall be damned; if they are not born again, they
shall not see the Kingdom of God; if they continue in any course of Sin, as
Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, Theft, Pride, Covetousness, Lying, etc.
they shall have their Portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone:
And if they neglect this so great Salvation, they shall not escape Divine Wrath.

3 dly and lastly, The Threatenings that are in the Gospel, may be of great use
to Believers, even as a Whip or Lash to quicken them when grown slothful and
negligent in their Duties, or fall into a sleepy and secure State; and to show
them that the Gospel tolerates no looseness, allows of no Sin, but that the
whole Design of it is, to promote Holiness, God will be sanctified by all
Levit. 10. 2, 3.
that draw near to him. They may serve also to prevent the Power and Prevalency
of indwelling Sin, or tend to nip off the Buds as they put forth, or kill those
Weeds that might otherwise grow the more in their Hearts; and also to stir them
up to stand upon their Watch, and make a stout Resistance of all Enemies; for
that God tells us, we must either kill or be killed: If ye live after the
Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit mortify the Deeds of Romans 8.
13.
the Body, ye shall live. Christ's Soldiers are sure of the Victory, but not
without sighting; if they turn their Backs, they are gone; though to their
great Joy and Comfort, if they are true Believers, they know they are not of
that sort that draw back unto Perdition. Also by these Threats, the Saints may
be the better enabled to suffer Persecution, and endure any Trials here for
Christ's sake; they hereby knowing how much easier it is to bear and undergo
the Wrath of Man, than it is to endure the Wrath of God.

What kind of Sinners Wrath shall fall upon.
Quest. On whom is the Wrath of God denounced, or what kind of Sinners shall
undergo it?

Answ. 1. I answer, All profane and ungodly Sinners, of what sort soever, as
Aduiterers, Fornicators, covetous Persons, malicious Romans 2. 29, 30. 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Rev. 21. 8. Romans 1. 18.
Persons, Whisperers, Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful and proud Persons,
Covenant-breakers, Implacable, Unmerciful, Thieves, Drunkards, Revilers,
Extortioners, Murderers, Witches, Sorcerers, and all Liars. These and all other
profane Persons whatsoever, who live and die in any of these, or other Sins,
having neglected this Salvation, shall not escape the Wrath of God; For the
Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven againstall Ungodliness, and
Unrighteousness of Men. The Wages of every Sin, yea the very Lusts of the
Heart, is Eternal Death; Sin is their Sickness, and the neglecting the
Salvation of the Gospel, is their refusing that Remedy and only Cure of their
Sickness which God does afford.

2. All civilized Persons, such who depend upon Principles of Morality, or
living a sober Life, and never look after Faith in Jesus Christ and
Regeneration: I say unto you, Except your Righteousness Mat. 5. 20
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Yet Paul when a Pharisee, says, That as
touching the Righteousness which is of the Law, Phil 3. 8, 9 Joh. 3. 3.
I was blameless. Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
These as much neglect this great Salvation, as scandalous and profane Sinners,
and therefore shall not escape God's Wrath.

3. All Idolaters, Persecutors, and heretical Persons, such who are corrupted
with damnable Heresy, who deny the Person of Christ, or our Lord Jesus the only
Savior, or Salvation and Righteousness by him; these also are neglecters of
this Salvation, and living and dying in those Sins, cannot escape the Wrath of
God.

4. All Unbelievers, or such who are without saving Faith in Jesus Christ: He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he Mark 16. 16.
that believes not, shall be damned. -- He that believes not, shall not see
Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him. No Unbeliever can Joh. 3. 3.
escape the Wrath of God.

5. All Hypocrites, or such who make a Profession of the Gospel, without the
saving Grace of God in their Hearts. Of these there are two sorts.

(1.) Such who are self-condemned Hypocrites, who know they are not what they
profess themselves to be, but have carnal and sinister Ends and Aims in their
professing the Gospel, Religion being but a Cloak to cover their Deceit and
Hypocrisy.

(2.) Such as the foolish Virgins were, whose Hearts deceive them, thinking
their State was good; 1. But never passed through the Pangs of the new Birth,
but trusted to a Form of Godliness without the Power of it. This sort it seems,
2. are very blind and ignorant, in that they thought to receive Advantage by
the Graces or good Works of wise and gracious Christians; Give us of your Oil,
for our Lamps are gone out: 3. They never sought for Grace Mat. 25. 8.
any way, until it was too late, even not till the Bridegroom was come. 4. It
appears that this sort also were very consident of the Goodness of their
Condition; (that is a bad sign) for they rose up to meet the Bridegroom.
Gracious Christians are attended with Godly Jealousies of their own Hearts: yet
these Men's outward Conversation might be clean to outward appearance, in that
they were not known to the Wise to be foolish Ones. 5. Their Folly appears in
that they please themselves with a Name of being Christians, Saints, and
Church Members, without the Nature, Faith and Holiness of such, prizing a Lamp
of Profession above the Grace of God, or a Form of Religion more than the Power
of it; valuing the Approbation of Men more than the Approbation and Acceptance
of God; esteeming the empty Cabinet, or pleasing themselves with the Shell of
Religion without the Kernel of it; and in their thinking it was time enough to
sow, when others were just going to reap, and by laying Claim to Heaven,
without any Title to it. None of these, living and dying under this Deceit,
Ignorance and Hypocrisy, can escape the Wrath of God.

6. All such cannot escape, who utterly apostatize or backslide from God and
the Truths of the Gospel; who after they have made a Profession of Religion,
turn with the Sow to her wallowing in the Mire, and with the Dog lick up their
old Vomit again; I mean, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.
cleave again to their former evil and ungodly Ways and Practices, and become
utter Enemies to God and his People.

7. Lastly, All Atheists, or such who deny the Being of God, or the Eternal
Godhead and Deity of the Majesty of Heaven, and ridicule and contemn all
supernatural Knowledge or Revelation of God; these shall receive and undergo the
Wrath of God, from which they cannot escape.

APPLICATION.

This may serve to awaken all secure Sinners who have false Notions of God's
Mercy. What will you do if you persist still in your evil Ways? I am afraid
here may be some of one sort or another of them which I have named, that shall
not escape the Wrath of God. O that we could but hear that Cry which we read
of, Acts 2. 36. What shall we do? Were Sinners pricked in their Hearts, they
would break forth into Tears in the sight and sense of the Evil of Sin. Has
Sin put the Lord of Life and Glory to death? Was the Wrath of God due to us let
out upon him, that we might never feel the weight thereof? O how should this
fill our Hearts with Revenge and Indignation against Sin! Certainly the
Sufferings of Christ for our Sins, show forth the Evil of it, beyond all the
Torments the Damned endure in Hell: and if God did not spare him, who as our
Surety stood in our Place and Room, what will become of thee, O Sinner, that
go on presumptuously in thy evil Way, and do not regard or lay to Heart
the great Salvation of the Gospel? Shall not the Love of God overcome thee?
then fear his Wrath, which is so dreadful, and will be let out in Fury.

Quest. What is the Reason Men do no more fear and dread the Wrath of God?

Answ. 1. It is because they do not know the direful Nature thereof: We knowing
the Terror of the Lord, says the Apostle, persuade 2 Cor. 5. 11.
Men. The faithful Servants of God know it, but Sinners know it not, therefore
fear it no more.

2. It is because God does not execute the Sentence against their evil Works
presently: This is the Reason, Solomon tells us why; Eccles. 8. 11.
The Hearts of the Children of Men are fully set in them to do wickedly.

3. Sinners are blinded by the Devil, and think God takes no notice of their
Ways and evil Doings, and so go on boldly; may be think no Eye sees them: And
because God is so gracious, patient, and slow to Anger, and long before he
strikes, they think the Blow will never come at all. O it is sad that the
Goodness, Romans 2. 3, 4.
Mercy, and Long-suffering of God, which should lead Men to Repentance, should
tend to harden them in their evil Ways: but though they now despise his
Goodness and Forbearance, etc. yet they shall not escape the Judgment of God.

Quest. What should Sinners do to escape the Wrath of God?

Answ. 1. Sinner, if thou would escape God's Wrath, find out the Original
Cause thereof; ponder well thy State by Nature, and the Pollution of thy Heart,
from whence all actual Sins flow.

2. Find out the immediate Cause of his Displeasure and Wrath that is ready to
break forth against thee, and cry out, What have I done? O see, what Guilt lies
upon you, and the Nature of it.

3. Labor to know what it is that has appeased God's Wrath: nothing but a
Sacrifice, an Atonement could do it; thy Tears, thy Prayers, thy Repentance
could not do it: the Storm was great, and our beloved Jonas was thrown into the
Sea of God's Wrath to allay it, and to cause a Calm.

4. Get a through Sense of the great Evil of Sin.

5. And then loath your selves. Nothing but Grace poured forth from the Lord
can do this. O when once you can mourn for your Iniquities, as a Man mourns for
his Firstborn, by beholding him whom you have pierced, there will be hope.

6. Pray and cry mightily to the Lord, cease not Day nor Night, until you find
out the Plague of your own Hearts.

7. Above all things fly to Jesus Christ, look up to him, and neglect not this
Salvation one Hour, but throw down your Arms, sight against God no more, nor
fence against the twoedged Sword of his Mouth; but as a poor, lost, and
burdened Sinner, come to him, and thou shall find rest unto thy Soul. Mat. 11.
28.


Object. But perhaps some may object, Is not this Doctrine a Legal Doctrine?

Answ. I say no, but I shall answer this Objection the next time, and so close
with this Text.

HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?
Sermon XV.
I Showed you the last Time, wherefore the Gospel is clothed with such fearful
Threatenings against Sinners that neglect the great Salvation that is offered
unto them therein. Also what sort of Sinners are like for ever to fall under
the Wrath of God. Moreover, you may remember I mentioned an Objection which
possibly some may raise, viz.

Object. Is not this Doctrine a Legal Doctrine, or a legal way of preaching, to
insist so much upon the Threatenings of Wrath and Divine Vengeance?

I answered, No, it is not. I therefore now shall endeavor, God assisting, to
do two things. First, Show you what is not a Legal Doctrine, or a Legal Way of
Preaching. Secondly, Show you what is a Legal Doctrine, or not Evangelical
Preaching.


1. To preach God a Just and Holy God, is no Legal Doctrine, though the Law, it
is true, holds him forth so to be, that discovers that God is Just; but his
Mercy was veiled under dark Shadows, Types and Legal Sacrifices. But now the
Gospel sets forth the infinite Justice of God beyond the Law; for in a
Ceremonial Way, the Blood of Beasts seemed to pacify God's Wrath. Though we
deny not but the Blood of Jesus Christ, the great Sacrifice (which alone in a
proper sense can satisfy for Sin) was held forth thereby. But in the Gospel,
the Justice and Holiness of God so clearly shines forth in Jesus Christ, that
it is with open Face manifested unto all; all may behold therein the Just
actually slain, and made a Sacrifice for the Unjust. Never did God's Justice
appear so fully, as it does in the Suffering and Death of Christ for Sin.
Therefore to preach the Severity and Justice of God against Sin and Sinners,
can be no Legal Doctrine.

2. To preach Repentance, the Necessity of Repentance, Regeneration and
Holiness, is no Legal Doctrine; but it is pure Gospel. The Law allowed of no
Repentance: For those that sinned against Moses 's Law, died without Mercy,
under two or three Witnesses. Do Heb. 19. 28.
not mistake me, I do not say that there was no Repentance for such who lived
under the Dispensation of the Law; for tho the Law, or first Covenant, allowed
of no Repentance, yet the Gospel was preached to Adam, to Abraham, to Moses,
David, etc. But pray remember, and consider it well, that Repentance came in,
not through the Law, but through the Gospel, upon the account of Christ's
Satisfaction; and therefore it is only a Gospel-Blessing: which being duly
considered, Men have little reason to think Repentance a harsh Doctrine; no,
no, it is sweet and blessed Tidings to hear that there is Repentance vouchsafed
to poor Sinners, yea, for the worst of Sinners. Besides, was not Repentance the
very first Doctrine Jesus Christ preached when he entered upon his Ministry? He
calls upon Men to repent, and believe the Gospel; he declares there is a Way
found out for Pardon and Remission of Sin. And what can so kindly and sweetly
excite, or stir up Sinners to Repentance, as the sight of the infinite Mercy
and pardoning Grace of God through the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ? His Mercy
only melts and breaks the hard Heart of guilty Criminals.

3. To preach the Combinations and Threatenings of God's Wrath and Vengeance
against all ungodly and impenitent Sinners, who slight and neglect the
Salvation of the Gospel, can be no Legal Doctrine.

(1.) Because the Gospel abounds with them, yea, and more fearful Threatenings
than those were under the Law; for the one were Threats of Temporal Punishment,
but the other are Eternal, even the Denunciation of God's Wrath in Hell for
ever.

(2.) Because of the greatness of that Mercy and Divine Grace and Goodness,
which such who sin under the Gospel do abuse and tread under their Feet.

(3.) To show the Justice, Headship and Authority of Jesus Christ, who is God
as well as Man, that so all Men may stand in awe of him, and dread and fear
him, because of his great Love and Goodness extended through his suffering for
Sin, and enduring the heavy Wrath of God for us; and for many other Reasons
which you have heard.

(4.) Because the Threatenings of the Gospel do not only render God as a just
Revenger, but also as a merciful Redeemer; not only as a Judge to pass Sentence,
but as a gracious Sovereign, ready to give forth Pardon to all convicted,
broken and self-condemned Rebels. The Law threatens Death, but affords no
Offers of Life on any Terms that can be attained to, therefore no Encouragement
given by it to Sinners to humble themselves: it commands perfect Obedience, but
affords no Strength to perform it; pronounces the Sentence against us, but
produces no Pardon for us; it commands us to trust in God, but reveals not a
Mediator, who is the immediate Object of Faith and Trust.

(5.) The Threatenings of the Gospel are a Manifestation of God's Goodness: As a
Father threatens his Child from that Love and Bowels he has to it, that so it
might not feel the Lashes of his Rod and Anger. And O how are
Gospel-Threatnings mixed with alluring Motives and endearing Arguments and
Persuasions, intimating how ready God is to pass by our Offenses, if we submit
our selves to him, and accept of the Offers of his Grace and Favor. If such
preaching of Wrath therefore be Legal, I must acknowledge my great Ignorance of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Besides, how long are the Threatenings of the Gospel
deferred before executed? The Contemners of the Law died presently, as well as
it discovered no Remedy: But so it is not here, God seems to be ready to
forgive, and slow to Wrath; he waits long before he strikes, and brings Wrath
and Judgment upon Offenders, as well as he directs them to a way to escape.

Secondly, I shall show you what is a Legal Doctrine, or Legal Preaching.

1. The Doctrine or Preaching of such Persons is legal that say, that all who
will be eternally saved, must arrive to a perfect and sinless Righteousness in
themselves, i. e. keep the Law perfectly and sin not in their own Persons, or
they cannot be justified. William Penn, speaking of that Text, Romans 2. 13. Not
the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the Doers of the Law shall be
justified, says, Pen' s Sandy Foundation shaken, p. 26.
"From whence, how unanswerably may I observe, that unless we become Doers of
that Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but, as our Example, to fulfill, we
can never be justified before God; nor let any fancy, that Christ has so
fulfilled it for them as to exclude their Obedience from being requisite to
their Acceptance, but only as their Pattern." Now this is a Legal Doctrine with
a witness, these Men would be looked upon as true Preachers of the Gospel, but
let all Men be aware of them. Is any Man able perfectly to keep the Law? if so,
why does the Apostle say, Romans 8. 2, 3.
What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending
his Son? etc. Besides, if there had been a Law that could have given Life,
verily, says Paul, Righteousness should have been by the Law. And again, he
says, By the Works of the Law, no Man is Gal. 2. 16, 21.
justified: and if Righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain.
Christ it seems, by what this Man says, came only to fulfill the Law, as our
Example, that we might conform to him therein, and so be justified by it. But
he forgot that we and all Mankind have broke the Law, and stand charged and
condemned thereby unto eternal Condemnation; and who shall make Atonement for
that Breach, and deliver us from the Curse thereby incurred? No Doctrine can
cast higher Contempt upon Christ, and invalidate his Suffering, and
Justification by Faith alone in him, than this Doctrine does.

2. Such preach a Legal Doctrine, who preach up Obedience by us to the Law or
Gospel, either as the procuring or moving Cause and Condition of our
Justification and Eternal Life.

3. Such also preach a Legal Doctrine, who preach up Wrath and Divine
Vengeance, to scare or frighten Men out of their Sins; and as if by the bare
leaving and forsaking of Sin, Men might escape Death and Wrath. Such a
Doctrine, as Reverend Dr. Owen notes, may fill an unregenerate Man with Horror
and servile Fear; whereby, as Bond-Servants, or Slaves, by the Whip of this
Doctrine, they may be forced to break off from some gross Acts of Sin, and
perform some outward Duties of Religion, which otherwise they are unwilling to
do: for, as it is not from Love to God, nor from Faith in Christ, so they find
no Delight nor Sweetness in it; but being often remiss, and seeing cause to
doubt of the Sincerity of their Obedience, they fall under Terror and slavish
Fear, they only acting from an enlightened Conscience, and not from Faith, or
renewing Grace. These Men neither love the Law nor Gospel, tho they are forced
to keep up in some degree of Obedience to it.

4. Such preach a Legal Doctrine, that affirm Man's own Faith and inherent
Righteousness for the sake of Christ's Merits, is part of our Righteousness to
Justification in the sight of God; and that Christ has procured or merited a
mild Law of Grace, of Faith and sincere Obedience, in the room of the Law of
perfect Obedience: Which Law of sinless Obedience Christ having given to God a
full Recompense for our Breach of, he has taken that Law-away; and that so far
as we faithfully live up to this new Law of Grace, we are justified in God's
sight, and accepted for the sake of Christ's Merits: Not that Christ's
Righteousness alone is the matter of our Justification exclusive of all our
inherent Righteousness and Obedience; no, no, but rather it is our
Righteousness which does justify us. The Gospel, according to these Men, is
propounded as a Law, and God as a Rector, or just Governor, commanding
Obedience thereunto, as the procuring Cause of our Justification: So that our
Faith and Obedience is a Cause and Condition of Life, as Unbelief and
Disobedience is the Cause of Eternal Death. But having formerly detected this
dangerous Error, I shall not further insist upon the Confutation of it here.

5. Such preach a Legal Doctrine, that render Man a Co-worker with Christ in
the Salvation of their own Souls, by which means there is room left for him to
boast and glory. Such a Doctrine they preach, who magnify the Will of Man, or
the Power of the Creature; which I hope I have, by the Assistance of God,
sufficiently detected and refuted in this Treatise: All boasting being excluded
by the Grace of God in the Gospel, Man being abased, and God alone exalted.

APPLICATION.

I shall now come to make the general Application of what I have said unto you
from this great Text, and so conclude with all I shall say from it.

First Inform. First by way of Information; the Doctrine which has in these
Sermons been insisted on may inform us, That Gospel-Sins are the greatest Sins,
and that the blind Heathens are not, cannot be so guilty and culpable before
God, nor in such a dangerous Condition as those are who live under the
preaching of the Gospel, and yet slight, and neglect the Salvation of it. O
what will they do in the Day of Judgment, that live in England, in London, in a
Land and City of so great Light, and perish through their Sin, and Contempt or
Neglect of Gospel Grace!

Secondly, This may also inform us, how strangely Mankind are blinded and
deceived by the God of this World; in that small things are accounted great,
and that which is of the greatest Concernment, is little, or not at all
regarded, but esteemed as a trivial matter. O, says some, we must mind the main
Chance! they mean the main Business in respect of their Earthly Subsistence,
which is to get Bread, and to provide for the Body, for their Wives and
Children. Now the Doctrine which you have heard, shows you how you are deluded,
that look upon Earthly Things to be the main Business you should look after.
What is of such Importance as the Salvation of your precious and immortal
Souls, and to be providing for an endless Eternity?

Thirdly, I may infer from hence, That the greatest part of Mankind are
Unbelievers; for all that neglect this Salvation, and look not upon this matter
as their chief Business, are doubtless in a State of Unbelief: They do not
credit this holy Doctrine, they believe not God's Word. If one should tell you
that are going a Journey, that if you go such a Way, you will certainly be
destroyed by Thieves, or wild Beasts, yet you will go on; Would it not follow
clearly that you believe not what was told you? Why thus it is here, Sinners
are told and assured from the Word of God, as certain as God is true, and his
Word true, that if they leave not their Swearing, their Pride, their
Drunkenness, their Lying, their Lusts and Uncleanness, their
Worldly-mindedness, and their preferring Earth, and the things of the World
above the things of God; or if they do not believe, repent, and be born again,
they shall certainly perish for ever; yet they go on and live in those ways of
Sin, and believe not, repent not: this is an evident sign that they do not give
Credit to what is told them, and so are Unbelievers; and if they still persist
in their way, they will be certainly damned.

1. Our Savior says, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; Luke 13.
3.
ye shall not escape eternal Wrath, be ye great Sinners, or not Sinners of the
first Rank. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that
forget God.

2. Christ says, He that believes not, the Wrath of God abides on him: and
they that do not believe, are told there is no other Joh. 3. 36.
way to escape this Wrath, and that this Wrath will be poured forth upon them
like Fire, unless they believe in Christ, receive Christ, obtain an Interest in
Jesus Christ; nay, that they are condemned already; but they believe not.

3. Moreover, such who live a sober moral Life, are told, that notwithstanding
that, yet unless they are born again, unless they get Faith in Jesus Christ,
and their Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and they obtain the Righteousness of Christ, they cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Now they will not believe this, but conclude their State is good,
and that Morality is sufficient to save their Souls: which shows that these are
Unbelievers also.

4. Others are told, that their good Deeds, their good Duties, their Prayers,
their hearing of Sermons, or their being Baptized, and having Communion with
God's People, will not do, unless they are savingly renewed and sanctified,
having the true Grace of God in their Hearts, and lead a Godly, Holy and
Spiritual Life, finding the powerful Operations of the Spirit changing them
into the Likeness of Jesus Christ: but they believe it not, but rest upon their
Duties and outward Privileges, tho they are told the Kingdom of God is not in
Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness, and Truth, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; or
that the Kingdom of God is not inward only, but in Power also, and that Lamps
of Profession will not save them, except they have Oil in their Vessels: many
of these are like the foolish Virgins, and believe it not, but rest on a bare
Name of Christians, on a Form of Godliness, and may be fall short too as to an
outward Profession of Godliness; for so do they who pray not in the Closet, nor
in their Families, neither read God's Word, nor make it their Business to hear
the Word preached, in Season and out of Season, but every small Matter takes
them off of those Duties. Be sure, all prayerless Souls are graceless Souls; it
is to be feared many of this sort make Religion but little of their Business,
who neither read, pray nor meditate, nor perhaps call upon their Children and
Servants so to do, but let their Children have their Carnal Lusts, their Pride,
ambitious and wanton Inclinations indulged and nourished in them. O how little
is the outward Part of God's Worship kept up in the Families of some Professors!

Fourthly, This may serve also for a Use of Terror to secure Sinners. Terror.


1. May not Cry out, Fire, Fire? Such a Cry has often startled and amazed many
of you that live in and about this City. Sirs, a Fire is just a breaking out,
which you cannot escape, unless you look about you the sooner. When People hear
the Cry of Fire in the Night, how do they cry out, Where, Where? Alas, this
Fire seizes not on your Houses, nor Goods, no nor on your Bodies only, but on
your Souls; it has already kindled even the Wrath of God, which no Sinner can
escape that neglects this Salvation. God's Wrath is compared to Fire, and it
has perhaps already taken hold of some of your Consciences; but if it be not
kindled there, yet it is kindled in God's Anger: For a Fire is kindled in my
Anger, and shall burn unto the lowest Hell. O that they were wise, that they
understood Deuteronomy. 32. 22, 29.
this, that they would consider their latter End.

2. Is the Wrath of God so terrible, and can no Unbeliever or impenitent Sinner
escape it; what cause is here for them all to tremble? Suppose you should be
told, that this Night you shall certainly not escape Death, neither you, nor
your Wife, nor Children, but that your House shall be burned down, your Goods,
Self, Wife and Children shall all be burned to Ashes, and that this Judgment
you shall not escape; would it not be startling and terrifying Tidings if you
should believe it? But alas, what would that be to this doleful Tidings, viz.
that your precious Soul and Body, as well as your Wife and Children, and all
belonging to you, if you and they do neglect the Means of this Salvation, and
not believe in Christ, and become new Creatures, shall in a short time be in
everlasting Flames, and undergo intolerable Pain and Punishment from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, which you shall not
escape, for the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it? Nay, and it shall be
more tolerable for Sodom Mat. 10. 15. Mat. 11. 22, 23. Mar. 6. 11.
and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for you, or for that Soul who
refuses the Offers of Christ, Pardon of Sin, and Salvation through him.

Lamentat.
Fifthly, It may be for a Lamentation, to see how few understand the Nature of
this Salvation, and study the Mysteries of it, or desire an Interest in it; and
also to see how many make light of it, whilst others by dangerous Errors seek
ways to eclipse the Glory of God's Free Grace therein. Remember those
Demonstrations you have heard, to open the Greatness of the Salvation the
Gospel.

Sixthly, This reprehends such who are more affected with Temporal Salvation,
than with the Spiritual and Eternal Salvation of Reproof.
the Soul; and also all such that defer looking after, and striving to get an
Interest in it.

Seventhly, By way of Exhortation.

1. Exhortat.
Let me exhort you to praise God for Jesus Christ, who is the Author and
Finisher of this Salvation: Christ is all, and in all, in our Salvation: God
has sent us an Almighty Savior. O how miserable should we have been for ever,
had not God sent us Jesus Christ.

2. Let me exhort you to admire the Love of Christ in coming to work out this
Salvation: What has he born and undergon to save our Souls? O love and exalt
this Savior, and eclipse none of his Glory.

3. Be exhorted to praise God for affording you the Knowledge of
Gospel-Salvation. O how few are they who have heard of this joyful Tidings! But
few Nations of the World have this News sounding in their Ears, viz. the Gospel
preached to them, they have no declaration of it. God shows his Sovereignty
herein; he reveals himself, and the Knowledge of Salvation to whom he pleases.
And indeed many dark Parts of this Nation have but little of the Mysteries of
the Gospel made known to them. What People in the World have greater cause to
admire God's distinguishing Grace and Favor, than we that live in and about
this City. London is exalted to Heaven in respect of the Means of Grace: O that
it may never be brought down to Hell, as our Savior threatened Capernaum.

4. From hence also I might exhort you to bless God for faithful Ministers, who
publish the Salvation of the Gospel to you. How beautiful upon the Mountains
are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings, that publishes Peace, that
brings good Tidings of Good, that publishes Salvation! Isa. 52. 7.
Let it appear you highly value and honor your faithful Ministers, by your
diligent attention on the Word and Doctrine they preach. For Motives, consider,
(1.) God has ordained Preaching as the ordinary Way and Means to work Faith;
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: And to increase and
strengthen Faith also. Romans 10. 17.
(2.) God is gradiously pleased to assord Men a Day, or a Time of Visitation,
in which he offers Terms of Peace unto them: Take heed you do not like
Jerusalem, lose your Day, and neglect the Means God affords you (3.) You know
not how short your Day may be; and if you lose your Day, you will lose your
Souls also: The Harvest will end with some, and they not saved. And that you
may not lose the Day of your Visitation, take a few Directions.


1. Seriously think on the sad and woeful Condition which naturally you are in,
being dead in Sin, and Children of Wrath; and Ephesians. 2. 1.
if you die in that Estate, you are lost for ever.

2. Let your Thoughts now be let out on your latter End; for when the Night
comes, no Man can work. This is great Wisdom, and every Man's Duty; we none of
us know how soon our great Change may come: And what will you do, if you live
in the neglect of the Means of Salvatio even until God cuts you off?

3. Pray that the Wind of the Spirit would blow upon your Souls: The Wind
blows where it lists; it blows at God's Command, Joh. 3. 8.
when, on whom, and how he pleases. The Spirit is that great and only Agent
that must work Faith in you, quicken you, and regenerate your Souls.

4. Therefore see that you do not quench the Spirit, but improve all the
Convictions thereof.

5. If you would have an Interest in this great Salvation, you must have an
Interest in Jesus Christ the great Savior: If you do not receive Christ by
Faith, but refuse him, sad will your Condition be; for no Christ, no Salvation.

Quest. How may I know that I have Christ, or an Interest in him?

Answ. 1. If thou have Christ, thou have Life, thou art spiritually How Persons
may know they have an Interest in Christ.
quickened: And as thou have Spiritual Life, so also thou have Light; thy Eyes
are opened, I mean, the Eyes of thy Understanding.

2. Thou can remember the time when thou had no God, no Christ, or wast
without Christ; and it is much if thou art not able to tell how, when, or after
what manner thou did meet with him, whether it was by the Word preached, or
by reading, or by some Affliction, etc.

3. If Christ be thine, he is very precious to thee: Can 1 Pet. 2. 7. Ps. 73.
25.
thou say with David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? neither is there any on
Earth that I desire beside thee? And with the Spouse, My Beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand? Paul accounted Cant. 5. 10 Phil. 3. 9,
10.
all things as loss, or as nothing, for the Excellency of Jesus Christ his Lord.

4. Does Jesus Christ rule and reign in thee by his Spirit? He that has Christ
in him, may feel his ruling Power, and that he by his Spirit has spoiled the
ruling and predominating Power of Sin, every evil Habit in the Heart and Life
of such being broke.

5. Moreover, if Christ is in thee, and thou by Faith art in him, then thou art
a new Creature: This the Apostle positively does assert; Therefore if any Man
be in Christ, he is a new Creature: old 2 Cor. 5. 17.
things are passed away, behold all things are become new. Such have new
Understandings, or are renewed in their Understandings, Wills and Affections:
they have also new Thoughts, new Love, new Fears, new Joy, new Desires, new
Companions, and new Conversations; all things with such are become new.

Lastly, And to conclude with all I shall say from this Text, here is also
Matter and Cause of Comfort and great Consolation to all Believers, to all who
have a part in this Salvation. I need not show you which way this appears, for
every one that has heard what a kind of Salvation it is, may easily infer from
thence, that all that have a part in it are happy for ever; it is a great and
glorious Salvation: Remember what you are delivered from by it, and what you
are raised up unto by it, and also that it is a sure and certain Salvation; no
Enemy, no Sin, no Devil can dispossess you of it if you are Believers, and have
received the Earnest thereof, which is the Holy Spirit, by which also you are
sealed to the Day of Redemption. Therefore it remains, that you endeavor to
show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness into his
marvelous Light, and has given you a true sight of, and interest in this great
Salvation wrought by Jesus Christ; To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
be Glory, Honor and Praise, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A.
Access. FREE access to the Father, an Effect of Christ's Death, Page 262
Accompany. What those things are that do accompany Salvation, 323, 366
Adoption. Adoption a glorious Privilege, 417
Afflictions. Afflictions compared to a Refiner's Fire, 17 Afflictions Christ's
Fan, 17
Aggravation. The Aggravations of Sin opened in ten Particulars, 356
All. Christ died not eternally to save all Men, proved, 248, to 256 Christ in
some sense did die for all universally, or for every individual Person, 256
Angels. Angels pry into our Salvation, 433 Angels great understanding, yet
learn by Experience of the Church, 434
Arian Heresy what, 85 Arminianism. Arminianism detected, 146, 147 Arminianism
again detected, 158 Arminianism further detected, 228, to 256
Attributes. All the Attributes glorified equally in our Salvation by Jesus
Christ, 372 All the holy Attributes united together in Christ to save
Believers, 247 All the Attributes of God in Arms to cut down such who neglect
the Salvation of the Gospel, 467, 468

B.
Backbiting a notorious Evil, such may be guilty of Murder, 7 Baptizing is
dipping, 132 Baptism of great use to Believers, 133 Beguiled. Christ's Sheep
may be beguiled by Deceivers, how far, 89, 90
Blood unlawful to be eaten: The whole World forbid to eat it, because it is
the Life of the Creature, Page 256 Business. The Salvation of our Souls the
chief Business we have to mind whilst in this World, showed in many
Particulars, 441, 442, 443

C.
Cease. Such who are begotten and born of God, cannot cease being his Children,
214
Chaff. Why false or hypocritical Professors are compared to Chaff; showed in
six things, from p. 18, to 25 Who are Chaff, from p 18, to 25
Charity. Ministers should exercise Charity toward such Christians that seem
dull and drowsy, 322
Child. John Child's Sin what, 48 Some Passages of his Desparation, 48, 49, 50
He hanged himself, 51
Children. The happy State of being the Children of God, born of God, 222, to
227 How God's Children are known, 219, 220
Christ. Christ is God and Man, wherefore, 93, 94 Christ coequal to the Father,
380 Christ the express Image of the Father's Person, 368 How Christ is the
Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 273, 274
Condition, Conditional. Christ not a Conditional Redeemer, 251 The Condition
that Arminians say the Creature is to perform, is impossible, 250, 251, 252
Their Conditional Redemption no Redemption at all, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254 It
renders Salvation not free or wholly by Grace, 151
Cornelius not saved without Faith in Christ, tho his Prayers are said to be
heard, 385 Curse of the Law remains on all Unbelievers, 474
D.
Darkness. Hell a Place of utter Darkness, Page 5
Dead. Man naturally dead, 145 How Men may know they are spiritually dead, or
dead in Sin, 146
Death. The Nature of natural Death, 145 Natural and Spiritual Death compared,
145, 146 Death of Christ secures the Saints Final Perseverance, 235 Christ
suffered Death in our stead, 239
Dear. How a dear Child of God may be known, 219, 220
Despair a great Sin, 449, 455, 456 Utter Despair will add to the Damneds
Misery, 61 Devil. The Devil the Cause of Sinners spiritual Blindness, 445 The
Devil will torment the Damned, by upbraiding them, 61 Devils and wicked Men
tormented together, 62
Discipline. The Fan of Church -Discipline twofold, 13, 14, 15

E.
Effect. 1. Appeasing God's Wrath an Effect of Christ's Death. 257 2.
Reconciliat an Effect of Christ's Death, 258 3. The Holy Spirit as given to the
Elect an Effect of Christ's Death, 259 4. Adoption an Effect of Christ's Death,
262 5. Pardon of Sin an Effect of Christ's Death and Satisfaction, 262 6. Free
Access to the Throne of Grace, an Effect of Christ's Death, 262 7. Redemption
an Effect of Christ's Death, 262 8. Justification an Effect of Christ's Death,
263 9. Sanctification an Effect of Christ's Death, 263 10. Glorification an
Effect of Christ's Death, 265 First Effect of Christ's Death in us by the
Spirit, is Life, 267 Second, Light Conviction, 267 Christ's Death shall have
its Effect on all for whom he died, like as a Corn of Wheat that is sown will
have its Effect, 253
Elect, Election. There is Election of Grace. Personal Election proved, 170,
171, 172, etc. Christ the Head of Election, 170 Election secures the Saints
Final Perseverance, 172, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182
Envy a great Sin, 7 Essentials. What the Essentials of Christianity are, 85,
86
Every Man does not intend oft-times all and every individual Person in the
World, 299 Eutychians. What the Eutychian Heresy is, 85

F.
Faith. Justifying Faith is a reliance on Christ. A full persuasion that Christ
is mine, not essential to the being of Faith. 420 Of a direct Act of Faith. 420
A general Faith to believe Christ died for all, therefore for me, not to be
valued, and may be a false Faith. 268
Fall, Fallings. Saints may fall foully. 162 Causes of the Saints Fallings.
164, 165, 166, 167 Falling from Grace. No final falling from Grace, proved.
177, to 298 Objections for final falling answered. 298, to 312
Fan. What is Christ's Fan, showed in six Particulars, from p. 9, to 17
Father. God the Father the Contriver of our Redemption. 377 The Father could
only appoint the Terms or Way of our Recovery. 378 The Father substituted and
appointed Christ to be our Savior and Surety. 378 The Father prepared Christ a
Body, and sent him into the World. The Father chose us in Christ, the Father
draws us to Christ. 378, 379
Fire. Why God's Wrath is compared to Fire, showed in eight things. 31, 32, 33
Grace compared to Fire. 288
Floor. What is Christ's Floor, showed 3, 4, 5, 6 1. Jewish Church. 2. National
Churches. 3. Congregational Churches.

Follow. How Christ's Sheep follow him, opened in eight Particulars. 115, 116,
117
Food. The Nature of Spiritual Food, opened in seven Particulars. 137
Full. Gospel-Salvation a full and complete Salvation, opened at large. 421, to
429

G.
Garner. What meant by Christ's Garner, viz. 1. His Church. 29 2. Heaven. 30
Chaff as well as Wheat in Christ's Garner below, but none in his Garner above.
30
Ghost. Sin against the Holy Ghost, what. 360, 361, 362, 363. How false
Professors may be said to partake of the Holy Ghost. 334
Good. The Word of God Good, in what respect. 335, 336.
Grace. Vocation of God's Free Grace. 151 Faith is a Grace, and of God's pure
Grace and Favor. 151 Repentance a Grace. 151 Why Eternal Life is merely of
Grace, showed in five Particulars. 154, 155 The Father sent Christ to merit
Grace for us, the Son purchased Grace for us, and the Holy Spirit works Grace
in us. 382, 383 Grace works physically. 448 The Spring, Author and Excellency
of Grace, as it is a Divine Principle in Believers, opened. 286, 287, 288, 289
Gross Acts of Sin may be left by unrenewed Persons. 448.
H.
Habits. To change the evil Habits of the Heart, is the Work of the Spirit of
God only, not in Man's Power. 448
Hand. What meant by the Father's Hand. 249, 250, 251. What meant by Christ's
Hand. 273, to 280 In what sense Christ's Sheep may be said to be in his Hand.
280, to 284 The happy State of Believers by being put into Christ's Hand. 276,
278, 280, 281
Heaps. Many Heaps of profane Persons in the National Floor. 4, 5, 6
Hell Torments direful, opened in many respects. 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58,
59, 60, etc. Hypocrites. How Hypocrites may be known, or the Chaff from the
Wheat. 18, to 25.

I.
Importance. The Salvation of our Souls matter of chiefest Importance we have
to mind whilst in this World. 441, 442, 443
Intercession. The Nature and Power of Christ's Intercession, opened. 293, 294
Interests. All Interests concerned about our Salvation, are secured in Christ,
how. 275
Judgment. Eternal Judgment an Essential of the Christian Religion. 86
Justification. Justification how, or what. 95, 96 Justification wholly of
Grace. 151 The Nature of Justification opened. 414, 415 Justification complete.
416 Christ's Righteousness being the Matter of it, 415. Justification not a
gradual Act, as Sanctification is, in us; those that are justified, are
perfectly justified, and for ever justified. 263, 415.

K.
Kingdom. What meant by Christ's delivering up the Kingdom to the Father. 345
Kingdom of Christ very near. 353 Kingdom of Christ when it begins. 345 It will
be glorious. 344.
Knowledge. The Knowledge Christ has of his Sheep, largely opened. 98, to 107
Non-proficiency in Knowledge very dangerous. 321 Some People perish for lack of
Knowledge. 445,

L.
Lake. Hell a Lake of Fire. 55
Law. The Law must be satisfied for our Breach made of it. Page 152 The Gospel
justifies not as a mild Law of Grace requiring sincere Obedience, according to
the new Doctrine. 153 Perfection of Obedience as well required under the Gospel
as under the Law, tho not of us in point of Justification. 152, 153, 154 Moral
Law not abrogated. 153, 154 Why Christ was made under the Law. 238, 239.
Life, Eternal Life. A threefold Life of Man. 143 What meant by Eternal Life.
143, 144 How and why Eternal Life is merely of God's Grace. 147, 148, 149, 150,
153, 154 Why Christ will give Eternal Life to his Sheep, 155, 156 How Christ is
said to be our Life. 264 Believers have Eternal Life now, how. 144
Love. The Love of the Father, what. 184 It secures the standing of Believers
in a State of Grace. 185, 186, etc. Love of Christ an early, a wonderful, a
conjugal, an attracting and an inconceivable Love, it passes Knowledge. 195,
196, 197 Christ's Love secures our standing also. 198 Love to the poor Saints,
and relieving them for Christ's sake, a better sign of true Grace than the
greatest of spiritual Gifts. 323.

M.
Mark. What the Mark is on the Forehead and right Hand. 119.
Means. The Means of Salvation, as well as the End, is ordained of God. 300.
Memory. A strong Memory but a natural Gift. 38.
Mercy. God's Mercy manifested in its greatest Glory in Christ. 372 Had not God
vouchsafed a Redeemer, Divine Mercy had never been manifested. 372 Divine Mercy
will rise up against such that neglect the Gospel-Salvation. 468.
Ministers. Christ the great Minister of the New Testament. 429 Ministers
Office a high and sublime Office. 431 Ministers Christ's Ambassadors. 431
Ministers to be careful lest Chaff be let into the Church, which is Christ's
Garner. 30.
Murder. Self -Murder not an unpardonable Sin. 51, 361.

N.
Name, Names. Christ a Name above every Name, what. 380 What Names Christ has.
380 Christ's Name according to his Nature.
Nation, National. The National Sins, what, great, odious and hateful to God.
4, 5, 6 National Church of the Jews dissolved and gone. 4, 33 No National
Church under the Gospel. 33, 34.

O.
Office. The Office of the Holy Spirit, what. 461 Such that neglect
Gospel-Salvation, strive to obstruct the Holy Spirit in the discharge of his
Work and Office. 461, 462.
Old. The Old Heaven and Old Earth shall pass away, to make way for the New.
345
Orphan. Believers are in Christ's Hand, as an Orphan is in the Hand of a
faithful Guardian. 283.

P.
Pardon. Pardon of Sin, what. 413 Pardon of Sin a great Blessing, opened in six
Particulars. 413
Passions. All the Passions of the Soul let out in Hell, will add to their
Misery. 58, 59, 60.
Pastures. What the Pastures are where Christ feeds his Sheep. 130, 131, 132,
134.
Peace a Gospel-Blessing, it passes all understanding. 418. Perseverance.
Final Perseverance of the Saints proved. 177, to 297 Objections against the
Saints Final Perseverance answered. 297, to 310.
Personal Election what. Personal Election proved. 170, 172, 173. Portion. God
the Portion of Believers. What a Portion God is, opened in eleven Particulars.
Page 427, 428.
Prayer. The Nature of pure spiritual Prayer. 134, 135. Prayer one of Christ's
Pastures. 134.
Principle. From what Principle true Christians act toward God. 324 Grace a
Vital Principle. 288 Grace an abiding Principle. 289, to 296.
Promises. Promises of God a fat Pasture for Christ's Sheep. 135.
Providence. The profit and usefulness of Experiences of God's Providence.
136.

Q.
Quench. Dangerous to quench the Holy Spirit. Satan cannot totally quench the
Spirit in Believers. 228.
Quickening. The Spirit the quickening Principle of the Soul. 228

R.
Resurrection of the Body an Essential of the Christian Religion. 86
Right Hand. Christ the Father's Right Hand. 274
Righteousness. What Righteousness it is a Man may turn from. 307 Christ's
Righteousness, which is the Material Cause of our Justification, is an
Everlasting Righteousness, and therefore cannot be lost. 307 Such that trust to
their own Righteousness shall perish. 307 Christ's Righteousness a Garment.
382, 383
Rod. The Rod Christ's Voice. 86.

S.
Salvation wholly of Grace. Page 147 Showed and proved in eight Particulars.
147, 148, 149, 150 Salvation a Garment; the Father prepared it, the Son wrought
it, the Holy Ghost puts it on the Soul. 382, 383 Salvation great. 369, to 435
Who neglect the great Salvation. 436, to 443 From whence Salvation is
neglected. 443, 444 Great Evil of neglecting Salvation. 452, 453, etc. Great
Evil in respect of God the Father. 452, 453 In respect of Christ. 457 In
respect of the Holy Spirit. 461 In respect of the Sinner himself. 468, 469, 470
Salvation our greatest Business, proved. 441, 442, 443. Sheep. Believers
Christ's Sheep, 1. By Choice. 2. By the Father's Donation. 3. By Purchase. 4.
By Renovation. 5. By Covenant made with the Father. 6. By Conquest. 7. By their
Resignation of themselves to him. 77, 78, 79, 80
Characters of Christ's Sheep. 11^, to 121
Shepherd. What a kind of Shepherd Christ is. 122, to 129
Sin. The Evil of Sin opened in many Particulars, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393,
etc. Sins of the Saints of a heinous Nature on several respects. 168 Sins of
Believers cannot separate them from God's Love. 185, 186, 187, 188, etc. Why
Saints cannot, dare not sin. 191, 192 The great Evil of the Sin in neglecting
Gospel-Salvation. 464, to 469 Those that are born God cannot commit Sin,
showed. 216, 217 The odiousness of Sin showed. 470 Christ died for all the Sins
of the Elect. 236, 241. For their Unbelief. 241 No vindictive Wrath due to
Believers their Sins. Page 243 Sin the greatest Evil. 58
Socinians what their Errors are. 85 Sovereignty. It is God's absolute
Sovereignty to choose and call whom he will, and send the Gospel to whom he
will. 169, 172, 173, 314
Soul. The Soul of Man very precious, proved by many Arguments. 400, 401, 402,
etc. The Soul proved to be Immortal, by seven Arguments. 406, 407 Ministers and
Parents have a great Charge, having the Charge of Souls. No impairing the final
loss of the Soul. 409.
Spira. Francis Spira's Fall, what. 44 Spira's natural Disposition. 44 Some
Passages of his fearful State. 44, 45, 46.
Spirit. The great Blessings we receive by the Holy Spirit, opened. 259, 260,
261 1. The Spirit an Earnest to us. 260, 2. A Seal, a Witness. 261.
A twofold Act of the Witness of the Holy Spirit. 1. A direct Act. 2. A reflex
Act. 261.
State. The State of Sinners by Nature very miserable, opened in many
Particulars. 393, 394, 395.
Stead. Christ died, not only for our good, but in our stead, proved by 9
Arguments. 237, 238, 239, 240.
Strangers. Who are Strangers, and why so called. 90 How Christ's Sheep will
not follow nor hear the Voice of Strangers. 90, 91.
Supper. The precious Nature of the Lord's Supper opened. 133, 134.

T.
Taste. What a Taste of God's Word Hypocrites may have. 337 What a Taste the
Saints have. 340, 341.
Threatenings. Why there are such Threatenings contained in the Gospel. 483, 484,
485.
Torments. Torments of Hell what, largely opened. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57 Torments
of Hell eternal, why. 58, 59.
Tremble. What sort of Persons have cause to tremble at the thoughts of Wrath
and Hell. 50, 59, 60.

U.
Unbelief the greatest Sin, showed in many Particulars. 449. Union. Union with
Christ opened. 224, 225, 226 Union with Christ secures Believers from Final
Apostasy. 227, 228, 229, 230, 231.
Universal. No Universal Redemption from Sin and Wrath, proved by many
Arguments. 252, 253, 254.
Voice. What meant by Christ's Voice, showed in four things. 80, to 86 What a
kind of Voice the Voice of Christ's Spirit is, showed in 8 Particulars. 81, 82
What meant by hearing Christ's Voice, and how the Saints hear it, showed in
many Particulars. 87, 88, 89.

W.
Water. The Nature of Water. 138 What meant by Water of Life, or Spiritual
Water. 139.
Weigh. God weighs all Men, and their Spirits, Graces, Duties. 37, 38.
Wheat. Why the Saints are compared to Wheat, showed in nine respects. 27, 28,
29.
Will. The Will of Man determines the whole Event of Man's Redemption,
according to the Arminian Doctrine. 15^
World. There is a World to come, what meant thereby. 343 The World to come in
its greatest Glory, begins when Christ comes the second time. 344 The Riches,
Honors and Pleasures of the World to come, opened. 449, 450, 451, 452, 453.
The World to come will consist of a new Heaven and new Earth. 344 The word
World sometimes refers to the Elect. 256.
Wrath. The Wrath of God dreadful. Page 41 The External Wrath of God, what. 42
The Internal Wrath, what. 43 The Eternal Wrath in Hell, opened. 52 1.
Inconceivable. 2. According to the fear of it. 53 3. No Misery like Wrath in
Hell. 53, 54 4. Wrath of God in Hell without mixture. 54, 55
At what time Sinners shall not escape God's Wrath. 478, 479 The Nature of
God's Wrath opened, which they shall not escape that neglect the great
Salvation of the Gospel. 480, 481 What kind of Sinners shall suffer and undergo
God's Wrath. 487, 489.

Y.
Yoke. There is a Yoke to be taken up by all such that will be saved. 447 The
Yoke uneasy to the Flesh, or to all unrenewed Persons. 447.

ERRATA.
^^ge 52, line 15, read Elementary. P. 53. l. 25. r. Wretch. P. 118. l. 24. for
his, (...). P 170. l. 29. for says, r. said. P. 212. l. 27. r. whosoever has
that efficacious, (...), (...)-transforming, Soul-renewing, etc. P. 213. l. 26.
dele sooner than Flesh? P. 9. l. 10. for in self, r. in it self. 224. l. 4. for
Thirdly, r. 2. P. 236. l. 23. dele the (...). P. 246. l. 5. for great, r.
(...), l. 16. for nor, r. or (...) 9. dele not. P. 255-(...) read, it is
evident that by the word All, and the word (...) is only intended, etc. P. 302,
l. 6. for thy, r. the. P. 324. l. 20. read, (...) things which they acted. P.
368. l. 33. for only, r. also. P. 379. l. 38. r. Gospel-Salvation P. 381. l.
38. dele the first the. P. 405. l. 8. dele because.


