At the Court of Committees for the East India Company the 10th of August, 1681.
WE Esteem Captain Knox a Man of Truth and Integrity, and that his Relations
and Accounts of the Island of Ceylon (which some of us have lately Perused in
Manuscripts) are worthy of Credit, and therefore encouraged him to make the
same Public.

Robert Blackbourne, Secretary. By Order of the said Court.

August 8. 1681. Mr. Chiswell,
I Perused Capt. Knox's Description of the Isle of Ceylon, which seems to be
Written with great Truth and Integrity; and the Subject being new, containing
an Account of a People and Country little known to us; I conceive it may give
great Satisfaction to the Curious, and may be well worth your Publishing.

Chr. Wren.

Capt. Robert Knox.


AN Historical Relation Of the Island CEYLON, IN THE EAST INDIES:

TOGETHER, With an ACCOUNT of the Detaining in Captivity the AUTHOR and diverse
other Englishmen now Living there, and of the AUTHOR'S Miraculous ESCAPE.

Illustrated with Figures, and a Map of the ISLAND.

By ROBERT KNOX, a Captive there near Twenty Years.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Chiswell, Printer to the ROYAL SOCIETY, at the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

TO THE Right Worshipful The GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and Four and Twenty
Committees of the Honorable the EAST INDIA Company, Viz. Sir Josiah Child
Baronet, Governor. Thomas Papilion Esquire Deputy. The Right Honorable George Earl
of Berkley, Sir Joseph Ash Baronet, Sir Samuel Barnardiston Baronet, Mr.
Christopher Boon, Mr. Thomas Canham, Colonel John Clerk, Mr. John Cudworth,
John Dubois Esquire, Sir James Edwards Knight, and Alderman, Richard Hutchinson
Esquire, Mr. Joseph Herne, Mr. William Hedges. Sir John Lawrence Knight, and
Alderman, Mr. Nathaniel Letton, Sir John Moore Knight, and Alderman, Samuel
Moyer Esquire, Mr. John Morden, Mr. John Paige, Edward Rudge Esquire, Mr.
Jeremy Sambrooke, Mr. William Sedgwick, Robert Thomson Esquire, Samuel Thomson
Esquire. James Ward Esquire.

Right Worshipful,
WHat I formerly Presented you in Writing, having in pursuance of your Commands
now somewhat dressd by the help of the Printer and Graver, I a second time
humbly tender to you. It Is I confess at best too mean a Return for your great
Kindness to me. Yet I hope you will not deny it a favorable Acceptance, since
it is the whole Return I made from the Indies after Twenty years stay there;
having brought home nothing else but

London 1st. of August, 1681. (who is also wholly at your Service and Command)
ROBERT KNOX.

THE PREFACE.
HOw much of the present Knowledge of the Parts of the World is owing to late
Discoveries, may be judged by comparing the Modern with the Ancient's Accounts
thereof; though possibly many such Histories may have been written in former
Ages, yet few have escaped the Injury of Time, so as to be handed safe to us.
'Twas many Ages possibly before Writing was known, then known to a few, and
made use of by fewer, and fewest employed it to this purpose. Add to this, that
such as were written, remained for the most part Imprisoned in the Cells of
some Library or Study, accessible to a small number of Mankind, and regarded by
a less, which after perished with the Place or the Decay of their own
Substance. This we may judge from the loss of those many Writings mentioned by
Pliny, and other of the Ancients. And we had yet found fewer, if the Art of
Printing, first Invented about 240 years since, had not secured most that
lasted to that time. Since which, that Loss has been repaired by a vast number
of new Accessions, which besides the Satisfaction they have given to Curious
and Inquisitive Men by increasing their Knowledge, have excited many more to
the like Attempts, not only of Making but of Publishing also their Discoveries.
But I am not ignorant still; that as Discoveries have been this way preserved,
so many others have been lost, to the great Detriment of the Public. It were
very desirable therefore that the Causes of these and other Defects being
known, some Remedies might be found to prevent the like Losses for the future.

The principal Causes I conceive may be these; First, The want of sufficient
Instructions (to Seamen and Travelers,) to show them what is pertinent and
considerable, to be observed in their Voyages and Abodes, and how to make their
Observations and keep Registers or Accounts of them. Next, The want of some
Public Encouragement for such as shall perform such Instructions. Thirdly, The
want of fit Persons both to Promote and Disperse such Instructions to Persons
fitted to engage, and careful to Collect Returns; and Compose them into
Histories; by examining the Persons more at large upon those and other
Particulars. And by separating what is pertinent from what is not so, and to be
Rejected; who should have also wherewith to gratify every one according to his
Performances. Fourthly, The want of some easy Way to have all such Printed:
First singly, and afterward diverse of them together. It having been found that
many small Tracts are lost after Printing, as well as many that are never
Printed; upon which account we are much obliged to Mr. Haclute and Mr. Purchase,
for preserving many such in their Works. Fifthly, The want of taking care to
Collect all such Relations of Voyages and Accounts of Countries as have been
Published in other Languages, and Translating them either into English, or
(which will be of more general use) into Latin, the learned Language of Europe.
There being many such in other Countries hardly ever heard of in England.


The Difficulties of removing which Defects is not so great but that it might
easily fall even within the compass of a private Ability to remove, if at least
Public Authority would but Countenance the Design, how much less then would it
be if the same would afford also some moderate Encouragement and Reward?

The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge, has not been
wanting in preparing and dispersing Instructions to this end, and is ready
still to promote it, if the Public would allow a Recompense to the
Undertakers. The desirableness and facility of this Undertaking may, I hope, in
a short time produce the Expedients also. In the Interim all means should be
used, to try what may be obtained from the Generosity of such as have had the
Opportunities of knowing Foreign Countries.

There are but few who, though they know much, can yet be persuaded they know
any thing worth Communicating, and because the things are common and well known
to them, are apt to think them so to the rest of Mankind; This Prejudice has
done much mischief in this particular as well as in many other, and must be
first removed. There are others that are conscious enough of their own
Knowledge, and yet either for want of Ability to write well, or of use to
Compose, or of time to Study and Digest, or out of Modesty and fear to be in
Print, or because they think they know not enough to make a Volume, or for not
being prompted to, or earnestly solicited for it, neglect to do it; others
delay to do it so long till they have forgotten what they intended. Such as
these Importunity would prevail upon to disclose their knowledge, if fitting
Persons were found to Discourse and ask them Questions, and to Compile the
Answers into a History. Of this kind was lately produced in High Dutch a
History of Greenland, by Dr. Fogelius of Hamborough, from the Information of
Frederick Martin, who had made several Voyages to that Place, in the doing of
which, he made use of the Instruction given by the Royal Society.

It Is much to be wondered that we should to this Day want a good History of most
of our VVest-Indian Plantations. Ligon has done well for the Barbados, and
somewhat has been done for the Summer Islands, Virginia, etc. But how far are
all these short even of the knowledge of these and other Places of the
West Indies, which may be obtained from diverse knowing Planters now Residing
in London? And how easy were it to obtain what is Defective from some
Ingenious Persons now Resident upon the Places, if some way were found to
gratify them for their Performances? However till such be found, it is to be
hoped that the kind Acceptance only the Public shall give to this present
Work, may excite several other Ingenuous, and knowing Men to follow this
Generous Example of Captain Knox, who though he could bring away nothing almost
upon his Back or in his Purse, did yet Transport the whole Kingdom of Cande Uda
in his Head, and by Writing and Publishing this his Knowledge, has freely given
it to his Country, and to You Reader in particular.

'Twas not I confess without the earnest Solicitations and Endeavors of my
self, and some others of his Friends obtained from him, but this uneasiness of
parting with it was not for want of Generosity and Freedom enough in
Communicating whatever he knew or had observed, but from that usual Prejudice
of Modesty, and too mean an Opinion of his own Knowledge and Abi^^ties of doing
any thing should be worthy the view of the Public. And had he found leisure to
Compose it, he could have filled a much greater Volume with useful and
pertinent, as well as unusual and strange Observations. He could have inrich't
it with a more particular Description of many of their curious Plants, Fruits,
Birds, Fishes, Insects, Minerals, Stones; and told you many more of the
Medicinal and other uses of them in Trades and Manufactures. He could have
given you a complete Dictionary of their Language, understanding and speaking
it as well as his Mother Tongue. But his Occasions would not permit him to do
more at present. Yet the Civil Usage this his Firstborn meets with among his
Countrymen, may it is hoped oblige him to gratify them with further
Discoveries and Observations in his future Travels.

To conclude, He has in this History given you a taste of his Observations. In
which most Readers, though of very differing Gusts, may find somewhat very
pleasant to their Pallat. The Statesman, Divine, Physician, Lawyet, Merchant,
Mechanic, Husbandman, may select something for their Entertainment. The
Philosopher and Historian much more. I believe at least all that love Truth
will be pleased; for from that little Conversation I had with him I conceive
him to be no ways prejudiced or biased by Interest, affection, or hatred, fear
or hopes, or the vainglory of telling Strange Things, so as to make him swarve
from the truth of Matter of Fact: And for his opportunity of being informed,
any one may satisfy himself when he understands his almost 20 years Abode and
Converse among them. His Skill in the Language and Customs of the People, his
way of Employment in Traveling and Trading over all Parts of the Kingdom; add
to this his Breeding till 19 years of Age under his Father a Captain for the
East India Company, and his own Natural and acquired parts; but above all his
good Reputation, which may be judged from the Employment That Worshipful
Company have now freely bestowed upon him, having made him Commander of the
Tarquin Merchant, and entrusted him to undertake a Voyage to Tarquin.

Read therefore the Book it self, and you will find your self taken Captive
indeed, but used more kindly by the Author, than he himself was by the Natives.

After a general view of the Sea Coasts, he will lead you into the Country by
the Watches, through the Thorney Gates, then Conduct you round upon the
Mountains that Encompass and Fortify the whole Kingdom, and by the way carry
you to the top of Hommalet or Adam's Peak; from those he will descend with you,
and show you their chief Cities and Towns, and pass through them into the
Country, and there acquaint you with their Husbandry, then entertain you with
the Fruits, Flowers, Herbs, Roots, Plants and Trees, and by the way shelter you
from Sun and Rain, with a Fan made of the Talipat-Leaf. Then show you their
Beasts, Birds, Fish, Serpents, Insects; and last of all, their Commodities.
From hence he will carry you to Court, and show you the King in the several
Estates of his Life; and acquaint you with his way of Governing, Revenues,
Treasures, Officers, Governors, Military Strength, Wars: and by the way
entertain you with an account of the late Rebellion against him. After which he
will bring you acquainted with the Inhabitants themselves, whence you may know
their different Humors, Ranks and Qualities. Then you may visit their Temples
such as they are, and see the Foppery of their Priests Religious Opinions and
Practices both in their Worship and Festivals, and afterward go home to their
Houses and be acquainted with their Conversation and Entertainment, see their
Housewifery, Furniture, Finery, and understand how they Breed and Dispose of
their Children in Marriage; and in what Employments and Recreations they pass
their time. Then you may acquaint your self with their Language, Learning,
Laws, and if you please with their Magic and Iugling. And last of all with
their Diseases, Sickness, Death, and manner of Burial. After which he will give
you a full account of the Reason of his own Going to, and Detainment in the
Island of Ceylon, and Kingdom of Conde-Uda. And of all his various Conditions,
and the Accidents that befell him there during Nineteen years and an halfs abode
among them. And by what ways and means at last he made his Escape and Returned
safe into England in September last, 1680.

Aug. 1. 1681. Robert Hook.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Thomson Knight, Governor, Thomas Papillon
Esquire, Deputy, and the 24 Committees of the Honorable EAST INDIA Company
hereunder Specified, Viz. The Right Honorable George Earl of Berkley, The Right
Honorable James Lord Chandois. Sir Matthew Andrews Knight, Sir John Bancks
Baronet, Sir Samuel Barnardiston Baronet, Mr. Christopher Boon, John Bathurst
Esquire, Sir Iosia Child Baronet, Mr. Thomas Canham, Colonel John Clerk, Sir
James Edwards Knight, Mr. Joseph Herne, Richard Hutchinson Esquire, James
Hublon Esquire, Sir John Lethieullier Knight, Mr. Nathaniel Petton, Sir John
Moor Knight, Samuel Moyer Esquire, Mr. John Morden, Mr. John Paige, Edward
Rudge Esquire, Daniel Sheldon Esquire, Mr. Jeremy Sambrook, Robert Thomson
Esquire.

Right Worshipful,
SInce my return home to my Native Country of England, after a long and
Disconsolate Captivity, my Friends and Acquaintance in our Converse together
have been Inquisitive into the State of that Land in which I was Captivated;
whose Curiosity I endeavor to satisfy. But my Relations and Accounts of
Things in those Parts were so strange and uncouth, and so different from those
in these Western Nations, and withal my Discourses seeming so Delightful and
Acceptable unto them, they very frequently called upon me to write what I knew
of that Island of Ceilon, and to digest it into a Discourse, and make it more
Public; unto which motion I was not much unwilling, partly that I might comply
with the Desires and Councels of my Friends, and chiefly that I might Publish
and Declare the great Mercy of God to me, and Commemorate before all Men my
singular Deliverance out of that Strange and Pagan Land, which as often as I
think of or mention, I cannot but admire and adore the goodness of God toward
me, there being in it so many notable Footsteps of his signal Providence.

I had then by me several Papers, which during my Voyage homeward from Bantam
at leisure times I writ concerning the King and the Country, and concerning
the English there, and of my Escape; which Papers I forthwith set my self to
Peruse and draw into a Method, and to add what more might occur to my Thoughts
of those Matters, which at length I have finished, contriving what I had to
relate under four Heads. The first concerning the Country and Products of it.
The second concerning the King and his Government. The third concerning the
Inhabitants, and their Religion and Customs, and the last concerning our
Surprise, Detainment and Escape; In all which I take leave to Declare, That I
have writ nothing but either what I am assured of by my own personal Knowledge
to be true, and wherein I have born a great and a sad share, or what I have
received from the Inhabitants themselves of such things as are commonly known
to be true among them. The Book being thus perfected, it required no long
Meditation unto whom to present it, it could be to none but your selves (my
Honored Masters) by whose Wisdom and Success the East-Indian Parts of the
World are now near as well known, as the Countries next adjacent to us. So that
by your means, not only the Wealth, but the Knowledge of those Indies is
brought home to us. Unto your Favor and Patronage therefore (Right Worshipful)
I humbly presume to recommend these Papers and the Author of them, who
rejoices at this opportunity to acknowledge the Favors you have already
conferred on him, and to profess that next unto God, on you depend his Future
Hopes and Expectations; being

Land. 18th. March, 16^^/^^. Right Worshipful, Your most obliged and most
humble and devoted Servant to be Commanded, Robert Knox.

The CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. A General Description of the Island.
THE Inland Parts of it hitherto unknown. The chief Places on the Seacoasts.
The Names of the Provinces and Counties of the Inland Country. Which are
divided from each other by Woods. The Country Hilly, but enriched with Rivers.
The great River Mavelagonga described. Woody. Where most Populous and
Healthful. The nature of the Valleys. The great Hill, Adams Peak, described.
The natural Strength of this Kingdom. The difference of the Seasons in this
Country. What Parts have most Rain.

CHAP. II. Concerning the chief Cities and Towns of this Island.
THE most Eminent Cities are Five. Viz. Cande, Nellemby, All^utneur. The
Country of Bintan described. Badoula. The Province of Ouvah. Digligy, the place
of the King's Residence. Gauluda. Many ruins of Cities. Anarodgburro. The
nature of the Northern Parts. The Port of Portaloon Affords Salt. Leawava
Affords Salt in abundance, Described. Their Towns how built. Many ly in ruins
and forsaken, and upon what occasion.

CHAP III. Of their Corn, with their manner of Husbandry.
THE Products and Commodities of the Country. Corn of diverse sorts. Rice.
Grows in water. Their ingenuity in watering their Corn-lands. Why they do not
always sow the best kind of Rice? They sow at different times, but reap
together. Their artificial Pooles, Alligators harbor in them. They sow Corn on
the mud. A sort of Rice that grows without water. The Seasons of Seed-time and
Harvest. A particular description of their Husbandry. Their Plow. The
convenience of these Plowes. Their First plowing. Their Banks, and use of them.
Their Second plowing. How they prepare their Seed-Corn: And their Land after it
is plowed. Their manner of Sowing. How they manure and order Young Corn. Their
manner of reaping. They tread out their Corn with Cattle. The Ceremonies they
use when the Corn is to be trodden. How they unhusk their Rice. Other sorts of
Corn among them. Coracan, Tanna, Moung, Omb.

CHAP. IV. Of their Fruits and Trees.
GReat Variety of Fruits and delicious. The best Fruits where ever they grow
reserved for the Kings use. Betel-Nuts, The Trees, The Fruit, The Leaves, The
Skins, and their use. The Wood. The Profit the Fruit yields. Iacks, another
choice Fruit. Iombo another. Other Fruits found in the Woods. Fruits common
with other Parts of India. The Tallipot; the rare use of the Leaf. The Pith
good to eat. The Kettule. Yields a delicious juice. The Skin bears strings as
strong as Wire. The Wood; its Nature and Use. The Cinnamon Tree. The Bark, The
Wood, The Leaf, The Fruit. The Orula. The Fruit good for Physic and Dying.
Water made of it will brighten rusty Iron, and serve instead of Ink. The
Dounekaia. The Capita. Rattans. Their Fruit. Canes. The Betel tree. The
Bo-gauhah or God-Tree.

CHAP. V. Of their Roots, Plants, Herbs, Flowers.
ROots for Food, The manner of their growing. Boiling Herbs, Fruits for Sauce.
European Herbs and Plants among them. Herbs for Medicine. Their Flowers. A
Flower that serves instead of a Dyal, called Sindric-mal. Picha-mals, Hop-mals.

CHAP. VI. Of their Beasts Tame and VVild. Insects.
WHat Beasts the Country produces. Deer no bigger than Hares. Other Creatures
rare in their kind. The way how a wild Deer was catched for the King. Of their
Elephants. The way of catching Elephants. Their understanding. Their Nature.
The damage they do. Serve the King for executing his Malefactors. Their
Disease. The Sport they make. Ants of diverse sorts. How one sort of them,
called Coddias, came to sting so terribly. These Ants very mischievous. The
curious Buildings of the Vaeos, another kind of them. The manner of their
death. Bees of several kinds. Some build on Trees like Birds. The people eat
the Bees, as well as their Honey. Leaches, that ly in the grass, and creep on
Travaylers Legs. The Remedies they use against them. Apes and Monkeys of diverse
kinds. How they catch Wild Beasts. How they take the Wild Boar.

CHAP. VII. Of their Birds, Fish, Serpents, and Commodities.
THeir Birds. Such as will be taught to speak. Such as are beautiful for
Color. A strange Bird. Water-Fowls resembling Ducks and Swans. Peacocks. The
King keeps Fowl. Their Fish, How they catch them in Ponds, And how in Rivers.
Fish kept and fed for the King's Pleasure. Serpents. The Pimberah of a
prodigious bigness. The Polonga. The Noya. The Fable of the Noya and Polonga^
The Carowala. Gerendo. Hickanella. Democulo, a great Spider. Kobbera-guson, a
Creature like an Aligator. Tolla-guion. The people eat Rats. Precoius Stones,
Minerals, and other Commodities. The People discouraged from Industry by the
Tyranny they are under.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the present King of Cande.
THE Government of this Island. The King's Lineage. His Person, Mien and Habit.
His Queen and Children. His Palace; Situation and Description of it^ Strong
Guards about his Court. Negro's Watch next his Person. Spies sent out a Nights.
His Attendants. Handsome Women belong to his Kitchen. His Women. And the
Privileges of the Towns, where they live. His State, when he walks in his
Palace, or goes abroad. His reception of Ambassadors. His delight in them.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Kings Manners, Vices, Recreation, Religion.
SPare in his Diet. After what manner he eats. Chaste himself, and requires his
Attendants to be so. He committed Incest, but such as was allowable. His Pride.
How the People address to the King. They give him Divine Worship. Pleased with
high Titles. An instance or two of the King's haughty Stomach. He slights the
defection of one of his best Generals. He scorns to receive his own Revenues.
The Dutch serve their ends upon his Pride by flattering him. The People give
the way to the Kings foul Cloths. His natural Abilities, and deceitful temper.
His wise saying concerning Run-awayes. He is naturally Cruel. The Dogs follow
Prisoners to Execution. The Kings Prisoners; their Misery. He punishes whole
Generations for the sake of one. The sad condition of young Gentlemen that wait
on his Person. His Pleasure-houses. Pastimes abroad. His Diversions at home.
His Religion. He stands affected to the Christian Religion.

CHAP. III. Of the King's Tyrannical Reign.
HIS Government Tyrannical. His Policy. He farms out his Country for Service.
His Policy to secure himself against Assassinations and Rebellions. Another
Point of his Policy. Another which is to find his People work to do. A Vast
work undertaken and finished by the King, viz. Bringing Water diverse Miles through
Rocks, Mountains and Valleys unto his Palace. The turning this Water did great
injury to the People. But he little regards his Peoples Good. By craft at once
both pleases and punishes his People. In what Labors he employs his People.
He Poisons his only Son. The extraordinary Lamentation at the Death of his
Sister. His Craft and Cruelty shown at once.

CHAP. IV. Of his Revenues and Treasure.
THe King's Rents brought three times in a year. The first is accompanied with
a great Festival. How the Nobles bring their Gifts, or Duties. Inferior Persons
present their New Years Gifts. What Taxes and Rents the People pay. The
accidental incoms of the Crown. The Profits that accrue to the King from
Corn-Lands. Custom of Goods Imported formerly paid. His Treasuries. He has many
Elephants. Great Treasures thrown into the River formerly. The Treasure he most
valueth.

CHAP. V. Of the King's great Officers, and the Governors of the Provinces.
THe two Greatest Officers in the Land. The next Great Officers. None can put
to Death but the King. Theso Dissauvas are Durante been placito. Whom the King
makes Dissauvas. And their Profits and Honors. Other benefits belonging to
other Officers. They must always reside at Court. The Officers under them, viz.
The Cour-lividani. The Cong-conna. The Courliatchila. The Liannah. The Vndia.
The Monannah. Some Towns exempt from the Dissauvas Officers. Other Officers
yet. These Places obtained by Bribes. But remain only during pleasure. Country
Courts. They may appeal. Appeals to the King. How the Great Officers Travel
upon Public Business. Their Titles and signs of State. The misery that succeeds
their Honor. The foolish ambition of the Men and Women of this Country.

CHAP. VI. Of the King's Strength and Wars.
THe King's Military affairs. The natural strength of his Country. Watches and
Thorn-gates. None to pass from the King's City without Pasports. His Soldiery.
All men of Arms wait at Court. The Soldiers have Lands allotted them insted of
Pay. To prevent the Soldiers from Plotting. The manner of sending them out on
Expeditions. Requires all the Captains singly to send him intelligence of their
affairs. When the War is finished they may not return without order. The
condition of the Common Soldiers. He conceals his purpose when he sends out his
Army. Great Exploits done, and but little Courage. They work chiefly by
Stratagems. They understand the manner of Christian Armies. Seldom hazard a
Battle. If they prove unsuccessful, how he punishes them.

CHAP. VII. A Relation of the Rebellion made against the King.
A Comet ushereth in the Rebellion. The Intent of the Conspirators. How the
Rebellion began. The King flies. They pursue him faintly. They go to the Prince
and Proclaim him King. The carriage of the Prince. Upon the Prince's flight,
the Rebels scatter and run. A great Man declares for the King. For the space of
eight or ten days nothing but Killing one another to approve themselves good
Subjects. The King Poisons his Son to prevent a Rebellion hereafter. His
ingratitude. Another Comet, but without any bad Effects following it.

PART III.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Inhabitants of this Island.
THe several Inhabitants of the Island. The Original of the Chingulays. Wild
Men. Who pay an acknowledgement to the King. How they bespeak Arrows to be made
them. They rob the Carriers. Hourly wild Men Trade with the People. Once made
to serve the King in his War. Their Habit and Religion. A skirmish about their
Bounds. Curious in their Arrows. How they preserve their Flesh. How they take
Elephants. The Dowries they give. Their disposition. The Inhabitants of the
Mountains differ from those of the Low-Lands. Their good opinion of Virtue, tho
they practice it not. Superstitions. How they Travel. A brief character of
them. The Women, their habit and nature.

CHAP. II. Concerning their different Honors, Ranks, and Qualities.
HOw they distinguish themselves according to their Qualities. They never Marry
beneath their rank. In case a Man lies with a Woman of inferior rank. Their
Noble men. How distinguished from others. The distinction by Caps. Of the
Hondrews or Noble men two sorts. An Honor like unto Knighthood. Goldsmiths,
Blacksmiths, Carpenters, and Painters. The Privilege and State of the Smiths.
Craftsmen. Barbers. Potters. Washers. Iaggory-makers. The Poddah, Weavors.
Basket-makers. Mat-makers. The lower ranks may not assume the habit or names of
the higher. Slaves. Beggars. The reason the Beggars became so base and mean a
People. They live well. Their Contest with the Weavors about dead Cows. Incest
common among them. A Punishment, to deliver Noble women to these Beggars. Some
of these Beggars keep Cattle and shoot Deer. Refuse Meat dressed in a Barbar's
house; and why.

CHAP. III. Of their Religion, Gods, Temples, Priests.
THeir Religion is Idolatry. They worship Gods and Devils. And the God, that
saves Souls. The Sun and Moon they seem to repute Deities. Some of their
Temples of exquisite work. The form of their Temples. The shape of their Idols.
They wor^hip not the Idol, but whom it represents. The Revenues of the Temples,
and the Honors thereof. They are dedicated to Gods. Private Chapels. The
Priests. The first Order of them. The habit of these Priests. Their Privileges.
What they are Prohibited. When any are religiously disposed, these Priests sent
for in great Ceremony. None ever used violence toward them before this present
King. The second Order of Priests. The third Order. How they dedicate a Red
Cock to the Devil. Their Oracle.

CHAP. IV. Concerning their Worship and Festivals.
THE chief days of Worship. How they know what God or Devil has made them
sick. The Gods of their Fortunes, viz. the Planets. What worship they give
Devils. Who eat the Sacrifices. Their Gods are local. The Subjection of this
People to the Devil. Sometimes the Devil possesses them. The Devils voice
often heard. Their Sacrifice to the chief Devil. Their Festivals. Festivals to
the honor of the Gods that govern this World. The Great Festival in June, with
the manner of the Solemnity. The Feast in November. The Festival in honor of
the God of the Soul. The high honor they have for this God.

CHAP. V. Concerning their Religious Doctrines, Opinions and Practices.
AS to their Religion they are very indifferent. If their Gods answer not their
Desires, they curse them. They undervalue and revile their Gods. A Fellow gives
out himself for a Prophet. His Success. The King sends for one of his Priests.
Flies to Columbo. Pretends himself to be a former Kings Son. Flies from the
Dutch. The King catches and quarters him. The Peoples high opinion still of
this new God. Their Doctrines and Opinion. The highest points of their
Devotion. Their Charity. The Privilege of the Moorish Beggars. Respect
Christians, and why.

CHAP. VI. Concerning their Houses, Diet, Housewifery, Salutation, Apparel.
THeir Houses mean. No Chimneys. The Houses of the better sort. Their
Furniture. How they eat. How the great Men eat. Discouraged from nourishing
Cattle. Cle^^ly in dressing their meat. Their manner of drinking and eating.
Their manner of washing before and after meals. None must speak while the Rice
is put into the Pot. Sauce made of Lemmon juice. Their sweet meats. A kind of
Puddings. The Women's Housewifry. How they entertain Strangers, And Kindred.
When they Visit. Their manner of Salutation. The Nobles in their best Apparel.
The fashion of their hair. The Wom^n dressed in their Bravery. How they dress
their heads. They commonly borrow their fine Cloths.

CHAP. VII. Of their Lodging, Bedding, Whoredom, Marriages, Children.
THeir Bed, and how they sleep a Nights. They rise often in the Night. Children
taught to sing at going to bed. Young People ly at one another Hous^s. Nothing
so common as Whoredom. They are guilty of the thing, but love not the Name.
The man may kill wh^^ he finds in bed with his Wife. The Women's craft to
compass and conceal their Debauchery. They do treat their Friends with the use
of their Wives or Daughters. The Mother for a small reward prostitutes her
Daughter. Marriages. No Wooing. The Bridegroom goes to the Brides house. How
the Bridegroom carries home his Bride. A Ceremony of Marriage. Man and Wife may
part at pleasure. Men and Women change till they can please themselves. Women
sometimes have two Husbands. Women unclean. Privileges of Men above Women.
Privileges of Women. They often destroy Newborn Infants, But seldom a
Firstborn. Their Names. They are ambitious of high Titles.

CHAP^ VIII. Of their Employments and Recreations.
THeir Trade. Work not discreditable to the best Gentleman. How they geld their
Cattle. How they make Glue. Their Manufactures. How they make Iron. How they
make Butter. Shops in the City. Prices of Commodities. Of their Measures. Their
Weights. Measures bigger than the Statute punishable; but l^ss, not: And why.
Of their Coin: Of their Play. A Play or a Sacrifice: For the filthiness of it
forbid by the King. A cunning Stratagem of an Officer. Tricks and Feats of
Activity. At leisure times they meet and discourse of News. Drunkenness
abhorred. Their eating BetelL^^ves. How they make Lime.

CHAP. IX. Of their Laws and Language.
THeir Laws. Lands descend. In case Corn receives damage by a Neighbors
Cattle. The loss of letting out Land to Till. The great Consideration for Corn
borrowed. A Debt becomes double in two years. If the Debtor pay not his Debt,
he is liable to be a Slave for it. Diverse other Laws and Customs. For
deciding Controversies. Swearing in the Temples. The manner of swearing in hot
Oil. How they exact. Fines. Of their Language. Titles given to Women according
to their qualities. Titles given to Men. No difference between a Countryman
and a Courtier for Language. Their Speech and manner of Address is courtly and
becoming. Their Language in their Address to the King. Words of form and
Civility. Full of Words and Complement. By whom they swear. Their way of
railing and scurrility. Proverbs. Something of their Grammar. A Specimen of
their Words. Their Numbering.

CHAP. X. Concerning their Learning, Astronomy and Art Magic.
OF their Learning. Their Books and Arts. How they learn to write. How they
make and write a Book. The Priests write Books of B^nna. The Kings Warrants how
wrapped up. They write upon two sorts of Leaves. Their Skill in Astronomy.
Their Almanacks. They pretend to know future things by the Stars. Their Era.
Their Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours. How they measure their Time. Their
Magic. The Plenty of a Country destroyed by Magic. Their Charm to find out a
Thief. The way to dissolve this Charm. Inscriptions upon Rocks.

CHAP. XI. Of their Sickness, Death and Burial.
THE Diseases this Country is subject to. Every one a Physician to himself. To
Purge: To Vomit. To heal Sores. To heal an Impostume. For an hurt in the Eye.
To cure the Itch. The Caudle for Lying-in Women. Goraca, a Fruit. Excellent at
the Cure of Poison. They easily heal the biting of Serpents by Herbs, And
Charms. But not good at healing inward Distempers. They both bury and burn
their Dead. They send for a Priest to pray for the Soul of the Departed. How
they mourn for the Dead. The nature of the Women. How they bury. How they burn.
How they bury those that die of the Small Pox.

PART IV.
CHAP. I. Of the reason of our going to Ceylon, and Detainment there.
THE subject of this Fourth Part. The occasion of their coming to Ceylon. They
were not jealous of the People being very Courteous. A Message pretended to the
Captain from the King. The beginning of their Suspicion. The Captain seized and
seven more. The Longboat men seized. The General's craft to get the Ship as
well as the Men. The Captains Order to them on board the Ship. The Captains
second Message to his Ship. The Ships Company refuse to bring up the Ship. The
Captain orders the Ship to depart. The Lading of Cloth remained untouched. The
probable reason of our Surprise. The number of those that were left on the
Island. The Dissauva departs.

CHAP. II. How we were carried up in the Country, and disposed of there, and of
the Sickness, Sorrow and Death of the Captain.
THey intend to attempt an Escape, but are prevented. Their Condition
commiserated by the People. They are distributed into diverse Towns. An Order
comes from the King to bring them up into the Country. How they were treated on
the way in the Woods. And in the Towns among the Inhabitants. They are brought
near Cande, and there separated. The Captain and his Son and two more quartered
together. Parted: How they fared: The Captain and his Son placed in Coos-swat.
Moneys scarce with them. But they had good Provisions without it. The Town
where they were sickly. How they passed their time. Both fall Sick. Deep grief
seizes the Captain. Their Sickness continues. Their Boys Disobedience adds to
their trouble. His excessive Sorrow. His Discourse and Charge to his Son before
his Death. His Death, and Burial. The Place where he lies. Upon the Captain's
Death a Message sent from Court to his Son.

CHAP. III. How I lived after my Father's Death. And of the Condition of the
rest of the English: and how it fared with them. And of our Interview.
HIs chief Employment is Reading: He loses his Ague: How he met with an
English Bible in that Country: Struck into a great Passion at the first sight
of the Book: He ca^ts with himself how to get it: Where the rest of the English
were bestowed: Kept from one another a good while, but after permitted to see
each other: No manner of Work laid upon them: They begin to pluck up their
hearts: What course they took for Cloths: Their Fare: What Employment they
afterward followed: How the English domineered: What Satisfaction one of them
received from a Potter. A scuffle between the English and Natives. The Author
after a year sees his Countrymen. Their Conference and Entertainment. He
consults with his Countrymen concerning a future livelihood. The difficulty he
met with in having his Rice brought him undressed. He reasons with the People
about his Allowance. Builds him an House. Follows Business and thrives. Some
attempted running away, and were catched. Little encouragement for those that
bring back Run-awayes.

CHAP. IV. Concerning some other Englishmen detained in that Country.
THe Persia Merchantmen Captives before them. Plundered by the Natives. Brought
up to the King. They hoped to have their liberty, but were mistaken. A
ridiculous action of these Men. They had a mind to Beef, and how they got it. A
passage of A NEW MAP of the Kingdom of CANDY UDA. in the Island of CEYLON.
their Courage. Two of this Company taken into Court. The One out of favor.
His End. The other out of Favor. And his lamentable Death. The King sends
special Order concerning their good Usage. Mr. Vassal's prudence upon his
Receipt of Letters. The King bids him read his Letters. The King pleased to hear
of Englands Victory over Holland. Private discourse between the King and Vassal.

CHAP. V. Concerning the means that were used for our Deliverance. And what
happened to us in the Rebellion. And how we were settled afterward.
MEans made to the King for their Liberty, Upon which they all meet at the
City. Word sent them from the Court, that they had their Liberty. All in
general refuse the Kings Service. Commanded still to wait at the Palace. During
which a Rebellion breaks out. They are in the midst of it, and in great danger.
The Rebels take the English with them, designing to engage them on their side:
But they resolve neither to meddle nor make. The day being turned, they fear
the King; but he justifies them. They are driven to beg in the Highways. Sent
into New Quarters, and their Pensions settled again. Fall to Trading and have
more freedom than before.

CHAP. VI. A Continuation of the Author's particular Condition after the
Rebellion.
AT his new Quarters builds him another House. The People counsel him to Marry,
which he seems to listen to. Here he lived two years. A Fort built near him by
the Dutch; but afterward taken by the King. He and three more removed out of
that Country; and settled in a dismal place. A Comfortable Message brought
hither from the King concerning them. Placed there to punish the People for a
Crime. Weary of this Place. By a piece of craft he gets down to his old
Quarters. Began the world anew the third time. Plots to remove himself. Is
encouraged to buy a piece of Land. The situation and condition of it. Buys it.
Builds an House on it. Leaves Laggendenny. Settled at his new Purchase with
three more living with him. Their freedom and Trade. His Family reduced to two.

CHAP. VII. A Return to the rest of the English, with some further accounts of
them. And some further Discourse of the Authors course of Life.
THey confer together about the lawfulness of marrying with the Native women.
He resolves upon a single life. What Employments they follow. The respect and
credit they live in. A Chingulay punished for beating an English man. An
English man preferred at Court. Some English serve the King in his Wars. Who
now live miserably. He returns to speak of himself. Plots and consults about an
Escape. A description of his House. He takes up a new Trade and thrives on it.
His Allowance paid him out of the Kings Storehouses.

CHAP. VIII. How the Author had like to have been received into the Kings
Service, and what Means he used to avoid it. He meditates and attempts an
Escape, but is often prevented.
HE voluntarily forgoes his Pension. Summoned before the King. Informed that he
is to be preferred at Court: But is resolved to refuse it. The answer he makes
to the Great Man: Who sends him to another Great Officer: Stays in that City
expecting his Doom. Goes home, but is sent for again. Having escaped the
Court-Service, falls to his former course of life: His Pedling forwarded his
Escape. The most probable course to take was Northwards. He and his Companion
get three days Journey Northwards; But return back again: Often attempt to fly
this way, but still hindered. In those Parts is bad water, but they had an
Antidote against it. They still improve in the knowledge of the Way. He meets
with his Black Boy in these Parts; Who was to guide him to the Dutch: But
disappointed. An extraordinary drought for three or four years together.

CHAP. IX. How the Author began his Escape, and got onward on his way about an
hundred miles.
THeir Last and Successful attempt. The Way they went. They design for
Anarodgburro: Turn out of the way to avoid the King's Officers: Forced to pass
through a Governors Yard. The Method they used to prevent his Suspicion of them.
Their danger by reason of the Ways they were to pass. They still remain at the
Governors to prevent suspicion. An Accident that now created them great fear:
But got fairly rid of it. Get away plausibly from the Governor. In their way,
they meet with a River, which they found for their purpose. They come safely to
Anarodgburro: This Place described. The People stand amazed at them. They are
examined by the Governor of the Place. Provide things necessary for their
Flight. They find it not safe to proceed further this way. Rosolve to go back
to the River they lately passed.

CHAP. X. The Authors Progress in his Flight from Anarodgburro into the Woods,
unto their arrival in the Malabars Country.
THey depart back again toward the River, but first take their leave of the
Governor here. They begin their Flight; Come to the River along which they
resolve to go; Which they Travel along by till it grew dark. Now they fit
themselves for their Journey. Meeting with an Elephant they took up for the
second Night. The next morning they fall in among Towns before they are aware.
The fright they are in lest they should be seen. Hide themselves in a hollow
Tree. They get safely over this danger. In that Evening they Dress Meat and lay
them down to sleep. The next morning they fear wild Men, which these Woods
abound with. And they meet with many of their Tents. Very near once falling
upon these People. What kind of Traveling they had. Some account of this
River. Ruins. The Woods hereabouts. How they secured themselves anights against
wild Beasts. They pass the River, that divides the King's Country from the
Malabars. After four or five days Travel, they come among Inhabitants. But do
what they can to avoid them. As yet undiscovered.

CHAP. XI. Being in the Malabar Territories how they encountered two Men, and
what passed between them. And of their getting safe unto the Dutch Fort. And
their Reception there; and at the Island Manaar, until their Embarking for
Columbo.
THey meet with two Malabars. To whom they relate their Condition. Who are
courteous to them. But loath to Conduct them to the Hollander. In danger of
Elephants. They overtake another Man, who tells them they were in the Dutch
Dominions. They arrive at Arrepa Fort. The Author Traveled a Nights in these
Woods without fear, and slept securely. Entertained very kindly by the Dutch.
Sent to Manaar, Received there by the Captain of the Castle, Who intended they
should Sail the next day to Iafnipatan to the Governor. They meet here with a
Scotch and Irish Man. The People Flock to see them. They are ordered a longer
stay. They Embark for Columbo.

CHAP XII. Their Arrival at Columbo, and Entertainment there. Their Departure
thence to Batavia. And from thence to Bantam; Whence they set Sail for England.
THey are wondered at Columbo; ordered to appear before the Governor. Treated
by English there. They come into the Governor's presence. His State. Matters
the Governor enquired of: Who desires him to go with him to Batavia. Cloths
them, And sends them Money, and a Surgeon. The Author writes a Letter hence
to the English he left behind him. The former Demands and Answers penned down
in Portugueze by the Governor's Order. They Embark for Batavia. Their friendly
Reception by the Governor there; Who furnishes them with Cloths and Money; And
offers them passage in their Ships home. Come home from Bantam in the Caesar.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning some other Nations, and chiefly Europeans, that now
live in this Island; Portugueze, Dutch.
MAlabars that Inhabit here. Their Territories. Their Prince. That People how
governed. Their Commodities and Trade. Portugueze: Their Power and Interest in
this Island formerly. The great Wars between the King and them forced him to
send in for the Hollander. The King invites the Portugueze to live in his
Country. Their Privileges. Their Generals. Constantine Sa. Who loses a Victory
and Stabs himself. Lewis Tissera served as he intended to serve the King. Simon
Caree, of a cruel Mind. Gaspar Figazi. Splits Men in the middle. His Policy.
Gives the King a great Overthrow, loses Columbo, and taken Prisoner. The
Dutch. The occasion of their coming in. The King their implacable Enemy, and
why. The Damage the King does them. The means they use to obtain Peace with
him. How he took Bibligom Fort from them. Several of their Ambassadors detained
by the King. The first Ambassador there detained since the Author's
Remembrance. His Preferment, and Death. The next Ambassador dying there, his
Body is sent down to Columbo in great State. The third Ambassador. Gets away by
his Resolution. The fourth was of a milder Nature. The fifth brings a Lion to
the King as a Present. The number of Dutch there. They follow their Vice of
Drinking. The Chingulays prejudiced against the Dutch, and why.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the French. With some Enquiries what should make the
King detain white men, as he does. And how the Christian Religon is maintained
among the Christians there.
THe French come hither with a Fleet. To whom the King sends Provisions, and
helps them to build a Fort. The French Ambassador offends the King. He refuses
to wait longer for Audience. Which more displeases him. Clapped in Chains. The
rest of the French refuse to dwell with the Ambassador. The King uses means to
reconcile them to their Ambassador. The Author acquaints the French Ambassador
in London, with the Condition of these men. An Inquiry into the reason of this
King's detaining Europoeans. The Kings gentleness toward his White Soldiers.
They watch at his Magazine. How craftily the King corrected their negligence.
The Kings inclinations are toward White men. The Color of White honored in
this Land. Their privilege above the Natives. The King loves to send for and
talk with them. How they maintain Christianity among them. In some things they
comply with the worship of the Heathen. An old Roman Catholic Priest used to
eat of their Sacrifices. The King permitted the Portugueze to build a Church.

ERRATA.
Besides diverse Mispointings, and other Literal Mistakes of smaller moment,
these are to be amended.

PAge 1. Line 16. after Parts, strike out the Comma, p. 3. l. 25. for Oudi
p^llet read Oudi pollat, p. 7. l. 31. after they dele that, p. 12. l. 43. for
Ponudecarso read Ponudecars, p. 13. after rolling dele it, p. 22. l. 38. for
Out-yards read Ortyards, p. 25. l. 6. for tarrish read tartish, p. 27. l. 10.
for sometimes read some, p. 29. l. 33. for Rodgerati read Rodgerah, p. 33. l.
15, 25, 29. for Radga in those three lines, read Raja, p. 35. l. 12. for a read
at, Ibid. l. 51. for being none read none being, p. 39. l. 1. dele a, p. 47. l.
36. for Ourpungi read Oulpangi, Ibid. l. 43. for Dackini read Dackim, p. 50. l.
16. for Rotera^ts read Roterauls, Ibid. l. 17. after these read are, Ibid. l.
24. after them read to, p. 51. l. 2. after them a Semicolon, Ibid. Marg. l. 3.
for others read these, Ibid. l. 18. for their read theirs, Ibid. l. 19. dele
and. Ibid. l. 49. for Courti-Atchila read Courli-atchila, p. 58. l. 30. after
were read or were, p. 62. Marg. l. 1. for By read Pay, Ibid. l. 18. after
shooting add him; Ibid. Marg. l. 14. for one read once, p. 69. l. 28. after
lace dele the Comma, Ibid. l. 30. for Kirinerahs read Kinnerahs, p. ^1. l. 3.
after places add and, p. 73. 14. dele they say, Ibid. l. 42. for ward read
reward, p. 74. l. 5. dele ^he Semicolon after Vehar, and place it after also,
Ibid. l. 27. for hands read heads, p. 76. l. 23. for God read Gods, Ibid. l.
36. after know a Period, p. 80. l. 3. for him read them, p. 87. l. 27. after
Hens ^ Semicolon, p. 88. l. 35. for stream read steam, p. 89. l. 7. for a read
the, p. 101. l. 28. for Husband read Husbandman, p. 102. l. 23. after
considerable a Comma, p. 103. Marg. l. 4. for benefit read manner, p. 105. l.
26. for so read To, p. 109. l. 1. read Heawoy com-coraund, To fight, as much as
to say, To act the Soldier, p. 110. l. 29. after go add their Journey, p. 111.
l. 9. for Friday read Iridah, p. 112. l. 52. after temple add in, p. 118. l.
41. after and add his, p. 128. l. 51. dele no, p. 132. l. 38. dele the Comma
after Holstein, p. 134. l. 47. For Crock read crook, p. 138. l. 37. for ny read
any, Ibid. l. 47. after they read had, p. 148. l. 52. for go read got, p. 151.
l. 6. for here read have, p. 154. l. 27. for favors read feav^rs, p. 155. l. 4.
dele the first [ it] Ibid. l. 18. for he read we, p. 161. l. 43. for D^abac
read Diabat. p. 168. l. 4. after before add us, Ibid. l. 7. after comparing add
it, p. 176. l. 22. for the read great, p. 179. l. 21. for be read beg, Ibid. l.
34. dele what they keep; And instead of Cande Uda throout the Book, read Conde
Uda.

AN Historical Relation OF ZEILON, (Alias Ceylon,) AN Island in the EAST INDIES.
PART I.
CHAP. I. A general Description of the Island.
HOw this Island lies with respect unto the Neighboring Countries, I shall not
speak at all, that being to be seen in our ordinary Sea-Cards, which describe
those Parts; and but little concerning the Maritime parts of it, now under the
Jurisdiction of the Dutch: my design being to relate such things only that are
new and unknown unto these Europaean Nations. It is the Inland Country
therefore I chiefly intend to write of, which is yet an hidden Land even to the
Dutch themselves that inhabit upon the Island. For I have seen among them a
fair large Map of this Place, the best I believe extant, yet very faulty: the
ordinary Maps in use among us are much more so. I have procured a new one to be
drawn, with as much truth and exactness as I could, and his Judgment will not
be deemed altogether inconsiderable, who had for Twenty Years Traveled about
the Island, and knew almost every step of those Parts, especially, that most
want describing.

I begin with the Seacoasts. Of all which the Hollander is Master. On the
North end the chief places are Iafnipatan, and the Island of Manaur. On the East
side Trenkimalay, and Batticalow. To the South is the City of Point de Galle.
On the West the City of Columbo, so called from a Tree the Natives call Ambo,
(which bears the Mango-fruit) growing in that place; but this never bare fruit,
but only leaves, which in their Language is Cola, and thence they called the
Tree Colaambo: which the Christians in honor of Columbus turned to Columbo. It
is the chief City on the Seacoasts, where the chief Governor has his
residence. On this side also is Negumba, and Colpentine. All these already
mentioned are strong fortified places: There are besides many other smaller
Forts and Fortifications. All which, with considerable Territories, to wit, all
round bordering upon the Seacoasts, belong to the Dutch Nation.

A general division of the Inland Country.
I proceed to the Inland-Country, being that that is now under the King of
Cande. It is convenient that we first understand, that this land is divided
into greater or less shares or parts. The greater divisions give me leave to
call Provirces, and the less Counties, as resembling ours in England, tho not
altogether so big. On the North parts lies the Province of Nourecalava,
consisting of five lesser Divisions or Counties; the Province also of Hotcourly
(signifying seven Counties:) it contains seven Counties. On the Eastward is
Mautaly, containing three Counties. There are also lying on that side
Tammanquod, Bintana, Vellas, Paunoa, these are single Counties. Ouvah also
containing three Counties. In this Province are Two and thirty of the Kings
Captains dwelling with their Soldiers. In the Midland within those already
mentioned lie Wallaponahoy (it signifies Fifty holes or vales which describe
the nature of it, being nothing but Hills and Valleys,) Poncipot, (signifying
five hundred Soldiers.) Goddaponahoy, (signifying fifty pieces of dry Land;)
Hevoihattay (signifying sixty Soldiers,) Cote-mul, Horsepot (four hundred
Soldiers.) Tunponahoy (three fifties.) Oudanour (it signifies the Upper City,)
where I lived last and had Land. Tattanour (the Lower City) in which stands the
Royal and chief City, Cande. These two Counties I last named, have the
pre-eminence of all the rest in the Land. They are most populous, and fruitful.
The Inhabitants thereof are the chief and principal men: insomuch that it is a
usual saying among them, that if they want a King, they may take any man, of
either of these two Counties, from the Plow, and wash the dirt off him, and he
by reason of his quality and descent is fit to be a King. And they have this
peculiar Privilege, That none may be their Governor, but one born in their
own Country. These ly to the Westward that follow, Oudipollat, Dolusbaug,
Hotteracourly, containing four Counties; Portaloon, Tuncourly, containing three
Counties; Cuttiar. Which last, together with Batticalaw, and a part of
Tuncourly, the Hollander took from the King during my being there. There are
about ten or twelve more un-named, next bordering on the Coasts, which are
under the Hollander. All these Provinces and Counties, excepting six,
Tammanquod, Vellas, Paunoa, Hotteracourly, Hotcourly, and Neurecalava, ly upon
Hills fruitful and dwell watered: and therefore they are called in one word
Conde Vda, which signifies, On top of the Hills, and the King is styled, the
King of Conde Vda.

Each County divided by Woods.
All these Counties are divided each from other by great Woods. Which none may
fell, being preserved for Fortifications. In most o^ them there are Watches
kept constantly, but in troublesome times in all.

The Country Hilly, but enriched with Rivers.
The Land is full of Hills, but exceedingly well watered, there being many pure
and clear Rivers running through them. Which falling down about their Lands is
a very great benefit for the Country in respect of their Rice, their chief
Sustenance. These Rivers are generally very rocky, and so un-navigable. In them
are great quantities of Fish, and the greater for want of Skill in the People
to catch them. The main River of all is called Mavelagonga; The great River,
Mavelagonga described.
Which proceeds out of the Mountain called Adams Peak (of which afterward:) it
runs through the whole Land Northward, and falls into the Sea at Trenkimalay. It
may be an Arrows flight over in breadth, but not Navigable by reason of the many
Rocks and great falls in it: Toward the Sea it is full of Aligators, but on
the Mountains none at all.

It is so deep, that unless it be mighty dry weather, a man cannot wade over
it, unless toward the head of it. They use little Canoues to pass over it: but
there are no Bridges built over it, being so broad, and the Stream in time of
Rains (which in this Country are very great) runs so high, that they cannot
make them, neither if they could, would it be permitted; for the King cares
not to make his Country easy to travel, but desires to keep it intricate.
This River runs within a mile or less of the City of Cande. In some places of
it, full of Rocks, in others clear for three or four miles.

There is another good large River running through Cotemul, and falls into that
before mentioned. There are diverse others brave Rivers that water the Country,
tho none Navigable for the cause abovesaid.

The Land is generally covered with Woods, Woody.
excepting the Kingdom of Ovuah, and the Counties of Oudipallet, and
Dolusbaug, which are naturally somewhat clear of them.

It is most populous about the middle, Where most populous and healthful.
least near about by the Sea; how it is with those Parts under the Hollander, I
know not. The Northern parts are somewhat sickly by reason of bad water, the
rest very healthful.

The Valleys between their Hills are many of them quagmires, The nature of the
Valleys.
and most of them full of brave Springs of pure water: Which watery Valleys are
the best sort of Land for their Corn, as requiring much moisture, as shall be
told in its place.

On the South side of Conde Vda is an Hill, The great, Hill Adams Peak,
described.
supposed to be the highest on this Island, called in the Chingulay Language,
Hamalell; but by the Portuguez and the Europaean Nations, Adams Peak. It is
sharp like a Sugar Loaf, and on the Top a flat Stone with the print of a foot
like a man's on it, but far bigger, being about two foot long. The people of
this Land count it meritorious to go and worship this impression; and generally
about their New Year, which is in March, they, Men, Women and Children, go up
this vast and high Mountain to worship. The manner of which I shall write
hereafter, when I come to describe their Religion. Out of this Mountain arise
many fine Rivers, which run through the Land, some to the Westward, some to the
Southward, and the main River, viz. Mavelagonga before mentioned, to the
Northward.

This Kingdom of Conde Vda is strongly fortified by Nature. The natural
Strength of this Kingdom.
For which way soever you enter into it, you must ascend vast and high
mountains, and descend little or nothing. The ways are many, but very narrow,
so that but one can go abreast. The Hills are covered with Wood and great
Rocks, so that it is scarce possible to get up any where, but only in the
paths, in all which there are gates made of Thorns, the one at the bottom, the
other at the top of the Hills, and two or three men always set to watch, who
are to examine all that come and go, and see what they carry, that Letters may
not be conveyed, nor Prisoners or other Slaves run away. These Watches, in case
of opposition, are to call out to the Towns near, who are to assist them. They
oftentimes have no Arms, for they are the people of the next Towns: but their
Weapons to stop people are to charge them in the Kings Name; which disobeyed,
is so severely punished, that none dare resist. These Watches are but as
Sentinels to give notice; for in case of War and Danger the King sends
Commanders and Soldiers to ly here. But of this enough. These things being
more proper to be related, when we come to discourse of the Policy and Strength
of the Kingdom.

The difference of the Seasons in this Country.
The one part of this Island differs very much from the other, both in respect
of the Seasons and the Soil. For when the Westwardly Winds blow, then it rains
on the West side of the Island: and that is the season for them to till their
grounds. And at the same time on the East side is very fair and dry weather,
and the time of their Harvest. On the contrary, when the East Winds blow, it is
Tilling time for those that inhabit the East Parts, and Harvest to those on the
West. So that Harvest is here in one part or other all the Year long. These
Rains and this dry weather do part themselves about the middle of the Land^ as
oftentimes I have seen, being on the one side of a Mountain called Cauragas
hi^g, rainy and wet weather, and as soon as I came on the other, dry, and so
exceeding hot, that I could scarcely walk on the ground, being, as the manner
there is, barefoot.

What Parts have most Rain.
It rains far more in the High-Lands of Conde Vda, then in the Low-Lands beneath
the Hills. The North End of this Island is much subject to dry weather. I have
known it for five or six Years together so dry, (having no Rains, and there is
no other means of water but that, being but three Springs of running water,
that I know, or ever heard of) that they could not plow nor sow, and scarcely
could dig Wells deep enough to get water to drink, and when they got it, its
taste was brackish. At which time in other Parts there wanted not Rain; Whither
the Northern People were forced to come to buy food. Let thus much suffice to
have spoken of the Countries, Soil and Nature of this Island in general. I will
proceed to speak of the Cities and Towns of it, together with some other
Remarkable Matters thereunto belonging.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Chief Cities and Towns of this Island.
The most Eminent Cities are Five.
IN this Island are several Places, where, they say, formerly stood Cities; and
still retain the Name, tho little or nothing of Building be now to be seen. But
yet there are Five Cities now standing, which are the most Eminent, and where
the King has Palaces and Goods; yet even these, all of them, except that
wherein his Person is, are ruined and fallen to decay.

The First is the City of Candy, Candy.
so generally called by the Christians, probably from Conde, which in the
Chingulays Language signifies Hills, for among them it is situated, but by the
Inhabitants called Hingodagul-neure, as much as to say, the City of the
Chingulay people, and Mauneur, signifying the Chief or Royal City. This is the
Chief or Metro-political City of the whole Island. It is placed in the midst of
the Island in Tattanour, bravely situate for all conveniences, excellently well
watered. The Kings Palace stands on the East corner of the City, as is
customary in this Land for the Kings Palaces to stand. This City is
three-square like a Triangle: but no artificial strength about it, unless on
the South side, which is the easiest and openest way to it, they have long
since cast up a Bank of Earth cross the Valley from one Hill to the other;
which nevertheless is not so steep but that a man may easily go over it any
where. It may be some twenty foot in height. In every Way to come to this City
about two or three miles off from it are Thorn-Gates and Watches to examine all
that go and come: It is environed round with Hills. The great River coming down
from Adams Peak runs within less than a mile of it on the West side. It has
oftentimes been burnt by the Portuguez in their former Invasions of this
Island, together with the Kings Palace and the Temples. Insomuch that the King
has been fain to pay them a Tribute of three Elephants per annum. The King left
this City about Twenty Years ago, and never since has come at it. So that it is
now quite gone to decay.

A second City is Nellemby-neur, Nellemby.
lying in Oudipollat, South of Cande, some Twelve miles distance. Unto this the
King retired, and here kept his Court, when he forsook Candy.

Thirdly, The City Allout-neur on the North East of Cande. Allout-neur
Here this King was born^ here also he keeps great store of Corn and Salt, etc.
against time of War or Trouble. This is Situate in the Country of Bintan, The
Country of Bintan described.
which Land, I have never been at, but have taken a view of from the top of a
Mountain, it seems to be smooth Land, and not much hilly; the great River
runs through the midst of it. It is all over covered with mighty Woods and
abundance of Deer. But much subject to dry Weather and Sickness. In these Woods
is a sort of Wild People Inhabiting, whom we shall speak of in their place.

Fourthly, Badoula Eastward from Cande some two days Journey, Badoula.
the second City in this Land. The Portugals in time of War burnt it down to
the ground. The Palace here is quite ruined; the Pagodas only remain in good
repair.

This City stands in the Kingdom or Province of Ouvah, The Province of Ouvah.
which is a Country well watered, the Land not smooth, neither the Hills very
high, wood very scarce, but what they plant about their Houses. But great
plenty of Cattle, their Land void of wood being the more apt for grazing. If
the^e Cattle be carried to any other Parts in this Island they will commonly
dye, the reason whereof no man can tell, only they conjecture it is occasioned
by a kind of small Tree or Shrub, that grows in all Countries but in Ouvah, the
Touch or Scent of which may be Poison to the Ouvah Cattle; though it is not so
to other. The Tree has a pretty Physical smell like an Apothecaries Shop, but
no sort of Cattle will eat it. In this Cuontry grows the best Tobacco that is
on this Land. Rice is more plenty here then most other things.

The fifth City is Digligy-neur toward the East of Cande, lying in the Country
of Hevahatt. Digligy, the place of the Kings constant Residence.
Where the King ever since he was routed from Nellemby in the Rebellion Anno
1664. has held his Court. The situation of this place is very Rocky and
Mountainous, the Lands Barren; So that hardly a worse place could be found out
in the whole Island. Yet the King chose it, partly because it lies about the
middle of his Kingdom, but chiefly for his safety; having the great Mountain
Gauluda behind his Palace, Gauluda.
unto which he fled for Safety in the Rebellion, being not only high, but on
the top of it lie three Towns, and Corn Fields, whence he may have necessary
supplies: and it is so fenced with steep Cliffs, Rocks and Woods, that a few
men here will be able to defend themselves against a great Army.

Many Ruins of Cities.
There are besides these already mentioned, several other ruinous places that do
still retain the name of Cities, where Kings have Reigned, tho now little
Footsteps remaining of them. At the North end of this Kings Dominions is one
of these Ruinous Cities, called Anurodgburro where they say Ninety Kings have
Reigned, Anurodgburro.
the Spirits of whom they hold now to be Saints in Glory, having merited it by
making Pagoda's and Stone Pillars and Images to the honor of their Gods,
whereof there are many yet remaining: which the Chingulayes count very
meritorious to worship, and the next way to Heaven. Near by is a River, by
which we came when we made our escape: all along which is abundance of hewed
stones, some long for Pillars, some broad for paving. Over this River there
have been three Stone Bridges built upon Stone Pillars, but now are fallen
down; and the Country all desolate without Inhabitants. At this City of
Anurodgburro is a Watch kept, beyond which are no more people that yield
obedience to the King of Candy. This place is above Ninety miles to the
Northward of the City of Candy. The nature of the Northern Parts.
In these Northern Parts there are no Hills, nor but two or three Springs of
running water, so that their Corn ripeneth with the help of Rain.

The Port of Portaloon: It affords Salt.
There is a Port in the Country of Portaloon lying on the West side of this
Island, whence part of the Kings Country is supplied with Salt and Fish: where
they have some small Trade with the Dutch, who have a Fort upon the Point, to
prevent Boats from coming: But the Eastern Parts being too far, and Hilly, to
drive Cattle thither for Salt, Gods Providence has provided them a place on
the East side nearer them, which in their Language they call Leawava. Leawava
affords Salt in abundance.
Where the Eastwardly Winds blowing, the Sea beats in, and in Westwardly Winds
(being then fair weather there) it becomes Salt, and that in such abundance,
that they have as much as they please to fetch. This Place of Leawava is so
contrived by the Providence of the Almighty Creator, Described.
that neither the Portuguez nor Dutch in all the time of their Wars could ever
prevent this People from having the benefit of this Salt, which is the
principal thing that they esteem in time of Trouble or War; and most of them do
keep by them a store of Salt against such times. It is, as I have heard,
environed with Hills on the Land side, and by Sea not convenient for Ships to
ride; and very sickly, which they do impute to the power of a great God, who
dwells near by in a Town they call Cotterag^m, standing in the Road, to whom
all that go to fetch Salt both small and great must give an Offering. The Name
and Power of this God strikes such terror into the Chingulayes, that those who
otherwise are Enemies to this King, and have served both Portuguez and Dutch
against him, yet would never assist either to make Invasions this way.

Having said thus much concerning the Cities and other Eminent places of this
Kingdom, Their Towns how Built.
I will now add a little concerning their Towns. The best are those that do
belong to their Idols, wherein stand their Dewals or Temples. They do not care
to make Streets by building their Houses together in rows, but each man lives
by himself in his own Plantation, having an hedge it may be and a ditch round
about him to keep out Cattle. Their Towns are always placed some distance from
the Highways, for they care not that their Towns should be a thorough-fair for
all people, but only for those that have business with them. They are not very
big, in some may be Forty, in some Fifty houses, and in some above an Hundred:
and in some again not above eight or ten.

And as I said before of their Cities, so I must of their Towns, Many lie in
Ruins, and forsaken; and upon what occasion.
That there are many of them here and there lie desolate, occasioned by their
voluntary forsaking them, which they often do, in case many of them fall sick,
and two or three die soon after one another: For this they conclude to happen
from the hand of the Devil. Whereupon they all leave their Town and go to
another, thinking thereby to avoid him: Thus relinquishing both their Houses
and Lands too. Yet afterward, when they think the Devil has departed the
place, some will sometimes come back and reassume their Lands again.

CHAP. III. Of their Corn, with their manner of Husbandry.
HAving discoursed hitherto of the Country, The Products and Commodities of
the Country.
method will require that I proceed now to the Products of it; Viz. their
Fruits, Plants, Beasts, Birds, and other Creatures, Minerals, Commodities, etc.
whereof I must declare once for all, That I do not pretend to write an Exact
and Perfect Treatise, my time and leisure not permitting me so to do; but only
to give a Relation of some of the chief of these things, and as it were a taste
of them, according as they that occur to my Memory while I am writing. I shall
first begin with their Corn, as being the Staff of their Country.

They have diverse sorts of Corn, Corn of diverse sorts.
tho all different from ours. And here I shall first speak of their Rice, the
Choice and Flower of all their Corn, and then concerning the other inferior
kinds among them.

Of Rice they have several sorts, Rice.
and called by several names according to the different times of their
ripening: However in taste little disagreeing from one another. Some will
require seven Months before it come to maturity, called Mauvi; some six,
Hauteal; others will ripen in five, Honorowal; others in four, Henit; and
others in three, Aulfancol: The price of all these is one and the same. That
which is soonest ripe, is most savoury to the taste; but yields the least
increase. It may be asked then, why any other sort of Rice is sown, but that
which is longest a Ripening, seeing it brings in most Profit? In answer to
this, you must know, That all these sorts of Rice do absolutely require Water
to grow in, Grows in Water.

Their Ingenuity in watering their Corn Lands.


all the while they stand; so that the Inhabitants take great pains in
procuring and saving water for their Grounds, and in making Conveyances of
Water from their Rivers and Ponds into their Lands, which they are very
ingenious in; also in levelling their Corn Lands, which must be as smooth as a
Bowling-Green, that the Water may cover all over. Neither are their steep and
Hilly Lands incapable of being thus overflown with Water. For the doing of
which they use this Art. They level these Hills into narrow Allies, some three,
some eight foot wide one beneath another, according to the steepness of the
Hills, working and digging them in that fashion that they lie smooth and flat,
like so many Stairs up the Hills one above another. The Waters at the top of
the Hills falling downwards are let into these Allies, and so successively by
running out of one into another, water all; first the higher Lands, and then
the lower. The highest Allies having such a quantity of Water as may suffice to
cover them, the rest runs over unto the next, and that having its proportion,
unto the next, and so by degrees it falls into all these hanging parcels of
Ground. These Waters last sometimes a longer, and sometimes a shorter Season.
Now the Rice they sow is according as they foresee their stock of Water will
last. It will sometimes last them two or three, or four or five Months, more or
less; the Rice therefore they choose to cast into the Ground, Why they do not
always sow the best kind of Rice.
is of that sort that may answer the duration of the Water. For all their Crop
would be spoilt if the Water should fail them before their Corn grew ripe. If
they foresee their Water will hold out long, then they sow the best and most
profitable Rice, viz. that which is longest a ripening; but if it will not,
they must be content to sow of the worser sorts; that is, those that are sooner
ripe. Again, they are forced sometimes to sow this younger Rice, for the
preventing the damage it might otherwise meet with, if it should stand longer.
For their Fields are all in common, which after they have sown, they enclose
till Harvest; But as soon as the Corn first sown becomes ripe, when the Owner
has reaped it, it is lawful for him to break down his Fences, and let in his
Cattle for grazing; which would prove a great mischief to that Corn that
required to stand a Month or two longer. Therefore if they are constrained to
sow later than the rest, either through want or sloth, or some other
Impediment, yet they make use of that kind of Rice that will become ripe, equal
with that first sown. And so they all observe one time of reaping to prevent
their Corn being trampled down or eaten up by the Cattle. They sow at different
times, but reap together.
Thus they time their Corn to their Harvest; some sowing sooner, some later,
but all reaping together, unless they be Fields that are enclosed by
themselves; and peculiar to one Man.

Their Artificial Pools.
Where there are no Springs or Rivers to furnish them with Water, as it is in
the Northern Parts, where there are but two or three Springs, they supply this
defect by saving of rain Water; which they do, by casting up great Banks in
convenient places to stop and contain the Rains that fall, and so save it till
they have occasion to let it out into their Fields: They are made rounding like
a C or Half Moon, every Town has one of these Ponds, which if they can but get
filled with Water, they count their Corn is as good as in the Barn. It was no
small work to the ancient Inhabitants to make all these Banks, of which there
is a great number, being some two, some three Fathoms in height, and in length
some above a Mile, some less, not all of a size. They are now grown over with
great Trees, and so seem natural Hills. When they would use the Water, they cut
a gap in one end of the Bank, and so draw the Water by little and little, as
they have occasion for the wat^ring their Corn. These Ponds in dry weather dry
up quite. If they should dig these Ponds deep, it would not be so convenient
for them. It would indeed contain the Water well, but would not so well nor in
such Plenty empty out it self into their Grounds. In these Ponds are Aligators,
Aligators harbor in them.
which when the Water is dried up depart into the Woods, and down to the
Rivers; and in the time of Rains come up again into the Ponds. They are but
small, nor do use to catch People, nevertheless they stand in some fear of
them. The Corn they sow in these Parts is of that sort that is soonest ripe,
fearing lest their Waters should fail. As the Water dries out of these Ponds,
they make use of them for Fields, treading the Mud with Buffeloes, They sow
Corn on the Mud.
and then sowing Rice thereon, and frequently casting up Water with Scoops on
it. I have hitherto spoken of those Rices that require to grow in Water.

There is yet another sort of Rice, A sort of Rice that grows without Water.
which will ripen though it stand not always in Water: and this sort of Corn
serves for those places, where they cannot bring their Waters to overflow; this
will grow with the Rains that fall; but is not esteemed equal with the others,
and differs both in scent and taste from that which grows in the watery
Fields.

The ordinary Season of seed time, The Seasons of Seed-time and Harvest.
is in the Months of July and August, and their Harvest in or about February;
but for Land that is well watered, they regard no Season; the Season is all the
year long. When they Till their Grounds, or Reap their Corn, they do it by
whole Towns generally, all helping each other for Attoms, as they call it; that
is, that they may help them as much, or as many days again in their Fields,
which accordingly they will do. They Plough only with a crooked piece of Wood,
something like an Elbow, which roots up the Ground, as uneven as if it were
done by Hogs, and then they overflow it with water.

But if any be so curious as to know more particularly how they order and
prepare their Lands, A particular description of their Husbandry.
and sow their Corn, take this account of it. But before we go to work, it will
be convenient first to describe the Tools. To begin therefore with their
Plough. Their Plough^
I said before it was a crooked piece of Wood, it is but little bigger than a
Man's Arm, one end whereof is to hold by, and the other to root up the Ground.
In the hollow of this Plough is a piece of Wood fastened some three or four
Inches thick, equal with the breadth of the Plough; and at the end of the
Plough, is fixed an Iron Plate to keep the VVood from wearing. There is a Beam
let in to that part of it that the Ploughman holds in his hand, to which they
make their Buffaloes fast to drag it.

These Ploughs are proper for this Country, The convenience of these Ploughs.
because they are lighter, and so may be the more easy for turning, the Fields
being short, so that they could not turn with longer, and if heavier, they
would sink and be unruly in the mud. These Ploughs bury not the grass as ours
do, and there is no need they should. For their endeavor is only to root up
the Ground, and so they overflow it with Water, and this rots the Grass.

Their first Ploughing.
They Plough twice before they sow. But before they begin the first time, they
let in Water upon their Land, to make it more fost and pliable for the Plough.
After it is once Ploughed, they make up their Banks. For if otherwise they
should let it alone till after the second Ploughing, it would be mere Mud, and
not hard enough to use for Banking. Their Banks, and use of them.
Now these Banks are greatly necessary, not only for Paths for the People to go
upon through the Fields, who otherwise must go in the Mud, it may be knee deep;
but chiefly to keep in and contain their Water, which by the help of these
Banks they overflow their Grounds with. These Banks they make as smooth with
the backside of their Houghs, as a Bricklayer can smooth a Wall with his
Trowel. For in this they are very neat. These Banks are usually not above a
Foot over.

Their second Ploughing.
After the Land is thus Ploughed and the Banks finished, it is laid under water
again for some time, till they go to Ploughing the second time. Now it is
exceeding muddy, so that the trampling of the Cattle that draws the Plough,
does as much good as the Plough; for the more muddy the better. Sometimes they
use no Plough this second time, but only drive their Cattle over to make the
Ground the muddier.

How they prepare their Seed-Corn,
Their Lands being thus ordered, they still keep them overflowed with Water,
that the Weeds and Grass may rot. Then they take their Corn and lay it a soak
in Water a whole night, and the next day take it out, and lay it in a heap, and
cover it with green leaves, and so let it lie some five or six days to make it
grow. Then they take and wet it again, and lay it in a heap covered over with
leaves as before, and so it grows and shoots out with Blades and Roots. And
their Land after it is Ploughed.
In the mean time while this is thus a growing, they prepare their Ground for
sowing; which is thus: They have a Board about four foot long, which they drag
over their Land by a yoke of Buffaloes, not flat ways, but upon the edge of it.
The use of which is, that it jumbles the Earth and Weeds together, and also
levels and makes the Grounds smooth and even, that so the Water (for the ground
is all this while under water) may stand equal in all places. And wheresoever
there is any little hummock standing out of the Water, which they may easily
see by their eye, with the help of this Board they break and lay even. And so
it stands overflown while their Seed is growing, and become fit to sow, which
usually is eight days after they lay it in soak.

When the Seed is ready to sow, they drain out all the Water, and with little
Boards of about a foot and a half long, fastened upon long Poles, they trim the
Land over again, laying it very smooth, making small Furrows all along, that in
case Rain or other Waters should come in, it might drain away; for more Water
now would endanger rotting the Corn. Their manner of sowing.
And then they sow their Corn, which they do with very exact evenness, strewing
it with their hands, just as we strew Salt upon Meat.

How they Manure and order their young Corn.
And thus it stands without any Water, till such time as the Corn be grown some
three or four Inches above the Ground. There were The Manner of their Ploughing.
The Manner of Smoothing their Feilds.
The Manner of treading out their Rice.
certain gaps made in the Banks to let out the water, these are now stopped to
keep it in. Which is not only to nourish the Corn, but to kill the weeds. For
they keep their Fields as clean as a Garden without a weed. Then when the Corn
is grown about a span high, the Women come and weed it, and pull it up where it
grew too thick, and transplant it where it wants. And so it stands overflown
till the Corn be ripe, when they let out the water again to make it dry for
reaping. They never use any dung, but their manner of plowing and soaking of
their Ground serves instead thereof.

At reaping they are excellent good, just after the English manner. Their
manner of Reaping.
The whole Town, as I said before, as they join together in Tilling, so in
their Harvest also; For all fall in together in reaping one man's Field, and so
to the next, until every man's Corn be down. And the Custom is, that every man,
during the reaping of his Corn, finds all the rest with Victuals. The women's
work is to gather up the Corn after the Reapers, and carry it all together.

They use not Threshing, but tread out their Corn with Cattle, They tread out
their Corn with Cattle.
which is a far quicker and easier way. They may tread out in a day forty or
fifty Bushels at least with the help of half a dozen Cattle.

When they are to tread their Corn they choose a convenient adjoining place.
The Ceremonies they use when the Corn is to be trodden.
Here they lay out a round piece Ground some twenty or five and twenty foot
over. From which they cut away the upper Turf. Then certain Ceremonies are
used. First, they adorn this place with ashes made into flowers and branches,
and round circles. Then they take diverse strange shells, and pieces of Iron,
and some sorts o^ Wood, and a bunch of betel Nuts, (which are reserved for such
purposes) and lay all these in the very middle of the Pit, and a large stone
upon them. Then the women, whose proper work it is, bring each their burden of
reaped Corn upon their heads, and go round in the Pit three times, and then
fling it down. And after this without any more ado, bring in the rest of the
Corn as fast as they can. For this Labor, and that of weeding, the Women have
a Fee due to them, which they call Warapol, that is as much Corn, as shall
cover the Stone and the other Conjuration-Instruments at the bottom of the Pit.

They will frequently carry away their new reaped Corn into the Pit, and tread
it out presently as soon as they have cut it down, to secure it from the Rains,
which in some Parts are very great and often; and Barns they have none big
enough, But in other places not so much given to Rains, they will sometimes set
it up in a Cock, and let it stand some months.

They unshale their Rice from its outward husk by beating it in a Mortar, How
they unhusk their Rice.
or on the Ground more often; but some of these sorts of Rice must first be
boiled in the husk, otherwise in beating it will break to powder. The which
Rice, as it is accounted, so I by experience have found, to be the wholsomest;
This they beat again the second time to take off a Bran from it; and after that
it becomes white. And thus much concerning Rice-Corn.

Besides this, tho far inferior to it, there are diverse other sorts of Corn,
Other sorts of Corn among them.
which serve the People for food in the absence of Rice, which will scarcely
hold out with many of them above half the Year. There is Coracan, Coracan.
which is a small seed like Mustard Seed, This they grind to meal or beat in a
Mortar, and so make Cakes of it, baking it upon the Coals in a potsheard, or
dress it otherwise. If they which are not used to it, eat it, it will gripe
their Bellies; When they are minded to grind it, they have for their Mill two
round stones, which they turn with their hands by the help of a stick: There
are several sorts of this Corn. Some will ripen in three months, and some
require four. If the Ground be good, it yields a great increase; and grows both
on the Hills and in the Plains. There is another Corn called Tanna; Tanna.
It is much eaten in the Northern Parts, in Conde Vda but little sown. It is as
small as the former, but yields a ^ar greater increase. From one grain may
spring up two, three, four or five stalks, according as the ground is, on each
stalk one ear, that contains thousands of grains. I think it gives the greatest
increase of any one seed in the World. Each Husbandman sowes not above a Pottle
at a Seeds-time. It grows up two foot, or two foot and an half from the
ground. The way of gathering it when ripe, is, that the Women (whose office it
is) go and crop off the ears with their hands, and bring them home in baskets.
They only take off the ears of Coracan also, but they being tough, are cut off
with knives. This Tanna must be parched in a Pan, and then is beaten in a
Mortar to unhusk it. It will boil like Rice, but swell far more; the taste not
bad but very dry, and accounted wholesome; the fashion fla^tish, the color
yellow and very lovely to the Eye. It ripens in four months, some sorts of it
in three. There are also diverse other sorts, which grow on dry Land (as the
former) and ripen with the Rain. As Moung, Moung.
a Corn somewhat like Vetches, growing in a Cod. Omb, Omb.
a small seed, boiled and eaten as Rice. It has an operation pretty strange,
which is, that when it is new it will make them that eat it like drunk, sick
and spue; and this only when it is sown in some Grounds, for in all it will not
have this effect: and being old, none will have it. Minere, a small seed.
Boumas, we call them Garavances. Tolla, a seed used to make Oil, with which
they anoint themselves; and sometimes they will parch it and eat it with
Iaggory, a kind of brown Sugar. And thus much of their Corn.

CHAP. IV. Of their Fruits, and Trees.
Great variety of Fruits, and delicious.
OF Fruits here are great plenty and variety, and far more might be if they did
esteem or nourish them. Pleasant Fruits to eat ripe they care not at all to do,
They look only after those that may fill the Belly, and satisfy their hunger
when their Corn is spent, or to make it go the further. These only they plant,
the other Fruits of Pleasure plant themselves, the seeds of the ripe Fruits
shedding and falling on the ground naturally spring up again. They have all
Fruits that grow in India. Most sorts of these delicious Fruits they gather
before they be ripe, and boil them to make Carrees, to use the Portuguez word,
The best Fruits, wherever they grow, reserved for the King.
that is somewhat to eat with and relish their Rice. Bu^ wheresoever there is
any Fruit better than ordinary, the Ponudecarso, or Officers of the Country,
will tie a string about the Tree in the Kings Name with three knots on the end
thereof, and then no man, not the Owner himself, dares presume under pain of
some great punishment, if not death, to touch them. And when they are ripe,
they are wrapped in white cloth, and carried to him who is Governor of that
Country wherein they grow: and if they be without any defect or blemish, then
being wrapped up again in white cloth, he presents them to the King. But the
owner in whose Ground they grow is paid nothing at all for them: it is well if
he be not compelled to carry them himself into the bargain unto the King, be it
never so far. These are Reasons why the People regard not to plant more than
just to keep them alive.

But to specify some of the chief of the Fruits in request among them. I begin
with their Betel-Nuts, Betel-Nuts.
the Trees that bear them grow only on the South and West sides of this Island.
They do not grow wild, they are only in their Towns, and there like unto Woods,
without any enclosures to distinguish one man's Trees from another; but by
marks of great Trees, Hummacks or Rocks each man knows his own. They plant them
not, but the Nuts being ripe fall down in the grass and so grow up to Trees.
The Trees. The Fruit.
They are very straight and tall, few bigger than the calf of a man's Leg. The
Nuts grow in bunches at the top, and being ripe look red and very lovely like a
pleasing Fruit. When they gather them, they lay them in heaps until the shell
be somewhat rotted, and then dry them in the Sun, and afterward shell them
with a sharp stick one and one at a time. These Trees will yield some 500, some
a 1000, some 1500 Nuts, and some but three or four hundred. They bear but once
in the Year generally, but commonly there are green Nuts enough to eat all the
Year long. The leaves of it are somewhat like those of a Coker-Nut Tree, The
Leaves.
they are five or six foot long, and have other lesser leaves growing out of
the sides of them, like the feathers on each side of a quill. The Chingulays
call the large leaves the boughs, and the leaves on the sides, the leaves. They
fall off every Year, and the skin upon which they grow, with them. These skins
grow upon the body of the Tree, The Skins, and their use.
and the leaves grow out on them. They also clap about the buds or blossoms
which bear the Nuts, and as the buds swell, so this skin-cover gives way to
them, till at length it falls quite off with the great leaf on it. It is
somewhat like unto Leather, and of great use unto the Country People. It
serves them instead of Ba^ons to eat their Rice in, and when they go a Journey
to tie up their Provisions: For in these skins or leaves they can tie up any
liquid substance as Oil or water, doubling it in the middle, and rolling it in
the two sides, almost like a purse. For bigness they are according to the
Trees, some bigger, some less, ordinarily they are about two foot length, and a
foot and an half in breadth. In this Country are no Inns to go to, and
therefore their manner when they Travel is, to carry ready dressed what
provisions they can, which they make up in these leaves. The Trees within have
only a kind of pith, and will split from one end to the other, the Wood is
hard and very strong; The VVood.
they use it for Laths for their Houses, and also for Rails for their Hedges,
which are only stakes struck in the ground, and rails tied along with rattans,
or other withs growing in the Woods. The profit the Fruit yields.
Money is not very plentiful in this Land, but by means of these Nuts, which is
a great Commodity to carry to the Coasts of Cormandel, they furnish themselves
with all things they want. The common price of Nuts, when there was a Trade, as
there was when I came first on this Land, is 20000 for one Doller; but now they
ly and grow, or ^ot on the ground under the Trees. Some of these Nuts do dif^er
much from others in their operation, having this effect, that they will make
people drunk and giddy-headed, and give them some stools^ if they eat them
gre^n.

Iacks.
There is another Fruit, which we call Iacks; the Inhabitants when they are
young call them Polos, before they be full ripe Cose^ and when ripe, Warracha
or Vellas; But with this difference, the Warracha is hard, but the Vellas as
soft as pap, both looking alike to the eye no difference; but they are distinct
Trees. These are a great help to the People, and a great part of their Food.
They grow upon a large Tree, the Fruit is as big as a good Peck loaf, the
outside prickly like an Hedg-hog, and of a greenish color; there are in them
Seeds or Kernels, or Eggs as the Chingulayes call them, which lie dispersed in
the Fruit like Seeds in a Cucumber. They usually gather them before they be
full ripe, boreing an hole in them, and feeling of the Kernel, they know if
they be ripe enough for their purpose. Then being cut in pieces they boil them,
and eat to save Rice and fill their Bellies; they eat them as we would do
Turnips or Cabbage, and taste and smell much like the latter: one may suffice six
or sev^n men. When they are ripe they are sweet and good to eat raw. The
Kernels do very much resemble Chestnuts both in color and taste, and are almost
as good: the poor people will boil them or roast them in the embers, there
being usually a good heap of them lying in a corner by the fire side; and when
they go a Journey, they will put them in a bag for their Provisions by the way.
One Jack may contain three pints or two quarts of these seeds or kernels. When
they cut these Iacks, there comes running not a white thick substance like tar,
and will stick just like Birdlime, which the Boys make use of to catch Birds,
which they call Cola, or blood of the Cos. Some will mix this with the flower
of Rice, and it will eat like Eggs.

Iombo.
Another Fruit there is which I never saw in any other Parts of India, they call
it Iombo. In taste it is like to an Apple, full of Juice, and pleasant to the
Palate, and not unwholsom to the Body, and to the Eye no Fruit more amiable,
being white, and delicately colored with red, as if it were painted.

Other Fruits found in the Woods.
Also in the wild Woods are several sorts of pretty Fruits, as Murros, round in
shape, and as big as a Cherry, and sweet to the taste; nearest Dongs, like to a
black Cherry. Ambelo's like to Barberries. Carolla cabella, Cabela pooke, and
Polla's, these are like to little Plums, and very well tasted. Paragidde, like
to our Pears, and many more such like Fruits.

Fruits common with other parts of India.
Here are also, of Indian Fruits, Coker-nuts; Plantins also and Banana's of
diverse and sundry sorts, which are distinguished by the taste as well as by the
names; rare sweet Oranges and sower ones, Limes but no Lemons, such as ours
are; Pautaurings, in taste all one with a Lemon, but much bigger than a man's two
fists, right Citrons, and a small sort of sweet Oranges. Here are several other
sorts of Lemons, and Oranges, Mangoes of several sorts, and some very good and
sweet to eat. In this sort of Fruit the King much delights, and has them
brought to him from all Parts of the Island. Pine-Apples also grow there,
Sugarcanes, Water-Melons, Pomegranates, Grapes both black and white,
Mirablins, Codjeu's, and several other.

The manner of their sheltring themselves from the Rain by the Tolipat leaf.


There are three other Trees that must not here be omitted; which tho they bear
no eatable Fruit, yet the Leaves of the one, and the Juice of the other, and
the Bark of the third are very renowned, and of great benefit.

The first is the Tallipot; The Tallipot; the rare Uses of the Leaf.
It is as big and tall as a Ships Mast, and very straight, bearing only Leaves:
which are of great use and b^nefit to this People; one single Leaf being so
broad and large, that it will cover some fi^teen or twenty men, and keep them
dry when it rains. The leaf being dried is very strong, and limber and most
wonderfully made for men's Convenience to carry along with them; for tho this
leaf be thus broad when it is open, yet it will fold close like a Ladies Fan,
and then it is no bigger than a man's arm. It is wonderful light, they cut them
into pieces, and carry them in their hands. The whole leaf spread is round
almost like a Circle, but being cut in pieces for use are near like unto a
Triangle: They lay them upon their heads as they travel with the peaked end
foremost, which is convenient to make their way through the Boughs and Thickets.
When the Sun is vehement hot they use them to shade themselves from the heat.
Soldiers all carry them; for besides the benefit of keeping them dry in case
it rain upon the march, these leaves make their Tents to ly under in the Night.
A marvelous Mercy which Almighty God has bestowed upon this poor and naked
People in this Rainy Country! one of these I brought with me into England, and
you have it described in the Figure. These Leaves all grow on the top of the
Tree after the manner of a Coker. It bears no kind of Fruit until the last year
of its life, and then it comes out on the top, and spreads abroad in great
branches, all full first of yellow blossoms, most lovely and beautiful to
behold, but smell very strong, and then it comes to a Fruit round and very
hard, as big as our largest Cherries, but good only for seed to set: and tho
this Tree bears but once, it makes amends, bearing such great abundance, that
one Tree will yield seed enough for a Country. If these Trees stand near any
houses, the smell of the blossoms so much annoyes them, that they regarding not
the seed, forthwith cut them down. This Tree is within a Pith only, which is
very good to eat if they cut the Tree down before it runs to seed. The pith
good to eat.
They beat it in Mortars to Flower, and bake Cakes of it; which taste much like
to white bread. It serves them instead of Corn before their Harvest be ripe.

The next Tree is the Kettule. The Kettule yields a delicious juice.
It grows straight, but not so tall or big as a Coker-Nut-Tree; the inside
nothing but a white Pith, as the former. It yields a sort of Liquor, which
they call Tellegie: it is rarely sweet and pleasing to the Palate, and as
wholesome to the Body, but no stronger than water. They take it down from the
Tree twice, and from some good Trees thrice, in a day. An ordinary Tree will
yield some three, some four Gallons in a day, some more and some less. The
which Liquor they boil and make a kind of brown Sugar, called Iaggory; but if
they will use their skill, they can make it as white as the second best Sugar:
and for any use it is but little inferior to ordinary Sugar. The manner how
they take this Liquor from the Tree is thus; When the Tree is come to maturity,
first out of the very top there comes out a bud, which if they let it grow,
will bear a round fruit, which is the seed it yields, but is only good to set
for increase. This bud they cut and prepare, by putting to it several sorts of
things, as Salt, Pepper, Lemons, Garlic, Leaves, etc. which keeps it at a
stand, and suffers it not to ripen. So they daily cut off a thin slice off the
end, and the Liquor drops down in a Pot, which they hang to catch it.

The Skin bears strings as strong as wire.
It bears a leaf like to that of a Betel-Nut-Tree, which is fastened to a Skin as
the Betel-Nut Leaves were, only this Skin is hard and stubborn like a piece of
Board: the Skin is all full of strings as strong as Wire; they use them to make
Ropes withal. As long as the Tree is growing the leaves shed; but when the Tree
is come to its full growth, they remain many years upon the Tree before they
fall; and when they fall, there are no new ones come again: The top-bud, as it
ripens and withers, other buds come out lower and lower every Year till they
come to the bottom of the Boughs, and then it has done bearing, and so may
stand seven or ten years, and then dies.

The VVood; its Nature and Life.
The Wood of this Tree is not above three inches thick, mighty strong and hard
to cut in two, but very apt to split from top to bottom; a very heavy wood,
they make pestles of it to beat their Rice with; the color black, but looks
not like natural wood, but as if it were composed of diverse pieces. The budds
of this Tree, as also of the Coker, and Betel Nut-Tree, are excellent in taste,
resembling Walnuts or Almonds.

The Cinnamon-Tree.
I proceed to the third Tree, which is the Cinnamon, in their Language Corunda
gauhah. It grows wild in the Woods as other Trees, and by them no more
esteemed; It is most on the West side of the great River Mavela-gonga. It is
much as plenty as Hazel in England, in some places a great deal, in some
little, and in some none at all. The Trees are not very great, but sizable. The
Cinnamon is the Bark or Rind, The Bark.
when it is on the Tree it looks whitish. They scrape it and pull it off, and
dry it in the Sun: they take it only from off the smaller Trees, although the
Bark of the greater is as sweet to the smell and as strong to the taste. The
Wood has no smell, The VVood.
in color white, and soft like Fir. Which for any use they cut down, favoring
them no more than other wild Trees in the Wood. The Leaf much resembles the
Laurel both in color and thickness; The Leaf.
the difference is, whereas the Laurel has but one strait rib throughout,
whereon the green spreads it self on each sides, the Cinnamon has three by
which the Leaf stretches forth it self. When the young leaves come out they
look purely red like scarlet: Break or bruise them, and they will smell more
like Cloves than Cinnamon. It bears a Fruit, The Fruit.
which is ripe in September, much like an Acorn, but smaller, it neither tastes
nor smells much like the Bark, but being boiled in water, it will yield an Oil
swimming on the top, which when cold is as hard as tallow and as white; and
smells excellently well. They use it for Ointments for Aches and Pains, and
to burn in Lamps to give light in their houses: but they make no Candles of it,
neither are any Candles used by any but the King.

Here are many sorts of Trees that bear Berries to make Oil of, both in the
Woods and Gardens, but not eatable, but used only for their Lamps.

There are other Trees remarkable either for their strangeness, or use, or
both. Of these I shall mention a few.

The Orula, The Orula, the Fruit good for Physic, and Dying.
a Tree as big as an Apple Tree, bears a Berry somewhat like an Olive, but
sharper at each end; its Skin is of a reddish green color, which covers an
hard stone. They make use of it for Physic in Purges; and also to die black
color: Which they do after this manner; They take the fruit and beat it to
pieces in Mortars, and put it thus beaten into water; and after it has been
soaking a day or two, it changes the water, that it looks like Beer. Then they
dip their cloth in it, or what they mean to die, and dry it in the Sun. And then
they dip it in black mud, and so let it ly about an hour, then take it and wash
it in water: and now it will appear of a pale black. Then being dry, they dip
it again into the aforesaid Die, and it becomes a very good black.

Another use there is of this water. This water will brighten rusty Iron, and
serve instead of Ink.
It is this: Let any rusty Iron ly a whole night in it, and it will become
bright; and the water look black like Ink, insomuch that men may write with it.
These Trees grow but in some Parts of the Land, and nothing near so plentiful
as Cinnamon. The Berries the Drugsters in the City there, do fell in their
Shops.

The Dounekaia gauhah, The Dounekaia.
a shrub, bears leaves as broad as two fingers, and six or eight foot long, on
both sides of them set full of Thorns, and a streak of Thorns runs through the
middle. These leaves they split to weave Matts withal. The Tree bears a bud
above a span long, tapering somewhat like a Sugar Loaf. Leaves cover this bud
folding it about, like the leaves of a Cabbage. Which leaves smell rarely
sweet, and look of a lovely yellow color like gold. This bud blows into
diverse bunches of Flowers, spreading it self open like a Plume of Feathers,
each Flower whitish, but very small. The Roots of this shrub they use for
Ropes, splitting them into Thongs, and then making them into Ropes.

The Capita gauhah, The Capita.
is a shrub never bigger than a man's arm. The Wood, Rind and Leaves have all a
Physical smell; and they do sometimes make use of it for Physic. The Leaf is of
a bright green, roundish, rough, and as big as the palm of an hand. No sort of
Cattle will eat it, no, not the Goats, that will sometimes brouze upon rank
poison. There is abundance of these Trees every where, and they grow in all
Countries, but in Ouvah. And this is supposed to be the cause, that the
Ouvah-Cattle die, when they are brought thence to any other Country. They
attribute it to the smell of this Tree, of such a venomous nature it is to
Beasts. And therefore to destroy their Fleas, or to keep their houses clear of
them, they sweep them with Brooms made of this shrub. It Is excellent good for
firing, and will burn when it is green. There are no other coals the Goldsmiths
use, but what are made of this wood.

Rattans grow in great abundance upon this Island. Rattans.
They run like Honey-suckles either upon the Ground, or up Trees, as it
happens, near Twenty fathom in length. There is a kind of a shell or skin grows
over the Rattan, and encloseth it round. Which serves for a Case to cover and
defend it, when tender. This Skin is so full of prickles and thorns, that you
cannot touch it. As the Rattan grows longer and stronger, this Case grows
ripe, and falls off prickles and shell and all.

It bears fruit in clusters just like bunches of Grapes, and as big. Its Fruit.
Every particular Berry is covered with a husk like a Gooseberry, which is
soft, yellow and scaly, like the scales of a Fish. hansome to look upon. This
husk being cracked and broken, within grows a Plum of a whitish color: within
the Plum a stone, having meat about it. The people gather and boil them to make
sour pottage to quench the thirst.

Canes.
Canes grow just like Rattans, and bear a fruit like them. The difference only
is, that the Canes are larger.

The Betel Tree.
The Tree that bears the Betel-leaf, which is so much loved and eaten in these
parts, grows like Ivy, twining about Trees, or Poles, which they stick in the
ground, for it to run up by: and as the Betel grows, the Poles grow also. The
form of the Leaf is longish, the end somewhat sharp, broadest next to the
stalk, of a bright green, very smooth, just like a Pepper leaf, only different
in the color, the Pepper leaf being of a dark green. It bears a fruit just
like long Pepper, but not good for seed, for it falls off and rots upon the
ground. But when they are minded to propagate it, they plant the spriggs, which
will grow.

The Bo-gauhah, or God-Tree.
I shall mention but one Tree more as famous and highly set by as any of the
rest, if not more, tho it bear no fruit, the benefit consisting chiefly in the
Holiness of it. This Tree they call Bo-gahah; we, the God-Tree. It is very
great and spreading, the Leaves always shake like an Asp. They have a very
great veneration for these Trees, worshipping them; upon a Tradition, That the
Buddou, a great God among them, when he was upon the Earth, did use to sit
under this kind of Trees. There are many of these Trees, which they plant all
the Land over, and have more care of, than of any other. They pave round under
them like a Key, sweep often under them to keep them clean; they light Lamps,
and set up their Images under them: and a stone Table is placed under some of
them to lay their Sacrifices on. They set them every where in Towns and High
ways, where any convenient places are: they serve also for shade to
Travelers. They will also set them in memorial of persons deceased, to wit,
there, where their Bodies were burnt. It is held meritorious to plant them,
which, they say, he that does, shall die within a short while after, and go to
Heaven: But the oldest men only that are nearest death in the course of
Nature, do plant them, and none else; the younger sort desiring to live a
little longer in this World before they go to the other.

CHAP. V. Of their Roots, Plants, Herbs, Flowers.
Roots for Food.
SOme of these are for Food, and some for Medicine. I begin with their Roots,
which with the Iacks before mentioned, being many, and generally bearing well,
are a great help toward the sustenance of this People. These by the Chingulays
by a general name are called Alloes, by the Portugals and us Inyames. They are
of diverse and sundry sorts, some they plant, and some grow wild; those that
grow wild in the Woods are as good, only they are more scarce and grow deeper,
and so more difficult to be plucked up. It would be to no purpose to mention
their particular names; I shall only speak a little in general of them. They
serve both for Food, and for Carrees, that is, sauce, or for a relish to their
Rice. But they make many a meal of them alone to lengthen out their Rice, or
for want of it: and of these there is no want to those that will take pains but
to set them, and cheap enough to those that will buy.

There are two sorts of these Alloes; The manner of their growing.
some require Trees or Sticks to run up on; others require neither. Of the
former sort, some will run up to the tops of very large Trees, and spread out
very full of branches, and bear great bunches of blossoms, but no use made of
them; The Leaves die every year, but the Roots grow still, which some of them
will do to a prodigious bigness within a Year or two's time, becoming as big as
a man's wast. The fashion of them somewhat roundish, rugged and uneven, and in
diverse odd shapes, like a log of cleft wood: they have a very good, savoury
mellow taste.

Of those that do not run up on Trees, there are likewise sundry sorts; they
bear a long stalk and a broad leaf; the fashion of these Roots are somewhat
roundish, some grow out like a man's fingers, which they call Angul-alloes, as
much as to say Finger-Roots; some are of a white color, some of a red.

Those that grow in the Woods run deeper into the Earth, they run up Trees
also. Some bear blossoms somewhat like Hopps, and they may be as big as a man's
Arm.

For Herbs to boil and eat with Butter they have excellent good ones, and
several sorts: Boiling Herbs.
some of them are six months growing to maturity, the stalk as high as a man
can reach, and being boiled almost as good as Asparagus. There are of this
sort, some having leaves and stalks as red as blood, some green: some the
leaves green, and the stalk very white.

They have several other sorts of Fruits which they dress and eat with their
Rice, Fruits for sauce.
and taste very savoury, called Carowela, Wattacul, Morongo, Cacorehouns, etc.
the which I cannot compare to any things that grow here in England.

They have of our English Herbs and Plants, Colworts, Carrots, Radishes,
Fennel, Balsam, Spearmint, Mustard. Europaean Herbs and Plants among them.
These, excepting the two last, are not the natural product of the Land, but
they are transplanted hither; By which I perceive all other European Plants
would grow there: They have also Fern, Indian Corn. Several sorts of Beans as
good as these in England: right Cucumbers, Calabasses, and several sorts of
Pumkins, etc. The Dutch on that Island in their Gardens have Lettice, Rosemary,
Sage, and all other Herbs and Sallettings that we have in these Countries.

Nor are they worse supplied with Medicinal Herbs. Herbs for Medicine.
The Woods are their Apothecaries Shops, where with Herbs, Leaves, and the
Rinds of Trees they make all their Physic and Plasters, with which sometimes
they will do notable Cures. I will not here enter into a larger discourse of
the Medicinal Virtues of their Plants, etc. of which there are hundreds: only
as a Specimen thereof, and likewise of their Skill to use them; I will relate a
Passage or two. A Neighbor of mine a Chingulay, would undertake to cure a
broken Leg or Arm by application of some Herbs that grow in the Woods, and that
with that speed, that the broken Bone after it was set should knit by the time
one might boil a pot of Rice and three carrees, that is about an hour and an
half or two hours; and I knew a man who told me he was thus cured. They will
cure an Imposthume in the Throat with the Rind of a Tree called Amaranga,
(whereof I my self had the experience;) by chawing it for a day or two after it
is prepared, and swallowing the spittle. I was well in a day and a Night, tho
before I was exceedingly ill, and could not swallow my Victuals.

Their Flowers.
Of Flowers they have great varieties, growing wild, for they plant them not.
There are Roses red and white, scented like ours: several sorts of sweet
smelling Flowers, which the young Men and Women gather and tie in their hairs
to perfume them; they tie up their hair in a bunch behind, and enclose the
Flowers therein.

There is one Flower deserves to be mentioned for the rarity and use of it, A
Flower that serves instead of a Dial.
they call it a Sindric-mal, there are of them some of a Murry color, and some
white. Its Nature is, to open about four a clock in the Evening, and so
continues open all Night until the morning, when it closes up it self till
four a clock again. Some will transplant them out of the Woods into their
Gardens to serve them instead of a Clock, when it is cloudy that they cannot
see the Sun.

There is another white Flower like our Iasmine, well scented, they call them
Picha-mauls, which the King has a parcel of brought to him every morning,
wrapped in a white cloth, hanging upon a staff, and carried by people, whose
peculiar office this is. All people that meet these Flowers, out of respect to
the King, for whose use they are, must turn out of the Way; and so they must
for all other things that go to the King being wrapped up in white cloth. These
Officers hold Land of the King for this service: their Office is, also to plant
these Flowers, which they usually do near the Rivers where they most delight to
grow: Nay, they have power to plant them in any man's Ground, and enclose that
ground when they have done it for the sole use of their Flowers to grow in:
which Enclosures they will keep up for several years, until the Ground becomes
so worn, that the Flowers will thrive there no longer, and then the Owners
resume their own Lands again.

Hop-Mauls, are Flowers growing upon great Trees, which bear nothing else, they
are rarely sweet scented; this is the chief Flower the young people use; and is
of greatest value among them.

CHAP VI. Of their Beasts, Tame and Wild. Insects.
What Beasts the Country produces.
HAving spoken concerning the Trees and Plants of this Island, We will now go on
to speak of the Living Creatures on it, viz. Their Beasts, Insects, Birds,
Fish, Serpents, etc. useful or noxious. And we begin first with their Beasts.
They have Cowes, Buffaloes, Hogs, Goats, Deer, Hares, Dogs, Iacols, Apes,
Tigers, Bears, Elephants, and other Wild Beasts. Lions, Wolves, Horses, Asses,
Sheep, they have none. Deer are in great abundance in the Woods, and of several
sorts, from the largeness of a Cow or Buffalo, to the smalness of a Hare. Deer
no bigger than Hares.
For here is a Creature in this Land no bigger, but in every part rightly
resembles a Deer, It is called Meminna, of color gray with white spots, and
good meat.

Here are also wild Buffalo's; also a sort of Beast they call Gauvera, Other
Creatures rare in their kind.
so much resembling a Bull, that I think it one of that kind. His back s^ands
up with a sharp ridg; all his four feet white up half his Legs. I never saw but
one, which was kept among the Kings Creatures. Here was a Black Tygre catched
and brought to the King, and afterward a Deer milk white; both which he very
much esteemed; there being no more either before or since ever heard of in that
Land.

If any desire to know how this white Deer was caught, The way how a Wild Deer
was catched.
it was thus; This Deer was observed to come on Evenings with the rest of the
Herd to a great Pond to drink; the People that were ordered to catch this Deer,
fenced the Pond round and plain about it with high stakes, leaving only one
wide gap. The men after this done lay in ambush, each with his bundle of Stakes
ready cut. In the Evening the Deer came with the rest of the Herd to drink
according to their wont. As soon as they were entered within the stakes, the men
in ambush fell to their work, which was to fence in the gap left, which, there
being little less than a Thousand men, they soon did; and so all the Herd were
easily caught; and this among the rest.

The King has also an Elephant spotted or speckled all the body over, Of their
Elephants.
which was lately caught; and tho he has many and very stately Elephants, and
may have as many more as he pleases, yet he prefers this before them all. And
since I am fallen upon discourse of the Elephant, The way of catching Elephants.
the creature that this Country is famed for above any in India, I will detain
my self a little longer upon it.

I will first relate the manner of taking them, and afterward their Sagacity,
with other things that occur to my memory concerning them. This Beast, tho he
be so big and wise, yet he is easily catched. When the King commands to catch
Elephants, after they have found them they like, that is such as have Teeth;
for tho there be many in the Woods, yet but few have Teeth, and they males
only: unto these they drive some She-Elephants, which they bring with them for
the purpose; which when once the males have got a sight of, they will never
leave, but follow them wheresoever they go; and the females are so used to it,
that they will do whatsoever either by a word or a beck their Keepers bid them;
and so they delude them along through Towns and Countries, through the Streets of the
City, even to the very Gates of the Kings Palace; Where sometimes they seize
upon them by snares, and sometimes by driving them into a kind of Pound, they
catch them. After they have brought the Elephant which is not yet caught
together with the She, into the Kings presence, if it likes him not, he
commands to let him go; if it does, he appoints him some certain place near
unto the City, where they are to drive him with the Females; for without them
it is not possible to make him stay; and to keep him in that place until the
Kings further order and pleasure is to catch him, which perhaps may not be in
two or three or four Years; All which time there are great men with Soldiers
appointed to watch there about him: and if he should chance to stray a little
out of his bounds set by the King, immediately they bring him back, fearing the
Kings displeasure, which is no less than death it self. Here these Elephants
do, and may do, great damage to the Country, by eating up their Corn, and
trampling it with their broad feet, and throwing down their Coker Nut Trees,
and oftentimes their Houses too, and they may not resist them. It is thought
this is done by the King to punish them that ly under his displeasure. And if
you ask what becomes of these Elephants at last; sometimes after they have thus
kept watch over them two or three Years, and destroyed the Country in this
manner, the King will send order to carry them into the Woods, and let them go
free. For he catches them not for any use or benefit he has by them, but
only for his recreation and pastime.

The understanding of Elephants. Their Nature.
As he is the greatest in body, so in understanding also. For he will do any
thing that his Keeper bids him, which is possible for a Beast not having hands
to do. And as the Chingulayes report, they bear the greatest love to their
young of all irrational Creatures; for the She Is are alike tender of any ones
young ones as of their own: where there are many She Elephants together, the
young ones go and suck of any, as well as of their Mothers; and if a young one
be in distress and should cry out, they will all in general run to the help and
aid thereof; and if they be go^ng over a River, as here be some somewhat broad,
and the streams run very swift, they will all with their Trunks assist and help
to convey the young ones over. They take great delight to ly and tumble in the
water, and will swim excellently well. Their Teeth they never shed. Neither
will they ever breed tame ones with tame ones; but to ease themselves of the
trouble to bring them meat, they will ty their two fore-feet together, and put
them into the Woods, where meeting with the wild ones, they conceive and go one
Year with young.

The damage they do.
It is their constant practice to shove down with their heads great Trees, which
they love to eat, when they be too high, and they cannot otherwise reach the
boughs. Wild ones will run much faster than a man, but tame ones not. The
People stand in fear of them, and oftentimes are killed by them. They do them
also great damage in their Grounds, by Night coming into their Fields and
eating up their Corn and likewise their Co^^r-nut-Trees, etc. So that in Towns
near unto the Woods, where are plenty of them, the people are forced to watch
their Corn all Night, and also their Outyards and Plantations; into which being
once entered with eating and trampling they will do much harm, before they can
get them out. Who oftentimes when by lighting of Torches, and hollowing, they
will not go out, take their Bows and go and shoot them, but not without some
hazard, for sometimes the Elephant runs upon them and kills them. For fear of
which they will not adventure unless there be Trees, about which they may dodg
to defend themselves. And although here be both Bears and Tigers in these Woods,
yet they are not so fierce, as commonly to assault people; Travelers and
Wayfaring men go more in fear of Elephants than of any other Beasts.

Serve the King for Executing Malefactors.
The King makes use of them for Executioners; they will run their Teeth through
the body, and then taer it in pieces, and throw it limb from limb. They have
sharp Iron with a socket with three edges, which they put on their Teeth at
such times; for the Elephants that An Execution by an Eliphant.
are kept have all the ends of their Teeth cut to make them grow the better,
and they do grow out again.

At some uncertain seasons the males have an infirmity comes on them, Their
Diseases.
that they will be stark mad, so that none can rule them. Many times it so
comes to pass that they with their Keepers on their backs, run raging until
they throw them down and kill them: but commonly there is notice of it before,
by an Oil that will run out of their cheeks, which when that appears,
immediately they chain them fast to great Trees by the Legs. For this infirmity
they use no Medicine, neither is he sick: but the females are never subject to
this.

The Keepers of the Kings Elephants sometimes make a sport with them after this
manner. The Sport they make.
They will command an Elephant to take up water, which he does, and stands with
it in his Trunk, till they command him to squirt it out at some body, which he
immediately will do, it may be a whole paleful together, and with such a force,
that a man can hardly stand against it.

There are Ants of several sorts, Ants of diverse sorts.
and some worthy our remark.

First of all, there are the Coumbias, a sort of small reddish Ants like ours
in England.

Secondly, the Tale-Coumbias, as small as the former but blackish. These
usually live in hollow Trees or rotten Wood, and will sting most terribly.

Thirdly, the Dimbios, great red Ants. These make their nests upon the Boughs
of great Trees, bringing the Leaves together in clusters, it may be as big as a
man's head; in which they lay their Eggs and breed. There will be oftentimes
many nests of these upon one Tree, insomuch that the people are afraid to go up
to gather the Fruits lest they should be stung by them.

A fourth sort of Ants are those they call Coura-atch. They are great and
black, living in the ground. Their daily practice is to bring up dirt out of
the ground, making great hollow holes in the Earth, somewhat resembling
Cony-Burrows; only these are less, and run strait downwards for some way, and
then turn away into diverse paths under ground. In many places of the Land there
are so many of these holes, that Cattle are ready to break their Legs as they
go. These do not sting.

A fifth is the Coddia. This Ant is of an excellent bright black, and as large
as any of the former. They dwell always in the ground; and their usual practice
is, to be traveling in great multitudes, but I do not know where they are
going, nor what their business is; but they pass and repass some forwards and
some backwards in great have, seemingly as full of employment as People that
pass along the Streets. These Ants will bite desperately, as bad as if a man
were burnt with a coal of fire. But they are of a noble nature: for they will
not begin; and you may stand by them, if you do not tread upon them nor disturb
them. The reason their bite is thus terribly painful is this; Formerly these
Ants went to ask a Wife of the Noya, a venomous and noble kind of Snake; How
these Coddia's come to sting so terribly.
and because they had such an high spirit to dare to offer to be related to
such a generous creature, they had this virtue bestowed upon them, that they
should sting after this manner. And if they had obtained a Wife of the Noya,
they should have had the privilege to have stung full as bad as he. This is a
current Fable among the Chingulays. Tho undoubtedly they chiefly regard the
wisdom that is concealed under this, and the rest of their Fables.

These Ants a very mischievous sort.
There is a sixth sort called Vaeos. These are more numerous than any of the
former. All the whole Earth does swarm with them. They are of a middle size
between the greatest and the least, the hinder part white, and the head red.
They eat and devour all that they can come at; as besides food, Cloth, Wood,
Thatch of Houses and every thing excepting Iron and Stone. So that the people
cannot set any thing upon the ground within their houses for them. They creep
up the walls of their houses, and build an Arch made of dirt over themselves
all the way as they climb, be it never so high. And if this Arch or Vault
chance to be broken, they all, how high soever they were, come back again to
mend up the breach, which being finished they proceed forwards again, eating
every thing they come at in their way. This Vermin does exceedingly annoy the
Chingulays, insomuch that they are continually looking upon any thing they
value, to see if any of these Vaeos have been at it. Which they may easily
perceive by this Case of dirt, which they cannot go up any where without
building as they go. And wheresoever this is seen, no doubt the Ants are there.

The curious Buildings of the Vaeos.
In places where there are no houses, and they can eat nothing belonging to the
people, they will raise great Hills like Butts, some four or five or six foot
high; which are so hard and strong, that it would be work enough to dig them
down with Pick-Axes. The Chingulays call these Humbosses. Within they are full
of hollow Vaults and Arches where they dwell and breed, and their nests are
much like to Honeycombs, full of eggs and young ones. These Humbosses are built
with a pure refined Clay by the ingenious builders. The people use this Clay to
make their Earthen Gods of, because it is so pure and fine.

The manner of their death.
This sort of creatures as they increase in multitudes, so they die in multitudes
also. For when they come to maturity they have wings and in the Evening after
the going down of the Sun, (never before) all those that are fledged and ripe,
will issue forth in such vast numbers, that they do almost darken the Sky,
flying to such an height, as they go out of sight, and so keep flying till they
^all down dead at last upon the Earth. The Birds that tarry up late, and are
not yet gone to roost, fly among them and make good Suppers of them.

The People in this Land never feed their Poultry. But they feed upon these
Ants, which by scraping among the leaves and dirt they can never want; and they
delight in them above Rice or any thing else. Besides all these Ants already
mentioned, there are diverse other distinct sorts of them.

Bees of several kinds.
But we will proceed to a more beneficial Insect, the Be. Of which there be
three sorts. The first are the Meemasses, which are the right ^nglish Bees.
They build in hollow Trees, or hollow holes in the ground, which the Vaeo's
have made. Into which holes the men blow with their mouths, and the Bees
presently fly out. And then they put in their hands, and pull out the Combs,
which they put in Pots or Vessels, and carry away. They are not afraid of their
stinging in the least, nor do they arm themselves with any cloths against them.

Bees tha^ build on Trees like Birds.
The second are the Bamburo's, larger and of a brighter color than our English
Bees. Their Honey is thin like water comparatively. They make their Combs upon
limbs of Trees, open and visible to the Eye, generally of a great height. At
time of year whole Towns, forty or fi^ty in company together will go out into
the Woods, and gather this honey, and come home laden with it for their use.

The third sort they call Connameia, signifying a blind Be. They are small
like a Fly, and black. They build in hollow Trees; and their honey somewhat
tarrish: and they make such small quantities of it, that the people little
regard it. The Boys will sometimes cut a hole and take it out.

When they meet with any swarms of Bees hanging on any Tree, The people eat the
Bees, as well as their honey.
they will hold Torches under to make them drop; and so catch them and carry
them home. Which they boil and eat, and esteem excellent food.

There is a sort of Leaches of the nature of ours, Leaches that ly in the
grass, and creep on Travelers Legs.
only differing in color and bigness^ For they are of a dark reddish color
like the skin of Bacon, and as big as a Goose quill, in length some two or
three inches. At first, when they are young, they are no bigger than a horse
hair, so that they can scarce be seen. In dry weather none of them appear, but
immediately upon the fall of Rains, the Grass and Woods are full of them. These
Leaches seize upon the Legs of Travelers; who going barefoot according to the
custom of that Land, have them hanging upon their Legs in multitudes, which
suck their blood till their bellies are full, and then drop off. They come in
such quantities, that the people cannot pull them off so fast as they crawl on.
The blood runs pouring down their Legs all the way they go, and it is no little
smart neither, so that they would willingly be without them if they could,
especially those that have sores on their Legs; for they all gather to the sore.

Some therefore will tie a piece of Lemon and Salt in a rag and fasten it unto
a stick, The remedies they use against them.
and ever and anon strike it upon their Legs to make the Leaches drop off:
others will scrape them off with a reed cut flat and sharp in the fashion of a
knife. But this is so troublesome, and they come on again so fast and so
numerous, that it is not worth their while: and generally they suffer them to
bite and remain on their Legs during their Journey; and they do the more
patiently permit them, because it is so wholesome for them. When they come to
their Iourneys end they rub all their Legs with ashes, and so clear themselves
of them at once: but still the blood will remain dropping a great while after.
But they are most annoyed by them when they go out to stool a-Nights, being
small and of the color of their bodies, so that they can neither see nor feel
to pull them off. And these, tho they be in such quantities in some of these
Countries, yet in others there are none at all, nor ever were known to have
been. But besides these, there are Water Leaches the same with ours.

Monkeys. Apes and Monkeys of diverse kinds.
Of which there are abundance in the Woods, and of diverse sorts, some so large
as our English Spaniel Dogs, of a darkish gray color, and black faces, with
great white beards round from ear to ear, which makes them show just like old
men. There is another sort just of the same bigness, but differ in color,
being milk white both in body and face, having great beards like the others; of
this sort of white ones there is not such plenty. But both these sorts do but
little mischief, keeping in the Woods, eating only leaves and buds of Trees,
but when they are catched, they will eat any thing. This sort they call in
their Language, Wanderows. There is yet another sort of Apes, of which there is
great abundance, who coming with such multitudes do a great deal of mischief to
the Corn, that grows in the Woods, so that they are fain all the day long to
keep Watch to scare them out: and so soon as they are gone to fray them away at
one end of the Field; others who wait for such an opportunity come skipping in
at the other; and before they can turn, will fill both bellies and hands full,
to carry away with them; and to stand all round to guard their Fields is more
than they can do. This sort of Monkeys have no beards, white faces, and long
hair on the top of their heads, which parts and hangs down like a man's.
These are so impudent that they will come into their Gardens, and eat such
Fruit as grows there. They call these Rillowes. The flesh of all these sorts of
Apes they account good to eat. There are several sorts of Squirrels also, which
they do eat when they can catch them.

Before I make an end of my discourse of their Beasts, it may be worth while to
relate the ways they use to catch them. At which they are very crafty.

How they catch wild Beasts.
For the catching of Deer or other wild Beasts, they have this ing^nious device.
In dark Moons when there are drisling Rains, they go about this design. They
have a basket made with canes somewhat like unto a funnel, in which they put a
potsheard with fire in it, together with a certain wood, which they have
growing there, full of sap like pitch, and that will burn like a pitch-barrel.
This being kindled in the potsheard flames, and gives an exceeding light. They
carry it upon their heads with the flame foremost; the basket hiding him that
is under it, and those that come behind it. In their hands they carry three or
four small bells, which they tingle as they go, that the noise of their steps
should not be heard. Behind the man that carries the light, go men with Bows
and Arrows. And so they go walking along the Plains, and by the Pond sides,
where they think the Deer will come out to feed. Which when they see the light,
stand still and stare upon it, seeing only the light, and hearing nothing but
the tingling of the bells.

The eyes of the Deer or other Cattle first appear to them glistering like
Stars of light or Diamonds: and by their long experience they will distinguish
one Beast from another by their eyes. All Creatures, as Deer, Hares, Elephants,
Bears, etc. excepting only wild Hogs, will stand still, wondering at this
strange sight, till the people come as near as they do desire, and so let fly
their Arrows upon them. And by this means they seldom go, but they catch
something. The blades of their hunting-Arrowes are at least a foot or a foot
and an half long^ and the length of the staff of their Arrows is a Rian, that
is about two cubits.

Again, they will observe where a Deers haunt is to break over their Hedges
into the Corn Grounds. There they will set a sharp pole like a Spear full
against the Haunt. So that the Deer when she leaps over thrusts her self upon
the point of it.

If a Tiger chance to come into their Grounds and kill a Cow, they will take
notice of the place through which he passed, and set a Cross-bow there ready
charged. The Tiger coming that way again touches something that is fastened to
the tricker of the Cross-bow, and so it discharges upon him.

^ ^a^derow.
^ Rillow.


The wild Hog is of all other the hardest to be caught; How they take the Wild
Boar.
and it is dangerous to attempt the catching of him. For the people make valor
to consist in three things, one is to fight against the Enemy, another to hunt
the Elephant, and the third to catch Hoggs. Yet sometimes by their art they
entrap them. And that they do after this manner. They dig an hole in the Earth
of a convenient depth, and fix diverse sharp stakes in the bottom of it. Then
they cover it over lightly with Earth and Leaves, and plant thereupon roots
which the Hog loves, as Potatoes or such like, which will grow there. And the
pit remains, it may be sometimes months or half a year, till at last an Hog
comes, and while he is rooting his weight betrays him and in he falls.

Again, sometimes they will set a falling trap of an exceeding weight, and
under it plant Roots and such like things, which the Hog delights in. There are
contrivances under the weeds and leaves, which when he goes to eat by touching
or treading upon something ^astned to the trap, ^t falls down upon him. These
are made so artificially, that people sometimes have been caught and destroyed
by them. Once such a trap in my remembrance ^ell upon three women and killed
them Who having been stealing Cotton in a Plantation, and fearing to be
catched went to creep out at a hole, where this Trap stood.

And th^s I have related some of their ways of taking wild Cattel^ They are
good al^o at catching Birds and Vermin; In fine, they are the cun^^^gest people
in the World for such kind of traps and gins. And all of them they make only
by the help of their Knives with green sticks and withs that grow in the Woods.
And so much of their Beasts.

CHAP. VII. Of their Birds, Fish, Serpents, Commodities.
IN the next place I will entertain you with some relation of the other living
Creatures among them. Their Birds.
I begin with their Birds. In that Land there are Crows, Sparrowes, Tom-titts,
Snipes, just like these in England, Wood-Pigeons also, but not great flocks of
any sorts, as we have, only of Crows and Pigeons. I have seen there Birds
just like Woodcocks and Partridges, but they are scarce. A great many wild
Peacocks: small green Parrots, but not very good to talk. But here is another
Bird in their Language called Mal-cowda, Such as will be taught to speak.
which with teaching will speak excellently well. It is black with yellow gills
about the bigness of a Blackbird: And another sort there is of the same
bigness, called Cau-cowda, yellow like gold, very beautiful to the eye, which
also might be taught to speak.

Here are other sorts of small Birds, not much bigger than a Sparrow, very
lovely to look on, but I think good for nothing else: some being in color
white like Snow, Such as are beautiful for color.
and their tail about one ^oot in length, and their heads black like jet, with
a tuft like a plume of Feathers standing upright thereon. There are others of
the same sort only differing in color, being reddish like a ripe Orange, and
on the head a Plume of black Feathers standing up. I suppose, one may be the
Cock, and the other the Hen.

Here is a sort of Bird they call Carlo, which never lights on the ground,
but always sets on very high Trees. He is as big as a Swan, the color black, A
strange Bird.
the Legs very short, the Head monstrous, his Bill very long, a little rounding
like a Hawks, and white on each side of the head, like ears: on the top of the
crown grows out a white thing, somewhat like to the comb of a Cock; commonly
they keep four or five of them together; and always are hopping from bough to
bough; They are seldom silent, but continually make a roaring noise, somewhat
like the quacking of a Duck, that they may be heard at least a mile off; the
reason they thus cry, the Chingulayes say, is for Rain, that they may drink.
The bodies of these Fowls are good to eat.

Water-Fowls resembling Ducks and Swans.
Here is a sort of Bird very much resembling a Duck, but not very plentiful. And
another sort of Fowl as big as a Duck, cole black, which lives altogether upon
Fish. It is admirable to see, how long they will remain under water, and at
what a distance they will rise again. Besides these, there are many other kinds
of Birds, much larger than Swans, which keep about the Ponds and Marshes to
catch Fish, but the people eat them not: Nature has endowed them with an
admirable understanding, that they are not to be catched by the Allegators, tho
there be many of them in those waters.

Peacocks.
The Peacocks in rainy weather are sometimes hunted and caught by Dogs; for
their Feathers being wet, they are incapable of flying far.

The King keeps Fowl.
The King has Geese, Ducks, Turkeys, Pigeons, which he keeps tame, but none
else may. Turkeys he delights not in, because they change the color of their
heads: Neither does he kill any of these to eat, nor any other creature of what
sort soever, and he has many, that he keeps tame.

Their Fish.
They have no want of Fish, and those good ones too. All little Rivers and
Streams running through the Valleys are ^ull of small Fish, but the Boys and
others wanting somewhat to eat with their Rice, do continually catch them
before they come to maturity: nay all their Ponds are full of them, which in
dry weather drying up, the people catch multitudes of them in this manner. How
they catch them in Ponds.
They have a kind of a Basket made of small Sticks, so close that Fish cannot
get through; it is broad at bottom, and narrow at top, like a funnel, the hole big
enough for a man to thrust his Arm in, wide at the mouth about two or three
foot; these baskets they jobb down, and the ends stick in the mud, which often
happen upon a Fish; when they do, they feel it by the Fish beating it self
against the sides. Then they put in their hands and take them out. And rieve a
Rattan through their gills, and so let them drag after them. One end of this
Rattan is stuck in the fisher's girdle, and the other knotted, that the fish
should not slip off: which when it is full, he discharges himself of them by
carrying them ashore. Nay every ditch and little plash of water but anckle deep
has fish in it.

The great River, Mavela-gonga, abounds exceedingly with them. Some of them as
big as Salmons. But the people have little understanding in the way of taking
them. In very dry weather, they stretch a With over the River, How they catch
Fish in the River.
which they hang all full of boughs of Trees to scare the Fish. This With thus
hung they drag down with the stream, and to Leeward they place Fish-pots
between the Rocks, and so drive Their manner of Fishing.
the Fish into them. N^ts or other ways they have few or none.

At a Passage-place near to the City of Candy, the Fish formerly have been
nourished and sed by the Kings order, to keep them there for his Majesty's
pleasure; whither, having used to be thus provided for, Fish kept and fed for
the Kings pleasure.
notwithstanding ^^oods and strong Streams, they will still resort: and are so
tame, that I have seen them eat out of men's hands; but death it is to them that
presume to catch them. The people passing over here, will commonly feed them
with some of their Rice, accounting it a piece of charity so to do, and
pleasure to see them eat it. In many other places also there are Fish thus fed
and kept only for the Kings Recreation: for he will nev^r let any be catched
for his use.

Of Serpents, there are these sorts. The Pimberah, Serpents. The Pimberah of a
prodigious bigness.
the body whereof is as big as a man's middle, and of a length proportionable.
It is not swift, but by subtilty will catch his prey; which are Deer or other
Cattle; He lies in the path where the Deer use to pass, and as they go, he
claps hold of them by a kind of peg that grows in his tail, with which he
strikes them. He will swallow a Roe Buck whole, horns and all; so that it
happens sometimes the horns run through his belly, and kill him. A Stag was caught
by one of these Pimberahs, which seized him by the buttock, and held him so
fast, that he could not get away, but ran a few steps this way and that way. An
Indian seeing the Stag run thus, supposed him in a snare, and having a Gun shot
him; at which he gave so strong a jerk, that it pulled the Serpents head off,
while his tail was encompassing a Tree to hold the Stag the better.

There is another venomous Snake called Polongo, The Polong^.
the most venomous of all, that kills Cattle. Two sorts of them I have seen,
the one green, the other of a reddish gray, full of white rings along the
sides, and about five or six foot long.

Another poisonous Snake there is called Noya, The Noya.
of a grayish color, about four foot long. This will stand with half his body
upright two or three hours together, and spread his head broad open, where
there appears like as it were a pair of spectacles painted on it. The Indians
call this Noy-Rogerati, that is, a Kings-Snake, that will do no harm. But if
the Polonga and the Noya meet together, they cease not fighting till one has
killed the other.

The reason and original of this fatal enmity between these two Serpents, The
Fable of the Noya and Polonga.
is this, according to a Fable among the Chingulays. These two chanced to meet
in a dry S^ason, when water was scarce. The Polonga being almost famished for
thirst, asked the Noya, where he might go to find a little water. The Noya a
little before had met with a bowl of water in which a Child lay playing. As it
is usual among this people to wash their Children in a bowl of water, and there
leave them to tumble and play in it. Here the Noya quenched his thirst, but as
he was drinking, the Child that lay in the bowl, out of his innocence and play,
hit him on the Head with his hand, which the Noya made no matter of, but bare
patiently, knowing it was not done out of any malice: and having drunk as much
as sufficed him, went away without doing the Child any harm.

Being minded to direct the Polonga to this bowl, but desirous withal to
preserve the Child, he told him, That he knew of water, but that he was such a
surly hasty creature, that he was fearful to let him know where it was, lest he
might do some mischief; Making him therefore promise that he would not, he then
told him, that at such a place there was a bowl of water with a Child playing
in it, and that probably the Child might, as he was tumbling give him a pat on
the Head, as he had done to him before, but charged him nevertheless not to
hurt the Child, Which the Polonga having promised went his way toward the
water, as the Noya had directed him. The Noya knowing his touchy disposition,
went after him, fearing he might do the Child a mischief, and that thereby he
himself might be deprived of the like benefit afterward. It fell out as he
feared. For as the Polonga drank, the Child patted him on the head, and he in
his hasty humor bit him on the hand and killed him. The Noya seeing this, was
resolved to be revenged; and so reproaching him for his baseness, fought him so
long till he killed him, and after that devoured him: Which to this day they
ever do, always fight when they meet, and the Conqueror eats the the body of
the vanquished. Hence the Proverb among the Chingulayes, when they see two men
irreconcilable, they compare them to the Polonga and Noya, and say, Noya
Polonga waghe, like a Noya and Polonga.

The Carowala.
There is the Carowala, about two foot in length very poisonous, that lurks in
the holes and thatch of houses. The Cats will seize these and kill and eat them.

Gerende.
Other Snakes there are, called Gerende, whereof there are many but not
venomous. Of the former there are but a few in comparison. These last mentioned
the greatest mischief they do, is to destroy young Birds and Eggs, and young
Hares. Rabbets cannot be kept here to run wild, because of these and other
Vermin, such as Polecats, Ferrets, Weazels, etc.

Hickanella.
Hickanella, much like a Lizzard, venomous, but seldom bites unless provoked,
these ly in the thatch of the houses.

A great Spider.
There is a Spider called Democulo, very long black and hairy, speckled and
glistering. Its body is as big as a man's fist with feet proportionable. These
are very poisonous; and they keep in hollow Trees and holes. Men bitten with
them will not die, but the pain will for some time put them out of their Senses.

Cattle are often bit by some of these Snakes, and as often found dead of them,
tho not eaten. Treading upon them sleeping, or the like, may be the cause of
it. When the people are bitten by any of these, they are cured by Charms and
Medicines, if taken and applied in tim^.

There are also a sort of Water Snakes they call Duberria; but harmless.

Alligators may be reduced hither: there be many of them. Of which we have said
somewhat before.

Kobbera-guion, a Creature like an Allegator.
There is a Creature here called Kobbera guion, resembling an Alligator. The
biggest may be five or six foot long, speckled black and white. He lives most
upon the Land, but will take the water and dive under it: has a long blew
forked tongue like a sting, which he puts ^orth and hisseth and gapeth, but
does not bite nor sting, tho the appearance of him would scare those that knew
not what he was. He is not afraid of people, but will ly gaping and hissing at
them in the way, and will scarce stir out of it. He will come and eat Carrion
with the Dogs and Iackals, and will not be scared away by them, but if they
come near to bark or snap at him, with his tail, which is about an Ell long
like a whip, he will so slash them, that they will run away and howl. This
Creature is not eatable.

But there is the Tolla guion very like the former, Tolla-guion.
which is eaten, and reckoned excellent meat. The Chingulays say it is the best
sort of flesh; and for this reason, That if you eat other flesh at the same
time you eat of this, and have occasion to vomit, you will never vomit out this
tho you vomit all the other. This creature eats not carrion, but only leaves
and herbs; is less of size than the Kobbera guion, and blackish, lives in
hollow Trees and holes in the Humbosses: And I suppose is the same with that
which in the West Indies they call the Guiana.

This Country has its Vermin also. They have a sort of Rats, The People eat
Rat^.
they call Musk-Rats, because they smell strong of Musk. These the Inhabitants
do not eat of, but of all other sort of Rats they do.

Before I conclude my discourse of the Growth and Product of this Country, it
will not be improper to reduce under this head its Precious Stones, Minerals,
and other Commodities. Of which I shall briefly speak, and so make an end of
this First Part.

In this Island are several sorts of Precious Stones, Precious Stones.
which the King for his part has enough of, and so cares not to have more
discovery made. For in certain places where they are known to be, are sharp
Poles set up fixed in the ground, signifying, that none upon pain of being
stuck and impaled upon those Poles, presume so much as to go that way; Also
there are certain Rivers, out of which it is generally reported they do take
Rubies and Saphires for the Kings use, and Cats eyes. And I have seen several
pretty colored stones, some as big as Cherry-stones, some as Buttons, and
transparent, but understood not what they were. Rubies and Saphires I my self
have seen here.

Here is Iron and Crystal in great plenty. Minerals and other Commodities.
Saltpeter they can make. Brimstone some say, is here, but the King will not
have it discovered. Steel they can make of their Iron. Ebony in great
abundance, with choice of tall and large Timber. Cardamums, Iaggory, Rack, Oil,
black Lead, Turmeric, Salt, Rice, Bettel-Nuts, Musk, Wax, Pepper^ Which last
grows here very well, and might be in great plenty, if it had a Vend. And the
peculiar Commodity of the Island, Cinnamon. Wild Cattle, and wild Honey in
great plenty in the Woods; it lies in holes or hollow Trees, free for any that
will take the pains to get it. Elephants Teeth, and Cotton, of which there is
good plenty, growing in their own Grounds, sufficient to make them good and
strong cloth for their own use, and also to sell to the People of the Vplands,
where Cotton is not so plenty. All these things the Land affords, and it might
do it in much greater quantity, if the People were but laborious and
industrious. But that they are not. For the C^ingulays are Naturally, a people
given to sloth and laziness: if they can but any ways live, they abhor to work;
only what their necessities force them to, they do, that is, to get Food and
Raiment. Yet in this I must a little vindicate them; For what indeed should
they do with more than Food and Raiment, seeing as their Estates increase, so
do their Taxes also? The People discou^aged from Industry by the Tyranny they
are under.
And although the People be generally covetous, spending but little, scraping
together what they can, yet such is the Government they are under, that they
are afraid to be known to have any thing, lest it be taken away from them.
Neither have they any encouragement for their industry, having no Vend by
Traffic and Commerce for what they have got.

Rajah Singah the King of ^e^lon.


PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the present King of Cande.
HItherto I have treated of the Country, The Government of this Island.
with the Provisions and Wealth of it: Our next Discourses shall be of the
Political Government there exercised. And here Order will lead us to speak
first of the King and Matters relating to him.

Anciently this Country consisted of Nine Kingdoms, all which had their
several Kings; but now by the vicissitude of Times and Things, they are all
reduced under one King, who is an absolute Tyrant, and Rules the most
arbitrarily of any King in the World. We will first speak of him as to his
Personal Capacity, and next as to his Political.

In his Personal Capacity, are to be considered his Birth and Parentage, his
Person, his Relations, his State, his Manners, his Pleasures and Recreations,
his Religion.

Radga-Singa is his Name, which signifies a Lyon-King. The King's Lincage.
He is not of the right Descent of the Royal-Blood. For the former King
deceased leaving his Queen a Widow, and two young Princes, which he had issue
by her. She was a Christian, having been baptized by the Portuguez, and named
Dona Catharina. She afterward married to the Chief Priest, whom in their
Language they call Tirinanxy. And by him had this Son, the present King. The
Tirinanx his Father reigned and ruled the Land during the minority of the young
Princes: but being aged, he divided the Country between the three Princes by
Lot, intending Conde Vda, which is the best part of the Land, for his own Son,
Radga-Singa. Which was obtained by this device. The names of the three Kingdoms
being written on three Papers, were put into a Pot, and one was appointed, who
knew the matter to take them out, and deliver them one to each, beginning with
the Eldest, craftily delivering that which had Conde Vda written in it unto
Radga-Singa; and so it came to pass according to the old Kings determination.
All these three in the beginning of their Reigns joined together against the
Portuguez, but soon after fell out among themselves, and this King in the end
prevailed, and got all the Country. Danna Polla Rodgerah the youngest, King of
Mautoly, being overthrown, fled down to the Portuguez to Columba, who sent him
to Goa, where he dyed. The other named Comaure-Si^ga, King of Owvah, dyed in
Cande.

As to the Person of the present King. His Person, Mien, and Habit.
He is not tall, but very well set, nor of the clearest color of their
complexion, but somewhat of the blackest; great rolling Eyes, turning them and
looking every way, always moving them: a brisk bold look, a great swelling
Belly, and very lively in his actions and behavior, somewhat bald, not having
much hair upon his head, and that gray, a large comely Beard, with great
Whiskers; in conclusion, a very comely man. He bears his years well, being
between Seventy and Eighty years of age; and tho an Old man, yet appears not to
be like one, neither in countenance nor action. His Apparel is very strange and
wonderful, not after his own Countrey-fashion, or any other, being made after
his own inven^tion. On his head he wears a Cap with four corners like a Jesuits
three teer high, and a Feather standing upright before, like that in the head
of a fore-horse in a Team, a long band hanging down his back after the
Portuguez ^ashion, his Doublet after so strange a shape, that I cannot well
describe it, the body of one, and the sleeves o^ another color; He wears long
Breeches to his Anckles, Shoes and Stockings. He does not always keep to one
fashion, but changes as his ^ancy leads him: but always when he comes abroad,
his Sword hangs by his side in a belt over his shoulder: which no Chingulays
dare wear, only white men may: a Gold Hilt, and Scabberd most o^ beaten Gold.
Commonly he holds in his hand a small Ca^e, painted of diverse colors, and
toward the lower end set round about with such stones, as he has, and
pleases, with a head of Gold.

His Queen^ and Children.
His right and lawful Queen, who was a Malabar, brought from the Coast, is still
living, but has not been with him, as is known, this Twenty years, remaining
in the City of Cande, where he le^t her; She wants indeed neither maintenance
nor attendance, but never comes out of the Palace. Several Noble men's Daughters
hold Land for this Service, viz. to come to her Court in their turns to wait
upon her Majesty. She bare him a Prince, but what became of him, shall
herea^ter be shown. He had also a Daughter by Her, she came also in her Youth
to a piteous and un^ortunate death, as I shall relate in its place.

His Palace, Situation and Description of it.
He keeps his Court at Digligy^neur, whither he ^led in a Rebellion against him.
His Palace stands adjoining to a great Hill, which was before mentioned; near
unto that part of the Hill next abutting upon his Court none dares presume to
set his ^oot: that being ^or his safeguard to fly unto in time of need. The
Palace is walled about with a Clay Wall, and Thatched, to prevent the Claye's
being melted by the Rains, which are great and violent: Within this Wall it is
all ^ull of houses; most of which are low and thatched; but some are two
Stories high, and tyled very handsomely, with open Galleries ^or Air, rayled
about with turned Banisters, one Ebony, and one painted, but not much Prospect,
standing between two Hills. And indeed the King lives there not so much for
pleasure as security. The Palace it self has many large and s^a^ely Gates two
leaved; these Gates, with their Posts, excellently carved; the Iron work
thereunto belonging, as Bolts and Locks, all rarely engraven. The Windows
inlayd with Silver Plates and Ebony. On the top of the houses of his Palace and
Treasury, stand Earthen Pots at each corner; which are ^or ornament; or which
is a newer fashion, something made of Earth resembling Flowers and Branches.
And no Houses besides, except Temples, may, have these placed upon them. The
contrivance of his Palace is, as I may say, like Woodstock Bower, with many
turnings and windings, and doors, he himself having ordered and contrived all
these Buildings, and the manner o^ them. At all the Doors and Passages stand
Watches: and they who thus give attendance are not to pass without special
Order from one place to another, but are to remain in that place or at that
Ga^e, where the King has appointed them. By means of these contrivances it is
not easy to know in what part or place his Person is, neither does he care
they should.

He has strong Watches night and day about his Court. Strong Guards about his
Court.
And they are his Grandees, who themselves in person watch in certain places,
where the King himself appoints them: and they dare not be absent from thence,
without it be to go to eat, or upon such like occasions. At Night they all have
their ^et places within the Court, where they cannot one come to the speech of
the other, neither dare they that are near together, or in sight one of the
other, so much as come and sit together and talk^ to pass away the Nights. All
these great men have Soldiers under them, and they are also to come by turns
to watch a the Court. But at Night as their Masters and Commanders watch within
the Walls, so they must watch without, in outward Courts and Guards; neither
dare any of them be seen within with their Commanders. At the end o^ every
Watch there are a multitude of Trumpets and Drums to make a noise; which is to
keep his People waking, and for the honor of his Majesty. There are also
Elephants, which are appointed all night to stand and watch, lest there should
be any Tumult; which if there should, could presently trample down a multitude.

He has also a Guard o^ Cofferies or Negro's, Next his own Person Negro's
watch.
in whom he imposes more con^idence, then in his own People. These are to
watch at his Chamber door, and next his Person.

At uncertain times he will send out a Spy by Night, Spies sent out a Nights.
to see what Watch is kept. Who once finding one of the Great Men asleep, took
his Cap, his Sword and other Arms, and brought them to the King; who afterward
restored them to the Owner again, reproving him, and bidding him take more heed
^or the future. These Spies also are to hear and see what passes: neither is
there any thing said or done but he has notice o^ it. Formerly he used in the
Nights to disguise himself and walk abroad in the Streets to see all passages,
but now he will not adventure so to do.

Most of his Attendants are Boys, and Young Men, His attendants.
that are well favored, and o^ good Parentage. For the supplying himself with
these, he gives order to his Dissava's or Governors of the Countries to pick
and choose out Boys, that are comely and o^ good Descent, and send them to the
Court. These Boys go bare-headed with long hair hanging down their backs. Not
that he is guilty of Sodomy, nor did I ever hear the Sin so much as mentioned
among them.

He has many Women belonging to his Kitchen, Handsome women belong to his
Kitchin^
choosing to have his Meat dressed by them. Several times he has sent into the
Countries a Command to gather handsome young Women of the Chingulayes to
recruit his Kitchen, with no exceptions whether married or unmarried^ and those
that are chosen ^or that Service never return back again. Once since my being
on the Land, all the Portuguez Women that were young and white were sent ^or to
the Court, no matter whether Maids or Wives; where some remained until now, and
some that were not amiable in his ^ight were sent home; and some having
purchased his displeasure were cast into a River, which is his manner of
executing Women. And some sent Prisoners in the Country, being none admitted
to speech or sight o^ them.

Concubines he keeps not many. Some are within his Palace. And those whose
Office is about his Kitchen are reported to be so; His Women, and the Privilege
of the Towns where they live.
which is not improbable, seeing he admits none but them that are young and
very handsome to the employment. Other of his women dwell in Towns near to the
City. Into which no Stranger is permitted to go, nay it is dangerous to
approach near. These Towns have this Privilege, that if any Slave ^lee from his
Master and come hither, he is safe and free from his Masters service, but still
remains a Slave there to them.

His State when he walks in his Palace; or goes abroad.
Sometimes he walks about his Palace, where there are certain Pedestalls of
Stone whitened with Lime and laid in Oil, so that they look purely white, made
and set up in diverse places, here he stands when he comes forth, that he might
be above the rest of the People, and see about him. But when he is minded to go
abroad, though it be never so little a way, and he seldom or never goes far,
Order is given some time before, for all Soldiers of hi^ Guards which are a
great many, it may be Thousands, together with a Dutch and Portugal Captain
with their Flags and Soldiers, Drummers, Trumpeters, Pipers, Singers, and all
belonging, as Elephants, Horses, Falkeners with their Faulkons, and many
others, to stand at the Gate in a readiness to attend his pleasure. And tho he
means not to come forth, yet they must wait in this manner, until he give
order, that they may depart to their houses. Commonly all this assembly are
gathered together at the Palace three or four times before he comes out once.
And oftentimes he comes out when none there are aware of it, with only those
that attend on his person within his Palace. And then when it is heard, that
his Majesty is come forth, they all run ready to break their necks, and place
themselves at a distance to Guard his Person and wait his pleasure. Sometimes,
but very seldom, He comes forth riding upon an Horse or Elephant. But usually
he is brought out in a Pall^nkine; which is nothing so well made as in other
parts of India. The ends of the Bambou it is carried by, are largely tipped
with Silver, and curiously wrought and engraven: for he has very good workmen
of that profession.

The place where he goes when he comes thus abroad, is to a Bankqueting-house
built by a Pond side, which he has made. It is not above a Musket shot from
his Palace. Where he goes for his diversion. Which I shall by and by more
particularly relate.

Another instance of his State and Grandeur will appear in his reception of
Ambassadors. His reception of ^^bassadors.
Who are received with great honor and Show. First he sends several of his
great men to meet them with great Trains of Soldiers, the ways all ^ut broad,
and the grass pared away for many miles: Drums and Trumpets, and Pipes, and
Flags going before them, Victuals and all sorts of varieties are daily brought
to them, and continue to be so all the time they are in the Land, and all at
free-cost. For the Custom here is, Ambassadors, stay they never so long, are
maintained at the Kings Cost and Charges. And being in the City, have their
Victuals brought them out from the Kings Palace, ready dressed. Presents, Goods
or whatsoever they please to bring with them, the King prepares men to carry.
And when they are come to the House that is prepared for them, which is hung
top and sides with white Callico, they are kept under a Guard, and great
Commanders with Soldiers appointed to watch at their Gates, which is accounted
for a great honor. But these Guards dare not permit any to come to the Speech
of them, for the King cares not that any should talk with Ambassadors, but
himself, with whom he takes great delight to have conference, His delight
(...) them.
and to see them brought before him in sine Apparel, their Swords by their
sides with great State and Honor, and that the Ambassadors may see and take
notice of the greatness o^ his Majesty. And after they have been there some
times, he gives them both Men and handsome young Maids for their Servants, to
attend and also to accompany them: often causing them to be brought into his
presence to see his Sports and Pastimes, and not caring to send them away; but
in a very familiar manner entertaining discourse with them.

CHAP. II. Concerning the King's Manners, Vices, Recreation, Religion.
UNder the Consideration of his Manners, will fall his Temperance, his Ambition
and Pride, his Policy and Dissimulation, his cruel and bloody Disposition.

He is temperate both in his Diet and his Lust. Sparing i^ his Diet.
Of the ^ormer, I am in^ormed by those that have attended on his Person in his
Palace, that though he has all sorts of Varieties the Land affords brought to
his Table, yet his chief fare is Herbs, and ripe pleasant Fruits: and this but
once a day. Whatsoever is brought for him to eat or drink is covered with a
white cloth, and whoever brings it, has a Muster tied about his mouth, lest
he should breath upon the Kings Food. The Kings manner of eating is thus. After
what manner he Eats.
He sits upon a Stool before a small Table covered with a white cloth, all
alone. He eats on a green Plantane-Leaf laid in a Gold Basin. There are twenty
or thirty Dishes prepared for him, which are brought into his Dining Room. And
which of these Dishes the King pleases to call for, a Nobleman appointed for
that service, takes a Portion of and reaches in a Ladle to the Kings Basin.
This person also waits with a mus^er about his mouth.

And as he is abstemious in his eating, Chaste himself, and requires his
Attendants uo b^ so.
so in the use of women. If he uses them it is unknown and with great secrecy.
He has not had the Company o^ his Queen this twenty years, to wit, since he
went from Candy, where he left her. He allows not in his Court Whoredom or
Adultery; and many times when he hears of the misdemeanors of some o^ his
Nobles in regard of women, He not only Executes them, but severely punishes
the women, i^ known: and he has so many Sp^e^, that there is but little done,
which he knows not o^. And often he gives Command to expel all the women ou^ o^
the City, not on^ to remain. But by little and little when they think his wrath
is appens'd, they do creep in again. But no women of any Quality dare presume,
and if they would, they cannot, the Watches having charge given them not to let
them pass. Some have been taken concealed under man's Apparel, and what became
of them all may judge, ^or they never went home again. Rebellion does not more
displease this King^ then ^or his Nobles to have to do with women. Therefore
when any are admitted to his Court to w^it upon him, they are not permitted to
enjoy the Company of their Wives, no more then any other women. Neither has he
su^^ered any for near this twenty years to have their Wives in the City, except
Slaves or inferior servants.

He ^ommi^^ed Iu^^st, but such a^ wa^ allowable.
Indeed he was once guilty of an A^l, that seemed to argu^ him a man of most
unbridled ^^st. For he had a Daughte^ that was with Child by himself but in
^hildbed ^oth d^ed. But this manner of Iu^^st is allowable in Kings^ i^ it be
only to beget a right Royal Is^ue, which can only be gotten that way^ But in
all other '^^s held abom^inable, and severely punished. And here they have a
common and usual Pr^uerb, Ne^e can reproach the ^^us nor the Begga^. The one
being so high, that none ^a^e; the other so low^ that nothing can ^hame or
reproach them.

His Pride.
His Pride and asse^lation of honor is unmeasu^able. Which appears in his
Peoples manner of Address to him, How the people Address to the King.
which he either Commands or allows of. When they come before him they fall
flat down on their Faces to the Ground at three s^veral ^imes^ and then they
sit with their legs under them upon their Knees all the time they are in his
presence: And when he ^ids them to absent, they go backwards, until they are
out of hi^ sight^ o^ a great distance from him. But of Christian People indeed
he requires no more then to kneel with their ^a^^ o^^ before him.

They give him divine worship.
Nay, He takes on him all the Cer^monies and Solemnitie^ of Honor, which they
show unto their Gods, making his a^^ount that as he is now their King, so
her^a^ter he shall be one o^ their Gods. And the People did call him God.
Formerly since my ^^^ing on that land, he used not to come ou^ o^ his Palace
into the sight of the People but very seldom ou^ o^ State and ^augh^^n^^^s o^
Spirit: but now of later times he comes ^orth daily. And although he be near
fourscore years of age, yet his greatest delight is in Honor and Majesty,
Pleased with high ^ule^.
being most pleased with high and windy ^^le^ given him. Such as Mau^^w^ul, a
Phrase ^npo^ting G^eatne^s, but not expressible in our Language. ^ondi^wn^
Bondenind (...) y^u^ Majesty be a God. When the King speaks to them, they
answer him at every period, (...), many Lives^ Baula Gant, the ^im^ of a Dog^
spe^king to the King of themselves: yet now o^ late tun^s sin^e here happened a
Rebellion against him, he ^^ars to assum^ to himself the Title of God; having
visibly seen and almost (...), that the^e is a greater power th^n Hi^ ruling on
Earth, which ^et the hea^ts of the People against Him: and so has given
command to profane that great Name no more, by ascribing it to him.

In Anno 1075. one o^ the Kings greatest and most Valiant Generals, and that
had been notably succe^^ful against the Dutch, had done many pieces o^ good
service ^or the King, An ins^an^^ o^ ^wo o^ ^he King'^ haugh^y (...).
expelled the Hollande^s out o^ seve^al Fort^, taking and killing many o^ them,
this man the King was jealous o^, and did resolve to take away his Head a^ ^
toward o^ his Valor; which he had some private Intelligence o^, and ^o Fled,
being the^ in Camp against the Dutch, He sligh^^ the (...) of one of hi^ ^e^^
(...).
and got to ^^lum^^a with h^^ wi^^ and goods. By which the King had an
invaluable Loss. Yet the King out o^ the height of his Stomach, seemed not in
the least to be v^xed the^^at, neither did he regard i^, (...) i^ it were
beneath the quality of such a Monarch to be moved with such a Tri^le. But sen^
down another General in his place; And as ^or the house and es^ate of him that
Fled, and whatsoever he le^t behind him, he let it lie and (...) s^orning to
esteem or regard it.

To give you an Instance or two more o^ this Princes Spirit At the t^^e of New
^ea^ all his Subjects, high and low, He (...) hi^ (...).
do bring him c^rtain Presents, or rather Tax^s, ^ach one a c^^^ain rate; which
^ormerly he used constantly to take, but of late years. (...) so abounds with
all things, continually putting into his Treasury, and but seldom taking out,
and that but li^^le, that he think^ scorn to receive these his due revenues,
least his people should think it were out o^ necessity and want. Nevertheless
the Great Men still at the New year, b^ing their Presents day after day before
the King at his coming ^orth, hoping i^ will please him to accept them, but now
o^ many years he receives them not. His mind is so haughty, that he (...) ^o
^eem to value any thing in the world. When tyding^ are som^time^ b^ought him,
that the Dut^h have made an Invasion into hi^ Co^ntr^y, although he be well
able to expel them, he will not so much ^^ ^^ga^d (...).

The Dutch knowing his Proud Spirit make their advantage of it, ^he Dut^h se^ve
^he^^ (...) upon hi^ P^^de by ^la^ ^^^ing him.
by Fla^^^^ing him with their Ambassado^s, telling him that they ar^ his
Majestie^ (...) Subj^^^s and Servants; and that it is out of their ^oyalty to
him, that they build (...), and keep Wa^^he^ round about hi^ ^oun^^ey, to
prev^nt ^o^^aign Nations and Enemies from coming. And that a^ they a^e thu^
employed in hi^ Majesty's service, so it is ^or sustenan^e, wh^^h they want,
that o^^asioned their coming up into his Majest^^s Count^ey and thu^ by
Fla^^ering him, and ascribing to him High and Honour^^^^ ^ule^, which are
things he greatly delight^ (...), sometimes they p^^vail to have the Count^ey
(they have in^aded,) and he ^^ have the Honor. Yet a^ other times, upon bette^
Consideration, h^ will not be Flattered, but ^alls upon them at unawar^es, and
does them great damage.

Such a Ven^^^^^n do^^ he expe^^ from the People, The people giv^ way ^o the
King's ^^^l ^loths.
that whatsoever things a^^ car^ying to (...) which are known by the white
Cloth they are wrapped up in, all persons mee^ing them turn out o^ the way: not
ex^epting the Kings soul Clothes ^or when they are ^^^^^d to wall^^g (which is
daily) all even the greatest ri^e up, as they come by, which is known by being
carried on an hand h^^v^d upwa^^^, ^^ve^ed with a Pain^^d cloth. Hi^ natural
(...), and dece^^^ul (...).


He (...), a great dissembler, no^ does he want wisdom. He ^^ no^ passiona^^ in
hi^ anger. For with whomsoever he be angry, h^ will not show (...) n^^^h^^ ^^
he ^^^h or ove^ ^^^ly in any matter^, but does all things with deliberation,
tho but with a little advise: asking Counsel of no body but himself. He
accounts it Wit and Policy to lie and dissemble, that his intents and purposes
may the better be concealed; but he abhors and punishes those that lie to
him.

His wise saying concerning Runnawayes.
Dutch Runnawayes, whereof there are several come to him, he says are Rogues
that either have robbed or killed, or else would never run away from their own
Nation. And tho he receives them, yet esteems them not.

Naturally cruel.
He seems to be naturally disposed to Cruelty: For he sheds a great deal of
blood, and gives no reason for it. His Cruelty appears both in the Tortures and
Painful deaths he inflicts, and in the extent of his punishments, viz. upon
whole Families for the miscarriage of one in them. For when the King is
displeased with any, he does not always command to kill them outright, but
first to torment them, which is done by cutting and pulling away their flesh by
Pincers, burning them with hot Irons clapped to them to make them confess of
their Confederates; and this they do, to rid themselves of their Torments,
confessing far more than ever they saw or knew. After their Confession,
sometimes he commands to hang their two Hands about their Necks, and to make
them eat their own flesh, and their own Mothers to eat of their own Children;
and so to lead them through the City in public view to terrify all, unto the
place of Execution, the Dogs following to eat them. The Dogs follow Prisoners
to execution.
For they are so accustomed to it, that they seeing a Prisoner led away, follow
after. At the place of Execution, there are always some sticking upon Poles,
others hanging up in quarters upon Trees; besides, what lies killed by
Elephants on the ground, or by other ways. This place is always in the
greatest Highway, that all may see and stand in awe. For which end this is his
constant practice.

Moreover, he has a great many Prisoners, whom he keeps in Chains, The Kings
Prisoners, their Misery.
some in the common Gaol, some committed to the custody of Great Men; and for
what or for how long time none dare enquire. Commonly they ly thus two, four or
six years; and some have Victuals given them, and some not having it, must ask
leave to go out and beg with a Keeper. It is according as the King appoints,
when they are committed. Or some of them being driven to want do get food by
work, such as, sewing, making Caps, Doublets, Purses. This coming once to the
Kings Ears, he said, I put them there to torment and punish them, not to work
and be well maintained; and so commanded to take away their Sizzars and Needles
from them. Yet this lasted not long, for afterward they fell to their work
again. Those that have been long there are permitted to build little Shops on
the Street side against the Prison, and to come out in the day time, and sell
their work as they make it; but in the Night time are shut up again.

When the Streets are to be swept about the Palace, they make the Prisoners
come out in their Chains, and do it.

And after all their Imprisonment, without any examination, they are carried
forth and executed: and these not only the common sort, but even the greatest
and most nobly descended in the Land: For with whom he is displeased, he makes
no difference.

He punishes whole generations for the^ sake of one.
Nor is his wrath appeased by the Execution of the Malefactor, but oftentimes he
punishes all his Generation; it may be kills them altogether, or gives them
all away for Slaves.

One Impaled on a Stake.


Thus he often deals with those, whose Children are his Attendants. I mentioned
before, that young Men of the best Families in the Land, are sought out to wait
upon the King in his Court. The sad condition of young Gentlemen that wait on
his Person.
These after they have served here some small time, and have as it were but
seen the Court, and known his Customs and Manners, he requiteth them by cutting
off their Heads, and putting them into their Bellies: other faults none do
know. Heretofore, as it is reported, he was not so Cruel, but now none escapes,
that serves in his Palace. Then he recruits his Slain out of the Countries, by
giving Orders to his Dissava's or Governors to send him others to Court.
Whither they go like an Ox to the Slaughter, but with far more heavy hearts.
For both they and their Parents full well know what end the King's honorable
Service will bring them to. Howbeit there is no remedy. Being thus by Order
sent unto the Court, their own Parents must provide for and maintain them,
until the King is pleased to call them to his Use, which it may be will not be
in some years. Sometimes it happens, that the Boys thus brought, before the
King makes use of them about his Person, are grown too big, and so escape. But
those that are employed in the Palace, enjoy this favor, That all such Taxes,
Customs, or other Duties belonging to the King, which their Fathers were wont
to pay, are released, until such time as they are discharged from the King's
Employment; which is always either by Execution, or by being given to somebody
for perpetual Bondmen. During the time of the King's favor, he is never
admitted to go home to Visit his Parents and Friends. The Malekind may come to
see him, but no Women are admitted, be it his Mother that bare him. And after
he is killed, though for what no man knows, he is accounted a Rebel and Traitor
against the King: and then his Father's House, Land and Estate is seized on for
the King. Which after some time by giving of Fees and Gi^ts to the great ones,
they do redeem again: And sometimes the whole Family and Generation perish, as
I said before. So that after a Lad is taken into the King's Palace, his Kindred
are afraid to acknowledge Alliance to him. But these matters may more properly
be related, when we come to speak of his Tyranny.

Sometimes for his Pleasure, His Pleasure Houses.
he will ride or be carried to his Banqueting House, which is about a
Musket Shot from his Palace. It stands on a little Hill; where with abundance
of pains and many Months labor, they have made a little Plain, in length not
much above an Arrows ^light, in breadth less. Where at the head of a small
Valley, he has made a Bank cross to stop the Water running down. It is now
become a fine Pond, and exceeding full of Fish. At this Place the King has
several Houses built according to his own appointment very handsome, born up
with carved Pillars and Painted, and round about Rails and Banisters turned,
one Painted and one Ebony, like Balconie. Some standing high upon a Wall, being
for him to sit in, and see Sport with his Elephants, and other Beasts, as also
for a Prospect abroad. Others standing over this Pond, where he himself sits
and feeds his Fish with boiled Rice, Fruits and Sweetmeats. They are so tame
that they will come and eat in his hand; but never does he suffer any to be
caught. This Pond is useful for his Elephants to wash in. The Plain was made
for his Horses to run upon. For oftentimes he commands his Grooms to get up and
ride in his Presence; and sometimes for that good Service, gives the Rider five
or ten Shillings, and it may be a piece of Cloth. Always when he comes forth,
his Horses are brought out ready saddled before him; but he himself mounts them
very seldom. All of which he had from the Dutch, some sent to him for Presents,
and some he has taken in War. He has in all some twelve or fourteen: some of
which are Persian Horses.

His Pastimes abroad.
Other Pastimes and Recreations he has (for this is all he minds or regards.)
As to make them bring wild Elephants out of the Woods, and catch them in his
Presence. The manner how they get them unto the City, I have mentioned already.
Also when he comes out of his Court, he Delights to look upon his Hawks, although
he never use them for his Game; sometimes on his Dogs, and tame Deer, and
Tigers, and strange kind of Birds and Beasts; of both which he has a great
many. Also he will try his Guns, and shoot at Marks, which are excellently
true, and rarely inlay'd with Silver, Gold, and Ivory. For the Smiths that make
them dare not present them to his hand, not having sufficiently proved them. He
has Eight or Nine small Iron Cannon, lately taken from the Dutch, which he
has mounted in Field-Carriages, all rarely carved, and inlay'd with Silver and
Brass, and colored Stones, set in convenient places, and painted with Images
and Flowers. But the Guns disgrace the Carriages. He keeps them in an House on
the Plain. Upon some Festival times he uses them. I think, they are set there
chiefly for a Memorial of his late Victories: For he has many, and far better
Guns of Brass that are not so regarded.

His Diversion at h^m^.
In his Palace he passes his time with looking upon certain Toys and Fancies
that he has, and upon his Arms and Guns, calling in some or other of his great
Men to see the same, asking them if they have a Gun will shoot further than
that: and how much Steel such a Knife, as he will show them, needs to have in
it. He takes great delight in Swimming, in which he is very expert. And the
Custom is, when he goes into the Water, that all his Attendance that can Swim
must go in likewise.

H^s Religion.
And now lastly for his Religion, you cannot expect much from him. Of the
Religion of his Country he makes but a small Profession; as perceiving that
there is a greater God, than those that they through long custom, have and do
Worship. And therefore when an Impostor, a Bastard Moor by Nation born in that
Land; came and publicly set up a new nameless God, as he styled him; and that
he was sent to destroy the Temples of their Gods, the King opposed it not for a
good while, as waiting to see which of these Gods would prevail, until he saw
that he aimed to make himself King, then he allowed of him no longer: as I
shall show more at large hereafter: when I come to speak of the Religion of the
Country.

How he stands affected to the Christian Religion.
The Christian Religion, he does not in the least persecute, or dislike, but
rather as it seems to me, esteems and honors it. As a sign of which take this
passage. When his Sister died, for whom he had a very dear Affection, there was
a very grievous Mourning and Lamentation made for her throughout the whole
Nation: all Mirth and Feasting laid aside, and all possible signs of sorrow
expressed: and in all probability, it was as much as their lives were worth, who
should at this time do any thing, that might look like joy. This was about
Christmas. The Dutch did notwithstanding adventure to keep their Christmas by
Feasting. The News of this was brought to the King. And every body reckoned it
would go hard with the Dutch for doing this. But because it was done at a
Festival of their Religion, the King past it by, and took no notice of it. The
Value also that he has for the Christian Religion, will appear from the respect
he gives the Professors of it; as will be seen afterward.

CHAP. III. Of the King's Tyrannical Reign.
WE have all this while considered this King, with respect unto his Person,
Temper, and Inclinations, now we will speak of him with more immediate respect
unto his Office, and Government, as he is a King. And here we will discourse of
the manner of his Government, of his Treasure and Revenues, of his Great
Officers, and lastly, of his Strength and Wars.

As to the manner of his Government, His Government Tyrannical.
it is Tyrannical and Arbitrary in the highest d^gree: For he rules Absolute,
and after his own Will and Pleasure: his own Head being his only Counselor.
The Land all at his Disposal, and all the People from the highest to the lowest
Slaves, or very l^k^ Slaves: both in Body and Goods wholly at his Command.
Neither wants He those three Virtues of a Tyrant, Jealousy, Dissimulation, and
Cruelty.

But because Policy is a necessary endowment of a Prince, His Policy.
I will first show in an instance or two, that he is not devoid of it.

The Country being wholly His, the King Farms out his Land, not for Money, but
Service. He Farms out his Country for Service.
And the People enjoy Portions of Land from the King, and instead of Rent, they
have their several appointments^ some are to serve the King in his Wars, some
in their Trades, some ^erve him for Laborers, and others are as Farmers to
furnish his House with the Fruits of the Ground; and so all things are done
without Cost and every man paid for his pains: that is, they have Lands for it;
yet all have not watered Land enough for their needs, that is, such Land as
good Rice requires to grow in; so that such are fain to sow on dry Land, and
Till other men's Fields for a subsistence. These Persons are free from payment
of Taxes; only sometimes upon extraordinary occasions, they must give an Hen or
Mat or such like, to the King's use: for as much as they u^e the Wood and Water
that is in his Country. But if any find the Duty to be heavy, or too much for
them, they may leaving their House and Land, be free from the King's Service,
as there is a Multitude do. And in my judgment they live far more at ease,
after they have relinquished the King's Land, than when they had it.

Many Towns are in the King's hand, the Inhabitants whereof are to Till and
Manure a quantity of the Land according to their Ability, and lay up the Corn
for the King's use. These Towns the King often bestows upon some of his Nobles
for their Encouragement and Maintenance, with all the fruits and benefits that
before came to the King from them. In each of these Towns there is a Smith to
make and mend the Tools of them to whom the King has granted them, and a
Potter to fit them with Earthen Ware, and a Washer to wash their Clothes, and
other men to supply what there is need of. And each one of these ha^h a piece
of Land for this their Service, whether it be to the King or the Lord; but what
they do for the other People they are paid for. Thus all that have any Place or
Employment under the King, are paid without any Charge to the King.

His Policy to secure himself from Assassination or Rebellion.
His great Endeavor is to Secure himself from Plots and Conspiracies of his
People, who are sorely weary of his tyrannical Government over them, and do
often Plot to make away with him; but by his subtilty and good fortune
together, he prevents them. And for this purpose he is very Vigilant in the
Night: the noise of Trumpets and Drums, which he appoints at every Watch,
hinders both himself and all others from sleeping. In the Night also he
commonly does most of his Business, calling Ambassadors before him, and reading
the Letters; also displacing some of his Courtiers, and promoting others, and
giving Sentence to execute those whom he would have to live no longer; and many
times Commands to lay hold on and carry away great and Noble men, who until
that instant knew not that they were out of his favor.

Another point of ^i^ Policy.
His Policy is to make his Country as intricate and difficult to Travel as may
be, and therefore forbids the Woods to be felled, especially those that divide
Province from Province, and permits no Bridges to be made over his Rivers: nor
the Paths to be made wider.

Another, which is to find his People work to do.
He often employs his People in vast works, and that will require years to
finish, that he may inure them to Slavery, and prevent them from Plotting
against him, as happily they might do if they were at better leisure. Therefore
he approves not that his People should be idle; but always finds one thing or
other to be done, tho the work be to little or no purpose. According to the
quantity of the work, so he will appoint the People of one County or of two to
come in: and the Governor of the said County or Counties to be Overseer of the
Work. At such times the Soldiers must lay by their Swords, and work among the
People. These works are either digging down Hills, and carrying the Earth to
fill up Valleys; thus to enlarge his Court, which stands between two Hills,
(a more uneven and unhandsom spot of ground, he could not well have found in
all his Kingdom); or else making ways for the Water to run into the Pond, and
elsewhere for his use in his Palace. Where he has it running through in many
places unto little Ponds made with Lime and Stone, and full of Fish.

A vast work undertaken and finished by the King.
To bring this Water to his Palace, was no small deal of labor. For not having
a more convenient way, they were forced to split a great Mountain in twain to
bring the Water through, and after that to make a Bank cross a Valley far above a
Cables length, and in height above four Fathom, with thickness proportionable
to maintain it, for the Water to run over the top. Which at first being only
Earth, the Water would often break down; but now both bottom and sides are
paved and wrought up with Stone. After all this, yet it was at least four or
five Miles to bring this Water in a Ditch; and the ground all Hills and
Valleys, so that they were forced to turn and wind, as the Water would run.
Also when they met with Rocks which they could not move, as this Ground is full
of them, they made great Fires with Wood upon it, until it was soundly hot; and
hereby it became so soft, that they could easily break it with Mawls.

This Water was that which nourished that Country, The turning this water did
great injury to the People.
from whence it was taken. The People of which ever since have scarce been able
to Till their Land. Which extremity did compel the People of those Parts to use
a means to acquaint the King how the Country was destroyed thereby, and
disabled from per^orming those Duties and Services, which they owed unto the
King; and that there was Water sufficient both ^or His Majesty's Service, and
also to relieve their Necessities. Which the King took very ill from them, as
if they would seem to grudge him a little Water. And sure I am, woe be to him,
t^^t should mention that matter again.

So far is he from regarding the good of his Country, But he little regards
his Peoples good.
that he rather endeavors the D^struction thereof. For issue he has none
alive, and e're long, being of a great Age Nature tells him, he must leave it.
Howbeit no love lo^^ between the King and his People. Yet he daily contriveth
and builds in his Palace like Nebuchad^ezzar, wet and dry, day and night, not
showing the least sign of Favor to his People. Who oftentimes by such needle^s
Employments, are Let from the seasonable times of Ploughing and Harvest, to
their great prejudice, and sometimes utter undoing.

After the Rebellion, when the People that lived at a further distance, The
King by craft at once both pleased and punish^d his People.
saw that the King intended to settle himself near the Mountain to which he
fled, Viz. Digligy, and not to come into the old City again, it being very
troublesome and tedious to bring their Rents and Taxes thither, they all jointly
met together, being a great number, and sent an Address to intimate their
Desires to him; which was with great Submission, That His Majesty would not
leave them destitute of his Presence, which was to them as the Sun, that he
would not absent himself from them to dwell in a Mountain in a desolate
Country; but seeing there was no further danger, and all the Rebels destroyed,
that he would return to his old Palace again, vowing all Fidelity to him. The
King did not like this Message, and was somewhat afraid there being such a
tumultuous Company met together, and so thought not fit to drive them away, or
publicly to declare his displeasure at them; but went to work like a
Politician. Which was to tell them that he thanked them for their love and
affection toward him; and that he was desirous to dwell among them in such a
part of their Country as he named: and so bad them all go to work to build him
a Palace there. The People departed with some Satis^action, and fell to work
might and main: and continued at it for near two years together, selling
Timber, and fetching it out of the Woods, laying Foundations, hewing Stone,
till they were almost killed with labor. And being wrought quite tired, they
began to accuse and grumble at one another for having been the occasion of all
this toil. After they had labored thus a long while, and were all discouraged,
and the People quiet, the King sent word to them to leave off. And now it lies
unfinished, all the Timber brought in, rots upon the place, and the building
runs to ruin.

And this is the manner how he employs his People; In what labors he employs
his People.
pulling down and building up again, equalling unequal grounds, making sinks
under ground for the passage of water through his Palace, dragging of great Trees
out of the Wood to make Pounds to catch Elephants in his Pres^nce; although they
could catch them with far less labor, and making houses to keep them in^ alter
they are taken.

He ^oy^on^ his only Son.
He stands not upon any (...) to establish himself, or s^^^ke terror into his
People. This made him (...) o^^ his only Son, a young man of about ^ifteen
years. After the Rebellion the Kingdom being settled in the King's hands again,
and knowing that the hearts of the People disa^^ecting him^ stood strongly bent
toward the Prince, and fearing his own safely as the Prince grew to ^per
years, to prevent all, he poisoned him. For about a year after the Rebellion,
his Son was Sick, the King takes this Opportunity to dispatch him by pretending
to send Phy^i^ to him to ^^^e him. The People hea^ing of the Death of the
Prince, according to the Custom of the ^and when any of the Royal Blood is
deceased, came all in general toward the City where he was, with black or else
very dirty Clothes, which is their Mourning, the Men all ^a^e headed, the Women
with their hair loose and hanging about their Shoulders, to mourn and lament
for the Death of their ^oung Prince. Which the King hearing of, sent this word
unto them. That since it was not his fortune to live, to sit on his Throne
after him and Reign over the Land, it would be but in vain to mourn^ and a
great trouble and let^ unto the Country: and their voluntary good will was
taken in as good part as the mourning it self, and so dismi^^ the Assembly; and
burned the Princes dead Body without Ceremonies or Solemnities.

The extraordinary lamentation at the death of his Sister.
Yet the Death of an old Sister which he had, caused no small ^amentation. It
was she that carried the Prince away in the Rebellion. Which I shall relate by
and by. Country alter Country came up to mourn, giving all signs of
extraordinary sadness, both in Habit and Countenance; the King himself was s^^n
to weep bitterly. The White men also came, which the King took well^ Insomuch
that the H^llanders supposing the King himself to be dead, came up to take
Possession of the Country; but hearing the contrary and understanding their
mistake returned back again. The King and all his Country for more than a
years time went in mourning. And her Body was burnt with all the Honor and
State that could be. Yet notwithstanding all the love and respect he bare unto
he^, he did not once Visit her in all the time of her Sickness. And it i^ now
for certain reported that there is not one of his Generation left.

His c^af^ and cru^lty sh^wn at once.
Once to try the hearts of his Attendant^, and to see what they would do^ being
in the Water a swimming, he seigned himself to be in extremity, and near
Drowning, and cried out for help^ upon which two young Men more venturous and
forward than the rest, immediately made way and came to his help^ who taking
hold of his Body brought him ^a^e to ^and. At which he seemed to be very glad.
Putting on his Clothes he went to his Palace then he demanded to know who and
which they were that had helped him out of the Water. They, supposing by his
Speech it was to give them a reward for the good Service they had so lately
done him, answered. We were they. Whereupon he Commands to call such a great
Man. (For it is they whom he appoints always to see Execution done by their
Soldiers) To whom^ h^ gave Command, saying, ^ake both these, and lead them to
(...) a (...), and ^ut off their Heads, who dared to presume to lay their hands
on my Person, and did not pre^^a^^e themselves rather that I might lay my hand
on them for my ^^li^^ and ^a^e^y. And accordingly they were Executed.

CHAP. IV. Of (...) and ^reasure.
Three (...) in the year they usually carry their Rent^ unto the King. The
King's (...) brought three (...) in the year.
The one is at the New-year called O^rida ^^tamaul. The other is for the (...).
And the last is at a certain Sacrifice in the Month o^ No^ember to their God,
called ^^oy ^^tamaul But ^^sides th^se, whatsoever is wanting in the King's
House at any other time, and they have it, they must upon the King's Order
bring it. These Rents are but little Money, but chiefly Corn, Rice, or what
grow^ out of the Ground.

To speak a little of the first time, The first (...) ^omp^^nded with a great
Festival.
Viz. at the beginning of the New year, when the King'^ Duties are brought him.
Their New year is always either the ^th, or the 18th, or the 19th of March. At
this time upon a spec^al and good day (for which the Astrologers are consulted)
the King washes his head, which is a very great Solemnity among them. The
Palace ^^all adorned with (...), a sort of (...), that make a very (...) show.
They are high Poles standing in tow^ before all the Gates of the Palace, either
nine or seven in a ^ow, the middlemost being the highest, and so they fall
lower and lower on each side. Through the middle of them there is an arched
passage which ^e^ves for a Door. On the top of the Poles are (...) slying, and
all about (...) full of painted Cloth with Images, and Figures of Men, and
Beasts, and (...) and Flowers^ Fruits also hanged up in great order and (...).
On each side of the entrance of the Arch stand Plant^^^ Trees, with bunches of
Plantane^^ on them (...) they were growing.

There are also (...) some places, single Poles of an exceeding height standing
by, with long Honor of diverse colors ^lying, and a Bell at the end of each,
as in the Figure ^^. And now they say, The Palace ^ adorned beyond Heaven.

All the Army is summoned in to stand and wait at the Palace, for the greater
State. In the mean time he goes to lie. Washing houses, house^ built on purpose
for him to wash in, called Outpung^, here are Bathe, and Streams and
Conveyances of Water, and many Servants, whole Office it is to wait upon the
business of these houses. Here he washe^ his head. Which when he has done, he
comes forth into Publi^ view, where all h^^ M^^^a stand in then A^^^. Then the
great Guns are fir^d. Now all the great Men, the Nobles, How the Nobles being
their (...), of D^^^^s.
and the Gover^nor^ of the Country make their appearance before him with their
Pa^k^u^, then New years Gifts, which are due and accustomed Presents, for
Perform^ in their Places and Offices to give. There is a certain Rate for it.
Their manner of bringing these G^^^^^ ^^ther Duties in thus, Their Servants
bring them wrapped up in white Cloth to the Court, and then they take them at
their hands, put them upon their heads, and so come in humble manner, and lay
them at the King's feet. These Presents are Gold, Jewels, Plate, Arms, Knives,
Cloth, each one by a rate according to the Place he is in, and the Country he
has under him: And most o^ them are to present a Sum of Money besides. And if
they can procure any precious Stone, or Rarity, or any other thing, which they
think the King will accept, that also they bring, and glad they are to be
honored with the savor of his acceptance. These New years Gifts for these
many years he thinks scorn to receive, and bids them carry them away again till
another time. Thus they come with them time after time presenting them, which
he as often refusing; at last they bring them no more.

Inferior Persons present their New-year Gifts.
All sorts of Tradesmen also, and such as by their Skill can any ways get Money,
at the New year are to pay into the Treasury each one a certain rate. Which now
adays he accepts not, though formerly he always did.

What Taxes and Rents the People pay.
At this and the other times the things which the People carry as their Rents
and Taxes, are Wine, Oil, Corn, Honey, Wax, Cloth, Iron, Elephants Teeth,
Tobacco, Money. They bring them themselves, and wait at Court with them
commonly diverse Months, before they be received. The great Officers tell the
King, the People have brought their Rents. The King says, It Is well. But if he
give no order withal to receive the things brought (as he seldom does) there is
no remedy, but there they must wait with them. And this he does out of State.
The Rents and Duties brought at the two other times are after the same manner;
the great Men do only bring theirs once at the New year.

The accidental Incomes of the Crown.
There are other Revenues the King has, which are accidental; but bring in
great wealth; That whenever any man dies, that has a stock of Cattle,
immediately out thence must be paid a Bull and a Cow with a Calt, and a Male
and Female Buffalo, which tax they call Marral. And there are Officers
appointed, whose place it is, to come and carry them away. Also at Harvest
yearly there is a certain rate of Corn to be paid by every man according to the
Land they hold and enjoy. Heretofore the King granted, that upon Payment of a
Sum of Money, they should be clear from this yearly Tax of Corn so long, till
the present Possessor died, and the Land descended to his Son or some body
else. And then the Estate became liable again to the ^orementioned Duties. But
now of late there is no mention of any discharge by Money. The Profits that
accrue to the King from Corn-Lands.
So that in time all Houses and Families in the Kingdom will be liable to the
Payment of this Tax of Corn; which will bring in no small quantity of Provision
to the King. Only Soldiers that are slain in the Wars, their Lands are free
from the Payment of this Tax; but if they die naturally they are not. The
Farmers all in general, besides their measures of Corn, pay a certain Duty in
Money, with their Rents.

If they Sell or Alienate their Inheritances, the Kings accustomed Duties must
not be diminished, whosoever buyeth or enjoys them. Neither is here any Land
which does not either pay, or do some Duty to the King. Only one case expected,
and that is, if they give or dedicate Land to a Priest, as an Alms or Deed of
Charity in God's Name. On that there is never any more Tax or Duty to be
imposed, as being sacrileg^^ns to take ought from one that belongs to the
Temple. Formerly the King had the Benefit of the trade of two Ports Cotiar and
Portalone, unto each of which used to come yearly some twenty or thirty Sail of
small Vessel, which brought considerable Customs in. Custom of goods imported
formerly pa^d.
But now the Hollander has deprived him of both, suffering no Vessels to come.

The King has several Treasure houses, and in several places, in Cities and
Towns, where always are Guards of Soldiers to watch them both day and night.
His Treasuries^
I cannot certainly declare all that is contained in them. There are Precious
Stones such as his Land affords, money, but not very much, Cloth, and what he
has got by Shipwreck, Presents, that have been sent him from other Nations,
Elephants-teeth, Wax, good store of Arms, as Guns, Bows and Arrows, Pikes,
Halberds, Swords, Ammunition, store of Knives, Iron, Tallipat-Leaves, whereof
one will cover a large Tent, Bedsteads, Tables, Boxes, Mats of all sorts. I
will not adventure to declare further the Contents of his Treasuries, les^ I
may be guilty of a mistake. But sure I am he has plenty of all such things, as
his Land affords. For he is very Provident, and Careful to be well furnished
with all things. And what he does abound with, he had rather it should lie and
rot, then be imbezelled and wasted, that is, distributed among his Servants, or
Slaves; of which he has great store.

He has some hundreds o^ Elephants, He has many Elephants.
which he keeps tame, and could have as many more as he pleases; but although
not catched, yet they are all his, and at his Command when he pleases.

It is frequently reported and I suppose is true, Great Treasure thrown into
the River formerly.
that both he and his Predecessors, by the distress they have been driven to by
the Portuguezes, have cast some store of Riches into the great River,
Ma^velagonga, running by the City, in deep holes among Rocks, which is
irrecoverable, and into a made Pond by the Palace in the City of Cande, or
Hingodegul^neur. Wherein are kept to this day two Alligators, so that none dare
go into the water for fear of being devoured by them. And often times they do
destroy Cows, that go to drink there. But this Pond by cutting the Bank might
easily be drained.

To conclude, the Land that is under his jurisdiction, is all his, The Treasure
he most valueth.
with the People, their Estates, and whatsoever if affords, or is therein. But
that which he does chiefly value and esteem, are Toys and Novelties, as Hawks,
Horses, Dogs, strange Birds, and Beasts, and particularly a spotted Elephant,
and good Arms, of which he has no want.

CHAP. V. Of the Kings great Officers, and the Governors of the Provinces^
THere are two, who are the greatest and highest Officers in the Land. Two
greatest Officers in the Land.
They are called Adigars, I may term them Chief Judges; under whom is the
Government o^ the Cities, and the Countries also in the Vacancy of other
Governors. All People have liberty in default of Justice to appeal to these
Adiga^s^ or if their causes and diffe^rences be not decided by their Governors
according to their minds.

To these there are many Officers and Sergeants belonging. All which, to be
known, carry slaves in their hands like to Band^e^, the crooked end uppermost,
which none but they dare carry. The sight of which slaves, upon what message
soever they be sent, signifies as much as the Adigars Hand and Seal. If the
Adigar be ignorant in what belong^ to his place and office, these men do
instruct him what and how to do The like is in all other places which the King
bestows: if they know not what belongs to their places, there are Inferior
Officers under them, that do teach and direct them how to Act.

The next great Officers.
Next under the Adigars, are the Dissauva's, who are Governors over Provinces
and Counties of the Land. Each Province and County has its Governor: but all
Governors are not Dissauva's, nor other great Officers known by other names of
Titles, as R^teraut^ and ^^^anies^ But all these Generals or Chief Commanders,
who have a certain number of Soldiers under them. These great men are to
provide, that good orders be kept in the Countries over which they are placed,
and that the Kings accustomed duty be brought in due season to the Count. They
have Power also to decide controversies between the People of their
Jurisdiction, and to punish contentions and disorderly persons^ which they do
chiefly by amercing a Fine from them, which is for their Pro^fit, for it is
there own: and also by committing them Prison. Into which when they are once
fallen, no means without money can get them out again. None can put to death but
the King.
But be the ^ac^ never so heinous (Murder it ^ell) they can put none to death.
The sentence of death being pronounced only by the King. They also are sent
upon expeditions in War with their Soldiers, and give Attendance, and watch at
Court in their appointed Stations.

These Dissauva's are also to see that the Soldiers in their Countries do come
in due season and order for that purpose.

These Dissauva's are du^ants been ph^^^^^.
They are appointed by the King himself, not for life, but during his good
pleasure. And when they are dead or removed, oftentimes their places lay void,
sometimes for months, sometimes pe^haps for years^ during which time the Adigar
rules and governs those Countries: and for his labor receives all such Incoms
and Profits as are accustomed and of right do belong to the Governor.

Whom the King makes Dissauva's. And their Pro^^^^ and Honors.
The King when he advances any to be Dissauva's, or to any other great Office
regards not their ability or sufficiency to perform the same, only they must be
persons of good rank, and gentile extrac^ion: and they are all naturally
discreet and very solid, and so the si^ter for the Kings employment. When he
first promotes them, he shows them great testimonies of his Love and ^avour,
(especially to those that are Christians, in whose service he imposes greater
confidence than in his own people, concluding, that they will make more
con^^^ence of their ways, and be more ^aithful in their Office) and give^ them
a Sword, the hil^ all carved and inlaid with Silver and Brass very handsomely,
the Scabberd also covered with Silver, a Knife and H^lbe^d: and lastly, a Town
or Towns for their maintenance. The benefit of which i^, that all the Profit^
which before the King received from those Towns^ now accrues un^o the Kings
Officer. These Towns are composed of all (...) And in the discharge of this his
Office, he may call in the assistance of any man.

^he Liannah.
The next Officer under the Governor is the Liannah. The Writer. Who reads
Letters brought, and takes accounts of all Business, and of what is sent away
to the Court: He is also to keep Registers, and to write Letters, and to take
notice of things happening.

The Undia.
Next to him is the Vndia. A word that signi^ieth a lump. He is a Person that
gathers the King's Money: and is so fly led because he gathers the King's
Moneys together into a lump.

The Monnannah.
After him is the Monnannah. The Measurer. His Place is to go and measure the
Corn that grows upon the King's Land. Or what other Corn belongs to him.

The Power of these Officers extends not all a whole Coun^ty or Province over,
but to a convenient part of division of i^. To w^^, so much as they may well
manage themselves. And there are several ^ets of the like Officers appointed
over other Portions of the Coun^^^^. As with us there are diverse Hundreds or
Division^ in a County. To each of which are distinct O^^icers belonging.

Some Towns ^xempt from the Pi^^uva's. Officers.
These Officers can exercise their Authority, throughout the whole Division over
which they are constituted, excepting some certain Towns, that are of exempt
jurisdiction. And they are of two sort^ First, such Towns as belong to the
Idol-Temples, and the Priests, having been given and bestowed on them long ago
by former Kings. And secondly, The Towns, which the King allots to his Noblemen
and Servants. Over these Towns thus given away, neither the ^ore^mentioned
Officers, nor the chie^ Magistrate himself has any Power. But those to whom
they are given and do belong to, do put in their own Officers, who serve to the
same purposes as the abovesaid do

Other Officers (...).
But these are not all the Officers: there are others, who^e place it is, upon
the Death of any Head of a Family to ^etch away the King's Marrals, Harriots as
I may call them; Viz. a Bull and a C^w, a Male and Female Buffalo, out of his
Stock. Which is accustomably due to the King, as I have mentioned before. And
others, who in Harvest time carry away certain measures of Co^n out of every
Man's Crop according to the rate of their Land.

These places obtained by B^^^es.
These Inferior Officers commonly get their Places by Bribery; Their Children do
pretend a right to them after their Father's Death, and will be preferred
before others, greazing the Magistrate.

But remain only during pleasure.
None of these have their Places for life; and no longer than the Governor
pleases. And he pretty often removes them or threatens to do so upon pretense
of some neglects, to get Money from them. And the People have this privilege,
that upon Complaint made o^ any of these Officers, and request that they may be
changed and others made. They must be displaced, and others put in; but not at
their Choice, but at the Choice of the Chief Magis^rate, or Owner of the Town.

Coun^rey-Courts.
For the hearing Complaints and doing Justice among Neighbors, here are
Countrey-Courts o^ Judicature, consisting of these Officers, together with the
Head-Men of the Places and Towns, where the Courts are kept: They may appeal.
and these are called Gom sabbi, as much as to say^ Town-Consultations. But if
any do not like, and is loath to stand by what they have determined, and think
themselves wronged, they may appeal to their Head Governor, that dwells at
Court; but it is cha^geable, for he must have a ^eg. They may appeal also from
him to the Adigars, or the ^hi^^ Iu^^^^s of the Kingdom. But whosoever gives the
greatest Bribe^ he shall overcome. For it is a common say^ing in this Land.
That he that has M^ney to see the Judge, needs not fear nor ^are, whether his
cause ^e right or not. The greatest Punishment that these Judges can in^l^^^
upon the greatest Malefactors, is but Imprisonment. From which Money will
release them.

Some have adventured to Appeal to the King sometimes; Appeals to the King.
^alling down on the ground before him at his coming ^orth, which is the manner
of their obe^sance to him, to complain o^ Injustice. Sometimes he will give
order to the great ones to do them r^ght, and some^times ^id them wa^^, until
he is pl^ased ^o hear the Cause, which is not suddenly: for he is very slow in
all his Business: neither dare they then depart from the Court, having, been
hidden to stay. Where they stay till they are weary, being at Expense, so that
the Rem^dy is worse than the Disease. And sometimes again when they thus ^all
before him, he commands to ^e^t them and put them in Chains for troubling of
him; and perhaps in that Condition they may lay for some years.

The King's great Officers when they go abroad into the Countri^^, about the
King's Business, How th^s^ great Offi^ers ^rave upon public Business.
they go attended with a number of Soldiers, armed both before and behind them;
their Sword if not by their side, a Boy carries after them, neither do they
carry their Swords for their safety or security. For in traveling here is
little or no dang^r at all. But it is out of State, and to show their
greatness. The Custom is that all their journey Victuals ^e prepared for them
ready dressed; and if their Business requires hast^ then it is brought on a
Pole on a Man's shoulder, the Pots that hold it hanging on each end, so that
nothing can be spilt out into the road; and this is got ready against the great
Man's coming. So that they are at no charge for Diet: It is brought in at the
charge of the Country. But however this is not ^or all his Soldiers that
attend him (they must bring their own Provisions with them) but only for
himself, and some of his Captains.

The greatest Title that is allowed in the City to be given to the greatest Man
is Oussary, Their Titles and Signs of (...).
which signifies Worshipful. But when they are abroad from the King, men call
them S^hattu and Dis^ond^ew, ^mplying, Honor and Ex^ellency. These Grande^s
whenever they walk abroad, their manner is in State to lean upon the arm of
some Man or Boy. And the Adigar besides this piece of State, wheresoever he
goes, th^re is one with a great Whip like a Coach-whip goes before him slashing
it, that all People may have notice that the Adigar is coming.

But there is something comes after, The misery that succeeds their Honor.
that makes all the Honor and Wealth of these great Courtiers not at all
desirable: and that is^ that they are so abnoxious to the King's displeasure.
Which is a thing so customary, that it is no disgrace for a Nobleman to have
been in Chains^ nay and in the Common Goal too. And the great Men are as ready
when the King Commands, to lay hold on one another, as he to command them: and
glad to have the Honor to be the King's Executioners, hoping to have the Place
and Office of the Executed. When any of these are thus dispatched, commonly he
cuts off or impri^oneth all the Male kind, that are near of ^in, a^ Sons or
Brothers. ^^aring they should plot revenge, and seizes on all the Estate. And
as ^or the Family, after Examination with Punishment to make them con^ess where
the Estate lies, they have Monthly Allowance out o^ the ^ame. But the Wise or
Women-Kindred are now nothing at all in es^eem ^or Honorable Ladies as they
were before. Yet sometimes he will send for the Sons or Brothers o^ these whom
he has cut of^ ^or T^aitors, and remand them out o^ the Prisons where he had
committed them, and prefer them in honorable Employment.

The foolish ambition of the Men and Women of this Country.
It is generally reported, and I have seen it so, that those whom he prefers
unto the greatest and weightiest Employments are those whom he intends soon to
cut of^, and contrariwise those whom he does a^^ect, and intends to have longer
Service o^, shall not be so laden with Places and Honors. Howbeit although they
know and see this before their eyes daily, yet their hearts are so haughty and
ambitious, that their desires and endeavors are to ascend unto the highest
degrees o^ honor: tho that be but one remove from Death and utter Destruction.
And the Women's ambition is so great also, that they will put their Husbands on
to seek for Preferment, urging how dishonorable it is ^or them to sit at home
like Women, that so they may have respect, and be reputed for great Ladies.

CHAP. VI. Of the King's Strength and Wars.
The King's Military A^fairs.
IT remains now that I speak a little o^ the King's Military Affairs. His Power
consists, in the natural Strength o^ his Country, in his Watches, and in the
Craft, more than the Courage, o^ his Soldiers.

The natural strength of his Country.
He has no Artificial Forts or Castles, but Nature has supplied the want o^
them. For his whole Country o^ Cande Vda, standing upon such high Hills, and
those so difficult to pass, is all an Impregnable Fort: and so is more
especially Digligy neur his present Palace. These Places have been already
described at large; and therefore I omit speaking any ^urther of them here.

Watches and Thorn-gates.
There are cons^ant Watches set in convenient places in all parts of the
Country, and Thorn-gates: but in time of danger, besides the ordinary Watches,
in all Towns, and in all places and in every cross Road, exceeding thick, that
it is not possible for any to pass unobserved. Th^se Thorn-gates which I here
mention and have done before, are made of a sort of Thorn bush or Thorn-tree;
each stick or branch whereof thrusts out on all sides round about, sharp
prickles, like Iron Nails, of three or four inches long: one of these very
Thorns I have lately seen in the Repository at Gresham College: These sticks or
branches being as big as a good Cane, are platted one very close to another,
and so being ^astned and tied to three or four upright spars, are made in the
^ashion of a Door. This is hung upon a Door case some ten or twelve foot high,
(so that they may, and do ride through upon Elephants) made of three pieces of
Timber like a Gallows, after this manner ^ the Thorn door hanging upon the
transverse piece like a Shop window; and so they lift it up, or clap it down,
as there is occasion: and tie it with a Rope to a cross Bar.

But especially in all Roads and Passages from the City where the King now
Inhabits, None to pass from the Kings City without Pasports.
are very strict Watches set: which will suffer none to pass not having a
Passport; which is the print of a Seal in clay: It is given at the Court to
them that have License to go through the Watches. The Seals are di^^erent,
according to the Profession of the Party: as to a Soldier the print o^ a man
with a Pike on his Shoulder: to a Labourer, a Man with two Bags hanging on each
end of a Pole upon his Shoulder, which is the manner they commonly carry their
Loads. And to a white man, the Passport is the print of a Man with a Sword by
his side, and a Hat on his head. And so many Men as there are in the Company,
so many prints there must be in the Clay. There is not half the examination for
those that come into the City, as for those that go out, whom they usually
search to see what they carry with them.

To speak now of their Soldiery, Their Soldiery.
their Expeditions and manner of Fight. Besides the Dissauvas, spoken of
before, who are great Generals, there are other great Captains. As those they
call Mote-Ralls; as much as to say, Scribes. Because they keep the Rolls or
Registers of certain Companies of Soldiers, each containing 970 Men, who are
under their Command. Of these Mote-Ralls, there are four principal. But besides
these, there are smaller Commanders over Soldiers; who have their Places from
the King, and are not under the Command of the former great ones.

All these both Commanders and common Soldiers must wait at the Court. All Men
of Arms wait at Court.
But with this difference. The great Men must do it continually: each one
having his particular Watch appointed by the King. But the private Soldiers
take their turns of Watching. And when they go, they do carry all their
Provisions for the time of their stay with them upon their Backs. These
Soldiers are not listed, (listing Soldiers being only upon extraordinary
occasions) but are by Succession the Son after the Father. For which Service
they enjoy certain Lands and Inheritances, which is instead of Wages or Pay.
The Soldiers have Lands allotted them instead of Pay.
This duty if they omit or neglect, they loose or forfeit their Inheritance. Or
if they please to be released or discharged, they may, parting with their Land.
And then their Commander places another in their room; but so long as the Land
lies void, he converts the Profits to his own proper use. And he that after
takes it, gives a Bribe to the Commander, who yet notwithstanding will not
permit him to hold it above two or three years, unless he renew his Bribes.

The Soldiers of the High-Lands called Cande Vda, To prevent the Soldiers from
Plotring^
are dispersed all over the Land; so that one scarcely knows the other, the
King not suffering many Neighbors and Townsmen to be in one Company: which
has always heretofore been so ordered for fear of Conspiracies.

When the King sends any of these Commanders with their Armies abroad to War or
otherwise, The manner of sending them out o^ Expedition^.
sometimes they see not his face, but he sends out their Orders to them by a
Messenger; sometimes admits them into his Presence, and gives them their Orders
with his own mouth, but nothing in Writing. And when several of them are sent
together upon any Design, there is not any one appointed to be Chief Commander
or General over the whole Army; but each one as being Chief over his own Men,
disposes and orders them according to his pleasure; the others do the like.
Which sometimes begets disagreement among themselves, and by that means their
Designs are frustrated. Neither does he like or approve, that the great
Commanders of his Soldiers should be very intimate or good Friends, lest they
should conspire against him, nor will he allow them to disagree in such a
degree that it be publicly known and observed.

The King require^ all the Captains singly to send him intelligence of their
Affairs.
And when there is any tidings to send the King, they do not send in general
together by consent, but each one sends particularly by himself. And their
common custom and practice is to inform what they can one against another,
thinking thereby to obtain the most favor and good will from the King. By this
means there can nothing be done or said, but he has notice thereof.

When the War is finished they may not return without order.
Being in this manner sent forth, they dare not return, although they have
per^ormed and finished the Business they were sent upon, until he send a
special Order and Command to recall them.

When the Armies are sent abroad, as he does send them very often against the
Dutch, it goes very hard with the Soldiers; The Condition of the common
Soldiers.
who must carry their Victuals and Pots to dress it in upon their Backs,
besides their Arms, which are Swords, Pikes, Bows and Arrows, and good Guns. As
for Tents, for their Armies always ly in the Fields, they carry Tallipat
leaves, which are very light and convenient, along with them. With these they
make their Tents: Fixing sticks into the ground, and laying other pieces of
Wood overthwart, after the manner of the roof of an House, and so lay their
leaves over all, to shoot the Rains off. Making these Tents stronger or
slighter, according to the time of their tarriance. And having spent what
Provisions they carried out with them, they go home to fetch more. So that
after a Month or two a great part of the Army is always absent.

He conceals his purpose, when he sends out his Army.
Whensoever the King sends his Armies abroad upon any Expedition, the Watches
beyond them are all secured immediately, to prevent any from passing to carry
Intelligence to the Enemy. The Soldiers themselves do not know the Design they
are sent upon, until they come there. None can know his intentions or meaning
by his actions. For sometimes he sends Commanders with their Soldiers to ly in
certain places in the Woods until farther order, or until he send Ammunition to
them. And perhaps when they have laid there long enough, he sends for them back
again. And after this manner oftentimes he catches the Hollanders before they
be aware, to their great prejudice and damage. He cares not that his great Men
should be free-spirited or Valiant; if there be any better than the rest, them
to be sure suddenly he cuts off, lest they might do him any mischief.

Great exploits done, and but little Courage.
In their War there is but little valor used, although they do accomplish many
notable Exploits. For all they do is by crafty Stratagems. They will never meet
their Enemies in the Field, to give them a repulse by Battle, They work chiefly
by Stratagems.
and force of Arms: neither is the Enemy like to meet with any opposition at
their first goings out to invade the King's Coasts, the King's Soldiers knowing
the adverse Forces are at first wary and vigilant, as also well provided with
all Necessaries. But their usual practice is to way lay them, and stop up the
ways before them: there being convenient places in all the Roads, which they
have contrived for such purposes. And at these places the Woods are not
suffered to be felled, but kept to shelter them from the sight of their
enemies. Here they lie lurking, and plant their Guns between the Rocks and
Trees, with which they do great damage to their Enemies before they are aware.
Nor can they then suddenly rush in upon them, being so well guarded with Bushes
and Rocks before them, through which before their Enemies can get, they flee
carrying their great Guns upon their Shoulders and are gone into the Woods^
where it is impossible to find them, until they come them selves to meet them
after the former manner.

Likewise they prepare against the enemies coming great bushy Trees, having
them ready cut hanging only by withs which grow in the Wood; these as they
march along they let fall among them with many shot and Arrows.

Being sent upon any design they are very circumspect to keep it hidden from
the Enemies knowledge; by suffering only those to pass, who may make for their
Benefit and advantage; their great endeavor being to take their Enemies
unprovided and at unawares.

By the long wars first between them and the Portugueze, They understand the
manner of Christian Armies.
and since with the Hollander, they have had such ample experience, as has
much improved them in the art of War above what they were formerly. And many of
the chief Commanders and Leaders of their Armies are men which formerly served
the Portugueze against them. By which they come to know the disposition and
discipline of Christian Armies. Insomuch as they have given the Dutch several
overthrows, and taken Forts from them, which they had up in the Country.

Heretofore for bringing the head of an Enemy, the King used to to gratify them
with some reward, They seldom hazard a battle.
but now the fashion is almost out of use. The ordering of their battle is with
great security, there being very few lost in Fight. For if they be not almost
sure to win the battle, they had rather not fight, than run any hazard of
loosing it.

If his men do not successfully accomplish the design he sends them upon, If
they prove unsuccessful, how he punishes them.
to be sure they shall have a lusty piece of work given them, to take revenge
on them; for not using their weapons well he will exercise them with other
tools houghs and pickaxes, about his Palace. And during the time they stay to
work, they must bring their Victuals with them not having moneys there to buy:
They cannot carry for above one month, and when their Provisions are all spent,
if they will have any more, they must go home and fetch them. But that is not
permitted them without giving a Fee to the Governor or his Overseer. Neither
can they go without his leave, for besides the punishment, the Watches which
are in every Road from the Kings City will stop and seize them.

CHAP. VII. A Relation of the Rebellion made against the King.
A Comet ushered in the Rebellion.
FOr the Conclusion of this Part, it will not be improper to relate here a
dangerous rising of the People against the King. It happened in the year 1664.
About which time appeared a fearful Blazing-Star. Just at the Instant of the
Rebellion, the Star was right over our heads. And one thing I very much
wondered, at, which was that whereas before this Rebellion, the Tail stood away
toward the Westward from which side the Rebellion sprung, the very night after
(for I very well observed it) the Tail was turned and stood away toward the
Eastward. And by degrees it diminished quite away.

The intent of the Conspirators.
At this time, I say, the people of this land, having been long and sore
oppressed by this Kings unreasonable and cruel Government, had contrived a Plot
against him. Which was to assault the Kings Court in the night, and to slay
him, and to make the Prince his Son, King. He being then some twelve or fifteen
years of age, who was then with his Mother the Queen in the City o^ Cande. At
this time the King held his Court in a City called Nillemby. The Situation of
which is far inferior to that of Cande, and as far beyond that of Digligy where
he now is. Nillemby lies some fourteen miles southward of the City of Cande.
In the place where this City stands it is reported by Tradition an Hare gave
chase after a Dog, upon which it was concluded that place was fortunate, and so
indeed it proved to the King. It is environed with Hills and Woods.

The time appointed to put their design in action was the one and twentieth of
December 1664. about Twelve in the night. How the Rebellion began.
And having gotten a select company of men, how many well I know not, but as is
supposed, not above two hundred, neither needed they many here, having so many
Confederates in the Court; in the dead of the night they came marching into the
City. The Watch was thought to be of their confedracy: but if he were not, it
was not in his power to resist them. Howbeit afterward, whether he were not,
he was execued for it. The said men, being thus in the City, hastened and came
down to the Court; and ^ell upon the great men, which then said without the
Palace upon Watch: since which by the Kings order they lie allways within the
Palace. For they were well informed before who were for them and who not. Many
who before were not entrusted to know of their design, were killed and wounded;
and those that could, seeing the slaughter of others, got in unto the King. The
King Flies.
Who was walled about with a Clay-wall, thatched: that was all his strength.
Yet these people feared to assault him, laying still until the morning. At
which time the King made way to flee, fearing to stay in his Palace,
endeavoring to get unto the mountains, and had not with him above fifty
persons. There were horses went with him, but the ways were so bad, that he
could not ride. They were fain to drive an Elephant before him, to break the
way through the Woods, that the King with his followers might pass.

As he fled they pursued him, but at a great distance, fearing to approach
within shot of him. For he wanted not for excellent good Fowling pieces, which
are made there. They pursue him faintly.
So he got safe upon a Mountain, called Gauluda, some fifteen miles distant,
where many of the Inhabitants, that were near, resorted to him. Howbeit had the
people of the Rebel-party been resolute, who were the major part (almost all
the Land;) this Hill could not have secured him, but they might have driven him
from thence; there being many ways by which they might have ascended. There is
not far from thence a high and peaked hill called Mondamounour, where there is
but one way to get up, and that very steep, at the top are great stones hanging
in chains to let fall when need requires. Had he fled hither, there had been
no way to come at him. But he never will adventure to go, where he may be
stopped in.

The People having thus driven away the old King, They go to the Prince and
Proclaim him King.
marched away to the City of Cande, and proclaimed the Prince, King: giving out
to us English who were there, that what they had done they had not done rashly,
but upon good Consideration, and with good advice; the King by his evil
Government having occasioned it, who went about to destroy both them and their
Country: As in keeping Ambassadors, disanulling of Trade, detaining of all
people that come upon his Land, and killing of his Subjects and their Children,
and not suffering them to enjoy nor to see their Wives. And all this was
contrary to reason, and as, they were informed, to the Government of other
Countries.

The Prince being young and tender, The carriage of the Prince.
and having never been out of the Palace, nor ever seen any but those that
attended on his person, as it seemed afterward, was scared to see so many
coming and bowing down to him, and telling him that he was King, and his Father
was fled into the mountains. Neither did he say or act any thing, as not owning
the business, or else not knowing what to say or do. This much discouraged the
Rebels, to see they had no more thanks for their pains. And so all things
stood until the five and twentieth of December, at which time they intended to
march and fall upon the old King.

But in the Interim, the Kings Sister Flies away with the Prince from the Court
into the Country near unto the King; Upon the Princes Flight, the Rebels
scatter and run.
which so amazed the Rebels, that the money and cloth and plunder which they
had taken, and were going to distribute to the Strangers to gain their good
will and assistance, they scattered about and fled. Others of their Company
seeing the Business was overthrown, to make amends for their former fact,
turned and fell upon their Consorts, killing and taking Prisoners all they
could. The people were now all up in arms one against another, killing whom
they pleased, only saying they were Rebels and taking their goods.

By this time a great man had drawn out his men, and stood in the Field, and
there turned and publicly declared for the old King: A great man declares for
the King.
and so went to catch the Rebels that were scattered abroad. Who when he
understood that they were all fled, and no whole party or body left to resist
him, marched into the City killing all that he could catch.

And so all revolted, and came back to the King again: whilst he only lay still
upon his mountain. For eight or ten days nothing but killing one another to
approve themselves good Subjects.
The King needed not to take care to catch or execute the Rebels, for they
themselves out of their zeal to him, and to make amends for what was past,
imprisoned and killed all they met; the Plunder being their own. This continued
for some eight or ten days. Which the King hearing of, commanded to kill no
more, but that whom they took they should imprison, until examination passed;
which was not so much to save innocent persons from violence, as that he might
have the Rebels to torment them, and make them confess of their Confederates.
For he spared none that seemed guilty: some to this day lie chained in Prison,
being ^equestred of all their Estates, and beg for their living. One of the
most noted Rebels, called Ambom Wellaraul, he sent to Columba to the Dutch to
execute, supposing they would invent new Tortures for him, beyond what he knew
of. But they instead of executing him, cut off his chains, and kindly
entertained him, and there he still is in the City of Columba, reserving him
for some designs they may hereafter have against the Country.

The King could but not be sensible, that it was his rigorous government that
had occasioned this Rebellion, The King poisons his Son to prevent a Rebellion
hereafter.
yet amended it not in the least; but on the contrary like to Rehoboam, added
yet more to the Peoples yoke. And being thus safely re-instated in his Kingdom
again, and observing that the life of his Son gave encouragement to the
Rebellion, resolved to prevent it for the future by taking him away. Which upon
the next opportunity he did by Poisoning him, which I have related before.

But one thing there is, that argues him guilty of imprudence and horrible
ingratitude, His ingratitude.
that most of those that went along with him when he fled, of whose Loyalty he
had such ample experience, he has since cut off; and that with extreme cruelty
too.

In the year 1666 in the month of February, there appeared in this Country
another Comet or stream in the West, Another Comet, but without any bad effects
following it.
the head end under the Horizon, much resembling that which was seen in England
in the year 1680 in December. The sight of this did much daunt both King and
People, having but a year or two before felt the sad event of a Blazing-Star in
this Rebellion which I have now related. The King sent men upon the highest
mountains in the Land to look if they could perceive the head of it, which they
could not, being still under the Horizon. This continued visible about the
space of one month, and by that time it was so diminished, that it could not be
seen. But there were no remarkable passages that ensued upon it.

A Vadda or Wild Man.


PART III.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Inhabitants of this Island.
WE shall in this Part speak of the Inhabitants of this Country, with their
Religion, and Customs, and other things belonging to them.

Besides the Dutch who possess, as I judge, about one fourth of the Island, The
several Inhabitants of this Island.
there are Malabars, that are free Denizons, and pay duty to the King for the
Land they enjoy, as the Kings natural Subjects do; there are also Moors, who
are like Strangers, and hold no Land, but live by carrying goods to the
Seaports, which now are in the Hollanders hands. The Seaports are inhabited
by a mixed people, Malabars and Moors, and some that are black, who profess
themselves Roman Catholics, and wear Crosses, and use Beads. Some of these are
under the Hollander; and pay toll and tribute to them.

But I am to speak only of the natural proper People of the Island, which they
call Chingulays.

I have asked them, whence they derive themselves, but they could not tell.
They say their Land was first inhabited by Devils, The Original of Chinguluys.
of which they have a long Fable. I have heard a tradition from some Portugueze
here, which was; That an ancient King of China had a Son, who during his
Fathers Reign, proved so very harsh and cruel unto the people, that they being
afraid he might prove a Tyrant if he came to the Crown, desired the King to
banish him, and that he might never succeed. This that King, to please the
people, granted. And so put him with certain Attendants into a ship, and turned
them forth unto the Winds to seek their fortune. The first shore they were cast
upon, was this Island. Which they seated themselves on, and peopled it. But to
me nothing is more improbable than this Story. Because this people and the
Chinese have no agreement nor similitude in their features nor language nor
diet. It is more probable, they came from the Malabars, their Country lying
next, tho they do resemble them little or nothing. I know no nation in the
world do so exactly resemble the Chingulays as the people of Europe.

Of these Natives there be two sorts, Wild and Tame. I will begin with the
former. For as in these Woods there are Wild Beasts, Wild-men.
so Wild Men also. The Land of Bintan is all covered with mighty Woods, filled
with abundance of Deer. In this Land are many of these wild men; they call them
Vaddahs, dwelling near no other Inhabitants. They speak the Chingulayes
Language. They kill Deer, and dry the Flesh over the fire, and the people of
the Country come and buy it of them. They never Till any ground for Corn,
their Food being only Flesh. They are very expert with their Bows. They have a
little Ax^ which they stick in by their sides, to cut honey out of hollow Trees.
Some few, which are near Inhabitants, have commerce with other people. They
have no Towns nor Houses, only live by the waters under a Tree, with some
boughs cut and laid round about them, to give notice when any wild Beasts come
near, which they may hear by their rustling and trampling upon them. Many of
these habitations we saw when we fled through the Woods, but God be praised the
Vaddahs were gone.

By an acknowledgment to the King.
Some of the tamer sort of these men are in a kind of Subjection to the King.
For if they can be found, tho it must be with a great search in the Woods, they
will acknowledge his Officers, and will bring to them Elephants-Teeth, and
Honey, and Wax, and Deers Flesh: but the others in lieu thereof do give them
near as much, in Arrows, Cloth etc. fearing lest they should otherwise appear
no more.

How they bespeak Arrows to be made them.
It has been reported to me by many people, that the wilder sort of them, when
they want Arrows, will carry their load of Flesh in the night, and hang it up
in a Smith's Shop, also a Leaf cut in the form they will have their Arrows
made, and hang by it. Which if the Smith do make according to their Pattern
they will requite, and bring him more Flesh: but if he make them not, they will
do him a mi^chief one time or another by shooting in the night. If the Smith
make the Arrows, he leaves them in the same place, where the Vaddahs hung the
Flesh.

They violently took away Carriers goods.
Formerly, in this Kings Reign these wild men used to lie in wait, to catch
Carriers people, that went down with Oxen to trade at the Seaports, carrying
down Betelnuts, and bringing up Cloth, and would make (...) to give them such
things as they required, or else threatening to shoot them. They fearing their
lives, and not being able to resist, were fain to give them what they asked; or
else most certainly they would have had both life and goods too. At which this
King sent many Commanders with their Soldiers to catch them, which at length
they did: But had not some of themselves proved false to them, being encouraged
by large promises, they could never have taken them. The chief being brought
before the King, promising amendment, were pardoned: but sent into other Woods
with a Command not to return thither any more, neitheir to use their former
courses. But soon after their departure, they forsook those Woods they were put
into, and came to their old haunt again, falling to their former course of
Life. This the King hearing of, and how they had abused his Pardon, gave
command either to bring them dead or alive. These Vaddahs knowing now there
could be no hope of Pardon, would not be taken alive, but were shot by the
Treachery of their own men. The heads of two of the chiefest were hanged on
Trees by the City. And ever since they have not presumed to disturb the
Country, nor the King them he only desiring their quiet, and not to be against
him.

Hourly Vadahs trade with the people.
About Hourly the remotest of the Kings Dominions there are many of them, that
are pretty tame, and come and buy and sell among the people. The King once
having occasion of an hasty Expedition against the Dutch, One made to serve the
King.
the Governor summoned them all in to go with him, which they did. And with
their Bows and Arrows did as good service as any of the rest but afterward
when they returned home again, they removed farther in the Woods, and would be
seen no more, for fear of being afterward pressed again to serve the King.

Their habit and Religion.
They never cut their hair but tie it up on their Crowns in a bunch. The cloth
they use, is not broad nor large, scarcely enough to cover their Buttocks. The
wilder and tamer sort of them do both observe a a Religion. They have a God
peculiar to themselves. The tamer do build Temples, the wild only bring their
sacrifice under Trees, and while it is offering^ dance round it, both men and
women.

They have their bounds in the Woods among themselves, and one company of them
is not to shoot nor gather honey or fruit beyond those bounds. A Skirmish about
their bounds.
Near the borders stood a Iack-Tree; one Vaddah being gathering some fruit from
this Tree, another Vaddah of the next division saw him, and told him he had
nothing to do to gather Iacks from that Tree, for that belonged to them. They
fell to words and from words to blows, and one of them shot the other. At which
more of them met and fell to skirmishing so briskly with their Bows and Arrows,
that twenty or thirty were left dead upon the spot.

They are so curious of their Arrows that no Smith can please them. Curious in
their Arrows.
The King once to gratify them for a great Present they brought him, gave all
of them of his best made Arrow-blades: which nevertheless would not please
their humor. For they went all of them to a Rock by a River and ground them
into another form. The Arrows they use are of a different fashion from all
other, and the Chingulays will not use them.

They have a peculiar way by themselves of preserving Flesh. How they preserve
their flesh.
They cut a hollow Tree and put honey in it, and then fill it up with flesh,
and stop it up with clay. Which lies for a reserve to eat in time of want.

It has usually been told me that their way of catching Elephant is, How they
take Elephants.
that when the Elephant lies asleep they strike their ax into the sole of his
foot, and so laming him he is in their power to take him. But I take this for a
fable, because I know the sole of the Elephants foot is so hard, that no ax can
pierce it at a blow; and he is so wakeful that they can have no opportunity to
do it.

For portions with their Daughters in marriage they give hunting Dogs. They are
reported to be courteous. The dowr^e^ they give. Their disposition.
Some of the Chingulays in discontent will leave their houses and friends, and
go and live among them, where they are civilly entertained. The tamer sort of
them, as has been said, will sometimes appear, and hold some kind of trade
with the tame Inabitants, but the wilder called Ramba-Vaddahs never show
themselves.

But to come to the civilized Inhabitants, whom I am chiefly to treat of. A
description of a Chingulay.
They are a people proper and very well favored, beyond all people that I have
seen in India, wearing a cloth about their Loins, and a doublet after the
English fashion, with little skirts buttoned at the wrists, and gathered at the
shoulders like a shirt, on their heads a red Tunnis Cap, or if they have none,
another Cap with flaps of the fashion of their Country, described in the next
Chapter, with a handsome short hanger by their side, and a knife sticking in
their bosom on the right side.

They are very active and nimble in their Limbs: Their disposition.
and very ingenious: for, except Iron-work, all other things they have need of,
they make and do themselves: insomuch that they all build their own houses.
They are crafty and treacherous, not to be trusted upon any protestations: for
their manner of speaking is very smooth and courteous, insomuch that they who
are unacquainted with their dispositions and manners, may easily be deceived by
them. For they make no account nor conscience of lying, neither is it any shame
or disgrace to them, if they be catched in telling lies: it is so customary.
They are very vigilant and wakeful, sufficed with very little sleep: very hardy
both for diet and weather, very proud and self conceited. They take something
after the Bramines, with whom they scruple not both to marry and eat. In both
which otherwise they are exceeding shy and cautious. For there being many Ranks
or Casts among them, they will not match with any Inferior to themselves; nor
eat meat dressed in any house, but in those only that are of as good a Cast or
Race as themselves: and that which any one has left, none but those that are
near of kin will eat.

They are not very malicious one toward another; and their anger does not last
long; seldom or never any blood shed among them in their quarrels. It is not
customary to strike; and it is very rare that they give a blow so much as to
their Slaves; who may very familiarly talk and discourse with their Masters.
They are very near and covetous, and will pinch their own bellies for profit;
very few spend-thrifts or bad husbands are to be met with here.

The Inhabitants of the Mountains differ from those of the Low-lands.
The Natures of the Inhabitants of the Mountains and Low-lands are very
different. They of the Low^lands are kind, pitiful, helpful, honest and plain,
compassionating Strangers, which we found by our own experience among them.
They of the Vp-lands are ill-natured, false, unkind, though outwardly fair and
seemingly courteous, and more of complaisant carriage, speech and better
behavior, than the Low-landers.

Their good opinion of Virtue, though they practice it not.
Of all Vices they are least addicted to stealing, the which they do exceedingly
hate and abhor; so that there are but few Robberies committed among them. They
do much extol and commend Chastity, Temperance, and Truth in words and actions;
and confess that it is out of weakness and infirmity, that they cannot practice
the same, acknowledging that the contrary Vices are to be abhorred, being
abomination both in the sight of God and Man. They do love and delight in those
Men that are most Devout and Precise in their Matters. As for bearing Witness
for Confirmation in any matters of doubt, a Christians word will be believed
and credited far beyond their own: because, they think, they make more
Conscience of their words.

Superstitious.
They are very superstitious in making Observations of any little Accidents, as
Omens portending good to them or evil. Sneezing they reckon to import evil. So
that if any chance to sneeze when he is going about his Business, he will stop,
accounting he shall have ill success if he proceeds. And none may Sneeze,
Cough, nor Spit in the King's Presence, either because of the ill boding of
those actions, or the rudeness of them or both. There is a little Creature much
like a Lizzard, which they look upon altogether as a Prophet, whatsoever work
or business they are going about; if he cries, they will cease for a space,
reckoning that he tells them there is a bad Planet rules at that instant. They
take great notice in a Morning at their first going out, who first appears in
their sight: and if they see a White Man, or a big-bellied Woman, they hold it
fortunate: and to see any decrepit or deformed People, as unfortunate.

How they travail.
When they travel together a great many of them, the Roads are so narrow, that
but one can go abreast, and if there be Twenty of them, there is but one
Argument or Matter discoursed of among them all from the first to the last. And
so they go talking along all together, and every one carries his Provisions on
his back for his whole Journey.

In short, in Carriage and Behavior they are very grave and stately like unto
the Portugals, A brief Character of th^^^
in understanding quick and apprehensive, in design subtle and crafty, in
discourse courteous but full of Flatteries, naturally inclined to temperance
both in meat and drink, but not to Chastity, near and Provident in their
Families, commending good Husbandry. In their dispositions not passionate,
neither hard to be reconciled again when angry. In their Promises very
unfaithful, approving lying in themselves, but misliking it in others;
delighting in sloth, deferring labor till urgent necessity constrain them,
neat in apparel, nice in eating; and not given to much sleep.

As for the Women, The Women their Habit and Nature.
their Habit is a Wastcoat of white Callico covering their Bodies, wrought into
flourishes with Blew and Red; their Cloth hanging longer or shorter below
their Knees, according to their quality; a piece of Silk flung over their
heads; Jewels in their Ears, Ornaments about their Necks, and Arms, and
Middles. They are in their gate and behavior very high, stately in their
carriage after the Portugal manner, of whom I think they have learned: yet they
hold it no scorn to admit the meanest to come to speech of them. They are very
thrifty, and it is a disgrace to them to be prodigal, and their Pride and Glory
to be accounted near and saving. And to praise them selves they will sometimes
say, That scraps and parings will serve them but that the best is for their
Husbands. The Men are not jealous of their Wives, for the greatest Ladies in
the Land will frequently talk and discourse with any Men they please, although
their Husbands be in presence. And although they be so stately, they will lay
their hand to such work as is necessary to be done in the House,
notwithstanding they have Slaves and Servants enough to do it. Let this suffice
concerning the Nature and Manners of the People in general: The ensuing
Chapters will be spent in more particular accounts of them. And because they
stand much upon their Birth and Gentility, and much of what is afterward to be
related has reference unto it: I shall first speak of the various ranks and
degrees of Men among them.

CHAP. II. Concerning their different Honors, Ranks, and Qualities.
How they distinguish themselves according to their qualities.
AMong this People there are diverse and sundry Casts or degrees of Quality,
which is not according to their Riches or Places of Honor the King promotes
them to, but according to their Descent and Blood. And whatsoever this Honor
is, be it higher or lower, it remains Hereditary from Generation to Generation.
They abhor to eat or drink^ or intermarry with any of Inferior Quality to
themselves. The signs of higher or meaner Ranks, are wearing of Doublets, or
going bare-backed without them: the length of their Cloth below their knees;
their sitting on Stools, or on Blocks or Mats spread on the Ground: and in
their Caps.

They never m^rry beneath t^^ir rank.
They are especially careful in their Marriages, not to match with any inferior
Cast, but always each within their own rank: Riches cannot prevail with them in
the least to marry with those by whom they must eclipse and stain the Honor of
their Family: on which they set an higher price than on their lives. And if any
of the Females should be so deluded, as to commit folly with one beneath her
self, if ever she should appear to the sight of her Friends, they would
certainly kill her, there being no other way to wipe off the dishonor she has
done the Family, but by her own Blood.

In case a Man lies with a Woman of inferior rank.
Yet for the Men it is something different; it is not accounted any shame or
fault for a Man of the highest sort to lay with a Woman far inferior to
himself, nay of the very lowest degree; provided he neither eats nor drinks
with her, nor takes her home to his House, as a Wife. But if he should, which I
never knew done, he is punished by the Magistrate, either by Fine or
Imprisonment, or both, and also he is utterly ecluded from his Family, and
accounted thenceforward of the same rank and quality, that the Woman is of,
whom he has taken. If the Woman be married already, with whom the Man of
better rank lies, and the Husband come and catch them together; how low soever
the one be and high the other, he may kill him, and her too, if he please.

And thus by Marrying constantly each rank within it self, the Descent and
Dignity thereof is preserved for ever; and whether the Family be high or low it
never alters. But to proceed to the particular ranks and degrees of Men among
them.

Their Noblemen.
The highest, are their Noblemen, called Hondrews. Which I suppose comes from
the word Homdrewne, a Title given to the King, signifying Majesty: these being
honorable People. It Is out of this sort alone, that the King chooses his
great Officers and whom he imploys in his Court, and appoints for Governors
over his Country. Riches are not here valued, nor make any the more
Honorable. For many of the lower sorts do far exceed these Hondrews in
Estates. But it is the Birth and Parentage that inobleth.

How distin^^^shed from ^^^ers.
These are distinguished from others by their names, and the wearing of their
cloth, which the Men wear down half their Legs, and the Women to their Heels:
one end of which Cloth the Women fling over their Shoulders, and with the very
end carelessly cover their Breasts; whereas the other sort of Women must go
naked from the wast upwards, and their Clothes not hang down much below their
Knees: except it be for cold; for then either Women or Men may throw their
Cloth over their Backs. But then they do excuse it to the Hondrews, when they
meet them, saying, Excuse me, it is for warmth.

They are distinguished also by their own Country Caps, The distinction by
Caps.
which are of the fashion of Mitres: there are two flaps tied up over the top
of the Crown. If they be Hondrews, their Caps are all of one Color, either
White or Blew: if of inferior quality, than the Cap and the flaps on each side
be of different Colors, whereof the Flaps are always Red.

Of these Hondrews there be two sorts, Of the Hondrews two sorts.
the one somewhat Inferior to the other as touching Marriage; but not in other
things. The greatest part of the Inhabitants of the Land are of the degree of
Hondrews.

All Christians either White or Black are accounted equal with the Hondrews.
The Whites are generally Honorable, only it is an abatement of their Honor
that they eat Beef, and wash not after they have been at Stool; which things
are reckoned with this People an Abomination.

Among the Noblemen may be mentioned an Honor, An Honor like unto Knighthood.
that the King confers, like unto Knighthood; it cease in the Person's death,
and is not Hereditary. The King confers it by putting about their Heads a piece
of Silk or Ribbond embroidered with Gold and Silver, and bestowing a Title upon
them. They are styled Mundianna. There are not above two or three of them now
in the Realm living.

Next after the degree of Hondrews may be placed Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths,
Carpenters and Painters. Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths, Carpenters, etc.
Who are all of one degree and quality. But the Hondrews will not eat with
them: however in Apparel there is no difference; and they are also privileged
to sit on Stools, which none of the Inferior ranks of People hereafter
mentioned, may do. Heretofore they were accounted almost equal to the Inferior
sort of Hondrewes, and they would eat in these Artificers Houses, but
afterward they were degraded upon this occasion. It chanced some Hondrews came
to a Smith's Shop to have their Tools mended, when it came to be Dinner time,
the Smith leaves work, and goes in to his House to dine, leaving the Hondrewes
in his Shop: who had waited there a great while to have their work done. Now
whether the Smith fearing lest their hunger might move them to be so impudent
or desperate as to partake with him of his Dinner, clapped to his Door after him:
Which was taken so hainously by those hungry People in his Shop, that
immediately they all went and declared abroad what an affront the Smith had put
upon them. Whereupon it was decreed and confirmed, that for ever after all the
People of that rank should be deposed, and deprived of the Honor of having the
Hondrewes to eat in their Houses. Which Decree has stood in force ever since.

Nevertheless these Smiths take much upon them, The Privilege and state of the
Smiths.
especially those who are the King's Smiths; that is, such who live in the
King's Towns, and do his work. These have this Privilege, that each has a
parcel of Towns belonging to them, whom none but they are to work for. The
ordinary work they do for them is mending their Tools, for which every Man pays
to his Smith a certain Rate of Corn in Harvest time according to ancient
Custom. But if any has work extraordinary, as making new Tools or the like,
besides the aforesaid Rate of Corn, he must pay him for it. In order to this,
they come in an humble manner to the Smith with a Present, being Rice, Hens,
and other sorts of Provision, or a Bottle of Rack, desiring him to appoint his
time, when they shall come to have their work done. Which when he has
appointed them, they come at the set time, and bring both Coals and Iron with
them. The Smith sits very gravely upon his Stool, his Anvil before him, with
his left hand toward the Forge, and a little Hammer in his Right. They
themselves who come with their work must blow the Bellows, and when the Iron is
to be beaten with the great Maul, he holds it, still sitting upon his Stool,
and they must hammer it themselves, he only with his little Hammer knocking it
sometimes into fashion. And if it be any thing to be filed, he makes them go
themselves and grind it upon a Stone, that his labor of fileing may be the
less; and when they have done it as well as they can, he goes over it again
with his file and finisheth it. That which makes these Smiths thus stately is,
because the Towns People are compelled to go to their own Smith, and none else.
And if they should, that Smith is liable to pay Damages that should do work
for any in another Smith's Jurisdiction.

Craftsmen.
All that are of any Craft or Profession are accounted of an inferior degree, as
Elephant-Catchers, and Keepers, who are reckoned equal with the Smiths, etc.
abovesaid, tho they neither eat nor marry together; and these may wear Apparel
as do the Hondrews, and sit on Stools, but the Hondrews eat not with them.

No Artificers ever change their Trade from Generation to Generation; but the
Son is the same as was his Father, and the Daughter marries only to those of
the same Craft: and her Portion is such Tools as are of use, and do belong unto
the Trade: tho the Father may give over and above what he pleases.

Bar^ars.
Next are are Barbars; both the Women and Men may wear Doublets, but not sit on
Stools, neither will any eat with them.

Potters.
Potters yet more Inferior, may not wear any Doublets, nor their Cloth much
below the Knee, nor sit on Stools, neither will any eat with them. But they
have this Privilege, because they make the Pots, that when they are athirst
being at a Hondrew's House, they may take his Pot, which has a Pipe to it, and
pour the Water into their mouths themselves: which none other of these inferior
degrees may be admitted to do: but they must hold their hands to their mouths
and gape, and the Hondrews themselves will pour the Water in. The Potters were
at first denied this Honor, upon which they jointly agreed to make Pots with
Pipes only for themselves, and would sell none to the Hondrews that wanted;
whereat being constrained, they condescended to grant them the Honor above
other inferior People, that they should have the favor to drink out of these
Pots with spouts at their Houses.

Washers.
The next are the Ruddaughs, Washers. Of these there are great Numbers. They
wash Cloths for all People to the degree of a Potter; but for none below that
degree. Their usual Posture is to carry a Cloth on their Shoulder, both Men and
Women: They use Lie in their washing, setting a Pot over the Fire holding seven
or eight Gallons of Water, and lay the foul Cloths on the top; and the steam of
the water goes into the Cloths and scalds them. Then they take them and carry
them to a River side, and instead of rubbing them with their hands, slap them
against the Rock, and they become very clean; nor does this tear the Cloths at
all, as they order it.

Another rank after these are the Hungrams, or Iaggory-Makers. Iaggory-Makers.
Tho none will eat with them, yet it is lawful to buy and eat the Iaggory they
make, (which is a kind of Sugar) but nothing else.

Another sort among them is the Poddah^ The Poddah.
These are of no Trade or Craft, but are Husbandmen and Soldiers, yet are
inferior to all that have been named hitherto. For what reason neither I, nor,
I think, themselves can tell: only thus it falls to them by Succession from
their Predecessors, and so will ever remain.

After these are the Weavers. Weavers.
Who beside their Trade, which is Weaving Cloth, are Astrologers, and tell the
People good Days and good Seasons: and at the Birth of a Child write for them
an account of the day, time and Planet, it was born in and under. These
accounts they keep with great Care all their Lifetime: by which they know
their Age, and what success or evil shall befall them.

These People also beat Drums, and play on Pipes, and dance in the Temples of
their Gods, and at their Sacrifices; they eat and carry away all such Victuals
as are offered to their Idols. Both which to do and take, is accounted to
belong to People of a very low degree and quality. These also will eat dead
Cows.

Next to the Weavers are the Kiddeas or Basket-Makers. Basket-Makers.
Who make Fans to fan Corn, and Baskets of Canes, and Lace, Bedsteds and Stools.

Then follow the Kirinerabs. Whose Trade is to make fine Matts. Mat-Makers.
These Men may not wear any thing on their Heads. The Women of none of these
sorts ever do. Of these two last there are but few.

All below the Couratto or Elephant-Men, may not sit on Stools, The lower ranks
may not assume the Habit or Names of the higher.
nor wear Doublets, except the Barbar, nor wear the Cloth low down their Legs.
Neither may any of these ranks of People, either Man or Woman, except the
Potter and the Washer, wear the end of their Cloth to cover their Bodies,
unless they be sick or cold. Neither may they presume to be called by the Names
that the Hondrews are called by; nor may they, where they are not known, change
themselves by pretending or seeming to be higher than Nature has made them:
and I think they never do, but own themselves in the rank and quality wherein
they were born, and demean themselves accordingly.

All Outlandish People are esteemed above the inferior ranks. The Names of the
Hondrews always end in oppow, of others below the degree of the Elephant People
in adgah,

The Slaves may make another rank. Slaves.
For whose maintenance, their Masters allow them Land and Cattle. Which many of
them do so improve; that except in Dignity they are not far behind their
Masters, only they are not permitted to have Slaves. Their Masters will not
diminish or take away ought, that by their Diligence and Industry they have
procured, but approve of it, as being Persons capable to repose trust in. And
when they do buy or otherways get a new Slave, they presently provide him a
Wise, and so put him forward to keep House, and settle, that he may not think
of running away. Slaves that are born of Hondrew Parents, retain the Honor of
their degree.

Beggars.
There is one sort of People more, and they are the Beggars: who for their
Transgression, as hereafter shall be shown, have by ^ormer Kings been made so
low and base, that they can be no lower or baser. And they must and do give
such titles and respects to all other People, as are due from other People to
Kings and Princes.

The Reason they became so base and mean a People.
The Predecessors of these People, from whom they sprang, were Dodda Vaddahs,
which signifies Hunters: to whom it did belong to catch and bring Venison for
the King's Table. But instead o^ Venison they brought Man's flesh, unknown;
which the King liking so well, commanded to bring him more of the same sort of
Venison. The King's Barbar chanced to know what flesh it was, and discovered it
to him. At which the King was so enraged, that he accounted death too good for
them; and to punish only those Persons that had so o^fended, not a sufficient
recompense ^or so great an Affront and Injury as he had sustained by them.
Forthwith therefore he established a Decree, that all both great and small,
that were of that Rank or Tribe, should be expelled from dwelling among the
Inhabitants of the Land, and not be admitted to use or enjoy the benefit of any
means, or ways, or callings whatsoever, to provide themselves sustinence; but
that they should beg from Generation to Generation, from Door to Door, through the
Kingdom; and to be looked upon and esteemed by all People to be so base and
odious, as not possibly to be more.

And they are to this day so detestable to the People, that they are not
permitted to fetch water out of their Wells; but do take their water out of
Holes or Rivers. Neither will any touch them, lest they should be defiled.

And thus they go a begging in whole Troops, both Men, Women, and Children,
carrying both Pots and Pans, Hens and Chickens, and whatsoever they have, in
Baskets hanging on a Pole, at each end one, upon their Shoulders. The Women
never carry any thing, but when they come to any House to beg, they Dance and
show Tricks, while the Men beat Drums. They will turn Brass Basins on one of
their singers, twirling it round very swift, and wonderfully strange. And they
will toss up Balls into the Air one after another to the number of Nine, and
catch them as they fall, and as fast as they do catch them, still they toss
them up again; so that there are always Seven up in the Air. Also they will
take Beads of several Colors, and of one size, and put them in their mouths,
and then take them one by one out of their mouths again each Colors by
themselves. And with this Behavior, and the high and honorable Titles which
they give, as to Men, Your Honor, and Your Majesty; and to Women, Queens,
Countesses; and to white Men, White of the Royal Blood, etc. They do beg for
their living; and that with so much importunity, as if they had a Patent for it
from the King, and will not be denied; pretending that it was so ordered and
decreed, that by this very means they should be maintained, and unless they
mean to perish with hunger they cannot accept of a denial. The People on the
other hand cannot without horrible shame, lift up their hand against them to
strike or thrust them away; so rather than to be troubled with their
importunity, they will relieve them.

And thus they live, They live well.
building small Hovels in remote Places, Highways, under Trees. And all the
Land being, as it were of Necessity, Contributers toward their maintenance,
these Beggars live without labor, as well or better, than the other sorts of
People; being free from all sorts of Service and Duties, which all other are
compelled to per^orm for the King. Of them it is only required to make Ropes of
such Cow-hides, Their Contest with the Weavers about dead Cow^
as die of themselves, to catch and tie Elephants with: By which they have
another Privilege, to claim the flesh there of for themselves, from the
Weavers. Who when they meet with any dead Cows, use to cut them up and eat
them. But if any of these Roudeahs, Beggars, see them, they will run to them
and drive them away, offering to beat them with the Poles, whereon they carry
their Baskets, saying to them, How can we perform the King's Service to make
Ropes of the Hide, if the Weavers hack and spoil it? telling them also, That it
is beneath such honorable People as they, to eat such Unclean and Polluted
flesh. By these words, and the ^ear the Weavers are in to be touched by that
base People, than which nothing could be more in^amous, they are glad to get
them away as fas^ as they can.

These Men being so low that nothing they can do, Incest common among them.
can make them lower, it is not unusual with them to lay with their Daughters,
or for the Son to lay with his Mother, as i^ there were no Consanguinity among
them.

Many times when the King cuts off Great and Noble Men, A Punishment to deliver
Noble Women to these Baggers.
against whom he is highly incensed, he will deliver their Daughters and Wives
unto this sort of People, reckoning it, as they also account it, to be far
worse Punishment than any kind of Death. This kind of Punishment being
accounted such horrible Cruelty, the King does usually of his Clemency show
them some kind of Mercy, and pitying their Distress, Commands to carry them to
a River side, and there to deliver them into the hands of those, who are far
worse than the Executioners of Death: from whom, if these Ladies please to ^ree
themselves, they are permi^ted to leap into the River and be drowned; the which
some sometimes will choose to do, rather than to consort with them.

There are some of this sort of People which dwell in remote Parts, Some of
these Beggars keep Cattle and shoot Deer.
distant from any Towns, and keep Cattle, and sell them to the Chingulayes,
also shoot Deer and sell them where they ^all in the Woods; for if they should
but touch them, none would buy them.

The Barbar's Information having been the occasion of all this misery upon this
People, Refuse Meat dressed in a Barbar's house^
they in revenge thereof abhor to eat what is dressed in the Barbar's House
even to this day.

CHAP. III. Of their Religion, Gods, Temples, Priests.
TO take a more particular view of the state of this Country, we shall first
give some account of their Religion, as it justly requires the first place, and
then of their other secular concerns.

Under their Religion will come to be considered, Their Gods, their Temples,
their Priests, their Festivals, Sacrifices, and Worship, and their Doctrines
and Opinions; and whatsoever other matters occur, that may concern this Subject.

Their Religion, their gods.
The Religion of the Country is Idolatry. There are many both Gods and Devils,
which they worship, known by particular Names, which they call them by. They do
acknowledge one to be the Supreme, whom they call Ossa polla maupt Dio, which
signifies the Creator of Heaven and Earth; and it is he also, who still rules
and governs the same. This great Supreme God, they hold, sends forth other
Deities to see his Will and Pleasure executed in the World; and these are the
petty and inferior gods. These they say are the Souls of good men, who formerly
lived upon the Earth. There are Devils also, who are the Inflicters of Sickness
and Misery upon them. And these they hold to be the Souls of evil men.

They worship the God that saves Souls^
There is another great God, whom they call Buddou, unto whom the Salvation of
Souls belongs. Him they believe once to have come upon the Earth. And when he
was here, that he did usually sit under a large shady Tree, called Bogaha^.
Which Trees ever since are accounted Holy, and under which with great
Solemnities they do to this day celebrate the Ceremonies of his Worship. He
departed from the Earth from the top of the highest Mountain on the Island,
called Pico Adam: where there is an Impression like a ^oot, which, they say, is
his, as has been mentioned before.

The Sun and Moon they repute Deities.
The Sun and Moon they seem to have an Opinion to be gods from the Names they
sometimes call them by. The Sun in their Language is Irri, and the Moon Handa.
To which they will sometimes add the Title Haumi, which is a name they give to
Persons of the greatest Honor; and Dio, that signifies God: saying Irrihaumi,
Irridio: Handahaumi, handa Dio. But to the Stars they give not these Titles.

Some of their Temples of exquisite Work.
The Pagoda's or Temples of their Gods are so many that I cannot number them.
Many of them are of Rare and Exquisite work, built of Hewn Stone, engraven with
Images and Figures; but by whom and when I could not attain to know, the
Inhabitants themselves being ignorant therein. But sure I am they were built by
far more Ingenious Artificers, than the Chingulayes that now are on the Land.
For the Portugueze in their Invasions have defaced some of them, which there is
none found that has Skill enough to repair to this day.

The form of their Temples.
The fashion of these Pagoda's are different; some, to wit those that were
anciently built, are of better Workmanship, as was said before; but those
lately erected are far Inferior; made only with Clay and Sticks, and no
Windows. Some, viz. Those belonging to the Buddon, are in the form of a Pigeon
House, foursquare, one Story high, and some two; the Room above has its Idols
as well as that below. Some of them are Tiled, and some Thatched.

In them are Idols and Images most monstrous to behold, some of silver, some of
brass and other metals: The shape of their Idols^
and also painted sticks, and Targets, and most strange kind of Arms, as Bills,
Arrows, Spears and Swords. But these Arms are not in the Buddou's Temples, he
being for Peace: therefore there are in his Temples only Images of men
cross-legged with yellow coats on like the Go^ni-Priests, their hair frisled,
and their hands before them like women. And these they say are the spirits of
holy men departed. Their Temples are adorned with such things as the peoples
ability and poverty can afford; accounting it the highest point of Devotion,
bountifully to dedicate such things unto their Gods, which in their estimation
are most precious.

As for these Images they say, They worship not the Idol, but whom it
represents.
they say they do not own them to be Gods themselves but only Figures,
representing their Gods to their memories; and as such, they give to them
honor and worship.

Women having their natural in^irmities upon them may not, The revenues of the
Temples^ and the honors thereof.
neither dare they presume to come near the Temples or houses of their Gods.
Nor the men, i^ they come out of houses where such women are.

Unto each of these Pagodas, They are dedicated to Gods.
there are great Revenues of Land belonging: which have been allotted to them
by former Kings, according to the State of the Kingdom: but they have much
impaired the Revenues of the Crown, there being rather more Towns belonging to
the Church, than unto the King. These estates of the Temples are to supply a
daily charge they are at; which is to prepare victuals or sacrifices to set
before the Idols. They have Elephants also as the King has, which serve them
for State. Their Temples have all sorts of Officers belonging to them, as the
Palace has.

Most of these Pagodas are dedicated to the name and honor of those, whom they
call Dio or Gods: to whom, they say, belong the Government on earth, and of all
things appertaining to this life.

Besides these Public Temples, many people do build in their yards private
Chapels, Private Chap^pels.
which are little houses, like to Closets, sometimes so small, that they are
not above two ^oot in bigness, but built upon a Pillar three or ^our ^oot from
the ground wherein they do place certain Image of the Buddou, that they may
have him near them, and to testify their love and service to him. Which they
do by lighting up candles and lamps in his house, and laying ^lowers every
morning before him. And at some times they boil victuals and lay it before him.
And the more they perform such ceremonious service to him here, the more shall
be their ward hereafter.

All blessings and good success, they say, come from the hand of God, but
sickness and diseases proceed from the Devil; not that of himself he has such
absolute power, but as servants have power, license and authority from their
Masters, so they from God.

But the Gods will require some to wait at their Altars; The Priests^
and the Temples, men to o^^iciate in them: their Priests therefore fall under
the next consideration. O^ these there are three sorts according to the three
differences of Gods among them. And their Temples are also called by three
different names.

The first and highest order of Priests are the Tirinanxes. Who are the Priests
of the Buddou God. Their Temples are styled Vehars. There is a religious house
in the City of Digligy, The first order of them.
where they dwell and assemble and consult together about their affairs, which
being the meeting place of such holy men, they call it a Vihar; also they admit
none to come into their order but persons of the most noble birth, and that
have learning and be well bred; of such they admit many. But they do not
presently upon their admission arrive unto the high degree of a Tirinanx. For
of these there are but three or four: and they are chose out of all the rest of
the order unto this degree. These Tirinanxes only live in the Vihar, and enjoy
great Revenues, and are as it were the Superiors of all the Priests, and are
made by the King.

Many of the Vehars are endowed and have Farms belonging to them. And these
Tirinanxes are the Landlords, unto whom the Tenants come at a certain time and
pay in their Rents. These Farmers live the easiest of any people in the Land,
for they have nothing to do but at those set times to bring in their dues and
so depart, and to keep in repair certain little Vehars in the Country. So that
the rest of the Chingulais envy them and say of them, Though they live easy in
this world, they cannot escape unpunished in the life to come for enjoying the
Buddou's land and doing him so little service for it.

The habit of these Priests.
All the rest of the order are called Gonni. The habit is the same to the whole
order, both Tirinanxes and Gonni. It is a yellow coat gathered together about
their wast, and comes over their left shoulder, girt about with a belt of fine
pack-thread. Their heads are shaved, and they go bare-headed and carry in their
hands a round fan with a wooden handle, which is to keep the sun off there hands.

They have great benefit and honor. They enjoy their own lands without paying
scot or lot or any Taxes to the King. Their Privileges.
They are honored in such a measure, that the people, where ever they go, bow
down to them as they do to their Gods, but themselves bow to none. They have
the honor of carrying the Tallipot with the broad end over their heads
foremost; which none but the King does: Wheresoever they come, they have a mat
and a white cloth laid over upon a stool for them to sit upon; which is also an
honor used only to the King.

They are debarred from laying their hands to any manner of work; What they are
prohibited.
and may not marry nor touch women, nor eat but one meal a day, unless it be
fruit and rice and water, that they may eat morning and evening: nor must they
drink wine. They will eat any lawful flesh that is dressed for them, but they
will have no hand in the death of it; as to give order or consent to the
killing of it.

They may lay down their order, if they please; which some do, that they may
marry. This is done by pulling off their coat, and flinging it into a River,
and washing themselves head and body, and then they become like other laymen.

When any is rel^giously disposed, these Priests sent for in great ceremony.
There is a benefit that accrueth to them, which is, when any man is minded to
provide for his soul, they bring one of these Priests under a cloth held up by
four men, unto his house, with drums and Pipes and great solemnity which only
can be done unto the King besides. Then they give him great entertainment and
bestows gifts on him according as they are able: which, after he has tarried a
day or more, they carry for him, and conduct him home with the like solemnities
as A Tirinanxy or Chief Priest
he came^ But the night that he ^arries with them he must sing Bonna, that is
matter concerning their Religion out o^ a Book made of the leaves of ^^llipet:
and then he tells them the meaning of what he sings, it being in an eloquent
style which the Vulgar people do not understand.

Some of these Priests, against whom the King took displeasure^ N^ne eve^ used
violence toward them (...) the (...) King.
were beheaded, afterward cast into the River. Which thing caused amazement in
all the people, how the King durst presume to do it toward such holy and
reverend persons.

And none here^o^ore by any ^ormer Kings have ever been so served^ being
reputed and called Sons of Boddon. But the reason the King ^lew them was
because they conspired in the Rebellion. They threw aside their Habits, and got
their swords by their sides.

The second order of Priests are those called ^eppu^^. The s^^ond or^ (...) of
^h^ is Pri^sts.
Who are the Priest^ that belong to the Temples of the other Gods. Their
Temples are called ^^wal^. These are not distinguished by any ha^bit from the
rest of the People, no, nor when they are at their worship; only they wear
clean cloths, and wash themselves before they go to their service. These are
taken out from among the Hondrew^. They enjoy a piece of Land that belongs to
the ^ewal where they officiate, and that is all their benefit, unless they
steal somewhat that is dedicated to the Gods. They follow their Husbandry and
employments as other men do, but only when the times of worship are, which
usually is every morning and evening, oftener or seldomer according as the
Revenue will hold out, that belongs to that Temple^ whereof each is Priest. The
service is, that when the boiled rice and other vic^uals are brought to the
Temple door by others, he takes it and presents it before the Idol. Whence,
after it has ^^ood a while, he brings it out again, and then the drummers,
pipers, and other servants that belong to the Temple, eat it. These Gods have
never any flesh brought in sacrifice to them, but any thing else.

The third order of Priests are the Iadde^es, The third order.
Priests of the Spirits, which they call Daya^taus. Their Temples are called
Co^els^ which are in^erior to the other Temples, and have no revenues belonging
to them. A man piously disposed, builds a small house at his own charge^ which
is the Temple, and himself becomes Priest thereof. Therein are Bills, and
Swords, and Arrows, and Shields, and Images, painted upon the walls like ^ierce
men. This house is seldom called Gods house, but most usually Iacco, the
Devils. Upon some extradinary festival to the Iacco, the Iaddese shave^ off all
his heard.

When they are sick, they dedicate a red Co^k to the Devil. Which they do after
this manner. They send for the Iaddese to their house, How they dedi^ate a red
Co^k to the Devil.
and give him a red Cock chicken, which he takes up in his hand and holds an
Arrow with it, and dedicates it to the God, by telling him that if he restore
the party to his health, that Cock is given to him; and shall be dressed and
sacrificed to him in his Covel. They then let the Cock go among the rest of the
Poultry, and keep it afterward, it may be, a year or two: and then they carry
it to the Temple, or the Priest comes for it. For sometimes he will go round
about, and fetch a great many Cocks together, that have been dedicated, telling
the owners that he must make a sacrifice to the God; though it may be when he
has them, he will go to some other place and convert them into money for his
own use, as I my self can witness. We could buy three of them for four pence
halfpenny.

When the people are minded to enquire any thing of their Gods, the Priests
take up some of the Arms and Instruments of the Gods, that are in the Temples,
upon his shoulder; and then he either fains himself to be mad, or really is so:
which the people call Pissowetitch; and then the spirit of the Gods is in him,
and whatsoever he pronounces, is looked upon as spoken by God himself, and the
people will speak to him, as if it were the very person of God.

CHAP. IV. Concerning their Worship, and Festivals.
The chief days of worship.
WEdnesdays and Saturdays are the days, when people, who have any business with
the Gods, come and address themselves; that is either to pray to their God for
health, or for their help in some weighty matters, as in War etc. or to swear
concerning any matter in controversy, which is done before the Idols.

How they know what God or Devil has made them sick.
But one of their great and frequent businesses with their Gods is for the
Recovery of health. And that God or Devil that has made them sick, in his
power only it is to restore them. Therefore when they feel themselves sick or
sore, first, they use means to know which God or Devil has been the cause or
author thereof. Which to find they use these means. With any little stick they
make a bow, and on the string thereof they hang a thing they have to cut
Betel-nuts, somewhat like a pair of Sizzars; then holding the stick or Bow by
both ends, they repeat the names of all both God and Devils: and when they come
to him who has afflicted them, then the Iron on the bowstring will swing. They
say by that sign they know their ilness proceeds from the power of that God
last named; but I think this happens by the power of the Hands that hold it.
The God being thus found, to him chiefly they offer their oblations and
sacrifices.

The Gods of their fortunes.
There are nine Deities, which they call Gerehah, which are the Planets
(reckoning in probably the Dragons head and Tail.) From whom proceed their
Fortunes. These they reckon so powerful, that if they be ill affected toward
any party, neither God nor Devil can revoke it.

What worship they give the Planets.
When they are disposed to worship these Gerehah, they make Images of Clay
according to the number that stand disaffected, toward them, which by certain
Magic Tricks they know these Images, which are made by the Weavers, they paint
of diverse colors, of horrible and monstrous shapes; some with long tusks like
a Boar, some with horns like a Bull, all in a most deformed manner, but
something resembling the shape of a man. Before them they prostrate Victuals,
the sick party sitting all the while before them. These ceremonies are always
celebrated in the night with Drums and Pipes and dancing until almost day, and
then they take these Images and cast them out into the high ways to be trampled
under foot: and the Victuals taken away and eaten by the attendants, and
despicable people that wai^ there on purpose.

When they worship those whom they call Devils, many of whom they hold to be
the Spirits of some that died heretofore, they make no Images for them, as they
did for the Planets; What worship they give Devils.
but only build a new house in their yard, like a Barn very slight, covered
only with leaves, and adorn it with Branches and Flowers. Into this House they
bring some of the Weapons or Instruments, which are in the Pagods or Temples,
and place them on Stools at one end of the house, which is hanged with Cloth
for that purpose, and before them on other Stools they lay Victuals: and all
that time of the Sacrifice there is Drumming, Piping, Singing, and Dancing. Who
eat the Sacrifices.
Which being ended, they take the Victuals away, and give it to those which
Drum and Pipe, with other Beggars and Vagabonds; for only such do eat of their
Sacrifices; not that they do account such things hallowed, and so dare not
presume to eat them, but contrariwise they are now looked upon as polluted
meat. And if they should attempt to eat thereof, it would be a reproach to them
and their Generations.

These Spirits o^ Gods are local. Their God^ are local.
For those which they worship in one County or part of the Land, are not known
or owned to have power over the People in other parts. But each Country has
several Spirits or Devils, that are peculiar to those places, and do domineer
over them, and are known by several names they call them by: under whose
subjection the People do acknowledge themselves to be: and, as I well perceive,
do stand in a greater awe of them, than they do of them, whom they call and own
to be their Gods.

And indeed it is sad to consider, how this poor People are subjected to the
Devil, The subjection of this People to the Devil.
and they themselves acknowledge it their misery, saying their Country is so
full of Devils, and evil Spirits, that unless in this manner they should adore
them, they would be destroyed by them. Christians they do acknowledge have a
Prerogative above themselves, and not to be under the Power of these infernal
Spirits.

I have many times seen Men and Women of this People strangely possessed,
Sometimes the Devil possesses them.
insomuch that I could judge it nothing else but the effect of the Devil's
power upon them: and they themselves do acknowledge as much. In the like
condition to which I never saw any that did profess to be a worshipper of the
Holy Name of JESUS. They that are thus possessed, some of them will run mad into
the Woods, screeching and roaring, but do mischief to none; some will be taken
so as to be speechless, shaking, and quaking, and dancing, and will tread upon
the fire and not be hurt; they will also talk idle, like distracted folk.

This may last sometimes two or three Months, sometimes two or three days. Now
their Friends reckoning it to proceed from the Devil, do go to him and promise
him a reward if he will cure them. Sometimes they are cured, and sometimes die.
The People do impute this madness to some breach of promise that the Party
affected had made to the Devil, or else for eating some fruit or Betel-leaves
dedicated to him: For they do dedicate some fruit trees to the Devil; and this
they do, to prevent People from stealing them (which few will dare to do after
such a Dedication) and also to excuse themselves in not bestowing their fruit
upon any that might ask or desire it. But before this dedicated fruit is lawful
for them to use, they must carry some of it to the Temple.

This for certain I can affirm, That oftentimes the Devil does cry with an
audible Voice in the Night; it is very shrill almost like the barking of a Dog.
The Devil's Voice often heard.
This I have often heard my self; but never heard that he did any body any
harm. Only this observation the Inhabitants of the Land have made of this
Voice, and I have made it also, that either just before or very suddenly after
this Voice, the King always cuts off People. To believe that this is the Voice
of the Devil these reasons urge, because there is no Creature known to the
Inhabitants, that cry like it, and because it will on a sudden depart from one
place, and make a noise in another, quicker than any fowl could fly: and
because the very Dogs will tremble and shake when they hear it; and it is so
accounted by all the People.

This Voice is heard only in Cande Vda, and never in the Low Lands. When the
Voice is near to a Chingulaye's house, he will curse the Devil, calling him
Geremoi goulammah, Beef-eating Slave be gone, be damned, cut his Nose off, beat
him a pieces. And such like words of Railery, and this they will speak aloud
with noise, and passion, and threatening. This Language I have heard them bestow
upon the Voice; and the Voice upon this always cease for a while, and seems
to depart, being heard at a greater distance.

Their Sacrifice to the chief Devil.
When smaller Devils do fail them, they repair unto the great one. Which they do
after this manner. They prepare an Offering of Victuals ready dressed; one dish
whereof is always a red Cock. Which they do as frequently offer to the Devil,
as Papists do Wax-Candles to Saints. This Offering they carry out into a remote
place in the Woods, and prostrate it to the honor and service of the Grand
Devil, before which there are men in an horrible disguise like Devils, with
Bells about their Legs and Doublets of a strange fashion, dancing and singing,
to call, if it were possible, the Devil himself to come and eat of the
Sacrifices they have brought; the sick Party is all the while present.

Their Festivals.
I have hitherto spoke of their ordinary and daily Worship, and their private
and occasional Devotions; besides these they have their solemn and annual
Festivals. Now of these there are two sorts, some belonging to their Gods that
govern the Earth, and all things referring to this life; and some belonging to
the Buddou, whose Province is to take care of the Soul and future well-being of
Men.

Festivals to the honor of the Gods that govern this World.

The great Festival in June.


I shall first mention the Festivals of the former sort. They are two or three.
That they may therefore honor these Gods, and procure their aid and
assistance, they do yearly in the Month of June or July, at a New Moon, observe
a solemn Feast and general Meeting, called Perahar; but none are compelled, and
some go to one Pagoda, and some to another. The greatest Solemnity is performed
in the City of Cande; but at the same time the like Festival or Perahar is
observed in diverse other Cities and Towns of the Land. The Perahar at Cande is
ordered after this manner.

The Priest brings forth a painted stick, about which strings of Flowers are
hanged, and so it is wrapped in branched Silk, some part covered, and some not;
before which the People bow down and worship; each one presenting him with an
Offering according to his free will. These free will Offerings being received
from the People, the Priest takes his painted stick on his Shoulder, having a
Cloth tied about his mouth to keep his breath from defiling this pure piece of
Wood, and gets up upon an Elephant all covered with white Cloth, upon which he
rides with all the Triumph that King and Kingdom can afford, through all the
Streets of the City. But before him go, first some Forty or Fifty Elephants,
with brass Bells hanging on each side of them, which tingle as they go.

Next, follow men dressed up like Giants, which go dancing along agreeable to a
Tradition they have, that anciently there were huge men, that could carry vast
Burdens, and pull up Trees by the Roots. etc. After them go a great multitude
of Drummers, and Trumpetters, and Pipers, which make such a great and loud
noise, that nothing else besides them can be heard. Then follows a Company of
Men dancing along, and after these Women of such Casts or Trades as are
necessary for the service of the Pagoda, as Potters and Washer-women, each cast
goes in Companies by themselves, three and three in a row, holding one another
by the hand; and between each Company go Drummers, Pipers and Dancers.

After these comes an Elephant with two Priests on his back: one whereof is the
Priest before spoken of, carrying the painted stick on his Shoulder, who
represents Allout neur Dio, that is, the God and Maker of Heaven and Earth. The
other sits behind him, holding a round thing, like an Vmbrello, over his head,
to keep off Sun or Rain. Then within a yard after him on each hand of him
follow two other Elephants mounted with two other Priests, with a Priest
sitting behind each, holding Vmbrello's as the former, one of them represents
Cotteragom Dio, and the other Potting Dio. These three Gods that ride here in
Company are accounted of all other the greatest and chiefest, each one having
his residence in a several Pagoda.

Behind go their Cook-women, with things like whisks in their hands to scare
away flies from them; but very fine as they can make themselves.

Next after the Gods and their Attendance, go some Thousands of Ladies and
Gentlewomen, such as are of the best sort of the Inhabitants of the Land,
arrayed in the bravest manner that their Ability can afford, and so go hand in
hand three in a row: At which time all the Beauties on Zelone in their Bravery
do go to attend upon their Gods in their Progress about the City. Now are the
Streets also all made clean, and on both sides all along the Streets Poles
stuck up with Flags and Pennons hanging at the tops of them, and adorned with
boughs and branches of Coker Nut-Trees hanging like Fringes, and lighted Lamps
all along on both sides of the Streets, both by day and night.

Last of all, go the Commanders sent from the King to see these Ceremonies
decently performed, with their Soldiers after them. And in this manner they
ride all round about the City once by day and once by night. This Festival
lasts from the New Moon until the Full Moon.

Formerly the King himself in Person used to ride on Horseback with all his
Train before him in this Solemnity, but now he delights not in these Shows.

Always before the Gods set out to take their Progress, they are set in the
Pagoda-Door, a good while, that the People may come to worship and bring their
Offerings unto them; during which time there are Dancers, playing and showing
many pretty Tricks of Activity before him. To see the which, and also to show
themselves in their Bravery, occasions more People to resort hither, than
otherwise their Zeal and Devotion would prompt them to do.

Two or thee days before the Full Moon, each of these Gods has a Pallenkine
carried after them to add unto their honor. In the which there are several
pieces of their superstitious relicts, and a Silver Pot. Which just, at the
hour of Full Moon they ride out unto a River, and dip full of water, which is
carried back with them into the Temple, where it is kept till the year after
and then flung away. And so the Ceremony is ended for that year.

This Festival of the Gods taking their Progress through the City, in the year
1664. the King would not permit to be performed; and that same year the
Rebellion happened, but never since has he hindered it.

At this time they have a Superstition, which lasts six or seven days, too
foolish to write; it consists in Dancing, Singing, and Iugling. The reason of
which is, lest the eyes of the People, or the Power of the Iacco's, or Infernal
Spirits, might any ways prove prejudicial or noisome to theaforesaid Gods in
their Progress abroad. During the Celebration of this great Festival, there are
no Drums allowed to be beaten to any particular Gods at any private Sacrifice.

The Feast in November.
In the Month of November the Night when the Moon is at the Full, there is
another great solemn Feast, called in their Language Cawtha Poujah. Which is
celebrated only by lighting of Lamps round about the Pogada. At which time they
stick up the longest Poles they can get in the Woods, at the Doors of the
Pagods and of the King's Palace. Upon which they make contrivances to set Lamps
in rows one above the other, even unto the very tops of the Poles, which they
call Tor-nes. To maintain the charge hereof, all the Country in general do
contribute, and bring in Oil. In this Poujah or Sacrifice the King seems to
take delight. The reason of which may be, because he participates far more of
the Honor, than the Gods do, in whose name it is celebrated; his Palace being
far more decked and adorned with high Poles and Lights, than the Temples are.
This Ceremony lasts but for one Night.

The Festival in honor of the God of the Soul.
And these are their Anniversary Feasts to the honor of those Gods, whose power
extends to help them in this Life; now follows the manner of their Service to
the Buddou, who it is, they say, that must save their Souls, and the Festival
in honor of him.

To represent the memorial of him to their eye, they do make small Images of
Silver, Brass, and Clay, and Stone, which they do honor with Sacrifices and
Worship, showing all the signs of outward reverence which possibly they can. In
most places where there are hollow Rocks and Caves, they do set up Images in
memorial of this God. Unto which they that are devoutly bent, at New and Full
Moons do carry Victuals, and worship.

His great Festival is in the Month of March at their New Years Tide. The
Places where he is commemorated are two, not Temples, but the one a Mountain
and the other a Tree; either to the one or the other, they at this time go with
Wives and Children, for Dignity and Merit one being esteemed equal with the
other.

The Mountain is at the South end of the Country, called Hammalella, but by
Christian People, Adam's Peak, the highest in the whole Island; where, as has
been said before, is the Print of the Buddou's foot, which he left on the top
of that Mountain in a Rock, from whence he ascended to Heaven. Unto this
footstep they give worship, light up Lamps, and offer Sacrifices, laying them
upon it, as upon an Altar. The benefit of the Sacrifices that are offered here
do belong unto the Moors Pilgrims, who come over from the other Coast to beg,
this having been given them heretofore by a former King. So that at that season
there are great numbers of them always waiting there to receive their
accustomed Fees.

The Tree is at the North end of the King's Dominions at Annarodgburro. This
Tree, they say, came flying over from the other Coast, and there planted it
self, as it now stands, under which the Buddou-God at his being on earth used,
as they say, often to sit. This is now become a place of solemn worship, The
due performance whereof they reckon not to be a little meritorious: insomuch
that, as they report, Ninety Kings have since reigned there successively, where
by the ruins that still remain, it appears they spared not for pains and labor
to build Temples and high Monuments to the honor of this God, as if they had
been born only to hew Rocks, and great Stones, and lay them up in heaps. These
Kings are now happy Spirits, having merited it by these their labors.

Those whose Ability or Necessity serve them not to go to these Places, may go
to some private Vihars nearer.

For this God above all other, The high honor they have for this God.
they seem to have an high respect and Devotion; as will appear by this that
follows. Ladies and Gentlewomen of good Quality, will sometimes in a Fit of
Devotion to the Buddou, go a begging for him. The greatest Ladies of all do not
indeed go themselves, but send their Maids dressed up finely in their stead.
These Women taking the Image along with them, carry it upon the palms of their
hand covered with a piece of white Cloth; and so go to men's houses, and will
say, We come a begging of your Charity for the Buddou toward his Sacrifice.
And the People are very liberal. They give only of three things to him, either
Oil for his Lamps, or Rice for his Sacrifice, or Money or Cotton Tarn for his
use.

Poor men will often go about begging Sustenance for themselves by this means:
They will get a Book of Religion, or a Buddou's Image in a Case, wrapping both
in a white Cloth, which they carry with great reverence. And then they beg in
the name of the Book or the God. And the People bow down to them, and give
their Charity, either Corn, or Money, or Cotton yarn. Sometimes they will tell
the Beggar, What have I to give? And he will reply, as the saying is, as much
as you can take up between your two fingers is Charity. After he has received a
gift from any, he pronounces a great deal of blessing upon him, Let the
blessing of the Gods and the Buddou go along with you; let your Corn ripen, let
your Cattle increase, let your Life be long, etc^

Some being devoutly disposed, will make the Image of this God at their own
charge. For the making whereof they must bountifully reward the Founder. Before
the Eyes are made, it is not accounted a God, but a lump of ordinary Metal, and
thrown about the Shop with no more regard than any thing else. But when the
Eyes are to be made, the Artificer is to have a good gratification, besides the
first agreed upon reward. The Eyes being formed, it is thenceforward a God. And
then, being brought with honor from the Workman's Shop, it is dedicated by
Solemnities and Sacrifices, and carried with great state into its shrine or
little house, which is before built and prepared for it.

Sometimes a man will order the Smith to make this Idol, and then after it is
made will go about with it to well-disposed People to contribute toward the
Wages the Smith is to have for making it. And men will freely give toward the
charge. And this is looked upon in the man that appointed the Image to be made,
as a notable piece of Devotion.

I have mentioned the Bogahah Tree before, which in memory of this God they
hold Sacred, and perform Sacrifices, and celebrate Religious Meetings under.
Under this Tree at some convenient distance about ten or twelve foot at the
outmost edge of the Platform, they usually build Booths or Tents; some are made
slight only with leaves for the present use, but some are built substantial
with hewn Timber and Clay Walls, which stand many years. These Buildings are
divided into small Tenements for each particular Family. The whole Town joins,
and each man builds his own Appartment: so that the Building goes quite round
like a circle, only one gap is left, which is to pass through to the Bogahah Tree:
and this gap is built over with a kind of Portal. The use of these Buildings is
for the entertainment of the Women. Who take great delight to come and see
these Ceremonies, clad in their best and richest Apparel. They employ
themselves in seeing the Dancers, and the Iuglers do their Tricks: who
afterward by their importunity will get Money of them, or a Ring off their
Fingers, or some such matters. Here also they spend their time in eating Betel,
and in talking with their Consorts, and showing their fine Cloths. These
Solemnities are always in the Night, the Booths all set round with Lamps; nor
are they ended in one Night, but last three or four, until the Full Moon, which
always puts a Period to them.

CHAP. V. Concerning their Religions Doctrines, Opinions, and Practices.
THere are few or none zealous in their worship, As to their Religion they are
very indifferent.
or have any great matter of esteem for their Gods. And they seldom busy
themselves in the matters of their Religion, until they come to be sick or very
aged. They debar none that will come to see the Ceremonies of their worship;
and if a stranger should dislike their way, reprove or mock at them for their
Ignorance and Folly, they would acknowledge the same, and laugh at the
superstitions of their own Devotion, but withal tell you that they are
constrained to do what they do, to keep themselves safe from the malice and
mischiefs that the evil spirits would otherwise do them, with which, they say,
their Country swarm.

Sometimes in their Sickness they go to the House of their Gods with an
Offering, If their Gods answer not their desires, they Curse them.
with which they present him, entreating his favor and aid to restore them to
health. Upon the recovery whereof they promise him not to fail but to give unto
His Majesty (for so they entitle him) far greater Gifts or Rewards, and what
they are, they do particularly mention; it may be, Land, a Slave, Cattle,
Money, Cloth, etc. and so they will discourse, argue and expostulate with him,
as if he were there present in Person before them. If after this, he fails on
his part, and cannot restore them to their health, then the fore-promised
things are to remain where they were: and instead of which perhaps he gets a
Curse, saying, He does but cheat and deceive them.

It is a usual saying, They undervalue and revile their Gods.
and very frequent among them (if their Gerahah, which is their fortune, be
bad) What can God do against it: Nay, I have often heard them say, Give him no
Sacrifice, but shit in his Mouth, what a God is He? So slight an estimation
have they of their Idol-Gods; and the King far less esteems them. For he does
not in the least give any countenance either to the Worshipper, or to the
manner of worship. And God's name be magnified, that has not suffered him to
disturb or molest the Christians in the least in their Religion, or ever
attempt to force them to comply with the Countries Idolatry. But on the
contrary, both King and People do generally like the Christian Religion better
than their own: and respect and honor the Christians as Christians; and do
believe there is a greater God than any they adore. And in all probability they
would be very easily drawn to the Christian or any other Religion: as will
appear by this story following.

There was lately one among them that pretended himself a Prophet sent to them
from a new God, A fellow gives out himself for a Prophet^
that as yet was nameless. At which the People were amused, especially because
he pretended to heal the Sick, and do Miracles: and presently he was had in
high veneration. He gave out it was the command of the new nameless God to
spoil and pull down the Dewals, that is, the Temples of the former Gods. This
he made a good progress in, with no let or impediment from King or People. The
King all this while inclined neither to one or other, as not regarding such
matters, until he might see which of these Gods would prevail, the old or the
new. For this People stand in fear of all that are called Gods; and this
especially surprised them, because without a Name; so contrary to all their old
ones, who have Names. This newfound God therefore went on boldly and
successfully without contro^l: His Success.
the People all in general began to admire him thus come among them. And great
troops of People daily assembled thither with Sacrifices, and to worship him.
Whereby seeing their inclination so strong toward him, he began to perceive it
was not only possible, but also easy and probable to change his Priesthood for
a Kingdom.

The King sends for one of his Priests.
At which time, whether the King began to suspect or not, I cannot say; but he
sent for one of his Priests to be brought up to the Court. For this God had his
residence in the Country at Vealbow in Hotcourly, somewhat remote from the
King. This Priest having remained at the City some days, the King took a Ring
from off his Finger, and put it in an Ivory Box, and sent it by three of his
great Men to him, bidding him to enquire of his nameless God what it was that
was therein; which amazed this Priest; but he returned this subtle answer, that
he was not sent to divine, but to heal the Diseases and help the Infirmities of
the People. Upon which the King gave Command to take him and put him in the
Stocks under a Tree, there to be wet with the Rain, and dry again with the Sun.
Which was executed upon him accordingly.

Flies to Columba, pretends himself to be a former King's Son.
The Chief Priest, who was the first Inventor of this new God, hearing what the
King had done, and fearing what might follow, suddenly dispatched, and carried
all what he had plundered out of the Pagods with him to Columba, and stole one
of the King's Elephants to carry it upon. Where being arrived, he declares
himself to be Son of the King of Mautoly; who was elder Brother to this King
that now is, and for fear of whom he fled to Columba; being at that time when
the Portugals had it, who sent him to Goa, where he died.

Flies from the Dutch.
This being noised abroad that he was a Prince, made the People flock faster to
him than before. Which changed both his heart and behavior from a Priest to a
King. Insomuch that the Dutch began to be in doubt what this might grow to. Who
to prevent the worst, set a watch over him: which he not liking of, took the
advantage of the night, and fled with all his Followers and Attendance up to
the King again, and came to the same place where he lay before.

The King catches and quarters him.
No sooner had the King notice of his arrival, but immediately he dispatched
five of his greatest Commanders with their Soldiers to catch him, and to bring
him up to him. Which they did, laying both him and all his followers in Chains.
The King commanded to keep him in a certain Pagoda of the Chingulayes, until
the matter were examined, the People in general much lamenting him, tho not
able to help. The chief of their Churchmen, viz. their Gonni-nancies, were all
commanded to make their Personal appearance at Court. Which all thought was to
see the Prince or Priest, should have a legal Trial. But in the mean time, the
King commanded to cut him in four quarters, and hang them in places, which he
appointed. Which was done.

The Peoples opinion still of this new God.
Nevertheless the Vulgar People to this day do honor and adore the name and
memorial of the nameless God. With which if he could have been content, and not
have gone about to usurp the Crown, the King so little regarding Religion, he
might have lived to dye a natural death.

These people do firmly believe a resurrection of the body, and the Immortality
of Souls, and a future State. Upon which account they will worship their
Ancestors. Their Doctrine and Opinions.
They do believe that those they call Gods are the spirits of men that formerly
have lived upon the earth. They hold that in the other world, those that are
good men tho they be poor and mean in this world, yet there they shall become
high and eminent; and that wicked men shall be turned into beasts. There is a
Spider among them, that breeds an Egg, which she carries under her belly, it is
as wide as a groat, and bigger then the body of the Spider. This egg is full of
young Spiders that breed there: it hangs under her belly wheresoever she goes:
and as their young ones grow to bigness they eat up the old one. Now the
Chingulayes say, that disobedient children shall become Spiders in the other
world, and their young ones shall eat them up.

They hold that every man's good or bad Fortune was predetermined by God, before
he was born, according to an usual Proverb they have, Ollua cottaula tiana, It
is written in the head.

They reckon the chief points of goodness to consist in giving to the Priests,
The highest points of Devotion.
in making Pudgiahs, sacrifices to their Gods, in forbearing shedding the blood
of any creature: which to do they call Pau boi, a great sin: and in abstaining
from eating any flesh at all, because they would not have any hand, or any
thing to do in killing any living thing. They reckon Herbs and Plants more
innocent food. It is religion also to sweep under the Bogaha or God-Tree, and
keep it clean. It is accounted religion to be just and sober and chaste and
true, and to be endowed with other virtues, as we do account it.

They give to the poor out of a Principle of Charity, Their Charity.
which they extend to forraigners, as well as to their own Countrymen. But of
every measure of rice they boil in their houses for their families they will
take out an handful, as much as they can gripe, and put into a bag, and keep it
by it self, which they call Mitta-haul. And this they give and distribute to
such poor as they please, or as come to their doors.

Nor are they charitable only to the poor of their own Nation, but as I said to
others: and particularly to the Moorish beggars, The Privilege of the Moorish
Beggars.
who are Mahometans by religion. These have a Temple in Cande. A certain former
king gave this Temple this Privilege, that every Free holder should contribute
a Ponnam to it. And these Moors go to every house in the land to receive it.
And if the house be shut, they have power to break it open, and to take out of
goods to the value of it. They come very confidently when they beg, and they
say they come to fulfill the peoples charity. And the people do liberrally
relieve them for charity sake.

There is only one County in the Land, viz. Dolusba^g, that pays not the
aforesaid duty to the Moors Temple. And the reason is, that when they came
first thither to demand it, the Inhabitants beat them away. For which act they
are free from the payment of that Ponnam, and have also another privilege
granted them for the same, That they pay no Marral, or Harriots, to the King as
other Countries do.

These Moors Pilgrims have many pieces of Land given them by well disposed
persons out of charity, where they build houses and live. And this land becomes
theirs from generation to generation for ever.

They lay Flowers, out of religion, before their Images every morning and
evening, for which Images they build little Chapels in their yards as we said
before. They respect Christians, and why.
They carry beads in their hands on strings, and say so many prayers as they
go. Which custom in all probability they borrowed of the Portugueze. They love
a man that makes conscience of his ways. Which makes them respect Christians
more than any others, because they think they are just and will not lie. And
thus we have finished our discourse of their Religion.

CHAP. VI. Concerning their Houses, Diet, Housewifry, Salutation, Apparel.
HAving already treated of their Religion, we now come to their secular
concerns. And first we will lead you into their houses, and show you how they
live.

Their houses.
Their Houses are small, low, thatched Cottages, built with sticks, daubed with
clay, the walls made very smooth. For they are not permitted to build their
houses above one story high, neither may they cover with tiles, nor whiten
their walls with lime, but there is a Clay which is as white, and that they use
sometimes. They employ no Carpenters, or house-builders, unless some few
noblemen, but each one builds his own dwelling. In building whereof there is
not so much as a nail used; but instead of them every thing which might be
nailed, is tied with rattans and other strings, which grow in the woods in
abundance; whence the builder has his Timber for cutting. The Country being
warm, many of them will not take pains to clay their walls, but make them of
boughs and leaves of Trees. The poorest sort have not above one room in their
houses, few above two, unless they be great men. Neither does the King allow
them to build better.

They are not nice nor curious in their houses. They have no Chimneys in them,
No Chimneys.
but make their fires in one corner, so that the roof is all blacked with the
smoke.

The houses of the better sort.
The great people have handsome and commodious houses. They have commonly two
buildings one opposite to the other, joined together on each side with a wall,
which makes a square Courtyard in the middle. Round about against the walls of
their houses are banks of clay to sit on; which they often daub over with soft
Cow Dung, to keep them smooth and clean. Their Slaves and Servants dwell round
about without in other houses with their wives and children.

Their Furniture.
Their Furniture is but small. A few earthen pots which hang up in slings made
of Canes in the middle of their houses, having no shelves; one or two brass
Basins to eat in, a stool or two without backs. For none but the King may sit
upon a stool with a back. There are also some baskets to put corn in, some mats
to spread upon the ground to sleep on: which is the bedding both for themselves
and friends when they come to their houses. Also some Ebeny pestels about four
foot long to beat rice out of the husk, and a wooden Mortar The Manner of their
Eating and Drinking.
to beat it in afterward to make it white, a Hirimony or Grater to grate their
Coker-nuts with, a flat stone upon which they grind their Pepper and Turmeric,
etc. With another stone which they hold in their hands at the same time. They
have also in their houses Axes, Bills, Houghs, Atches, Chissels, and other
Tools for their use. Tables they have none, but sit and eat on the ground.

And now we are mentioning eating, How they eat.
let us take a view of this people at their meals. Their Diet and ordinary fare
is but very mean, as to our account. If they have but Rice and Salt in their
house, they reckon they want for nothing. For with a few green Leaves and the
juice of a Lemmon with Pepper and Salt, they will make a hearty meal. Beef here
may not be eaten; it is abominable: Flesh and Fish is somewhat scarce. And that
little of it they have, they had rather sell to get money to keep, then eat it
themselves: neither is there any but outlandish men, that will buy any of them.
It is they indeed do eat the fat and best of the Land. Nor is it counted any
shame or disgrace, to be a niggard and sparing in diet; but rather a credit
even to the greatest of them, that they can fare hard and suffer hunger, which
they say, Soldiers ought to be able to endure.

The great ones have always five or six sorts of food at one meal, How the
great men eat.
and of them not above one or two at most of Flesh or Fish, and of them more
pottage than meat, after the Portugal fashion. The rest is only what grows
out of the ground. The main substance with which they fill their bellies is
Rice, the other things are but to give it a relish.

If these people were not discouraged from rearing and nourishing of Cattle and
Poultry, Discouraged from nourishing Cattle.
provisions might be far more plentiful. For here are many Iackalls, which
catch their Hens and some Tigres, that destroy their Cattle^ but the greatest
of all is the King; whose endeavor is to keep them poor and in want. For from
them that have Hens his Officers take them for the Kings use giving little or
nothing for them; the like they do by Hogs. Goats none are suffered to keep,
besides the King, except strangers.

In dressing of their victuals they are not to be discommended: Cleanly in
dressing their meet.
for generally they are cleanly and very handy about the same. And after one is
used to that kind of fare, as they dress it, it is very savoury and good. They
sit upon a mat on the ground, and eat. But he, whom they do honor and respect,
sits on a stool and his victuals on another before him.

Their common drink is only water: Their drink and manner of eating.
and if they drink Rack, it is before they eat, that it may have the more
operation upon their bodies. When they drink they touch not the Pot with their
mouths, but hold it at a distance, and pour it in. They eat their Rice out of
China dishes, or Brass Basins, and they that have not them, on leaves. The
Carrees, or other sorts of Food which they eat with their Rice, is kept in the
Pans it is dressed in, and their wives serve them with it, when they call for
it. For it is their duties to wait and serve their Husbands while they eat, and
when they have done, then to take and eat that which they have left upon their
Trenchers. During their eating they neither use nor delight to talk to one
another.

They always wash their hands and mouths both before and after they have eaten;
Their manner of washing before and after meals.
but for others to pour the water on their hands is looked upon as an affront.
For so they do to them, whom they account count not worthy to handle their
Water pot. But when they wash, with one hand they pour it themselves upon the
other. They are very cleanly both in their bodies and heads, which they do very
often wash, and also when they have been at stool they make use of water.

None must speak while the Rice is put into the Pot.
But to give you a little of their Cookery. If People be in the room talking
together, the woman being ready to put the Rice into the Pot, bids them all be
^ilent till she has put it in, and then they may proceed with their discourse.
For if they should talk while the Rice is putting in, it would not swell.

Sauce made of Lemmon juice.
At the time of the year that there is most plenty of Lemmons, they take them
and squeez the juice into an earthen Pot, and set over the fire, and boil it so
long, till it becomes thick and black like Tar. This they set by for their u^e,
and it will keep as long as they please. A very small quantity of it will
suffice for sauce. They call it Annego.

Their sweet meats.
They have several sorts of sweetmeats. One they call Caown. It is like to a
Fritter made of Rice-flower, and Iaggory. They make them up in little lumps,
and lay them upon a Leaf, and then press them with their thumbs, and put them
into a Drying Pan, and fry them in Coker-nut Oil or Butter. When the Dutch came
first to Columba, the King ordered these Caown to be made and sent to them as a
royal Treat. And they say, the Dutch did so admire them, that they asked if
they grew not upon Trees, supposing it past the Art of man to make such
dainties.

Oggulas another sort of sweetmeats, made of parched Rice, Iaggory, Pepper,
Cardamum, and a little Cinnamons. They roll them up in Balls, which will grow
hard. These they tie up in bags and carry them with them when they travail to
eat in afternoons when they are hungry.

Alloways, made much after the former manner, only they are flat in the fashion
of a Lozenge; which are good for faintings and thirsty souls to relish their
water, and to eat of in afternoons when they are at home. We carried some of
these along with us in our travayl.

A kind of Puddings.
Tacpetties, made of Rice-flower, and the meat of the Coker-nut and Iaggory.
They are made up into small lumps, and so put in a Leaf, and laid on a cloth
over a Pot of boiling water. The stream of which heats that which is laid upon
it: and so they are sodden like a Pudding. They taste like white bread, Almonds
and Sugar.

Pitu. Which is made thus. They take flower of Coracan, and sprinkle a little
water into it, being both put into a large Pot for the purpose. Then they stir
and roll it in the Pot with their hands: by which means it crumbles into corns
like Gunpowder. Then they have a Pot of boiling water with a cloth tied over
it; and upon this cloth they lay so much of this corn flower as they can
conveniently cover with another Pot. And so the steam coming through the cloth
boils it, that it will be much like unto a Pudding. And this they use to eat as
they do Rice.

The Women's Houswifry.
The women's Housewifry is to beat the Rice out of the husk; which they do with
an Ebeny Pestle before mentioned. They lay the Rice on the ground, and then
beat it, one blow with one hand, and then tossing the Pestle into the other, to
strike with that. And at the same time they keep stroke with their feet (as if
they were dancing) to keep up the Corn together in one heap. This being done,
they beat it again A Noble Man
in a wooden Mortar to whiten it, as was said before. This work tho it be very
hard, belongs only to the women: as also to fetch both wood and water. The
wood they bring upon their heads, the water in an earthen Pot, placing it upon
their hip. To the women also belongs a small bill to cut Herbs, Pumkins etc.
Which she is to dress. Which bill she lays upon the ground, the edg upwards,
and sets her self upon a Staff or handle to hold it fast, and what she means
to cut, she lays it upon the edge, and shoveth it on it.

When one comes to another house, being set down the Entertainment is, How
they entertain strangers,
green Leaves, they call Bullat, which they eat raw with Lime and Betel-nut,
and Tobacco. And being set a while, the man of the house will ask the Stranger
what he comes for, which if he does not suddenly, the Stranger will take
exceptions at it, as thinking he is not welcome to him. Neither do they ever go
one to visit the other, unless it be for their own ends, either to beg or
borrow.

And if Kindred, And Kindred.
that are very nearly related come together, they have no loving or private
conference one with the other, but sit like strangers very solid and grave. And
if they stay above one night, which is the common custom, then they do help and
assist the man of the house in any work or service he has to do.

When any friends go to another house to visit, When they visit.
they never go empty handed, but carry provisions and sweat meats with them to
their friend. And then he makes them a Feast according to his ability, but they
never eat of those things, which themselves brought. But there is but little
feasting among them unless at a Wedding.

We have been long enough in the house, let us walk abroad, and show you how
the People demean themselves without doors.

When they meet one another, their manner of Salutation or obeisance is, Their
manner of Salutations.
to hold forth their two hands, the Palms upwards, and bow their Bodies: but
the superior to the inferior holds forth but one hand, and if the other be much
beneath, him he only nods his head. The women salute by holding up both their
hands edgways to their Foreheads. The general complement one to another at
first meeting is to say Ay; it signifies how do you: and the other answers,
Hundoi, that is, well.

The Habit of the men when they appear abroad is after this sort. The Nobles in
their best Apparel.
The Nobles wear Doublets of white or blew Callico, and about their middle a
cloth, a white one next their skin, and a blew one or of some other color or
painted, over the white: a blew or red shash girt about their loins, and a
Knife with a carved handle wrought or inlaid with Silver ^^icking in their
bosom; and a complete short Hanger carved and inlaid with Brass and Silver by
their sides, the Scabbard most part covered with Silver, bravely engraven; a
paint^d Cane and sometimes a Tuck in it in their hands, and a boy always
bare-headed with long hair hanging down his back waiting upon him, ever holding
a small bag in his hand, which is instead of a Pocket, wherein is Betel-leaves
and nuts. Which they constantly keep chewing in their mouths, with Lime kept in
a Silver Box rarely engraven, which commonly they hold in their hands, in shape
like a Silver Watch.

The great ones also generally, and spruce young men, do wear their hair long
hanging down behind: The fashion of their hair.
but when they do any work or travail hard, it annoying them, they tie it up
behind. Heretofore generally they bored holes in their ears, and hung weights
in them to make them grow long, like the Malabars, but this King not boring
his, that fashion is almost left off. The men for ornament do wear Brass,
Copper, Silver Rings on their Fingers, and some of the greatest Gold. But none
may wear any Silk.

But the women in their Apparel do far surpass the men, neither are they so
curious in clothing themselves as in making their wives fine. The men's Pride
consists in their Attendance, having men bearing Arms before and behind them.

The Women dressed in their bravery.
In their houses the women regard not much what dress they go in, but so put on
their cloths as is most convenient for them to do their work. But when they go
abroad, and make themselves fine, They wear a short Frock with sleeves to cover
their bodies of fine white Callico wrought with blew and red Thread in flowers
and branches: on their Arms Silver Bracelets, and their fingers and toes full
of Silver Rings, about their necks, Necklaces of Beads or Silver, curiously
wrought and engraven, gilded with Gold, hanging down so low as their breasts.
In their ears hang ornaments made of Silver set with Stones, neatly engraven
and gilded. Their ears they bore when they are young, and roll up Coker-nut
leaves and put into the holes to stretch them out, by which means they grow so
wide that they stand like round Circles on each side of their faces, which they
account a great ornament, but in my Judgment a great deformity, they being well
featured women.

How they dress their heads.
Their other ornaments and Apparel show very comely on them Their Hair they oil,
with Coker-nut oil to make it smooth, and comb it all behind. Their hair grows
not longer than their wastes, but because it is a great ornament to have a great
bunch of hair, they have a lock of other hair fastened in a Plate of engraved
Silver and gilded, to tie up with their own, in a knot hanging down half their
Backs. Their hands are bare, but they carry a scarf of striped or branched Silk
or such as they can get, casting it carelessly on their head and shoulders.
About their Wastes they have one or two Silver girdles made with Wire and Silver
Plate handsomely engraven, hanging down on each side, one crossing the other
behind. And as they walk they chew Betel. But notwithstanding all their bravery
neither man nor woman wears shoos or stockings, that being a Royal dress, and
only for the King himself.

They commonly borrow their fine cloths.
It is in general a common custom with all sorts of People, to borrow Apparel or
Jewels to wear when they go abroad, which being so customary is no shame nor
disgrace to them, neither do they go about to conceal it. For among their
friends or strangers where they go, they will be talking saying, This I
borrowed of such an one, and this of another body. Their Poverty is so great,
that their ability will^not reach to buy such Apparel as they do desire to
wear; which nevertheless is but very mean and ordinary at the best.

A Gentlewoman


CHAP. VII. Of their Lodging, Bedding, Whoredom, Marriages, and Children.
HAving been thus entertained with the fine Ladies abroad, it is time now to
return home to our Lodging. And the night coming on, we will lead you to their
Bed-Chambers, and show you how they sleep. About which they are not very
curious. If their house be but one room (as it often is) then the men sleep
together at one end and the women at the other.

They have Bedsteads laced with Canes or Rattans, Their Bed, and how they sleep
a nights.
but no Testars to them, nor Curtains; that the King allows not of; neither
have they nor care they for more than one Bedstead, which is only for the
Master of the house to sit or sleep on. To this Bedstead belongs two mats and a
straw Pillow. The Woman with the Children always lies on the ground on mats by
the fireside. For a Pillow she lays a block or such like thing under her mat,
but the Children have no Pillows at all. And for covering and other bedding
they use the cloth they wear by day. But always at their feet they will have a
fire burning all night. Which makes more work for the Women; who must fetch it
all upon her head. For it is accounted a disgrace for the man to meddle or make
with those affairs, that properly do belong unto the Woman.

The younger sort of Children, such as go naked by day, creep in under a corner
of their mothers cloths. They rise in the night.
And if they feel themselves cold in the night, they rise and blow the fire
with their mouths, having no Bellows in that Country, and so sit and warm
themselves thereby.

They are so little given to sleep, that they do rise many times in the night
to eat Bea^el and to take Tobacco. Which done they lay them down, and sing
songs until they fall a sleep again.

At their first going to bed, Children taught to sing at going to Bed.
it is very seldom that they do pray to God, neither do they ever teach their
Children so to do. But sometimes will say Au^ Dio, which is God help or keep
me. But they do instead of that, teach and bid their Children to sing songs
when they go to bed.

Where their houses consist but of one room, the Children that are of any years
always go and sleep in other houses among their neighbors. Young People lie at
one anotheir houses.
Which please them better than their own. For so they come to meet with
bedfellows, nor does it displease the Parents, if young men of as good quality
as themselves become acquainted with their daughters, but rather like well of
it; knowing that their daughters by this means can command the young men to
help and assist them in any work or business that they may have occasion to use
them in. And they look upon it so far distant from a disgrace, that they will
among their consorts brag of it, that they have the young men thus at their
command.

So that youth are bred up to Whoredom. Nothing so common as Whoredom.
Indeed here are no Public Whores allowed by Authority. In the City some that
have followed that Trade, have o^tentimes by the King's order been severely
punished by Whipping, and having their Ears and Hair cut off. But in private
few or none can exempt themselves. And for the matter of being with Child,
which many of them do not desire, they very exquisitely can prevent the same.

They are guilty of the thing, but love not the name.
Indeed the Public Trade would be bad, and hardly maintain them that exercised
it, the private one being so great. And tho I think they be all Whores, yet
they abhor the Name of Vesou, which is Whore. Neither do they in their anger
reproach one another with it, unless they should lay with a Man of an inferior
quality to themselves. And the Woman reckons her self as much obliged to the
Man for his Company, as he does to her for hers. In these affairs the Women are
very expert (it being their continual practice) to keep their design from the
Husbands knowledge: tho by his own Experience he cannot be ignorant of Women's
devices. And unless he catch them in the act he does not much trouble himself
to prove himself a Cuckold; Cuckolds being so common, that it is not here
regarded.

The Man may kill whom he finds in Bed with his Wife.
It is a Law here, that if a Man catch another in Bed with his Wife, he may, be
it whosoever, kill him and her, if he please. It has so happened that the Man
has come to the Door, when another has been within with his Wife, there being
no way to escape, the Woman has took a pan of hot ashes, and as she opened the
Door, her Husband being entering, cast them in his Eyes, and so she and her
Bedfellow made an escape.

The Women's craft to compass and conceal their Debauchery.
To fetch wood out of the Woods to burn, and to fetch home the Cattle is the
Woman's work. If they cannot have their opportunities at home, now they appoint
their meetings, while the Husband stays at home holding the Child. In the
Evenings it is common for them with whom the Women be acquainted, to come and
wait behind the House when it is dark to attend their coming forth to them. To
which end they give them notice either by breaking of a stick, or by putting
some Betel over the Wall to fall in such places as they have appointed, where
she will look to find it. And when she has such notice, she cannot want an
excuse to go forth to meet him.

They bear such love to their Bed^ellows, that I have known this done, The
Husband has beset the House, and the Woman's Friend in it, when she has helped
him to make a hole through the Thatch to get out at, which he has done and made
his Escape, and she remain behind to suffer all the blame her self. When other
opportunities are wanting to enjoy the Company of their Paramours whole Nights
together, they usually take occasion to be discontented and fall out with their
Husbands, and so go home to their Friends houses, to get longer enjoyments. Who
to show their Friendship will not hinder but further them in what they delight
in.

They do treat their Friends with the use of their Wives or Daughters.
In some Cases the Men will permit their Wives and Daughters to lie with other
Men. And that is, when intimate Friends or great Men chance to Lodge at their
houses, they commonly will send their Wives or Daughters to bear them company
in their Chamber. Neither do they reckon their Wives to be Whores for lying
with them that are as good or better than themselves.

The Mother for a small reward prostitutes her Daughter.
They do not matter or regard whether their Wives at the first Marriage be Maids
or not. And for a small reward the Mother will bring her Daughter being a
Maiden unto those that do desire her. But it is so much abhorred for Women of
the high Cast or Descent to admit Men of the low Cast to have any thing to do
with them, that I think they never do it.

But enough of this Ribaldry, Marriages.
let us turn away to more honest Practices. To speak of their Marriages, which
make the Bed lawful. There are not many Ceremonies used in or about the same.
Here is no wooing for a Wife. No wooing.
The Parents commonly make the Match, and in their choice regard more the
Quality and Descent than the Beauty. If they are agreed, all is done. The Match
being thus made, the Man carries or sends to the Woman her Wedding Cloths;
which is a Cloth containing six or seven yards in length, and a Linen
Wast-coat wrought with Blew and Red. If the Man be so poor that he cannot buy a
Cloth, it is the Custom to borrow one. In case the Man with his Friends goes
and carries it himself, that Night they both sleep together to beget
acquaintance one with the other. And then they appoint a day when he is to come
and fetch her home; which is the Marriage-Day.

The day being come, he attended with his Friends goes to her house, The
Bridegroom goes to the Brides House.
which is always in the Evening, and brings Provisions and Sweetmeats with him
according to his Ability, toward the Charges of the Wedding. Which is never
more than two Meals. Whereof Supper is the first. Then the Bride and Bridegroom
both eat together in one Dish, which is to intimate that they are both of one
rank and quality, and sometimes they tie their Thumbs together, but not always:
and that Night go to sleep together.

The next day having dined he takes his Bride, How the Bridegroom carries
home his Bride.
and departs home with her, putting her before him, and he following her,
with some of her Friends to Conduct her. For it is the constant Custom and
Fashion in this Land for the Husband to follow his Wife. The reason whereof is
a Tradition among them, that a Man once going foremost, it happened that his
Wife was stolen away, and he not aware of it. Being come home the Bridegroom
makes a Feast as he is able.

Some few days after, A Ceremony of Marriage.
her Friends usually come to see her bringing a present of Provision with them.
And sometimes they use this Ceremony, the Man is to stand with one end of the
Woman's Cloth about his Loins, and she with the other, and then they pour water
on both their Heads, wetting all their Bodies: which being done, they are
firmly Married to live together, so long as they can agree.

The Elder sorts of People usually woe and conclude their Marriages as they are
in Bed together. For when they have lost their Maidenheads, they fear not much
what Man comes to sleep with them, provided he be of as good quality as they,
having nothing more to lose. And at the day appointed the Man gives the Woman
her Cloths, and so takes her home.

But their Marriages are but of little force or validity. Man and Wife may part
at pleasure.
For if they disagree and mislike one the other; they part without disgrace.
Yet it stands firmer for the Man than for the Woman; howbeit they do leave one
the other at their pleasure. They do give according to their Ability a Portion
of Cattle, Slaves and Money with their Daughters; but if they chance to mislike
one another and part asunder, this Portion must be returned again, and then she
is fit for another Man, being as they account never the worse for wearing.

Both Women and Men do commonly wed four or five times before they can settle
themselves to their contentation. Men and Women change till they can ple^se
themselves.
And if they have Children when they part, the Common Law is, the Males ^or the
Man, and the Females for the Woman. But many of the Women are free from this
controversy, being Childless.

Women have two Husbands.
In this Country each Man, even the greatest, has but one Wife; but a Woman
often has two Husbands. For it is lawful and common with them for two Brothers
to keep hou^e together with one Wi^e, and the Children do acknowledge and call
both Fathers.

Women unclean.
So long as the Women have their Infirmities or Flowers upon them, they are
accounted very unclean, insomuch that the very house is polluted in that degree
that none will approach near it. And even she her self cares not to conceal it,
but calls out to them that come near, that they may avoid her house. But after
she has washed her Head and Body all is purified again. It is lawful for no
Woman, Privileges of Men above Women.
although they be great Men's Wives, to sit on a Stool in the presence of a Man.
It is customary for Men upon any frivolous account to charge one another in the
King^s Name to do or not to do, according as they would have it. This the Women
upon Penalty of having their Tongues cut out, dare not presume to do.

As it is usual to punish Men for faults committed by Imprisonment and Chains,
or by making them stand with a weight on their Backs, until they do pay such a
Sum of Money as is demanded: which for ordinary faults may be five or ten
Shillings. So the Punishment which is inflicted upon Women, is to make them
stand with a Basket of Sand upon their Heads, so long as they shall think
sitting, who appoint the Punishment. Punishment by stripes is never used either
to Men or Women, but only to those on whom the King Commands them to be laid.

Privileges of Women.
Lands of Inheritance which belong to Women are exempted from paying Harriots to
the King. Women pay no Custom for things they carry to the Seaports. Neither
is any Custom paid for what is carried upon any Female Cattle, Cow or Buffalo.

They often destroy new born Infants.
They have no Midwives, but the neighboring good Women come in and do that
Office. As soon as the Child is born, the Father or some Friend apply
themselves to an Astrologer to enquire, whether the Child be born in a
prosperous Planet, and a good hour or in an evil. If it be sound to be in an
evil they presently destroy it, either by starving it, letting it lie and die,
or by drowning it, putting its head into a Vessel of water, or by burying it
alive, or else by giving it to some body of the same degree with themselves;
who often will take such Children, and bring them up by hand with Rice and
Milk; for they say, the Child will be unhappy to the Parents, but to none else.
We have asked them why they will deal so with their poor Infants, that come out
of their Bowels. They will indeed have a kind of regret and trouble at it. But
they will say withal, Why should I bring up a Devil in my House? For they
believe, a Child born in an ill hour, will prove a plague and vexation to his
Parents by his disobedience and untowardliness.

But seldom a First born.
But it is very rare that a Firstborn is served so. Him they love and make much
of. But when they come to have many, then usual it is, by the pretense of the
Child's being born under an unlucky Planet, to kill him. And this is reputed no
fault, and no Law of the Land takes cognizance of it.

In their Infancy they have Names, Their Names.
whereby one may be called and distinguished from the other. But when they come
to years it is an affront and shame to them either Men or Women, to be called
by those Names. Which they say is to be like unto Dogs. Then they change their
Names into Titles according to the Town wherein they were born or do dwell.
Also they have other Names, which may be compared to Coats of Arms, properly
and only belonging to that Family: by which likewise they are called.

This People are very Ambitious of their Titles, They are ambit^ous of high
Titles.
having but little else that they can boast in: and of Names and Titles of
respect they have great plenty in their Language; instances whereof shall be
given afterward.

CHAP. VIII. Of their Employments and Recreations.
IT is full time now, that we relate what course of life the People take, and
what means they use for a livelihood. This has been in part already related.

As for Commerce and Merchandise with Foreign Nations, Their Trade.
there is little or nothing of that now exercised. Indeed in the times when the
Portugueze were on this Island, and Peace between them and the King, he
permitted his People to go and Trade with them. The which he would never permit
them to do with the Hollander, tho they have much sought ^or it. They have a
small Traffic among themselves, occasioned from the Nature of the Island. For
that which one part of the Country a^^ords, will not grow in the other. But in
one part or other of this Land they have enough to sustain themselves, I think,
without the help of Commodities brought from any other Country: exchanging one
Commodity for another; and carrying what they have to other parts to supply
themselves with what they want.

But Husbandry is the great Employment of the Country, Work not discreditable
to the best Gentleman.
which is spoken of at large before. In this the best men labor. Nor is it
held any disgrace for Men of the greatest Quality to do any work either at home
or in the Field, if it be for themselves; but to work for hire with them is
reckoned for a great shame: and very few are here to be ^ound that will work
so: But he that goes under the Notion of a Gentleman may dispense with all
works, except carrying; that he must get a man to do when there is occasion.
For carrying is accounted the most Slave-like work of all.

Under their Husbandry, it may not be amiss to relate how they geld their
Cattle. How they geld their Cattle.
They let them be two or three years old before they go about this work; then
casting them and tying their Legs together; they bruise their Cods with two
sticks tied together at one end, nipping them with the other, and beating them
with Mallets all to pieces. Then they rub over their Cods with fresh Butter and
Soot, and so turn them loose, but not suffer them to lie down all that day. By
this way they are secured from breeding Maggots. And I never knew any die upon
this.

How they make Glue.
Whenever they have occasion to use Glue, they make it after this fashion.
They take the Curd of milk, and strain the water from it through a cloth. Then
tying it up in a cloth like a Pudding, they put it into boiling water, and let
it boil a good while. Which done it will be hard like Cheese-curd, then mixing
it with Lime, use it. If it be not for present use, they will roll up these
Curds into a Ball; which becomes hard, and as they have occasion will scrape
some of it off with a Knife, and so temper it with Lime. This Lime with them is
as soft as Butter.

Their Manufactures.
Their Manufactures are few: some Callicoes, not so fine as good strong Cloth
for their own use: all manner of Iron Tools for Smiths, and Carpenters, and
Husbandmen: all sorts of earthen ware to boil, stew, fry and fetch water in,
Goldsmith's work, Painter's work, carved work, making Steel, and good Guns, and
the like.

But their Art in ordering the Iron-Stone and making Iron, may deserve to be a
little insisted on. For the Country affords plenty of Iron, which they make of
Stones, that are in several places of the Land; they lay not very deep in the
ground, it may be, about four or five or six ^oot deep.

How they make Iron.
First, They take these Stones, and lay them in an heap, and burn them with
wood, which makes them more soft and fitter for the Furnace. When they have so
done they have a kind of Furnace, made with a white sort of Clay, wherein they
put a quantity of Charcoal, and then these Stones on them, and on the top more
Charcoal. There is a back to the Furnace, like as there is to a Smith's Forge,
behind which the man stands that blows, the use of which back is to keep the
heat of the fire from him. Behind the Furnace they have two logs of Wood placed
fast in the ground, hollow at the top, like two pots. Upon the mouths of these
two pieces of hollow wood they tie a piece of a Deers Skin, on each pot a
piece, with a small hole as big as a man's finger in each skin. In the middle
of each skin a little beside the holes are two strings tied ^ast to as many
sticks stuck in the ground, like a Spring, bending like a bow. This pulls the
skin upwards. The man that blows stand with his feet, one on each pot, covering
each hole with the soles of his feet. And as he treads on one pot, and presses
the skin down, he takes his foot off the other, which presently by the help of
the Spring rises; and the doing so alternately conveys a great quantity of
wind through the Pipes into the Furnace. For there are also two Pipes made of
hollow reed let in to the sides of the Pots, that are to conduct the wind, like
the nose of a Bellows, into the Furnace.

For the ease of the Blower, there is a strap, that is fastened to two posts,
and comes round behind him, on which he leans his back: and he has a slick laid
cross-ways before him, on which he lays both his hands, and so he blows with
greater ease. As the Stones are thus burning, the dross that is in them melts
and runs out at the bottom, where there is a slanting hole made for the purpose
so big as the lump of Iron may pass through: out of this hole, I say, runs out the
dross like streams of fire, and the Iron remains behind. Which when it is
purified, as they think, enough, so that there comes no more dross away, they
drive this lump of Iron through the same sloping hole. Then they give it a chop
with an Ax half through, and so sling it into the water. They so chop it, that it
may be seen that it is good, Iron for the Satisfaction of those that are minded
to buy.

For a ^arewel of their labors, How they make Butter.
let it not be unacceptable to relate here a piece of their Housewifry; and
tell you how they make Butter. First, They boil the Milk, then they turn it
into a Curd; the next morning they skim off the Cream, and drill it in an
earthen Vessel with a stick having a cross at the bottom of it, somewhat like a
Chocolate stick. When the Butter is come, they put it in a pan, and fry it, to
get all the water dry out of it, and so put it into an earthen pot for use.

There are no Markets on the Island. Shops in the City.
Some few Shops they have in the Cities, which sell Cloth, Rice, Salt, Tobacco,
Limes, Druggs, Fruits, Swords, Steel, Brass, Copper, etc.

As to the Prices of Commodities, Prizes of Commodities^
they are sold after this rate. Rice in the City, where it is dearest, is after
six quarts for fourpence halfpeny English, or a small Tango, or half a Tango;
six Hens as much; a fat Pig the same: a ^at Hog, three shillings and six pence
or four shilling: but the^e are none so big as ours. A fat Goat, two and six
pence. Betle-nuts 4000 nine pence Current price, when a Trad.

And now we are discoursing of their Traffic, we will speak a little of their
Measures, Weights, and Coin.

First for Measures. Of their Me^sures.
A Rian is a Cubit, which is with them from the bone on the inside of the Elbow
to the tip of the fourth Finger. A Waddo rian is the Carpenters Rule. It is as
much as will reach from one Elbow to the other, the Thumbs touching one the
other at the tops, and so s^retching out both Elbows.

For their Corn-measures, the least is a Potta, which is to contain as much
Grain as a man can hold heaped up in his whole hand palm and fingers and all.
Four Pottas make a lawful or Statute-measure, called Bonder Nellia, signi^ying
the King's measure. Which is the King's ordinary allowance to a man, that is as
much as he can eat in a day. But we Englishmen were allowed two. Four of these
Bonder Nellias make a Courney. In ^ashion it is an handsome turned measure, some
of them are made with Canes like a Basket. Ten of these Courneys make a Pale,
that is forty measures, which is the usual quantity that they sell ^or a Laree,
or fifth part of a Piece of eight, the usual price in Cande Vda. But in time of
Harvest two Pales for a Laree. Four of these Pales make an Ommouna. In which
they keep the account of their Corn, reckoning by Ommounas.

For their Weights, Their Weights.
their smallest is a Collonda, six make just a Piece of eight. They have half
Collondas, and quarter Collondas. When they are to weigh things smaller than a
Collonda, they weigh them with a kind of red Berries, which grow in the Woods,
and are just like Beads. The Goldsmiths use them, Twenty of these Beads make a
Collonda, and Twenty Collondas make a Pallum.

Here is no Punishment for those that make less weights and measures. Measures
bigger than the Stature punishable, but less not^ and why^
They are more circumspect that their measures be not too big than too little.
For Money being scarce, Corn passes instead of Money, and every man mets by
his own measure. Which therefore he makes as large as he can or dares, that so
when he receives his Debt of Corn, he may get as much as he can. Which upon
this account would be a great injury to the poorer sort of People, who commonly
are the Debtors. Therefore the Adigars Officers will go about the Towns to
examine the measures by a Statute-Measure; and where they find great ones they
cut them in pieces, and hang them up in the Streets to terrify others, and
sometimes will amerce a Fine upon them that have them.

Of their Coi^.
Of Money they have but three sorts that passes for Coin in the King's
Dominions. The one was Coined by the Portugals, the King's Arms on one side,
and the Image of a Friar on the other, and by the Chingulayes called Tangom
massa. The value of one is nine pence English, Poddi Tangom, or the small
Tangom is half as much. There is another sort, which all People by the King's
Permission may and do make. The shape is like a fish-hook, they stamp what mark
or impression on it they please. The Silver is purely fine beyond pieces of
Eight. For if any suspect the goodness of the Plate, it is the Custom to burn
the Money in the fire red hot, and so put it in water: and if it be not then
purely white, it is not Current Money.

The third sort of Money is the King's proper Coin. For none upon pain of Death
may Coin it. It is called a Ponnam. It is as small as a Spangle: Seventy five
make a piece of Eight, or a Spanish Dollar. But all sorts of Money is here very
scarce: And they frequently buy and sell by exchanging Commodities.

Of their Pl^y.
Pass we now from their Business to their Pastimes and Diversions. They have but
few Sports, neither do they delight in Play. Only at their New year, they will
sport and be merry one with another. Their chief Play is to bowl Coker-nuts one
against the other, to try which is the hardest. At this time none will work,
until their Astrologers tell them, it is a good hour to handle their Tools. And
then both Men and Women do begin their proper works; the Man with his Ax, Bill,
and Hough, and the Woman with her Broom, Pestle, and Fan to clean her Corn.

A Play or a Sacrafice.
There is another Sport, which generally all People used with much delight,
being, as they called it, a Sacrifice to one of their Gods; to wi^, Potting
Dio. And the benefit of it is, that it frees the Country from grief and
Diseases. For the beastliness of the Exercise they never celebrated it near any
Town, nor in sight of Women, but in a remote place. The manner of the Game is
thus. They have two crooked sticks like Elbows, one hooked into the other, and
so with contrivances they pull with Ropes, until the one break the other; some
siding with one stick, and some with the other; but never is Money laid on
either side. Upon the breaking of the stick, that Party that has won does not
a little rejoice. Which rejoicing is expressed by Dancing and Singing, and
uttering such sordid beastly Expressions, together with Postures of their
Bodies, as I omit to write them, as being their shame in acting, and would be
mine in rehearsing. For he is at that time most renowned that behaves himself
most shamelesly and beast-like.

For the filthiness of it forbid by the King.
This filthy Solemnity was formerly much in use among them; and even the King
himself has spent time in it, but now lately he has absolutely forbidden it
under penalty of a forfeiture of Money. So that now the practice hereof is
quite left off.

A cunning stratagem of an O^fi^er.
But tho it is thus gone into dis-use, yet out of the great delight the People
had in it, they of Gompala would revive it again; and did. Which coming to the
King's ear, he sent one of his Noblemen to take a Fine from them for it. The
Nobleman knew the People would not come to pay a Fine, and therefore was fain
to go to work by a Stratagem. Pitching therefore his Tents by a Pond, he gave
order to call all the People to his assistance to catch Fish for the King's
use. Which they were very ready to do, hoping to have the refuse Fish for
themselves. And when they were all thus assembled together with their Tools,
and necessary Instruments for that purpose, the Nobleman charged them all in
the King's Name according to the Countries fashion, which was by pulling off
his Cap, and falling down upon the ground three times, that not a man of them
should budge till they had paid such a Sum of Money, which was so much a piece,
for reviving that Play that the King had forbid. Which they were forced to do
before they departed from the Pond side. And the Money was carried into the
King's Exchequer.

When they would be merry, Tricks and feats of Activity.
and particularly at their great Festival in the New Moon of June or July
(before mentioned;) they have People that show pretty tricks and feats of
Activity before them. A man sets a Pole of seven or eight foot long upon his
Breast; a Boy gets to the top of this Pole, and leans with his Belly upon the
end of it; and thus the man danceth with the Pole on his Breast, and the Boy on
it, and but little holding the Pole. A man takes four Arrows with blades about
a foot long, they are tied one cross another, and so laid upon the end of a
Pole, which rests upon the man's Breast. On a sudden he squatts down upon the
ground, and the four Arrows all fall on the four sides of him, sticking in the
ground. Two Cross-bows stand bent one opposite to the other, charged with
Arrows drawn up to the heads: they are placed just so high, as they may fly
over a man's back when he lies flat upon the ground. A man danceth between them
and shows Tricks, and when he is pleased, he touches a string made fast to both
their trickers, at which they both instantly Discharge, and he falls flat down
between them, and the Arrows fly over his back, which if they hit him,
undoubtedly fly through his Body. A Woman takes two naked Swords under each Arm
one, and another she holds in her mouth, then fetches a run and turns clear
over, and never touches the ground till she lights on her feet aga^n, holding
all her Swords fast. There are diverse other Diversions of this nature too large
to mention.

At their leisure when their affairs will permit, At leisure times they meet,
and discourse of News.
they commonly meet at places built for strangers and wayfaring men to lodge
in, in their Language called Amblomb, where they sit chewing Betel, and looking
one upon the other very gravely and solidly, discoursing concerning the Affairs
at Court, between the King and the great Men; and what Employment the People of
the City are busied about. For as it is the chief of their business to serve
the King, so the chief of their discourse is concerning such matters. Also they
talk of their own affairs, about Cattle and Husbandry. And when they meet with
Outlandish-men they enquire about the Laws and Government of their Country,
and if it be like theirs; and what Taxes and Duties we are bound to pay, and
perform to our King, etc.

And this manner of passing their leisure time they account the greatest
Recreation. Drunkenness they do greatly abhor, Drunkenness abhorred.
neither are there many that do give themselves to it. Tobacco likewise they
account a Vice, but yet is used both by Men and Women; but more eaten than
drunk in Pipes.

Their great delight in Betel.
But above all things Betel leaves they are most fond of, and greatly delighted
in: when they are going to Bed, they first fill their mouths with it, and keep
it there until they wake, and then rise and spit it out, and take in more. So
that their mouths are no longer clear of it, than they are eating their
Victuals. This is the general practice both of Men and Women, insomuch that
they had rather want Victuals or Cloths than be without it; and my long
practice in eating it brought me to the same condition. And the Reasons why
they thus eat it are, First, Because it is wholesome. Secondly, To keep their
mouths perfumed: for being chewed it casts a brave scent. And Thirdly, To make
their Teeth black. For they abhor white Teeth^ saying, That is like a Dog.

The better sort of Women, as Gentlewomen or Ladies, have no other Pastime but
to sit and chew Betel, swallowing the spittle, and spitting out the rest. And
when Friends come to see and visit one the other, they have as good Society
thus to sit and chew Betel, as we have to drink Wine together.

The Manner of their eating Betel leaves.
But to describe the particular manner of their eating these Leaves. They carry
about with them a small Box filled with wet Lime: and as often as they are
minded to eat Betel, they take some of this Lime. as much as they judge
convenient, and spread it thin upon their lea^; then they take some slices of
the Betel-nut, and wrap them up in the leaf, and so eat it, rubbing their Teeth
therewith ever and anon to make them black. Thus they eat it generally: but
sometimes they eat it otherwise, according as they please; neither spreading
the Lime on the leaf, nor rolling up slices of the Nut into it: But they will
take a little of the Lime out of their Box between their Fingers, and put it in
their mouths, and eat of the Nut and the Lea^ by themselves.

But whenever they eat of the Betel leaf, the Lime and the Nut always
accompany it.

How they make Lime.
They have a pretty shift of making their Lime, when they chance to need it as
they are travailing. They take certain Shells, almost resembling Snails Shells,
which they pick up in fresh water Rivers, washed a shor^ with the water beating
upon the Rocks. These Shells, mixed with Charcoal and, ^ire they wrap up in a
wisp of Rice-straw, and bind them together in a round bundle of a convenient
bigness, tying all up with green Withs, that they may not fall in pieces. By a
With some four foot long they hold it in their hands, swinging it round over
their heads. Which motion blows the Co^ls and makes them burn^ And as they are
weary with swinging it in one hand, they shift and take it in the other: and so
keep swinging it for hal^ an hour or there^abouts. By which time it will be
burnt to very good Lime, and most part of the straw consumed: but it is still
kept together by the green Withs. Then they take it and wet it in water, and
put it into their Pots or Boxes for their use. The Lime made of white s^one
burnt in a Kiln they do indifferently use to eat with their Leaves, as well as
this made of Shells now described.

CHAP. IX. Of their Laws and Language.
THere are three things, that ingenious men may possibly be inquisitive after,
which have not yet been professedly handled, their Laws, their Language, and
their Learning.

Concerning the first, here are no Laws, Their Laws.
but the Will of the King, and what soever proceeds out of his mouth is an
immutable Law. Nevertheless they have certain ancient usages and Customs that
do prevail and are observed as Laws; and Pleading them in their Courts and
before their Governors will go a great way.

To hint some of them, their Lands are hereditary, Lands descend^
and do descend from Parents to their Children. But the eldest son by Privilege
of Birth right does not possess and enjoy all the Land, but if the Father
please he can divide it among his Children. Yet in case the eldest son does
^njoy the Land, then without dispute he is to maintain his Mother and her
Children until they come to years of ability to provide for themselves.

They have a custom in the Land of Ouvah, which is a great breeder of Cattle,
In case Corn receives damage by a Neighbors Cattle.
and has but very little Wood, so that they have not where with to make
hedges; It is that when they sow their Lands, they drive their Cattle thence,
and watch them all day that they break not into the Corn; and at night they tie
their Cattle to secure them from straying into the Corn-Lands: otherwise if one
Neighbors Cattle eats another neighbors Corn, he must pay the damage.

Those that are lazy and loath to Plow, or that are Poor and want Corn to sow,
the Custom is, to let out their ground to others to Till at Ande, that is at
halves; ^ut sees and accustomable dues taken, out by the Husbandman that tills
it, the Owner of the Land receives not much above a third part.

For the Hus^and has diverse considerable payments besides his half share of
the Corn. The loss of leting our la^d to Till.
As namely, first he has Cotoumann, that is, so much Corn as they scratch off
from the whole heap of trodden Corn by drawing a bundle of Thorns over it.
Secondly, Waracool, that is a consideration for the expenses they are at in
Tilling and Sowing: for which there is a Rate according to the bigness of the
field. Thirdly, Warrapoll, that is the Corn they leave at the bottom of the
heap after they have done sanning. Which is the Woman's fee ^or their pains in
weeding the Corn, and in pulling it it up where it is too thick, and planting
it where it is thin, etc. Fourthly, Bolerud which is the Cha^^ and sweepings of
the Pit. This sometimes comes to a considerable value according to the quantity
of Corn that is trodden. Fi^^ly, Peldorah, which is a piece o^ Corn they leave
standing before the watch house, which is set up in their Corn grounds to watch
their Corn from the wild beasts. And this left standing is the fee for
watching. There is yet another due Ockyaul which belongs to their Gods, and is
an offering sometimes carried away by the Priest; and sometimes they bestow it
upon the beggars, and som^times they will take it and hang it up in their
houses, and at convenient time sacrifice it themselves. It is one of their
measures, which is about half a Peck.

The great consideration for Corn borrowed.
And in the mean time until this Corn is ripe, the Owner is fain to go a
borrowing Corn to sustain himself and Family. Which he pays consideration for:
which is, when his own Corn is ripe, a bushel and an half for a bushel that is,
at the rate of Fifty per Cent. Which manner of lending Corn is a means that
does maintain many strangers and others. For they who have got a small stock of
Corn by that Profit may competently live upon it. Which was the means that
Almighty God prepared for my relief and maintenance.

Corn thus lent is somewhat difficult to receive again. For the Debtor being
Poor, all the Creditors will come into the field, when the Corn is a shareing,
that being the place of payment: and as soon as it is divided each one will
scramble to get what he can. And having taken possession of it, from thence the
Creditor must carry it home himself, be it far or near.

The debt becomes double in two years.
If the Debt remains in the Debtors hands two years, it becomes doubled: and
from thence forward be it never so long, no more use is to be paid by the Law
of the Land, which Act was established by the King in favor of the Poor, there
having been some whole Families made Slaves for a bushel of Corn.

If the debtor pay not his debt he is ly^able to be a Slave for it.
But yet it is lawful for the Creditor, missing Corn, to lay hands on any of his
goods: or if the sum be somewhat considerable on his Cattle or Children, first
taking out a License from the Magistrate so to do, or if he have none, on
himself or his wife, if she came with him to fetch the debt, if not, she is
clear from this violence; but his Children are not.

Diverse other other Laws and Customs.
If a woman goes away from her Husband without his consent, no Man may marry
her, until he first be married. In lending of money by the use of it in one
years time, it becomes double. And if the Creditor receive not his money at the
expiration of the year, but lets it lie in the Debtors hands never so long
after, no more than double is is to be paid, the increase never runs up higher
as it is in lending Corn. If a Bondwoman has Children by a Freeman, the
Children all are Slaves to her Master: but if a Bondman has Children by a
Freewoman, the Children are free: For the Children are always as the Mother,
whether Bond or Free. No man may cut down a Coker-nut-Tree. If any man to a
bargain or promise gives a stone in the Kings name, it is as firm as hand and
seal. And if any after this go back of his word, it will bear an Action. If any
man be taken stealing, he must restore seven for one, or else be made a Slave,
if he be not able to pay it.

It is lawful and customary for a man in necessity to sell or pawn his
Children, or himself. No man building an house either in his own or another
man's ground, if he be afterward minded to leave his Land, where his house
stood, may pull it down again: But must let it stand for the benefit of
whosoever comes after him.

For the deciding of matters in controversy especially of more abstruse
cognizance, For deciding ^^n^roversies.
the paaties do both swear before their Gods, sometimes in their Temples, and
sometimes upon more extraordinary occasions in hot Oil.

Sometimes in their Temples. To explain which, take this following relation. A
Slave was accused by a Merchant to have robbed his house. Whereupon to clear
himself, the Slave desired he might swear. Swearing in the Temples.
So the Merchant and Slave went both to the Temple to swear. The Merchant swore
positively that the Slave had robbed his house; and the Slave swore as point
blank that he had not robbed his house: and neither of them having any
witnesses, God who knew all things was desired to show a Judgment upon him that
was forsworn. They both departed to their houses, waiting to see upon whom the
Judgment would fall. In the mean time the Slave privately sets the Merchants
house on fire, and his house was burnt down to the ground. Then it was clear by
this supposed divine Judgment, the Merchant was forsworn. The Slave presently
demands satisfaction for laying The^t fasly to his charge. The Merchant could
not tell what to say to it, but would give him none. The Slave was now to take
his own satisfaction, as he had opportunity. And his Master bids him seize upon
the Merchants Person or any other relating to him, and bring them to his house,
and there detain them. Within a short time after, the Slave seeing a Kinsman of
the Merchants passing by, offers to seize him. But he, rather than be taken,
draws his Knife and Stabs the Slave on the shoulder, and so escapes. In Fine,
the Merchant was fain to bribe the Great Men to save himself from further
damage, and sit down contented with the loss of his goods and house. Though
the Slave was a person of a very bad reputation, and had done diverse Thests;
and some of his stolen goods he has brought to me to sell.

Sometimes they do decide their debates by swearing in hot Oil. Which because
it is remarkable, The benefit of swearing in hot Oil.
I will relate at large. They are permitted thus to swear in matters of great
importance only, as when Law Suits happen about their Lands, or when their is
no witness. When they are to swear, ach party has a License from the Governor
for it, written with his hand to it. Then they go and wash their heads and
bodies, which is a religious ceremony. And that night they are both confined
Prisoners in an house with a guard upon them, and a cloth tied over each of
their right hands and sealed, least they might use any charm to harden their
fingers.

The next morning they are brought out; they then put on clean cloths, and
purify themselves, reckoning they come into the presence of God. Then they tie
to their wrists the Leaf wherein the Governors License is, and repair under
some Bogahah, God-Tree, and all the Officers of the County assemble with a vast
number of people besides. Coker-nuts are brought, and Oil is there extracted
from them in the sight of the people, that all may see their is no deceit. Also
they have a Pan of Cow Dung and water boiling close by: The Oil and Cow Dung
being both boiling and thoroughly hot, they take a young leaf of a Coker-nut
Tree and dip that into the Oil, that all may see it is hot. For it singes, and
frizzels up, and roars as if you poured water into hot boiling Oil. And so they
do likewise to the Cow Dung. When all are satisfied the Oil is hot, the two men
come and stand on each side of this boiling Oil; and say, The God of Heaven and
Earth is witness, that I did not do this that I am accused of; Or, The four
sorts of Gods be witness, That this Land in controversy is mine. And then the
other swears quite contrary. But first the Accuser always swears. The Accused
also relates his own innocence, or his own Right and Title. The cloths that
their hands were bound up in are taken off. And immediately upon using the
former words, he dips his two fingers into the hot Oil, flinging it out three
times. And then goes to the boiling Cow Dung, and does the same. And so does
the other. Then they tie up their hands again with the cloth, and keep both of
them Prisoners till the next day. When their hands are looked upon, and their
fingers-ends rubbed with a cloth, to see if the skin come off. And from whose
fingers the skin comes, he is forsworn. The Penalty of which is a great
forfeiture to the King and great satisfaction to the Adversary.

I am able to testify, that the fingers of some of these that have thus sworn
have been whole from any scald after this use o^ hot Oil: but whether it be
their innocence or their Art, that it thus comes to pass, I know not. The
penalty of the breach of the Laws or Customs of this Land is at the pleasure
of the Judge, either amercement, or imprisonment, or both.

For the taking of Fines from men, on whom they are laid, this is their Custom.
How they exact Fines.
The Officers, wheresoever they meet the man, stop him in the place. Where they
take away his Sword and Knife; and make him pull off his Cap and Doublet; and
there he sits with his Keepers by him, till he pays the Fine. And if he delays
paying it, they clap a great Stone upon his back; in which condition he must
remain till he pays it. And if he does not pay, they load him with more Stones,
until his compliance prevent further pains. Another way they have to exact the
payment of the Fines laid upon them. They take some sprigs of Thorns, and draw
them between the man's naked Legs till he pays. But if he r^main obstinate they
clap him up in chains.

They have an odd usage among them to recover their debts. Which is this. They
will sometimes go to the house of their debtor with the leaves of N^iingala a
certain Plant, which is rank Poison, and threaten him, that they will eat that
Poison and destroy themselves, unless he will pay him what he ows. The debtor
is much afraid of this, and rather than the other should Poison himself, will
sometimes sell a Child to pay the debt: Not that the one is tender of the life
of the other, but out of care of himself. For if the party dies of the Poison,
the other for whose sake the man Poisoned himself must pay a ransom for his
life. By this means also they will sometimes threaten to revenge themselves of
those with whom they have any contest, and do it too. And upon the same intent
they will also jump down some steep place or hang or make away with themselves;
that so they might bring their Adversary to great damage.

To speak now a little of their Language. It is a language peculiar toth at
Island: and I know not any Indian Nations that speak it but themselves. There
are a few words that are common to the Chingulays and the Malabars, Of their
Language.
which they might borrow of one another, by Intercourse and Commerce, but the
words are so few, that a Malabar cannot understand a Chingulay, nor on the
contrary.

Their language is Copious, Smooth, Elegant, Courtly; according as the People
that speak it are. Who are full of words, Titles and The manner of Extorting
their Fine.
Complements. They have no less than twelve or more Titles that they use when
they speak to Women according to their ranks and qualities. Titles to women
according to their qualities.


Puddeci. A word for a woman of the lowest condition. Kiddekel. A term of more
respect, given to a young wench. Nanda. A term for an inferior woman something
in years, signifies also Ant. Nandadga. A little higher yet, of the like years.
Nauchere. A Title may be given to an ordinary woman, still, but yet higher.
Lamhaumi. A Title higher than any yet^ Ettani. Higher still. Lam-Ettani. Of
more respect. Ettanihaumi. Higher than that. Maugi. Proper only to an old
woman, but of good quality. Maugiwanxi. Better then the Maugi. Comaurehaumi. A
Title due to the greatest Ladies. Hondreunie. Given to the Queen or the King.
So that it is hard to speak to a woman without they know what she is before,
least they might mistake her Title. And the women are much pleased with some of
the better Titles.

The men also have various Titles, tho not so many as the women. Titles give^
to men.
People give to them these Titles according to the business they have with
them. If they come for some favor or kindness to be done them, they bestow the
better sort of Titles upon them.

They have seven or eight words for Thou, or You, which they apply to persons
according to their quality, or according as they would honor them. And they
are so, Topi, Vmba, Vmbela, Tomnai, Tomsi, Tomsela, Tomnanxi. All these words
are gradually one higher than the other.

Their ordinary Plow-men and Husbandmen do speak elegantly, and are full of
complement. And there is no difference between the ability and speech of a
Countryman and a Courtier. No difference between a a Country man and a
Courtier for Language.
When any has a favor to beg of a Nobleman, or any business with him, they
do not abruptly speak their desires or errand at first, but bring it in with a
long harangue of his worth or good disposition or abilities; and this in very
handsome and taking style. They bring up their Children to speak after this
manner, Their speech and manner of Address is Courtly and becoming.
and use them to go with errands to great men; and they are able to tell their
tale very well also.

In their speech the people are bold without sheepish shame facedness, and yet
no more confidence than is becoming.

The King they call by a name, Their Language in their address to the King.
that signifies somewhat higher than a man, and next to God. But before the
Wars they styled him Dionanxi, which is a Title higher than God by the addition
of Nanxi. This Title the King took before the Rebellion, but since he forbad
it. When they speak to the King concerning themselves, they do not speak in the
first person, and say I did so or so, but Baulagot the limb of a Dog did it or
will do it. And when they speak of their Children unto the King, they call them
Puppies. As if he ask them how many Children they have, they say so many
Puppy-dogs, and so many Puppy-bitches. By which by the way, we may conjecture
at the height of the King and the slavery of the People under him.

They have certain words of Form and Civility, that they use upon occasion.
Words of Form and Civility.
When they come to another man's house, he asks them what they come for, which
is his civility, and they answer Nicamav^, I come for nothing, which is their
ordinary reply, tho they do come for something. And upon this they have a ^able.

A God came down upon earth one day, and bad all his Creatures come before him
and demand what they would have and it should be granted them. So all the
beasts and other Creatures came, and one desired Strength, and another Legs,
and another Wings, etc. And it was bestowed on them. Then came the White men,
the God asked them, what they came for? And they said, they desired Beauty and
Valor and Riches. It was granted them. At last came the Chingulays, the God
required of them, what they came for. They answered, Nicamava, I come for
nothing. Then replied he again, do you come for nothing, then go away with
nothing. And so they for their complement fared worse than all the rest.

When one proffers something as a gift to another, although it be a thing that he
is willing to have, and would be glad to receive, yet he will say, E eppa
queinda, No, I thank you; how can I be so chargeable to you? And in the same
time while the words are in his mouth, he reaches forth his hand to receive it.

Neither are they free or forward to requite them, from whom they have received
a gift or good turn, Full of words and complement.
otherwise than with words and windy protestations; the which shall not be
wanting. But forwards they are to receive, yet very backward to part with
anything. And if one neighbor asks ought of another, or to borrow any thing,
which the other is unwilling either to give or lend, they never will plainly
deny by saying, I cannot or will not; but with dissembling they will excuse
themselves, saying, They have it not, or is it lent abroad already, although it be
with them in the house at the same time.

Their usual manner of swearing in protestations, is by their Mother, or by
their Children, By whom they swear.
or by their two Eyes, oftener than by their Gods. But their protestations be
they never so deep, and seem they never so serious, they are not to be
regarded, as proceeding more from custom than truth.

Their Railery.
Some of their words of Reproach, or Railery are such as these. One brother
will say to another, and that in presence of their Mother, Tomotowoy, go lie
with your Mother, the other replies go you and lie with your Mother. And the
Mother will say to the Daughter, Iopi oppota audewind, go lie with your Father;
intimating she is good for nothing. They will commend their Children, when they
can use their tongues in their own defense by scolding and say, Haerri, oppana,
Well said, valiantly spoken. They will say also in reproach, Creep between my
legs, cut your Nose off. If you have five hundred lives, you shall be damned.
The worst railery they can give a woman is to tell her, she has laid with ten
sorts of inferior ranks of People, which they will rather dye than do. If any
thing be stole out of their grounds or Plantations fruit or the like, they will
cry out a loud, This was done by some low-cast begotten Rogue, or She was a
whore to some inferior rank who dressed it; and this Language they will
continue for half an hour together, tho they know not who has done it. The
worst word they use to Whites and Christians, is to call them Bea^-eating
Slaves.

I shall conclude this Discourse of their Language, by giving you a taste of
their Proverbs, some hints of the strain of their Speech.

Miris dilah, ingurah gotta. I have given Pepper, and got Ginger. Proverbs.
Spoken when a man makes a bad exchange. And they use it in reference to the
Dutch succeeding the Portugueze in their Island.

Datta horrala Badda peri^d. Pick your Teeth to fill your Belly. Spoken of
stingy niggardly People.

Caula yonawa ruah atti. To eat before you go forth is handsome and convenient.
Which they therefore ever do.

Kiallah tiannah, Degery illand avah oppala hanguand mordy, As the saying is,
if I come to beg Butter-milk, why should I hide my Pan. Which is ordinarily
spoken to introduce the business that one man comes to speak to the other about.

Hingonna wellendam cor cottonwat geah par wardenda netta. A Beggar and a
Trader cannot be lost. Because they are never out of their way.

Atting mitting delah hottarah harracurnowah. To lend to another makes him
become an Enemy. For he will hate you if you ask him for it again.

Annuna min yain ecka ourowaying younda eppa. Go not with a Slave in one Boat.
It signifies, to have no dealing or correspondence with any ones Slave. For if
any damage should happen, it would fall upon your head, and by their Law you
must make it good.

Issara otting bollanowa pos cotting. First look in the hand, afterward open
the mouth. Spoken of a Judge, who first must have a Bribe before he will
pronounce on their side.

Take a Ploughman from the Plough, and wash off his dirt, and he is fit to rule
a Kingdom. Spoken of the People of Cande Vda, where there are such eminent
Persons of the Hondrew rank; and because of the Civility, Understanding, and
Gravity of the poorest Men among them.

No body can reproach the King and the Beggar. Because the former is above the
slander of the People, and nothing can be said bad enough of the latter:

Like Noia and Polonga. Denoting Irreconcilable Enemies. The story of which
two Serpents has been related before.

He that has Money to give to his Judge, needs not fear, be his Cause right or
wrong. Because of the corruption of the great Men, and their greediness of
Bribes.

If our Gerehah, fortune be bad, what can God do against it? Reckoning that
none of their Gods have Power to reverse the fate of an ill Planet.

The Ague is nothing, but the Headache is all. That Country is very subject to
Agues, which do especially afflict their heads who have them. I might multiply
many more of their Proverbial sayings, but let these suffice.

I cannot pretend to give an account of the Grammar of this Tongue. I shall
only give a few instances of their words, and leave it to the Learned to make
their Conjectures. First, I will give you some of their Nouns Plural.

Minnia, Something of their Grammar.
A Man. Cucula, A Cock. Cole-la, A Boy. Minnis, Men. Cuculong, Cocks. Colani,
Boys. Gahah, A Tree. Auhoun, A Horse. Polaha, A young Jack. Gos, Trees.
Auspio, horses. Polas, Iacks.
But usually when they have occasion to speak of many they express themselves
by Numerals set after the Noun; as Dissawva two, three, etc. An Egg, Bittera,
Eggs, Bittera cattei, word for word, Egg many.

Their Verbs they form after this manner: Mam conna, I eat. Mam conyum, I will
eat. Mam cava, I have eat. Conowa, Eating. Caupoudi, Let him eat. Caum, Let us
eat. Conda, To eat. Caula, Eaten.
Mam denyam, I will give. Mam Doun-na, I gave. Dila, I have given. Dendi, Shall
I give? Dendi, To give. Them, Let us give. Dennowa, Giving. Dipon, Give him.
Douna, or Given. Dila tiana, Given.
Mam yonyam, I Will go. Mam yonda oni, I will go. Young, Let us go. Yonowa, Going.
Yonda dipadi, Let him go. Pollatch, Gone, spoken of an ordinary person.
Pollad-da, Gone, spoken of a person of great quality.
Mam oy, I am, Eai, He, or They, or He is. Mam gia atti, I have been. [Atti]
signifies [have] Gia dendi. Let him, or give him leave to go.
Dio, A Specimen of their words.
God. Dio loco, Heaven. Iacco, The Devil. Narra cauda, Hell. Aucoi, The Sky.
Taurcoi, A Star. Deure, Water. Gindere, Fire. Gani, A Woman. Rodgura, A King.
Haul, Raw rice. Bat, Boiled rice. Banglale, A Table. Wellau, Time. Wauri,
Season. Colading, Harvest. Oppa, Father. Pianannah, Father. Oppatchi, Father.
Omma, Mother. Ommandea, Mother. Puta, Son. Putandi, Son. Dua, Daughter.
Donianna, Daughter.
Molla, A flower. Gauhah, A tree. Courilla, A bird. Gom, A town. Oppuland, To
wash cloths. Naund, To wash the body. Pinaund, To swim. Coppaund, To cut.
Horraund, To bore. Hoppacaund, To bite. Coraund, To do. Corowaund, To cause to
be done.
Goumanic, A journey. Gauman corowaund, word for word, To send, to cause to do
a journey. Heuwoya, All words signifying Common Soldiers, only they are titles
one above another, and the two last are as much as to say Gentlemen Soldiers.
Heuwoynanna, All words signifying Common Soldiers, only they are titles one
above another, and the two last are as much as to say Gentlemen Soldiers.
Heuwoynanoura, All words signifying Common Soldiers, only they are titles one
above another, and the two last are as much as to say Gentlemen Soldiers.
Heuwaycom, To fight Coraund, as much as as to say, To act the Soldier.
Mihi, To dye. Mich, Dead. Mienyum, I will dye. Mioenowa, Dying. Eppa, Do not.
Negatind, To rise. Upaudenowa, The Resurrection. Negantind Eppa, Do not rise.
Tonnaund, To build. Tannitch, Built. Touncheroutwitch, It is finished. Na and
Natti, No, or not.


I shall only make one Observation from these words, and that is concerning the
four first. It is this, that they have no words of their own Language for God
and Heaven, but in all probability borrowed them from the Portugueze. But for
the two next, The Devil and Hell, words of their own. They number thus, Eckhoi
I. Deckhoi II. Tunhoi III. Hotterhoi IV. Pauhhoi V. Hoyhoi VI. Hothoi VII. Ot
hoi VIII. Novihoi IX. Dauhoihoi X. Eckolauhoi XI. Dolahoi XII. Dauhottunhoi
XIII. Dauhotterhoi XIV. Paulohoi. XV. Dauhossahoi XVI. Dauhahottoi XVII. Their
Numbering.
Dauha ot hoi XVIII. Dauhanovihoi XIX. Vishoi XX. Tihoi XXX. Hottalehoi XL.
Ponnahoi L.


CHAP. X. Concerning their Learning, Astronomy, and Art Magic.
THeir Learning is but small. Of their Learning.
All they ordinarily learn is to read and to write. But it is no shame to a man
if he can do neither. Nor have they any Schools wherein they might be taught
and instructed in these or any other Arts.

Their Books are only of their Religion and of Physic. Their Books, and Arts.
Their chief Arts are Astronomy and Magic. They have a Language something
differing from the vulgar tongue (like Latin to us) which their Books are writ
in. They learn to write upon Sand, How they learn to write.
spreading it upon the ground, and making it smooth with the hand, and so write
the letters with their fingers to bring their hand in use.

They write not on Paper, for of that they have little or none; but on a
Talli-pot leaf with an Iron Bodkin, which makes an impression. This leaf thus
written on, is not folded, but rolled up like Ribbond, and somewhat resembles
Parchment.

If they are to write a Book, How they make and write a Book.
they do it after this manner. They take the Tallipot leaf, and cut it into
diverse pieces of an equal shape and size, some a foot, some eight inches, some
a foot and an half long, and about three fingers broad. Then having thus
prepared the leaves, they write in them long ways from the left hand to the
right, as we do. When the Book is finished they take two pieces of board, which
are to serve for the cover of the Book. To these boards are fastened two
strings, which do pass through every leaf of the Book, and these tie it up fast
together. As the Reader has read each leaf, he lifts it up, and lays it by
still hanging upon the strings, and so goes to the next leaf, something
resembling Bills filed upon Wyre.

The Priests write Books of Bonna.
The Gonnies, who are men of leisure, write many Books of Bonna, that is of the
Ceremonies of their Religion: and will sometimes carry them to great Men, as a
present, and do expect a reward.

The King's Warrants how wrapped up.
The King when he sends any Warrants or Orders to his Officers, has his
Writings wrapped up in a way proper to himself, and none else do or may fold up
their leaves in that manner but He.

They write upon two sorts of leaves.
They write upon the Tallipat leaves Records or matters of great moment, or that
are to be kept and preserved: but for any ordinary business as Letters, etc.
they commonly use another leaf, called Taulcole. The leaves of which will bear
a better impression than the Tallipat, but they are more stubborn, and harder
than the other, and will not fold.

Their Skill in Astronomy.
But to speak a little of their Astronomy. They who have understanding in it,
and practice it, are the Priests of the highest Order, of which the present
King's Father was. But the common sort of Astronomers are the Weavers. These
men can certainly foretell Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. They make Leet, that is
Almanacks that last for a Month. Their Almanacks.
They are written upon a Tallipat leaf, a little above a foot long, and two
fingers broad. In them are told the Age of the Moon, and the good Seasons and
times to begin to Plough or to Sow, or to go a Journey, or to take any work in
hand. On this precise time they will be sure to sprinkle their first Seed, tho
they sow all their Field it may be a Month after. And so they will begin to set
forth at the very moment, tho possibly they will not go till some days after.

These Astronomers tell them also when the old year ends to the very minute. At
which time they cease from all work, except the Kings, which must not be
omitted. They acquaint them also with the good hour of the New year, they are
to begin to work. At which time every Man and Woman begins to do somewhat in
their employment they intend to follow the ensuing year. They have also another
season directed them by their Astronomers: that is, when to begin to wash their
heads, which is assigned to every one according to the time of their
Nativities, which Ceremony they observe very religiously.

They pretend to know future things by the Stars.
These Astronomers, or rather Astrologers, are skilful in the Knowledge of the
Stars, and Planets, of which they reckon nine: it is supposed they may add the
Dragon's Head and Tail. By which they pretend to foretell all things concerning
the health and recovery of Sick Persons; also concerning the fate of Cildren
born, about which the Parents do presently consult them, and save their
Children or kill them according to the fortunate or unfortunate hour they tell
the Parents they were born in.

When a Person is Sick, he carries to these men his Nativity, which they call
Hanna hom pot, upon the perusal of which they tell his destiny. These also
direct ^it times for beginning Iourneys, or other undertakings. They are
likewise consulted concerning Marriages by looking upon the Man and Woman's
Nativity.

They reckon their Time from one Saccawarsi an ancient King. Their year
consists of 365 days, Their AEr^, Their Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours.
They begin their year upon our Eight and twentieth day of March, and sometimes
the Seven and twentieth, and sometimes, but very seldom, on the Nine and
twentieth. The reason of which I conceive to be, to keep it equal to the course
of the Sun, as our Leap year does. They call the year Quredah. This they divide
into Twelve Months, named, Wasachmaha, Pomaha, Ahalamoha, Micheneha, Bochmoha,
etc. They divide their Months into Weeks, each consisting of seven days, called
Fridah, Sandudah, Onghorudah, Bodadah, Braspotindah, S^couradah, Henouradah.
The first of which they account a good and a fortunate day to begin to do or
undertake any thing: and it falls our upon our Sunday. On their Wednesdays, and
Saturdays they open their Churches, and perform their Ceremonies. Their day,
which they call Dausack, they divide into Thirty Pays, hours or parts, and
begin their account from the Sun rising, and their Night also into as many, and
begin from Sunsetting: So that the Fifteenth Pay is Twelve a Clock at Noon.
They have a Flower by which they judge of the time, which constantly blows open
seven Pays before Night.

They have no Clocks, Hour-glasses, or Sun-Dials, but keep their time by guess.
How they measure their time.
The King indeed has a kind of Instrument to measure time. It is a Copper Dish
holding about a Pint, with a very small hole in the bottom. This Dish they set
a swimming in an Earthen Pot of water, the water leaking in at the bottom till
the Dish be full, it sinks. And then they take it out, and set it empty on the
water again, and that makes one Pay. Few or none use this but the King, who
keeps a man on purpose to watch it continually. The People will use it upon
some occasions, as if they are to sow their Corn at any particular hour, as
being the good lucky Season, then they make use of the Copper Pan, to know the
time exactly.

They do practice Magic. Their Magic.
Whereof take these two remarkable instances of many that might be given.

The Country of Neurecalava formerly brought forth great plenty of Corn,
occasioned by reason of its large waterings. The Plenty of a Country destroyed
by Magic.
A Neighbor Kingdom, the Kingdom of Cournegal which lies in Hotcourley, in
those times was brought to a great dearth. At which the King sends to the
People of Neurecalava, that they would bring a supply of Corn to his Country,
which they did in great store upon Beasts in Sacks, and arrived at the King's
City: and there for the more expeditious measuring out every Householder his
proportion of Corn, they made a hole in the Sacks, and let it run out, still
driving on the Beasts before them: and all that was shed before every man's
House, was to be his share. This exceedingly gratified the King.

Afterward the King to requite them, asked what they most needed in their
Country? They answered, They had plenty of all things, only they wanted Cahah
mirris, that is Turmeric and Pepper. The King to gratify them sent them such a
quantity of each as his Country could afford. As soon as this was brought to
the People of Neurecalava, they went to measure it out to every man his
Portion, but finding it of so small a quantity, they resolved to grind it, as
they do when they use it with their Victuals, and put it into the River to give
a seasoning to the water, and every Man was to take up his Dish of water thus
seasoned. From whence Neurecalava had its denomination, viz. from Neur,
signifying a City, and Cahah that signifies Turmeric, and Lava, as if it were
Lalla, put into the River.

The King hearing of this Action of theirs was offended, in that they so
contemned his gift; but concealed his displeasure. Sometime after he took a
Journey to them, and being there, desired to know how their Country became so
very fruitful. They told him, it was the water of the River pent up for their
use in a very vast Pond. Out of which they made Trenches to convey the water
down into their Corn Grounds. This Pond they had made with great Art and Labor
with great Stones and Earth thrown up of a vast length and thickness, in the
fashion of an half Moon. The King afterward took his leave of them and went
home; and by the help of his Magicians brake down this vast Dam that kept in
the water, and so destroyed the Pond. And by this means this fruitful Country
wanting her water is become as ordinary Land as the rest, having only what
falls out of the Sky.

Their Charm to find out a Thief.
When a Robbery is committed to find the Thief, they Charm a Coker-nut, which is
done by certain words, and any one can do it, that can but utter the Charm
words. Then they thrust a stick into it, and set it either at the Door or hole
the Thief went out at. Then one holds the stick with the Nut at the end of it,
and the Nut pursues and follows in the Tract that the Thief went. All the way
it is going they still continue Charming, and flinging the Blossoms of the
Betel-nut-Tree upon it. And at last it will lead to the house or place where
the Thief is, and run upon his Feet. This Nut will sometimes go winding hither
and thither, and sometimes will stand still. Then they follow their Charms,
strewing on Blossoms, and that sets it forward again. This is not enough to
find the Thief guilty; but if they intend to prosecute the Man upon this
Discovery, the Charmer must swear against him point blank: which he sometimes
will do upon the Confidence of the Truth of his Charm: And the supposed Thief
must either Swear or be Condemned.

The way to dissolve this Charm.
Oftentimes Men of courage and metal, will get Clubs, and beat away the Charmer,
and all his Company, and by this means put all to an end. If the Thief has the
wit to lay his tail by the way, the Coker-nut when it comes thither will stop
and run round about it, but go no further. I doubting the truth hereof, once
took the stick, and held it my self, when they were upon this Business, but it
moved not forward while I held it in my hand, tho they strewed their Flowers,
and used their mutterings to provoke it. But afterward when another took it,
it went forward. I doubted whether they did not guide it with their hand, but
they assured me it guided their hand.

I^^^riptions upon Rocks.
Here are some ancient writings engraven upon Rocks which poseth all that see
them. There are diverse great Rocks in diverse parts in Cande Vda, and in the
Northern Parts. These Rocks are cut deep with great Letters for the space of
some yards, so deep that they may last to the worlds end. No body can read them
or make any thing of them. I have asked Malabars, Gentuses, as well as
Chingulays and Moors, but none of them understood them. You walk over some of
them. There is an ancient Temple Goddiladenni in Tattanour stands by one place
where there are of these Letters. They are probably in memorial of something,
but of what we must leave to learned men to spend their conjectures.

CHAP. XI. Of their Sickness, Death and Burial.
NOthing now remains, but to carry you to their Sick-beds, The diseases this
Country is subject to.
and to tell you what they do with the Bodies of their friends deceased, and
their Behavior on these occasions. They live to a great Age very often to
fourscore, and hale at that age the Kings Sister was near an hundred. They are
healthy and of a sound constitution. The Diseases this Land is most subject to,
are Agues and Fevours, and sometimes to Bloody-fluxes. The Smallpox also
sometimes happens among them. From which they cannot free themselves by all
their charms and enchantments, which are often times successful to them in
other distempers. Therefore they do confess like the Magicians in Egypt, that
this is the very finger of Almighty God. They are also subject to Aches and
Pains in their Bodies. For the Remedy whereof they have excellent ointments and
oils, which they make and keep to have ready when they have occasion.

Here are no professed Physicians nor Chyrurgeons, Every one a Physician to
himself.
but all in general have some skill that way, and are Physicians and
Chyrurgeons to themselves. Their Medicines they make of the leaves that are in
the Woods, and the barks of Trees. With which they purge and vomit themselves,
and will do notable Cures upon green wounds, and also upon sore eyes.

To give a few hints of their method of Physic and what Ingredients they make
use of.

For purging they make use of a Tree called Dallugauhah. To Purge.
It bears no leaves, nothing but thorns, and is of a soft substance. Being cut
there runs out a white thick milk; in which we soak some whole corns of Pepper
a whole night. The next day the Pepper is taken out, and washed clean, and then
boiled in fair water with a sower fruit they call Goraca, which we shall speak
of by and by. This they drink, and it purges very well. This milk is rekoned
as rank Poison as any thing can be, and yet the Goats eat of the Tree greedily
without harm.

For a Vomit, there is is a leaf of a Plant called Warracole in color like a
Cabbage leaf, but smaller; To Vomit.
it grows upon a long stalk some three foot high. This leaf as soon as it is
broken from the stalk is full of milk, which runs out. In this milk they put a
lump of Salt, and let it lie a whole night. The next day they take the Salt
out, which is not dissolved, and wash it clean: then boil a little, Rice and
Water together. After it is taken off the fire, they put this salt into it, and
drink it.

There is a strong Purge they make with a berry called Iawpolls^ which is a
little long greenish berry. Of it self it is rank Poison. They boil it with
Goraca, and Pepper in water, and drink a little of the water.

To heal Sores.
For drawing and healing of Sores, they have a leaf called Mockinacola; it is a
very like our Tunhoof or Ground Ivy, only it is a brighter green; it runs along
upon the ground and spreads it self as Tunhoof does. They only take the leaf
and clap it upon the sore.

To heal an Impostume.
For an Impostume in the Throat, we take the rind of the Tree Amaranga and
bruise it and rub it with green Turmeric, and wrap it up in a Plantane leaf,
and bury it in hot ashes, and there let it lie an hour or two till the fire
has well qualified it. Then the Patient takes it, and keeps chewing it for a
day or two swallowing the spittle. The Virtue of this I my self can testify
being exceedingly ill with a sore Throat, and could not swallow. By the use of
this I was well within a day and a night.

For a hurt in the Eye.
For a sore or hurt in the eye, they take Oulcande-cole, Goderacole, two herbs,
the juice of each, and woman's milk and having mingled them, drop them into the
eye. I had a Thorn of a considerable length run into the gray of my eye, and
put me to great pain, the Chingulays advised me to use this means, assuring me
how successful it was wont to be; but I was loath to tamper with so tender a
place; and thanks be to God, after some days the Thorn fell out of it self.

To cure the Itch.
It is a speedy Cure of the Itch, to take Coudouro giddi, a fruit of a Tree in
form somewhat like a Mussel but bigger. This fruit they cut in slices and fry
it in Coker-nut oil. And with this oil they anoint the body.

The Caudle for Lying in women.
The ordinary Caudle for Women in Childbed, is Goraca boiled in water with
Pepper and Ginger. Women in that condition use nothing else. This Goraca is a
fruit round like an Apple marked with diverse creases along the sides of it.
Goraca.
Being ripe it is within and without red like blood, but sower. they use this
fruit as we do Lemons and Oranges. The core is sweet and pleasant, but They
regarding it not fling it away. If you bite this fruit, it sticks to the Teeth
like wax or pitch. But their chief use of it, is to boil it with other things
to make them taste sower. They gather them at the time of year, and break the
cloves assunder by their fingers, for they, if they be pulled, will part at the
creases. And then they lay them in the Sun and dry them, being dried they look
like men's ears. And so they keep them for their use. Two or three of these will
give a pleasant sower relish unto a large vessel of any liquid thing. This
Goraca is in great use among them.

As there are in this Country very many Poisonous Plants, and Creatures,
Excellent at the cure of Poison.
so the People have excellent skill in the healing thereof. There is one plant
among the rest so strong a venom, that no creature will eat or touch it; and
this is the leaf, that the People sometimes carry with them when they go to
demand their debts, and threaten their debtors, they will poison themselves
before them, unless they will pay them. It is called Neiingala, a sprig that
springs out of the ground almost like an Hony-suckle, but not so big: and bears
a curious Flower much like an Hony-suckle.

They easily heal the biting of Serpents, by herbs.
They are oftentimes stung with venomous Serpents, upon which sudden death
follows without speedy help: But if the bite be taken in time, they can
certainly cure themselves, and make nothing of it. Which they perform both by
Herbs and Charms. Tho upon the sting they presently vomit blood. The knowledge
of these antidotal herbs they have learned from the Mounggoutia a kind of
Ferret. This creature when the Noya and he meets always fight. If he chances
to be bitten by the Serpent, which is very venomous, he runs away to a certain
herb and eats it and so is cured, and then comes back and fights again. The
Chingulays when they see these two creatures fighting, do diligently observe
them, and when they see the Mounggoutia goes away, they take notice of the
herbs he eats, and thereby have learned what herbs are proper to cure such
venoms.

They are skilful also in the use of Charms, And Charms.
to cure the stings of Serpents or to prevent them, the Noyas they can charm to
that pass, that they will take them up in their hands, and carry them in
baskets and handle them and kiss them without any harm. But the Polonga will
not hear a charm. They charm other wild and venomous creatures also; as the
Tiger that he shall not hurt their Cattle.

But to cure inward diseases they are not excellent. Not good at healing inward
distempers.
But generally when they are sick they apply themselves to their Gods. But
their chief supplication they make to the Devil, as being God's instrument,
sent to punish and afflict whom he pleases; as I have discoursed at large
already.

These People are very loath to dye, and as much afraid of the Devil in their
sickness, They both bury and burn their dead.
whom at such times they chiefly invoke. Being dead none will come near the
house for many days, lest they should be defiled. The better sort burn the
dead, because worms and maggots should not eat them. But the poorer sort who
regard not such matters bury them making a hole in the Woods, and carrying the
body wrapped up in a mat upon a Pole on their shoulders with two or three
attending it, and so laying it in without any ceremony, and covering it.

Some days after his decease, if his friends wish well to his Soul, They send
for a Priest to pray for his Soul.
they send for a Priest to the house, who spends a whole night in praying and
sing^ng for the saving of that Soul. This Priest besides very good
entertainment, in the morning must have great gifts and rewards. And to
encourage them therein, he tells them that the like bounty and liberality as
they show to him, shall the Soul of their departed friend receive in the other
world. And so according to their ability, they freely give unto him, such
things as they are possessors of. And he out of his wonderful good nature
refuses not any thing, be it never so mean. And thus with Drums and Pipes
sounding before him, they conduct him home to his house.

Their manner of mourning for the dead is, How they mourn for the dead.
that all the Women that are present do loose their hair, and let it hang down,
and with their two hands together behind their heads do make an hideous noise,
crying and roaring as loud as they can, much praising and extolling the Virtues
of the deceased, tho there were none in him: and lamenting their own woeful
condition to live without him. Thus for three or four mornings they do rise
early, and lament in this manner, also on evenings. Mean while the men stand
still and sigh.

These women are of a very strong courageous spirit, The nature of the Women.
taking nothing very much to heart, mourning more for fashion than affection,
never overwhelmed neither with grief or love. And when their Husbands are dead,
all their care is where to get others, which they cannot long be without.

It may not be unacceptable to relate how they burn their Dead. How they Bury.
As for Persons of inferior Quality, they are interred in some convenient
places in the Woods, there being no set places for Burial, carried thither by
two or three of their Friends, and Buried without any more ado. They lay them
on their Backs, with their heads to the West and their feet to the East, as we
do. Then those People go and wash; for they are unclean by handling the Dead.

How they Burn.
But Persons of greater quality are burned, and that with Ceremony. When they
are dead they lay them out, and put a Cloth over their Privy Parts, and then
wash the Body, by taking half a dozen Pitchers of water, and pouring upon it.
Then they cover him with a Linen cloth, and so carry him forth to burning.
This is when they burn the Body speedily. But otherwise, they cut down a Tree
that may be proper for their purpose, and hollow it, like a Hog-trough, and put
the Body being Embowelled and Embalmed into it, filled up all about with
Pepper. And so let it lay in the house, until it be the King's Command to carry
it out to the burning. For that they dare not do without the King's order, if
the Person deceased be a Courtier. Sometimes the King gives no order in a great
while, it may be not at all. Therefore in such cases, that the Body may not
take up house-room, or annoy them, they dig an hole in the floar of their
house, and put hollowed tree and all in and cover it. If afterward the King
commands to burn the Body, they take it up again in obedience to the King,
otherwise there it lies.

Their order for burning is thus. If the Body be not thus put into a Trough or
hollowed Tree, it is laid upon one of his Bedsteds, which is a great honor
among them. This Bedsted with the Body on it, or hollowed Tree with the Body in
it, is fastened with Poles, and carried upon Men's Shoulders unto the place of
Burning: which is some eminent place in the Fields or Highways, or where else
they please. There they lay it upon a Pile of Wood some two or three foot high.
Then they pile up more Wood upon the Corpse, lying thus on the Bedsted, or in
the Trough. Over all they have a kind of Canopy built, if he be a Person of
very high Quality covered at top, hung about with painted Cloth, and bunches of
Coker-nuts, and green Boughs; and so fire is put to it. After all is burnt to
ashes, they sweep together the ashes into the manner of a Sugar loaf: and hedge
the place round from wild Beasts breaking in, and they will sow Herbs there.
Thus I saw the King's Uncle, the chief Tirinanx, who was as it were the Primate
of all the Nation, burned, upon an high place, that the blaze might be seen a
great way. If they be Noblemen, but not of so high quality, there is only a
Bower erected over them, adorned with Plantane Trees, and green boughs, and
bunches as before.

How they bury those that die of the Small Pox.
But if any dye of the small Pox, be his Degree what it will, he must be Buried
upon Thorns, without any further Ceremony.

The manner of burning their Dead.


PART IV.
CHAP. I. Of the reason of our going to Ceilon, and Detainment there.
IN this Fourth and last Part, The subject of this fourth Part.
I purpose to speak concerning our Captivity in this Island, and during which,
in what Condition the English have lived there, and the eminent Providence of
God in my escape thence, together with other matters relating to the Dutch, and
other European Nations, that dwell and are kept there. All which will afford so
much variety, and new matters, that I doubt not but the Readers will be
entertained with as much delight in perusing these things, as in any else that
have been already related. I begin with the unhappy Occasion of our going to
this Country.

Anno MDCLVII. The occasion of their coming to Ceilon.
The Ann Frigate of London, Capt. Robert Knox Commander, on the One and
twentieth day of January, set Sail out of the Downs, in the Service of the
Honorable the English East India Company, bound for Fort S. George, on the
Coast of Cormandel, to Trade one year from Port to Port in India. Which we
having performed, as we were Lading of Goods to return for England, being in
the Road of Ma^lipatan, on the Nineteenth of November Anno MDCLIX. happened
such a mighty Storm, that in it several Ships were cast away, and we forced to
cut our Mainmast by the Board, which so disabled the Ship, that she could not
proceed in her Voyage. Whereupon Cotiar, in the Island of Ceilon, being a very
commodious Bay, fit for our present Distress, Thomas Chambers Esquire (since Sir
Thomas) the Agent at Fort S. George, ordered, That the Ship should take in some
Cloth, and go to Cotiar Bay, there to Trade, while she lay to set her Mast.
Where being arrived according to the appointment of those Indian Merchants of
Porta Nova we carried with us, to whom those Goods belonged, they were put
ashore, and we minded our Business to set another Mainmast, and repair our
other Damages we had sustained by the late Storm.

At our first coming thither, They were not jealous of the People, being very
courteous.
we were shy and jealous of the People of the Place, by reason our Nation never
had any Commerce or Dealing with them. But now having been there some Twenty
days, and going a Shore and coming on Board at our Pleasure without any
molestation, the Governor of the Place also telling us, that we were welcome, as
we seemed to our selves to be, we began to lay aside all suspicious thoughts of
the People dwelling thereabouts, who had very kindly entertained us for our
Moneys with such Provisions and Refreshings a^ those Parts afforded.

By this time the King of the Country had notice of our being there, and as I
suppose grew suspicious of us, A pretended Message to the Captain from the King.
not having all that while by any Message made him acquainted with our intent
and purpose in coming. Thereupon he dispatched down a Dissauva or General with
his Army to us. Who immediately sent a Messenger on Board to acquaint the
Captain with his coming, and desired him to come ashore to him, pretending a
Letter to him from the King. We saluted the Message with firing of Guns, and my
Father the Captain ordered me with Mr. John Loveland, Merchant of the Ship, to
go on shore and wait upon him. When we were come before him, he demanded who we
were, and how long we should stay? We told him, We were English, and not to
stay above twenty or thirty days, and desired Permission to Trade in his
Majesty's Port. His answer was, the King was glad to hear that the English
were come to his Country, and had commanded him to assist us as we should
desire, and had sent a Letter to be delivered to none, but to the Captain
himself.

We were then some twelve Miles from the Seaside. Our reply was, That the
Captain could not leave his Ship to come so far, but if he pleased to come down
to the Seaside himself, the Captain would immediately wait upon him to receive
the Letter. Upon which the Dissauva desired us to stay that day, and on the
morrow he would go down with us.

Which being a small request, and we unwilling to displease him, consented to.

The beginning of their Suspicion.
The same day at Evening, the Dissauva sent two of his chief Captains to the
House where we lay to tell us, That he was sending a Present to the Captain,
and if we pleased we might send a Letter to him; that he would send the Present
in the Night, and himself with us follow the next Morning. At which we began to
suspect, and accordingly concluded to write and advise the Captain not to
adventure himself, nor any other on shore till he saw us. We having writ a
Letter to this purpose they took it and went away, but never delivered it.

The Captain seized, and seven more.
The next Morning the Present, which was Cattle, Fruit, etc. was brought to the
Sea side, and delivered to the Captain; the Messengers telling him withal, that
we were upon the way coming down, with the Dissauva; who desired his Company on
shore against his coming, having a Letter from the King to deliver into his own
hand. Hereupon the Captain mistrusting nothing, came up with his Boat into a
small River, and being come ashore, sat down under a Tamarind Tree, waiting for
the Dissauva and us. In which time the Native Soldiers privately surrounded him
and Men, having no Arms with them; and so he was seized on and seven men with
him, yet without any violen^e or plundering them of any thing: and then they
brought them up unto us, carrying the Captain in a Hammock upon their Shoulders.

The Longboat Men seized.
The next day after, the Long-boats Crew, not knowing what had happened, came
ashore to cut a Tree to make Cheeks for the Mainmast, and were made Prisoners
after the same manner, though with more violence. For they being rough and making
resistance, were bound with Wyths, and so were led away till they came where
the People got Ropes. Which when our Men saw brought to them, they were not a
little affrighted. For being already bound, they concluded there could be no
other use for those Ropes but to hang them. But the true use of them was to
bind them faster, fearing lest the Wyths might break, and so they were brought
up farther into the Country; but afterward being become more tame, they were
loosed. They would not adventure to bring them to us, but quartered them in
another House, tho in the same Town. Where without leave we could not see one
another. The House wherein they kept the Captain and us, was all hanged with
white Callico, which is the greatest Honor they can show to any. But the House
wherein the other men were, that were brought up after us, was not. They gave
us also as good Entertainment as the Country afforded.

Having thus taken both our Boats and Eighteen men of us, The General's Craft
to get the Ship, as well as the Men.
their next care was, fearing lest the Ship should be gone, to secure her:
Therefore to bring this about, the Dissauva told the Captain that the reason of
this their detainment was, that the King intended to send Letters and a Present
to the English Nation by him, and therefore that the Ship must not go away,
till the King was ready to send his Messenger and Message, and thereupon
desired the Captain to send on Board to order her stay; and it being not safe
for her to ride in the Bay, lest the Dutch might come and fire her, that he
should take order for her bringing up into the River. Which advice of his, the
Captain approved not of. But concealing his dislike of it, replied, that unless
he could send two of his own men on Board with his Letter and Order, those in
the Ship would not obey him, but speedily would be gone with the Ship. Which
he, rather than he would run the hazard of the Ships departing, granted;
imagining that the Captain would order the Ship to be brought up into the
River, as he had advised, tho the Captain intended to make another use of this
Message.

Upon which the Captain sent two of his men, The Captain's Order to them on
board the ship.
some Indians accompanying them in a Canoo to the Ship, the Captain ordering
them when they were aboard not to abuse the Indians, but to entertain them very
kindly, and afterward that setting them ashore, they should keep the Canoo to
themselves, instead of our two Boats, which they had gotten from us, and to
secure the Ship, and wait till further order.

These two men stayed on Board, and came not back again. This together with the
Ships not coming up displeased the Dissauva, and h^ demanded of the Captain the
reason thereof. His answer was, That being detained on Shore, the Men on Board
would not obey his C^^mand. The Captain's second Message to his Ship.
Upon this some days after the Dissauva bid the Captain s^^d his Son with order
to those aboard that the Ship might be brought into the River, but provided
that he would be Security for my re^urn; which he promised he would. His order
to me was, to see the top Chains put upon the Cables, and the Guns Shotted, and
to tell Mr John Burford chief Mate, and all the rest, as they valued their
Lives and Liberties to keep a Watch, and not to suffer any Boat to come near,
after it was dark: and charged me upon his Blessing, and as I should answer it
at the great Day, not to leave him in this Condition, but to return to him
again. Upon which I solemnly vowed according to my Duty to be his Obedient Son.

So having seen all done according to his appointment, I wrote a Letter in the
Name of the Company to clear my Father and my self, to this effect; The Ships
Company refuse to bring up the Ship.
That they would not obey the Captain, nor any other in this matter, but were
resolved to stand upon their own defense. To which they all set their hands.
Which done according to my Promise and Duty I returned again, and delivered the
Letter to the Dissauva, who was thereby answered, and afterward urged the
Captain no more in that matter: but gave him leave at his pleasure to write for
what he pleased to have brought to him from the Ship: still pretending the
King's order to release us, was not yet, but would suddenly come. And so we
remained expecting it about two Months, being entertained as formerly with the
best Diet and Accommodation of the Country.

The Captain orders the ship to depart.
Having continued thus long in suspense, and the time and season of the year
spending for the Ship ^o proceed on her Voyage to some other place, and our
condition being, as we feared, and afterward found to be, the beginning of a
sad Captivity, the Captain sent order to Mr. John Burford to take the charge of
the Ship upon him, and to set Sail for Porto Nova whence we came, and there to
follow the Agent's order.

The Lading of Cloth remained untouched.
If any inquire what became of the Cloth of our Lading, which we brought
thither, they only took an account to see what it was, and so left it where and
as it was before, and there it remained until both House and Goods rotted, as
the People of the same Town informed me afterward.

The probable reason of our Surprise.
I impute the main reason of our Surprise to our Neglect, viz. in not sending a
Letter and Present to the King at our first coming. Who looking upon himself as
a great Monarch, as he is indeed, requires to be treated with suitable State.

The number of those that were left on the Island.
Thus were Sixteen of us left to the mercy of those Barbarians, the Names of
which are as follow. The Captain, Mr. Ioh. Loveland, John Gregory, Charles
Beard, Roger Gold, Stephen Rutland, Nicolas Mullins, Francis Crutch, John
Berry, Ralph Knight, Peter Winn, William Hubbard, Arthur Emery, Richard
Varnham, George Smith, and my Self. Tho our hearts were very heavy, seeing our
selves betrayed into so sad a Condition, to be forced to dwell among those that
knew not God nor his Laws; yet so great was the mercy of our gracious God, that
he gave us favor in the sight of this People. Insomuch that we lived far
better than we could have expected, being Prisoners or rather Captives in the
hands of the Heathen; from whom we could have looked for nothing but very
severe usage.

The Dissauva departs.
The Ship being gone, the King sent to call the Dissauva speedily to him, who
upon this order immediately marched away with this Army, leaving us where we
were. But concerning us was no order at all.

CHAP. II. How we were carried up into the Country, and disposed of there, and
of the sickness, sorrow and death of the Captain.
THe Dissauva with his men being gone, the people of the Town were appointed to
guard and secure us until further order. They intend to attempt an Escape, but
are prevented.
But they carried us some six miles higher into the Country, and would not yet
adventure to bring the Long boats-crew unto us, but kept them by themselves in
another Town, fearing lest we might make an escape, as certainly we would have
attempted it, had they not removed us. There was a small Moors Vessel, which
lay in the River, which they had seized on about this time, as we supposed they
would have done by our Ship if they could have catched her there. This Vessel
had some forty men belonging to her, who were not made Prisoners as we were,
but yet lay in the same Town: with those we had concluded, that they should
furnish us with Arms, and in the night altogether to march down, and get on
board of their Vessel, and so make our escape. But being prevented in this
design by our departure, we were fain to lay at their mercy.

In our new quarters our entertainment proved as good as formerly. And indeed
there was this to mitigate our misery, that the People were courteous to us and
seemed to pity us. Their condition commiserated by the People.
For there is a great difference between the People inhabiting the high-lands,
or the mountains of Cande, and those of the low-lands where we now are placed,
who are of a kinder nature by far than the other. For these Countries beneath
the mountains formerly were in subjection unto the Portugueze. Whereby they
have been exercised and acquainted with the customs and manners of Christian
People. Which pleasing them far better than their own have begot and bred in
them a kind of love and affection toward Strangers, being apt to show Pity and
Compassion on them in their distress. And you shall hear them oftentimes
upbraiding the High-landers for their insolent and rude behavior.

It was a very sad Condition whilst we were all together, They are distributed
into diverse Town,
yet hitherto each others company lessened our sufferings, and was some comfort
that we might condole one another. But now it came to pass that we must be
separated and placed asunder, one in a Village, where we could have none to
confer withal or look upon, but the horrible black faces of our heathen
enemies, and not understand one word of their Language neither, this was a
great addition to our grief. Yet God was so merciful to us, as not to suffer
them to part my Father and I.

For it was some sixteen days after our last remove, An Order comes from the
King to bring them up into the Country.
the King was pleased to send a Captain with Soldiers to bring us up into the
Country. Who brought us and the other men taken in the Long boat together:
Which was an heavy meeting; Being then, as we well saw, to be carried Captives
into the mountains. That night we supped together, and the next morning changed
our condition into real Captivity. Howbeit they gave us many comfortable
promises, which we believed not; as, that the Kings intent was not to keep us
any longer, than till another Ship came to carry us away. Although we had but very
little to carry, God knows, yet they appointed men to carry the cloths that
belonged to the Captain and Officers.

How they were Treated on the way in the Woods.
We still expected they would plunder us of our cloths, having nothing else to
be plundered of: but the Chingulay Captain told us, that the King had given
order that none should take the value of a thread from us: Which indeed they
did not. As they brought us up they were very tender of us, as not to tire us
with Traveling, bidding us go no faster than we would our selves. This
kindness did somewhat comfort us. The way was plain and easy to Travail
through great Woods, so that we walked as in an Arbor, but desolate of
Inhabitants. So that for four or five nights we lay on the Ground, with Boughs
of Trees only over our heads. And of Victuals twice a Day they gave us as much
as we could eat, that is, of Rice, Salt-fish, dried Flesh: And sometimes they
would shoot Deer and find Honey in the Trees, good part of which they always
brought unto us. And drink we could not want, there being Rivers and Puddles
full of Water as we Traveled along.

But when we came out of the Woods among Inhabitants and were led into their
Towns, And in the Towns among the Inhabitants.
they brought us Victuals ready dressed after their fashion, viz. Rice boiled
in Water, and three other sorts of Food, whereof one Flesh, and the other two
Herbs or such like things that grow in their Country, and all kinds of ripe
Fruit, which we liked very well and fed heartily upon. Our entertainment all
along was at the Charge of the Country: So we fed like Soldiers upon free
Quarter. Yet I think we gave them good content for all the Charge we put them
to. Which was to have the satisfaction of seeing us eat, sitting on Mats upon
the Ground in their yards to the Public view of all Beholders. Who greatly
admired us, having never seen, nor scarce heard of, Englishmen before. It was
also great entertainment to them to observe our manner of eating with Spoons,
which some of us had, and that we could not take the Rice up in our hands, and
put it to our mouths without spilling, as they do, nor gaped and powered the
Water into our Mouths out of Pots according to their Countries custom. Thus at
every Town where we came they used both young and old in great Companies to
stare upon us.

Being thus brought up all together somewhat near to the City of Cande. They
are brought near Cande, and there separated.
Now came an Order from the King to separate us, and to place us one in a Town.
Which then seemed to us to be very hard, but it was for the convenience of
getting Food, being quartered upon the Country at their Charge.

The Captain and his Son and two more quartered together.
The Captain Mr. John Loveland, my self and John Gregory were parted from the
rest, and brought nearer to the City, to be ready when the King should send for
us. All the Rest were placed one in a Town according to the aforesaid Order.
Special Command also was given from the King, that we all should be well
entertained, and according to the Country fare we had no cause to complain.
Parted.
We four were thus kept together some two Months, faring well all the while.
How they ^ared.
But the King minding us not, Order came from the great Men in Court to place
us in Towns, as the rest were; only my Father and I were still permitted to be
together, and a great Charge given to use us well. And indeed twice a Day we
had brought unto us as good fare as the Country afforded^ All the rest had not
their Provisions brought to them, as we had, but went to eat from house te
house, each house taking its turn.

On the Sixteenth of September, 1660. The Captain and his Son placed in
Coo^-wat.
My Father and I were placed in a Town called Bonder Coos-wat the situation was
very pleasing and commodious, lying about Thirty Miles to the Northward of the
City of Cande, in the Country called Hotcurly and distant from the rest of our
People a full days journey. We were removed hither from another Town nearer to
the City where the Nobles at Court supposing that the King would call for us,
had placed us to have us ready. Being thus brought to Bonder Cooswat, the
People put it to our choice which House we would have to reside in. The
Country being hot and their Houses dark and dirty, my Father chose an open
House, having only a Roof but no Walls. Wherein they placed a Cot, or Bedstead
only with a Mat upon it for him, which in their Account is an extraordinary
Lodging; and for me a Mat upon the Ground.

Moneys at that time were very low with us. Moneys scarce with them.
For although we wanted not for opportunity to send for what we would have
brought unto unto us from the Ship, yet fearing we should be plundered of it,
sent not for any thing only a Pillow for my Father. For we held it a point
without dispute, that they that made Prisoners of our Bodies would not spare to
take our Goods; my Father also alleging, that he had rather his Children at
home should enjoy them.

But to make amends for that, we had our Provisions brought us without money,
But they had good Provisions without it.
and that twice a Day, so much as we could eat, and as good as their Country
yielded; to wit, a Pot of good Rice, and three Dishes of such things as with
them is accounted good Cheer; one always either Flesh, Fish or Eggs; but not
over much of this Dish, the other Dishes, Herbs, Pumkins or such like, one of
which is always made sower.

The first year that we were brought into this Town, The Town where they were,
Sickly.
this part of the Land was extraordinary Sickly by Agues and Feavours, whereof
many People dyed; insomuch that many times we were forced to remain an hungry,
there being none well enough either to boil or bring Victuals unto us.

We had with us a Practice of Piety, and Mr. Rogers seven Treatises, called the
Practice of Christianity. How they passed their time.
With which companions we did frequently discourse; and in the cool of the
Evening walk abroad in the Fields for a refreshing, tired with being all day in
our House or Prison.

This Course lasted until God was pleased to visit us both with the Country
Sickness, They both fall Sick.
Ague and Feavour. The sight of my Fathers misery was farmore grievous unto me
than the sense of my own, that I must be a Spectator of his Affliction, and not
any ways able to help him. And the sight of me so far augmented his grief, that
he would often say, What have I done when I charged you to come ashore to me
again, your dutifulness to me has brought you to be a Captive. I am old and
cannot long hold out, but you may live to see many days of Sorrow, if the mercy
of God do not prevent it. But my prayers to God for you shall not be wanting,
that for this cause he would visit you with his Mercy, and bestow on you a
Blessing.

My Father's Ague lasted not long, but deep grief daily more and more increased
upon him, which so overwhelmed even his very heart, that with many a bitter
sigh he used to utter these words, Deep Grief seizes the Captain.
These many years even from my youth have I used the Seas, in which time the
Lord God has deliver^d me from a multitude of Dangers; rehearsing to me what
great Dangers he had been in, in the Straits by the Turks and by other Enemies,
and also in many other places, too large here to insert, and always how
merciful God was to him in delivering him out of them all, So that he never
knew what it was to be in the hand of an Enemy; But now in his old Age, when
his head was grown gray, to be a Captive to the Heathen, and to leave his Bones
in the Eastern Parts of the World, when it was his hopes and intention, if God
permitted him to finish this Voyage, to spend and end the residue of his days
at home with his Children in his Native Country, and to settle me in the Ship
in his stead; the thoughts of these things did even break his heart.

Their Sickness continues.
Upwards of three Months my Father lay in this manner upon his Bed, having only
under him a Mat and the Carpet he sat upon in the Boat when he came ashore, and
a small Quilt I had to cover him withal. And I had only a Mat upon the Ground
and a Pillow to lay on, and nothing to cover me but the Cloths on my back: but
when I was cold, or that my Ague came upon me, I used to make a Fire, Wood
costing nothing, but the fetching.

Their Boy's disobedience adds to their trouble.
We had a black Boy my Father brought from Porto Nova to attend upon him, who
seeing his Master to be a Prisoner in the hands of the People of his own
Complexion, would not now obey his Command, further than what agreed unto his
own humor, neither was it then as we thought in our Power to compel or make
him; but it was our ignorance. As for me, my Ague now came to a settled course;
that is, once in three days, and so continued for Sixteen Months time.

His excessive sorrow.
There appearing now to us no probability, whereupon to build any hopes of
Liberty, the sense of it struck my Father into such an Agony and strong Passion
of Grief, that once I well remember in Nine days time nothing came into his
mouth, but cold water; neither did he in three Months together ever rise up out
of his Bed, but when the course of Nature required it: always groaning and
sighing in a most piteous manner: which for me to hear and see come from my
dear Father, my self also in the same Condition, did almost break my heart. But
then I felt that Doctrine most true, which I had read out of Mr. Roger's Book,
That God is most sweet, when the world is most bitter.

In this manner my Father lay until the Ninth of February 16 60/61. By which
time he was consumed to an Anatomy, having nothing left but Skin to cover his
Bones; yet he often would say, That the very sound of Liberty would so revive
him, that it would put strength into his Limbs. But it was not the will of him,
to whom we say, Thy will be done, to have it so.

His Discourse and charge to his Son before his Death.
The evening before his Death, he called me to come near his Bed side, and to
sit down by him, at which time also I had a strong Feavor upon me. This done,
he told me, That he sensibly felt his life departing from him, and was assured
that this Night God would deliver him out of this Captivity, and that he never
thought in all his Lifetime that Death could be so easy and welcome to any Man,
as God had made it to be to him, and the joys he now felt in himself he wanted
utterance to express to me. He told me, These were the last words, that ever he
should speak to me, and bid me well regard and be sure to remember them, and
tell them to my Brother and Sister, if it pleased God, as he hoped it would, to
bring us together in England; where I should find all things settled to my
contentation, relating to me after what manner he had settled his Estate by
Letters which he sent from Cotiar.

In the first place and above all, He charged me to serve God, and with a
circumspect care to walk in his ways, and then, he said, God would bless me and
prosper me. And next, he bad me have a care of my Brother and Sister. And
lastly, He gave me a special charge to beware of strong Drink, and lewd
Company, which as by Experience many had found, would change me into another
man, so that I should not be my self. It deeply grieved him, he said, to see me
in Captivity in the prime of my years, and so much the more because I had
chosen rather to suffer Captivity with him than to disobey his Command. Which
now he was heartily sorry for, that he had so commanded me, but bad me not
repent of obeying the command of my Father; seeing for this very thing, he
said, God would bless me, and bid me be assured of it, which he doubted not of,
viz. That God Almighty would deliver me: which at that time I could not tell
how to conceive, seeing but little sign of any such Matter. But blessed be the
Name of my most gracious God, who has so bountifully sustained me ever since
in the Land of my Captivity, and preserved me alive to see my Deceased Father's
word fulfilled! And truly I was so far from repenting, that I had obeyed the
Command of my Father, and performed the Oath and Promise I made unto him upon
it, that it rather rejoiced me to see that God had given me so much Grace.

But tho it was a trouble to him, that by his means I was thus made a Captive;
yet it was a great Comfort to him, he said, to have his own Son sit by him on
his Deathbed, and by his hands to be Buried, whereas otherwise he could expect
no other but to be eaten by Dogs or wild Beasts. Then he gave me order
concerning his Burial, That having no winding she^t, I should pull his Shirt
over his head, and slip his B^eeches over his feet, and so wrap him up in the
Mat he laid upon: and then ceased speaking, and fell into a Slumber. His Death.
This was about Eight or Nine a Clock in the Evening, and about Two or Three in
the Morning he gave up the Ghost, Feb. the Ninth, 1660. being very sensible
unto the very instant of his Departure.

According to his own appointment with my own hands I wrapped him up ready for
the Grave; And Burial.
my self being very sick and weak, and as I thought ready to follow after him.
Having none but the black Boy with me, I bad him ask the People of the Town for
help to carry my Father to the Grave, because I could not understand their
Language. Who immediately brought forth a great Rope they used to tie their
Cattle withal, therewith to drag him by the Neck into the Woods, saying, They
could afford me no other help, unless I would pay for it. This Insolency of the
Heathen grieved me much to see, neither could I with the Boy alone do what was
necessary for his Burial, though we had been able to carry the Corpse, having
not wherewithal to dig a Grave, and the ground very dry and hard. Yet it was
some comfort to me that I had so much Ability as to hire one to help; which at
first I would not have spared to have done, had I known their meaning.

The Place where he lies.
By this means I thank God, in so decent a manner as our present condition would
permit, I laid my Father's Body in the Grave. Most of which I dug with my
own hands; the place being in a Wood, on the North-side of a Corn Field, where
heretofore we had used often to walk, going up to Handapoul: that Division, as
I have said, being called Bonder Cooswat, because formerly it had belonged to
the Revenues or Iointure of the Queen, Bonder implying something relating to
the King. It lies toward the Northwest of the middle of the Island in the
County of Hotcurly.

Thus was I left Desolate, Sick, and in Captivity, having no earthly Comforter,
none but only He who looks down from Heaven to hear the groaning of the
Prisoners, and to show himself a Father of the Fatherless, and a present help
to them that have no helper.

Upon the Captain's death, a Message sent his Son from Court.
The News of my Father's Death being carried to Court, presently two Messengers
were sent from thence to see me, and to know of me, How and in what manner my
Father died, and what he had left. Which was a Gold Ring, a Pagoda, and some
two or three Dollars and a few old Cloths; God knows but a very little, yet it
scared me not a little, fearing they would take it away from me, and my want
being so great; but they had no such order nor intent. But the chief occasion
of their coming was to renew the former order unto the People of that Town,
that they should be kind to me and give me good Victuals, lest I might dye also
as my Father had done. So for a while I had better entertainment than formerly.

CHAP. III. How I lived after my Father's Death. And of the Condition of the
rest of the English: and how it fared with them. And of our Interview.
His chief employment is Reading.
I Still remained where I was before, having none but the black Boy, and my Ague
to bear me Company. Never found I more pleasure in Reading, Meditating and
Praying than now. For there was nothing else could administer to me any
Comfort, neither had I any other Business to be occupied about. I had read my
two Books so often over, that I had them almost by heart. For my custom was
after Dinner to take a Book and go into the Fields and sit under a Tree,
reading and meditating until Evening; excepting the Day when my Ague came, for
then I could scarce hold up my head. Often have I prayed as Elijah under the
Juniper Tree, that God would take away my life, for it was a burden to me.

He loses his Ague.
At length it pleased God my Ague began to be a little moderate; and so by
degrees it wore away, after it had held me sixteen Months.

Provisions falling short with me, tho Rice I thank God, I never wanted, and
Moneys also growing low; as well to help out a Meal as for Recreation,
sometimes I went with an Angle to catch small Fish in the Brooks, the aforesaid
Boy being with me. How he me^ with an English Bible in that Country.
It chanced as I was Fishing, an old Man passed by, and seeing me, asked of my
Boy, If I could read in a Book. He answered, Yes. The reason I ask, said the
old Man, is because I have one I got when the Portugueze lost Columbo, and if
your Master please to buy it, I will sell it him. Which when I heard of, I bad
my Boy go to his House with him, which was not far off, and bring it to me to
see it, making no great account of the matter, supposing it might be some
Portugueze Book.

The Boy having formerly served the English, knew the Book, and as soon as he
had got it in his hand came running with it, calling out to me, It is a Bible.
It startled me to hear him mention the name of a Bible. For I neither had one,
nor scarcely could ever think to see one. Upon which I flung down my Angle and
went to meet him. The first place the Book opened in after I took it in my
hand, was the Sixteenth Chapter of the Acts, and the first place my eye pitched
on, was the Thirtieth and one and Thirtieth Verses, where the Iailor asked S.
Paul, What must I do to be saved? And he answered saying, Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thine house.

The sight of this Book so rejoiced me, and affrighted me together, that I
cannot say, which Passion was greater, Struck into a great Passion at the sight
of the Book.
the joy, for that I had got sight of a Bible, or the fear, that I had not
enough to buy it, having then but one Pagoda in the World, which I willingly
would have given for it, had it not been for my Boy, who dissuaded me from
giving so much, alleging my Necessity for Money many other ways, and
undertaking to procure the Book for a far meaner price, provided I would seem
to slight it in the sight of the old Man. This counsel after I considered I
approved of, my urgent Necessities earnestly craving, and my Ability being but
very small to relieve the same: and however, I thought, I could give my piece
of Gold at the last cast, if other means should fail.

I hope the Readers will excuse me, that I hold them so long upon this single
passage, For it did so affect me then, that I cannot lightly pass it over as
often as I think of it, or have occasion to mention it.

The sight indeed of this Bible so overjoyed me, as if an Angel had spoke to me
from Heaven. To see that my most gracious God had prepared such an
extraordinary Blessing for me; which I did, and ever shall look upon as
miraculous, to bring unto me a Bible in my own Native Language, and that in
such a remote part of the World, where his Name was not so much as known, and
where any English Man was never known to have been before. I looked upon it, as
somewhat of the same nature with the Ten Commandments he had given the
Israelites out of Heaven; it being the thing for want whereof I had so often
mourned, nay and shed tears too; and than the enjoyment whereof there could be
no greater joy in the world to me.

Upon the sight of it I left off Fishing, He casts with himself how to get i^.
God having brought a Fish to me, that my Soul had longed for; and now how to
get it and enjoy the same, all the Powers of my Soul were employed. I gave God
hearty thanks that he had brought it so near me, and most earnestly prayed that
he would bestow it on me. Now, it being well toward Evening, and not having
wherewithal to buy it about me, I departed home, telling the old Man, that in
the Morning I would send my Boy to buy it of him.

All that Night I could take no rest for thinking on it, fearing lest I might
be disappointed of it. In the Morning as soon as it was day, I sent the Boy
with a knit Cap he had made for me to buy the Book, praying in my heart for
good success, which it pleased God to grant: For that Cap purchased it, and the
Boy brought it to me to my great joy, which did not a little comfort me over
all my Afflictions.

Where the rest of the English were bestowed.
Having said all this concerning my Father and my Self, it will be time now to
think of the rest of our poor Countrymen, and to see what is become of them.
They were carried into the County of Hotteracourly, Westward from the City of
Cande, and placed singly according to the King's Order aforesaid, some four,
some six Miles distant one from the other. It was the King's Command concerning
them that the People should give them Victuals, and look after them. So they
carried each man from house to house to eat, as their turns came to give them
Victuals, and where they Supped there they Lodged that Night. Their Bedding was
only a Mat upon the Ground.

Kept from one another a good while, but after permitted to see each other.
They knew not they were so near to one another a great while; till at length
Almighty God was pleased by their grief and heaviness to move those Heathen to
Pity and take Compassion on them: So that they did bring some of them to one
another. Which joy was but Abortive, for no sooner did they begin to feel the
Comfort of one another Company, but immediately their Keepers called upon them
to go from whence they came: fearing they might consult and run away, although
Columbo the nearest Port they could fly to was above two days Journey from
them. But as it is with wild Beasts beginning to grow tame, their Liberty
increases: So it happened to our Men; so that at length they might go and see
one another at their pleasures; and were less and less watched and regarded.
And seeing they did not attempt to run away, they made no matter of it, if they
stayed two or three days one with the other.

No manner of work laid upon them.
They all wondered much to see themselves in this Condition, to be kept only to
eat, and the People of the Country giving it unto them, daily expecting when
they would put them to work, which they never did, nor dared to do. For the
King's order was to feed them well only, and to look after them until he
pleased to send for them. This after some time made them to change their minds,
and not to think themselves Slaves any more, but the Inhabitants of the Land to
be their Servants, in that they labored to sustain them.

Which made them to begin to Domineer, and would not be content unless they had
such Victuals as pleased them, and oftentimes used to throw the Pots, Victuals
and all at their heads that brought them, which they patiently would bear.

They begin to pluck up their heart^.
And as they lived here longer, they knew better what Privileges they had in
belonging unto the King, and being maintained by virtue of his Command. And
their Privileges they made use of to no purpose, as I shall relate an instance
or two by and by; and showed their English Metal.

Victuals was the only thing allowed them, but no Cloths. By this time the
Cloths they had were almost worn out. What course they took for Cloths.
This put them to a study what course to take to procure more, when those on
their backs were gone. The readiest way that they could devise was this, that
whereas they used to take their Victuals brought to them ready dressed, they
should now take them raw; and so to pinch somewhat out of their Bellies, to
save to buy Cloths for their Backs. And so accordingly they concluded to do:
and by the favor that God gave them in the sight of the People, by alleging
the Innocence of their Cause, and the Extremity of their present Condition,
having not the least ability to help or relieve themselves, they consented to
give them two Measures of Rice a day each man. One of which is as much as any
man can eat in a day, so that the other was to serve for advance toward
Cloths. Their fa^e.
For besides Rice, they gave them to eat with it Salt, Pepper, Limes, Herbs,
Pumpkins, Coker-Nuts, Flesh a little. These and such like things were their
constant fare.

And thus they made a shift to live for some years, What Employment they
afterward followed.
until some of them had an insight in knitting Caps, by whom all afterward
learned, and it proved to be the chief means and help we all had to relieve our
wants. The ordinary price we sold these Caps for, was Nine pence a piece in
value English Money, the Thread standing us in about three pence. But at
length, we plying hard our new Learned Trade, Caps began to abound, and Trading
grew dead, so that we could not sell them at the ^ormer price: which brought
several of our Nation to great want.

The English began now to pluck up their hearts, How the English Domineered.
and tho they were entered into a new Condition, they kept their old Spirits,
especially considering they were the King's Men, and quartered by his special
order upon the People. When they had obtained to have their Allowance raw, if
any brought them not their full due, they would go in and Plunder their Houses
of such Goods as they found there, and keep them until they came and brought
them their complete allowance to redeem their Goods back again.

Some of our English men have proceeded further yet. What Satisfaction one of
them received from a Potter.
One for example went to buy Pots of a Potter. Who because he would not let him
have them at his own price fell to quarrel, in which the English man met with
some blows. Which he complained of to the Magistrate, as being a Person that
belonged unto the King, and therefore claimed better usage. And the Magistrate
condemned the Potter as guilty in lifting up his hand against him, and sent
some of his Soldiers to bind him, and then bad the English man go and content
himself by paying him in the same Coin again, as he had served our Countreyman;
which he did until he was satisfied, and moreover, ordered him to take the Pots
he came to buy and pay nothing. But the Law was not so satisfied neither, for
the Soldiers laid on many blows besides.

Another time at a certain Feast, A scuffle between the English and Natives.
as they were drinking and wanting Wine, they sent Money to buy more; but the
Seller refused to give it them for their Money. Which they took so hainously,
that they unanimously concluded to go and take it by force. Away they went each
man with his Staff in his hand, and entered the House and began to Drink; which
the People not liking of, gathered their Forces together, and by blows began to
resist them. But the English men bravely behaved themselves, and broke several
of their Pates. Who with the Blood about their Ears went to the City to
complain to the great Men. They demanded of them, If they had ever sold them
Wine before. They answered, Yes. They asked them again, Why then did they
refuse to sell them now? And that they were well served by the English for
denying them drink for their Money: and so sent them away laughing at them. Our
Men got two or three black and blew Blows, but they came home with their
Bellies full of Drink for their pains.

The Author after a year sees his Countrymen.
But to return unto my self. It was a full year after my Father died, before I
had sight of any of my Countrymen and Fellow Prisoners. Then John Gregory with
much ado obtained leave to come and see me: which did exceedingly rejoice me.
For a great Satisfaction it was, both to see a Countreyman, and also to hear of
the welfare of the rest. But he could not be permitted to s^ay with me above
one day. Until then, I knew not punctually where the rest of my Countrymen
were, but having heard that they were within a days Journey of me, I never
ceased importuning the People o^ the Town where I dwelt, to let me go and see
them. Which tho very loath, yet at last they granted. Being arrived at the
nearest English man's House, I was joyfully received, and the next day he went
and called some of the rest of our Countrymen that were near. So that there
were some seven or eight of us met together.

Their Conference and Entertainment.
We gave God thanks for his great Mercies toward us, being then, as we did
confess, in a far better Condition than we could have expected. They were now
no more like the Prisoners I left them, but were become Housekeepers, and
Knitters of Caps, and had changed their Habit from Breeches to Clouts like the
Chingulays. They entertained me with very good cheer in their Houses beyond
what I did expect.

He consults with his Countrymen for a future livelihood.
My Money at the same time almost gone, and Clothes in the same condition, it
was high time for me now to take some course in hand to get more. Therefore I
took some advice with them about Knitting, my Boy having Skill therein.
Likewise they advised me to take my Victuals raw, wherein they found great
Profit. For all this while here being no signs of releasing us, it concerned me
now to bethink my self how I should live for the future. For neither had I, any
more than my Countrymen, any allowance for Cloths, but Victuals only.

Having stayed here some two or three days, we did take leave of one another,
hoping to see one another oftener, since now we knew each others Habitations:
and I departed to my House, having a Keeper with me.

The difficulty he met with of having raw Rice.
By this time I began to speak the Language of the Country. Whereby I was
enabled the better to speak my mind unto the People that brought me my
Victuals. Which was henceforward not to boil my Rice, but to bring it raw
according to the quantity that the other English men had. This occasioned a
great deal of disputing and reasoning between us. They alleged, That I was not
as they, being the Captain's Son, and they but his Servants, and therefore that
it was ordered by the great Men at Court, that my Victuals should be daily
brought unto me, whereas they went always from house to house for theirs:
Neither was it fitting for me, they said, to employ my self in such an Inferior
Office as to dress my own Meat, being a Man that the King had notice of by
Name, and very suddenly before I should be aware of it, would send for me into
his Presence, where I should be highly promoted to some Place of Honor. In the
mean time, they told me, as pretending to give me good counsel, That it was
more for my credit and repute to have my Provisions brought unto me ready
Dressed as they were before.

Although I was yet but a Novice in the Country, and knew not much of the People,
He reasons with the People about his allowance.
yet plain reason told me, that it was not so much for my good and credit that
they pleaded, as for their own benefit. Wherefore I returned them this answer,
That if as they said I was greater in quality than the rest, and so held in
their Estimation, it would be but reason to demand a greater allowance, whereas
I desired no more than the other English men had. And as for the toil and
trouble in dressing of it, that would be none to me, for my Boy had nothing
else to do. And then I alleged several inconveniences in bring^ng my Victuals
ready boiled; as first, that it was not dressed accordingi to my Diet; and many
times not brought in due Season, so that I could not eat when I was an hungry.
And the last and chief reason of all was, that I might save a little to serve
my Necessity of Clothing: and rather than want Cloths for my Back, I must pinch
a little out of my Belly, and so both go share and share like. And so at
length, thanks be to God, I obtained, tho with much ado, to get two Measures of
Rice per day for my self, and one for my Boy; also Coker-nuts, Pumpkins, Herbs,
Limes, and such like enough, besides Pepper and Salt; and sometimes Hens, Eggs,
or Flesh: Rice being the main thing they stand upon, for other things they
refuse not to give what they have.

Now having settled all Business about my allowance, my next concern was to
look after an House more convenient, He builds him an House.
for my present one was too small to dress my Victuals in, and to sleep in too.
Thereabouts was a Garden of Coker-nut Trees, belonging unto the King, a
pleasant situation; this place I made choice of to build me a House in. And
discovering my desire to the People, they consented, and came and built it for
me: but before it was finished, their occasions called them away^ but my Boy
and I made an end of it, and whitened the Walls with Lime, according to my own
Country fashion. But in doing this I committed a Capital Offense: for none may
white their Houses with Lime, that being peculiar to Royal Houses and Temples.
But being a Stranger nothing was made of it, because I did it in ignorance: had
it been a Native that had so done, it is most probable it would have cost him
his Head, or at the least a great Fine.

Being settled in my new House, He follows business and thrives.
I began to keep Hogs and Hens; which by God's Blessing thrived very well with
me, and were a great help unto me. I had also a great benefit by living in this
Garden. For all the Coker-nuts that fell down they gave me, which afforded me
Oil to burn in the Lamp, and also to fry my meat in. Which Oil being new is but
little inferior to this Country Butter. Now I learned to knit Caps, which
Skill I quickly attained unto, and by God's Blessing upon the same, I obtained
great help and relief thereby.

In this manner we all lived, seeing but very little sign that we might build
upon, Some attempted r^^ning away, but were catched.
to look for Liberty. The chief of our hopes of it was, that in process of time
when we were better acquainted, we might run away. Which some of our People
attempted to do too soon, before they knew well which way to go, and were taken
by the Inhabitants. For it is the custom of the Chingulays to suspect all white
People, they meet travailing in the Country, to be Runaways; and to examine
them: and if they cannot give satisfactory answers, they will lay hold of them
and carry them back unto the City. Where they will keep them Prisoners under a
guard of Soldiers in an open House like a Barn with a little Victuals
sometimes, and sometimes with none at all. Where they have no other remedy to
help themselves but Begging. And in this Condition they may lie perhaps for
their Life^time, being so kept for a Spectacle unto the People.

Little encouragement for those that bring back Runnaways.
Tho the common way whereby the King gratifies such as catch Runawayes and bring
them up, is not over acceptable. For they are appointed to feed and watch them
until he calls for them to be brought before him. At which time his promise is
bountifully to reward them. But these Promises I never knew performed. Neither
does he perhaps ever think of it after. For when the King is made acquainted
with the matter, the men that have brought up the Prisoner are in a manner as
bad Prisoners themselves, not daring to go home to their Houses without his
leave, but there they must remain. After some years stay, the common manner is,
for them to give a Fee unto the Governor of the Country, and he will license
them to go home, which they must be contented with instead of the promised
reward.

CHAP. IV. Concerning some other English men detained in that Country.
The Persia Merchant's men Captives before us.
IN the same Captivity with our selves on this Island, was another Company of
English Men, who were taken about a year and an half before us, viz. in the
year MDCLVIII. They were Thirteen in number, whose names were as follow, Viz.
Mr. William Vassal, John Merginson, Thomas March, Thomas Kirby, Richard Ielf,
Gamaliel Gardener, William Day, Thomas Stapleton, Henry Man, Hugh Smart, Daniel
Holstein, an Hamburger, James Gony, and Henry Bingham. The occasion of their
Seizure was thus. The Ship these Men belonged unto was the Persia Merchant,
Capt. Francis Johnson Commander, which was lost upon the Maldives Islands. But
they escaped in their Boats, and passing along by this Land went on shore to
recruit and buy Provisions, and so were taken. The Chingulays that took them
Plundered them of what they had, Plundered by the Natives.
except their Cloths. Yet one of them, John Merginson by name, having cunningly
hid his Money about him, saved it from the Heathen, but from his own Countrymen
he could not, some of whom knowing of it set upon him and robbed him of it. But
it did them little good, for the King hearing of it sent and robbed the Robbers.

These men thus seized were carried up before the King. Brought up to the King^
Of whom he demanded, whether the English had Wars with the Hollanders. They
answered, No. Or, if the English could beat them. They answered, They could and
had done it lately. Then he gave order to give them all some Cloths, and to Mr.
William Vassal, being the chief of them, a double Portion. And out of them made
choice of two Lads; whom afterward he sent and took into his Court. Their
honors and their ends we shall see by and by. They were all placed in the City
of Cande, and each of them had a new Mat given them to sleep on, and their Diet
was Victuals dressed and brought them twice a day from the King's own Palace.
They had Cloths also distributed to them another time.

So that these men had the advantage of us. For we neither had Mats nor Cloths,
nor had the honor of being ever brought into the King's Presence.

This civil Reception upon their first coming up into the City, They hoped to
obtain Liberty, but were mistaken.
put these Persia Merchantmen in hope, that the King would give them their
Liberty. There was at that time an old Portugueze Father, Padre Vergonse by
name, living in the City. With him they discoursed concerning the probability
of their Liberty, and that the favors the King had shown them seemed to be
good signs of it: but he told them the plain truth, that it was not customary
there to release white Men. For saying which, they railed at him, calling him
Popish Dog, and Iesuitical Rogue, supposing he spoke as he wished it might be.
But afterward to their grief they found it to be true as he told them.

Their entertainment was excellently good according to the poor condition of
the Country, A ridiculous action of these Men.
but they thought it otherwise, very mean and not according to the King's
order. Therefore that the King might be informed how they were abused, each man
took the Limb of an Hen in his hand, and marched rank and file in order through
the Streets with it in their hands to the Court, as a sign to the great Men,
whereby they might see, how illy they were served; thinking hereby the King
might come to hear of their misusage, and so they might have order to be fed
better afterward. But this proved Sport to the Noblemen who well knew the fare
of the Country, laughing at their ignorance, to complain where they had so
little cause. And indeed afterward they themselves laughed at this action of
theirs, and were half ashamed of it, when they came to a better understanding
of the Nature of the Countries Diet.

Yet notwithstanding being not used to such short Commons of Flesh, They had ^
mind to Beef, and how they got it.
tho they had Rice in abundance, and having no Money to buy more, they had a
desire to kill some Cows, that they might eat their Bellies full of Beef, but
made it somewhat a point of Conscience, whether it might be lawful or not, to
take them without leave. Upon which they apply themselves to the old Father
abovesaid, desiring him to solve this Case of Conscience. Who was very ready to
give them a Dispensation. And told them, That forasmuch as the Chingulayes were
their Enemies and had taken their Bodies, it was very lawful for them to
satisfy their Bodies with their Goods. And the better to animate them in this
design, bid them bring him a piece, that he might partake with them. So being
encouraged by the old Father, they wen ton boldly in their intended Business.

A Passage of the Courage of the Men.
Now if you would have an account of the Metal and Manfulness of these men, as
you have already had a taste of ours, take this passage. The Jack Fruit the
Kings Officers often gather wheresoever it grows, and give to the Kings
Elephants, and they may gather it in any man's grounds without the Owners leave,
being for the Kings use. Now these English men were appointed to dwell in an
house, that formerly belonged unto a Noble man, whom the King had cut off, and
seized upon it. In the ground belonging to this House stood a Jack Tree full of
Fruit. Some of the Kings men came thither to gather some of them to feed the
Elephants. But although the English had free liberty to gather what they could eat
or desire, yet they would permit none but themselves to meddle with them, but
took the Officers by the shoulders and turned them out of the Garden, although
there were more a great many than they could tell what to do with. The Great
men were so Civil, that notwithstanding this Affront, they laid no Punishment
upon them. But the Event of this was, that a few days after they were removed
from this house to another, where was a Garden but no Trees in it. And because
they would not allow the King a few, they lost all themselves.

Two of his Company taken into Court.
I mentioned before two Lads of this Company, whom the King chose out for his
own service, their Names were Hugh Smart and Henry Man. These being taken into
his Court, obtained great Favor and Honor from him, as to be always in his
presence, and very often he would kindly and familiarly talk with them
concerning their Country, what it afforded; and of their King and his Strength
for War. Thus they lived in his Favor for some time.

The one out of Favor, his ^^d.
Till at length Hugh Smart, having a desire to hear news concerning England,
privately got to the Speech of a Dutch Ambassador. Of which the King had
notice, but would not believe it, supposing the information was given him out
of Envy to his Favorite, but commanded privately to watch him, and if he went
again, to catch him there. Which he not being aware of, went again, and was
catched. At which the King was very angry. For he allows none to come to the
speech of Ambassodours, much less one that served in his presence, and heard
and saw all that passed in Court. But yet the King dealt very favorably with
him. For had it been a Chingulay, there is nothing more sure, than that he
should have dyed for it. But this English man's Punishment was only to be sent
away and kept a Prisoner in the Mountains without Chains, and ordered him to be
well used there. Where indeed he lived better content than in the Kings Palace.
He took a Wife here and had one Son by her, and afterward dyed by a mischance,
which was thus. As he was gathering a Jack from the Tree by a Crock, it fell
down upon his side, and bruised him so that it killed him.

The other out of Favor, and lamentable Death.
Henry Man the other, yet remained in Favor, and was promoted to be Chief over
all the Kings Servants that attended on him in his Palace. It happened one Day,
that he broke one of the Kings China Dishes. Which made him so sore afraid,
that he fled for Sanctuary into a Vehar, a Temple where the Chief Priests
always dwell, and hold their consultations. This did not a little displease the
King; this Act of his supposing him to be of Opinion that those Priests were
able to secure him against the Kings displeasure. However he showing Reverence
to their Order would not violently fetch him from thence; b^t sent a kind
Message to the English man, bidding him not to be afraid for so small a matter
as a Dish (And it is probable had he not added this fault he might have escaped
without Punishment) and that he should come and Act in his place as formerly.
At which Message he came forth, and immediately, as the King had given order,
they took hold of him and bound his Arms above the Elbows behind, which is
their fashion of binding men. In which manner he lay all that Night, being
bound so hard that his Arms swelled, and the Ropes cut throw the Flesh into the
Bones. The next day the King Commanded a Noble^man to loose the Ropes off his
Arms, and put Chains on his Legs, and keep him in his House, and there feed him
and cure him.

Thus he lay some Six Months, and was cured, but had no Strength in his Arms,
and then was taken into his Office again, and had as much Favor from the King
as before. Who seemed much to lament him for his folly, thus to procure his own
ruin.

Not long after he again offended the King. Which as it is reported was thus. A
Portugueze had been sent for to the City to be employed in the Kings Service;
to which Service he had no Stomach at all, and was greatly afraid of, as he
justly might be. For the avoiding therefore of it he sends a Letter to this
English Courtier, whein he entreated him to use his interest to excuse him to
the King. The English man could not read the Letter being writ in the
Portugueze Tongue, but gave it to another to read. Which when he knew the
contents of thought it not safe for him to meddle in that business, and so
concealed the Letter. The person to whom the English man had given it to read,
some time after informed the King thereof. Whereupon both the Portugueze that
sent the Letter, and the English man to whom it was sent, and the Third Person
that read it, because he informed no sooner, were all three at one time and in
one place torn in pieces by Elephants.

After this Execution the King supposing that we might be either discontented
in our selves, The King sends special order concerning their good usage.
or discountenanced by the People of the Land, sent special order to all parts
where we dwelt, that we should be of good cheer, and not be discouraged,
neither abused by the Natives.

Thus jealous is the King of Letters, and allows none to come or go. We have
seen how dear it cost poor Henry Man. Mr. William Vassal, another of the
Persia-Merchant men, was therefore more wary of some Letters he had, and came
off better.

This man had received several Letters, Mr. Vassals prudence upon the receipt of
Letters.
and it was known abroad that he had. Which he fearing lest the King should
hear of, thought it most convenient and safe to go to the Court and present
them himself; that so he might plead in his own Defense to the King. Which he
did. He acknowledged to him that he had received Letters, and that they came to
his hands a pretty while ago: but withal pretended excuses and reasons to
clear himself. As first, that when he received them, he knew not that it was
against the Law and manner of the Country; and when he did know, he took
Council of a Portugueze Priest, (who was now dead) being, old and as he thought
well experienced in the Country. But he advised him to defer a while the
carrying them unto the King until a more convenient season. After this he did
attempt, he said, to bring them unto the King, but could not be permitted to
have entrance through the Watches: so that until now, he could not have
opportunity to present them.

The King bids him read his Letters.
The King at the hearing hereof, seemed not to be displeased in the least, but
bid him read them. Which he did in the English Language, as they were writ; and
the King sat very attentive as if he had understood every word. After they were
read, the King gave Vassal a Letter he had intercepted, sent to us from Sir
Edward Winter, then Agent at Fort St. George; and asked the News and Contents
thereof. Which Mr, Vassal informed him at large of. It was concerning the
Victory we had gained over the Dutch when Obdam Admiral of Holland was slain,
and concerning the number of our Ships in that Fight, being there specified to
be an Hundred and Fifty Sail. The King inquired much after the number of Guns
and Men they carried. The number of Men he computed to be one Ship with another
about Three Hundred per Ship. At that rate, the King demanded of him, how many
that was in all. Which Mr. Vassal went about to cast up in the Sand with his
finger. But before he had made his Figures, the King had done it by Head, and
bid him desist, saying it was 45000.

The King pleased to hear of England Victory over Holland.
This News of the Hollanders overthrow, and the English Victory much delighted
the King: and he inquired into it very particularly. Then the King pretended he
would send a Letter to the English Nation, and bad Mr. Vassal inform him of a
Trusty Bearer. Which he was very forward to do, and named one of the best which
he had made trial of. One of the Great men there present, objected against him,
saying, he was insufficient, and asked him, if he knew no other. At which
Vassal suspected their Design, which was to learn who had brought those Letters
to him; and so framed his answer accordingly, which was that he knew no other.

Private discourse between the King and Vassal.
There was much other discourse passed between the King and him at this time in
the Portugueze Tongue. Which what it was I could never get out of him, the King
having commanded him to keep it secret. And he says, he has sworn to himself
not to divulge it, till he is out of the Kings hands. At parting, the King told
him, for Secrecy he would send him home privately, or otherwise he would have
dismissed him with Drums and Honor. But after this the King never sent for him
again. And the man, that he named as fit and able to carry the Kings Letter,
was sent away Prisoner to be kept in Chains in the Country. It is supposed,
that they concluded him to have been the man that brought Vassal his Letters.
And thus much of the Captivity and Condition of the Persia-Merchant men.

CHAP. V. Concerning the means that were used for our Deliverance. And what
happened to us in the Rebellion. And how we were settled afterward.
ALl of us in this manner remained until the year MDCLXIV. Means made to the
King for our Liberty.
At which time arrived a Letter on our behalf to the King from the Right
Worshipful Sir Edward Winter, Governor of Fort St. George, and Agent there.
The Dutch Ambassador also at that time by a Commission from the Governor of
Columba treated with the King for us. With Sir Edward's Message the King was
much pleased, and with the Dutch's mediation so prevailed with, that he
promised he would send us away.

Upon this, he commanded us all to be brought to the City. Upon which they all
met at the City.
Whither when we came, we were very joyful not only upon the hopes of our
Liberty, but also upon the sight of one another. For several of us had not seen
the others since we were first parted. Here also we met with the Persia
Merchant men, whom until this time we had not seen. So that we were nine and
twenty English in all.

Some few days after our Arrival at the City, we were all called to the Court.
Word sent them from the Court, that they had their Liberty.
At which time standing all of us in one of the Palace Court-yards, the Nobles
by command from the King came forth and told us, that it was his Majesty's
Pleasure to grant unto us our Liberty, and to send us home to our Country, and
that we should not any more look upon our selves as Prisoners or detained men.
At which we bowed our heads and thanked his Majesty. They told us moreover,
that the King was intended to send us either with the Dutch Ambassador, or by
the Boat which Sir Edward Winter had sent; and that it was his Majesty's good
will to grant us our choice. We humbly referred it to his Majesty's pleasure.
They answered, his Majesty could and would do his pleasure, but his will was to
know our minds. After a short consultation we answered, since it was his
Majesty's pleasure to grant us our choice, with many Thanks and Obeisance we
chose to go with the Dutch Ambassador, fearing the Boats insufficiency, she
having, as we were well sensible, laid there a great while: and if we had
chosen the Boat, the danger of going that way might have served them for a Put
off to us, and a Plea to detain us still, out of care of us. And again, had we
refused the Ambassadors kindness at this time, for the future, if these things
succeeded not with us now, we could never have expected any more aid or
friendship from that Nation.

In the next place they told us, All in general refuse the King's service^
It was the Kings pleasure to let us understand, that all those that were
willing to stay and serve his Majesty, should have very great rewards, as
Towns, Moneys, Slaves and places of Honor conferred upon them. Which all in
general refused.

Then we were bidden to absent, while they returned our answers to the King. By
and by there came Order to call us in one at a time, where the former promises
were repeated to every one of us of great Favors, Honors and Rewards from the
King to those that were willing to stay with him. And after each one had given
his answer, he was sent into a corner in the Court, and then another called,
and so all round one after another, they inquiring particularly concerning each
man's trade and office; Handycrafts-men and Trumpetters being most desired by
the King. We being thus particularly examined again, there was not one of us
was tempted by the Kings rewards, but all in general refused the Kings
honorable employment, choosing rather to to go our Native Country. By which
we purchased the Kings Displeasure.

Commanded still to wait at the Palace. During which a Rebellion breaks out.
After this they told us, we must wait at the Palace gate daily, it being the
Kings pleasure, that we should make our personal appea^ance before him. In this
manner we waited many days. At length happened a thing a thing which he least
suspected, viz. a general Rebellion of his People against him. Who assaulted
his Palace in the Night: but their hearts failed them, daring not to enter into
the Apartment where his Person was. For if they had had courage enough, they
might have taken him there. For he stayed in his Palace until the Morning; and
then fled into the Mountains, and escaped their hands, but more through their
cowardliness than his valor. This Rebellion I have related at large in the
second Part, whither he that desires to know more of it may have recourse. Only
I shall mention here a few things concerning our selves, who were gotten into
the midst of these Broils and Combustions, being all of us now waiting upon the
King in the City.

It was a great and mavelous mercy of Almighty God to bring us safe through
these dangers, They are in the midst of it, and in great danger.
for it so happened all along that we were in the very midst. Before they gave
the Assault on the Kings Palace, they were consulting to lay hands on us,
fearing lest we might be prejudicial to their Business, in joining to the help
and assistance of the King against them. For tho we were but few in comparison,
yet the Name of White men was somewhat dreadful to them. Whereupon at first
their Counsels were to cut us off. But others among them advised that it would
be better to let us alone; For that we being ignorant of their Designs, as
indeed we were, and at quiet in our several Lodgings, could not be provided to
hurt or endanger them. But otherwise if they should lay hands on us, it would
certainly come to the Kings Ears, and Allarm him, and then all would be
frustrated and overthrown. This some of their own Party have related to us
since. These Cousels were not given out of any secret good will ny of them bore
to us (as I believe) but proceeded from the over ruling hand of God, who put
those things into their hearts for our safety and preservation. The People of
the City whence the King fled, ran away also leaving their Houses and Goods
behind them. Where we found good Prey and Plunder; being permitted to Ransack
the Houses of all such as were fled away with the King.

The Rebels take the English with them.
The Rebels having driven away the King, and marching to the City of Cande to
the Prince, carried us along with them; the Chief of their Party telling us
that we should now be of good cheer; for what they done upon very good
advisement they had done, the Kings ill Government having given an occasion to
it. Who went about to destroy both them and their Country; and particularly
insisted upon such things as might be most plausible to Strangers, such as,
keeping Ambassadors, discouraging Trade, detaining of Forainers that come upon
his Land, besides his cruelties toward themselves that were his natural
People. All which they told us, They had been informed was contrary to the
Government ^f other Countries; and now so soon as their business was settled,
they assured us, They would detain none that were minded to go to their own
Countries.

Being now at Cande, on Christmas Day of all the days in the year, They design
to engage the English with them.
they sent, to call us to the Court, and gave us some Money and Cloths first,
to make us the more willing to take Arms, which they intended then to deliver
unto us, and to go with them upon a Design to ^all upon the old King in the
place whither he was fled. But in the very interim of time, God being merciful
unto us, the Prince with his Aunt fled. Which so amazed and discouraged them,
that the Money and Cloths which they were distributing to us and other
Strangers to gain us over to them, they scattered about the Court and fled
themselves. And now followed nothing but cutting one another Throats to make
themselves appear the more Loyal Subjects, and make amends for their former
Rebellion.

We for our parts little thinking in what danger we were, They resolve neither
to meddle or make.
fell in to scramble among the rest to get what we could of the Moneys that
were strewed about, being then in great necessity and want. For the allowance
which formerly we had was in this Disturbance lost, and so we remained without
it for some three Months, the want of which, this Money did help to supply.
Having gotten what we could at the Court, we made way to get out of the hurly
burly to our Lodgings; intending as we were Strangers and Prisoners, neither to
meddle nor make on the one side or the other, being well satisfied, if God
would but permit us quietly to sit, and eat such a Christmas Dinner together,
as he had prepared for us.

For our parts we had no other dealings with the Rebels, The day being turned,
they fear the King.
than to desire them to permit us to go to our Native Country, which Liberty
they promised we should not want long. But being sent for by them to the Court,
we durst not but go, and they giving us such things as we wanted, we could not
refuse to take them. But the day being turned put us into great fear, doubting
how the King would take it at our hands, from whom we knew this could not be
hid.

Into our Houses we got safely. But he justifies them.
But no sooner were we there, but immediately we were called again by a great
Man, who had drawn out his Men, and stood in the Field. This Man we thought had
been one of the Rebels, who to secure himself upon this change, had intended to
run away down to Columbo to the Dutch. Which made us repair to him the more
cheerfully, leaving our Meat a roasting on the Spit. But it proved otherwise.
For no sooner had he gotten us unto him, but he Proclaimed himself for the old
King, and forthwith he and his Company taking us with him marched away to Fight
or seize the Rebels, but meeting none went into the City, and there dismissed
us, saying, He would acquaint the King, how willing and ready we were to fight
for him, if need had required; although, God knows, it was the least of our
thoughts and intents, yet God brought it to pass for our good. For when the
King was informed of what we had received of the Rebels, this piece of good
Service that we had done, or rather supposed to have done, was also told unto
him. At the hearing of which himself justified us to be innocent; saying, Since
my absence, who was there that would give them Victuals? And, It was mere want
that made them to take what they did. Thus the words of the King's own mouth
acquitted us. And when the Sword devoured on every side, yet by the Providence
of God not one hair of our heads perished.

They are driven to beg in the Highways.
The Tumults being appeased, and the Rebellion vanished, the King was settled in
his Throne again. And all this happened in five days time. We were now greatly
necessitated for food, and wanted some fresh Orders from the King's mouth for
our future subsistence. So that having no other remedy, we were fain to go and
lay in the High way that leads to the City a begging; for the People would not
let us go any nearer toward the King, as we would have done. There therefore
we lay, that the King might come to the knowledge of us, and give Command for
our allowance again. By which means we obtained our purpose. For having laid
there some two Months, the King was pleased to appoint our Quarters in the
Country as formerly, not mentioning a word of sending us away, as he had made
us believe before the Rebellion.

Sent into new quarters there, and their Pensions settled again.
Now we were all sent away indeed, but not into our own Country, but into new
Quarters. Which being God would have to be no better, we were glad it was so
well, being sore a weary of laying in this manner. For for some three Months
time we had no manner of allowance. We were all now placed one in a Town as
formerly, together with the Persia Merchant men also, who hitherto had lived in
the City of Cande, and had their Provisions brought them out of the King's
Palace ready dressed. These were now sent away with us into the Country. And
as strict a charge was given for our good entertainment as before.

Fall to Trading, and have more freedom.
We were thus dispersed about the Towns here one and there another, for the more
convenient receiving our allowance, and for the greater ease of the People. And
now we were far better to pass than heretofore, having the Language, and being
acquainted with the Manners and Customs of the People, and had the same
proportion of Victuals, and the like respect as formerly. And now they fall
into employments as they please, either Husbandry or Merchandising, or knitting
Caps, being altogether free to do what they will themselves, and to go where
they will, excepting running away: and for that end, we are not permitted to go
down to the Sea, but we may travel all about the Country, and no man regards
us. For tho the People some of the first years of our Captivity, would scarcely
let us go any whither, and had an eye upon us afterward, yet in process of
time all their Suspicions of our going away wore off; especially when several
of the English had built them Houses, and others had taken them Wives, by whom
they had Children, to the number of eighteen living when I came away.

Having said all this in general of the English People there, I will now
continue a further account of my self.

CHAP. VI. A Continuation of the Author's particular Condition after the
Rebellion. Purchases a piece of Land.
MY hap was to be quartered in a Country called Handapondown, The Author at
his new quarters build^ him another House.
lying to the Westward of the City of Cande. Which place liked me very well,
being much nearer to the Sea than where I dwelt before, which gave me some
probable hopes, that in time I might chance to make an escape. But in the mean
time to free my self from the Suspicion of the People, who watched me by Night,
and by Day, had an eye to all my actions, I went to work with the help of some
of my Neighbors to Build me another House upon the Bank of a River, and
entrenched it round with a Ditch, and Planted an Hedge: and so began to settle
my self; and followed my business in Knitting and going about the Countries a
Trading; seeming to be very well contented in this Condition.

Lying so long at the City without allowance, The People counsel him to Marry.
I had spent all to some Seven shillings, which served me for a stock to set up
again in these new Quarters. And by the Blessing of my most gracious God, which
never sailed me in all my Unde^takings, I soon came to be well furnished with
what that Country afforded: insomuch that my Neighbors and Townsmen no more
suspected my running away; but earnestly advised me to marry, saying, It would
be an ease and help to me, knowing that I then dressed my Victuals my self:
having turned my Boy to seek his Fortune when we were at the City: They urged
also, That it was not convenient for a young man as I was to live so solitarily
alone in a house: and if it should so come to pass that the King should send me
hereafter to my Country, their manner of Marriage, they said, was not like
ours, and I might without any Offense discharge my Wife, and go away.

I seemed not altogether to s^ight their counsel, Which he seemed to listen to.
that they might the less suspect I had any thoughts of mine own Country, but
told them, That as yet I was not sufficiently stocked, and also, That I would
look for one that I could love: tho in my heart I never purposed any such
matter; but on the contrary, did heartily abhor all thoughts tending that way.

In this place I lived two years; Here he lived two years.
and all that time could not get one likely occasion of running for it. For I
thought it better to forbear running too great a hazard by being overhasty to
escape, than to deprive my self of all hopes for the future, when time and
experience would be a great help to me.

In the year MDCLXVI. the Hollanders came up and built a Fort just below me, A
Fort built near him, but afterward taken by the King.
there being but a ridge of Mountains between them and me. But tho so near, I
could not come to them, a Watch being kept at every passage. The King sent down
against them two great Commanders with their Armies, but being not strong
enough to expel them, they lay in these Watches to stop them from coming up
higher. The name of this Fort was called Arrandery. Which although they could not
prevent the Dutch from building at that time. Yet some years after when they
were not aware, they fell upon it and took it, and brought all the People of it
up to Cande, where those that remained alive of them were, when I came from
thence.

He and three more removed thence.
In this Country of Hotteracourly, where the Dutch had built this Fort, were
four English men placed, whereof I was one. All whom the King immediately upon
the News of the Dutche's Invasion, sent order to bring up out of the danger of
the War into Cande Vda, fearing that which we were indeed intended to do, viz.
to run away.

This Invasion happening so unexpectedly and our remove so sudden, I was forced
to leave behind me that little Estate which God had given me, lying scattered
abroad in Betel-nuts, the great Commodity of that Country, which I was then
parting from: and much ado I had to get my Cloths brought along with me, the
Enemies, as they called them, but my Friends being so near. And thus was I
carried out of this Country as poor as I came into it, leaving all the fruits
of my Labor and Industry behind me. Which called to my remembrance the words
of Job. Naked came I into this world, and naked shall I return: God gave and
God has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Settled in a dismal place.
We all four were brought up together into a Town on the top of a Mountain
called Laggendenny. Where I and my dear Friend and fellow Prisoner, and fellow
Bachelor Mr. John Loveland lived together in one House. For by this time not
many of our People were as we, that is, single men; but seeing so little hopes,
despaired of their Liberty, and had taken Wives or Bedfellows.

At our first coming into this Town, we were very much dismayed, it being one
of the most dismal places that I have seen upon that Land. It stands alone upon
the top of a Mountain, and no other Town near it, and not above four or five
Houses in it. And oftentimes into this Town did the King use to send such
Malefactors as he was minded suddenly to cut off. Upon these accounts our being
brought to this place could not but scare us, and the more, because it was the
King's special Order and Command to place us in this very Town.

A com^ortable Message from the King concerning us.
But this our trouble and dejection (thanks be to God) lasted but a day. For the
King seemed to apprehend into what a fit of Fear and Sorrow this our Remove
would cast us, and to be sensible, how sadly we must needs take it to change a
sweet and pleasant Country, such as Handapondown and the Country adjacent
was, for this most sad and dismal Mountain. And therefore the next day came a
comfortable Message from the King's own mouth, sent by no less Man than he, who
had the chief Power and Command over those People who were appointed to give us
our Victuals, where we were. This Messag^, which as he said himself, he was
ordered by the King to deliver to the People in our hearing, was this, That
they should not think that we were Malefactors, that is, such who having
incurred the King's displeasure were sent to be kept Prisoners there, but men
whom his Majesty did highly esteem, and meant to promote to great Honor in his
Service, and that they should respect us as such, and entertain us accordingly.
And if their ability would not reach thereunto, it was the King's Order, he
said, to bid them sell their Cattle and Goods, and when that was done their
Wives and Children, rather than we should want of our due allowance: which he
ordered, should be as formerly we used to have: and if we had not Houses
thatched, and sufficient for us to dwell in, he said, We should change, and
take theirs.

This kind Order from the King coming so suddenly, Placed there to punish the
People for ^ Crime.
did not a little comfort and encourage us. For then we did perceive the King's
purpose and intent in placing us in those remote Parts, was not to punish us,
but them: that we might be his Instruments to Plague and take revenge of that
People; who it seems had Plundered the King's Palace in the time of the late
Rebellion, when he left it and fled; for this Town lies near unto the same: and
their Office lying about the Court they had the fairer opportunity of
Plundering it. For the Service they are to perform to the King, is to carry his
Pallenkine when he pleases to ride therein, and also to bring Milk every
Morning to the Court, being Keepers of the King's Cattle.

In this Town we remained some three years; by which time we were grown quite
weary of the place, Weary of this place.
and the place and People also grown weary of us, who were but troublesome
Guests to them; for having such great Authority given us over them, we would
not lose it; and being four of us in call one of another, we would not permit
or suffer them to domineer^ over us. Being thus tired with one another
Company, and the King's Order being of an old Date, we used all means we could
to clear our selves of one another: often repairing unto the Court to seek to
obtain a License that we might be removed and placed any where else. But there
was none that durst grant it, because it was the King's peculiar Command, and
special Appointment that we must abide in that very Town.

During the time of our stay here, we had our Victuals brought us in good order
and due season: the Inhabitants having such a charge given them by their
Governor and he from the King, durst not do otherwise. So that we had but
little to do, only to dress and eat, and sit down to knit.

I had used the utmost of my skill and endeavor to get a License to go down to
my former Quarters, By a piece of Craft he gets down to his old Quarters.
all things being now pretty well settled, hoping that I might recover some of
my old Debts: but by no means could I obtain it. The denial of so reasonable a
desire, put me upon taking leave. I was well acquainted with the way, but yet I
hired a man to go with me, without which I could not get through the Watches. For
although I was the Master and he the Man, yet when we came into the Watches, he
was the Keeper and I the Prisoner. And by this means we passed without being
suspected.

Being come into my old Quarters, by pretending that this man was sent down
from the Magistrate to see that my Debts and Demands might be duly paid and
discharged, I chanced to recover some of them, and the rest gave over for lost;
for I never more looked after them. And so I began the world anew, Began the
world anew the third time.
and by the Blessing of God was again pretty well recruited before I left this
Town.

In the time of my residence here, I chanced to hear of a small piece of Land
that was to be sold. About which I made very diligent inquiry. For although I was
sore a weary of living in this Town, yet I could not get out of it, not having
other new Quarters appointed me, unless I could provide a place for my self to
remove to: which now God had put into my hand. As for the King's Command I
dreaded it not much, having found by observation, that the King's Orders wea^
away by time, and the neglect of them comes at last to be unregarded. However I
was resolved to put it to a hazard, come what will.

Is encouraged to buy a piece of Land.
Although I had been now some seven or eight years in this Land, and by this time
came to know pretty well the Customs and Constitutions of the Nation, yet I
would not trust my own knowledge, but to prevent the worst, I went to the
Governor of that same Country where the Land lay, to desire his advice,
whether or no I might lawfully buy that small piece of Land. He inquired, Whose
and what Land it was, I informed him, That it had been formerly dedicated to a
Priest, and he at his death had left it to his Grandson: who for want was
forced to sell it. Understanding this, the Governor approved of the business,
and encouraged me to buy it: saying, That such kind of Lands only were lawful
here to be bought and sold; and that this was not in the least litigious.

The Situation and condition of it.
Having gotten both his consent and advice, I went on cheerfully with my
purchase. The place also liked me wondrous well; it being a point of Land,
standing into a Corn Field, so that Corn Fields were on three sides of it, and
just before my Door a little Corn ground belonging thereto, and very well
watered. In the Ground besides eight Coker-nut Trees, there were all sorts of
Fruit Trees the Country afforded. But it had been so long desolate, that it
was all overgrown with Bushes, and no sign of a House therein.

Buys it.
The price of this Land was five and twenty Larees, that is five Dollars, a
great Sum of Money in the account of this Country; yet thanks be to God, who
had so far enabled me after my late and great loss, that I was strong enough to
lay this down. The terms of Purchase being concluded on between us, a Writing
was made upon a leaf after that Country manner, witnessed by seven or eight
Men of the best Quality in the Town: which was delivered to me, and I paid the
Money, and then took Possession of the Land. It lies some ten Miles to the
Southward of the City of Cande in the County of Oudaneur, in the Town of
Elledat.

Builds an House on it.
Now I went about Building an House upon my Land, and was assisted by three of
my Countrymen that dwelt near by, Roger Gold, Ralph Knight, and Stephen
Rutland, and in short time we finished it. The Country People were all well
pleased to see us thus busy our selves about buying of Land and Building of
Houses, thinking it would ty our Minds the faster to their Country, and make
us think the less upon our own.

Leaves Laggendenny.
Tho I had built my new House, yet durst I not yet leave my old Quarters in
Laggendenny, but wait until a more convenient time fell out for that purpose. I
went away therefore to my old home, and left my aforesaid three English
Neighbors to inhabit in it in my absence. Not long after I found a fit season
to be gone to my Estate at Elledat. And upon my going, the rest left the Town
also, and went and dwelt elsewhere, each one where he best liked. But by this
means we all lost a Privilege which we had before: which was that our Victuals
were brought unto us, and now we were forced to go and fetch them our selves;
the People alleging (true enough) that they were not bound to carry our
Provisions about the Country after us.

Being settled in my new House, I began to plant my ground full of all sorts of
Fruit Trees; and by the Blessing of God all grew and prospered, and yielded me
great Plenty, and good increase, Settled at his new purchase, with three more
living with him.
sufficient both for me, and for those that dwelt with me. For the three
English men I left at my House when I departed back to Laggendenny, still lived
with me. We were all single men; and we agreed very well together, and were
helpful to one another. And for their help and assistance of me, I freely
granted them Liberty to use and enjoy whatsoever the ground afforded, as much
as my self. And with a joint consent it was concluded amongst us, That only
single Men and Batchellors should dwell there, and such as would not be
conformable to this present agreement, should depart and absent himself from
our Society, and also forfeit his right and claim to the forementioned
Privilege, that is, to be cut off from all benefit of whatsoever the Trees and
Ground afforded.

I thought fit to make such a Covenant, to exclude women from coming in among
us, to prevent all strife and dissension, and to make all possible Provision
for the keeping up love and quietness among our selves.

In this manner we four lived together some two years very lovingly and
contentedly, not an ill word passing between us. We used to take turns in
keeping at home, while the rest went forth about their Business. For our house
stood alone and no Neighbor near it. Therefore we always left one within. The
rest of the English men lived round about us, some four or five miles distant,
some more. So that we were, as it were, within reach one of another; which made
us like our present Situation the more.

Thus we lived upon the Mountains, being round about us beset with watches,
most of our People being now married: Their freedom and Trade.
so that now all talk and suspicion of our running away was laid aside. Neither
indeed was it scarce possible. The effect of which was, that now we could walk
from one to the other, or where we would upon the Mountains, no man molesting
or disturbing us in the least. So that we began to go about a Pedling, and
Trading in the Country farther toward the Northward, carrying our Caps about
to sell.

By this time two of our Company seeing but little hopes of Liberty, His Family
reduced to two.
thought it too hard a task thus to lead a single life, and married. Which when
they had done according to the former agreement departed from us. So that our
Company was now reduced to two, viz. my Self and Stephen Rutland; whose
inclination and resolution was as steadfast as mine against Marriage. And we
parted not to the last, but came away together.

CHAP. VII. A return to the rest of the English, with some further accounts of
them. And some further discourse of the Authors course of life.
Confer together about the lawfulness of Marrying with the Native Women.
LEt us now make a Visit to the rest of our Countrymen, and see how they do.
They reckoning themselves in for their Lives, in order to their future
settlement, were generally disposed to Marry. Concerning which we have had many
and sundry disputes among our selves; as particularly concerning the lawfulness
of matching with Heathens and Idolaters, and whether the Chingulays Marriages
were any better than living in Whoredom: there being no Christian Priests to
join them together, and it being allowed by their Laws to change their Wives
and take others as often as they pleased. But these ca^es we solved for our own
advantage after this manner, That we were but Flesh and Blood, and that it is
said, It is better to Marry than to burn, and that as far as we could see, we
were cut off from all Marriages any where else, even for our Life time, and
therefore that we must marry with these or with none at all. And when the
People in Scripture were forbidden to take Wives of Strangers, it was then when
they might intermarry with their own People, and so no necessity lay upon them.
And that when they could not, there are examples in the Old Testament upon
Record, that they took Wives of the Daughters of the Lands, wherein they dwelt.
These reasons being urged, there was none among us, that could object ought
against them, especially if those that were minded to marry Women here, did
take them for their Wives during their lives, as some of them say, they do: and
most of the Women they marry are such as do profess themselves to be Christians.

He resolves upon a single life.
As for mine own part, however lawful these Marriages might be, yet I judged it
far more convenient for me to abstain, and that it more redounded to my good,
having always a reviving hope in me, that my God had not forsaken me, but
according to his gracious promise to the Jews in the xxx Chapter of
Deuteronomy, and the beginning, would turn my Captivity and bring me into the
Land of my Fathers. These and such like meditations, together with my Prayers
to God, kept me from that unequal Yoke of Unbeleivers, which several of my
Country men and fellow Prisoners put themselves under.

What employments they follow.
By this time our People having plied their Business hard, had almost knit
themselves out of work; and now Caps were become a very dead Commodity, which
was the chief stay they had heretofore to trust to. So that now most of them
betook themselves to other employments; some to Husbandry, Plowing Ground, and
sowing Rice, and keeping Cattle, others stilled Rack to sell, others went about
the Country a Trading. For that which one part of the Land affords is a good
Commodity to carry to another that wants it. And thus with the help of a little
allowance, they make a shift to to subsist. Most of their Wives spin Cotton
yarn, which is a great help to them for clothing, and at spare times also knit.

The respect and credit they live in.
After this manner by the blessing of God our Nation has lived and still does,
in as good fashion as any other People or Nation whatsoever, that are Strangers
here, or as any of the Natives themselves, only the Grandees and Courtiers
excepted. This I speak to the Praise and Glory of our God; who loves the
Stranger in giving him Food and Raiment; and that has been pleased to give us
Favor and a good Repute in the sight of our Enemies. We cannot complain for
want of justice in any wrongs we have sustained by the People; or that our
cause has been discountenanced; but rather we have been favored above the
Natives themselves.

One of our men happened to be beaten by his Neighbor. A Chingulay punished
for beating an English man.
At which we were all very much concerned, taking it as a reproach to our
Nation, and fearing it might embolden others to do the like by the rest of us.
Therefore with joint consent we all concluded to go to the Court to complain,
and to desire satisfaction from the Adigar. Which we did. Upon this the man who
had beat the English man was summoned in to appear before him. Who seeing so
many of us there, and fearing the cause will go very hard with him, to make the
Judge his friend, gave him a bribe. He having received it would have shifted off
the Punishment of the Malefactor. But we day after day followed him from house
to Court, and from place to place, wherever he went, demanding Justice and
Satisfaction for the wrong we received, showing the black and blew blows upon
the English man's shoulders to all the rest of the Noble men at Court. He
fearing therefore lest the King might be made acquainted herewith was forced
tho much against his will to clap the Chingulay in Chains. In which condition
after he got him, he released him not till besides the former fee he had given
him another.

Lately was Richard Varnham taken into the Kings service, An English man
preferred at Cour^.
and held as Honorable an employment as ever any Christian had in my time,
being Commander of Nine Hundred and Seventy Soldiers, and ^et over all the
great Guns, and besides this, several Towns were under him. A place of no less
Profit than Honor. The King gave him an excellent Silver Sword and Halberd,
the like to which the King never gave to any White man in my time. But he had
the good luck to die a natural Death. For had not that prevented, in all
probability he should have followed the two English men that served him, spoken
of before.

Some years since some of our Nation took up Arms under the King. The English
serve the King in hi^ Wa^^.
Which happened upon this occasion. The Hollanders had a small Fort in the
Kings Country, called Bibligom Fort. This the King minded to take and
demolish, sent his Army to beseige it. But being pretty strong; for there were
about Ninety Dutch men in it, besides a good number of Black Soldiers, and four
Guns on each point one, being in this condition it held out. Some of the great
men informed the King of several Dutch runnaways in his Land, that might be
trusted, not daring to turn again for fear of the Gallows, who might help to
reduce the Fort. And that also there were white men of other Nations that had
Wives and Children, from whom they would not run: and these might do him good
service. Unto this advice the King inclined.

Whereupon the King made a Declaration to invite the foreign Nations into his
Service against Bibligom Fort, that he would compel none, but such as were
willing of their own free accord, the King would take it kindly, and they
should be well rewarded. Now th^re entered into the Kings Service upon this
Expedition some of all Nations; both Portugueze, Dutch and English, about the
number o^ Thirty. To all that took Arms he gave to the value of Twenty
shillings in money, and three pieces of Callico for Clothes, and commanded them
to wear Breeches, Hats and Doublets, a great honor there. The King intended a
Dutchman, who had been an old Servant to him, to be Captain over them all. But
the Portugueze not caring to be under the Command of a Dutchman, desired a
Captain of their own Nation, which the King granted, studying to please them at
this time. But the English being but six, were too few to have a Captain over
them, and so were forced some to serve under the Dutch, and some under the
Portugueze Captain. There were no more of the English, because being left at
their liberty they thought it safest to dwell at home, and cared not much to
take Arms under a Heathen against Christians.

Who now live miserably.
They were all ready to go, their Arms and Ammunition ready with Guns prepared
to send down, but before they went, Tidings came that the Fort yielded at the
Kings Mercy. After this the Whites thought they had got an advantage of the
King in having these gifts for nothing, but the King did not intend to part
with them so; but kept them to watch at his Gate. And now they are reduced to
great Poverty and Necessity. For since the Kings first Gift they have never
received any Pay or Allowance; tho they have often made their Addresses to him
to supply their wants, signifying their forwardness to serve him faithfully. He
speaks them fair, and tells them he will consider them, but does not in the
least regard them. Many of them since, after three or four years service, have
been glad to get other Poor run away Dutch men to serve in their s^eads, giving
them as much money and cloths as they received of the King before; that so they
might get free to come home to their Wives and Children.

The Dutch Captain would afterward have forced the rest of the English to have
come under him, and called them Traitors because they would not, and threatened
them. But they scorned him, and bid him do his worst, but would never be
persuaded to be Soldiers under him, saying, that it was not so much his zeal to
the Kings service, as his own Pride to make himself greater by having more men
under him.

He returns to speak of him^el^ Plots and Consults about an Escape.
I will now turn to the Progress of my own Story. It was now about the year
MDCLXXII. I related before, that my family was reduced to two, my self and one
honest man more, we lived solitarily and contentedly being well settled in a
good House of my own. Now we fell to breeding up Goats: we began with two, but
by the blessing of God they soon came to a good many; and their Flesh served us
instead of Mutton. We kept Hens and Hogs also: And seeing no sudden likelihood
of Liberty, we went about to make all things handsome and convenient about us:
which might be serviceable to us, while we lived there, and might farther our
Liberty whenever we should see an occasion to attempt it: which it did, in
taking away all suspicion from the People concerning us: who not having Wives
as the others had, they might well think, lay the readier to take any advantage
to make an escape. Which indeed we two did Plot and Consult about, between our
selves with all imaginable Privacy, long before we we go away: and therefore we
labored by all means to hide our designs; and to free them from so much as
suspicion.

We had now brought our House and Ground to such a perfection that few Noble
men's Seats in the Land did excel us. On each side was a great Thorn-Gate for
entrance, A description of his House.
which is the manner in that Country: the Gates of the City are of the same.
We built also another House in the Yard all open for Air, for our selves to sit
in, or any Neighbors that came to talk with us. For seldom should we be
alone, our Neighbors oftener frequenting our House than we desired; out of whom
to be sure we could pick no Profit. For their coming is always either to beg or
borrow. For although we were Strangers and Prisoners in their Land, yet they would
confess that Almighty God had dealt far more bountifully with us than with
them, in that we had a far greater plenty of all things than they.

I now began to set up a new Trade. He takes up a new Trade and Thrives on it.
For the Trade of Knitting was grown dead, and Husbandry I could not follow,
not having a Wife to help and assist me therein, a great part of Husbandry
properly belonging to the woman to manage. VVhereupon I perceived a Trade in
use among them, which was to lend out Corn. The benefit of which is fifty per
cent. per annum. This I saw to be the easiest and most profitable way of
Living, whereupon I took in hand to follow it: and what stock I had, I
converted into Corn or Rice in the Hu^k. And now as customers came for Corn, I
let them have it, to receive their next Harvest, when their own Corn was ripe,
the same quantity I lent them, and half as much more. But as the Profit is
great, so is the trouble of getting it in also. For he that uses this Trade
must watch when the Debtors Field is ripe, and claim his due in time, otherwise
other Creditors coming before will seize all upon the account of their Debts,
and leave no Corn at all for those that came later. For these that come thus a
borrowing, generally carry none of their Corn home when it is ripe, for their
Creditors ease them of that Labor by coming into their Fields and taking it,
and commonly they have not half enough to pay what they ow. So that they that
miss getting there Debts this year must stay till the next when it will be
double, two measures for one: but the Interest never runs up higher, tho the
Debt lie seven years unpaid. By means hereof I was put to a great deal of
trouble, and was forced to watch early and late to get my Debts, and many times
miss of them after all my Pains. Howbeit when my Stock did increase that I had
dealings with many, I mattered not if I lost in some places, the profit of the
rest was sufficient to bear that out.

And thus by the Blessing of God my little was increased to a great deal. For
he had blessed me so, that I was able to lend to my Enemies, and had no need to
borrow of them. So that I might use the words of Jacob, not out of Pride of my
self, but thankfulness to God, That he brought me hither with my Staff and
blessed me so here, that I became two Bands.

For some years together after I removed to my own House from Laggen denny, His
Allowance paid him out of the King's Storehouses.
the People from whence I came continued my allowance that I had when I lived
among them. But now in plain Terms they told me they could give it me no more,
and that I was better able to live without it than they to give it me. Which
tho I knew to be true, yet I thought not ^it to loose that Portion of
Allowance, which the King was pleased to allot me. Therefore I went to Court
and appealed to the Adigar to whom such matters did belong. Who upon
consideration of the Peoples poor condition, appointed me monthly to come to
him at the Kings Palace for a Ticket to receive my Allowance out of the King's
Storehouses.

Hereby I was brought into a great danger, out of which I had much ado to
escape, and that with the loss of my Allowance for ever after. I shall relate
the manner of it in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. How the Author had like to have been received into the Kings
Service, and what means be used to avoid it. He meditates and attempts an
escape, but is often prevented.
He voluntarily forgoes his pension.
THis frequent Appearance at the Court, and waiting there for my Tickets,
brought me to be taken notice of by the Great men: in^omuch that they wondered
I had been all this while forgotten, and never been brought before the King,
being so fit, as they would suppose me, for his use and service, saying, That
from henceforward I should fare better than that Allowance amounted to, as soon
as the King was made acquainted with me. Which words of theirs served instead
of a Ticket. Whereupon fearing I should suddenly be brought in to the King,
which thing I most of all feared, and least desired, and hoping that out of
^ight might prove out of mind, I resolved to forsake the Court, and never more
to ask for Tickets, especially seeing God had dealt so bountifully with me as
to give me ability to live well enough without them. As when Israel had eaten
of the Corn of the Land of Canaan, the Manna ceased; so when I was driven to
forego my Allowance that had all this while sustained me in this wilderness,
God otherways provided for me.

Summoned before the King.
From this time forward to the time of my Flight out of the Land, which was five
years. I neither had nor demanded any more Allowance, and glad I was that I
could escape so. But I must have more trouble first. For some four or five days
after my last coming from Court, there came a Soldier to me, sent from the
Adigar, with an Order in writing under his hand, that upon sight thereof I
should immediately dispatch and come to the Court to make my personal appearance
before the King, and in case of any delay, the Officers of the Country, were
thereby Aut^orized and Commanded to assist the Bearer, and to see the same
Order speedily performed.

The chief occasion of this had been a Person, not long before my near
Neighbor and Acquaintance, Oua Matteral by name, who knew my manner of Life,
and had often been at my House; but now was taken in and employed at Court; and
he out of friendship and good will to me was one of the chief Actors in this
business, that he might bring me to Preferment at Court.

He ^s informed that he is to be prefer^ed at Court.
Upon the abovesaid summons there was no Remedy, but to Court I must go. Where I
first applied my self to my said old Neighbor, Oua Motteral, who was the
occasion of sending for me. I signified to him that I was come in obedience to
the Warrant, and I desired to know the reason why I was sent for? To which he
answered, Here is good news for you; you are to appear in the Kings Presence,
where you will find great Favor, and Honorable entertainment, far more than
any of your Country men yet here found. Which the great man thought would be a
strong Inducement to persuade me joyfully to accept of the Kings Employments.
But this was the thing I always most dreaded, and endeavored to shun, knowing
that being taken into Court would be a means to cut of all hopes of Liberty
from me, which was the thing I esteemed equal unto life it self.

Seeing my self brought unto this pass, But resolves to refuse it.
wherein I had no earthly helper, I recommended my cause to God, desiring him
in whose hands are the hearts of Kings and Princes to divert the business. And
my cause being just and right I was resolved to persist in a denial. My case
seemed to me to be like that of the four Lepers at the Gate of Samaria. No
avoiding of Death for me. If out of Ambition and Honor, I should have embraced
the Kings Service, besides the depriving my self of all hopes of Liberty, in
the end I must be put to death, as happens to all that serve him; and to deny
his service could be but Death. And it seemed to me to be the better Death of
the two. For if I should be put to Death only because I refused his service, I
should be pitied as one that dyed innocently; but if I should be executed in
his Service, however innocent I was, I should be certainly reckoned a Rebel and
a Traitor, as they all are whom he commands to be cut off.

Upon these considerations having thus set my resolutions, The answer he makes
to the Great man.
as God enabled me, I returned him this answer: First, That the English Nation
to whom I belonged had never done any violence or wrong to their King either in
word or deed. Secondly, That the causes of my coming on their Land was not like
to that of other Nations, who were either Enemies taken in War, or such as by
reason of poverty or distress, were driven to sue for relief out of the Kings
bountiful liberality, or such as fled for the fear of deserved punishment;
Whereas, as they all well knew, I came not upon any of these causes, but upon
account of Trade, and came ashore to receive the Kings Orders, which by notice
we understood were come concerning us, and to render an account to the Dissauva
of the Reasons and Occasions of our coming into the Kings Port. And that by the
grief and sorrow I had undergone by being so long detained from my Native
Country, (but, for which I thanked the Kings Majesty, without want of any
thing) I scarcely enjoyed my self. For my heart was always absent from my
body. Hereunto adding my insufficiency and inability for such honorable
Employment, being subject to many Infirmities and Diseases of Body.

To this he replied, Cannot you read and write English? Servile Labor the King
requires not of you. I answered; When I came ashore I was but young, and that
which then I knew, now I had forgot for want of practice, having had neither
ink nor paper ever since I came ashore. I urged moreover, That it was contrary
to the Custom and Practice of all Kings and Princes upon the Earth to keep and
detain men that came into their Countries upon such peaceable accounts as we
did; much less to compel them to serve them beyond their power and ability.

At my first coming before him he looked very pleasingly, and spoke with a
smiling countenance to me: but now his smiles were turned into frowns, He is
sent to another great Officer.
and his pleasing looks into bended brows, and in rough Language, he bad me be
gone and tell my tale to the Adigar. Which immediately I did; but he being busy
did not much regard me, and I was glad of it, that I might absent the Court.
But I durst not go out of the City. Sore afraid I was that evil would befall
me, and the best I could expect was to be put in Chains. All my refuge was
Prayer to God, whose hand was not shortened that it could not save, and would
make all things work together for good to them that trust in him. From him only
did I expect help and deliverance in this time of need.

He stays in the City expecting his Doom.
In this manner I lodged in an English man's house that dwelt in the City about
ten days, maintaining my self at my own charge, waiting with a sorrowful heart,
and daily expecting to hear my Doom. In the mean time my Country men and
Acquaintance, some of them blamed me for refusing so fair a Profer; whereby I
might not only have lived well my self, but also have been helpful unto my Poo^
Countrymen and friends: others of them pitying me, expecting, as I did,
nothing but a wrathful sentence from so cruel a Tyrant, i^ God did not prevent.
And Richard Varnham, who was at this time a great man about the King, was not a
little scared to see me run the hazard of what might ensue, rather than be
Partaker with him in the felicities of the Court.

He goes home but is sent for again.
It being chargable thus to lie at the City, and hearing nothing more of my
business, I took leave without asking, and went home to my House; which was but
a Days distance, to get some Victuals to carry with me and to return again. But
soon after I came home I was sent for again. So I took my load of Victuals with
me, and arrived at the City, but went not to the Court, but to my former
Lodging, where I staid as formerly, until I had spent all my Provisions: and by
the good hand of my God upon me, I never heard any more of that matter. Neither
came I any more into the Presence of the Great-men at Court, but dwelt in my
own Plantation, upon what God provided for me by my Labor and Industry.

Having escaped the Court service, falls to his former course of life.
For now I returned to my former course of life, dressing my Victuals daily with
mine own hands, fetching both Wood and Water upon mine own back. And this, for
ought I could see to the contrary, I was like to continue for my life time.
This I could do for the Present, but I began to consider how helpless I should
be, if it should please God I should live till I grew old and feeble. So I
entered upon a Consultation with my self for the providing against this. One way
was the getting of me a Wife, but that I was resolved never to do. Then I began
to enquire for some poor body to live with me, to dress my Victuals for me,
that I might live at a little more ease, but could not find any to my mind.
Whereupon I considered, that there was no better way, than to take one of my
poor Country-mens Children, whom I might bring up to learn both my own Language
and Religion. And this might be not only Charity to the Child, but a kindness
to my self also afterward. And several there were that would be glad so to be
eased of their charge, having more than they could well maintain, a Child
therefore I took, by whose aptness, ingenuity and company as I was much
delighted at present, so a^terwards I hoped to be served.

It was now about the year M DCL XXIII. Although I had now lived many years in
this Land, and God be praised, I wanted for nothing the Land afforded, yet
could I not forget my native Country England, and lamented under the Famine of
Gods Word and Sacraments, the want whereof I found greater than all earthly
wants: and my daily and fervent Prayers to God were, in his good time to
restore me to the enjoyment of them.

I and my Companion were still meditating upon our escape and the means to
compass it. Their pedling forwarded their escape.
Which our pedling about the Country did greatly forward and promote. For
speaking well the Language and going with our Commodities from place to place,
we used often to entertain discourse with the Country people; viz. concerning
the ways and the Countries, and where there were most and fewest inhabitants,
and where and how the Watches laid from one Country to another; and what
Commodities were proper to carry from one part to the other, pretending we
would from time to time go from one place to another, to furnish our selves
with ware that the respective places afforded. None doubted but we had made
these inquiries for the sake of our Trade, but our selves had other designs in
them. Neither was there the least suspicion of us for these our questions: all
supposing I would never run away and leave such an estate as in their accounts
and esteem I had.

By diligent inquiry I had come to understand, The most probable course to
take, was Northwards,
that the easiest and most probable way to make an escape was by travailing to
the Northward, that part of the Land being least inhabited. Therefore we
furnished our selves with such wares as were vendible in those parts, as
Tobacco, Pepper, Garlic, Combs, all sorts of Iron Ware, etc. and being laden
with these things, we two set forth, bending our course toward the Northern
Parts of the Island, knowing very little of the way; and the ways of this
Country generally are intricate and difficult: here being no great Highways
that run through the Land, but a multitude of little Paths, some from one Town to
another, some into the Fields, and some into the Woods where they sow their
Corn; and the whole Country covered with Woods, that a man cannot see any
thing but just before him. And that which makes them most difficult of all, is,
that the ways shift and alter, new ways often made and old ways stopped up. For
they cut down Woods, and sow the ground, and having got one Crop off from it,
they leave it, and Wood soon grows over it again: and in case a Road went through
those Woods, they stop it, and contrive another way; neither do they regard tho
it goes two or three miles about: and to ask and inquire the way for us white
men is very dangerous, it occasioning the People to suspect us. And the
Chingulays themselves never Travail in Countries where they are not experienced
in the ways without a guide, it being so difficult. And there was no getting a
guide to conduct us down to the Sea.

But we made a shift to travail from Cande Vda downwards toward the North from
Town to Town; They get three days journey Northward.
happening at a place at last which I knew before, having been brought up
formerly from Cooswat that way, to descend the Hill called Bocaul, where there
is no Watch, but in time of great disturbance. Thus by the Providence of God we
passed all difficulties until we came into the County of Neurecalava, which are
the lowest parts that belong to this King; and some three days journey from the
place whence we came.

We were not a little glad that we were gotten so far onwards in our way, but
yet at this time we could go no farther; for our ware was all sold, and we
could pretend no more excuses; and also we had been out so long, that it might
cause our Townsmen to come and look after us, it being the first time that we
had been so long absent ^^om home.

They attempted often to fly this way, but still hindered.
In this manner we went into these Northern Parts eight or ten times, and once
got as far as Hourly a Town in the extremities of the Kings Dominions, but yet
we could not attain our purpose. For this Northern Country being much subject
to dry weather, and having no springs, we were fain to drink of Ponds of Rain
water, wherein the Cattle lie and tumble, which would be so thick and muddy,
that the very filth would hang in our Beards when we drank. This did not agree
with our Bodies, being used to drink pure Spring water only. By which means
when we first used those parts we used often to be Sick of violent Favors and
Agues, when we came home. Which Diseases happened not only to us, but to all
other People that dwelt upon the Mountains, as we did, whenever they went
down into those places; and commonly the major part of those that ^all sick,
dies. At which the Chingulays are so scared, that it is very seldom they do
adventure their Bodies down thither: neither truly would I have done it, were
it not for those future hopes, which God of his mercy did at length accomplish.
For both of us smarted sufficiently by those severe Favors we got, when we
should both lay Sick together, and one not able to help the other. Insomuch
that our Countrymen and Neighbors used to ask us, if we went thither purposing
to destroy our selves, they little thinking, and we not daring to tell them our
intent and design.

In those parts is bad Water, but they had an Antidote against it.
At length we learned an Antidote and Counter-Poyson against the filthy venomous
water, which so operated by the blessing of God, that after the use thereof we
had no more Sickness. It is only a dry leaf; they call it in Portugueze Banga,
beaten to Powder with some of the Country Iaggory: and this we eat Morning and
Evening upon an empty Stomach. It intoxicates the Brain, and makes one giddy,
without any other operation either by Stool or Vomit.

They still improve in the knowledge of their Way.
Thus every Voyage we gathered more experience, and got lower down, for this is
a large and spacious Country. We travailed to and fro where the ways led us,
according to their own Proverb, The B^ggar and the Merchant is never out of his
way; because the one begs and the other trades wherever they go. Thus we used
to ramble until we had sold all our ware, and then went home for more. And by
these means we grew acquainted both with the People and the Paths.

Meets with his black Boy in these parts, who was to guide him to the Dutch.
In these parts I met with my black Boy, whom I had diverse years before turned
away, who had now Wife and Children. He proved a great help to me in directing
me in the ways; for he had lived many years in these parts. Perceiving him to
be able, and also in a very poor and sad condition, not able to maintain his
Family, I adventured once to ask him if a good reward would not be welcome to
him, for guiding us two down to the Dutch. Which having done he might return
again and no Body the wiser. At which Proposition he seemed to be very joyful,
and promised to undertake the same: only at this time for reasons he alleged,
which to me seemed probable, as that it was Harvest time and many People about
it^ it could not so safely and conveniently be done now, as it might be some
two Months after.

The Business was concluded upon, and the time appointed between us. But it so
fell out, that at the very precise time, all things being ready to depart on
the morrow, it pleased God, whose time was not yet come, to strike me with a
most grievous pain in the hollow on my right side, that for five days together
I was not able to stir from the fire side, but by warming it, and ^omenting and
chafing it I got a a little ease. But disapointed.


Afterward as soon as I was recovered, and got strength, we went down and
carried one English man more with us for company, for our better security,
seeing we must travail in the Night upon our Flight: but tho we took him with
us, we dared not to tell him of our design, because he had a Wife, intending
not to acquaint him with it, till the Business was just ready to be put into
action. But when he came expecting to meet with our guide, he was gone into
another Country; and we knew not where to find him, and we knew not how to run
away without him. Thus we were di^apointed that time.

But as formerly, we went to and fro until we had sold our ware; and so
returned home again and delivered the man to his wife; but never told him any
thing of our intended design, fearing lest, if he knew it, he might acquaint
her with it, and so all our purposes coming to be revealed might be overthrown
for ever afterward. For we were resolved by Gods help still to persevere in
our design. An extraordinary drought for three or four years together.


Some eight or nine years one after another we followed this Trade, going down
into this Country on pupose to seek to get beyond the Inhabitants, and so to
run away through the Woods to the Hollanders. Three or Four years together the dry
weather prevented us; when the Country was almost starved for want of Rain:
all which time they never tilled the Ground. The Wells also were almost all
dry; so that in the Towns we could scarcely get Water to drink, or Victuals to
eat. Which affrighted us at those times from running into the Woods, lest we
might perish for Thirst. All this while upon the Mountains, where our dwelling
was, there was no want of Rain.

We found it an inconvenience when we came three of us down together, reckoning
it might give occasion to the people to suspect our design, and so prevent us
from going thither again. Some of the English that followed such a Trade as we,
had been down that way with their Commodities, ^ut having felt the smart of
that Countries Sickness, would go there no more, finding as much profit in
nearer and easier Iourneys. But we still persisted in our courses this way,
having some greater matter to do here than to sell Wares. viz. to find out this
Northern Discovery; which in Gods good time we did effect.

CHAP. IX. How the Author began his Escape, and got onward of his Way about an
Hundred miles.
Their last and successful attempt.
HAving often gone this Way to seek for Liberty, but could not yet find it; we
again set forth to try what Success God Almighty would now give us, in the Year
MDCLXXIX, on the Two and twentieth of September, furnished with such Arms as we
could well carry with safety and secrecy, which were Knives and small Axes; we
carried also several sorts of Ware to sell as formerly: the Moon being seven
and twenty days old. Which we had so contrived, that we might have a light
Moon, to see the better to run away by: having left an Old Man at home, whom I
had hired to live with me, to look after my House and Goats.

The way they went.
We went down at the Hill Bocawl, where there was now no Watch, and but seldom
any. From thence down to the Town of Bonder Cooswat, where my Father dyed; and
by the Town of Nicavar, which is the last Town belonging to Hotcurly in that
Road. From thence forward the Towns stand thin. For it was sixteen miles to the
next Town called Parroah, which lay in the Country of Neure Cawlava, and all
the way through a Wilderness called Parroah Mocolane, full of wild Elephants,
Tigres and Bears.

They design for Anarodgbur^o.
Now we set our design for Anarodgburro, which is the lowest place inhabited
belonging to the King of Cande: where there is a Watch always kept: and nearer
than twelve or fourteen miles of this Town as yet we never had been.

They turn out of the way to avoid the King's Officers.
When we came into the midst of this Country, we heard that the Governor
thereof had sent Officers from the Court to dispatch away the Kings Revenues
and Duties to the City, and that they were now come into the Country. Which put
us into no small fear, lest if they saw us they should send us back again.
Wherefore we edged away into the Westernmost Parts of Ecpoulpot, being a remote
part of that Country wherein we now were. And there we sat to knitting until
we heard they were gone. But this caused us to overshoot our time, the Moon
spending so fast. But as soon as we heard they were departed out of the
Country, we went onwards of our Journey, having kept most of our Ware for a
pretense to have an occasion to go further. And having bought a good parcel of
Cotton Tarn to knit Caps withal, the rest of our Ware we gave out, was to buy
dried flesh with, which only in those lower Parts is to be sold.

Forced to pass through the Chief Governors yard.
Our Way now lay necessarily through the chief Governors Yard at Col^iwilla. Who
dwells there purposely to see and examine all that go and come. This greatly
distressed us. First, because he was a stranger to us, and one whom we had
never seen. And secondly, because there was no other way to escape him: and
plain reason would tell him, that we being prisoners were without our bounds.
Whereupon we concluded, that our best way would be to go boldly and resolutely
to his house, and not to seem daunted in the least, or to look as if we di^^
distrust him to disallow of our Journey, but to show such a behavior, as if we
had authority to travail where we would.

So we went forward, and were forced to enquire and ask the way to his house,
having never been so far this way before. I brought from home with me Knives
with fine carved handles, The Method they used to prevent his suspicion of them.
and a red Tunis Cap purposely to sell or give him, if occasion required,
knowing before, that we must pass by him. And all along as we went, that we
might be the less suspected, we sold Caps and other Ware, to be paid for at our
return homewards. There were many cross Paths to and fro to his house, yet by
Gods Providence we happened in the right Road. And having reached his house,
according to the Country manner we went and sat down in the open house; which
kind of Houses are built on purpose for the reception of Strangers. Whither not
long after the Great Man himself came and sat down by us. To whom we presented
a small parcel of Tobacco, and some Betel. And before he asked us the cause of
our coming, we showed him the Ware we brought for him, and the Cotton Yarn
which we had trucked about the Country: telling him withal how the case stood
with us: viz. That we had a Charge greater than the Kings allowance would
maintain; and that because dried Flesh was the chief Commodity of that Part, we
told him, That missing of the Lading which we used to carry back, we were glad
to come thither to see, if we could make it up with dried Flesh. And therefore
if he would please to supply us either for such Ware as we had brought, or else
for our Money, it would be a great favor, the which would oblige us for the
future to bring him any necessaries that he should name unto us, when we should
come again unto those Parts, as we used to do very often: and that we could
furnish him, having dealings and being acquainted with the best Artificers in
Cande.

At which he replied, That he was sorry we were come at such a dry time,
wherein they could not catch Deer, but if some Rain fell, he would soon
dispatch us with our Ladings of Flesh. But however, he bade us go about the
Towns, and see whether there might be any or no, tho he thought there was none.
This answer of his pleased us wondrous well, both because by this we saw he
suspected us not, and because he told us there was no dried Flesh to be got.
For it was one of our greatest fears that we should get our Lading too soon:
for then, we could not have had an excuse to go further. And as yet we could
not possibly fly: having still six miles further to the Northward to go before
we could attempt it, that is, to Anarodgburro.

From Anarodgburro it is two days Journey further through a desolate Wilderness
before there is any more Inhabitants. Their danger by reason of the ways they
were to pass.
And these Inhabitants are neither under this King nor the Dutch, but are
Malabars, and are under a Prince of their own. This People we were sorely
afraid of, lest they might seize us and send us back, there being a
correspondence between this Prince and the King of Cande; wherefore it was our
endeavor by all means to shun them; lest according to the old Proverb, We
might leap out of the Frying pan into the Fire.

But we must take care of that as well as we could when we came among them,
They still remain at the Governors, to prevent suspicion.
for as yet our care was to get to Anarodgburro. Where although it was our desire
to get, yet we would not seem to be too hasty, lest it might occasion
suspicion: but lay where we were two or three days: and one stayed at the
Governors House a knitting, whilst the other went about among the Towns to see
for Flesh. The Ponds in the Country being now dry, there was Fish every where
in abundance, which they dry like red Herrings over a fire. They offered to
sell us store of them, but they, we told them, would not turn to so good profit
as Flesh. The which, we said, we would have, tho we stayed ten days longer for
it. For here we could live as cheap, and earn as much as if we were at home, by
our knitting. So we seemed to them as if we were not in any have.

An accident that now created them great fear.
In the mean time happened an Accident which put us to a great fright. For the
King having newly clapped up several Persons of Quality, whereof my old
Neighbor Ova Motteral, that sent for me to Court, was one, sent down Soldiers
to this High Sheriff or Governor, at whose house we now were, to give him order
to set a secure Guard at the Watches, that no suspicious persons might pass.
This he did to prevent the Relations of these imprisoned persons from making an
Escape, who through fear of the King might attempt it. This always is the Kings
custom to do. But it put us into an exceeding fear, lest it might beget an
admiration in these Soldiers to see White men so low down: which indeed is not
customary nor allowed of: and so they might send us up again. Which doubtless
they would have done, had it not been of God by this means and after this
manner to deliver us. Especially considering that the King's Command came just
at that time and so expressly to keep a secure Guard at the Watches, and that in
that very Way that always we purposed to go in: so that it seemed scarcely
possible for us to pass afterward, tho we should get off fairly at present
with the Soldiers.

But get fairly rid of it.
Which we did. For they having delivered their Message, departed, showing
themselves very kind and civil unto us. And we seemed to lament for our hard
fortune, that we were not ready to go upwards with them in their good company:
for we were Neighbors dwelling in one and the same County. However we bid them
carry our commendations to our Countrymen the English, with whom they were
acquainted at the City, and so bad them farewell. And glad we were when they
were gone from us. And the next day in the morning we resolved, God willing, to
set forward. But we thought not fit to tell our Host, the Governor, of it, till
the very instant of our departing, that he might not have any time to
deliberate concerning us.

That Night he being disposed to be merry, sent for people whose trade it is to
dance and show tricks, to come to his house to entertain him with their Sports.
The beholding them spent most part of the Night. Which we merrily called our
Old Host's Civility to us at our last parting: as it proved indeed, tho he,
honest man, then little dreamed of any such thing.

They get away fairly from the Governor.
The morning being come, we first took care to fill our Bellies; then we packed
up those things which were necessary for our Journey to carry with us, and the
rest of our Goods, Cotton Yarn, and Cloth and other things, that we would not
incumber our selves withal, we bound up in a Bundle, intending to leave them
behind us. This being done, I went to the Governor, and carried him four or
five charges of Gunpowder, a thing somewhat scarce with them, entreating him
rather than we should be disappointed of Flesh, to make use of that and shoot
some Deer; which he was very willing to accept of, and to us it could be no
ways profitable, not having a Gun. While we, we told him, would make a step to
Anarodgburro to see what Flesh we could procure there. In the mean time,
according as we had before laid the business, came Stephen with the Bundle of
Goods, desiring to leave them in his house, till we came back. Which he was
very ready to grant us leave to do. And seeing us leave such a parcel of Goods,
tho, God knows, but of little account in themselves, yet of considerable value
in that Land, he could not suppose otherwise but that we were intended to
return again. Thus we took our leaves, and immediately departed, not giving him
time to consider with himself, or consult with others about us. And he like a
good natured man bid us heartily farewell.

Although we knew not the way to this Town, having never been there in all our
lives, and durst not ask, lest it might breed suspicion; yet we went on
confidently through a desolate Wood: and happened to go very right, and came out
directly at the place.

But in our way before we arrived hither, we came up with a small River, In
their way they meet with a River which they found for their purpose.
which ran through the Woods, called by the Chingulayes Malwat oyah: the which we
viewed well, and judged it might be a probable guide to carry us down to the
Sea, if a better did not present. Howbeit we thought good to try first the way
we were taking, and to go onward toward Anarodgburro, that being the shortest
and easiest way to get to the Coast: and this River being as under our Lee,
ready to serve and assist us, if other means failed.

To Anarodgburro therefore we came, called also Neur Waug. They come safely to
Anarodgburro.

This Place described.


Which is not so much a particular single Town, as a Territory. It is a vast
great Plain, the like I never saw in all that Island: in the midst whereof is a
Lake, which may be a mile over, not natural, but made by art, as other Ponds in
the Country, to serve them to water their Corn Grounds. This Plain is
encompassed round with Woods, and small Towns among them on every side,
inhabited by Malabars, a distinct People from the Chingulayes. But these Towns
we could not see till we came in among them. Being come out through the Woods into
this Plain, we stood looking and staring round about us, but knew not where nor
which way to go. At length we heard a Cock crow, which was a sure sign to us
that there was a Town hard by; into which we were resolved to enter. For
standing thus amazed, was the ready way to be taken up for suspicious persons,
especially because White men never come down so low.

Being entered into this Town, we sat our selves under a Tree, The People stand
amazed at them.
and proclaimed our Wares, for we feared to rush into their Yards, as we used
to do in other places, lest we should scare them. The People stood amazed as
soon as they saw us, being originally Malabars, tho Subjects of Cande. Nor
could they understand the Chingulay Language in which we spoke to them. And we
stood looking one upon another until there came one that could speak the
Chingulay Tongue: Who asked us, from whence we came? We told him, From Cande
Vda. But they believed us not, supposing that we came up from the Dutch from
Manaar. So they brought us before their Governor. They are examined by the
Governor of the Place.
He not speaking Chingulais, spoke to us by an Interpreter. And to know the
truth, whether we came from the place we pretended, he inquired about News at
Court; demanded, Who were Governors of such and such Countries? and what was
become of some certain Noblemen, whom the King had lately cut off? and also
What the common people were employed about at Court, for it is seldom that they
are idle. To all which we gave satisfactory answers. Then he enquired of us,
Who gave us leave to come down so low? We told him, That privilege was given to
us by the King himself full Fifteen Years since at his Palace at Nellemby, when
he caused it to be declared unto us, that we were no longer prisoners, and
(which indeed was our own addition) that we were free to enjoy the benefit of
Trade in all his Dominions.

To prove and confirm the truth of which, we alleged the distance of the Way
that we were now come from home, being near an hundred miles, passing through
several Counties, where we met with several Governors and Officers in their
respective Jurisdictions; who had they not been well sensible of these
Privileges granted us, would not have allowed us to pass through their Countries.
All which Officers we described to him by name; and also that now we came from
the High Sheriff's House at Colliwilla, where we had been these three days,
and there heard of the Order that was come to secure the Watches; which was not
for fear of the running away of White men, but of the Chingulayes. These
Reasons gave him full satis^action, that we were innocent Traders, seeing also
the Commodities that we had brought with us: this further confirmed his opinion
concerning us.

Provide things necessary for their flight.
The People were very glad of our coming, and gave us an end of an open house to
ly in: but at present they had no dried Flesh, but desired us to s^ay two or
three days and we should not fail: which we were very ready to consent to,
hoping by that time to come to the knowledge of the way, and to learn where
about the watch was placed. To prevent the least surmise that we were Plotting
to run away, we agreed, that Stephen should stay in the house by the things,
while I with some few went abroad; pretending to enquire for dried Flesh to
carry back with us to Cande, but intending to make discoveries of the way, and
provide necessaries for our Flight, as Rice, a Brass Pot to boil our Rice in, a
little dried Flesh to eat, and a Deers-skin to make us Shoes of. And by the
Providence of my gracious God, all these things I happened upon and bought. But
as our good hap was, Deers-Flesh we could meet with none. So that we had time
enough to fit our selves; all People thinking that we stayed only to buy Flesh.

They find it not safe to proceed further this way.
^ere we stayed three days; during which we had found the great Road that runs
down toward Iafnapatan, one of the Northern Ports belonging to the Dutch,
which Road we judged led also toward Manaar a Dutch Northern Port also, which
was the Place that we endeavored to get to, lying above two or three days
Journey distant from us. But in this Road there was a Watch lay, which must be
passed. Where this Watch was placed, it was necessary for us punctually to
know, and to endeavor to get a sight of it. And if we could do this, our
intent was to go unseen by Night, the people being then afraid to travayl, and
being come up to the Watch, to slip aside into the Woods, and so go on until
we were past it; and then strike into the Road again. But this Project came to
nothing, because I could not without suspicion and danger go and view this
Watch; which laid some four or five miles below this Plain; and so far I could
not frame any business to go.

But several inconveniences we saw here, insomuch that we found it would not be
safe for us to go down in this Road. For if we should have slipped away from them
by Night, in the Morning we should be missed, and then most surely they would
go that way to chase us, and ten to one overtake us, being but one Night before
them. Also we knew not whether or no, it might lead us into the Country of the
Malabar Prince, of whom we were much afraid.

Then resolving to let the great Road alone, we thought of going right down
through the VVoods, and steer our course by the Sun and Moon: but the Ground being
so dry we feared we should not meet with Water. So we declined that Counsel
also. Thus being in doubt, we prayed God to direct us, and to put it into our
hearts which way to take. Resolve to go back to the River they lately passed.
Then after a Consultation between our selves, all things considered, we
concluded it the best course to go back to Malwat oyah, the River we had well
viewed that lay in our way as we came hither. And back thither we resolved to
repair.

CHAP. X. The Author's Progress in his Flight from Anarodgburro, into the
Woods, unto their arrival in the Malabars Country.
NOw God of his Mercy having prospered our Design hitherto, They depart back
again toward the River.
for which we blessed his Holy Name, our next care was how to come off clear
from the People of Anarodgburro, that they might not presently miss us, and so
pursue after us. Which if they should do, there would have been no escaping
them. For from this Town to Colliwilla, where the Sheriff lived, with whom we
left our Goods, they are as well acquainted in the Woods as in the Paths. And
when we came away we must tell the People, that we were going thither, because
there is no other way but that. Now our fear was, lest upon some occasion or
other any Men might chance to Travel that way soon after we were gone, and not
finding us at Colliwilla, might conclude, as they could do no otherwise, that
we were run into the Woods. Therefore to avoid this Danger, we stayed in the
Town till it was so late, that we knew none durst venture to Travel afterward
for fear of wild Beasts. By which means we were sure to gain a Nights Travel at
least, if they should chance to pursue us.

So we took our leaves of the Governor, But first take their leave of the
Governor here.
who kindly gave us a Pot of Milk to drink for a farewell; we telling him, We
were returning back to the Sheriff at Colliwilla, to whom we had given some
Gunpowder when we came from him to shoot us some Deer, and we doubted not but
by that time we should get to him, he would have provided flesh enough for our
lading home. Thus bidding him and the rest of the Neighbors farewell, we
departed, they giving us the Civility of their accustomed Prayers, Diabac^ that
is, God bless, or keep you.

It was now the Twelfth day of October on a Sunday, They begin their flight.
the Moon eighteen days old. We were well furnished with all things needful,
which we could get, Viz. Ten days Provision, Rice, Flesh, Fish, Pepper, Salt, a
Basin to boil our Victuals in, two Calabasses to fetch Water, two great
Tallipats for Tents, big enough to sleep under if it should rain, Iaggory and
Sweetmeats, which we brought from home with us, Tobacco also and Betel,
Tinder-Boxes two or three for failing, and a Deers Skin to make us Shoes, to
prevent any Thorns running into our feet as we traveled through the Woods; for
our greatest Trust under God was to our feet. Our Weapons were, each man a
small Axe fastened to a long Staff in our hands, and a good Knife by our sides.
Which were sufficient with God's help to defend us from the Assaults of either
Tiger or Bear; and as for Elephants there is no standing against them, but the
best defense is to flee from them.

In this Posture and Equipage we marched forward. When we were come within a
Mile of this River, it being about Four in the Evening, we began to fear, lest
any of the People of Anarodgburro from whence we came, should follow us to
Colliwella. Which place we never intended to come at more: the River along
which we intended to go, laying on this side of it. That we might be secure
therefore that no People came after us, we sat down upon a Rock by a hole that
was full of water in the Highway; until it was so late, that we were sure no
People durst Travel. In case any had come after us, and seen us sitting there
and gotten no further, we intended to tell them, That one of us was taken Sick
by the way, and therefore not able to go. But it was our happy chance there
came none. So about Sundown we took up our Sacks of Provisions, and marched
forward for the River, They come to the River along which they resolved to go.

Which they travel along by till it was dark.


which under God we had pitched upon to be our guide down to the Sea.

Being come at the River, we left the Road, and struck into the Woods by the
River side. We were exceeding careful not to tread on the Sand or soft Ground,
lest our footsteps should be seen; and where it could not be avoided, we went
backwards, so that by the print of our feet, it seemed as if we had gone the
contrary way. We were now gotten a good way into the Wood; when it grew dark
and began to Rain, so that we thought it best to pitch our Tents, and get Wood
for Firing before it was all wet, and too dark to find it. Which we did, and
kindled a fire.

Now they fit themselves for their Journey.
Then we began to fit our selves for our Journey against the Moon arose. All our
Sale-wares which we had left we cast away, (for we took care not to sell too
much) keeping only Provisions and what was very necessary for our Journey.
About our Feet we tied pieces of Deers-hide to prevent Thorns and Stumps
annoying our feet. We always used to Travel barefoot, but now being to travel
by Night and in the Woods, we feared so to do. For if our feet should fail us
now, we were quite undone. And by the time we had well-fitted our selves, and
were refreshed with a Morsel of Portuguez Sweetmeats, the Moon began to shine.
So having commended our selves into the hands of the Almighty, we took up our
Provisions upon our shoulders, and set forward, and traveled some three or
four hours, but with a great deal of difficulty; for the Trees being thick, the
Moon gave but little light through, but our resolution was to keep going.

Meeting with an Elephant they took up for that night.
Now it was our chance to meet with an Elephant in our way just before us: which
we tried, but could not scare away: so he forced us to stay. We kindled a Fire
and sat down, and took a Pipe of Tobacco, waiting till Morning. Then we looked
round about us, and it appeared all like a Wilderness, and no sign that People
ever had been there: which put us in great hopes that we had gained our
Passage, and were past all the Inhabitants. Whereupon we concluded that we were
now in no danger of being seen, and might Travel in the Day securely. There was
only one great Road in our way, which led to Portaloon from the Towns which by
and by we fell into; this Road therefore we were shy of, lest when we passed it
over, some Passengers traveling in it, might see us; and this Road we were in
expectance about this time to meet withal, secure, as I said before, of all
other danger of People. But the River winding about to the Northward brought us
into the midst of a parcel of Towns called Tissea Wava, They fall in among
Town^ before they are aware.
before we were aware. For the Country being all Woods, we could not discern
where there were Towns, until we came within the hearing of them. That which
betrayed us into this danger was, that meeting with a Path, which only led from
one Town to another, we concluded it to be that great Road above mentioned; and
so having past it over, we supposed the Danger we might encounter in being
seen, was also past over with it; but we were mistaken; for going further we
still met with other Paths, which we crossed over, still hoping one or other of
them was that great Road; but at last we perceived our Error; viz. That they
were only Paths that went from one Town to another.

And so while we were avoiding Men and Towns, we ran into the midst of them.
This was a great trouble to us, hearing the Noise of People round about us, and
knew not how to avoid them; into whose hands we knew if we had fallen, they
would have carried us up to the King, besides Beating and Plundring us to boot.

We knew before that these Towns were here away, but had we known that this
River turned and run in among them, we should never have undertaken the
Enterprise. But now to go back, after we had newly passed so many Paths, and
Fields and places where People did resort, we thought not advisable, and that
the danger in so doing might be greater than in going forward. And had we known
so much then, as afterward did appear to us, it had been safer for us to have
gone on, than to have hid there as we did; which we then thought was the best
course we could take for the present extremity: viz. To secure our selves in
secret until Night, and then to run through in the dark. All that we now wanted
was a hole to creep in to lie close, for the Woods thereabouts were thin, and
no shrubs or bushes, under which we might be concealed.

We heard the noise of People on every side, Their fright le^t they should be
seen^
and expected every moment to see some of them to our great terror. And it is
not easy to say in what Danger, and in what apprehension of it we were; it was
not safe for us to stir backwards or forwards for fear of running among People,
and it was as unsafe to stand still where we were, le^t some body might spy us:
and where to find Covert we could not tell. Looking about us in these straits
we spyed a great Tree by us, Hid themselves in a hollow Tr^^.
which for the bigness thereof it is probable might be hollow. To which we went,
and found it so. It was like a Tub, some three foot high. Into it immediately
we both crept, and made a shift to sit there for several hours, tho very
uneasily, and all in mud and wet. But however it did greatly comfort us in the
fright and amazement we were in.

They get safely over this Danger.
So soon as it began to grow dark, we came creeping out of our hollow Tree, and
put for it as fast as our Legs could carry us. And then we crossed that great
Road, which all the day before we did expect to come up with, keeping close by
the River side, and going so long till dark Night stopped us. We kept going the
longer, because we heard the Voice of Men hollowing toward Evening: which
created us a fresh disturbance, thinking them to be People that were coming to
chase us. But at length we heard Elephants behind us, between us and the Voice,
which we knew by the noise of cracking the Boughs and small Trees, which they
break down and eat. These Elephants were a very good Guard behind us, and were
methought like the Darkness that came between Israel and the Egyptians. For the
People we knew would not dare to go forwards hearing Elephants before them.

They dress Meat and lay down to sleep.
In this Security we pitched our Tents by the River side, and boiled Rice and
roasted flesh for our Supper, for we were very hungry, and so commending our
selves to God's keeping laid down to sleep. The Voice which we heard still
continued, which lasting so long we knew what it meant; it was nothing but the
hollowing of People that lay to watch the Corn Fields, to scare away the wild
Beasts out of their Corn. Thus we past Monday.

They fear wild Men, which these Woods abound with.
But nevertheless next Morning so soon as the Moon shone out bright, to prevent
the worst we took up our Packs, and were gone: being past all the tame
Inhabitants with whom we had no more trouble. But the next day we feared we
should come among the wild ones^ for these Woods are full of them. Of these we
were as much afraid as of the other. For they would have carried us back to the
King, where we should be kept Prisoners, but these we feared would have shot
us, not standing to hear us plead for our selves.

They meet with many of their Tents.
And indeed all along as we went, by the sides of the River till we came to the
Malabar Inhabitants, had been the Tents of wild Men, made only of Boughs of
Trees. But God be praised, they were all gone, tho but very lately before we
came: as we perceived by the Bones of Cattle, and shells of Fruit, which lay
scattered about. We supposed that want of water had driven them out of the
Country down to the River side, but since it had rained a shower or two they
were gone again. Very near falling upon the wild People.
Once about Noon sitting down upon a Rock by the River side to take a Pipe of
Tobacco and rest our selves; we had almost been discovered by the Women of
these wild People, coming down, as I suppose, to wash themselves in the River.
Who being many of them, came talking and laughing together. At the first
hearing of the noise being a good distance, we marvailed what it was: sitting
still and listening, it came nearer a little above where we sat; and at last we
could plainly distinguish it to be the Voices of Women and Children. Whereupon
we thought it no boot to sit longer, since we could escape undiscovered, and so
took up our Bags and fled as fast as we could.

What kind of traveling they had.
Thus we kept traveling every day from Morning till Night, still along by the
River side, which turned and winded very crooked. In some places it would be
pretty good Traveling, and but few Bushes and Thorns, and in others a great
many. So that our Shoulders and Arms were all of a Gore, being grievously torn
and scratched. For we had nothing on us but a clout about our Middles, and our
Victuals on our Shoulders, and in our hands a Tallipat and an Ax.

The lower we came down this River, Some account of this River.
the less Water, so that sometimes we could go a Mile or two upon the Sand, and
in some places three or four Rivers would all meet together. When it happened
so, and was Noon, the Sun over our head, and the Water not running, we could
not tell which to follow, but were forced to stay till the Sun was fallen,
thereby to judge of our course. We often met with Bears, Hogs, Deer, and wild
Buffaloes, but all ran so soon as they saw us. But Elephants we met with no
more than that I mentioned before. The River is exceeding full of Aligators all
a long as we went; the upper part of it nothing but Rocks. Here and there by
the side of this River is a world of hevvn Stone Pillars, standing upright,
Ruins.
and other heaps of hevvn Stones, which I suppose formerly were Buildings. And
in three or four places are the ruins of Bridges built of Stone; some Remains
of them yet standing upon Stone Pillars. In many places are Points built out
into the River like Wharfs, all of hewn Stone; which I suppose have been built
for Kings to sit upon for Pleasure. For I cannot think they ever were employed
for Traffic by Water; the River being so full of Rocks that Boats could never
come up into it.

The VVoods in all these Northern Parts are short and shrubbed, The Woods
hereabouts.
and so they are by the River side, and the lower the worse; and the Grounds so
also.

In the Evenings we used to pitch our Tent, How they secured themselves a
nights against wild Beasts.
and make a great Fire both before and behind us, that the wild Beasts might
have notice where we lay; and we used to hear the Voices of all sorts of them,
but, thanks be to God, none ever came near to hurt us. Yet we were the more
wary of them, because once a Tiger showed us a cheat. For having bought a Deer,
and having nothing to salt it up in, we packed it up in the Hide thereof
salted, and laid it under a Bench in an open House, on which I lay that Night,
and Stephen laid just by it on the Ground, and some three People more lay then
in the same House; and in the said House a great Fire, and another in the Yard.
Yet a Tiger came in the Night, and carried Deer and Hide and all away. But we
missing it, concluded it was a Thief. We called up the People that lay by us,
and told them what had happened. Who informed us that it was a Tiger, and with
a Torch they went to see which way he had gone, and presently found some of it^
which he let drop by the way. When it was day we went further, and picked up
more which was scattered, till we came to the Hide it self, which remained
uneaten.

We had now Traveled till Thursday Afternoon, They pass the River that divides
the King's Country from the Malabars.
when we crossed the River called Coronda oyah, which was then quite dry; this
parts the King's Country from the Malabars. We saw no sign of Inhabitants
here. The VVoods began to be very full of Thorns, and shrubby Bushes with
Cli^ts and broken Land; so that we could not possibly go in the VVoods; but now
the River grew better being clear of Rocks, and dry, water only standing in
holes. So we marched along in the River upon the Sand. Hereabouts are far more
Elephants than higher up: by Day we saw none, but by Night the River is full of
them.

After four or five days travel they come among Inhabitants.
Friday about Nine or Ten in the Morning we came among the Inhabitants. For
then we saw the footing of People on the Sand, and tame Cattle with Bells about
their Necks. Yet we kept on our way right down the River, knowing no other
course to take to shun the People. And as we went still ^orwards we saw Coraca^
Corn, sowed in the VVoods, but neither Towns nor People: nor so much as the
Voice of Man. But yet we were somewhat dismayed, knowing that we were now in a
Country inhabited by Malabars. The Wanniounay or Prince of this People for
fear pay Tribute to the Dutch, but stands far more affected toward the King of
Cande. But do what they can to avoid them.
Which made our care the greater to keep our selves out of his hands; ^earing
lest if he did not keep us himself, he might send us up to our old Master. So
that great was our terror again, lest meeting with People we might be
discovered. Yet there was no means now left us how to avoid the Danger of being
seen. The VVoods were so bad, that we could not possibly Travel in them for
Thorns: and to Travel by Night was impossible, it being a dark Moon, and the
River a Nights so full of Elephants and other wild Beasts coming to drink; as
we did both hear and see laying upon the Banks with a Fire by us. They came in
such Numbers because there was Water for them no where else to be had, the
Ponds and holes of Water, nay the River it self in many places being dry.

As yet undiscovered.
There was therefore no other way to be taken but to Travel on in the River. So
down we went into the Sand, and put on as fast as we could set our Legs to the
ground, seeing no People (nor I think no body us) only Buffaloes in abundance
in the Water.

CHAP. XI. Being in the Malabar Territories, how they encountered two Men, and
what passed between them. And of their getting safe unto the Dutch Fort. And
their Reception there, and at the Island Manaar, until their Embarking for
Columbo.
They met with two Malabars. To whom they relate their Condition.
THus we went on till about three of the Clock afternoon. At which time coming
about a Point, we came up with two Bramins on a sudden, who were sitting under
a Tree boiling Rice. We were within forty paces of them; when they saw us they
were amazed at us, and as much afraid of us as we were of them. Now we
thought it better Policy to treat with them than to flee from them; fearing
they might have Bovvs and Arrovvs, whereas we were armed only with Axes in
our hands, and Knives by our sides; or else that they might raise the Country
and pursue us. So we made a stand, and in the Chingulay Language asked their
leave to come near to treat with them, but they did not understand it. But
being risen up spoke to us in the Malabar Tongue, which we could not
understand. Then still standing at a distance we intimated our minds to them by
signs, beckoning with our hand: which they answered in the same Language. Then
offering to go toward them, and seeing them to be naked men and no Arms near
them, we laid our Axes upon the ground with our Bags, lest we might scare them,
if we had come up to them with those weapons in our hands, and so went toward
them with only our Knives by our sides: by signs with our hands showing them
our bloody Backs we made them understand whence we came, and whither we were
going. Which when they perceived they seemed to commiserate our condition, and
greatly to admire at such a Miracle which God had brought to pass: and as they
talked one to another they lifted up their hands and faces toward Heaven,
often repeating Tombrane which is God in the Malabar Tongue.

And by their signs we understood they would have us bring our Bags and Axes
nearer; They are courteous to them.
which we had no sooner done, but they brought the Rice and Herbs which they
had boiled for themselves to us, and bad us eat; which we were not fitted to
do, having not long before eaten a hearty Dinner of better fare; yet could not
but thankfully accept of their compassion and kindness, and eat as much as we
could; and in requital of their courtesy, we gave them some of our Tobacco.
Which after much entreating they did receive, and it pleased them exceedingly.

After these civilities passed on either side, we began by signs to desire them
to go with us and show us the way to the Dutch Fort: But loath to conduct them
to the Hollander.
which they were very unwilling to do, saying, as by signs and some few words
which we could understand, that our greatest danger was past, and that by Night
we might get into the Hollanders Dominions. Yet we being w^ary with our tedious
journey, and desirous to have a guide, showed them Money to the value of five
Shillings, being all I had; and offered it them to go with us. Which together
with our great importunity so prevailed, that one of them took it; and leaving
his fellow to carry their Baggage he went with us about one Mile, and then
began to take his leave of, us, and to return. Which we supsed was to get more
from us. Having therefore no more Money, we gave him a red Tunis Cap and a
Knife, for which he went a Mile farther, and then as before would leave us,
signifying to us, that we were out of danger, and he could go no further.

Now we had no more left to give him, but began to perceive, that what we had
parted withal to him, was but flung away; and although we might have taken all
from him again being alone in the Wood, yet we feared to do it, lest thereby we
might exasperate him, and so he might give notice of us to the People, but bad
him farewell, after he had conducted us about four or five Miles. And we kept on
our journey down the River as before, until it was Night, and lodged upon a
Bank under a Tree: but were in the way of the Elephants^ In danger of Elephants.
for in the Night they came and had like to have disturbed us, so that for our
preservation we were forced to fling Fire brands at them to scare them away.

The next Morning being Saturday as soon as it was light, having eaten to
strengthen us, as Horses do Oats before they Travail, we set forth going still
down the River; the Sand was dry and loose, and so very tedious to go upon: by
the side we could not go, being all overgrown with Bushes. The Land hereabouts
was as smooth as a bowling-green, but the Grass clean burt up for want of Rain.

They overtake another man, who tells them they were in the Dutch Dominions.
Having Travailed about two hours, we saw a Man walking in the River before,
whom we would gladly have shunned, but well could not, for he walked down the
River as we did, but at a very slow rate, which much hindered us. But we
considering upon the distance we had come, since we left the Bramin, and
comparing with what he told us, we concluded we were in the Hollanders
jurisdiction: and so amended our pace to overtake the Man before us. Whom we
perceiving to be free from timerousness at the sight of us, concluded he had
used to see White-men. Whereupon we asked him, to whom he belonged. He speaking
the Chingulay Language answered, To the Dutch; and also that all the Country
was under their Command, and that we were out of all danger, and that the Fort
of Arrepa was but some six miles off. Which did not a little rejoice us, we
told him, we were of that Nation, and had made our escape from Cande, where we
had been many years kept in Captivity; and having nothing to give him our
selves, we told him, that it was not to be doubted, but the Chief Commander at
the Fort would bountifully reward him, if he would go with us and direct us
thither. But whether he doubted of that or no, or whether he expected something
in hand, he excused himself pretending earnest and urgent occasions that he
could not defer: but advised us to leave the River, because it winds so much
about, and turn up without fear to the Towns, where the People would direct us
the way to the Fort.

They Arrive at Arrepa Fort.
Upon his advice we struck up a Path that came down to the River, intending to
go to a Town, but could find none; and there were so many cross Paths that we
could not tell which way to go: and the Land here so exceedingly low and level,
that we could see no other thing but Trees. For although I got up a Tree to look
if I could see the Dutch Fort, or discern any Houses, yet I could not; and the
Sun being right over our heads neither could that direct us: insomuch that we
wished our selves again in our old friend, the River. So after so much wandering
up and down we sat down under a Tree waiting until the Sun was fallen, or some
People came by. Which not long after three or four Malabars did. One of which
could speak a little Portugueze. We told these Men, we were Hollanders,
supposing they would be the more vvilling to go with us, but they proved of
the same temper with the rest before mentioned. For until I gave one of them a
small Knife to cut Betel-nuts, he would not go with us: but for the lucre of
that he conducted us to a Town. From whence they sent a Man with us to the
next, and so we were passed from Town to Town, until we arrived at the Fort
called Arrepa: it being about four of the Clock on Saturday afternoon. October
the eighteenth MDCLXXIX. Which day God grant us grace that we may never
forget, when he was pleased to give us so great a deliverance from such a
long Captivity, of nineteen years, and six Months, and odd days, being taken
Prisoner when I was nineteen years old, and continued upon the Mountains among
the Heathen till I attained to Eight and Thirty.

He Travailed a Nights in the Woods without fear, and slept securely.
In this my Flight through the Woods, I cannot but take notice with some wonder and
great thankfulness, that this Traveling by Night in a desolate Wilderness was
little or nothing dreadful to me, whereas formerly the very thoughts of it
would seem to dread me, and in the Night when I laid down to rest with wild
Beasts round me, I slept as soundly and securely, as ever I did at home in my
own House. Which courage and peace I look upon to be the immediate gift of God
to me upon my earnest Prayers, which at that time he poured into my heart in
great measure and fervency. After which I found my self freed from those
frights and fears, which usually possessed my heart at other times.

In short, I look upon the whole Business as a miraculous Providence, and that
the hand of God did eminently appear to me, as it did of old to his People
Israel in the like circumstances, in leading and conducting me through this
dreadful Wilderness, and not to suffer any evil to approach nigh unto me.

The Hollanders much wondered at our Arrival, it being so strange that any
should escape from Cande; and entertained us very kindly that Night:
Entertained very kindly.
and the next Morning being Sunday, sent a Corporal with us to Manaar, and a
Black Man to carry our few things.

At Manaar we were brought before the Captain of the Castle, Sent to Manaar.
Received by the Captain of the Castle.
the Chief Governor being absent. Who when we came in was just risen from
Dinner; he received us with a great deal of kindness and bad us set down to
eat. It seemed not a little strange to us, who had dwelt so long in Straw
Cottages among the Black Heathen, and used to sit on the Ground and eat our
Meat on Leaves, now to sit on Chairs and eat out of China Dishes at a Table.
Where were great Varieties, and a fair and sumptuous House inhabited by White
and Christian People; we being then in such Habit and Guize, our Natural color
excepted, that we seemed not fit to eat with his Servants, no nor his Slaves.

After Dinner the Captain inquired concerning the Affairs of the King and
Country, Who intended them to Sail the next day to Iafnapatan.
and the condition of their Ambassadors and People there. To all which we gave
them true and satisfactory Answers. Then he told us, That to Morrow there was a
Sloop to sail to Iafnapatan, in which he would send us to the Commander or
Governor, from whence we might have passage to Fort St. George, or any other
place on that Coast, according to our desire. After this, he gave us some
Money, bidding us go to the Castle, to drink and be merry with our Countrymen
there. For all which kindness giving him many thanks in the Portugueze
Language, we took our leaves of him.

When we came to the Court of Guard at the Castle, Here they meet with a
Scotch and Irish man.
we asked the Soldiers if there were no English men among them. Immediately
there came ^orth two men to us, the one a Scotchman named Andrew Brown; the
other an Iirshman whose name was Francis Hodges. Who after very kind salutes
carried us unto their Lodgings in the Castle, and entertained us very nobly,
according to their Ability, with Rack and Tobacco.

The Nevvs of our Arrival being spread in the Tovvn^ the People came flocking
to see us, The People flock to see them.
a strange and wonderful sight! and some to enquire about their Husbands,
Sons, and Relations, which were Prisoners in Cande.

In the Evening a Gentleman of the Town sent to invite us to his House, were
we were gallantly entertained both with Victuals and Lodging.

The next day being Monday, ready to Embark for Iafnapatan, came Order from the
Captain and Council, They are ordered a longer stay.
that we must stay until the Commander of Iafnapatan, who was daily expected,
came thither. Which we could not deny to do: and order was given to the
Victualers of the So^diers, to provide for us. The Scotch and Irish man were
very glad of this Order, that they might have our company longer; and would not
suffer us to spend the Captains benevolence in their company, but spent freely
upon us at their own charges. Thanks be to God we both continued in health all
the time of our Escape: but within three days after we came to Manaar, my
Companion fell very Sick, that I thought I should have lost him.

They embark for Columbo.
Thus we remained some ten days; at which time the expected Commander arrived,
and was received with great ceremonies of State. The next day we went before
him to receive his orders concerning us. Which were, to be ready to go with him
on the morrow to Columbo, there being a Ship that had long waited in that Road
to carry him. In which we embarked with him for Columbo. At our coming on board
to go to Sea, we could not expect but to be Sea-sick, being now as Fresh men,
having so long disused the Sea, but it proved otherwise, and we were not in the
least stirred.

CHAP. XII. Their Arrival at Columbo, and entertainment there. Their departure
thence to Batavia. And from thence to Bantam: Whence they set Sail for England.
They are wondered at at Columbo.
BEing arrived safely at Columbo, before the Ship came to an Anchor, there came
a Barge on board to carry the Comman^er ashore. But being late in the evening,
and my Consort sick of an Ague and Fevor, we thought it better for us to stay
until Morning, to have a day before us. The next morning we bid the Skipper
farewell, and went ashore in the first Boat, going strait to the Court of Guard:
where all the Soldiers came staring upon us, wondering to see White-men in
Chingulay Habit. We asked them if there were no Englishmen among them; they
told us, There were none, but that in the City there were several. A Trumpetter
being hard by, who had formerly sailed in English Ships, hearing of us came and
invited us to his Chamber, and entertained my Consort being sick of his Ague,
in his own Bed.

Ordered to appear before the Governor.
This strange news of our arrival from Cande, was presently spread all about the
City, and all the English men that were there immediately come to bid us welcome
out of our long Captivity. With whom we consulted how to come to speech of the
Governor. Upon which one of them went and and acquainted the Captain of the
Guard of our being on shore. Which the Captain understanding went and informed
the Governor thereof. Who sent us answer that to morrow we should come before
him.

After my Consort's Fit was over, our Countrymen and their Friends invited us
abroad, to walk and see the City. We being barefoot and in the Chingulay Habit,
with great long Beards, Treated by English there^
the People much wondered at us, and came flocking to see who and what we were;
so that we had a great Train of People about us as we walked in the Streets.
After we had walked to and fro, and had seen the City, they carried us to their
Land-Ladies House, where we were kindly treated both with Victuals and Drink;
and returned to the Trumpetter's Chamber, as he had desired us, when we went
out. In the Evening came a Boy from the Governor's House to tell us, that the
Governor invited us to come to Supper at his House. But we having Dined late
with our Countrymen and their Friends, had no room to receive the Governor's
Kindness: and so Lodged that Night at the Trumpetters.

The next Morning the Governor, They come into the Governor's presence. His
state.
whose Name was Ricklof Van Gons, Son of Ricklof Van Gons^ General of Batavia,
sent for us to his House. Whom we found standing in a large and stately Room,
paved with black and white Stones; and only the Commander, who brought us from
Manaar, standing by him: who was to succeed him in the Government of that
place. On the further side of the Room stood three of the chief Captains
bare-headed. First, He bid us welcome out of our long Captivity, and told us,
That we were free men, and that he should have been glad if he could have been
an Instrument to redeem us sooner, having endeavored as much for us as for his
own People. For all which we thanked him heartily, telling him, We knew it to
be true.

The Governor perceiving I could speak the Portugueze Tongue, Matters the
Governor e^quired of.
began to inquire concerning the Affairs of the King and Country very
particularly, and oftentimes asked about such Matters as he himself knew better
than I. To all his Questions my too much Experience enabled me to give a
satisfactory Reply. Some of the most remarkable matters he demanded of me were
these.

First, They inquired much about the reason and intent of our coming to
Cuttiar. To which I answered them at large. Then they asked, If the King of
Cande had any Issue? I told them, As report went, he had none. And, Who were
the greatest in the Realm next to him? I answered. There were none of Renown
left, the King had destroyed them all. How the hearts of the People stood
affected? I answered, Much against their King. He being so cruel. If we had
never been brought into his presence? I told them, No, nor had ever had a near
^ight of him. What strength he had for War. I answered, Not well able to
assault them, by reason the hearts of his People were not true to him. But that
the strength of his Country consisted in Mountains and Woods, as much as in
the People.

What Army he could raise upon occasion? I answered, I knew not well, but as I
thought about Thirty Thousand men.

Why he would not make Peace with them, they so much sueing for it, and sending
Presents to please him? I answered, I was not one of his Council, and knew not
his meaning.

But they demanded of me, What I thought might be the reason or occasion of it?
I answered, Living securely in the Mountains he fears none; and for Traffic
he regards it not.

Which way was best and most secure to send Spies or Intelligence to Cande? I
told them, By the way that goes to Iafniputtan, and by some of that Country
People, who have great correspondence with the People of Neurecaulava, one of
the King's Countries.

What I thought would become of that Land after this King's Decease? I told
them, I thought, He having no Issue, it might fall into their hands.

How many English men had served the King, and what became of them? which I
gave them an account of.

Whether I had any Acquaintance or Discourse with the great Men at Court? I
answered, That I was too small to have any Friendship or Intimacy, or hold
Discourse with them.

How the common People used to talk concerning them? I answered, They used much
to commend their Justice and good Government in the Territories, and over the
People belonging unto them.

Whether the King did take Counsel of any, or rule and act only by his own will
and pleasure? I answered, I was a Stranger at Court, and how could I know that?

But, they asked further, What was my Opinion? I replied, He is so great, that
there is none great enough to give him counsel.

Concerning the French, If the King knew not of their coming before they came?
I ansvvered, I thought, not, because their coming seemed strange and wonderful
unto the People.

How they had proceeded in treating with the King? I ansvvered, as shall be
related hereafter; when I come to speak of the French detained in this Land.

If I knew any way or means to be used whereby the Prisoners in Cande might be
set free? I told them, Means I knew none, unless they could do it by War.

Also they enquired about the manner of Executing those whom the King commands
to be put to Death. They enquired also very curiously concerning the manner of
our Surprizal, and Entertainment or Usage among them. And in what parts of the
Land we had our Residence. And particularly, concerning my self: in what Parts
of the Land, and how long in each I had dwelt, and after what manner I lived
there, and of my Age; and in what Part or Place when God sends me home, I
should take up my abode. To all which I gave answers.

They desired to know also, how many English men there were yet remaining
behind. I gave them an account of Sixteen Men, and also of Eighteen Children
born there. They much enquired concerning their Ambassadors detained there, and
of their behavior and manner of living; also what the King allowed them for
Maintenance; and concerning several Officers of Quality Prisoners there, and in
general about all the rest of their Nation. And what Countenance the King
showed to those Dutch men that came running away to him? I answered, The Dutch
Runnawayes the King looks upon as Rogues. And concerning the Portugueze they
enquired also. I told them, The Portugueze were about some fifty or threescore
persons, and six or seven of those, Europe men born.

They asked me moreover, How we had made our Escape, and which way, and by what
Towns we passed, and how long we were in our Journey? To all which I answered
at large.

Then the Governor asked me, What was my intent and desire? I told him, To have
Passage to our own Nation at Fort S. GEORGE. To which he answered, That
suddenly the^e would be no convenient opportunity. But his desire was that we
would go with him to Batavia, The Governor desires him to go to Batavia.
where the General his Father would be very glad to see us. Which was not in
our power to deny. Then he commanded to call a Dutch Captain, who was over the
Countries adjacent, subject to their jurisdiction. To him he gave Order to take
us home to his House, and there well to entertain us, and also to send for a
Tailor to make us Cloths. Cloths them.
Upon which I told him, his Kindness shown us already was more than we could
have desired; it would be a sufficient favor now to supply us with a little
Money upon a Bill to be paid at Fort S. George, that we might therewith Cloth
our selves. To which he answered, That he would not deny me any Sum I should
demand, and Cloth us upon his own account besides. For which we humbly thanked
his Lordship: and so took our leaves of him; and went home with the aforesaid
Captain.

The Governor presently sent me Money by his Steward for Expenses when we
walked abroad in the City. Sends them Money.
We were nobly entertained without lac^^^ ^f any thing all the time we stayed
at Columbo. My Consort's (...) increased, and grew very bad; And a Surgeon.
but the chief Surgeon by order daily came to see him, and gave him such
Potions of Physic, that by God's Blessing he soon after recovered.

During my being here, I writ a Letter to my fellow Prisoners I left behind me
in Cande. The Author writes a Letter to the English at Cande.
Wherein I described at large the way we went, so that they might plainly
understand the same. Which I finding to be safe and secure, advised them, when
God permitted, to steer the same course. This Letter I left with the new
Governor, and desired him when opportunity presented, to send it to them. Who
said he would have it Copied out into Dutch for the benefit of their Prisoners
there, and promised to send both together.

The Governor seemed to be pleased with my aforesaid Relations, and Replies to
his Demands, The former Demands and Answers penned down ^^ Portugueze by the
Governor's order.
insomuch that he afterward appointed one that well understood Portugueze to
write down all the former particulars. Which being done, for further
satisfaction they brought me Pen and Paper, desiring me to write the same that
I had related to them in English, and sign it with my hand, which I was not
unwilling to do.

Upon the Governor's departure there were great and royal Feasts made. They
Embark for Batavia.
To which he always sent for me. Here were exceeding great Varieties of Food,
Wine, and sweet Meats, and Music. Some two and twenty days after our Arrival
at Columbo, the Governor went on board ship to sail to Batavia, and took us
with him. At which time there were many Scores of Ordnance fired. We Sailed all
the way with Flag and Penant under it, being out both Day and Night, in a Ship
of about Eight hundred Tuns Burden; and a Soldier standing armed Sentinel at
the Cabin door both Night and Day. He so far favored me, that I was in his own
Mess, and eat at his Table. Where every Meal we had Ten or Twelve Dishes of
Meat with variety of Wine. We set Sail from Columbo the Four and twentieth of
November, and the Fifth of January anchored in Batavia Road.

As we came to greater Men so we found greater Kindness; for the General of
Batavia's Reception of us, and favors to us exceeded (if possible) those of
the Governor his Son. As soon as we came before him, seeming to be very glad,
His friendly Reception at Batavia with the Governor.
he took me by the hand and bad us heartily welcome, thanking God on our behalf
that had appeared so miraculously in our deliverance; telling us withal, That
he had omitted no means for our Redemption, and that if it had laid in his
Power, we should long before have had our Liberty. I humbly thanked his
Excellency, and said, That I knew it to be true; and that tho it missed of an
effect, yet his good will was not the less, neither were our Obligations, being
ever bound to thank and pray for him.

Furnishes them with the Cloths and Money.
Then his own Tailor was ordered to take measure of us, and furnish us with two
Suits of Apparel. He gave us also Moneys for Tobacco and Betel, and to spend in
the City. All the time we stayed there, our Quarters were in the Captain of the
Castle's House. And oftentimes the General would send for me to his own Table,
at which sat only himself and Lady; who was all bespangled with Diamonds and
Pearls. Sometimes his Sons and Daughters-in-Law, with some other Strangers did
eat with him; the Trumpe^ sounding all the while. We finding our selves thus
kindly entertained, and our Habits changed, saw, that we were no more Captives
in Ca^^^, nor yet Prisoners elsewhere; therefore cut off our Beards which we
had brought with us out of our Captivity; for until then we cut them not; God
having rolled away the reproach of Cande from us.

Here also they did examine me again concerning the passages of Cande, causing
all to be writ down which I said, and requiring my hand to the same. Which I
refused, as I had done before, and upon the same account, because I understood
not the Dutch Language. Whereupon they persuaded me to write a Certificate upon
another Paper under my Hand, that what I had informed them of, was true. Which
I did. This Examination was taken by two Secretaries, who were appointed to
demand Answers of me concerning the King of Ceilon and his Country: which they
committed to Writing from my mouth.

Offer him passage in their Ships.
The General's youngest Son being to go home Admiral of the Ships this year, the
General kindly offered us passage upon their Ships, promising me Entertainment
at his Son's own Table, as the Governor of Columbo had given me in my Voyage
hither. Which offer he made me, he said, That I might better satisfy their
Company in Holland concerning the Affairs of Ceilon, which they would be very
glad to know.

Come home from Bantam in the Caesar.
At this time came two English Merchants hither from Bantam, with whom the
General was pleased to permit us to go. But when we came to Bantam, the English
Agent very kindly entertained us, and being not willing, that we should go to
the Dutch for Passage, since God had brought us to our own Nation, ordered our
Passage in the good Ship Caesar lying then in the Road, bound for England, the
Land of our Nativity, and our long wished for Port. Where by the good
Providence of God we arrived safe in the Month of September.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning some other Nations, and chiefly Europaeans, that now
live in this Island. Portugueze, Dutch.
HAving said all this concerning the English People, it may not be unacceptable
to give some account of other Whites, who either voluntarily or by constraint
Inhabit there. And they are, besides the English already spoken of, Portugueze,
Dutch, and French. But before I enter upon Discourse of any of these, I shall
detain my Readers a little with another Nation inhabiting in this Land, I mean,
the Mal^bars; both because they are Strangers and derive themselves from
another Country, and also because I have had occasion to mention them
sometimes in this Book.

Th^se Malabars then are voluntary Inhabitants in this Island, Concerning
Malabars that inhabit in this Island.

Their Territories.


and have a Country here; tho the Limits of it are but small: it lies to the
Northward of the King's Coasts betwixt him and the Hollander. Corunda Wy River
parts it from the King's Territories. Through this Country we passed, when we
made our Escape. The Language they speak is peculiar to themselves, so that a
Chingulays cannot understand them, nor they a Chingulays.

They have a Prince over them, Their Prince.
called Coilat wannea, that is independent either upon the King of Cande on one
hand, or the Dutch on the other, only that he pays an acknowledgment to the
Hollanders. Who have endeavored to subdue him by Wars, but they cannot yet do
it: yet they have brought him to be a Tributary to them, viz. To pay a certain
rate of Elephants per annum. The King and this Prince maintain a Friendship and
Correspondence together. And when the King lately sent an Army against the
Hollanders, this Prince let them pass through his Country; and went himself in
Person to direct the King's People, when they took one or two Forts from them.

The People are in great subjection under him: The People how governed.
they pay him rather greater Taxes than the Chingulays do to their King. But he
is nothing so cruel. He Victualleth his Soldiers during the time they are upon
the Guard, either about the Palace or abroad in the Wars: they are now fed at
his Charge: whereas it is contrary in the King's Country; for the Chingulay
Soldiers bear their own Expenses. He has a certain rate out of every Land that
is sown, which is to maintain his Charge.

The Commodities of this Country are, Their Commodities and Trade.
Elephants, Honey, Butter, Milk, Wax, Cows, wild Cattle: of the three last great
abundance. As for Corn it is more scarce than in the Chingulays Country;
neither have they any Cotton. But they come up into Neure Caulava yearly with
great droves of Cattle, and lade both Corn and Cotton. And to buy these they
bring up Cloth made of the same Cotton, which they can make better than the
Chingulays: also they bring Salt and Salt Fish, and brass Basins, and other
Commodities, which they get of the Hollander: because the King permits not his
People to have any manner of Trade with the Hollander: so they receive the
Dutch Commodities at the second hand.

We now proceed unto the Europaean Nations. And we begin with the Portugueze,
Concerning the Portugueze.
who deserve the first place, being the oldest Standers there.

Their Power and Interest in this Island formerly.
The Seacoasts round about the Island were formerly under their Power and
Government, and so held for many years. In which time many of the Natives
became Christians, and learned the Portugueze Tongue. Which to this day is much
spoken in that Land: for even the King himself understands and speaks it
excellently well. The Portugueze have often made Invasions throughout the whole
Land, even to Cande the Metropolis of the Island. Which they have burnt more
than once, with the Palace and the Temples: and so formidable have they been,
that the King has been forced to turn Tributary to them, paying them three
Elephants per Annum. However the middle of this Island, viz. Cand' Vda,
standing upon Mountains, and so strongly ^ortified by Nature, could never be
brought into subjection by them, much less by any other, but has always been
under the Power of their own Kings.

The great Wars between the King and them, force him to send in for the
Hollanders.
There were great and long Wars between the King of Ceilon and the Portugueze:
and many of the brave Portugal Generals are still in memory among them: of whom
I shall relate some passages presently. Great vexation they gave the King by
their irruptions into his Dominions, and the Mischiefs they did him, tho
oftentimes with great loss on their side. Great Battles have been lost and won
between them, with great destruction of Men on both parts. But being greatly
distres^ed at last, he sent and called in the Hollander to his aid. By whose
seasonable assistance together with his own Arms, the King totally dispossessed
the Portugueze, and routed them out of the Land. Whose rooms the Dutch now
occupy, paying themselves for their pains.

The King invites the Portugueze to live in his Country.
At the Surrender of Columbo, which was the last place the Portugueze held, the
King made Proclamation, That all Portugueze, which would come unto him, should
be well entertained. Which accordingly many did, with their whole Families,
Wives, Children, and Servants, choosing rather to be under him than the Dutch,
and diverse of them are alive to this day, living in Cande Uda; and others are
born there. Their Privileges.
To all whom he allows monthly maintenance; yea also, and Provisions for
their Slaves and Servants, which they brought up with them. This People are
privileged to Travel the Countries above all other Whites, as knowing they will
not run away. Also when there was a Trade at the Sea Ports, they were permitted
to go down with Commodities, clear from all Customs and Duties. Besides these
who came voluntarily to live under the King, there are others whom he took
Prisoners. The Portugueze of the best Quality the King took into his Service,
who are most of them since cut off according to his kind Custom toward his
Courtiers. The rest of them have allowance from that King, and follow
Husbandry, Trading about the Country, Stilling Rack, keeping Taverns; the
Women ^ew Women's Wastcoats, the Men ^ew Men's Doublets for Sale.

Their Generals.
I shall now mention some of the last Portugueze Generals, all within this
present King's Reign, with some passages concerning them.

Constantine Sa, Constantine Sa.
General of the Portugals Army in Ceilon, when the Portugueze had footing in
this Land, was very successful against this present King. He run quite through the
Island unto the Royal City it self, which he set on Fire with the Temples
therein. Insomuch that the King sent a Message to him signifying, that he was
willing to become his Tributary. But he proudly sent him word back again, That
that would not serve his turn; He should not only be Tributary, but Slave to
his Master the King of Portugal. This the King of Cande could not brook, being
of an high Stomach, and said, He would fight ^o the last drop of Blood, rather
than stoop to that. There were at this time many Commanders in the Generals
Army who were natural Chingulays; with these the King dealt secretly, assuring
them that if they would turn on his side, he would gratify them with very
ample Rewards. The King's Promises took effect; and they all revolted from the
General. The King now daring not to trust the Revolted, to make trial of their
Truth and Fidelity, put them in the forefront of his Battle, and commanded them
to give the first Onset. the King at that time might have Twenty or Thirty
thousand Men in the Field. Who taking their opportunity, set upon the
Portugueze Army, and gave them such a total overthrow, that as they report in
that Country not one of them escaped. The General seeing this Defeat, and
himself like to be taken, called his Black Boy to give him water to drink, and
snatching the Knife that stuck by his Boy's side, stabbed himself with it. He
loses a Victory and stabs himself.


Another General after him was Lewis Tissera. Lewis Tissera served as he
intended to to serve the King.
He swore he would make the King eat Coracan Tallipa, that is a kind of hasty
Pudding, made of Water and the Coracan Flower; which is reckoned the worst fare
of that Island. The King afterward took this Lewis Tissera, and put him in
Chains in the Common Goal, and made him eat of the same fare. And there is a
Ballad of this Man and this passage, Sung much among the common People there to
this day.

Their next General was Simon Caree, Simon Caree, of a cruel Mind.
a Natural Chingulays, but Baptized. He is said to be a great Commander. When
he had got any Victory over the Chingulays, he did exercise great Cruelty. He
would make the Women beat their own Children in their Mortars, wherein they
used to beat their Corn.

Gaspar Figari, Gaspar Figari Splits Men in the middle.
had a Portugueze Father and Chingulays Mother. He was the last General they
had in this Country. And a brave Soldier: but degenerated not from his
Predecessors in Cruelty. He would hang up the People by the heels, and split
them down the middle. He had his Axe wrapped in a white Cloth, which he carried
with him into the Field to execute those he suspected to be false to him, or
that ran away. Smaller Malefactors he was merciful to, cutting off only their
right hands. Several whom he has so served, are yet living, whom I have seen.

This Gaspar came up one day to fight against the King, His Policy.
and the King resolved to fight him. The General fixed his Camp at Motaupul in
Hotteracourly. And in order to the King's coming down to meet the Portugueze,
Preparation was made for him at a place called Cota coppul, which might be Ten
or Twelve miles distant from the Portugueze Army. Gaspar knew of the place by
some Spies; but of the time of the Kings coming he was informed, that it was a
day sooner than really it happened. According to this information he resolved
privately to march thither, and come upon him in the night unawares. And because
he knew the King was a Politician, and would have his Spies abroad to watch the
Generals motion, the General sent for all the Drummers and Pipers to Play and
Dance in his Camp, that thereby the Kings Spies might not suspect that he was
upon the March, but merry and secure in his Camp. In the mean time, having set
his People all to their Dancing and Drumming, he left a small party there to
secure the Baggage, and away he goes in the night with his Army, and arrives to
Catta coppul, intending to fall upon the King. But when he came thither, he
found the King was not yet come: but into the Kings Tents he went, and sits him
down in the seat appointed for the King. Gives the King a great overthrow.
Here he heard where the King was with his Camp: which being not far off, he
marched thither in the morning and fell upon him: and gave him one of the
greatest Routs that ever he had. The King himself made a narrow escape; for had
it not been for a Dutch Company, which the Dutch had sent a little before for
his Guard, who after his own Army fled, turned head and stopped the Portugueze
^or a while, he had been seized. The Portugueze General was so near the King,
that he called after him, Hour, that is Brother, stay, I would speak with you,
but the King being got a top of the Hills; was safe. And so Gaspar retired to
his Quarters.

This Gallant expert Commander, that had so often vanquished the Chingulays,
Looses Columbo, and taken Prisoner.
could not cope with another Europaean Nation. For when the Hollanders came to
beseige Columbo, he was sent against them with his Army. They told him before
he went, that now he must look to himself, for he was not now to Fight against
Chingulays, but against Soldiers, that would look him in the Face. But he made
nothing of them, and said, he would serve them as he had served the Chingulays.
The Hollanders met him, and they fought: but had before contrived a Stratagem,
which he was not aware of: they had placed some Fieldpieces in the Rear of
their Army. And after a small skirmish they retreated as if they had been
worsted; which was only to draw the Portugueze nearer upon their Guns. Which
when they had brought them in shot of, they opened on a sudden to the right
and left, and fired upon them, and so routed them, and drove them into Columbo.
This Gaspar was in the City when it was taken, and himself taken Prisoner. Who
was afterward sent to Goa, where he died. And so much of the Portugueze.

The Dutch the occasion of their coming in.
The Dutch succeeded the Portugueze. The first occasion of whose coming into
this Land was, that the present King being wearied and overmatched with the
Portugueze, sent for them into his aid long ago from Batavia. And they did him
good service, but they feathered their own nests by the means, and are now
possessed of all the Seacoasts, and considerable Territories thereunto
adjoining.

The King their inplacable enemy, and why!
The King of the Country keeps up an irreconcilable War against them. The
occasion of which is said to be this. Upon the beseiging of Columbo, which was
about the year MDCLV. it was concluded upon between the King and the Dutch,
that their Enemies the Portugueze being expelled thence, the City was to be
delivered up by the Dutch into the Kings hands. Whereupon the King himself in
person with all his Power went down to this War to assist and join with the
Hollanders, without whose help, as it is generally reported, the Dutch could
not have taken the City. But being surrendered to them, and they gotten into it,
the King lay looking, when they would come according to their former Articles,
and put him into possession of it. Mean while they turned on a sudden and fell
upon him, contrary to his expectation (whether the King had first broke word
with them,) and took Bag and Baggage from him: Which provoked him in so high a
manner, that he maintains a constant hostility against them, detains their
Ambassadors, and forbids his People upon pain of Death to hold Commerce with
them.

So that the Dutch have enough to do to maintain those places which they have.
The damage the King does them.
Oftentimes the King at unawares falls upon them and does them great spoil,
sometimes giving no quarter, but cutting off the Heads of whomsoever he
catches, which are brought up, and hung upon Trees near the City, many of which
I have seen. Sometimes he brings up his Prisoners alive, and keeps them by the
Highway sides, a spectacle to the People in memory of his Victories over them:
many of these are now living there in a most miserable condition, having but a
very small Allowance from him; so that they are forced to be, and it is a
favor when they can get leave to go abroad and do it.

The Dutch therefore not being able to deal with him by the Sword, The means
they use to obtain Peace with him.
being unacquainted with the Woods and the Chingulays manner of fighting, do
endeavor for Peace with him all they can, dispatching diverse Ambassadors to
him, and sending great Presents, by carrying Letters to him in great State
wrapped up in Silks wrought with Gold and Silver, bearing them all the way upon
their Heads in token of great Honor, honoring him with great and high Titles,
subscribing themselves his Subjects and Servants, telling him the Forts they
build are out of Loyalty to him, to secure his Majesty's Country from Foreign
Enemies; and that when they come up into his Country, it is to seek maintenance.
And by these Flatteries and submissions they sometimes obtain to keep what they
keep what they have gotten from him, and sometimes nothing will prevail, he
neither regarding their Ambassadors nor receiving the Presents, but taking his
opportunities on a sudden of setting on them by his Forces.

His Craft and Success in taking Bibligom Fort in the County of Habberagon, How
he took Bibligom Fort^
may deserve to be mentioned. The Chingulays had beseiged the Fort: and knowing
the Dutch had no Water there; but all they had was conveyed through a Trench
wrought under Ground from a River near by, they beseiged them so close, and
planted so many Guns toward the mouth of this Trench, that they could not come
out to fetch Water. They cut down Wood also, and made bundles of Faggots
therewith, which they piled up round about their Fort at some distance, and
every night removed them nearer and nearer. So that their works became higher
than the Fort. Their main intent by these Faggot-works, was to have brought
them just under the Fort, and then to have set it on Fire, the Walls of the
Fort being for the most part of Wood. There was also a Bo-gahah Tree growing
just by the Fort: on which they planted Guns and shot right down into them. The
houses in the Fort being Thatched, they shot also Fire-Arrows among them: So
that the beseiged were forced to pull off the Straw from their Houses, which
proved a great inconvenience to them being a Rainy Season: so that they lay
open to the weather and cold. The Dutch finding themselves in this extremity
desired quarter which was granted them at the Kings mercy. They came out and
laid down their Arms, all but the Officers, who still wore theirs. None were
plundered of any thing they had about them. The Fort they demolished to the
Ground^ and brought up the Four Guns to the Kings Palace; where they among
others stand mounted in very brave Carriages before his Gate.

The Dutch were brought two or three days journey from the Fort into the
Country they call Owvah: and there were placed with a Guard about them, having
but a small allowance appointed them; insomuch that afterward having spent
what they had, they perished for Hunger. So that of about ninety Hollanders
taken Prisoners, there were not above five and twenty living when I came away.

Several Embassad^rs detained by the King.
There are several white Ambassadors, besides other Chingulay People, by whom
the Dutch have sent Letters and presents to the King, whom he keeps from
returning back again. They are all bestowed in several ho^ses with Soldiers to
Guard them: And tho they are not in Chains, yet none is permitted to come to
them or speak with them; it not being the custom of that Land for any to come
to the speech of Ambassadors. Their allowance is brought them ready dressed
out of the Kings Palace, being all sorts of Varieties, that the Land affords.
After they have remained in this condition some years, the Guards are somewhat
slackned, and the Soldiers that are to watch them grow re^^ss in their Duty; so
that now the Ambassadors walk about the Streets, and any body goes to their
houses and talks with them: that is, after they have been so long in the
Country, that all their news is stale and grown out of date. But this liberty
is only winked at, not allowed. When they have been there a great while, the
King usually gives them Slaves, both men and women, the more to alienate their
minds from their own Country, and that they may stay with him with the more
willingness and content. For his design is^ to make them, if he can, inclinable
to serve him. As he prevailed with one of these Ambassadors to do for the love
of a woman. The manner of it I shall relate immediately.

There are five Ambassadors whom he has thus detained since my coming there;
of each of whom I shall speak a little, besides two, whom he sent away
voluntarily.

The first of these was sent up by the Hollanders some time before the
Rebellion against the King; The first Ambassador there detained since the
Authors remembrance.
Who had detained him in the City. After the Rebellion the King sent for him to
him to the Mountain of Gauluda whither he had retreated from the Rebels. The
King not long after removed to Digligy, where he now keeps his Court, but lest
the Ambassador at Gauluda remaining by himself, with a Guard of Soldiers. In
this uncomfortable condition, upon a dismal Mountain void of all society, he
continued many days. During which time a Chingulay and his Wife falls out, and
she being discontented with her Husband to escape from him flies to this
Ambassadors house for shelter. The woman being somewhat beautiful, he fell
greatly in love with her. And to obtain her he sent to the King, and proffered
him his service, if he would permit him to enjoy her company, Which the King
was very willing and glad to do, having now obtained that which he had long
aimed at, to get him into his service.

Hereupon the King sent him word that he granted his desire, and withal sent
to both of them rich Apparel, His preferment, and death.
and to her many Jewels and Bracelets of Gold and Silver. Suddenly after there
was a great House prepared from them in the City, furnished with all kind of
furniture out of the Kings Treasure and at his proper cost and charges. Which
being finished he was brought away from his Mountain into it. B^t from thence
forward never saw his Wife more, according to the custom of Court. And he was
entertained in the Kings Service, and made Courtalbad, which is chief over all
the Smiths and Carpenters in Cande Vda. Some short time after the King about to
send his Forces against a Fort of the Hollanders, called Arundery built by them
in the year MDCLXVI. He tho in the Kings service, yet being a well wisher to
his Country, had privately sent a Letter of advice to the Dutch concerning the
Kings intention and purpose, an Answer to which was intercepted and brought to
the King, wherein thanks was returned him from the Dutch for his Loyalty to his
own Nation, and ^h^t they would accordingly prepare for the Kings assault. The
King having this Letter, sent for him, and bad him read it, which he excused
pretending it was so written, that he could not. Whereupon immediately another
Dutchman was sent for, who read it before the King, and told him the Contents
of it. At which it is reported the King should say, Beia pas mettandi hitta pas
ettandi, That is, He serves me for fear, and them for love; or his fear is here
and his love is there; And forth with commanded to carry him forth to
Execution: which was accordingly done upon him. It Is generally said, that this
Letter was framed by somebody on purpose to ruin him.

The next Ambassador after him was Hendrick Draak; The next Ambassador dying
there his Body is sent down to Columbo in great State^
a fine Gentleman, and good friend of the English. This was he who was
Commissioned in the year MDCLXIV. to intercede with the King on the behalf of
the English, that they might have liberty to go home, and with him they were
made to believe they should return: which happened at the same time that Sir
Edward Winter sent his Letters to the King for us. Which I have already spoke
of in the fifth Chapter of this Part. This Ambassador was much in the Kings
favor, with whom he was detained till he died. And then the King sent his Body
down to Columbo carried in a Pallenkine with great State and Lamention, and
accompanied with his great Commanders, and many Soldiers.

Sometime after the loss of the Fort of Arrundery which was about the year
MDCLXX. the Dutch sent up another Ambassador to see if he could obtain a Peace,
The third Ambassador.

Gets away by his resolution.


which was the first time their Ambassadors began to bring up Letters upon
their heads in token of extraordinary reverence. This man was much favored by
the King, and was entertained with great Ceremony and Honor, clothing him in
Chingulay Habit, Which I never knew done before nor since. But being weary of
his long stay, and of the delays that were made; having often made motions to
go down, and still he was deferred from day to day, at length he made a
resolution, that if he had not leave by such a day, he would go without it;
saying that the former Ambassador who died there, died like a Woman, but it
should bo seen that he would die like a man. At the appointed day, he girt on
his Sword, and repaired to the Gates of the Kings Palace, pulling off his Hat,
and making his obeisance as if the King were present before him, and thanking
him for the Favors and Honors he had done him, and so took his leave. And
there being some Englishmen present, he generously gave them some money to
drink his Health; and in this resolute manner departed, with some two or three
Black-servants that attended on him. The upshot of which was, that the King,
not being willing to prevent his resolution by Violence, sent one of his
Noblemen to conduct him down; and so he had the good fortune to get home safely
to Columbo.

The fourth was of a milder Nature.
The next Ambassador after him was John Baptista. A Man of a milder Spirit than
the former, endeavoring to please and show compliance with the King. He
obtained many Favors of the King, and several Slaves both Men and Women. And
living well with Servants about him, is the more patient in waiting the King's
leisure till he pleases to send him home.

The fifth brings a Lion to the King as a Present.
The last Ambassador that came up while I was there, brought up a Lion: which
the Dutch thought would be the most acceptable Present that they could send to
the King, as indeed did all others. It was but a Whelp. But the King did never
receive it, supposing it not so famous as he had heard by Report Lions were.
This Man with his Lion was brought up and kept in the County of Oudapollat,
near Twenty Miles from the King's Court. Where he remained about a year, in
which time the Lion died. The Ambassador being weary of living thus like a
Prisoner with a Guard always upon him, often attempted to go back, seeing the
King would not permit him Audience. But the Guards would not let him. Having
diverse times made disturbances in this manner to get away home, the King
commanded to bring him up into the City to an House that was prepared for him,
standing some distance from the Court. Where having waited many days, and
seeing no sign of Audience, he resolved to make his Appearance before the King
by force, which he attempted to do, when the King was abroad taking his
Pleasure. The Soldiers of his Guard immediately ran, and acquainted the
Noblemen at Court of his coming, who delayed not to acquaint the King thereof.
Whereupon the King gave Order forthwith to meet him, and where they met him, in
that same place to stop him till further order. And there they kept him, not
letting him go either forward or backward. In this manner and place he remained
for three days, till the King sent Order that he might return to his House
whence he came. This the King did to tame him. But afterward he was pleased to
call him before him. And there he remained when I left the Country, maintained
with Plenty of Provisions at the King's charge.

The number of Dutch there.
The number of Dutch now living there may be about Fifty or Sixty. Some whereof
are Ambassadors, some Prisoners of War, some Runaways, and Malefactors that
have escaped the hand of Justice and got away from the Dutch Quarters. To all
whom are allotted respective allowances, but the Runaways have the least, the
King not loving such, tho giving them entertainment.

The Dutch here love Drink, and practice their proper Vice in this Country.
One who was a great Man in the Court, would sometimes come into the King's
Presence half disguised with Drink, which the King often past over; but once
asked him, Why do you thus disorder your self, that when I send for you about
my Business, you are not in a capacity to serve me? He boldly replied, That as
soon as his Mother took away her Milk from him, she supplied it with Wine, and
ever since, says he, I have used my self to it. With this answer the King
seemed to be pleased. And indeed the rest of the white Men are generally of the
same temper: insomuch that the Chingulays have a saying, That Wine is as
natural to white Men, as Milk to Children.

All differences of Ranks and Qualities are disregarded among those Chingulay
People that are under the Dutch. The Chingulays prejudiced against the Dutch,
and why.
Neither do the Dutch make any distinction between the Hondrews, and the low
and Inferior Casts of Men: and permit them to go in the same Habit, and sit
upon Stools, as well as the best Hondrews; and the lower Ranks may eat and
intermarry with the higher without any Punishment, or any Cognizance taken of
it. Which is a matter that the Chingulays in Cand' Vda are much offended with
the Dutch for; and makes them think, that they themselves are sprung from some
mean Rank and Extract. And this prejudiceth this People against them, that they
have not such an Esteem for them. For to a Chingulay his Rank and Honor is as
dear as his life. And thus much of the Dutch.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the French: With some Enquiries what should make the
King detain white Men as he does. And how the Christian Religion is maintained
among the Christians there.
ABout the year MDCLXXII. or LXXIII, there came Fourteen Sail of great Ships
from the King of France to settle a Trade here. The French come hither with a
Fleet.
Monsieur De la Hay Admiral, put in with this Fleet, into the Port of Cottiar.
From whence he sent up Three men by way of Embassy to the King of Cande. Whom
he entertained very Nobly, and gave every one of them a Chain of Gold about
their Necks, and a Sword all inlay'd with Silver, and a Gun. And afterward
sent one of them down to the Admiral with his Answer. Which encouraged him to
send up others: that is, an Ambassador and six more. Who were to reside there
till the return of the Fleet back again, being about to Sail to the Coast.

To the Fleet the King sent all manner of Provision, To whom the King sends
Provisions^ and helps them to build a Fort.
as much as his Ability could afford: and not only permitted but assisted them
to build a Fort in the Bay. Which they manned partly with their own People, and
partly with Chingulays, whom the King sent and lent the French. But the Admiral
finding that the King's Provisions, and what else could be bought in the Island
would not suffice for so great a Fleet, was forced to depart for the Coast of
Coromandel; promising the King, by the Ambassador aforementioned, speedily to
return again. So leaving some of his Men with the King's Supplies to keep the
Fort till his return, he weighed Anchor, and set sail. But never came back
again. Some reported they were destroyed by a Storm, others by the Dutch. The
Admiral had sent up to the King great Presents, but he would not presently
receive them, that it might not seem as if he wanted any thing, or were greedy
of things brought him: but since the French returned not according to their
promise, he scorned ever after to receive them. At first he neglected the
Present out of State, and ever since out of Anger and Indignation. This French
Fort at Cotiar was a little after easily taken by the Dutch.

The French Ambassador offends the King.
But to return to the Ambassador and his Retinue. He rode up from Cotiar on
Horseback, which was very Grand in that Country. And being with his Company
gotten somewhat short of the City, was appointed there to stay, until an House
should be prepared in the City for their Entertainment. When it was signified
to him that their House was ready for their Reception, they were conducted
forward by certain Noblemen sent by the King, carrying with them a Present for
his Majesty. T^^ Ambassador came riding on Horseback into the City. Which the
Noblemen observing, dissuaded him from, and advised him to walk on foot;
telling him, It was not allowable, nor the Custom. But he regarding them not,
rode by the Palace Gate. It offended the King, but he took not much notice of
it for the present.

He refuses to wait longer for Audience.
The Ambassador alighted at his Lodgings. Where he and his Companions were nobly
Entertained, Provisions sent them ready Dres^ed out of the King's Palace three
times a day, great Plenty they had of all things the Country afforded. After
some time the King sent to him to come to his Audience. In great State he was
Conducted to the Court, accompanied with several of the Nobles that were sent
to him. Coming thus to the Court in the Night, as it is the King's usual manner
at that Season to send for foreign Ministers, and give them Audience, he waited
there some small time, about two hours or less, the King not yet admitting him.
Which he took in such great disdain, and for such an affront, that he was made
to stay at all, much more so long, that he would tarry no longer but went
toward his Lodging. Some about the Court observing this, would have stopped
him by Elephants that stood in the Court, turning them before the Gate through
which he was to pass. But he would not so be stopped, but laid his hand upon
his Sword, as if he meant to make his way by the Elephants; the People seeing
his resolution, called away the Elephants and let him pass.

Which more displeased the King.

Clapped ^n Chains.


As soon as the King heard of it, he was highly displeased; insomuch that he
commanded some of his Officers, that they should go and beat them, and clap
them in Chains: which was immediately done to all excepting the two Gentlemen,
that were first sent up by the Admiral: for these were not touched, the King
reckoning they did not belong unto this Ambassador; neither were they now in
his Company; excepting that one of them in the Combustion got a few Blows. They
were likewise disarmed, and so have continued ever since. Upon this the
Gentlemen, Attendants upon the Ambassador, made their Complaints to the Captain
of their Guards, excusing themselves, and laying all the blame upon their
Ambassador; urging, That they were his Attendants, and a Soldier must obey his
Commander and go where he appoints him. Which sayings being told the King, he
approved thereof, and commanded them out of Chains, the Ambassador still
remaining in them, and so continued for six Months. After which he was released
of his Chains by means of the Entreaties his own men made to the great Men in
his behalf.

The rest of the French men, The rest of the French refuse to dwell with the
Ambassador.
seeing how the Embassador's imprudent carriage had brought them to this
misery, refused any longer to dwell with him. And each of them by the King's
Permission dwells by himself in the City; being maintained at the King's
charge. Three of these, whose Names were Monsieur Du Plessy, Son to a Gentleman
of note in France, and Iean Bloom, the third whose Name I cannot tell, but was
the Ambassador's Boy, the King appointed to look to his best Horse, kept in the
Palace. This Horse sometime after died, as it is supposed of old Age. Which
extremely troubled the King; and imagining they had been instrumental to his
Death by their carelessness, he commanded two of them, Monsieur Du Plessy and
Iean Bloom to be carried away into the Mountains, and kept Prisoners in Chains,
where they remained when I came thence.

The rest of them follow Employments; some whereof Still Rack, and keep the
greatest Taverns in the City.

Lately, a little before I came from the Island; The King uses means to
reconcile the French to their Ambassador.
the King understanding the disagreements and differences that were still kept
on foot betwixt the Ambassador and the rest of his Company, disliked it and
used these means to make them Friends. He sent ^or them all, the Ambassador and
the rest, and told them, That it was not seemly for Persons as they were at
such a distance from their own Country, to quarrel and fall out; and that if
they had any love for God, or the King of France, or himself, that they should
go home with the Ambassador and agree and live together. They went back
together, not daring to disobey the King. And as soon as they were at home, the
King sent a Banquet after them of Sweetmeats and Fruits to eat together. They
did eat the King's Banquet, but it would not make the Reconcilement. For after
they had done, each man went home and dwelt in their own Houses as they did
before. It was thought that this carriage would offend the King, and that he
would at least take away their Allowance. And it is probable before this time
the King has taken Vengeance on them. But the Ambassador's carriage is so
imperious, that they would rather venture whatsoever might follow than be
subject to him. And in this case I le^t them.

Since my return to England, The Author acquaints the French Ambassador in
London, with the condition of these Men.
I presumed by a Letter to inform the French Ambassador then in London of the
abovesaid Matters, thinking my self bound in Conscience and Christian Charity
to do my endeavor, that their Friends knowing their Condition, may use means
for their Deliverance. The Letter ran thus, THese may acquaint your Excellency,
That having been a Prisoner in the Island of Ceilon, under the King of that
Country near Twenty years; by means of this my long detainment there, I became
acquainted with the French Ambassador, and the other Gentlemen his Retinue;
being in all Eight Persons; who was sent to Treat with the said King in the
Year MDCLXXII. by Monsieur De la Hay, who came with a Fleet to the Port of
Cotiar or Trinkemalay, from whence he sent these Gentlemen. And knowing that
from thence it is scarce possible to send any Letters or Notice to other Parts,
for in all the time of my Captivity I could never send one word, whereby my
Friends here might come to hear of my Condition, until with one more I made an
Escape, leaving Sixteen English men yet there; The Kindness I have received
from those French Gentlemen, as also my Compassion for them, being detained in
the same place with me, has obliged and constrained me, to presume to trouble
your Lordship with this Paper; not knowing any other means whereby I might
convey Notice to their Friends and Relations, which is all the Service I am
able to perform for them. The Ambassador's Name I know not; there is a Kinsman
of his called Monsieur le Serle, and a young Gentleman called Monsieur du
Plessey, and another named Monsieur la Roche. The rest by Name I know not. And
then an account of them is given according to what I have mentioned above. I
shall not presume to be farther tedious to your Honor; craving Pardon for my
boldness, which my Affection to those Gentlemen being detained in the same Land
with me has occasioned. Concerning whom if your Lordship be pleased farther to
be informed, I shall be both willing and ready to be,

Yours, etc.




The Ambassador upon the receipt of this, desired to speak with me.. Upon whom
I waited, and he after some Speech with me told me he would send word into
France of it, and gave me Thanks for this my Kindness to his Countrymen.

An inquiry into the reason of this King's detaing Europaeans.
It may be worth some inquiry, what the reason might be, that the King detains
the Europaean People as he does. It cannot be out of hope of Profit or
Advantage; for they are so far from bringing him any, that they are a very
great Charge, being all maintained either by him or his People. Neither is it
in the power of Money to redeem any one, for that he neither needs nor values.
Which makes me conclude, it is not out of Profit, nor Envy or ill will, but out
of Love and Favor, that he keeps them, delighting in their Company, and to
have them ready at his Command. For he is very ambitious of the Service of
these Men, and winks at many of their failings, more than he uses to do toward
his Natural Subjects. As may appear from a Company of White Soldiers he has,
The King's gentleness toward his white Soldiers.
who upon their Watch used to be very negligent, one lying Drunk here and
another there. Which remisness in his own Soldiers he would scarce have
endured, but it would have cost them their lives. But with these he uses more
Craft than Severity to make them more watchful.

These Soldiers are under two Captains, the one a Dutch man and the other a
Portugueze. They are appointed to Guard one of the King's Magazines, They watch
at his Magazine.
where they always keep Sentinel both by Day and Night. This is a pretty good
distance from the Court, and here it was the King contrived their Station, that
they might swear and swagger out of his hearing, and that no body might disturb
them, nor they no body. The Dutch Captain lies at one side of the Gate, and the
Portugueze at the other.

Once the King to employ these his white Soldiers, How craftily the King
corrected their Negligence.
and to honor them by letting them see what an assurance he reposed in them,
sent one of his Boys thither to be kept Prisoner, which they were very Proud
of. They kept him two years, in which time he had learnt both the Dutch and
Portugueze Language. Afterward the King retook the Boy into his Service, and
within a short time after Executed him. But the King's reason in sending this
Boy to be kept by these Soldiers was, probably not as they supposed, and as the
King himself outwardly pretended, viz. To show how much he confided in them,
but out of Design to make them look the better to their Watch, which their
Debauchery made them very remiss in. For the Prisoners Hands only were in
Chains, and not his Legs; so that his possibility of running away, having his
Legs at liberty, concerned them to be circumspect and wakeful. And they knew if
he had escaped it were as much as their lives were worth. By this crafty and
kind way did the King correct the negligence of his white Soldiers.

Indeed his inclinations are much toward the Europaeans; The King's
Inclinations are toward white Men.
making them his great Officers, accounting them more faithful and trusty than
his own People. With these he often discourses concerning the Affairs of their
Countries, and promotes them to places far above their Ability, and sometimes
their Degree or Desert. And indeed all over the Land they do bear as it were a
natural respect and reverence to White Men, The color of white honored in
this Land.
in as much as Black, they hold to be inferior to White. And they say, the Gods
are White, and that the Souls of the Blessed after the Resurrection shall be
White; and therefore, that Black is a rejected and accursed color.

And as further signs of the King's favor to them, Their Privilege above the
Natives.
there are many Privileges, which White Men have and enjoy, as tolerated or
allowed them from the King; which I suppose may proceed from the aforesaid
Consideration; as, to wear any manner of Apparel, either Gold, Silver, or Silk,
Shoes and Stockings, a shoulder Belt and Sword; their Houses may be whitened
with Lime, and many such like things, all which the Chingulayes are not
permitted to do.

He will also sometimes send ^or them into his Presence, The King loves to send
and talk with them.
and discourse familiarly with them, and entertain them with great Civilities,
especially white Ambassadors. They are greatly chargeable unto his Country,
but he regards it not in the least. So that the People are more like Slaves
unto us than we unto the King. In as much as they are enforced by his Command
to bring us maintenance. Whose Poverty is so great oftentimes, that for want of
what they supply us with, themselves, their Wives, and Children, are forced to
suffer hunger, this being as a due Tax imposed upon them to pay unto us.
Neither can they by any Power or Authority refuse the Payment hereof to us. For
in my own hearing the People once complaining of their Poverty and Inability to
give us any longer our Allowance, the Magistrate or Governor replied, It was
the King's special Command, and who durst disannul it. And if otherwise they
could not supply us with our maintenance, he bad them sell their Wives and
Children, rather than we should want of our due. Such is the favor that
Almighty God has given Christian People in the sight of this Heathen King;
whose entertainment and usage of them is thus favorable.

How they maintain Christianity among them.
If any enquire into the Religious exercise and Worship practiced among the
Christians here, I am sorry I must say it, I can give but a slender account.
For they have no Churches nor no Priests, and so no meetings together on the
Lord's Days for Divine Worship, but each one Reads or Prays at his own House
as he is disposed. They Sanctify the Day chiefly by refraining work, and
meeting together at Drinking-houses. They continue the practice of Baptism; and
there being no Priests, they Baptize their Children themselves with Water, and
use the words, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; and give them Christian Names. They have their Friends about them at
such a time, and make a small Feast according to their Ability: and some teach
their Children to say their Prayers, and to Read, and some do not.

In some things they comply with the worship of the Heathen.
Indeed their Religion at the best is but Negative, that is, they are not
Heathen, they do not comply with the Idolatry here practiced; and they profess
themselves Christians in a general manner, which appears by their Names, and by
their Beads and Crosses that some of them wear about their Necks. Nor indeed
can I wholly clear them from compliance with the Religion of the Country. For
some of them when they are Sick do use the Ceremonies which the Heathen do in
the like case, as in making Idols of clay, and setting them up in their Houses,
and Offering Rice to them, and having Weavers to Dance before them. But they
are ashamed to be known to do this; and I have known none to do it, but such as
are Indians born. Yet I never knew any of them, that do inwardly in Heart and
Conscience incline to the ways of the Heathen, but perfectly abhor them: nor
have there been any, I ever heard of, that came to their Temples upon any
Religious account, but only would stand by and look on; An old Priest used to
eat of their Sacrifices.
without it were one old Priest named Padre Vergonce, a Genoez born, and of the
Jesuits Order, who would go to the Temples, and eat with the Weavers and other
ordinary People of the Sacrifices offered to the Idols: but with this Apology
for himself, that he eat it as common Meat, and as God's Creature, and that it
was never the worse for their Superstition that had past upon it. But however
this may reflect upon the Father, another thing may be related for his Honor.
There happened two Priests to fall into the hands of the King; on whom he
conferred great Honors; for having laid aside their Habits they kept about his
Person, and were the greatest Favorites at Court. The King one day sent for
Vergonse, and asked him, if it would not be better for him to lay aside his old
Coat and Cap, and to do as the other two Priests had done, and receive Honor
from him. He replied to the King, That he boasted more in that old habit and in
the Name of Jesus, than in all the honor that he could do him. And so refused
the King's Honor. The King valued the Father for this saying. He had a pretty
Library about him, and died in his Bed of old Age: whereas the two other
Priests in the King's Service died miserably, one of a Canker, and the other
was slain. The old Priest had about Thi^ty or Forty Books, which the King, they
say, seized on after his Death, and keeps.

These Priests, and more lived there, but all deceased, excepting Vergonse,
before my time. The King allowed them to build a Church; The King permitted the
Portugueze to build a Church.
which they did, and the Portugueze assembled there, but they made no better
than a Bawdy House of it; for which cause the King commanded to pull it down.

Although here be Protestants and Papists, yet here are no differences kept up
among them, but they are as good Friends, as if there were no such Parties. And
there is no other Distinctions of Religion there, but only Heathens and
Christians: and we usually say, We Christians.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Richard Chiswel.
FOLIO.
SPEED's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of
Anci^^t time. Wanly's Wonders of the little World, or History of Man. Sir Tho.
Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary, Latin and
English. Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of England. Caus^n's Holy Court.
Wilson's complete Christian Dictionary. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or
Philosophical Language. Pharmacopaeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis
reformata. Judge Ione's Reports in Common ^^w. Judge Vau^han's Reports in
Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbe's Leviathan. Lord
Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Sir W. Dugdale's Baronage of England, in 2
Vol.
QUARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary. Bishop Nic^olson on the Church Catechism. The
Complete Clerk. History of the late Wars of New England. Dr. Outram de
Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery. Dr. Gibb's Sermons.
Parkeri Disputationes de Deo. History of the future State of Europe. Dr.
Fowler's Defense of the Design of Christianity, against John Bunynan. Dr.
Sherlock's Visitation-Sermon at Warrington. Dr. West's Assize-Serm. at
Dorchester, 1671. Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain
French Gentlemen charged with a Robbery, 1671. The Magistrates Authority
asserted, in a Sermon by James Paston.
OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the English Service Book. Dr. Burnet's Vindication of
the Ordination of the Church of England. Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion.
Hard-castle's Christ. Geography and Arithmetic. Dr. Ashton's Apology for the
Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature
of the House of Peers, in the case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the House of
Peers in case of Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in ca^e of
Impositions. -- Letter about the Bishops Vote in Capital Cases. Dr. Grew's Idea
of Phytological History continued on Roots. The Spaniards Conspiracy against
the State of Venice. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton, of the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, etc. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr^ Till^^son's Rul^ of ^^ith.
Dr. Simpson's Chemical Anatomy or ^he Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the
Original of Hot Springs and other Fountains. -- His Hydrological Essays, with
an Account of the Allum-works at Whitby, and some Observations about the
Iaundies. Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient in reference to
Physic and Physicians. Organon Salutis: Or an Instrument to cleanse the
Stomach: with diverse New Experiments of Tobacco and Coffee: with a Preface of
Sir H. Blunt. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts. Allen's
Discourse of two Covenants, 1672. Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and
Holiness. Buckler of State and Justice against France's Design of Universal
Monarchy. A free Conference touching the Present State of England at home and
abroad, in order to the Designs of France. Bishop Tailor of Confirmation.
Mystery of Iesuitism, third and fourth Parts. Dr. Salmon's Dispensatory. Dr.
Samway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists. Record of Urines. Dr. Ashton's
Cases of Scandal and Persecu^ion.
DUODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae. Bishop
Hacket's Christian Consolations.
VICESIMO QUARTO.
VAlentine's Devotions. Guide to Heaven.
Books lately printed.
GVillim's Display of Herauldry, with large Additions. Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation of the Church of England, Folio, in two Volumes. Dr. Burlace's
History of the Irish Rebellion, folio. Herodoti Histori^, Gr^ (...) Fol. Cole's
Latin and English Dictionary, with large Additions. William's Sermon before the
Lord Mayor, October. 12. 1679. -- Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of the
Five Jesuits Executed for Treason, Fol. Dr. Burnet's Relation of the Massacre
of the Protestants in France, Quarto. -- His Letter written upon the Discovery
of the late Plot, Quarto. -- Decree made at Rome, March 2. 1679. condemning
some Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists, Quarto. Trials of the
Regicides, Octavo. Mr. James Brome's Two Fast Sermons. Dr. Iane's Fast Sermon
before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. Mr. John James's Visitation
Sermon, April 9. 1671. Quarto. Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon on Ian. 30. 1679.
quarto. -- His As^ize Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 1679. quarto. -- His Gospel
preached to the Romans, Octavo. Certain Genuine Remains of the Lord B^con, in
Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large Account of all his Works, by
Dr. Tho. Tenison. Octavo. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the
Church of England, Octavo. Dr. Saywel's Original of all the Plots in
Christendom; with the Danger and Remedy of Schism. Sir John Munson Baronet, of
Supreme Power and Common Right. Octavo. Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourses upon
Select Texts, Octavo. Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections: The Second Part.
Fol. -- His large and exact Account of the Trial of the E. of Straf. with all
the Circumstances preliminary to, concomitant with, and subsequent upon the
same, to his Death. Fol. Remarques relating to the state of the Church of the
three first Centuries. By Ab. Seller. Octavo. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter
against Baxter. Quarto. The Countrey-man's Physician. For the use of such as
live far from Cities, or Market Towns. Octavo. (...) Sermon upon the ^ast for
the Fire, 1680. quarto. -- Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan, a Person
of Quality of the Jewish Religion, lately Baptized a Christian. quarto. -- His
Life and Death of the late Earl of Rochester. Octavo. -- His Fast Sermon before
the Commons, December. 22^ 1680. -- His Sermon on the 30th of Ian. 168^. New
England Psalms. Twelves. An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason. Written by
Mr. Clifford Esquire Twelves. The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, etc. explained by diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges; with
other Observations thereupon, by William Cawley Esquire Fol. Bishop Sanderson's
Sermons, with his Life. Fol. Fowlis his History of Romish Conspiracies,
Treasons, and Usurpations. Fol. Markham's Perfect Horseman. Octavo. Dr.
Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and the
Christian Religion. quarto. Dr. Sherlock's practical discourse of Religious
Assemblies. Octavo. A Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of
Separation. Octavo. Dr. Outram's Sermons. Octavo.
FINIS.

