A GLIMPSE OF SIONS GLORY: OR, THE CHURCHES BEAUTY specified. Published for
the Good and Benefit of all those whose Hearts are raised up in the expectation
of the glorious Liberties of the SAINTS.

PSALM. 87.3. Glorious Things are spoken of Thee O thou City of GOD.

ESAIAS 40.10.11. Behold, the LORD shall come with might against the strong ones,
and his arm shall rule for him, etc.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LARNAR, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the golden Anchor near PAUL'S- Chain. MDCXLI.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, thou have here presented to thy view a small Tract: the
matter whereof is weighty, and of concernment to all that are the professed
Subjects of Jesus Christ. It is a thing of sad consequence to consider how we
have been kept under blindness and darkness, although not totally, yet in a
great measure, in regard of such truths as do immediately strike at Antichrist
and his false power. As namely this great Truth, CHRIST the King of his Church;
and that Christ has given this Power to his Church, not to a Hierarchy,
neither to a National Presbytery, but to a company of Saints in a
Congregationall way. Now these truths strike directly at Antichrist, and
therefore kept and quelled down as errors. And so by reason of this obscurity
(we being half blind) such bright truths seem strange to us, and go under
many aspersions and calumnies, as carnal, erroneous, absurd, and the like. And
truly we have been so accustomed to the yoke, that we seem to beat down
freedom, with casting up a thousand surmises, dreaming of strange Consequents.
Nay, there is a generation of of Men in these times (some or most of them
seeming to plead for Christ) are as inveterate against the one true Way of
Jesus Christ, as if it would be the bondage of Rehoboam, succeeding the light
oppression of Solomon: whereas it will prove to be a Haven to our tedious
storms, and a period to many distractions.

READER, give over thy wonted censuring of men's Labors; and learn to be more
wise; lay aside all prejudicial thoughts concerning this Tract, and weigh it
in the Balance of the Sanctuary, comparing it with the Word; if it will hold
out there; then embrace it, and make use of it for thy comfort. Indeed it may
be beneficial to thee diverse ways.

First, by this thou may learn to prize Jesus Christ more; what was that
among other things that made Christ so beloved and excellent in the eyes of his
Spouse? His head was of Gold. Now what is this Head of Gold, but that excellent
Government, that is upon his shoulder?

Secondly, it will administer comfort to thee, in regard of the former yokes,
of which there are hopes, they will be broken off, at least in the
accomplishing of these Truths; Nay the day is now dawning, wherein Sions Peace
and Comforts shall be fulfilled, Jesus Christ set up, the sole and great King
of his Church.

Thirdly, it will teach you to make that use of it that the Apostle Peter does
of the like Truths: What manner of Persons ought we to be? The use of it is
diverse, beyond my reach or weak Judgment to prescribe; and indeed my
commendation of it does but darken it, I being so far below the matter and the
Author. But thy experience may make up that of which I fall short. So
commending Thee (both in the use of this, and any thing else that bears the
stamp and Image of truth upon it) to the teaching of that Spirit, that is the
Author of all Truth in the hearts of Believers, to be taught by it; I leave
thee in the perusing of this small Treatise; hoping thou will reap some good
by it. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus. to command. W. K.

A GLIMPSE OF SIONS GLORY: OR, THE CHURCHES BEAUTY specified.
REVEL. 19. VERSE 6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great Multitude, and
as the voice of many Waters, and as the voice of mighty Thundrings, saying
HALLELVIAH, for the LORD GOD Omnipotent reigns.


AT the pouring forth of the first Vial, there was a Voice, saying, BABYLON is
fallen, it is fallen: at the pouring forth of the sixth, John hears a voice as
the voice of many Waters, and as the voice of Thundrings, saying Hallelujah,
the Lord God omnipotent reigns, immediately following the other. Babylons
falling is Sions raising Babylons destruction is Ierusalems salvation. The
fourth Vial was powered upon the Sun, which is yet doing, (namely upon the
Emperor and that House of Austria) and will be till that House be destroyed.
The heat of that makes the seat of the Beast hot, and prepares it unto the
fire, that it is appointed unto* God is beginning the pouring forth of the
fifth Vial, namely, upon the Throne of the Beast, upon Babylon; this is the
work that is in hand: as soon as ever this is done, that Antichrist is down,
Babylon fallen, then comes in Jesus Christ reigning gloriously; then comes in
this Hallelujah, the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Let Christ live, and
Barrabas die, was the last speech of Tremellius: Let Babylon fall, let
Jerusalem rise, and Christ reign in his glory; this is the voice of all the
Saints this day, and will continue to their last Voice: It is the work of the
day to cry down Babylon, that it may fall more and more, and it is the work
of the day to give God no rest, till he sets up Jerusalem as the praise of the
whole World. Bl^ssed is he that dasheth the Brats of Babylon against the
stones: Blessed is he that has any hand in pulling down Babylon: and
beautiful likewise are the feet of them that bring glad tidings unto
Jerusalem, unto Zion, saying, The Lord God omnipotent reigns. This is the
work of this Exercise; to show unto you, how upon the destruction of Babylon
Christ shall reign gloriously, and how we are to further it.

The words then read unto you, they are you see an Halleluiah.

Quaest.
But what is that to the day of a Fast? Is an Halleluiah suitable to a Fast?
Hallelujah is, Praise ye the Lord; the work of a Fast is a mourning work, and
yet this Hallelujah is suitable to this day of Fast.

Answ.
1. Suitable: First our mourning is to be Evangelicall, and therefore to have
comfort mixed with it.

Hallelujah.

Hallelujah is suitable for that.



Yea, we read of the Churrh of the Jews, that in their returning from the
Captivity, God did lead them by weeping, 31. Ier. 9. The Argument of
deliverance from Captivity under Antichrist, and the setting up of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, may stand with our weeping: and we in a weeping and a mourning
frame, are fittest to hear such an Argument as this is.

Quaest.
Hallelujah is an Hebrew word; why here used?

Answ.
First to note the joining of the Church of the Gentiles with the Jews,
according to the Prophecy in the 14 of Zachary 9. The Lord shall be King over
all the Earth, in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one.

Gentiles are to provoke the Church of the Jews to come in, according to the
Prophecy of Isaiah, 2. C. 3.5. Come ye, let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his Paths; 5. verse. O House of Jacob, Come ye and let us
walk in the light of the Lord: The Gentiles calling upon the Jews to come in:
so it shall be at the Jews Calling; and therefore this Hebrew word is used,
Hallelujah, as if the Gentiles should provoke the Jews after Antichrist is
fallen now to praise the Lord, because he reigns.

In this Hallelujah there are these 2. things considerable. First, what it is
for which this Hallelujah is sung. Secondly, from whom. First, what it is for?
It is for this, because the Lord God omnipotent reigns, the Lord God, that
is, Christ; Christ now appears to be Lord God: his Lordship and Dominion was
much darkened before: now it appears to all the world, that he is Lord God,
Lord God omnipotent: the Name of Christ is the mighty God, as 9. Isay, 6. but
he is but little known by this Name in comparison: after Antichrist is
fallen, he shall be known by his own Name, the mighty God, the Lord God
omnipotent, the Lord God omnipotent reigns; his Crown and Dignity were as it
were hidden before in comparison: little of the power of the Sovereignty of
Christ did outwardly appear before: but now it shall appear, before the eyes
of all his enemies, that it is he that reigns, he has the Kingdom of
Kingdoms, and is the Lord of Lords. 2. From whence came this Hallelujah, I
heard as it were the Voice of a great Multitude, and as the voice of many
Waters: by Waters we are to understand People; the voice of many Waters, of
many People.

First, it is the voice of the Waters, the voice of Jesus Christ reigning in
his Church, comes first from the Multitude, the common People, the voice is
heard from them first, before it is heard from any others: God uses the common
People and the Multitude to proclaim that the Lord God omnipotent reigns: As
when Christ came at first, the poor receive the Gospel; not many Wise, not
many Noble, not many Rich, but the Poor: so in the Reformation of Religion,
after Antichrist began to be discovered, it was the common People that first
came to look after Christ. In the 5. Cant. 7. we find the Church inquiring for
her beloved, which is to be understood of these times of Reformation: she went
to the Watchmen, the Watchmen smote her, despised her, and persecuted her; at
the 8th. verse she goes to the Daughters of Jerusalem, and enquires for her
Beloved, that is, among private Christians and common People, and this glorious
Church that is to come, when the Lord God omnipotent reigns, according as it
is here said, the voice will be first among the Multitude. It is observable
that we have in the 7. Cant. 1. where you find a description of the glorious
Church that is a coming, wherein Christ is to reign gloriously, the
description there begins at the feet, and goes upward: When Christ is described
5. Cant. the description of Christ is from the head, and so downward: But when
the Estate of the Church in her glory is described; she begins at the feet and
goes upward, to note the beginning and the raising of the Church is like to be
at first among the meaner sort of People, among the Multitude. The Hallelujah
for Babylons downfall was among the Multitude, before it came to the four and
twenty Elders, as you may see in the beginning of the Chapter. The Business
Brethren concerning the SCOTS, it is a business, in the issue whereof we hope
there will be great things: Where began it? at the very Feet, at the very soles
of the feet. You that are of the meaner rank, common People, be not
discouraged; for God intends to make use of the common People in the great
Work of proclaiming the Kingdom of his Son; the Lord God omnipotent
reigns: the Voice that will come of Christ's reigning, is like to begin from
those that are the Multitude, that are so contemptible, especially in the eyes
and account of Antichrists spirits, and the Praelacie, the vulgar Multitude,
the common People; what more contemned in their mouths then they? and yet it is
from them that this Voice does come; The Lord God omnipotent reigns. We read
in the 2. Chron. 30.15. that the Priests and Levites were ashamed in that
glorious Reformation of Hezekiah, they did not prepare themselves as the People
did: So it is many times, that in many places where God is doing a great work,
and whenever God sets up the Kingdom of his Son, in that glorious manner
that he does intend, he will not begin with the Priests and Levites, they will
not be so forward, but the People at the first are more forward. In the 3.
Nehem. 5. it is said concerning the building of the Temple and Jerusalem, that
the Nobles did not put to their necks, but it is said the People blessed those
that came to dwell at Jerusalem; but yet mark further, it came from the
Multitude as a noise of many Waters: though the voice of Christ's reign came
first from the Multitude; yet it comes but in a confused manner, as the noise
of many Waters: though the Multitude may begin a thing, and their intention may
be good in it; yet it is not for them to bring it to perfection, that which
they do commonly is mixed with much confusion, and a great deal of disorder.
It was but as the voice of many Waters, the People had a hint of something;
down with Antichrist, down with Popery, not understanding distinctly what
they did; their voice was but as the voice of many Waters: Therefore it
follows, and as the Voice of mighty Thundrings, that is, as one paraphrases of
it, the Voice that is more terrible and piercing like the Thunder; After the
beginning of this confused noise among the Multitude, God moves the hearts of
Great ones, of Noble, of Learned ones, and they come in to the Work, and their
voice is as the voice of mighty Thundering, a Voice that strikes terror, and
has a Majesty in it to prevail. We hear of the voice of the Multitude in
our own Country, as the voice of many Waters, they cry up the Kingdom of
Christ, and cry down the Kingdom of Antichrist, cry down Babylon, and the
Praelacie; but this does seem to be the Voice of many Waters, that the
Adversaries derided it, scorned it. It is but the Multitude, a company of rude
People: But blessed be God, we begin to hear the voice from the Thundrings
too in a more terrible way: God begins to work upon the Great ones of the Land,
the Worthies of the Land that are drawn together in that ASSEMBLY, and they
do begin to come to the Land, and beyond the Land to our ears, as it is
terrible in the ears of the Adversaries, that they begin to fear. This is the
work of the day, for us to lift up our voice to Heaven, that it might be
mighty to bring forth more and more; the voice of our PARLIAMENT as a voice of
Thunder, a terrible voice to the Antichristian party, that they may say, The
Lord God Omnipotent reigns. And let us not be discouraged, for our Prayers
though they be poor and mean, and scattered, they may further the Voice of
Thundrings: though our Prayers be as the Voice of many Waters, confused; we
may by them further this Work, so as to hear more of the Voice of our
Worthies that are assembled, as Thundrings, saying, The Lord God Omnipotent
reigns. 1. Sam. 7.9. When Samuel did but offer a sucking Lamb, there arose
Thundrings: If we come before the Lord, and it be but a sucking Lamb that we
are able to offer; if we come but to present our selves only to testify on
what side we are, there may come that Voice of Thundrings from our PARLIAMENT,
furthered by our Voice, saying, The Lord God Omnipotent reigns. How gladly
would we hear this Voice come from our Nobles, and the KING himself, and the
Great ones of the Kingdom, to hear them powerfully commanding and speaking
for the furtherance of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the setting it up! But
to come more closely to the words: there are these two Doctrinall conclusions
that contain the scope of them. 1. Doct.
First, that though the Kingdom of Christ may be darkened for a while; yet
certainly Christ will reign in his Church gloriously, at which the Saints will
sing Hallelujah.

2. Doct.
Secondly, that the beginning of this glorious Reign of Christ, the Multitude
of the People shall be the furtherers of it, and take special notice of it.
It is but only the first that I do intend to speak of, in way of a Doctrinall
Conclusion, it is this

Doct.
Though Christ's Kingdom be for a while darkened, Christ shall reign
gloriously, that is employed: It is revealed to John as a great wonder, as a
glorious thing. Why, did not Christ reign before? Yes, but not in that manner
that now he is to reign: the Kingdom of Christ has been exceedingly
darkened in the World; though it now begins to appear a little more brightly,
it has been exceedingly darkened. When he came in his own Person, how did he
appear to reign, and be the Lord God Omnipotent? I mean outwardly, he was a
man of Sorrows; one that was rather a Worm then a Man: as it is said of him,
He was one, in whom appeared no Form and Beauty; for which he should be
desired. He was even bruised by his Father, he was in the form of a Servant;
yea in the form of an evil Servant; being made sin for us, and beaten like
an evil servant; yea made a Curse for us, and that in the Abstract; how did he
reign? they made him a King in way of derision, put a Reed into his Hand in
stead of a Scepter, and bowed the Knee in scorn, and called him the King of
the Jews: and thus he reigned outwardly, and not otherwise, in his own Person.
And afterward in the Primitive Times how did he appear to be Lord God, and to
reign there, when the Heathen Emperors reigned over his Subjects, and had
their wills upon them? his Subjects were but a company of poor distressed for
lorne people, wandering up and down, persecuted, and destitute of all comforts.
Afterward when God brought Constantine the Christian Emperor and others to
reign, the Church enjoyed a little Peace, this was but for a little time. In
the 8. of the Revelation, it is said there was silence in Heaven for half an
hour, which is applied to the little Time of respite that the Church had in
Constantines time: for Litinius who was joined with Constantine in the Empire,
presently fell off, and grew a Persecutor: then spread Arianisme over all the
World, that all the World seemed to be an Arrian, so that he was not
acknowledged Lord God; and therefore not reigned. Then Antichristianisme spread
it self, and he set up himself as Lord God, and he prescribed Laws to the
Consciences of men, and Christ was cast out of his Throne: yea, to this day how
little has Christ reigned outwardly? The Devil himself is a greater King, I
mean in regard of multiplicity of Subjects. Divide the World into thirty
parts, and there are not above five of those that acknowledge Christ; and out
of those five take them where Antichrist reigns, and how little does Christ
reign? and among them where Christ is acknowledged, and Antichrist rejected,
how is his Kingdom persecuted, and of the better sort? how is his Kingdom
slighted, and many forward Professors, and zealous Ministers have hard
thoughts of it. Yea, among those that set up his Kingdom, in regard of their
miscarriages his Kingdom is darkened; so that Christ has but a little Reign
in the World: And it is a glorious thing spoken of to John, That Christ Lord
God Omnipotent reigns. What shall we say to these things? That Christ should
be King of Heaven and Earth, and should appear so little in his reign as he
has done, and yet does to this day. Let us stay a little here, and admire at
the infinite depth and Wisdom of Gods Counsels that are past finding out.
What God should aim at and mean (if we may speak with holy Reverence) to
suffer these Things, that his own Son so infinitely dear unto him, should
have his glory so darkened in the World as he has. We may think of some Reasons
why God does suffer this; but what his aim and intentions are in the depth of
his Counsels, is infinitely beyond us.

Reas. 1.
It may be it is to be a stumbling block to wicked and ungodly men in his just
Judgment, that they should see and not understand.

Reas. 2.
And it was upon this ground that God suffered his Kingdom to be darkened
hitherto, that Antichrist might prevail, because of much Glory that he is
intended to bring out of the prevailing of Antichrist in the World: therefore
in his Providence he has so permitted it, as that the Kingdom of his Son
for many years should be darkened. And (my Brethren) if the Kingdom of Christ
had bin kept in Congregations, in that way that we and some other Churches are
in, it had bin impossible that Antichrist should have got head. But God in his
Providence, because he would permit Antichrist to rise and to Rule for a long
time, and he had many things to bring out the Kingdom of Antichrist, to work
for his Glory; therefore God has left this Truth to be so dark, the setting
up of Christ in his Kingly Office. Reas. 3.
Thirdly, because God would exercise the Faith and other Graces of his Spirit in
his Children, that they might believe in, and love Jesus Christ for his
spiritual Beauty, though there appears nothing but spiritual Beauty, though
no outward Beauty, no outward Kingdom does appear, but he be as a spiritual
King only. It was a great and a glorious Work, in those three wise Men that
came to Christ that offered Frankincense, and Gold and Myrrh, to Christ when
he was in a Cratch, in a Manger; and so for Gods people now to believe in him,
now to love, now to rejoice in him, to offer all to him, now his Kingdom is
darkened, now he does appear so mean as he is, this is a glorious work of
Faith, and we should labor much to exercise this work of ^aith, in looking
upon this spiritual Beauty that is in Christ, and satisfying our Souls in
that, that so we may not be offended at the darkning of Christ's Kingdom
outwardly: And the less Christ does reign outwardly in the world, the less
glorious his Kingdom does appear outwardly, the more let us labor to bring
our hearts under his spiritual Reign: The more others say, We will not have
this man reign over us, the more let our Souls subject themselves to him, and
say, Christ is our KING, and let him reign for ever over us, yea let us labor
to symphathize with Jesus Christ in the darkning of his glory and of his
Kingdom. JESUS CHRIST, though he the glory of his Father, the Brightness of
his Glory, the Character and graven Form, or the Image of his Father, yet is
he contented to have his glory darkened. Who are we that we must have Glory in
this world and outward excellencies, when Christ is willing to be without them;
Let us be willing to go like the Witnesses, clothed in Sackcloth till Christ
comes to reign: There are white shining garments prepared, but that time is
not yet, though it will not be long. The Bridegroom yet seems to be absent, and
therefore it is fit for the Spouse to go low and mean in the mourning weeds as
a Widow: the trimming of the Bride in her outward glory, may come hereafter,
when Christ shall come in glory into the World. And Lastly the Kingdom of
Christ is darkened for a while outwardly, and therefore it should teach us to
bless God so much the more for that Opportunity that we have of setting up
Christ as King amongst us: For yet, the Voice is not heard much, That the Lord
God Omnipotent reigns abroad in the World, though lately some noise we have
heard: But, blessed be God, in our Congregations amongst us, we may hear, That
the Lord GOD Omnipotent reigns. It is through our wretched wickedness, if
his Kingly Power be not fully set up amongst us in all his Ordinances: And that
we should have an opportunity to set up his Kingly Power amongst us here,
while it is so much opposed, and so little known in the world, it is a great
mercy. And let us take heed of abusing that opportunity we have, for darkning
the Kingly Power of Christ, which we profess to set up: Especially in these
Times, when there comes to be a Voice, though confusedly, from the Multitude,
and some Kind of Voice of Thunder from the Great ones.

But though it be dark for a while, certainly he shall reign, and the Voice
will be glorious and distinct one Day, Saying, HALLELVIAH the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns. He shall reign first Personally; secondly, in his Saints.

First, Personally; we will not fully determine of the manner of his Personal
Reigning, but thus far we may see there is a Voice of great waters, though
not distinct: but a Probability in his Person GOD and MAN; he shall reign upon
the Earth, here in this World before that great and Solemn Day. There are
diverse Scriptures that have somewhat of this in them, we cannot give the
distinct Voice of those Scriptures, but many of Gods Saints, they do hear
something, and when a thing grows nearer and nearer, God will reveal it more
distinct; Zachary 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son. It is usually
understood either of a spiritual looking by the eye of Faith, or beholding
Christ at the Day of Judgment: But why should we take it for a spiritual
looking, and looking at the day of Judgment? that place does not hold out, that
is not the thing intended: They shall mourn every one apart; this is not like
the setting forth of the mourning at the Day of Judgment: And take but this
one Rule, that all Texts are to be understood literally, except they make
against some other Scriptures, or except the very Coherence and Dependence of
the Scripture shows it otherwise, or it makes against the Analogy of Faith;
now there is nothing against this, but it may be so. A second Scripture that
seems to hold out somewhat is that in the 26th. of Matthew, 29. I will not
henceforth drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until that Day, when I drink it
new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. It is true, this is likewise interpreted
in a mystical sense; but there is no reason, why we may not take it
literally. Not in the Kingdom of his Father in Heaven; but in that Kingdom
that he shall come in here to drink the Fruit of the Vine, to have Communion
with his Saints in this World, 2. These. 2.8. Antichrist shall be destroyed by
the brightness of Christ's coming, the brightness of his Personal coming:
And that place Revel. 20. where it is said, The Saints shall reign with him a
Thousand years, which cannot be meant reigning with him in Heaven. It is made
as a proper peculiar benefit unto such as had refused Antichrists Government,
especially to the Christian Church: It is likely diverse of the Prophets and
Patriarchs may come in; but especially it belongs to the Christian Church: Now
the reigning with Christ a thousand years is not meant reigning with him in
Heaven, for after these thousand years, there shall be many enemies raised
against the Church, GOG and MAGOG shall gather themselves together; if it were
meant of Heaven, that could not be; and therefore it must be meant of Jesus
Christ coming and reigning here gloriously for a Thousand years. And
although this may seem to be strange; yet heretofore it has not been
accounted so, it has been a Truth received in the Primitive Times. Iustine
Martyr, that lived presently after JOHN, he spoke of this as a thing that all
Christians acknowledged: and likewise Lactantius has such expressions in
diverse places of his Seventh Book. That there are glorious Times coming,
wherein shall be plenty and fruitfulness in the Church, yet First, Rome must
de burnt, and Babylon first down, and brings the Sybills, the Heathen Oracles
for it, and after a little Time there shall be stirring up of Enemies against
them: Thus far they go; if they did not believe that Christ himself should
come personally to reign, yet he shall with his Saints reign in a Glorious
Manner, and the Church shall be so raised up in the world outwardly, as to be
above all the men of the World in outward Glory.

And there are many Scriptures full for that which we may be much more
confident in, then we can be of the other. There is a Time coming, when there
shall be this Halleluiah in the Church, The Lord God omnipotent reigns. As in
the. 7. Dan. 17.18. The four Beasts are the four Monarchies, and the last is
the Roman Monarchy, and that Babylon shall go down together, and immediately
upon that, the Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom, and possess
the Kingdom for ever and ever: at the 21.22. Ver. 27. Verse. And the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the People
of the Saints of the most high: the Kingdom under Heaven is not the Kingdom
of the World to come. More apparent is that in the 12th. of Dan. which is
ordinarily interpreted of the day of Judgment: but surely this Text does not
aim at the Day of Judgment principally, but at a Time before. First, because
many that sleep shall awake, not all, but many. Secondly he says that they
that are wise, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament: Whereas the
Glory that shall be put upon the Saints in Heaven shall be as the Sun: Though
this Glory be great, it is inferior to that which shall be. The Third Reason
is, that Daniel must shut up these Words, and seal up this Book as a great
Secret: That there should be a Resurrection at the last Day, a reward of
happiness to the righteous, and of Misery to the Wicked is no great Secret,
but this that was revealed to Daniel was a great Secret. But Daniel might say,
if the Book be shut up, how shall the Truth come to be known? Many shall
run to and fro, and take pains in finding it out, and at last this Truth
shall come to be found out, and Knowledge shall be increased. And certainly it
is the Antichristian yoke that does hide this Truth. Men dare not whisper of
any truth, but of such as are held in the Church of Rome: But when there comes
to be liberty of Churches, and that men may freely search into this truth,
knowledge will be increased. The fourth Reason is, because in the last verse,
there seems to be a Promise even to Daniel, that he should have his share and
part in this glory: Was it such a matter, that Daniel in the resurrection
should have his lot, and that he should stand up at the Day of Judgment? No!
but that he should have his Lot in that Resurrection was a great Privilege.
Again, for Christ's Reigning with the Saints, take two Places in the Psalms.
Psalm 49.14. The Upright shall have Dominion over them in the Morning, there
is a Time they shall have Dominion, though now they have a Night, a morning
shall come that the Upright shall have Dominion. Psalm, 149.5. and so on: Let
his Saints be joyful in Glory, etc. and a two Edged Sword in their hands: To
execute Vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the People, etc. What
shall we make of these Scriptures? Indeed if we be put upon Allegorical
senses, we may put off any Scripture; but if we take them literally, why should
we not? And the Promise that is made to them that overcome, Revel. 12. the
latter end of it; He that overcommeth and keeps my words, to him will I give
Power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, and as the
Vessels of a Potter, they shall be broken to shivers. What shall we make of
this? except the Saints shall reign, and there shall be a glorious Reign of
Christ with the Saints, and so that place of the Saints reigning and judging
the World, some interpret it of the Day of Judgment, but these Scriptures
seem to have an apparancie to be before; and therefore Christ is said to make
them Kings and Priests unto GOD spiritually, though not every one properly
Kings over others; yet so, as to have Power and Dominion in the World; and
therefore where it is said in the Gospel, that righteous men desired to see
those things that you see, and did not: in the 10th. of Luke it is said, Kings
desired to see those things that you see, and have not seen them: so that
Christ shall reign together with his Saints. And that there shall be such a
reign of Christ; and this Hallelujah appears by many Arguments, as take this
one drawn from Scripture.

If there be many Prophesies and Promises in Scripture that are not yet
fulfilled; and the fulfilling whereof will bring the Church into a more
glorious condition then ever it was yet in the World: then there is a glorious
Time a coming. Now there are such Scriptures wherein are such glorious things
promised to be fulfilled to the Church, as yet never were fulfilled: And that
we know not what to make of, unless there be a truth in this. 24. Isay. 23.
Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun shall be ashamed, when the
Lord of Hoasts shall reign in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem: When was this, that
there was such a reign of Christ in Mount Zion, as that the Moon was
confounded, and the Sun ashamed? Certainly this cannot be understood of their
return from their Captivity, for the People of the Jews were under Contempt
after their Deliverance from Captivity, and came not to such a Glory as this,
and were under a kind of Captivity, and met with such oppositions, that they
were as long building the Temple as they were in Captivity, seventy years.

Object.
But some that were in Captivity saw both the first and the second Temple; how
could this be, if it were so long?

Answer
The Foundation they might see, but not see it finished. And in Ahasuerus time
they were in Captivity, as that had not God wrought mightily, they had all
been cut off by a wicked Haman: Therefore they were not so glorious. Isaiah.
33.20. Look upon Zion the City of our Solemnities: Thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down: This
Text neither has not bin fulfilled hitherto, but must remain. Isay 54.11. Oh
thou afflicted, tossed with Tempests, and not comforted; Behold, J will lay thy
Stones with fair Colors, and thy Foundations with Saphires, etc. When
Antichrist shall fall down, and the Jews, called; and this Halleluia sung, The
Lord God omnipotent reigns: then this Promise may be made good. Isay. 60. if
you read the whole Chapter, there are glorious things spoken of the reign of
the Church: but there have never been such glorious times since those
Prophecies, and therefore these we are to expect to be fulfilled. That place of
Ezekiel, of the dry Bones receiving Flesh and Life is apparent to be the Jews
coming, and Gods joining two sticks together, making Judah and Ephraim to be
one; and therefore glorious things are to be expected immediately after the
fail of Antichrist: and if you may speak of the fall of Antichrist as done,
you may speak of those Promises as done. So in the 21.22. Revel. There is a
description of the glorious estate of the Church, which ordinarily is applied
to the glory of Heaven: But there is a mistake in applying these things to the
glory that is in Heaven, and not to think of the glory that shall appear on
Earth before. It is said, that John saw the new Jerusalem come down from
Heaven; if it had been the glory of Heaven, more like Heaven should have been
opened, and he raised up to it. Again, John here says, that the foundations
of the Walls had twelve Stones, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles:
that the Foundations of Heaven should have the names of the twelve Apostles is
not like. For Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Patriarchs and Prophets shall be
there as well as the Apostles; and why should it not have the names of the
Patriarchs and Prophets as well as the Apostles? And if you read the
Revelations, you shall find that the Kings and Princes came to give in their
glory to the Church: Now that the Kings and Princes should come in to make
Heaven glorious, there is no likelihood in that. Thus there are these
Prophesies to be fulfilled, and these Promises to be accomplished, and
therefore a time for the Lord GOD with the Saints to reign gloriously: And why
should we think it much? Let us but consider the great Designs that God has
in honoring of his Saints in the World, and we have not cause to think much
of such a truth as this: for hereafter in Heaven Christ will be honored before
his Saints. But how will Christ be honored before all the World you will say
at the day of Judgment? But only at that time so long as the wicked shall
stand for their sentence? Do we think there shall be no further time for
Christ and his Saints to be honored but just then? God intends to honor
Christ and the Saints before all the World. Christ has purchased a glorious
Condition by humbling himself so low to the Death of the Cross, and therefore
was promised the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth
for his possession; and this must be given in due Time; and God is pleased to
raise the hearts of his People to expect it. And those that are most humble,
most godly, most gracious, most spiritual, searching into the Scriptures, have
their hearts most raised in expectation of this. And it is not like that that
work of the Spirit of theirs shall be in vain. But God is beginning to clear
it up more and more: God is beginning to stir in the World, and to do great
things in the World, the Issue whereof (I hope) will come to that we speak of.

Quest.
But what shall be the glorious Condition of the Church, when the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns; for which the Saints shall sing this glorious Hallelujah?
Tell us something of this good Land.

Answ.
In the general I answer, It is the resurrection from the Dead, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 11. concerning the Calling of the Jews. But for Particulars;
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God.

The first thing wherein the happiness of the Church consists, is this: That
it shall be delivered from all the Enemies of it, and from all molesting
troubles, and so be in a most blessed safety and security. The God of Peace
shall tread down Satan shortly, and all that are of Satan. Christ is described
in this Rev. 19. with his garment dyed in Blood, when he does appear to come
and take the Kingdom; and he appeared with many Crowns on his head; that
notes his many victories* and his name was King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
And the Saints appeared triumphing with him, clothed with white linen, and set
upon white Horses; is that a clothing for Soldiers? Yes, for the Army of
Christ, that rather comes to triumph then for to fight. Christ fights and
vanquisheth all these Enemies: and they come triumphing in white. All Tears
shall be wiped away from the Church, Isay. 25.8. Revel. 21.4. There shall be
no Brier nor Thorn, Ezekiel. 28.24. among the People of GOD; Ezekiel did once
live among Briers and Thorns, but there shall be no pricking Thorn left. And
this City that is described in the Revelation, shall have the gates always
open, in regard of the secuirty that is there; no danger at all of any Enemy.

Jew and Gentile shall join together to flow to the Beautifulnes of the Lord,
Dan. 2. verse 35. Christ is compared to the Stone, that shall break the Image,
and shall become a Mountain, and fill the whole Heaven, Isaiah, 60. They shall
come as Doves to the Windows. And when JOHN came to meathe City, the Church;
it was a great and mighty City.

Thirdly, because where there is much Confluence, there uses to be a
Contraction of much filthiness. Therefore in the third place it shall be most
pure, a pure Church: yea, in great part, if not altogether. Nay we may almost
affirm, altogether to be delivered from hypocrites. Without there shall be
Dogs, and whosoever shall work or make a lie. Not without, in Hell; but
without the Church. Hypocrites shall be discovered and cast out from the
Church: though many get into the Church now; then the righteous Nation shall
enter in. In the 44th. of Ezekiel, 9. There is a description of the Church
under the Gospel: And he shows that none uncircumcised in heart shall enter in
there: But the fulfilling of the Prophecies of those Chapters in the latter end
of Ezekiel, will not be till this time; and then no uncircumcised in heart
shall enter, Revel. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, etc. there are two Negatives in the Original, they shall not, they
shall not enter. As Christ says, Whosoever comes to me, J will in no wise cast
out; I will not, I will not cast out. Blessed are they that are called to the
Supper of the Lamb. Before, many were called, and few chosen; but now all that
are called are chosen, and none that are made partakers of the first
Resurrection shall die the second Death. It is a most pure Church, and
therefore is described; The Walls to be precious Stones, the City to be as
clear as glass, and the Pavement to be pure gold.

Fourthly, there shall be abundance of glorious Prophecies fulfilled, and
glorious Promises accomplished. When you read the Prophets, you have Prophecies
of many glorious things: And the knowledge of this truth will help to
understand those Prophecies. Revel. 2. It is said there was a Book sealed
showed unto John, and none could open the Book but the Lamb. The Book of the
Prophecies Prophecies is a sealed Book, and especially the book of the
Prophecies of the Revelatious. But when the Lamb, Christ, shall come to reign,
this shall be opened to us. And therefore it is said, the holy Apostles and
Prophets should rejoice at the destruction of Antichrist, because the Prophets
should be so clearly opened, and understood by the People of God. Revel. 22.6.
These sayings are faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy Prophets
sent his Angel, to show unto his Servants, the things which must shortly be
done. Why the Lord God of the holy Prophets? That Lord God that did intend to
make the holy Prophets clear and evident. Says the woman of Samaria, when the
Messiah comes, he shall teach us all things: We may well say it of the coming
of Christ, here the meaning of abundance of Prophecies and Promises, that we
know not what to make of, shall be clear before us. Christ is called the word
of God, and is said to be faithful and true, because he will discover the truth
and faithfulness of the Promises. And this will be a glorious Time, when the
Prophecies shall be opened, and the promises come to be fulfilled.

Fifthly, Abundance of hidden Mysteries of Godliness will be cleared then, that
now are exceeding dark. 4. Revel. John did but see a Door opened in Heaven:
But afterward, Revel. 19. he saw Heaven opened. Noting the clear revelation
of Truth that shall be then: And, Revel. 11.19. There was seen the Arc of the
Testament: Whereas the Arc stood before, in the Holy of Holies, that was shut
up, that none was to come into it, but the High Priest: But now it is opened to
all. In the Arc where the Secrets a Type of the Secrets that shall be opened
at this Time, that were shut up before. Glorious Truths shall be revealed, and
above all, the Mystery of the Gospel, and the righteousness of Faith shall
be discovered. Before what a little of the Mystery of the Gospel, and the
righteousness of Faith was discovered! but this will grow brighter and
brighter till that time, which is the great Design of God for his Glory to all
Eternity.

Sixthly, the gift of the Saints shall be abundantly raised. He that is weak
shall be as David, and he that is strong as the Angel of the Lord Zach. 12.8.
and then shall be accomplished that Promise, that GOD will power his Spirit on
them; and their young men shall see visions, and their old men shall dream
dreams. It was fulfilled in part upon the Apostles, but the full is not till
that time knowledge shall be increased.

Seventhly, the Graces of the Saints shall be wonderfully enlarged, even in a
manner glorified; thoughuot so full as afterward in the highest Heaven but
mightily raised. The Saints shall be all clothed in white linen which is the
righteousness of the Saints; that is, the Righteousness they have by Christ,
whereby they shall be righteous before God, and holy before Men: HOLINESS shall
be written upon their Pots, and upon their bridles: upon every thing their
Graces shall shine forth exceedingly to the glory of God. John saw a Vision of
the Bride coming down from Heaven, with a Heavenly Glory, fit to meet Christ
her Bridegroom, to stand in his presence, and serve him day and night.

Yea further, Religion shall be honored, and no more be a disgrace. God has
promised to his Church that he will wipe away their Reproaches for ever.

The People of God have been and are a despised People: But their Reproach
shall be for ever taken away, and they shall not be ashamed of Religion: for it
shall be glorified before the Sons of men. Therefore it is said Revel. 14.
They shall have the Name of God upon their Foreheads, openly to profess
Religion; A time shall come when ten men shall take hold on the skirt of a Jew,
and say, We will go with thee. Cant. 8.1. I will kiss thee, yet should I not
be despised: She would embrace Chirst publicly, and should not be despised:
It shall be so honorable, as none shall be able to despise it. There are
notable Texts of Scripture, to show the great Honor that shall be in the ways
of Religion, Isaiah 49.23. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
Nursing Mothers; they shall bow down to thee, and lick up the Dust of thy
Feet. What a high expression is this for the Honor of Godliness? So in
Isaiah, 60. are a great many of notable expressions, verse, 13. I will make the
place of my Feet glorious; that is, the Church. There was a time when as the
Feet of Christ were as burning Brass, to show the suffering condition of the
Church: But now the Feet of Christ, that is the Church, shall be made glorious,
verse. 14. you have two notable Scriptures for this in the Prophecy of Zachary.
The first in the 4th. of Zachary, 16. They shall be as the Stone of a
Crowne-lifted up: They are now trampled upon as the stones of the street; but
they shall be as the Stones of a Crown; and not only so, but as the Stones of
a Crown lifted up: The second place is in Zach. 12.5. The Governors of Judah
shall say in their hearts, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in
the Lord of Hoasts their God. We know, that now in many places, the Governors
of Judah, the great ones of the Country, their Spirits have been set against
the Saints of God: We know what reproachful names they have put upon them, and
how they have discountenanced them: Though the Governors of Judah have counted
them factious, and Schismatics, and Puritanes* there is a Time coming, when
the Governors of Judah shall be convinced of the Excellency of Gods people,
so convinced as to say in their hearts, that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that
is, the Saints of God gathered together in a Church, are the best
Commonwealths men: not seditious men, not factious, not disturbers of the
State; but they are our strength in the Lord of Hosts, they are the strength of
a Kingdom, and shall be countenanced by them as the strength of a Kingdom, as
those that will be most useful in a Kingdom. This will be a blessed time,
when as wicked men and wickedness shall be despised, and Godliness as
honorable as ever it was contemptible: this shall be when the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns in his Church. And through Gods mercy, we see light
peeping out this way: That the Governors of Judah are saying, The Inhabitants
of Jerusalem shall be our strength: Religion shall be honored in the World one
day, and not only at the day of Judgment, but here.

In the ninth place; the presence of Jesus Christ, and of God shall be
exceeding glorious in the Church: then the name of it shall be called JEHOVAH
SHAMMAH, The Lord is there. They shall follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes:
they shall see the King in his beauty and glory. And such a presence of Christ
will be there, as it is questionable whether there shall be need of Ordinances,
at least in that way, that now there is. And therefore some interpret that
place so: They shall be all taught of God, and shall not need to teach one
another. And so that place 2. Peter, 1.19. We have also a moresure Word of
promise, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed until the Day dawne, and the
Day Star arise in your hearts. Now the Morning-Starre, the Holy Ghost applies
to them, Revel. 2.28. That is such a glorious presence of Christ, as shall so
instruct them, as if they had not need to take heed to the Word of Prophecy.
And in Revelat. 21. They shall need no Temple, nor Sun, nor Moon; for the
Lamb is the Temple and the light thereof: the presence of Christ shall be
there, and supply all kind of Ordinances. And Revel. 7. Christ says; He will
lead them to the Fountain of living Waters; all the Ordinances. Here are but
the streams and Conduits; then they shall be led to the Fountain. Though we
dare not affirm that there shall be no Ordinances; yet is there some
probability at least thus far in comparison; there shall be such a presence of
Christ there, as therr shall not be that need of Ordinances.

In the tenth place. There shall be the addition of Martyrs, and many of the
Worthies of God that have lived in former Times shall rise again. If you read
the 7th. Revel. and 21th. Revel. you cannot but be convinced of this, That
those that have suffered Martyrdom under Antichrist shall have the glory of
that time; and Daniel shall come up and stand in his lot; and as he, so many of
the Worthies of God in former times: and this shall add to the Glory of that
time.

The eleventh is this: There shall be most blessed Union of all the Churches of
the World. The envy of Ephraim and of Judah shall be taken away. Isaiah 11.
There shall be one King; and one Name. Zach. 14.9. We all profess one Lord,
but give him diverse Names: but then there shall be one Lord, and his name one.
Zeph. 3.9. They shall serve the Lord with one Consent, with one Shoulder, it is
in the Original: And if you read that Chapter, you may see what Reference it
has to a more glorious Time, than the returning of the Jews from the
Captivity. Dissentions in any one Congregation are evil; and for one Church to
dissent from another is a grievous evil. Blessed will the Time be, when all
dissentions shall be taken away; and when there shall be a perfect Union of
all, and not any distinction of Calvinists or Lutherans, or the like: but all
shall come, and serve God, and be called by one Name.

The twelfth is the Resurrection of the Creatures of the World: and so in that
regard there shall be abundance of outward Glory and Prosperity. That place in
the 8th. of the Romans. The Creature groans under the Burden that it is in,
that it may be delivered into the Adoption of the Sons of God. When the
fullness of the glory of the Adoption of the Sons of God shall come, the
Creatures shall be delivered to them. The whole World is purchased by Christ,
and purchased for the Saints, that is Christ's aim. All is yours, (says the
Apostle) the whole World: and therefore, Revel. 21.7. it is said, The Saints
shall inherit all things. You see that the Saints have but little now in the
World; now they are the poorest and the meanest of all; but then when the
Adoption of the Sons of God shall come in the fullness of it, the World shall
be theirs; for the World is purchased for them by Jesus Christ. Not only
Heaven shall be your Kingdom but this World bodily. And so that place, 2 Pet.
3.10. where it is said, The Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat: the Apostle speaks as if it were
the Day of Judgment. But there is one passage whereby we may gather that the
Apostle only means a mighty change that shall be before the day of Judgment,
verse 13. We according to his promise look for new Heavens and new Earth. Where
has God promised a new Heaven, and a new Earth? I know no place in Scripture
that I can refer this place unto, but Isaiah 65.15. which is apparent to be
meant of the Church. Now the Apostle speaks of these Times, when there shall
be a mighty change in the World: then shall be fulfilled that Promise, There
shall be new Heavens, and a new Earth. We can find no such promise but in
Isaiah, and that is meant of the Church, and therefore it is probable the
Apostle means that Lactantius says, When the Thousand years come, the World
shall bring forth Fruit alone, and the Rock shall distill Dew, and no
Creature shall live upon Prey: the Dog shall not hunt, the Child shall not be
afraid of the Serpent: making the place of Isaiah, which we understand
metaphorically, to be understood, literally, Of the Wolf and the Lambs living
together, and the Child playing upon the Hole of the Cockatrice.

And all the Prayers that ever we put up for the Church will be answered, and
the blessing of all will come upon the Churches. Here we have some degree of
Blessing: But the Blessing of all the prayers of the Prophets and Apostles will
come upon it. In Isay, They were to cry to God, and give him no rest, till he
made Jerusalem the praise of the whole World: that is, till God did bring this
Time, and Jerusalem has not bin so lifted up. All these prayers that have not
given God rest all this while, shall be answered, and Jerusalem shall be
advanced.

Lastly, Those glorious Titles that the Church of God has in the old
Testament, will be made up to the full; and that is a Resultance from all the
Former. There are many glorious Titles of the Church of God in the old
Testament: Now the estate of the Church in the old Testament was but Typical;
typifying the estate of the Gospel. I shall name some of them, and when those
come to be fulfilled, it will be glorious. First the Lords Portion. Deuteronomy. 32.9.
Secondly his Pleasant Portion. Ierem. 12.10. Thirdly his Inheritance. Isaiah.
19.25. All People are the Work of his Hands, But his Church is his
Inheritance. Fourthly, the dearly Beloved of his Soul. Ierem. 12.7. Fifthly,
Gods Treasure, and Peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19.5. Sixthly, His Glory, Isaiah,
46.13. Seventhly, The House of Gods glory, Isaiah, 60.7. Eighthly, A Crown of
Glory. Isaiah, 62.3. Ninthly, A Royal Diadem, in the same place. Tenthly, The
glory of God. Ierem. 3.17. Again, The Throne of his Glory. Jeremiah, 14.21.
Again, The Ornament of God: and The Beauty of his Ornament, Ezekiel. 7.21.
Again, The Beauty of his Ornament in Majesty, in the same place. Now to have
all this made up to the full; to show that these are no high expressions, but
rather come short of what will be: it must be a glorious condition.

But you will say, Are these things true?

To that we answer; For the truth of them, I will go no further then this
Chapter, verse 9. These are the true sayings of God. It is a very strange
Phrase: If they be the sayings of God, they must needs be true. Were it not
enough to say they were the sayings of God, or true sayings? No, they are the
true sayings of GOD. And in the Original it is not only the true sayings of
God; but the true sayings of that God that is true: therefore they are certain.

Quest.
But how can they be?

Answ.
Zachary, 8.9. If it be mavelous in your eyes; should it also be mavelous
in my eyes, says the Lord of Hoasts? they are mavelous in your eyes; but
they are not so in mine. It is God Omnipotent that shall do these things, by
that power, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Mountains
shall be made plain, and he shall come skipping over Mountains, and over
difficulties, nothing shall hinder him. And why should you think it strange,
that these things should be, though they be great: God has done already as
great things as these. Certainly Christians that shall acknowledge the great
and never sufficiently admired and adored work of God in the Hypostaticall
Union of the Natures, that God should be Man, should never ask this Question,
how these things should be? or to think that any object propounded for our
Faith is too difficult.

Quest.
But when shall these things be?

Answ.
Truly (Brethren) we hope it is not long before they shall be; and the nearer
the Time comes, the more clearly these things shall be revealed. And because
they begin to be revealed so much as they do now, we have cause to hope the
Time is at hand. In Daniel, 12. God bids Daniel seal his Book until the time
come, as if then it should be opened. Does God begin to open this Book? Know
that the time is at hand. John was bidden not to seal the Book, because the
Time was at hand. The neernesse of the Time at hand discovers the Book; and
the nearer the Time, the more it is discovered. No place in Scripture gives us
so much light to know when this shall be as Dan. 12.11. And from the time that
the daily Sacrifices shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes
desolate set up; there shall be a thousand, two hundred and ninety days. What
is the meaning of this? The light that I have from this, I acknowledge to be
from that worthy Instrument of God Mr. Brightman. A day is usually taken for a
year, and so many days as were set, so many years it should be. All the
question is about the beginning of the time. This abomination of desolation was
in Julians time 360. because then Julian would set up the Temple again that
was destroyed, in despite of the Christians, and would set up the Jewish
Religion again: That was the abormination of desolation, says he; and the
whole Jewish Religion was not consumed till that time. Now reckon so many
years according to the Number of the days, it comes to, 1650. and it is now
1641. and that place for the abomination of desolation is like to be it as any
that can be named. But it is said, Blessed is he that comes to another Number:
1335. days, that is 45. years more added, that is, says he in 1650. they
shall begin; but it shall be 45. years, before it comes to full Head, and
blessed is he that comes to this Day. And he has hit right in other things,
as never the like, in making Sardis to be the Church of Germany, and foretold
from thence how things would fall out, and we see now are. Now we have also a
voice from the Multitude, as from the Waters, and it begins to come from the
Thundrings.

Seeing these things shall be, what manner of persons ought we to be? That is
the work I intended to have done, to have showed you the Duties, these things
call for at our Hands. If God has such an intention to glorify his Church,
and that in this World: Oh, let every one say to his own heart; What manner of
persons ought we to be? and especially, What manner of persons ought ye to
be? because you are beginning this despised Work, gathering a Church together,
which way God will honor. Certainly, the Communion of Saints, and independency
of Congregations God will honor.

And this Work is a Foundation of abundance of glory that God shall have, and
will continue till the coming of Christ. And blessed are they that are now
content to keep the Word of Gods Patience. And do you keep the Word of Gods
Patience, though you suffer for it, as you now do. And wait, the Text says,
Those that testify against Antichrist and Antichristianisme, and keep the Word
of Gods Patience, God will keep them in the hour of Temptation, he will make
them a Pillar in his House, and they shall never go out; God will open their
door, so as none shall shut it till the coming of Christ: and he will write
upon them the Name of the new JERUSALEM. Therefore keep the Word of Gods
Patience now you have an opportunity in your hands for furthering this great
Work. Take heed that you loose not this opportunity: certainly, if there
should fall out any just cause amongst you of scandal in regard of Divisions,
or any other way, you may do more hurt to hinder this glorious Work, then all
the Persecutors could do. For you will persuade the consciences of Men, that
this is not a Way of Christ. Persecutors cannot do so. So that the Governors
of Judah will not say, Our strength is in the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, those
that profess themselves to be the People of Jerusalem.

FINIS.

