Benjamin. Keach Minister of the Gospel* Aetat. 57.



THE JEWISH SABBATH ABROGATED: OR, THE Saturday Sabbatarians confuted. In Two
Parts.

First, Proving the Abrogation of the Old Seventh-day Sabbath.

Secondly, That the Lord's Day is of Divine Appointment.

Containing several Sermons newly preached upon a special Occasion, wherein are
many new Arguments not found in former Authors.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not again entangled with the Yoke of Bondage. LONDON; Printed and
sold by John Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street, 1700.

To the READER.
THere is not one Controvertable Point in and about Religion that I less
thought to have been concerned with this way, than that contained in these
Sermons presented here to thy view, until I was alarmed on a sudden, and
provoked (some few Months ago) to undertake it; there being one Person
especially under my charge (who for some time, by his unsettled and wavering
Spirit, and aspiring Temper, I feared would be troublesome) who had for some
considerable time, unknown to me, sucked in the Notion of the Jewish Sabbath,
and labored to corrupt many others of the younger sort, some of which, with
himself, fell into the Practice of keeping that Day, and cast off the
Lord's Day, as not being of Divine Appointment. Some of them being Apprentices,
declared they would and could do any Business or Work for their Masters upon
the first Day of the Week: And this Principle they received without acquainting
me or the Church with it, or ever coming to me to hear what I had to say
against it; insomuch that when it was publicly known, it had almost put the
whole Congregation into a flame; but to prevent which, I was desired by diverse
Members to endeavor to convince them by Scripture and solid Arguments, which I
labored to do, but found all was in vain as to several of them.

So that the Brethren saw it was necessary for me to preach upon this Subject,
which I my self perceived an absolute necessity to do; and praised be the Lord
who has blessed my Undertaking herein, and answered my hopes, which was not so
much to regain those hotheaded and conceited young Men, as to establish,
confirm and strengthen all others; many being much startled, and doubting which
Day they ought to observe, which the Ringleaders I perceived much gloried at,
some of them giving it out, that they hoped to bring over great part of the
Congregation to their Opinion; but these seasonable and timely Endeavors,
through the Blessing of God, have, I hope, finally prevented their Design, all
generally (save them who were at first corrupted) being thoroughly established
in the Observation of the Lord's Day in opposition to the old Seventh-day
Sabbath: And several that were wavering told me how fully all their Doubts were
resolved by hearing some of these Sermons preached.

These things first mentioned being the occasion of my insisting upon this
Controversy, I hope all will say my Call was just; and none will or can blame
me, that have no prejudice against me. And now also at the request and desire
of many (some not Members with us) the Sermons are published, hoping they may
be of some use to the Church of God in general.

As to the Work it self, all may perceive that I have taken no small Pains
according to my small Ability, in searching not only into God's Word, but also
into the Works and Labors of many pious and learned Authors; and I have cited
(to confirm my own Arguments) many Passages out of their Writings. (1.)
Thinking their words might do more with some Persons, than any thing I my self
might say, whose Learning and Abilities far exceed mine. (2.) Because few may
be ever saw some of these Books. I have, it is true, repeated some things two or
three times which I look upon emphatical, that they might make the greater
Impression on such Readers, for whose sake these Sermons are published, viz.
who are not learned; for others need not my help.

Reader, I did not (for some reasons) deliver from the Pulpit great part of
what is here published; and also some things I might say that are here omitted,
which being not in my Notes, I could not remember.

Dr. Owen, Dr. Wallis, Mr. Warren, etc. in particular, with several other
Reverend Ministers, have said enough to satisfy any on this Subject, whose
Books have not ever been answered. In my Citations of diverse Authors, I have
transcribed both the Greek and Latin, that all may know the original words, of
which our Opponents would make some earnings; and I can solemnly say I have not
wilfully mist in any Quotation. And if any of these Sabbatarians make Reply to
me, let them rather answer them (especially those three I have now mentioned)
than me, it will be more for their Honor: And this I will say, if they do
think to reply, unless they answer what these and other learned Men have said
which I have here recited, I shall take it for no Answer at all: Let them
therefore attempt to do it effectually, or not meddle with it.

It Is true, I differ from diverse learned Men in one or two things I have cited,
and from Reverend Dr. Owen particularly, i. e. about Adam in Innocence, and the
Patriarchs keeping the ^eventh Day; yet what the Doctor says on Heb. 4. does
well comport with my Principle: but tho as soon as God finished his Work, he
rested, and that day of Rest ensued thereon, to answer the end of Creation, and
the Covenant of Works; yet I cannot see any ground to believe it was given to
any to observe until Moses's time, Exodus 16. for reasons I and others have
given. Moreover, Dr. Wallis has showed in his Rejoiner to Mr. Bamfield, p. 123.
that that very Day before it rained Manna could not be a Sabbath, because on
that day Quails covered the Camp, and they were not forbid to gather them,
Exodus 16. 8, 13. But no more of that here. I expect better usage or treatment
from these Opponents than I met formerly with from some others about another
Controversy, who left the Argument to abuse my Person; yet I may say (with a
late Mr. Grascome.
Writer on this Subject) as for the Leaders (he says Deceivers) I despair of
doing good to them, but shall be glad if I may be an Instrument to recover any
that are misled, or deceived: Self-denial is a hard Lesson. You will find many
new Arguments I think not found in former Authors. I shall conclude with Advice
to unsettled Persons, who are ready to receive Novelties. But first, take a
Note or two how you may know such: they that are firmly rooted in the Truth
will not be soon shaken or removed.

Erroneous Persons, 1. Are subject to cavil with Truth doubtfully uttered,
which by an honest Hearer will be well taken.

2. They are subject to contradict plain evident Truth with a delight to
gainsay it, because they would not have it to be otherwise than they believe.

3. They have a vehement desire to infect others, or to draw many to be of
their Opinion.

4. A desire of Conference under pretense of taking Satisfaction, but on
purpose to vent their Notions more freely, and get the good opinion of others,
and occasion of insulting.

5. Commend themselves through Pride, and diminish the Credit and Honor of
others, and care not what pious Congregations they divide and trouble, to
augment their own Company.

6. Make a Profession of new Light, that hardly any before them ever attained,
and that all are in darkness but themselves.

7. Pretend to Conscience, and that they would embrace the Truth when they see
it: yet after clear Demonstration of Truth they remain stubborn, and persevere
in their Errors.

8. They matter not Church-dealings, nor any just and righteous Censure, nor
regard their own most solemn Church-Engagements, so that they can but please
their own fancy, and feed on their new Notions the more greedily -- And hardly
can a Man receive an Error, but he will prove a Seducer of others.

9. They show great Zeal and concernedness of Mind if they find any oppose
their Errors, as if their All lay at stake.

10. And if they receive one Error, they are ready to receive more.

11. They commonly seem uneasy under the Word where they are Members, and catch
at any thing to blemish their Minister, and will wander abroad to hear as their
fancies lead them, as if under no Government, tho they grieve and afflict the
Church and Members to whom they belong, breaking Christ's Bands, and casting
his Cords from them.

To close, (1.) Take heed of erroneous Books, and if you doubt do not presently
turn your Doubts into Practice. (2.) Beware of your own private Interpretation
of Scripture, and confer with such as have better Judgments than your selves.
(3.) Suspect all private Opinions which differ and dissent from the general
Doctrine, as taught by Christ and his Apostles, and owned in the two next Ages
after them, or that dissent from the general Doctrine and Practice of such whom
you believe in this Age have obtained the clearest Light: remember the way of
Truth is no By-path, but trodden by the Primitive Flock or Gospel-Churches.
(4.) Besure hear what can be said against your Notion, as well as what you hear
for it. There is one thing I should have noted touching the Error of these
Sabbatarians, viz. their Notion brings in an external force upon the Conscience
in matters of Religion; for they must force their Children and Servants not
only to rest, but to worship God on the seventh Day tho against their Light, or
they are guilty of Sabbathbreaking. But I will add no more.

O that God would put a Rebuke on, and stop all the Errors of these evil days,
and increase Love among his People! Let us all cry for more of the Anointing,
or for the latter Rain, and the glorious Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
is now just at the door. And, Reader, if thou do receive any profit by what
is here wrote, give the Glory to God, and let me have thy Prayers, who am thy
Soul's Friend and Servant in the Gospel,

Horsly-down, Southwark, this 12th of Jan. 1699-1700. Benj. Keach.

The Contents of this Book.
The First Part.
SErmon I. The occasion of these Sermons, with the Scope of the Text, Page 1 to
6. The Terms opened, and eight Explanatory Propositions, p. 6 to 16. Sermon. II.
The 9th Proposition containing many things about this Controversy, out of Dr.
Owen on the Sab. p. 23 to 27. The General Proposition from whence the Author
proceeds in his whole Work, in six Particulars, p. 28, 29. No Law of the
Sabbath written in Adam's Heart in Innocence, showed in six Particulars, p. 29
to 35. No positive Command given to Adam to keep the 7th day as a Sabbath,
proved by 12 Arguments, p. 37 to 56. Sermon. III. The Patriarchs kept not the 7th
day, proved in 12 Arguments. p. 58 to 74. Sermon. IV. The Sabbath begun in the
Wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. p. 75, 76. What a Moral Precept is, showed from
the Learned, p. 88, 89. The simple Morality of the 4th Command consists not in
the observance of the precise 7th Day, proved by 4 Arguments, p. 86 to 91.
Sermon. V. Eight Arguments more to prove the same, p. 93 to 124. The 7th Day a
sign of the Covenant of Works, p. (...), 104. What a Shadow of, p. 107. Sermon.
6. The Law of the Decalogue was only given to Israel and Proselites, p. 125 to
133. Objections answered from Romans 3. 19. Gal. 4. 5. and James, p. 133 to 135.
The Moral Law in the hand of Christ as Mediator, p. 136 to 147. No Precept nor
Precedent to keep the 7th day in the New Testament, p. 147 to 152. Sermon. VII.
Ten Arguments against the 7th Day, p. 155 to 158. The Law of the 7th Day
Sabbath not written in the Hearts of Gospel-Believers; p. 156, 157. Twelve
dangerous Consequents attending the Opinion of these Sabbatarians, p. 161 to
172.
The second Part.
SErmon I. The Scope of the Text opened, p. 175, 176. The first Day of Divine
Appointment: Man has no power to appoint a weekly Day of Worship, p. 178, 179.
The Equity of one Day in seven, p. 180. How to distinguish Moral Precepts from
Ceremonial, p. 181, 182. Pentecost proved the first Day of the Week. A long
citation of Mr. Warren, who cites Dr. Ulher's Letter to Dr. Twiss, from p. 186
to 198. Sermon. II. The Foundation of the first Day; partly containing Citations
of Dr. Owen on Heb. 4. from p. 200 to 221. This is the Day the Lord has made,
p. 210 to 214. First day confirmed by the Examples of the Gospel-Saints and
Churches, p. 214 to 223. Sermon. III. First day proved from Acts 20. 7. p. 224.
Also from Rev. 1. 10. The Lord's Day proved to be the first Day of the Week, p.
224 to 248. Sermon. 4. Proving there is one Day of the Week for preaching the
Word in season, and that it is the first Day, p. 248, 249. The first Day proved
from 1 Cor. 16. 12. p. 250. to 264. When the first Day begins, and how it ought
to be kept, from p. 266 to the end.
Faults escaped the Press, which before you read pray correct with your Pen.
PAge 23. in the Contents, line 6. for no, read any. P. 93. l. 5. for six, r.
eight. P. 104. l. 11. for God's Covenant, r. is called the Covenant. P. 132.
last line save one, r. not without Law to God. P. 140. l. 26. for breaking, r.
breakers. P. 142. last line, for by, r. is. P. 143. l. 3. blot out Law. P. 147.
l. 33. r. Sabbath was made, blot out not. P. 180. l. 27. for he, r. our. P.
205. Title, for Heb. 4. 11. r. Heb. 4. 9. and so P. 207. P. 219. l. 16. f. had
they met, r. meeting together. P. 249. l. 25. for approved it, r. and he
approved of it. P. 263. l. 26. for when they that intimate, r. when they
intimate.

The Jewish Sabbath Abrogated, or the Saturday Sabbatarian confuted, etc.
SERMON I.
The occasion of the Author's preaching on this Subject. The scope and
coherence of the Text opened. The Terms explained, and the Doctrines raised.
Diverse preliminary Propositions, showing what Medium the Author intends to take
in treating on this Subject.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days and months, times and years: I am afraid of
you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.
MY Brethren, The occasion of the Author's preaching these Sermons.
I am troubled I have such a provoking occasion to enter upon this Controversy,
viz. What day of the Week we under the Gospel Dispensation ought to observe as
a day of Rest, and of solemn Worship to the Lord, since universally the Church
and People of God of all Persuasions are agreed about it, and have been ever
since the new World, or Gospel-day did commence, except a few Christians
formerly, and a little Remnant of late times in this Nation, who have deserted,
and erred in this case. And had I not a clear Call to enter upon this Subject,
through the inadvertence of some young Men among us, I had not meddled with it;
who have not only, without advising with me or the Congregation, presumed to
keep the Jewish Sabbath, but with an unaccountable and overheated Zeal have
prosecuted their Notion and Practice to the disturbing of the Quiet and Peace
of the Congregation. My Brethren, is it not a lamentable thing to see how Satan
has prevailed to hinder the Power of Godliness, which consists not in Meats
and Drinks (nor in the Observation of Jewish Days) but in Righteousness, Romans
14. 17.
and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost?

One while he has endeavored to do this by suggesting of strange and uncouth
Notions, and Principles that edify not, into the minds of Christians; at
another time by raising up needless Cavils and Objections about the mode of the
discharge of a Moral as well as a Gospel-Duty, I mean that of singing the
Praises of God, which formerly caused no small trouble amongst us, as well as
in other Churches.

But when that Controversy was near vanquished, so another is raised, which I
hope God will make me an Instrument to quell also, and utterly drive away
hence, he having set me for the defense of the Gospel, and of all pure
Gospel Truths, in this place, in opposition to all Innovations, and Judaical
Rites and Observations, which some seem too fond of.

Yet let none mistake me: I shall not censure such as keep the seventh day,
provided they lay no stress upon it, but believe they are obliged by the
Authority of Christ (who is Lord of the Sabbath) to observe religiously the
Lord's Day, or first day of the Week, free from Labor, in the Worship and
Service of God; provided also they are such as have the command of their own
time, and can do it without wronging their Families, or are not by the
Observation of the seventh day necessitated to violate Precepts that all agree
are Moral Duties.

1. In not doing their Fathers; or Masters Business, in not working six days;
for tho it may be said of some, six days Work may be done, yet it may be said
of others who are Servants, six days they must work, it being their
indispensible Duty so to do.

2. In violating the Fifth Commandment (as the whole Moral Law is in the hands
of Christ) which requires Obedience to their Natural and Political Parents: in
all things wherein they transgress no Law of God, they ought carefully to
subject themselves to them; and in not doing it, Ephesians. 6. 1.
they sin and are guilty before God: Children, obey your Parents in the Lord;
for this is right: the Lord commands it, or it is agreeable to his Will. Romans
13. 1.
Again, it is said, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, Tit. 3. 1.
etc. Put them in mind to obey Magistrates, etc. And again, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; whether it
be to the King, as supreme, etc. Whatsoever Magistrates or Parents do require
agreeable to the Divine Will, ought faithfully to be done, and in Conscience to
God.

And as to the religious observation of the first day of the week, I shall
prove before I have done, that it is agreeable to the Will of God; and those
who observe it not, do violate the Rule of the Gospel, or the new Creation, and
so break both the Law of God and Man: nay, it grieves my Soul to hear what a
Reproach and Scandal some rash young Men who are Apprentices, have herein
brought upon their Profession; and I hear some who know they are Members with
us, have unjustly blamed and censured me and the Church upon that account, not
hearing what Pains I have taken to convince them of their great Evil therein:
and I do now declare my abhorrence of their Practices and unbecoming Behavior
to their Parents and Masters; and let such as encourage or countenance them,
see how they will answer it in the great day.

But not to retain you any longer in a way of Introduction, I shall proceed to
my Text.

And first to the occasion of the words, The occasion of the words opened.
which were written by holy Paul, the great Minister of the Gentiles, to the
Churches that were then at Galatia; not Church in the singular, but to the
Churches (there were more at Galatia than one) so it is expressed 1 Cor. 16. 2.
And thus he begins his Epistle, i. e. To the Churches of Galatia, chap. 1. 2.

1. He kindly salutes them, ver. 3. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. But soon upon it he sharply reproves them, ver. 6. I marvel ye are so soon
removed from him that called you to another Gospel, ver. 7. Which is not
another; but there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of
Christ.

Query. What was the Error they were corrupted with?

1. I answer, They were by some false Brethren taught to mix the Law and the
Gospel together in Justification, or to mix Works with Grace: and this is to
pervert the Gospel of Christ, and obscure the Doctrine of Free Grace.

2. They turned to Judaism in respect of the observation of Circumcision and
Jewish days: How turn ye again to weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye
desire again to be in Bondage? chap. 4. verse. 9. Ye having (as if he should
say) attained to the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
the glorious Mediator, Sovereign Lord, and only Lawgiver of his Church, it is
strange you should turn again to Moses, and so eclipse the Glory of Christ;
this does not comport with your former knowledge, and of that Revelation you
have had of the Truth as it is in Jesus.

By Beggarly Elements he does not only mean Circumcision, but also observation
of Jewish Days: Ye observe Days, etc. he does not mean the Gospel, or New
Testament days of Worship, but Jewish days; he could not be afraid of them if
they had only observed the first day of the Week, because he had given charge
to these Churches as well as others, religiously to keep it, as appears 1 Cor.
16. 1, 2, 3. but they observed the Jewish Sabbath, and other Old Testament
days; nay, and they laid such stress upon them, as to make the observation of
them necessary to eternal Life, as some do now, by affirming the keeping of the
Seventh-day, or old Jewish Sabbath, is a Moral Duty, being of the same nature
with the first Commandment, viz. Thou shall have no other Gods before me, or
any other simple Moral Precept. True, such at Rome as did esteem some other day
besides the first Day of the Week, and looked upon it as an indifferent thing,
were not reproved, as Romans 14. 5. The converted Jews perhaps thought they might
keep the Jewish Sabbath as well as the Lord's Day, and Paul dealt with them for
a time as Children, or Babes in Christ.

But when any came to plead for it as a Moral Duty, or as necessary to
Salvation, how sharp was he with them? I am afraid of you. From hence by the
way observe,

That Jewish-day and shadowy Ordinances under the Law, in comparison of New
Testament Ordinances, are but weak and beggarly Elements.

The Explanation.

1. By Days, The Terms of the Text explained.
I understand the Jewish weekly Sabbath Days.

2. By Months, is meant their New Moons or monthly Sabbaths, which were every
new Moon.

3. By Times, the Feasts of the Passover, the Feast of Pentecost, and that of
Tabernacles.

4. By Years, every seventh Year, and every fiftieth Year, which was their
great Jubilee. I find diverse learned Men thus explaining these Terms; Perkins
on Gal. p. 285.
and tho Mr. Perkins seems to go astray afterward, yet he speaks much to the
same purpose.

Now, my Brethren, the reasons why I conclude by Days here, are meant the
Jewish weekly Sabbath Days, are,

First, Because when Moses speaks of their Feasts, and Holy Days, he brings in
first of all their Seventh-day Sabbath, Levit. 23.

Secondly, If Days, Months, Times and Years, comprehend all Days, Months,
Times, and Years which the Jews observed; then their Seventh-day Sabbath is
comprehended here: but Days, Months, Times, and Years, comprehend all Days,
Months, Times and Years, that the Jews observed; therefore it comprehends their
Seventh Day here.

If the Minor be denied, let our Opponents, or any Person show where Days,
Months, Times, and Years are mentioned, and yet the Seventh-day not
comprehended.

Perhaps it may be objected by some who keep the Jewish Sabbath, Object.
That the Seventh Day is every where in Scripture expressed in the singular
Number, i. e. Day, not Days.

That is not true; Answ.
for in several places the Seventh-day is expressed in the plural Number, i. e.
Days: the Jews themselves called it Days; And they asked him, Mat. 12. 10.
saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath Days? see Matthew. 12. 5. My
Sabbaths ye shall keep, it is a Sign, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. 13. In the Greek it is read
Sabbaths, Exodus 28. 8. and Deuteronomy. 5. 12. as the Learned in that Language show;
and all Men of note, both Ancient and Modern Expositors of Holy Scripture,
says my Author, Dr. White p. 165.
expound St. Paul, Col. 2. 17. of Weekly Sabbaths as well as Annual Sabbaths.

Again it is objected, Object. 2.
That the Days, Months, Times, and Years, were not Jewish but Heathenish Days,
etc. Thus Coppinger in his Dispute with Mr. Ives; because, it is said, they did
Service to them who by nature are no Gods.

That there were Jews among these Galatians is evident: Answ.
Yet if otherwise, i. e. tho they were Gentiles, it is clear they desired to be
under the Law. Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law, do you hear the Law?
You that desire to be circumcised, and to observe the Jewish Sabbath, and other
Mosaical Times and Seasons; Do you hear the Law, i. e. do you not know that the
Bondwoman and her Son are cast out, that the Sinai Covenant that gendered to
Bondage is abolished, and the Law given on Mount Sinai as a Rule of
Righteousness, is put into the hands of the Son of God considered as Mediator?
Heb. 12. 2.
Ye are not come to Mount Sinai, but to Mount Sion; and are not now to hear him
that spoke of Earth, but him that speaks from Heaven: as if Paul should have
said, Do not you know that Circumcision, the Seventh-day Sabbaths, and other
Jewish Times, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20.
Seasons, and legal Rites, are gone, even all old things, and that all things
are become new?

My Brethren, these Christians did not desire to be under the observation of
Heathenish, but of Jewish Days.

They are called the Elements of the World, Object. 3.
therefore not Jewish days.

1. The Jewish Rites were called the Elements of the World; Answ.
for does not Paul say, We when Children were in bondage under the Elements of
the World? Gal. 4. 2, 3.

2. Besides, they were such Rudiments as the Jews were to observe till the
appointed time of the Father. Now the Father never appointed his Children
Gentile idolatrous Rudiments, therefore they could not be Heathenish Days.

3. What Heathenish Nation kept the seventh, or the fiftieth Year as a Sabbath?
For by Years in our Text, our Antagonists confess are meant those Years; and I
am sure by all Expositors it is so understood.

4. The Jewish Sanctuary is called a Worldly Sanctuary; see Heb. 9. 1. Then
verily the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine Service, and a Worldly
Sanctuary.

5. It is evident the Apostle means Mosaical Rudiments, by blaming of Peter,
who would have the Gentiles live after the manner of the Jews, Gal. 2. 14.
Moreover, he refers, as all may see, to the Jewish Yoke, Gal. 5. 1, 2.

6. To put it quite out of doubt what Days he intends, read Col. 2. 16. Let no
man judge you in Meats, or Drinks, or in respect of a holy Day, or of the New
Moons, or of the Sabbath Days; which are a Shadow of things to come, but the
Body is of Christ.

I. Now were any of the Idolatrous Days among the Heathen, shadows of things to
come, or of Christ? was he, or that Rest he has brought in, the Antitype of
them?

II. He speaks of a Holy Day, as a Term given to the Seventh-Day in the Old
Testament, and of Sabbath Days; and do any think he means by neither the
Seventh-Day Sabbath, and yet speaks of Sabbath Days distinct from New Mons,
Times, and Years? Certainly he must intend, in one or the other, the Jewish
weekly Sabbath days. I find a very Learned Man writing on this Text, speaking
thus, viz. for which also he cites St. Hierom: Paul writ this Epistle in the
sixteenth year after Christ; he lays it positively down that the Sabbath was
now abrogated, with the other Ceremonies which were to vanish at Christ's
coming. Let no man judge you, etc. the Sabbath, says he, is well matched with
Meats and Drinks, New Moons, and Holy Days, which were all Temporary
Ordinances, and to go off the stage at our Savior's entrance. And that Paul
means the Seventh-day Sabbaths, he cites Ambrose, Hierom, Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Augustine, and their particular Books: that they understood Paul
thus in Col. 2. 16. as he did, Praefat. in Galat. Apocal. 10.
take what Hierom says as follows; There is no Sermon of the Apostles, says
he, either delivered by Epistle, or by word of Mouth, wherein he labors not to
prove, that all the Burdens of the Law are now laid away (that all those things
which were before in Types and Figures, namely the Sabbath, Circumcision, the
New Moons, and the three Solemn Festivals) did cease upon preaching the Gospel.

In the Context, and from these Verses, the weekly Sabbath no doubt is
included: For,

1. It is part of the Handwriting, verse. 14.

2. It is a Shadow, etc. verse. 17.

3. They are commanded not to submit to the Censures of men herein, verse. 16.

And whereas it is objected, Object.
The Apostle does not mean the Weekly Sabbath.

1. It is certain that the primary (and almost constant) use of the word
Sabbath, Answ.
is to denote that weekly Day of Rest which God commanded the Jews to observe;
Read Mr. Baxter on the Subject.
and whereas it is applied to any other Days, it is in allusion to this, because
of the Rest from servile Work upon them; in which respect they were like to the
Weekly Sabbath, as appears Levit. 16. 31. and Chap. 23, 24, 32, 39. which are
all the places where the word Sabbath is expressly applied to any other days:
And therefore the primary and almost constant use of the word ought not to be
forsaken.

2. Wherever the word Sabbaths is used absolutely, as here, without any
expression in the Text to limit it, it is to be understood of the Weekly
Sabbath: The reason of which Rule is obvious, because otherwise the Scripture
would be of doubtful Interpretation, and, as 1 Cor. 14. 8. the Trumpet would
give an uncertain sound.

3. Therefore, as I said, wherever the word Sabbaths is used, as here, with
distinction from Holy Days, or Feasts, and New Moons, it must mean the Weekly
Sabbaths, otherwise the Apostle would be guilty of an unnecessary Tautology, it
being certain there is no other Day called a Sabbath in Scripture, but what is
included in those two words. Therefore I conclude, by Sabbaths in this Text not
only may, but must be understood the Weekly Sabbath; and consequently it proves
not only that Christians are not bound to observe the Jewish Sabbath, but that
they ought not so to do.

Take here what Mr. Baxter says on this Text, Baxter on the Lord's Day, P. 167
viz. How plainly and expressly Paul numbereth Sabbaths with Shadows that cease,
see Col. 2. 16. to pass by other Texts; and what violence men's own Wits must
use in denying the Evidence of so plain a Text. The Reason that he says not
Sabbath, but Sabbaths, is against themselves, the plural Number being most
comprehensive, and other Sabbaths receiving their name from this* And the word
Sabbath is always used in Scripture for a Rest, which was partly Ceremonial.
See what Dr. Young in his excellent Dies Domin.says, etc.

III. Moreover, can any serious thinking Christian suppose that Paul, the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, would thus write of Sabbath Days, New Moons, Times and
Years, without exception, if the Seventh-day Sabbath had remained as the
Sabbath of the Lord, and the Day of Gospel Worship? What, speak thus without
restriction, or intimation, and yet not include the Seventh-day Sabbath! Had
not that Day been comprehended and meant by Sabbath Days, sure he had let this
Church have known it; it behoved him to be faithful to us, who was our Apostle,
and so he says he was, and had declared the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20.
yet makes no mention of any such Jewish Sabbath to be our duty to observe, but
the direct contrary, that it was a Shadow, and that we are not to be judged or
condemned, who regard it not any more than other Times, as New Moons, etc.

But says the Seventh-day Sabbatarian, Object.
The Ordinances of the Law were glorious, therefore Paul could not refer to
them when he speaks of beggarly Elements. Thus Tillam.

When compared to the Ordinances of the Gospel, Answ.
they may be called weak and beggarly, as Paul shows, speaking of the Law
written in two Tables of Stone, which he calls glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 7. yet a
ministration of Death and Condemnation, verse. 9. For even that which was made
glorious, had no Glory in this respect, by reason of the Glory that excels,
verse. 10. The Shadow seems glorious till the Substance comes; but what Glory
appears in it then? None at all. What is the Glory of the Moon when the Sun
appears and shines forth splendidly? So what signifies the Shadow of Rest, to
the true Antitypical Sabbath of Rest which we have in Christ? we that believe,
do enter into Rest.

Besides, St. Paul calls Jewish Ordinances, Carnal Ordinances; which terms as
much eclipse their Glory, as to call them weak and beggarly Elements; Heb. 9.
10. Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances. Carnal
Ordinances, no doubt, include all the Jewish Sabbaths, viz. Days, Months,
Times, and Years, as well as Circumcision, legal Washings, and Sacrifices.

The Apostle calls them not only carnal, weak, and beggarly Elements, but
unprofitable: There was a disannulling of the Commandment going before, Heb. 7.
18.
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. Take here what Calvin says,
tho I in some things differ from him. For seeing in the Lord's Resurrection is
found the end and fulfilling of the true Rest, Instit. 2. c. 8. Sect. 34.
which the old Sabbath shadowed; by that very day, which set an end to those
Shadows, Christians are admonished not to stick to the shadowing Ceremony. He
it seems concludes, that the Jewish Weekly Sabbath, as well as their Fellows,
was a Shadow of that Rest we have in Christ.

Take also what another nameless Author says concerning the Ancient Fathers.

St. Paul sharply reproves those who allowed yet the Jewish Sabbath, i. e.
they observed Days, Months, Times, and Years, as if he had bestowed his labor
in vain upon them, Gal. 4. 10, 11. But more particularly in his Epistle to the
Colossians, Chap. 2. 16, 17. Let no man judge you in respect of an Holy Day, or
of the New Moons, or of the Sabbath Days, which were a Shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ. Yet notwithstanding all this care, both of the
Apostles in general, and more especially of St. Paul, to suppress this Error,
it grew up still, and had its Patrons and Abettors, Ebion and Cerinthus, two of
the wretchedest Heretics of the Primitive Times: And after them Apollinarius
is said to countenance and defend it; which doubtless made the Ancient Fathers
declare themselves fully in it, as a dangerous Point; it seemed to confirm the
Jews in their Incredulity, and might occasion others to make question of our
Savior's coming in the Flesh. Hence Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and
Eusebius, Men of Note in the Primitive Times, affirm, that never any of the
Patriarchs before Moses's Law, observed the Sabbath, which question less they
must have done had that Law been moral, and dictated by the Light of Nature. He
cites also Epiphanius and Theodoret on Ezech. 20. Procopius on Genesis 2.
Damascen, and our venerable Bede concurring with the former Fathers: All talk,
says he, that the Observation of the Jewish Sabbath vanished utterly, etc: I
might mention other Authors to the same purpose. But to proceed, my Brethren,
because one of my Arguments against the precise Seventh-day Sabbath, will be to
prove it a Sign or Shadow of that Rest Believers enter into when they first
close with Christ, I shall say no more now by way of Explanation of my Text,
but proceed to those Points of Doctrine that arise herefrom.

Doct. 1. That it is not the Duty of believing Gentiles under the Dispensation
of the Gospel, The Doctrines raised.
to keep the Seventh Day as a Sabbath to the Lord.

Doct. 2. That it is a dangerous thing for any to plead for, and keep the
seventh day, so i^ to lay the same stress on the observation thereof, as on a
purely natural, or simply mora^ Precept.

These two Propositions I purpose, God assisting, to prosecute, and confirm in
this method.

First, I shall lay down several Explanatory Propositions.

Secondly, Give many Arguments to prove the truth of the first Proposition.

Thirdly, I shall (taking in the second Proposition) endeavor to prove, that
the observing the seventh day Sabbath, so as to lay the same stre^ on it as on
a natural and simply moral Precept, ^ a dangerous thing.

Fourthly, I shall prove that all Believers (...) obliged to observe the first
day of the week free from secular business, in religious Worship, as the time
in season only under the Gospel Dispensation.

Fifthly, I shall endeavor to answer all the main Objections brought by our
Opponents against the Observation of the first day of the week. To begin,

First Proposition premised. Let it be considered, that the Apostles perceiving
the weakness of the Jews who believed in Christ, to take them off gradually
from Jewish Observation of days, and other legal Rites and Ordinances, did
admit of the Practice of some of them for a time, till they were better
instructed in the Truth as it is in Jesus, the nature of the new Creation, and
the change of the whole Law, viz. the utter abolishing of all things
Ceremonial, or that were Signs and Shadows of things to come, and the removing
the ministration of all Moral Precepts from Moses as Lawgiver, into the hand of
Christ as Mediator, in which capacity he had all Power delegated to him in
Heaven and Earth as our only Lord and Lawgiver. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
Thou see, Brother, how many thousands of the Jews there are which believe,
and they are all zealous of the Law; Acts 21. 20. Hence Paul complied with them
to purify himself, and to shave his Head, v. 24. and on the like account, in
compliance with their weakness, he circumcised Timothy. I might from hence by
the way note, that had we such a Passage that Paul kept one Jewish Sabbath, as
we have here of his circumcising Timothy, I suppose our Brethren would make no
small advantage of it, that it is our Duty from thence to keep it; but that
might have been on the same account and no better ground, than it would be for
us to plead for Circumcision, and be circumcised, as Tillam, Skip and Cooly
were (as I am informed) who called themselves the Ministers of the Circumcision.

But to proceed; Upon the same reason perhaps the Jewish Rites, Days, and
typical or shadowy Ordinances, might, and were called by their former and
ancient names, as well as for distinction sake: for tho those legal Ordinances
were dead, yet as our Annotators observe, they were not then deadly (if looked
upon as indifferent things) however God was pleased (they being his own
appointments) to vouchsafe them a gradual and decent funeral.

Second Proposition. But nevertheless after they had been better instructed
into the truth of the Gospel, and the change or end of the Law, they were more
plainly dealt with: I mean, he more fully and clearly informed them, and showed
them the great danger if they observed those legal Rites, Days, and Ordinances,
especially when he saw they laid such stress upon them, as to make them
necessary to eternal Life as a Rule of Obedience.

Hence the Apostle says, I Paul testify unto you, that if ye be circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing, Gal. 5. 1. And why if circumcised? because it
was a shadow, and the keeping up the shadow was a virtual denying that the
Substance was come; and besides, they were thereby bound to keep the whole Law.
Such was the natural tendency of observing one Legal Rite, or Precept, as given
by Moses, it being in that Ministration a Covenant of Works; and he that kept
one was obliged to keep all, and he that broke one was guilty of all.

1. And if so, why might not Paul have told them the same thing and danger if
they kept the legal Sabbath, which led them according to the Tenor of it, and
in the strictest observance to perfect Obedience; which is employed in those
words, Thou shall not think thy own thoughts, nor speak thy own words?

2. Or provided they made it necessary in order to a holy Life in point of
Obedience, as a pure moral Precept, even of the same nature with the first
Commandment, viz. Thou shall have no other Gods but me; or the second, Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. or the third, or fifth, or
any of the rest; I speak not of what is simply moral in the fourth Commandment,
but of that precise seventh day: I say, may not their danger be as great, if
thus they looked upon those Jewish Sabbaths, as if circumcised, because then if
they kept them not, it necessarily must follow, it would exclude them the
Kingdom of Heaven, as all other immoral Acts, or actual breach of pure moral
Precepts would do?

3. Because Paul tells them that those Sabbaths were a Shadow or Sign, so far
as Circumcision was, as I have and shall further make appear; and so hereby
unwarily they would deny that Christ was come to give us Rest, and we do not
yet cease working for Life in order to enter into Rest, which was held forth as
the Tenor of that Ministration of the Moral Law by Moses, and particularly in
their Sabbath.

Third Proposit. Let it be considered that the substance of the whole Moral
Law, or ten Commandments (I mean materially, not formally) was written in the
Heart of Adam in Innocence; and as written there, it contained the Covenant of
Works. And so long as he kept that Law perfectly, he stood justified, and all
Mankind in him: and also that he had but one positive Precept given him to try
his Obedience (according to the Tenor of this Covenant, and Law of his
Creation) is very evident, viz. Thou shall not eat of the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil, Adam broke all the Commandments.
etc. which positive Command he broke, and in breaking it broke all the ten
Commandments as to the matter or substance of them, and consequently the
fourth, as to what was simply moral therein. Dr. Lightfoot 's Miscel. p. 282,
283.


Thus Dr. Lightfoot: Adam, says he, heard as much in the Garden as Israel did
at Sinai, but in fewer words, and without Thunder -- At one clap he broke all
the Ten Commandments.

I. He chose himself another God, when he followed the Devil.

II. He idolized and defiled his own Belly, making it (as the Apostle phrases
it) his God.

III. He took God's Name in vain, when he believed him not.

IV. He kept not the Rest and State wherein God had set him.

V. He dishonored his Father which was in Heaven, and therefore his days were
not prolonged on Earth.

VI. He murdered himself and all his Posterity.

VII. From Eve he was a Virgin, but in his Eyes and Mind he committed spiritual
Adultery.

VIII. He stole (like Achan) that which God set aside, not to be meddled with,
etc.

IX. He bare witness against God, when he believed the witness of the Devil
before him.

X. He coveted an evil Covetousness, like Ammon, which cost him his Life and
all his Progeny.

Fourth Proposit. That tho a time of Rest, and a sufficient time to worship God
be moral, yet the particular precise day or time must be by Revelation, i. e.
by some positive Precept or Example made known to Mankind; it being in God, not
in Man, not in Nature, not in Grace: And God has reserved to himself a Power
to require, or to alter both the time, place, and modes of his Worship as seems
good in his sight, tho the second and fourth Commandments be moral and of the
same nature with the rest. Moreover, God if he please may make a positive
Precept perpetual, and alike obligatory as simple moral Precepts are, tho they
differ in respect of their own nature.

Fifth Proposit. All natural and pure moral Precepts do, as I conceive, oblige
all Mankind, and are unchangeable in their nature as to the matter of them, and
differ greatly from Laws or Precepts merely positive. Pure or simple moral
Precepts are good, good in themselves, and therefore commanded; but Precepts
merely positive and arbitrary are commanded of God, and therefore good: and
that Goodness that is in simple moral Precepts I do not conceive, See Mr.
Shepherd on the Sabbath, p. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
as Mr. Shepherd hints (if I mistake him not) refers to Man, i. e. suitable to
his good chiefly, but in reference to God, from the rectitude of whose holy
Nature they proceed. Moreover, it is acknowledged also that all Precepts
naturally and simply moral, are written in the Hearts of all Men, tho much
blur'd by Sin, for otherwise the Gentiles had not the Law written in their
Hearts, but a part as to the matter of the Law. Romans 2. 14, 15.
Simple moral Precepts are known by the Light of Nature, as to the matter ^or
substance of them. Precepts naturally moral may be known without Revelation, or
the knowledge of the Scripture; What Precepts are moral.
tho I know some learned Men seem to differ from others here, particularly Mr.
Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer, who affirm that some Precepts may be moral by a
positive Command, See Mr. Cawdrey Sabbath Rediv. p. 2, 3.
and these others call moral-Positives, which I understand not; yet I deny not
(as I said before) but that God may make a positive Command perpetually
obligatory. But more to this word moral, when I come to speak of the fourth
Commandment in Exodus 20.

Now mere positive Precepts cannot be known unless God by his Word, or in some
supernatural way, discovers them to his Creatures; and such was Circumcision,
the precise seventh-day Sabbath, the Passover, and diverse other things under
the Law: And such is the first day of the week under the Gospel as a day of
Rest, and of the solemn Worship of God, as also Baptism, the Lord's Supper, etc.

Sixth Proposit. That the whole Moral Law is changed from Moses to Jesus
Christ; not only changed as a Covenant of Works, but as a Rule of Life: for tho
the Moral Law as to the matter or substance of it perpetually remains as a Rule
of Righteousness, yet not as given in the hand of Moses, Exodus 20. but as in
the hand of Christ, considered as Mediator, who is our sole Lord and Lawgiver,
Mat. 28. 18, 19. and that we are to receive the Law from his mouth, who is our
antitypical High Priest; And behold, a Voice from the Cloud which said, This is
my beloved Son, hear him: hear him exclusively of Moses. The Disciples would
have had three Tabernacles, one for Moses, one for Elias, and another for
Christ; i. e. they would have Moses to teach them, or be under his
Ministration: but in this Transfiguration, wherein was a clear Representation
of the Gospel Church State (signified by the Kingdom of God) in a Figure, they
saw there was none to be heard as a Lawgiver but Christ alone; And when they
lifted up their Eyes they saw no Man save Jesus only, ver. 8. Certainly their
Eyes are not opened thoroughly, who go to Mount Sinai to know what their Duty is
in respect of any part of Gospel Worship, or day of Worship: Compare this place
of Scripture with Acts 3. 22, 23. For Moses truly said to the Fathers, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you, of your Brethren, like unto
me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. So Heb.
1. 1, 2, 3. And again it is said, Joh. 8. 35.
that the Servant abides not in the House for ever: Moses was a Servant, and
he had his day, and he is gone; but the Son abides for ever.

Seventh Proposit. That as old things are done away, and all things become new;
so is the old Seventh-day Sabbath. And it behooves us to call the Gospel-day of
Worship, or that Day appointed by Christ in the New Testament, by that Name or
Names given therein to it, viz. the first day, and the Lord's Day, and day of
Rest, or Sabbath, as Dr. Owen aptly enough calls it on Heb. 4. 11. Therefore
tho the day of Rest under the Gospel is not called a Sabbath, yet I shall blame
none that so call it, since Sabbath signifies Rest: and this is our only
Sabbath or resting day under this new and last Dispensation: but the great
Antitype of the Seventh-day Sabbath being come, we do not find that Name
directly given to our day of Rest in Gospel times.

Eighth Proposit. That the Moral Law or Law of the ten Commandments, as given
Exodus 20. contained directly an Administration of the Covenant of Works, and
was not given to Israel as God's People, as in a special and peculiar relation
to himself according to the new Covenant, or Covenant of Grace, but as his
People in that legal external typical Covenant made with the whole House of
Israel. Let it be considered also, that that Law and Covenant was not made
with, nor given to any other People but the People and House of Israel only: so
that as it had but its time, considered as a Law given by Moses, or as in his
hands, it did cease as so considered, and could not oblige any to observe it as
there formerly delivered (while it was in force) but such only as were under
it; tho I deny not, but affirm the whole World were under the Covenant of Works
in the first Adam, and obliged by the Law of God written in their Hearts to
discharge all Duties that are naturally and simply moral, etc. Moreover, I
shall enquire whether the Morality of the fourth Commandment does lie in the
Observation of the precise seventh day or not. And now Brethren, by these
Propositions all may perceive upon what foot of account, or mediums I purpose
to go, or take in handling this great and long controverted Subject. But there
is one Proposition more, which I thought to have mentioned now, but must refer
to the next time.

SERMON II.
The ninth Proposition by way of Premise. The method proposed. One general
Proposition laid down. Why the Law was added on Mount Sinai. No Seventh-day
Sabbath written in Adam's Heart in Innocence: Nor no positive Law given to him
to observe it.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years: I am
afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.
MY Brethren, the first thing I promised was to lay down several explanatory
Propositions, to make my way the more easy to what I have to say: and I past
through eight; I shall add but one more.

Ninth Proposit. 9th Proposit. by way of premise.
There are several things to be considered in respect of this Controversy,
which being noted by Dr. Owen, I shall recite them: Those about the thing it
self (says he) are various, Dr. Owen 's Exercit. p. 7, 8, 9.
and respect all the concerns of the day inquired after. Nothing that relates
to it, no part of its respect to the Worship of God, is admitted by all,
uncontended about; for it is debated amongst all Persons,

1. Whether any part of time be naturally and morally to be separated and set
apart to the solemn Worship of God; or (which is the same) whether it be a
natural and moral Duty to separate any part of time in any Revolution of it, to
Divine Service; I mean, so as it should be stated and fixed in any periodical
Revolution; otherwise to say, that God is solemnly to be worshipped, and yet
that no time is required thereto, is an open Contradiction.

2. Whether such a time supposed, be absolutely and originally moral, or made
so by positive Command, suited unto general Principles and Intimations of
Nature: and under this Consideration also, a part of time is called moral,
metonymically, from the duty of its observance.

3. Whether on a supposition of some part of time so designed, the space or
quantity of it, have its Determination, or Limitation morally, or be merely
positive and arbitrary? For the Observation of some part of time may be moral,
and the quanta pars arbitrary.

4. Whether every Law positive of the Old Testament were absolutely ceremonial,
or whether there may not be a Law moral positive as given to, and obligatory on
all Mankind, tho not absolutely written in the Heart of Man by Nature: that is,
whether there be no Morality in any Law, but what is a part of the Law of
Creation?

5. Whether the Institution of the Seventh-day Sabbath was from the beginning
of the World, and before the Fall of Man; or whether it was first appointed
when the Israelites came into the Wilderness. This in it self is only a matter
of Fact, yet such as whereon the determination of a point of right, as to the
universal Obligation to the Observation of such a Day does much depend, So
that, according to the Doctor, if it was not instituted in Paradise, tho given
forth in the Wilderness, it cannot be universally obligatory on all Mankind.
and therefore has the investigation and true sta^^ng of it, been much
la^our'd in, and after by learned Men.

6. Upon a supposition of the Institution of the Sabbath from the beginning,
whether the Additions made, and Observances annexed unto it at the giving of
the Law on Mount Sinai, with the Ends whereunto it was then designed, and the
Uses whereunto it was employed, gave unto the seventh day a new state distinct
from what it had before; although naturally the same day was continued as before.
For if they did so, that new state of the day seems only to be taken away under
the New Testament; if not, the day it self seems to be abolished; The Doctor
still, as it seems to me, builds chiefly on its Institution in Paradise, where
we can find no Institution referring to innocent Adam.
for that some change is made therein, from what was fixed under the Judaical
Economy, cannot modestly be denied.

7. Whether in the fourth Commandment, there be a foundation of a distinction
between a seventh day in general, or one day in seven, and that seventh day
which was the same numerically and precisely from the foundation of the World.
For whereas an Obligation unto the strict Observation of that day precisely is,
as we shall prove, plainly taken away in the Gospel, if the distinction
intimated be not allowed, there can be nothing remaining obligatory unto us in
that Command, whilst it is supposed that that day (the Doctor means the seventh
day) is at all required of us from thence So that the Morality of the fourth
Commandment lies not in the precise seventh day.
.

8. It is especially inquired, whether (...) seventh day, or one in seven, or
the Hebd^madal Cycle be to be observed holy unto the Lord, on the account of
the fourth Command^ment.

9. Whether under the New Testament (...) religious Observation of days be so
taken (...) way, as that there is no Divine Obligation ^^maining for the
observance of any one da^ at all; but that as all days are alike in
the^^selves, so are they equally free to be dispos^ of, and used by us as
occasion shall requir^ For if the observation of one day in seven (...) not
founded in the Law of Nature, express^ in the original positive Command
concernin^ it He alludes to Adam in Paradise, where we can find no express
positive Command.
; and if it be not seated morally in the fourth Commandment, it is, now certain
the the necessary observance of it is taken away.

10. On the other extreme, whether the seventh day from the Creation of the
World^^ be to be observed precisely under the New T^^stament by virtue of the
fourth Comman^^ment, and no other. The assertion here^^ supposes that our Lord
Jesus Christ, (...) Lord of the Sabbath, has neither changed (...) nor
reformed any thing in and about the re^ligious observation of an holy day of
Rest unto the Lord: whence it follows, that such an Observation can be no part
or act of Evangelical Worship properly so called, but only a moral Duty of the
Law Let our Jewish Sabbatarians consider well what the Doctor positively
asserts here.
.

11. Whether on the supposition of a non-obligation in the Law unto the
observation of the seventh day precisely, and of a new day to be observed
weekly under the New Testament, as a Sabbath of the Lord, on what grounds it is
to be observed.

12. Whether from the fourth Commandment, as one Day in seven, or only unto
some part or portion of Time; or whether without any respect unto that Command
as purely Ceremonial. For granting (as most do) the necessity of the
observation of such a Day; yet some say that it has no respect at all to the
fourth decalogical Precept, which is totally and absolutely abolished, with the
rest of the Mosaical Institutions. Others say that there is yet remaining in it
an Obligation to the Sacred Separation of some Time, or portion of Time, unto
the solemn Service of God, (and some say that it precisely requires the
sanctification of one Day in seven.)

13. If a Day be so now to be observed, it is enquired on what Ground, or on
what Authority there is an alteration made from the Day observed under the Old
Testament, to that now in use, that is, from the last Day to the first Day of
the Week; whether was this Translation of the Day of the solemn Worship of God
made by Christ and his Apostles, or by the Primitive Church? etc.

14. If this were done by the Authority of Christ and his Apostles, whether by
an express Institution of this new Day, or whether a direct Example be
sufficient, no Institution being needful for the First Day: for if we suppose
there is no Obligation to the observance of one Day in seven indispensibly
abiding; and on the supposition that an Obligation to keep one Day in seven
does abide, then no Institution is necessary, or can be properly made as to the
whole nature of it No express Institution is needful for the observance of the
first Day; but Examples only if the 7th part of Time, or one day in seven, do
abide in the 4th Command.
. Thus far the Doctor, who says many other things necessary to be considered
about the observation of a Day of Worship, whether as to the Work of the Day it
ought to be kept with the like strictness as the Jewish Sabbath in all
respects, and what Duties are to be performed on it; as also as to the proper
Limits of that Day, some pleading it ought to be from Evening to Evening as the
Jews kept it, or from Morning to Evening, that is from after twelve a Clock in
the Morning to twelve the next Evening, etc.

From what the Doctor notes, it appears that the Case in controversy calls for
much study and diligence; and it may be accounted an Act of great weakness in
any Persons to observe the Seventh Day to the disturbance of the Church,
without enquiring of such as God has enlightened in these things, and to whom
the care of their Souls are committed, to see what can be said against it. Is
it wisdom to advise with those only that are for it, and not with such also as
are directly against it? This shall suffice for the Propositions I first
proposed.

I shall endeavor to clear most of those things that seem difficult, which may
have been the occasion of some Persons (if not all) going astray, and falling
into the Error I purpose clearly and largely to detect.

This brings me to the next general Head of Discourse proposed.

Secondly, I told you I should lay down dive^^ Arguments to prove the Truth of
our Proposition, That it is not the Duty of Gentile Believers to keep the
Seventh Day as a Sabbath i^ Gospel Times.

First, The General Proposition.
I shall lay down one General Proposition, to discover the Method I shall
pursue for proving what I have taken in hand.

1. If the Law of God written in Adam's heart in Innocence, did not oblige him
to keep the Seventh Day as a Sabbath, that Law cannot oblige Gentile Believers
to keep it.

2. If a positive Law, or express Institution, supposed to be given to Adam
before, or just after his Fall, does not oblige Gentile Believers to keep it:

3. If the Law written in the Hearts of the Gentiles, or the most refined and
enlightened among them, does not oblige Gentile Believers to keep it:

4. If the Law of Moses, or the Law written in the two Tables of Stone, does
not oblige Gentile Believers to keep it:

5. If the Gospel, by any Precept or Example, does not oblige them to keep the
Seventh Day as a Sabbath:

6. And lastly, If the Law written in the Hearts of all Gospel-Believers by the
Holy Spirit, does oblige them to keep the Seventh Day as a Sabbath to the Lord:
Then I infer it is not their Duty to keep the Seventh-Day, etc. for I know no
other way, or means whereby Gentile Believers can pretend to know they are
obliged to keep the Seventh-Day as a Sabbath, or a Day of Rest and solemn
Worship. But by none of these ways or means, believing Gentiles are obliged to
keep the Seventh-Day as a Sabbath, etc. therefore it is not the Duty of Gentile
Believers to keep it. To proceed,

1. Let it be considered, that if the keeping of the Seventh-Day as a Sabbath,
i. e. that precise Day from the Creation of the World, were a purely natural or
simply moral Precept, no doubt but it was legibly written in Adam's Heart; I
mean as a Law of Creation, and so part of the holy Image of God, or of the same
nature with all other moral Precepts that result from the Perfections of God's
holy Nature, and not from the Sovereignty of his Will only: And if it was so
written in Adam's Heart in Innocence, he needed no positive Law to make it
known to him. What, was any thing that was purely or simply moral, even that
which belonged to good Manners, or to true natural Godliness or Righteousness,
not made known to Adam, to perfect Adam? this certainly cannot be.

That spiritual Worship which is due to God, Charnock on the Attributes, p. 131.
says Mr. Charnock, is known by the Light of Nature: But much more, say I, was
it clearly manifested to Adam in Innocence. But furthermore, says he, the
outward means or matter of that Worship which would be acceptable to God, was
not known by the Light of Nature: the Law for a spiritual Worship by the
Faculties of our Souls was natural, and part of the Law of Creation; tho the
determination of the particular Acts, whereby God would have this Homage
testified, was of positive Institution, and depended not on the Law of
Creation. Tho Adam in Innocence knew God was to be worshipped, yet by nature he
did not know by what outward Acts he was to pay this Respect, or at what Time
he was more solemnly to be exercised in it than another: This depended on the
Directions God, as the Sovereign Governor and Lawgiver, should prescribe; you
shall therefore find the positive Institution It is observable that this great
Man is not here concerned to confute the Seventh-day Sabbatarians, but about
another thing; yet affirms (with many other Learned Men) that Adam by the Law
of Creation, did not know in Innocence at what time God was more solemnly to be
worshipped than another.

2. No doubt but the substance of all the ten Precepts was wrote in Adam's
Heart; The Substance of all Moral Precepts written in Adam's Heart.
yet it appears the knowledge of the Seventh-day to be kept as a Sabbath was not
written there, tho that which was simply and naturally moral of the fourth
Commandment was.

Secondly, I argue thus: If the precise Seventh-day was written in Adam's
Heart, The Law of the 7th day Sabbath not written in Adam's Heart.
there had been no need of an Institution or positive Law to make it known to
him; for, what more need had he of an outward Revelation of this, than of the
other Commandments?

Take here what a Learned Man has said: Mr. P. a Minister at Rouen in France,
p. 3.
If the keeping of the Seventh-day were a Moral Duty, our Father Adam, by that
Light of Nature God put in his Mind when he created him, would have known it,
as well as he knew all other things in themselves good and necessary; but he
neither had, nor should have had any knowledge thereof, if God had not injoined
it to him by a particular Command, (as those which maintain the morality of the
Sabbath do avouch.) So that this follows manifestly, that the observation of
the Seventh-day depends merely on Institution.

My Brethren, Let this be considered well, that if the knowledge of the
Seventh-day wholly depended on the Will of God, or on mere Institution, and
resulted not, as all pure and simple moral Precepts do, from the holy Rectitude
of God's Nature, it follows that the precise Day pertains not to the Essence of
the Fourth Commandment, but the simple Morality of that Precept lies only in a
time of Worship: And certainly if God by a mere positive Command had not given
it to Israel, they had no more known it their duty to keep it, than the Pagan
World did, who were wholly ignorant thereof, as I shall prove. And be sure if
God wrote not the Law or knowledge of the Seventh-day Sabbath on Adam's Heart;
the Seventh-day is not of the same nature with simply moral Precepts, which God
engraved on his Heart, even the substance or tenor of all the Ten Commandments,
and made him know them naturally, without any instruction by word of mouth. But
it appears by their own Assertion, it was instituted, etc. Therefore the
knowledge of the Seventh-day as a special time of Worship, was not wrote in his
Heart. Our Opponents dare not deny but the substance of the whole Moral Law was
wrote in his Heart, and they foresee it is dangerous to deny it: From whence it
appears, that all the other Precepts are simply moral, and so is a time of
Worship; but the precise Seventh-day, by their own concession, was instituted
in Man's Innocence, and so depends wholly upon an express positive Command,
declared to Adam by audible Words resounding in his Ears.

Mr. Tillam says, Tillam 's Book, p. 7.
It was instituted before the Fall, and founded in Mount Paradise.

Answ. Tho I believe no such matter, nor can any Man prove it, yet to grant it,
for Argument-sake, then I say it follows, it was not written in Adam's Heart;
for the being perfect, he would naturally have known it without being told it
was his Duty to keep it. For consider that he was created on the Sixth Day, and
understood what was naturally and universally good* i. e. all those Duties that
were essential parts of Godliness, and Righteousness, or things belonging to
good Manners. Now if so, why need he be told he must keep the Seventh-day? or
why must that Precept come under express Institution, and none of the rest?

Object. God saw good to bring all the ten Commandments under express
Institution on Mount Sinai, as well as he brought the seventh-day Sabbath in
Paradise under express Institution.

Answ. I deny it not; God did then see good so to do, considering how the
Nature of Man was corrupted, and his Law written in his Heart was blotted and
blur'd by the Fall. But let it be considered, that the Law was not written in
two Tables of Stone, so much for a Rule of Life, as for other reasons: The
Reasons why God added the Ministration of the Law wrote in two Tables of Stone.


1. It was added and written there, to aggravate Sin on the Conscience; It was
added (says Pual) because of Transgression, Gal. 3. 19. it was to make Sin
appear exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 13.

2. It was written there to show the Creature his sad and woeful condition, and
to make known how unable fallen Man was to fulfill the Righteousness of God.

3. And as a Schoolmaster to lead such as were under it, to Christ, in whom
perfect Righteousness only is to be found; Man being not able to keep perfectly
that holy and just Law.

4. And to show them, as I conceive, that nothing but the Finger of God could
write his holy Law in the stony Hearts of Sinners, as shall be further
demonstrated hereafter; for that whole Ministration of the Law and Covenant I
shall prove was a shadow and typical, and so no standing Law or Ministration as
there written, but as it is in the hand of Jesus Christ.

5. That whole Law, and consequently the Seventh-day Sabbath, was given on
Mount Sinai as it suited the Judaical Economy, as well their Political as
Ecclesiastical state. There are many Additions made to the Seventh-day Sabbath,
together with other Ends annexed, and Designs and Uses thereto employed; which
is granted by such as assert it was given to Adam in Paradise This gave a new
state to it, says Dr. Owen, p. 8, 9.
.

Secondly, If it had been given to Adam in Innocence, he not knowing without an
Institution it was his Duty to keep it, I argue from hence: it follows that he
had the same need of knowing what special Worship he outht to be found
exercised in on that day. What, a Sabbath instituted, and no Sabbath-Service
appointed on that day? But this I shall further handle when I come to speak of
the pretended Institution and express Command given to Adam in Innocence.

Thirdly, If the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath was wrote in Adam's Heart, some
Remainders of the knowledge of that day would have been left in the Heart of his
Offspring, as there is of all other Precepts that are simply moral: tho much
blur'd, and almost quite obliterated in some, yet there were many Heathens who
retained, or recovered much knowledge of God's Law first written in the Heart of
Man; yea, they were led to the knowledge of all pure moral Precepts, i.e. that
there was but one God, and that he was to be worshipped, and his Name not
profaned; that they should not murder, commit Adultery, steal, etc. nay and
also to the knowledge of the fourth Commandment, as to what was simply moral in
it, viz. a sufficient time to worship that God; yet they were none of them led
to know that they ought to keep the seventh day as a Sabbath.

Fourthly, Moreover, if the Seventh-day Sabbath had been a simple, or pure
moral Precept, and written in Adam's Heart, it would have been written in the
Hearts of all God's New Covenant Children, as he promised he would write his
Law there, in Gospel Times: and evident it is that all Believers in Christ,
whether Jews or Gentiles, have the Image of God restored to them, it being
stamped upon their Hearts by the Spirit of God; hence it is said, who after God
are created in Righteousness, and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. nay, they are all
said to be renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created them, Col.
3. 10. But in the second Impression of God's holy Law and Image thus written on
our Hearts, there is not one line, nor lineament of any knowledge that it is our
Duty to keep the seventh day as a Sabbath to the Lord, which I shall further
evince hereafter.

Fifthly, Take what a learned Man says: If Adam was bound to keep the Sabbath,
I demand by what Law? by the Law written in his Heart? Why then he was bound to
keep a Sabbath before there was a Sabbath to keep: for the Law was engraven on
his Heart on the sixth day, as a branch of that Divine Image of God concreated
with him; whereas the Sabbath (to be sure) could not be instituted till the
seventh day, if then.

Sixthly, Before I close this, let me note here what is said concerning this
very thing by the Ancient Fathers, and Primitive Christian Writers, who it
appears denied the knowledge of the Seventh-day Sabbath was written in Adam's
Heart. Just. Mart. Respon. ad qu. p. 69. Theod. on Ezekiel. c. 20.
See Justin Martyr. Theodoret says, that these Commandments, Thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not steal, and others of that
kind, were generally implanted by Nature in the minds of Men; but for the
keeping of the Sabbath, it came not in by Nature, but by Moses's Law.

Chrysostom affirms (says my Author) that neither Adam nor any Man lived
without the Law imprinted on the Soul of Man, as made a living Creature; but
neither he nor any other of them say the seventh day was one of those Laws.
Also Rivet and others, who plead for the Antiquity of the Sabbath, dare not,
says he, refer the keeping of it to the Law written in Adam's Heart.

So that I may from what has been said positively affirm, the Precept of
keeping the seventh day was not written in Adam's Heart in Innocence; and
therefore that believing Gentiles are not obliged to keep the seventh day from
that Law.

From hence also I infer, it could not be written in the Hearts of any of the
Jews or Gentiles; for doubtless Adam by nature knew that which corrupt Man
never so perfectly knew: and it were great Presumption in any, since Sin was so
generally prevailing, to say they knew in a natural way that which Adam knew
not. Besides, is it not great folly for any to say this, since the Law in
Adam's Heart was the original? And shall a blur'd Copy be deemed more perfect
than that, or the muddy Stream be clearer than the Crystal Fountain?

Therefore, since it appears the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath was not written
in Adam's Heart, but that he needed an express positive Law to know it, or
discover it to him, I infer, much more need there was for poor Gentiles, nay
for Believers, to have an express Law to discover it to them. And since our
Opponents affirm that the Commandment of the precise seventh day as a Sabbath,
is of the same nature and quality with the first Commandment, and all other
simply moral Precepts, i. e. not only a time of Worship, or one day in seven,
but the precise seventh day from the Creation; I infer then what a woeful
condition are all we in, that break, or violate in the very Letter a simply
moral Command, nay and teach Men so to do? may, and how could our Savior then
be without Sin, who made Clay on that day, and did many other Works, and
commanded a Burden to be born, and also commended Acts of Mercy (which was but
a moral Duty) above keeping of the Seventh-day Sabbath; Matthew. 12.
comparing the strict Observation of that with Sacrifices, which all know were
but mere positive Laws to Israel under that Legal Dispensation. But more of
this hereafter.

Object. But tho it was not written in Adam's Heart that he should keep the
seventh day as a Sabbath, yet it was given to Adam in Innocence by a positive
Institution.

Answ. This is sooner said than proved: No positive Law given to Adam to keep
the Seventh-day Sabbath.
but let me tell you, that the Law of Nature our Opponents acknowledge was
antecedent to the Institution of the Sabbath, and that all purely moral
Precepts were certainly written in Adam's Heart. Now can the precise seventh
day be Adam's Duty to keep before it was sanctified to that end? this is to say
a thing was before it was, and that the Law of Creation teaches that which it
was impossible to teach, and also that Revealed Religion may be known by
natural Dictates or Principles, which is absurd to affirm; besides, all confess
that mere positive Precepts or Commands in instituted Worship may be altered or
changed, as the great Lawgiver pleases.

But to proceed to answer what is affirmed about its Institution in Paradise,
as given to innocent Adam; we will come to, and well weigh the words of this
pretended positive Precept given to Adam in Paradise: Genesis 2. 2. And on the
seventh day God ended his Work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh
day from all his Work which he had made. Ver. 3. And God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it; because that in it he had rested from all Work, which
God created and made. These are the words which contain what is called the
Institution and Command of the Sabbath to Adam in Paradise. Tillam and others
make a great noise of the Sabbath instituted in Paradise, and given to Adam to
keep: but Brethren, I must tell you that the Learned strangely differ among
themselves, who would have the Antiquity of the Sabbath thus early; some of
them affirming it was given to Adam in Innocence; others say not till he fell.
One speaks thus; Mr. Geo. Walker's Doctrine of the holy Sabbath, p. 10.
And for the time when God first instituted the Sabbath, I conceived it to have
been not in the state of Innocence, but after Man's Fall immediately, and yet
upon the seventh day, wherein God rested. These are his very words. From hence
I observe, he believed Adam did not stand in his Innocence one day, and this he
endeavors to prove; and others as well as he, Men of great Learning and
Wisdom. Let me cite here one more See Mr. Warren's Jewish Sabbath antiquated.
, I shall propose (says he) and endeavor to prove a counter Position, namely,
that it seems more consonant to Scripture (tho at the beginning) yet after the
Fall in Man's corrupt and vitiated state, the probation whereof depends much
(tho not altogether) upon the decision of that often canvassed Question,
whether our first Parents sinned the same day on which they were created.

Others not of less note and Learning, say, That the Sabbath did not commence
till Israel came into the Wilderness, and at the fall of Manna: Mr. Primrose in
his Treatise of the Sabbath in his Preface.
it appears not at all, that God gave any Commandment to Adam, either before
or after his Fall, binding him or his Progeny to the keeping of any such day
whatsoever, as to a thing moral and necessary: neither is there any trace of
such a Commandment to be found till the coming of the Israelites to the
Wilderness -- and that God assigned to them the seventh day of the week, P. 20.
as a particular point of Ecclesiastical Government, whereof he prescribed unto
them all the particular Rites.

Now my Brethren, I shall show you,

1. What is said by those who affirm it was given to Adam in Innocence, whose
Arguments seem to me of no weight at all.

2. I shall take notice what is said by those learned Men who deny it was given
to Adam in Innocence, and affirm it was not given as a Command till Israel came
into the Wilderness. To begin with those who affirm God gave it to Adam before
his Fall in Paradise, or in his state of Innocence.

1. They ground it upon what Moses says in Genesis 2. because it is there
mentioned as the day on which God rested from all his Works.

2. Because God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it. Owen on the
Sabbath, p. 42, etc.
Dr. Owen, after he had showed that some Jews and Rabbis affirm, the Sabbath
did not begin till the Israelites came into the Wilderness, tho some of them
differed in their Opinions about its Commencement; comes to tell us, P. 55.
That the Opinion of the Institution of the Sabbath from the beginning of the
World, is founded principally on a double Testimony: First, From the Old
Testament, Genesis 2. 1, 2, 3. because Moses says, God blessed the seventh day,
P. 62.
and sanctified it; not, says he, that God kept it holy himself, nor that he
purified it, and made it inherently holy, which the nature of the day is not
capable of; nor that he celebrated that which in it self was holy; but that he
set it apart to sacred use. Secondly, The Testimony to the same purpose, says
he, taken out of the New Testament, is in Heb. 4. 3, 4. For we which believe do
enter into Rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my Wrath, if they shall enter
into my Rest, although the Works were finished from the Foundation of the World.
For he speaks in a certain place on this wise, And God did rest the Seventh
Day from all his Works. Now, says the Doctor, the Works, and the finishing of
them, did not at all belong to the Apostle's Discourse, but only as they
denoted the beginning of the Seventh-day Sabbath; for it is the several Rests
of God alone that he is enquiring after. But to pass by what the Doctor says;

1. Let this be considered, that in this place only of all Paul's Writings
mention is made of the Seventh-day; but not one word here intimating that 'twas
our duty to observe that Day under the Gospel; which had it been the Christian
Sabbath, no doubt he would have given some hint of at this turn.

2. By the manner of his Words and Expressions, comparing these two Verses
together, it seems the Sabbath did not commence from the beginning of the
world; for tho God rested on the Seventh-day, and might then set it apart, yet
he might give no Command to keep it till aftertimes, when Sabbath Day Service
or Worship was appointed: This I rather think from these words, Although the Works
were finished from the Foundation of the World; yet the Day, as Man's Duty, was
not given till long after; for, as our Annotators observe, Paul alludes to
Exodus 31. 17. For he speaks in a certain place on his wise, etc.

Thus having given you the Proofs of those who assert the Sabbath was given to
Man in In^ocency, I shall now give you the Reasons urged ^y others who affirm
it was not given till Israel came into the Wilderness: Their Arguments are of
two sorts.

1. Many of them affirm, that Moses wrote ^ere in Genesis 2. by a Prolepsis, or
way of antici^ation.

2. Others do not so much assert that, but ^low it might be set apart in the
design of God from his finishing his Work, and yet af^^rm it was not given to
any to keep till Israel's ^oming into the Wilderness, when God was a^out to
form them into an Ecclesiastical and Po^itical Church State; and appointed them
Laws and Ordinances, particularly the Worship, Duties, and Sacrifices they were
to discharge on their Sabbath Day. And indeed it may seem unreasonable to
believe that the wise God shall give a Sabbath, not only for Rest, but for
Divine Worship, before he appointed those Du^^es of Worship he would have them
to per^orm on that day; which were essentially ne^essary for all to know, as
well as the special ^recise Day it self.

1. But to begin with the first Argument, that Moses wrote those words in his
History by way of Prolepsis, or Anticipation, and so to be ^ead, as it were, in
a Parenthesis: that is, Moses being the first Man that wrote by Revelation or
Inspiration; and having before he began to write, received the Command of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, and the reason of its Institution, coming to write of the
Time when God finished his Work, put in this concerning the Sabbath by way of
Anticipation, saying, God blessed the Seventh-day, and sanctified it; not that
Adam knew any thing of it, or that he gave him a Command to keep it. P. 64, 65.
Dr. Owe^ owns there are sundry things asserted in History by way of
Anticipation, tho he suppose they fell out commonly in the same Age: but
methinks he says little to the purpose to confut^ what other learned Men have
said on this account; and to reserve my own thoughts to m^^self, I shall give
you an account of what two (...) three of them assert, who believe Moses wrot^
this in Genesis 2. by way of Anticipation. On^ Author having showed that some
believe God (...) the beginning of the World did set apart the seventh day,
Heylin's Hist. of the Sabbath, p. 3.
and commanded Adam to keep it says, that others, and those antienter, and o^
more Authority, conceive these words to be spoken by a Prolepsis or
Anticipation, and to relate to the times wherein Moses wrote; and intimated
only the reason why God required of the Jews to sanctify the seventh day rather
than any other: no Precept to that purpose being given to Adam and to his
Posterity, nor any Mystery in the number seven, why it should be thought most
proper for God's Public Worship: And this, says he, is indeed the antienter
and more general Opinion, unanimously delivered both by Jews and Christians,
and not so much as questioned till these latter days: And tho some ascribe it
to Tostatus as the first Inventer of it, yet it is antienter far than he; tho
were it so, it could not be denied but it had an able and learned Author, who,
considering the times in which he lived, and the shortness of his Life, hardly
ever had his equal. (...) is true, Tostatus makes this Query, Whether (...)
Sabbath being sanctified by God in the In^^cy of the World, had been observed
by Men ^o the Light of Nature; and returns this An^^er, that God commanded not
the Sabbath to (...) sanctified in the beginning of the World, (...) it was
commanded afterward by the Law (...) Moses, when God did publicly make known
(...) Will on Mount Sinai; and that whereas (...) Scripture speaks of
sanctifying the seventh (...) in Genesis 2. it is not to be understood as if (...)
Lord did then appoint it for his public ^orship, but to be referred to the time
wherein ^oses wrote, which was in the Wilderness, etc. (...) so the meaning of
the Prophet will be ^^iefly this, that God did sanctify that day, ^at is, to us
that are his People of the House (...) Jacob. So far Tostatus. Our Author also
cites (...) Josephus speaking after the same manner: Antiq. l. 1, 2.
and, ^^th he, Solomon Jarchi, one of the principal ^abbins, speaks more
expressly to this purpose, (...) makes this Gloss or Comment upon Moses's words:
God blessed the seventh day, i. e. in Manna, because for every day of the week
an Homer of it fell upon the Earth, and a double ^ortion on the sixth; but none
fell on the seventh ^ay at all. He also quotes Mercer, one much ^onversant in
the Rabbis, who confesses the Rab^ins generally referred Genesis 2. to the
following ^^mes, even to the Sanctification of the Sabbath ^stablish'd by the
Law of Moses. -- Doubtless ^he Jews who so much doted on their Sabbath, would
by no means have robbed it of so great Antiquity, had they had any ground to
approve ^hereof, or not known the contrary: so that the ^cope of Moses in this
place was not to show the time when, but the occasion why God did afterward
sanctify the seventh day, because that on that day he rested from all his Works.

Moreover, the same Author says; Nor (...) it otherwise conceived, than that
Moses did he^^ speak by way of Prolepsis or Anticipation, (...) Ambrose
Catharini One of the Trent Council.
opened the contrary, th^^ next falls foul upon Tostatus: Yet, says he, (...)
same Catharini affirms in the same Book, th^^ nothing is more frequent in holy
Scripture th^^ these Anticipations; and among others our A^^thor mentions one
or two: it is said of Abr^^ham, that he removed to a Mountain eastwa^^ of
Bethel, whereas it was not called Bethel till (...) hundred years after, and
Abraham knew it (...) by that name; but Moses writing the Histor^ of Abraham
(says a French Protestant Divine (...) calls it by Anticipation Bethel, which
was (...) so called till Jacob gave it that name, Genesis 28. 13.
which b^^fore was called Luz. So in Judge. 5. 9, 19. (...) said, the Angel of
the Lord came up from G^^gal to Bokim, which was not so called till
afte^^wards. Ver. 32.
We also find in Exodus 16. that Mos^^ said, This is the thing that the Lord
commanded* Fill an Omer of it to be kept for your Generations, that they may
see the Bread wherewith you have been fed in the Wilderness, when I broug^^ you
forth from the Land of Egypt. Ver. 33.
-- So Aaron laid it up before the Testimony to be kept. Calvin says this
Author, tells us on this Text, indeed it could not well be otherwise
interpreted (i. e. but by Anticipation) for how could Aaron lay up a pot of
Manna to keep before the Testimony, when as yet there was neither Ark nor
Tabernacle, and so no Testimony at that time* Moreover, Moses tells us in the
place before mentioned, that the Children of Israel eat Manna forty years,
which, says he, is not otherwise true in that place and time, but by
Anticipation.

Now I argue thus: If Moses by way of Anticipation speaks of that as being
done, ^^ich was not actually done till forty, fifty, or ^undred years after,
why might he not in (...). 2. put that in after the same manner, that ^s not
indeed done till his time, when God gave (...) the Commandment of the Sabbath?
If he ^ts that into his History as done, which was (...) done till a hundred
years after, why not (...) other thing till two thousand years? The ^^stance of
time to me signifies nothing, tho (...). Owen seems to intimate as if it did. I
^^ll leave this to all Men's serious thoughts, (...) what little reason the
Sabbatarians, or others (...) to cast so much contempt on what these (...) have
said.

Secondly, As to the other sort, who insist not (...) much on this, yet deny
that God gave Adam (...) Command to keep the seventh day, tho it (...) said,
God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified (...)

Now by the way consider,

1. The Scripture expresses not the manner (...) the Lord sanctified it: God by
way of Destination from the beginning appointed the Sabbath for aftertimes.
(1.) Whether by ^^parting any special Holiness to that day, which (as Dr. Owen
says) it was not capable (...), there being no inherent Holiness in that day
^ore than another. (2.) Or by dedicating the ^^me to any Religious Worship for
Adam to be ^^und in on that day. Or, (3.) Whether he ^^ight not then by a
Decree or Purpose only ^^estine that day to religious Worship for future ^^mes:
for he foresaw Man would fall, and need (...) Sabbath for himself, and a
particular day to ^orship God in. Now it is evident a Law may (...) instituted
Tho I do not say the Sabbath was instituted in Paradise.
long before the time of its Com^encement, or being in force. Diverse great ^en
both Ancient and Modern, Treatise of the Sab. p. 41.
as Dr. White ^^timates, affirm that God by a Decree only destined that day to
religious Service in future time; he instances in venerable Bede, and before
him, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Iren^us, that God sanctified the seventh
day, Genesis 2. by his Decree and Destination only, not by any present Imposition.

The Arguments on which this Opinion (...) grounded are very weighty, which
shall (...) next considered.

First, All generally conclude that God ga^^ to Adam but one positive Law, and
in brea^^ing of that (as Dr. Lightfoot, and others shew^ he broke all the ten
Commandments, which (...) to the matter or substance of them were wro^ in his
Heart; and that this greatened his Si^ viz. that tho he had but one
Commandment* he violated it.

Secondly, Suppose Adam had had this positive Law given to him also, to keep
holy the seventh day, and had broke it, had he thereby been guilty of the
breach of all the others? For I have just now showed that most believe him
guilty of all in breaking that one Command, Thou shall not eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil. But being every way guilty, it must be supposed he
broke both those positive Commands, if he had two given him, and so was guilty
of the breach of the fourth twice. Nay, if what I say be considered, and that
which I inquire about be granted, he was doubly guilty of the breach of them
all.

Thirdly, The Law of the Sabbath was (as it is conceived) that Adam should keep
that day holy; nay, he must be so obliged, if any Command was given to him, yea
and keep it more holy than any of the other six. Now if so, would it not follow
that Adam was not perfect in Innocence? Does Perfection admit of any ^urther
degree of Holiness, or require more ^anctity on that day than any other?
Certain^^ while he stood, every day must be kept with ^e Holiness and Sanctity.
Or I say, what ^ason can be given that Adam, who was so ^ly and perfect, and
capable in the same de^ree of contemplating every day the Perfecti^ns of his
blessed Creator, should need one ^ecial day to do this in, having nothing to
^vert his thoughts, nor any need of a day of ^st from toilsom Labor? If so,
does not what ^ey say argue some Imperfection attending (...)? how then was he
created in the Image of (...), and perfect, if he was capable of keeping ^y one
day more holy than the rest whilst in ^nocency? If any should say he was
capable (...) rest from dressing the Garden on one day: (...) answer, if the
dressing the Garden was any ^nderance to him in Divine Contemplation, (...) any
holy Duty, it argues still he was not ^erfect, nor completely happy.

Fourthly, If one special day was appointed to ^orship God in, and this he
stood in need of, ^ill it not follow by the same reason, that he ^eeded to be
told what special parts of Wor^ip he should perform to God on that day? ^or, as
I hinted before, it seems strange he ^ould need a special day of Worship by a
po^^ive Law to be appointed him, and no Duties ^f Worship be instituted suitable
to such a day. ^vident it is, when God commanded his People Israel to keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath, he ^old them how they should do it, and what ^cts of
Worship they should discharge on that ^ay.

Fifthly, It may seem strange that any wise ^an should affirm that Adam was
enjoined to ^eep a Sabbath, from what is said in Genesis 2. whenas we read not one
word of a Sabbath there; all that Moses says is, that, God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it. Now, as one observes, the seventh day is three times
mentioned in this Text, but the term Sabbath not at all, nor indeed any where
else, till it came to be given to the Children of Israel in the Wilderness; nor
can they ever prove that the seventh day mentioned Exodus 16. or 20. wa^ the
precise seventh day immediately succeedin^ the six days of the Creation: but
more (...) that hereafter.

Sixthly, Since we read of no day called (...) Sabbath till near two thousand
years from the Creation, how should any before the Flood^ or before Moses, know
of such a day? for the bear Expression, that God sanctified the sevent^ day,
etc. if that was known to the old World and afterward (which I much doubt of)
could not without some other Revelation discover that they were obliged to keep
it as a Sabbath in religious Worship: tho it is said, God sanctified the
seventh day, yet it is not said that Ada^ also sanctified it, nor can they tell
how Adam should know that God then sanctified it; for being not created till
the sixth day, how could he, without some special Revelation, know the next day
after was the seventh day from the Creation? Could he tell how long God was in
making the Heavens and the Earth? etc. Moreover, it is worth noting how
strenuously our Opponents do urge that there is no express Command to keep the
first day. Now may not w^ say, there is no express Command for Adam in
Innocence, or when fallen, or for any till Moses's time to keep the seventh day
as a Sabbath? yet they boldly affirm it was their duty to keep it.

Again, Should it be granted that God commanded Adam to keep that very seventh
day on which he himself rested from his Work, and that Adam did sanctify that
one day, yet it is not said that he did, or was bid to keep holy every ^eventh
day to the world's end; and that he must ^egin every such day just at the same
time as God did his seventh day, or just at the same time ^f the day as it was
in Paradise, at that moment ^hen God ceased to work. Dr. Wallis Answ. to Mr.
Banfield, p. 12, 13.
Thus Dr. Wallis, who ^rther says, It is not expressly said that all Man^ind
must for ever after observe the seventh day, (...) every week of days, reckoned
continually from (...) first Creation.

Let me here add what another Author says ^s to the words of the Text blessed
and sancti^^ed: Mr. Gilb. Ironside, on the Sab. p. 20, 21.
That this was done (says he) we all agree; when it was done is the question:
for this Circumstance we have not expressly in the Text. Things are said in
Scripture to be sanctified two ways:

1. By way of Purpose and Destination only, as God sanctified Jeremiah to be a
Prophet to him before he was born.

2. By way of actual use and employment, as when the Levites were admitted to
the actual Service of the Tabernacle. God's resting from his Works, He calls it
Sabbath.
and sanctifying the seventh day, were coetaneous in the first sense, i. e. by
way of Purpose and Intention, which Moses relates; but not in the latter, by
way of actual Execution. As soon as he had ended his Work, he ordained the
seventh day, the day of his own Rest, to be that on which his Church should
rest, and follow his Example; and this was the great Blessing and Prerogative
bestowed on that day. Muscul. loc. com.
Musculus says, he dos well express Sanctificatus by destinatus, a day
sanctified, by a day destinated and afore-appointed. Byfield against Brerewood.
Mr. Byfield has observed, That the word in the original signifies to prepare:
to prepare is one thing, and actually to appoint is another. So then the
Sabbath had not an actual existence in the World from the beginning, it had
only a metaphysical being, as all natural things are said to be in their
Causes: for the cause or reason of the Sabbath's Sanctification (God's Rest)
was from the beginning, tho the Sanctification it self was a long time after.
Yet he owns God did sanctify the day then by way of Destination -- That as God
then actually rested, so he actually sanctified the day; but that therefore he
then commanded Adam to observe it, does not follow: for that God did then
sanctify, that is, destinate that day to be the Church's Sabbath in due time,
is one thing; and to command Adam to observe it* is another. -- He proceeds to
show how the Medes were called God's sanctified ones, that is* destinated to be
in time Destroyers of Babylon and the Father sanctified his Son, and sent hi^
into the World; Joh. 10. 36. Also Cyrus, Isa. 45. 1.

Seventhly, Besides, the Law of the Seventh day Sabbath ran thus, Six days thou
shall work* and do all thou have to do, but the seventh is the Sabbath, etc.
Now the Old Testament Sabbath was the last day of the week: they were to work
six, the six first; but this he could not do I mean the six first from the
Creation, because he was not created till the sixth day. So that the first six
days, tho the six days in which the Lord did all his Work, could not be Adam's
six working days. But if the Sabbath was given to him in Innocence, no doubt,
as Tilla^ says, he kept the first Sabbath; and then it ^ollows he begun with
God, and rested before (...) labored six days, contrary to the Order and
^ommand of the instituted Sabbath, Exodus 20.

Moreover, Warren 's Jewish Sabbath, etc. in his full Answer to Tillam 's Book,
p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
many learned Men believe Adam ^ll the same day he was created, namely, on ^he
sixth day, and so could not keep one Sab^ath in Innocence. But I desire such as
would (...) further informed of this, to read Mr. Edw. ^arren's Treatise, who
shows,

1. That Adam fell the same day he was created, appears from the words of our
blessed Savior, Joh. 8. 34. that the Devil was a Murderer from the beginning,
a Liar, and the Father of Lies: not, says he, from the beginning of the
World's Creation, but of Man's Creation, which most properly and precisely
implys the sixth day.

2. He says, the parley betwixt the Woman and the Serpent intimates as much; for
both the Serpent's demand, and the Woman's reply speak plainly that as yet they
had not tasted the sweets of Paradise: Has God said, Ye shall not eat of every
Tree of the Garden? the Serpent had not been so subtle to ask whether that
might be done which had been done already. Besides, we may conclude that, had
not the Serpent immediately set upon the Woman, his Craftiness had not been so
great; and Adam hearing of a Tree of Life, we may suppose would have first
tasted of that; and Satan it may be fearing the Effects of it, immediately set
upon the Woman. And, says our Author, the Tree of Life being sacramental, hence
may it well be thought that if Adam had stood one Sabbath, he had tasted of the
Tree of Life, so had been out of a possibility of falling.

3. Satan besure would take the fittest season and therefore tempts the Woman
timely.

4. It Is said they heard the Voice of the Lord God in the cool of the day, or
in the evening; Robert 's Myster. p. 39.
and as he notes, Mr. Roberts says the this is the Evening mentioned after the
Cre^^tion of Adam, and the Covenant made with him. Adam was arraigned and
sentenced to^wards the Evening of the sixth day, therefore he sinned the same
day, and so kept (...) Sabbath in Innocence.

5. He mentions that Text, Adam in hono^ lodged not a night, Psalm. 49. 12.
but was like the Beasts the perish; for, says he, so it is in the Hebre^ word
for word.

He further confirms what he says her^ and answers all Tillam's Objections, and
tha^ about the work Adam did of giving Names (...) all living Creatures, which
he shows he might soon do; and as to that of God's saying o^ the sixth day he
saw all his Works that the^ were good, therefore Man had not then sinne^ he
replys, that God's days works were done each day by a word speaking, or in a
mo^ment; he did not work as Man does: so tha^ on the sixth day early, or as
soon as Man was created, he might say all his Works were good, yet Man might
sin and fall before night.

6. He argues from Adam's not knowing hi^ Wife till he had sinned, and shows
that (...) good reason can be given why he should no^ have known her, had he
stood one day Now these things tho doubtful, with the other being well
observed, why should any affir^ the Sabbath was given to Adam in Innocence and
that he kept the first Sabbath in Paradi^^ with his Creator? for so says
Tillam.

Eighthly, A Sabbath was not agreeable to Adam in Paradise, either in respect
to himself, ^o rest from Labor, or as a special day to wor^^ip God in: Such was
the happiness of his ^ate, that he had no Burdens to bear, nor ^y toilsom
Labor; nor was there any Curse (...) the Creatures, that they should need a
day (...) Rest; he had no need of Servants, etc. ^o doubt the Sabbath referred
only to the state (...) fallen Man, and was given in Mercy to ^^rael, God's own
Vovenant People, under the ^aw; I say, in Mercy to them, and to the ^asts who
groan under their Burden. Adam's ^bour, if any, in Innocence was matter of
^light, and every day was a Sabbath to him: and, as Tertullian observes, Man
lived in Pa^^dise in a fruition of God. Let me close this ^ith what a Reverend
Author says.

First, Walker on the Sab. p. 8.
They all go too far, and have not one word in Scripture for their Opinion,
that say Adam in Innocence should or would have kept every seventh day for holy
Rest, and that God would have required it at his hands: for all Scriptures
which mention the Sabbath, speak of it as of a holy Sign looking toward
Christ, and the state of Grace and Glory in him, and not toward the state of
Innocence. It is most certain, Adam in that state was perfect with all natural
Perfections, and at all times equally disposed to obey and serve God, to
remember his Creation, and to honor his Creator: he needed no observation of
any day to be put in mind of any thing he had before known, and which God had
revealed to him; his Memory was perfect; his Will was every day ready to do
whatever he knew to be right; he needed no Sign to admonish him of his Duty, or
to move him to do it in due season: he did not labor nor weary himself; every
day to him was a day of Delight and Pleasure, of Rest and Recreation. -- In a
word, his whole Life was a constant and obedient serving o^ God; and there was
no inequality, nor les^ Worship of God performed by him in on^ day than in
another, for he fully served God at all times. Whoever denies this, must needs
deny Man's Perfections, and constant Conformity to God in the state of
Innocence For where one day is kept better than an^^ther, there is an
inequality, and no consta^ Uniformity in himself, nor Conformity to (...) Will
of God.

In the second place, they who hold the Sabbath was first instituted after
Man's Fall, and yet written in Man's Heart in Innocence, and that he was then
bound to keep it, fall into many Absurdities; as,

1. That Man was bound to keep a Sabbath before ever it was instituted.

2. That God did by his Word teach Man in vain, i. e. that which he was fully
taught already, and had written in his heart.

3. That God gave Man a Law in vain after his Fall, because he was become
unable to keep it.

4. They that hold that the Law of the Sabbath was not written in man's Heart,
but was by a Positive Law given in the State of Innocence, of the same nature
with that of eating of the Tree of Knowledge, make this Commandment of the
Sabbath utterly void by Man's Fall, even as that of eating, etc. is now void.
Thus far Mr. Walker. I might add, certainly there was a vast difference as to
the Cause and Design of God's giving a Sabbath to Man in Innocence, and when
fallen* Could a Sabbath suit equally with perfect and ^allen Man? Or could
there be the same need of a Sabbath to both? Certainly if God had ^ot given
that Command by Moses, the keep^^g that precise Day would not have been known
(...) be the Duty of any of Adam's Offspring, ^om a positive Law given to him
in Innocence.

Ninthly, To put the matter further out of ^oubt, pray mind the words of this
pretended ^ositive Command, God rested on the Seventh^^y; what then? but he
also blessed and sanc^^fied it: what tho? Because God sanctified (...) Priest,
may others do so too? He might (...) the Seventh-day apart for his People in
after^^es. Because God sanctified it, must Adam ^nctify it or keep it holy
without a Com^^and? Is it said therefore, Thou Adam shall ^eep this Day as a
Sabbath? No doubt Moses ^ould not only have mentioned God's blessing and
sanctifying that Day, had it been given to Adam as a Sabbath; but God's express
Command would have been mentioned by him, and would also have called it the
Sabbath Day.

I might now come to the last Argument, viz. If it had been commanded Adam and
all his Posterity to keep the Seventh-day after he fell, ^he Patriarchs that
lived before Moses kept it: But more of this next time.

Tenthly, If Adam had the Sabbath positively given to him in Innocence, besure
it was injoined with some Penalty, as the Command of not eating of the Tree of
Knowledge was. We also find the Penalty of the breach of the Seventh-day Sabbath
was Death: but as we read of no Positive Command given to him to keep that Day,
so of no threatening if he broke or violated it; therefore certainly it was
never enjoined upon him.

Elevehthly, When the Sabbath was institured for the House of Jacob, God
declared it was a Sign between him and them, or a Shadow of things to come,
Col. 2. 16, 17. it referred to Christ, or to that Rest all Believers do enter
into. Exodus 31. 13, 14.
Speak thou unto the Children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths, it is a
Sign between me and you throughout your Generations, Ezekiel. 20. 21.
that ye may know that I am the Lord that sanctify you, Exodus 31. 13. Ye shall
keep my Sabbath, therefore it is holy unto you; every one that defiles it
shall surely be put to death: For every one that does any work on the
Sabbath Day, shall be cut off from amongst his People, verse. 14. It was a sign
God set apart that People with a Ceremonial Sanctification, to signify that
alone by Jesus Christ all the true spiritual Israel should have
Gospel-Sanctification, as well as it was a sign of the Covenant of Works: but
it could be no sign of this Sanctification to Adam in Innocence, nor of any
other Gospel-blessing, therefore doubtless the Sabbath was not given to Adam in
Innocence.

Twelfthly, What reason can be given that God should allow Adam in Innocence
six days to labor in, and require but one, i. e. the seventh, as a day to his
Creator? No, it is evident from hence the Sabbath referred to fallen Man, who
God foresaw would need six days to do all his Labor; and it shows God's great
Mercy to Man and Beast in that woeful condition of Servitude, It might not be
our Duty to keep the Sabbath, tho given to Adam in Innocence.
under the Curse.

I might add, should it be granted that God gave Adam a positive Command to
keep the seventh day in Innocence, how can our Opponents thence prove it the
Duty of all to keep the said day? A Command to him in Innocence may not oblige
any Man in his fallen state, except the same be renewed. I find two of the
chiefest Writers I have met with, who are approved Orthodox, plead not for the
Sabbath as given to Adam in Innocence, See Sabbatum Redi. Part 3. p. 336.
viz. Mr. Dan. ^awdrey, and Mr. Herbert, Palmer: Take their words, We purpose
not to maintain that the Sabbath was given to Adam in Innocence before the
Fall: but they hint it might be given to him after the Fall, and that he fell
the same day he was created. P. 337.
Moreover, they say, If it was given before his Fall, it does not follow it
should oblige at this day; for the positive Precept of not eating of the Tree
of Knowledge, was given in Innocence, and yet does not universally oblige Adam's
Posterity, nor should if the Tree were at this day known. A positive Precept
binds only during the pleasure of the Lawgiver, etc. so say I, the same must be
granted, when it was given Exodus 16. and 20. the precise seventh day being
there a positive Precept.

SERMON III.
Proving the Patriarchs kept not the Seventh-day Sabbath: That the knowledge of
the seventh day was not written in the Hearts of all Mankind by Nature.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, etc.
MY Brethren, there are three sorts of Persons I have little hopes of doing
good to in preaching on this Subject.

1. Such as through self-conceit are so fond of their own Apprehensions, that they
resolve not to regard the strongest Arguments against what they believe: thus
it is with some who have sucked in dangerous Errors; who if a Book be presented
to them, presently cry, away with it, we will not read it: they are not like
him that said, What I know not, teach thou me; nor like the great Appollos, who
was ready to receive further Light by a poor Man and his Wife, much inferior to
him both as to Parts, Knowledge, and Learning, Acts 18.

2. The second sort are such as through the weakness of their Capacities are not
able to take in the strength of an Argument; and therefore, let never so much
be said, do intimate it is all little or nothing to them.

3. The third sort are such as seem indifferent whether they keep the seventh,
or the first day, or perhaps any at all, as a special day to the Lord: these
not seeing the danger of observing the old Jewish Sabbath, nor of their
indifference about keeping any day at all, trouble not themselves at all about
this matter. But to ^^ass this, and proceed.

I have proved, 1. That the Command for, or knowledge of keeping the Seventh-day
Sabbath was not written in Adam 's Heart. 2. That there was (...) positive
Command given to him, to observe that ^ay above any other, either before or
immediately after his Fall. A time to worship God was wrote in Adam's Heart no
doubt; and indeed all his time, while in Innocence, he was naturally led to
give up to his blessed Creator. All Adam's time in Innocence taken up in
adoring his blessed Creator.
What had he to do, but to adore, and contemplate the Perfections of his
bountiful Creator? and could he have done it better on one day than another?
The best and highest Acts of Worship he was capable of performing would have
been his work and delight for ever, had he abode in that state: for Perfection
admits of no greater Number, Measure, Degrees, or Additions.

Now I may infer from hence: If the Command of God to observe the seventh day
was not wrote in Adam's Heart, then it is not written in the Hearts of any of
his Offspring by Nature: For as I have said, the muddy Stream cannot be clearer
than the Crystal Fountain.

But our Brethren who keep the seventh day, and some others affirm, that the
Patriarchs from Adam to Moses did keep that day.

Answ. This I deny, and if I put them to prove it, The Patriarchs did not keep
the seventh day Sab.
they can never do it.

First, I grant that from Adam to Moses the holy and pious Patriarchs not only
discharged all Duties of natural Religion, but all Duties given by express
Command to them; yet we read not that God commanded them to keep the seventh
day, or reminded them of a former Precept given to Adam, and in him to them.
And no doubt they observed a sufficient time for the Worship of God, it may be
a part of every day, or more than one in seven: for they not only improved
their natural Light and Knowledge, but had a special Revelation of the Will of
God to them; yet we find not the least intimation that any of them kept the
seventh day.

Abel we read sacrificed; and this of offering Sacrifices could not be known by
the Light of Nature; God therefore commanded him so to do, or revealed it some
way or another in a supernatural way to him, because him and his Offering God
had respect unto: besides, he did it in Faith, and Faith must have a Rule to
act by; but we do not read he offered Sacrifices on the seventh day, or kept
that day as a Sabbath: had he kept one Sabbath Day, tho no mention is made of
any Command he had so to do, we should no more doubt of it, but conclude he had
such a Command, as we believe he had for his offering Sacrifices; but if he or
any other of the Patriarchs had kept the seventh day as a Sabbath, would it
from thence follow it was a moral Precept, and obligatory on us, any more than
their offering Sacrifices obliges us so to do?

We read of Men who began to call upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4. 26. or to
call themselves by the Name of the Lord, as one reads it, See Ainsw. Annot. on
the place.
but not a word of such a Sabbath observed by them. Ainsworth reads it thus,
Then began Men profanely to call upon the Name of the Lord: and one of the
Rabins Rabbi Maimon.
says, in those days Idolatry took its first beginning; so that from hence
there can no Proof be taken that they kept the seventh-day as a Sabbath. Enoch
walked with God three hundred years, and certainly if he had kept the Sabbath
we should have had ^ome account of it; but as we read of no such matter, so
Justin Martyr, as I find him cited by approved Authors, declares Enoch was one
if those that was not circumcised, neither kept the Sabbath. Lib. 4. c. 30. Ad
Judaeos.
And Irenaeus mentioning Enoch, with my Author, speaks thus, viz. Enoch that
righteous Man, being neither circumcised, nor a Sabbath-keeper, was by the Lord
translated.

And as it cannot be proved that the seventh day was observed before the Flood,
so we have ^o reason to believe it was kept by Noah, in those days the Flood
overflowed the World: (...) is said, Noah was only righteous in that
Generation, and therefore a true Worshipper of God; but we read not of his
keeping the Seventh-day Sabbath.

I know some would catch at that Expression, Genesis 8. 10, 12. that Noah stayed
seven days before he sent out the Dove; as if this might re^er to the Sabbath.

But in Answer to this (which indeed needs ^one at all) take what a learned Man
has ^id for a reason why Noah stayed seven days, and again other seven days:
Abulensis.
Noah, says he, desired to know whether the Waters were decreased. Now the
Waters being regulated by the Moon, Noah was most especially to regard her
Motions: for as she is either in Opposition or Conjunction with the Sun in her
increase or wane, there is proportionably an increase or falling of the Waters.
Noah then considering the Moon in her several quarters, which commonly we know
are at seven days distance, sent forth his Dove to bring him tidings: for the
Text tells us, that he sent out the Raven and the Dove four times; and the
fourth time, the Moon being in the last quarter, when both by the ordinary
course of Nature the Waters usually are, and by the Will of God were then much
decreased; the Dove which was sent out, had found good footing on the Earth.
There is greater reason to believe this than to suppose it referred to the
Sabbath. De Emendat. Temp. l. 5.
Scaliger, says my Author, one while thought the day on which, Noah left the
Ark and offered Sacrifices, to be the seventh day; but in the next Edition he
fixed that day to be the fourth day of the week. Now after the Flood we find
God gave to Noah and his Sons some express Laws and Commands, i. e. not to eat
Blood, and forbidding Murder, etc. Now this is the time doubtless to hear of a
Sabbath, and of the charge about it, if God had given it either to Adam before
or after the Fall; but not one word is mentioned, for it is not said, Remember
the seventh day, etc. or ye shall observe my Sabbath. Genesis 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7.
Now from Shem, Ham and Japhet, both Jews and Gentiles, proceeded even the
whole World; and to me it seems not probable, had the Sabbath been commanded,
that Jehovah should not at this time have given them a charge about it, there
being then so few positive Laws instituted; here is Blood forbid to the whole
World, and Murder, but not one word of a Sabbath, or seventh day to be
observed. Seven Precepts given to Noah, but no Sabbath.
The Rabbis speak of seven Precepts given to Noah and his Sons, but exclude
the Seventh-day Sabbath out of that number. If we have it not mentioned here,
besure we shall not meet with it till we come to Moses; but here we have it
not, nor indeed was it possible for some of them to keep that precise day,
being scattered to the furthermost ends of the Earth. We read of Abraham, that
he kept all God's Commandments, yet he kept no Seventh-day Sabbath: he built an
Altar, and sacrificed, which were mere positive Precepts, and (...) the
Seventh-day Sabbath is not mentioned, ^or commanded him, nor a hint given to
remember him to keep it.

Job lived also, Job lived, it is thought about Abraham's time.
it is concluded, about Abraham's time, which may be gathered by the number of
years he lived, which was about two hundred years, which few attained to after
Abraham. Joseph lived but a hundred and ten. It Is said Job lived a hundred and
forty years after his sore Trials were ended: Job 42. 16.
the Jews speak of his living in all two hundred and eighty years. ^ow, as one
observes, when he pleads his In^^grity and Innocence even to very minute
Particulars, he neither alleges his strict observation of the Seventh-Say
Sabbath, nor apologizes for the neglect thereof; nor do this Friends, who raked
up every thing against him, speak a word about this, nor of the Sabbath
throughout the whole Book; which treats in a manner wholly about Worship and
Devotion toward God: the Sabbath therefore no doubt had not ^^^ap'd (as he
minds) if it had been known, (...) been a Duty in his days.

As to Isaac, he was a most devout Man, and (...) Life was taken up in a
continual course of ^^ety: his custom was to go into the fields to meditate,
but it is not said he did it on the ^eventh day, or that he kept this day as a
Sabbath.

Jacob was a Man that fled from Idolatry (...) God's Command, and lived a godly
Life: and tho we read of his performing many Acts of Worship, yet nothing of
his keeping the seventh day as a Sabbath; no, tho we read of his hard Service
when he kept Laban's Sheep both in Winter and Summer, which might have caused
him to complain of his being incommoded from a strict observation of that day,
had he known it as his Duty; but in all his Complaints not one word of this. We
know among us how Shepherds are hindered in Sabbath-Observations, of which many
have complained, or may have occasion to do. Moreover during Joseph's being in
Pharaoh's Court, nor before, do we read of his observing this Sabbath, and when
Jacob came into Egypt, we read (...) of his observation thereof, nor of the
Egyptian keeping of it; or had they forgot it, besu^ there would have been some
notice taken of Jacob's keeping it, nor would he have avoided i^ that he might
please Pharaoh and his Servants.

Nor can it be thought on any good grounds that the Children of Israel kept the
Seventh-day Sabbath under their Taskmasters in Egypt, the some would infer they
did from these words, that you make the People rest from their Burdens, Exodus
5. 5. they would have these words to mean, you make them keep a Sabbath, where
as no such thing seems to have the least countenance, because Pharaoh's
Officers complain not of their resting or being idle on one day only* but two
days together; see Exodus 5. 14. Wherefore have you not fulfilled your Task in
making of Brick, both yesterday and to day, as heretofore?

Now since there is no mention that any (...) the Patriarchs kept the seventh
day as a Sabbath, we infer this as the first reason why they observed it not.

Secondly, Let it be considered that we read (...) many positive Commands given
to Noah, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but none to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath,
nor no reminding them of any former Institution or Precept to observe it;
wherefore we may conclude they kept it not.

Thirdly, The Patriarchs not commended for keeping the Seventh-day Sabbath.
We read how the faithful Patriarchs were commended for doing whatsoever God
commanded them, but not of any of them being commended for keeping the seventh
day as a Sabbath: yet after Moses's time, when the Sabbath was instituted and
given by God's express Command to Israel, he took (we find) as much notice of
their observing his Sabbaths as of any other Duty injoined on them, and this to
their great Commendation. Therefore had the Patriarchs been obliged to keep it,
no doubt they had as faithfully discharged their Duty therein, as any of God's
Servants did in after times; and God besure would have left something on Record
to their Commendation.

Fourthly, The old World not charged with Sabbath-breaking.
We read of diverse Sins the old World was guilty of, which provoked God, and
brought the Flood upon them, but not one word or hint given that they were
guilty of Sabbath-breaking. Now if it had been known either by the Light of
Nature, or by any positive Precept given to Adam, and handed down to them by
Tradition or otherwise; they being so universally corrupted and polluted, no
doubt had profaned that day; and if so, the sacred Record had mentioned that
great Sin doubtless as well as others.

Fifthly, Sodom not charged with Sabbath-breaking.
Moreover, we read of the crying Sins of the People of Sodom, etc. and no doubt
but they had violated all God's Commands, or whatsoever were their known
Duties; but nothing of breaking the Sabbath is charged against them. Now can it
be imagined they should not have failed in this case, or that God would
overlook or take no notice of it?

Sixthly, We have a Catalogue of almost all immoral Evils before and after the
Flood, as Idolatry, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Lasciviousness, Incest, Murder,
Lying, Covetousness, Theft, etc. and how Sin had possessed the Thoughts,
Hearts, and Lives of Men; but no account of their Violation of the Sabbath Day.

Seventhly, None from Adam to Moses reprehended for not keeping the Sabbath.
Let it be considered, that since God so severely reprehended the Jews for
profaning his Sabbaths, and hardly reproved them more sharply for any one Sin
than for this; certainly in his enumerating the Sins (...) his People, and of
the Wickedness of those that lived from Adam to Moses, he would have reproved
them for Sabbath-breaking, and not have utterly passed it by in silence, had
they been guilty of it: or can it be rationally supposed that tho they failed
in all other respects, yet that they did not in this? No doubt, had it been a
known Duty, (and that some of them had been guilty of the breach of it, as in
all likelihood they would) but God would have severely reprehended them for it.

Eighthly, Since we read of no Sabbath till Moses's time, Exodus 16. only that
God sanctified the seventh day; what makes our Brethren so boldly say that Adam
in Innocence kept it, and all the Patriarchs from Adam to Moses? This may seem
strange to any thinking Man, i. e. that they should affirm this, seeing they
require an express Command from us for the keeping of the first day, or else
all is nothing with them. Brethren, this I will say, that had we no more ground
to keep the Lord's day in solemn Worship, as a day of Rest, than they can find
for the Patriarchs keeping of the seventh day as a Sabbath, we should not say
one word more for it: I challenge them to show us one place where a Sabbath is
so much as once mentioned, or any express or implicit Command given to any to
observe it; or one Example from the Creation of the World that any Man or Woman
ever kept the seventh day as a Sabbath until we come to Moses, Exodus 16. I
shall, God assisting, show that we have more than mere Examples of the Gospel
Primitive Churches for observing in a solemn manner the Lord's Day, or the
first day of the week, when I come to that part of my Work.

Now let them produce but one Example, that ^ne, tho but one of the Patriarchs
did keep the ^eventh day as a Sabbath, I will conclude it might be given to
Adam after his Fall; for before his Fall it could not be a Law to him, for the
reasons I have urged: but if they could produce such an Example, yet say some
learned Men, it does no more prove that precise day is a moral Precept, or that
it from hence follows, that it is our Duty in Gospel Times to observe it, than
it proves it is our Duty to offer Sacrifices, which we read (before the
Ceremonial Law was given) they frequently did.

But since there is not one Instance to be given of any one Person that kept
that day till Moses's time, but that the Word of God is wholly silent about it,
we must and may say, according to that common Maxim used by Divines, i. e.
Where God has not a Mouth to speak, we ought not to have an Ear to hear.

Ninthly, The Proofs of the Learned for the Patriarchs keeping the Sabbath.
Let us now consider what some learned Men have produced for their pretended
Proofs that the Patriarchs kept the seventh day as a Sabbath, which I fear has
imboldned the Jewish Sabbatarians to affirm with such Confidence that all the
Patriarchs did keep it.

But by the way, Dr. Owen, who is one that asserted what I utterly deny, does
yet confess that many of the Jewish Masters or Rabbis ascribe the original of
the Sabbath to the Statute given to them in Mara, Exodus 15. and others of them
to Exodus 16. yet the said Reverend Doctor cites some of the probable grounds to
prove that the Patriarchs kept it. Dr. Owen on the Sab. p. 72.


1. The first and chief place I find he mentions is that in Genesis 18. 19. For I
know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the ways of the Lord, and do Justice and Judgment.

Answ. That Abraham had this Charge and Commandment given to him is granted:
but what little reason there is from hence to conclude he kept the Sabbath, or
gave charge to his Children so to do, I will leave to all Men's Consideration.
God gave to Abraham Commands, we find that evident enough; and some of them not
very easy to Flesh and Blood, as that of offering up his only Son. Moreover,
none doubt of the faithfulness of the Patriarch Abraham; but if the Sabbath was
not then instituted, nor any Command given to him to keep it, there could not
be any such Command meant or comprehended in that Charge given to him. The
truth is, my Brethren, learned Men, who are Men also of great natural Parts,
can put a fair gloss on any thing, and make that seem to be a Truth that there
is not the least ground to believe is so.

Abraham did all he did in Faith, and therefore he had Divine Authority for all
he did in God's Service.

Dr. Twiss's main Argument to prove that the Patriarchs observed the
Seventh-day Sabbath, is this, Dr. Twiss on the Christian Sab. p. 57.
viz. The Lord blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, therefore says he
the Patriarchs did observe it.

Answ. I answer, God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, but did not
give any Command to Adam to keep it; therefore the Patriarchs from thence could
not know, or see they had any ground to observe it.

Dr. Twiss says in the same place, i. e. And the truth is, until the coming of
the Children of Israel out of Egypt we read not of any Church of God any where
but in single Families; neither do we read of the Patriarchs before the Flood,
or a long time after, that they kept any day consecrated to God's Service.

But we say with him, that it does not therefore follow that they kept no day
at all in God's Service. They owned the True God, and worshipped him, and knew
that there must be a time, a sufficient time to discharge that Homage or
Worship to him; and tho perhaps they observed one day in seven, yet, as I
conceive, they did not know what precise day they ought to observe above any
other, until God by some express positive Command made it known, which was not
till he constituted the whole House of Israel into a Typical Churchstate, and
gave them an instituted Worship, and commanded their Legal and Typical Sabbath.

Besides, how could the Patriarchs know what Duties proper for
Sabbath-observation they should perform, except it had by some positive Law or
Precept been discovered to them, of which we read not? When God gave to Israel
a Sabbath, he told them how they should keep it, as well as the Reasons, End
and Causes wherefore.

Tenthly, I might also add here what some learned Men seem to affirm, i. e.
that it is doubtful whether the Patriarchs had the distinction of Days into
Weeks, but rather reckoned by Months and Years; so that the precise seventh day
from the Creation cannot be certainly known: and it is thought that the Jews
observed their seventh day from the falling of Manna six days, The Jews
reckoned their Seventh-day Sabbath from the falling of Manna.
but none on the seventh. No doubt but it is impossible for any to know that
that was the precise seventh day from the Creation.

But it may not be amiss to answer our Opponents as to what they say about the
Scripture not mentioning any Sabbath from Adam to Moses, or any Precept or
Remembrance of it, and yet things of less moment are punctually recited.

1. This they say, that we read not of Circumcision performed during all the
time of Israel's being in Egypt, which was near four hundred years, till
Zippora circumcised her Son.

2. Also say they, we read not of the Sabbath in the Books of Joshua and
Judges, etc.

Answ. This is no parallel case; for after the positive Command given to Israel
to keep it, there needed no such constant relation of it; for no doubt but
after that time it was continually observed.

Let me close this with what I find recited by many learned Men concerning the
Judgment of diverse of the ancient Fathers about the Patriarchs observing the
Sabbath. The Judgment of the an^ient Fathers.


Justin Martyr says, Just. Mart. (...) cum (...)
that Melchisedec (who it is supposed was Shem the Son of Noah) was neither
circumcised, nor kept the Sabbath.

Irenaeus says, Iren. l. 4. c. 30.
Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness before he was
circumcised, and without observing of the Sabbath.

Tertullian says, Tert. adv. Judaeos, de praescr. c. 2, 4.
Abel, Enoch, Noah and Melchisedec observed not the Sabbath. And again, he
says that not any of the Patriarchs kept the Sabbath, neither Adam, Enoch,
Noah nor Abraham, for 2455 years. And hence Tertullian says, Justin. de verit.
l. 2. in Tryph.
it is manifest therefore that that cannot be moral, nor perpetual, that began
with Moses (as Justin says) and ended in Christ.

Eusebius says, Moses brings in Melchisedec Priest of the most High God, Them.
l. 1. c. 6.
neither being circumcised, nor anointed with Oil (as was afterward commanded
in the Law) no nor so much as knowing there was a Sabbath.

Justin Martyr again says, Cont. Tryph.
in the days of Enoch People observd not Circumcision, or the Sabbath; before
Abraham there was no Circumcision, and before Moses no keeping holy the Sabbath.

I might also add several of the Jewish Rabbis asserting the same thing. But
to proceed.

I infer from hence, that that Text Genesis 2. does not contain in it any present
Institution of the Sabbath, but signifies God's Destination or Purpose to give
it as a Law to his People Israel in after times, and was not given to Adam in
Innocence for him to sanctify it. God might sanctify that precise day to his
own Rest after Adam fell, with respect had to Christ, in whom he took up his
perfect Rest; and afterward appointed the seventh day as a sign thereof.
However, it is one thing for God to sanctify or set apart a thing for this or
that use, and another thing to command that thing, or immediately to put it
into being. Our Lord Jesus was long sanctified or set apart to be our Redeemer,
Joh. 10. 36.
before he was sent into the World actually to redeem us. Jeremiah the Prophet
was sanctified or set apart to his Work and Office, long before he was actually
called to the execution thereof.

So that if these words, Genesis 2. concerning God's blessing and sanctifying of
the seventh day, Mr. Sam. Grascom, p. 18.
are to be extended, says one, to relate to any thing further than to that
particular seventh day following the Creation, it does not refer to any
immediate Institution of the Sabbath, but is a historical Narration telling us
what was done, and not when it was done. If therefore we can find out a certain
time when the Sabbath was indeed instituted, there is good reason to conclude
this Text refers to that time, as giving us the reason why God in the
Institution of the Seventh-day Sabbath made choice of that day.

And to sum up what I have said, take these Arguments.

1. We may infer, The Arguments against the Patriarchs keeping the Sabbath
(...) up.
that if the Patriarchs kept the seventh day, they had the knowledge of it by
the Light of Nature, or by a positive Command; but they had not the knowledge of
it by the Light of Nature, nor by any positive Command, therefore they observed
it not.

2. If they kept it by virtue of an express Command and Institution, they had
no doubt some Directions about the due observation thereof, and instituted
Sabbath Days Worship: but they had no Directions about it, nor instituted
Sabbath Days Worship; therefore they did not observe it.

3. Certainly if the Patriarchs were obliged to observe the seventh day as a
Sabbath, God would either have commended them, or some of them for keeping it,
or else reprehended others for not keeping it: but God neither commended any of
them for the keeping it, nor reprehended any others for profaning, and not
^eeping it; therefore none of them did observe (...).

Eleventhly, Let me add one Argument more (...) prove that the Patriarchs did
not observe the seventh day as a Sabbath, viz. If the Patriarchs and all
Mankind from the beginning of the World were or had been obliged to keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath, certainly there had ^een some account given of the Penalty
or Punishment due to Sabbath Breakers: but we read of no Penalty or Punishment
to be inflicted on Sabbath Breakers; therefore we conclude they were not
obliged to the observation thereof. How can it be thought that the Law of the
Seventh-day Sabbath should be imposed upon them, and yet God should hide the
Punishment due to the breach thereof from the World for more than two thousand
years? Evident it is that they knew what Punishment was to be inflicted for the
breach of other moral Precepts, as Murder, Adultery, etc. and if this were of
like nature, i. e. a pure moral Duty, how came it to pass that God discovered
not the Penalty to them for violating this Precept?

Twelfthly, My last Argument is this; The Sabbath under the Old Testament had a
respect to a stated, and stinted instituted Worship in a National Church: but
the Patriarchs, and all God's People from Adam to Moses were not brought into
such an Ecclesiastical and Political Church State; and from hence it seems to
me they were not enjoined to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath: that is, they had
no instituted, stated, and stinted Worship, nor any in a Magistratical Capacity
to inflict Punishment (...) such as violated the pretended Sabbath; (...) had
they been put into such a Capacity, (...) doubt but God had given them his
Sabbath with the like Sanction to them as afterward that the Penalty might have
been inflicted (...) Offenders, as he did after the Sabbath was ^^deed given to
the House of Israel in the Wi^derness of Sinai.

Nehemiah clearly intimates that the Sa^bath was only made known to Israel, T^^
made known to them thy holy Sahbaths: was first made known to Moses, Exodus
16. 20.
and then him to the Children of Israel; therefore (...) known to him or them
before.

The Scripture is certainly to be taken (...) this sense, and not in that sense
which so^^ would have the Holy Ghost intend, viz. th^^ it was made known more
clearly to that People with the mode of its observation, etc. but certainly it
was never known till God revealed (...) to Moses, nor given as a Law to any
till give^ to the People of Israel in the Wilderness (...) Sin.

SERMON IV.
(...) the Commencement of the Sabbath, and that it was in the Wilderness of
Sin. What a moral Law or Precept is. That the Morality of the fourth
Commandment lies not in the precise seventh day. Four Arguments urged to prove
this.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, etc.
I Have, my Brethren, endeavored to show and prove,

1. That God did not write the Law of (...) Seventh-day Sabbath in Adam's
Heart; that (...) is no Law of Creation wrote in the Hearts of the Gentiles,
and of all Mankind, and so no ^atural or simple moral Precept.

2. That it was not given to Adam by any express positive Command either before
or immediately after he fell; and so none of the Pa^riarchs did observe it. We
can find no original of the Seventh-day Sabbath (as to any observance of it)
hitherto, therefore must look for its beginning or original, or any actual or
express Command for the observation thereof, somewhere else; which indeed we
have in Exodus 16. 23.

True, The 7th day Sab. begun in the Wilderness of Sin.
some of the Jewish Rabbis affirm that it was given to Israel, Exodus 15. 25.
at Marah: There he made them a Statute and an Ordinance, and there he proved
them. It is called a Statut^ and Ordinance in the singular, not Statutes (...)
Ordinances; and probably it might be the Statute of the Sabbath, tho it is not
expressed (...) the falling of Manna, chap. 16. tho others by (...) figure
think it may comprehend not only the Sabbath, but all other Precepts of the Law.

I know that Dr. Owen seems not to be of opinion, that this Statute refers to
the Sabbath neither can we determine the case, yet it is very probable it might
be that. But we find (...) directly and expressly commanded, chap. 16. 2^* To
morrow is the Rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, etc. And many learned Men
do asse^^ that here was the Institution, and original (...) the observance of
it: Mr. Grascome.
Thus a late Writer expresses himself; The first time we find the observation
of the Sabbath Day enjoined is (...) the Wilderness of Sin, before they came
(...) Mount Sinai, where the ten Commandment^ were delivered; as if it were
purposely (...) distinguish the day, which is Ceremonial, an^ of divine
positive Institution, from the Wo^^ship it self.

The words in Exodus 16. 23. express plainly enough the Institution of this day,
by way of Information to the People, viz. To morrow is the Rest of the holy
Sabbath unto the Lord bake that which you will bake to day, etc. And when the
day came or begun, Ver. 25.
Moses said, Eat that to day, for to day is a Sabbath to the Lord* And in ver.
26. Six days ye shall gather it, but on the seventh day, which is the Sabbath,
in it there shall be none.

Observe by the way, that here is not one word on what day the Manna first
fell, so that none can tell this was the seventh day from the Creation; but
that it was the seventh day after the six days of its raining of Manna, is
evi^ent.

But to return to our business in hand: Here, ^ ^ay, is the original, or first
beginning of the ^^bbath, that we read of, as to any Precept or ^^junction on
the People, or any observation of (...)* which was, as one observes, about a
month ^^fore Moses received the Law on Mount Sinai.

Some, it is true, would infer, that the Sab^^th was known, and observed by the
Jews be^^re, because (they say) it is here spoken of (...) a thing well known.

1. I answer in the words of our late Author: Grascome's History of the Sab. p.
76.
This is a force put upon the words, and a gross mistake; for it is evidently
spoken of as a new thing, else what means that frequent Inculcation to make the
People take notice of it, if it had been familiar to them before? And what
means the coming of the Rulers of the Congregation to Moses to consult him as
on an unusual and unknown matter? Exodus 16. 22.


2. And let me add, they were told that they should gather it six days, and
that there should be none found on the seventh; and yet some of the People went
to gather it on the seventh day, as not being yet well acquainted with their
Sabbath, ver. 26, 27. and this displeased the Lord; and therefore Moses again
told them, ver. 29. See, for the Lord has given you the Sabbath, therefore he
gives you on the sixth day Bread for two days.

He has given you the Sabbath; Does not ^his imply he had not given it to any
before? To you, and none else; to you, and to none that went before you, as he
spoke to them afterward, Deuteronomy. 5. 2, 3. As to his Laws and Covenant on Mount
Sinai, the Covenant which God made with us in Horeb, the Lord made not this
Covenant with our Fathers, but with us, even (...) who are alive this day.

Their Fathers had the Covenant and all the Precepts before materially, as to
the substance of them, or what was simply moral; but the^ had not this
Covenant, nor those Precepts formally given to them, and so not the precise
seventh day.

3. If the People did know there was a Sabbath given in charge to Moses before
Manna it might refer to that chap. 15. yet they might not know what particular
day it was to begi^ on, or which day should be the day of their first Sabbath,
nor know yet how to keep it. For

4. As the same Author notes, the case of the Man who gathered Sticks on the
Sabbath Day* shows they were still unacquainted with Sabbath Days Duties, Numb.
15. 32, 33.
or rather wholly ignorant of the Penalty of the breach of it: they knew no^
what they should do with him, and this was whilst they were in the Wilderness;
and they put him in ward, for it was not yet declared what should be done unto
him. By which it appears (says he) to be a new thing not yet adjusted: for had
it been a Law from the Creation, it is scarce possible that all Men should have
been ignorant whether any Punishment or not, or what Punishment did belong to
the Violation of a Law of such standing.

Object. I know that Dr. Owen says, Dr. Owen on the Sab. p. 62.
if the original of the Sabbath was here, then the National Observation of it
is introduced with a strange abruptness, etc.

Answ. To which I answer, that it does not so appear to me; however, let every
Man read the words of Moses again, and how he repeats the same over and over,
To morrow is the Sabbath, etc. To day is a Sabbath unto the Lord; ^gain, The
Lord has given you the Sabbath: ^an any thing be brought in more solemnly? ^ut
I see how Men will try their Wits to de^^nd their own Scriptureless Notion of a
Sabbath given in Paradise, as well as in pleading (...) other groundless
Practices.

Object. But since you grant a Sabbath before (...) Law on Mount Sinai or
Ceremonial Laws ^ere given, does not this prove it is a moral Pre^^pt?

Answ. No, not at all, because we find that sacrifices, and offering the
Firstlings of the ^locks, Genesis 4. 7. and 7. 2. and 14. 20. and 28. 2.
and first Fruits of the Ground, were offered to God from the beginning: and
therefore should we grant that the Seventh-day Sabbath had been practiced from
the beginning ^^so, yet that would no more prove it a moral and perpetual Law,
than it proves the offering ^f the Firstlings of the Flocks, and the
First-^ruits, etc. to be perpetual Laws, or moral Duties; the Sabbath being a
sign and shadow as well as they were so. We come now to the ^^urth part of our
first general Proposition.

Object. The seventh-day Sabbath was given in the 20th. Chapter of Exodus, The
grand Argument for the Jewish Sabbath considered and answered.
with all the other ^ine moral and perpetual Commandments wrote in two Tables
of Stone, by the finger of Jehovah himself; and therefore it obliged believing
Gentiles to keep it, and all Mankind.

1. To this I answer, that if I can prove it is not the Duty of Gentile
Believers, nor any Believers in Christ in all the World to keep the Seventh-day
Sabbath from hence, I shall overthrow our Opponents strongest Fort, and so
utterly confute them; which I doubt not by God's Assistance I shall fully do,
and in order hereto shall lay down three Propositions.

First, The method proposed in answering this Argument.
I affirm the Morality of the fourth Commandment lies not in the observation of
the precise seventh day from the Creation.

Secondly, That the Law of the ten Commandments, as formally given to Moses,
and written with the finger of God in two Tables of Stone, and given to the
whole House of Israel, were not given to the Gentiles, nor to any other People
in the World, save the Strangers that were within their Gates, or were
proselyted to the Jewish Religion.

Thirdly, That the whole Law is changed* and that what was Ceremonial, or
shadows (...) things to come, ceased at the death of Christ: and all Precepts
of the Moral Law, or what (...) simply moral, as they were formally given by
Moses, are taken out of his hand, and put into the hands of Christ considered
as Mediator, our Lord, and only Lawgiver.

I shall now begin with the first of these Propositious.

First, I shall give you the sense of the Learned about a pure moral Precept.

First, The Term Moral being but a scholastical Expression, and not properly
signifying that which is usually understood by it, Cawdry 's Christian Sabbath,
p. 1, 2, 3.
say Mr. Cawdry and Mr. Palmer, we have ever judged it a Bone of Contention:
Moral (relating to a Law) signifies in it self any Precept serving to regulate
the Manners of Men.

Dr. White says, White on the Sab. p. 26.
A Divine Law called Moral is a just Rule or Measure imposed by God, directing
and obliging to Obedience of things holy, honest, and just. The same is
twofold, simply moral, or moral only by some external Constitution or
Imposition of God. Divine Law simply moral, commands or prohibits Actions good
or evil, in respect of their inward nature and quality.

Dr. Owen says, Owen on the Sab. p. 118.
Moral Laws are such as have the Reasons of them taken from the nature of the
things themselves required in them; for they are good from their respect to the
nature of God himself, etc. Laws Positive, as they are occasionally given, so
they are esteemed alterable at pleasure, being fixed by mere Will and
Prerogative, without respect to any thing that should make them necessary
antecedently to their being given; they may by the same Authority at any time
be taken away and abolished.

Mr. Shepherd says, Shepherd on the Sab. p. 6, 7.
A Law strictly and especially moral, is that which concerns the Manners of all
Men, of which we now speak, and may be thus described, viz. It is such a Law as
is commanded, because it is good; and it is not therefore merely good because
it is commanded. And thus Austin, says he, described it long since. Also
Cameron, and multitudes of other Writers and learned Men. But mere Divine
positive Laws are commanded of God, and therefore good.

Some say, that is simply moral that is the Law of Nature, or which naturally
obliges all Men, and is distinguished from Laws Ceremonial, and Judicial. Thus
one expresses himself, i. e. Primrose of the Sab. p. 4.
This Law Moral all Men take to be the Law of Nature, and reciprocally they
take the Law of Nature for this Law, for that which is naturally and
universally just.

Mr. Cawdry and Palmer say, Cawdry Sabbatum, p. 3.
It implys any Law of God expressed in Scripture, whether it can be proved
natural or not, which from the time it was given to the end of the World binds
all succeeding Generations of their Posterity to whom it was given, and more
especially it obliges the Church, etc.

I think Mr. Baxter in this case has said excellently well: Baxt. on the Sab.
p. 77.
Moral, says he, signifies that which by nature is universal and perpetually
obligatory. He answers this Question, Do not Divines say the Decalogue written
in Stone is the Moral Law, and of perpetual Obligation? Answ. Yes, for by moral
they mean natural, and so take moral not in a large sense, as it signifies a
Law de moribus, as all Laws be whatsoever; but in a narrower sense, as
signifying that which by nature is of universal and perpetual Obligation.

Now then that which I call a pure of simple Moral Law or Precept, is that
which is a Transcript of God's holy Nature, and therefore commanded, whether
written in the Heart of innocent Adam, or in God's Word or Law; and does
universally and perpetually oblige the whole World to conform thereunto.

Now having let you know what is to be understood by a simple Moral Law, I
shall show that the Law of the precise Seventh-day Sabbath is not a Law of this
nature, i. e. a pure moral Precept universally and perpetually obligatory on
all Men: tho I deny not but there is that in the fourth Commandment which is
moral in the sense I have given, viz.

1. A time, Three things contained in the fourth Commandment.
a sufficient time to be set apart from all worldly Business, for Rest, and the
Worship of God; and this is all I can find simply moral in the fourth
Commandment.

2. There is something more contained in it, which God by a positive Command
required from the Sovereignty of his Will, as that which he sees just and
reasonable; namely, that one day in seven be set apart as a day of Rest, and
for his Service, and that this should be perpetual to the end of the World. I
know Divines call this positively moral; and tho I cannot see reason so to call
it, yet I grant as much I think as they mean thereby.

3. God did also command the whole House of Israel under their Legal and
Typical Church-^tate, to observe the seventh, or last day of the week in
remembrance of his finishing the Works of the first Creation.

And now that the precise seventh Day was a ^hadow or a sign, I have and shall
prove; and (...) was only a Law to the Israelites during that Typical
Dispensation, and their Political Church-^tate, which Christ nailed to his
Cross, and ^uried with all other Shadows and Legal Ceremonies.

But before I proceed, I might give you the Observations of diverse Expositors
on the order and manner of the Expressions in the fourth Commandment: As first,
the essential part, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy; not the seventh
day. True, in the next words God declared that the seventh Day should be the
Jews Sabbath, whom he took into a Legal and Typical Covenant, and Church State,
to be his own People: The seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; not
thy God in Christ upon the terms of the new Covenant; no, no, but thy God in a
legal, and external Covenant. And so their Sabbath was given to them upon the
terms of the Law of Creation, or the Covenant of Works, which is a legal,
relative, and external Covenant God entered into with the whole House of
Israel, or Nation of the Jews, even them and all their natural Seed as such.

My Brethren, upon this foot of account was the Seventh-day Sabbath founded;
not in Christ, or on a new Covenant bottom; nor given to New Covenant Children
as such; but it wa^ bottomed upon the Covenant of Works, and only given to that
People whom God brought out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed from Egyptian
Bondage. And when he enters into that Covenant with them, he positively says
therefore he gave them his Sabbaths, Deuteronomy. 5. 1.
which was a shadow of a far greater Work than that (...) Creation, and of a
greater Redemption th^^ that out of Egypt. I heard lately of one (...) said,
this was his chief reason of observing (...) Seventh-day Sabbath, because it
was given (...) God's Vovenant People, etc. not being able to discern between
that legal and typical Covenant made with the whole Nation of Israel (which
took in their fleshly Seed as such) an^ the Covenant of Grace.

Moreover, Expositors observe concerning the close of this Commandment, ver.
11. Wherefore God blessed the Sabbath Day, and sanctified it, that it is not
said the seventh day here* but the Sabbath Day. One day in seven, and not the
precise seventh Day from the Creation, is by a positive Command in this place
intimated to be God's Will and Pleasure to be observed to the end of the World.

But the precise Seventh-day Sabbath given to Israel. I shall prove is not the
moral part of the fourth Commandment, but a shadow of what was to come, and
principally refers to Christ, and to that spiritual Rest Believers enter into
when they first close with him.

I know Divines call one Day in seven a moral positive, as I just now told you:
by moral they (...), as I conceive, that which ought perpe^^ally to be
observed; but that Day which God from the Sovereignty of his Will commanded the
Jews, was it is plain the seventh: and when Christ came, who has given us the
true Rest, and rose from the dead, he appointed, as I shall hereafter prove,
the first Day of seven upon the account of his finishing his Work, i. e. the
work of Redemption, as God commanded the Israe^^tes to keep the seventh-day,
because on it he ^ested when he had finished his Work, viz. that of Creation.

Now then, tho there is something naturally and simply moral in the fourth
Commandment; and tho God does here intimate from his own ^rerogative or
Arbitrary Will, that he will ^ave one day in seven perpetually observed as a
^ay of Rest and sacred Worship; yet that ^art of it that speaks of the
seventh-day was ^erely positive and typical, and so ceased with ^he Covenant of
Works.

Indeed Dr. Owen has excellently showed how his Commandment is of a mixed or
compound nature, partly simply moral, partly positively ^oral, and partly
typical or Ceremonial: the ^^st he refers to the precise seventh day, when he
says, P. 120, 121.
It was instituted for an outward present religious Observation, to signify and
represent something to come: And such, says he, were all the particulars of
the whole System of the Mosaical Worship, whereof the Law of the Sabbath was a
part. And in ^rief, the whole Law of the Sabbath was, as (...) its general
nature, positive and arbitrary, and so changeable, and particularly ceremo^ial
and typical, and so is actually changed and abolished.

Now to proceed: The precise Seventh-day Sabbath cannot be a simple moral
Precept, and therefore in that lies not the Morality of the ^ourth Commandment.
In order to prove this, ^et me lay down this Proposition, viz. If the Law of
the observation of the precise seventh Day has not in it one Character of a
Law that is simply moral; then the Morality of the fourth Commandment does not
confist in the observation of that precise Day: but that it has not one
Characte^ of such a Law, I shall endeavor to prove,

First, That the precise seventh Day is not the Morality of the fourth
Commandment, proved largely.
A simple moral Precept (that I me^ which is naturally moral, obliging all
Manki^^ for ever) as to the very matter of it, or this it self as so considered
(abstracted from (...) positive Command) is naturally holy, as ^^sulting from
the Nature of God.

But the seventh Day (in which our Breth^^ place the essence or substance of
the four^ Commandment, or the Morality of it) is (...) more holy naturally than
any other day of (...) week.

Object. If they say, but God sanctified th^^ Day.

1. I answer, they will not say that God added any inherent Holiness to that
Day.

2. But if they should say he did, then (...) would overthrow the Morality of
it, i. e. as (...) this first property of a simple moral Precept for then it
will follow it was made holy (...) an Act of God's Arbitrary Will and Pleasure*
and that it was not so naturally, as that Day was created, or proceeded from
the Holiness of God: because, as we have showed, all pu^^ moral Precepts as to
the matter of them are not good merely because God commands them, (...) are in
themselves good as resulting from the Holiness of his Nature.

For evident it is, that every Day of the (...) had one and the same efficient
Cause, namely* Divine Creation; and all days and things Go^ made were very
good; and God's sanctifying the seventh Day was but his setting it apart fo^^
some holy use: Dr. Owen on the Sab. p. 82.
the Day, says Dr. Owen, was not capable of any inherent Holiness. God then
sanctified, says he, this Day, not that he kept it holy himself, which in no
sense the Divine Nature is capable of; nor that he purified it and made it
inherently holy, which the nature of the Day is not capable of, nor that he
celebrated that which in it self was holy [mark that well] but he set it apart
to holy use. So that from hence it follows, if the Morality of the fourth
Commandment lay in the precise seventh Day, it wants the first Character of a
simple moral Precept. God might have set apart at first any other day if he had
pleased, as well as the seventh.

Secondly, The seventh Day never known universally to be a Sabbath.
Every Precept or Law simply moral (which obliges all Men to Obedience
perpetually) must be made known to all Men either by the Law of Nature, or by
Revelation from God himself in some supernatural way: the Righteousness of God
requires this, because the Violation of simple moral Precepts is damnable. (1.)
Now were there such a Law written in Men's Hearts, I mean to keep the seventh
Day, some one Man or another would that way have known it. But no Man has ever
so known it, therefore no such Law is written in any Man's Heart; and if not
one Man that way ever knew it, then not all Men universally besure. (2.) And as
the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath is not revealed to all the World by the Lord
this way, so he never gave any Commission to Moses, nor to any of his Prophets
to promulgate it, or reveal it to all Mankind; therefore I argue, it wants the
second Character of a simple moral Precept.

Thirdly, That Law which upon urgent necessity may be omitted or laid aside, or
be broken, can be no Precept simply moral; but the keeping of the Seventh-day
Sabbath, upon diverse urgent necessities, might be omitted or broken: Josh. 6.
15.
the Jews themselves might war, and go to battle on that day; 1 King. 20. 29.
and our Savior shows they might pull a Sheep or any other Beast out of a Pit
or Ditch on the Sabbath Day; Joh. 5. 10.
nay, our Lord wrought with his Hands, and made Clay on that day, did many
Miracles, and commanded the Man he healed to bear a Burden, i. e. to carry his
bed on that Day.

But Precepts simply moral, in respect of the negative part, oblige
perpetually, and by no means must be transgressed; for, as a Divine says, A
Man must not tell a Lie to save the World. Can any pretended necessity make it
lawful to worship another God, or profane his Name, or steal, murder, or
commit Adultery? I know what is said about the Israelites borrowing of the
Egyptians; and of God's commanding Abraham to slay his Son: but those actions
are to be accounted for, as being extraordinary cases.

Obj. Works of Mercy may be done on the Sabbath Day, and Christ speaks of Works
of Mercy.

Answ. Of what nature are works of Mercy? I hope not of a higher concern than
the discharge of a simple moral Precept. And can one simple moral Precept have
more Sanctity in it than another? What, violate the very letter of one moral
Law, to do that which is but employed as the necessary consequence of another!
nay, break a Command of the first Table, to keep a Command of the second Table!
This is a hard case.

Fourthly, That Law or Precept which is equalled to, or compared with
Sacrifices, is no simple moral Precept: but such is the Law or Precept of the
Seventh-day Sabbath; therefore it is not a simple moral Precept.

That our Savior himself does equal it to, or compare it with Sacrifices, see
Mat. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6.

1. Our Lord justifies his Disciples in plucking the Ears of Corn on the
Sabbath Day, and compares their so doing to David's eating the Shewbread,
verse. 3. which was unlawful by a mere positive Law.

2. He shows them how the Priests in the Temple profaned the Sabbath, and were
blameless, verse. 5. Some think they slew Beasts on that Day; however our Lord
says, they profaned the Sabbath, etc.

But then, says he, If ye had known what that means, I will have Mercy and
not Sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless, verse. 7. What can he
intend less than this; viz. If ye had known the difference between a pure moral
Precept and such a Precept as is nothing more than a Sign, a Shadow, like those
of Sacrifices, or a mere positive Law that I am Lord of, and can take away, and
give another at my pleasure, you would not have condemned the guiltless. For
tho all God's mere positive Precepts have great Sanctity in them, and ought
carefully to be kept; yet when a simple moral Duty comes in competition with
such as are but positive or ceremonial, the lesser must give place to the
greater; as we commonly say, Of two evils choose the least.

But if the precise Seventh-day Sabbath was a pure moral Precept, equal with,
and of the same nature of that Precept of showing Mercy, there had been no
ground for our Lord thus to have answered the Jews: for if it had been so, no
doubt he would have said, I must indeed blame my Disciples, because they have
broke one of God's righteous Precepts, whose Nature and Quality is above that
of David's eating of Shewbread, or Sacrifices. But he who was the great
Expounder of the Law, knew best the vast difference between a moral Precept,
and such as their Sabbath and Sacrifices were.

Our late Annotators on this place, express themselves to this purpose: The
meaning is, that God prefers Mercy before Sacrifices; where two Laws in
respect of some Circumstances, seem to clash one with another, so as we cannot
obey both, our Obedience is due to the more excellent Law. Now, says our
Savior, the Law of Mercy is the more excellent Law; God prefers it before
Sacrifice; which had you considered, you would never have accused my Disciples,
who in this point are guiltless. Why a more excellent Law? Is it not because
the one is a moral Law proceeding from God's Nature, and the other but merely
positive and Typical, and so arbitrary? And why do the Annotators apply that to
Sacrifices? Our Lord remotely refers to that, but directly and immediately to
the Seventh-day Sabbath, and mentions Sacrifices to show that the precise
Seventh-day Sabbath was no moral Law, but of the same nature with the Law of
Sacrifices, and that of the Shewbread.

Besides, our Savior's bringing in (on this occasion) those words, for the Son
of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath, clearly shows that he as Mediator had power
to change, dispose of, or take away the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath: for
what a Person is Lord of, he may do what he will with. So that it may be lawful
for any man to do any work on that Day, when it ceased and was abolished, as
indeed it now is, with all other Shadows and legal Ceremonies.

But none sure will say, Christ as the Son of Man, or as Mediator, is Lord of
any pure moral Precept; so that he can give liberty to men to worship other
Gods, or to make graven Images and bow down to them, or take God's holy Name in
vain, or commit Murder, Adultery, or steal, etc. No, no, it would be Blasphemy
with a witness to say this; such is the vast difference between Laws that
result from the nature of God, and mere positives, shadowy and Ceremonial
Precepts, which were given for a time as an Act of God's Prerogative and good
Pleasure, and when the Antitype is come, were to cease for ever.

Obj. But what say some? If Christ brake the Seventh-day Sabbath, he sinned:
thus a rash Person lately expressed himself.

Ans. 1. Because our Lord came not to destroy the Law, etc. but to fulfill it,
and was obliged exactly to keep the whole moral Law of God (that it might be
imputed to us with his passive Obedience, to justify us before God, as his full
and perfect Righteousness) that therefore he was obliged to conform to all
Typical and Ceremonial Laws, of which he himself was the Antitype, none I think
ever asserted; he had another way to fulfill all such Laws, than by his actual
Obedience to them. And,

2. Let it be considered in respect to the Typical Sabbath, the Antitype being
now come, which was that Evangelical Spiritual Rest in and by Christ, which all
entered into that believed in him at that time: for having given rest to all
that came to him, he had thereby in part fulfilled that figurative and typical
Law; and by his showing such strange indifference about his observance thereof,
and his carriage toward it at every turn, did clearly intimate that that
Typical Sabbath was departing, or in a dying condition, tho not quite dead,
till he himself suffered and dyed on the cross; and was afterward gradually,
and decently buried, it having, as one observes, an honorable Funeral, when
further light was given to God's People about it. But no more at this time.

SERMON V.
Six Arguments more to prove the Seventh-day Sabbath not moral. That it was a
Sign and Shadow to Israel of the Covenant of Works.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, etc.
THE last Day I gave four Reasons to prove that the simple moral part of the
fourth Commandment lies not in the observation of the precise Seventh-day
Sabbath. I have six more to add.

Fifthly. The 7th day Sabb. not given forth afresh by Christ or his Apostles.
That the precise Seventh-day Sabbath cannot be that part of the fourth
Commandment which is purely moral, I argue thus: Whatsoever is a simple moral
Precept, universally and perpetually obligatory, is by our Savior or his
Apostles confirmed or given forth anew in the New Testament; but the
Seventh-day Sabbath is not so confirmed or given forth, therefore is not a
simple moral Precept.

To prove the Major, or first Proposition, let it be considered, that the moral
Law is transferred from Moses to Jesus Christ, or taken out of Moses's hands as
a Lawgiver, and put into the hands of Christ considered as Mediator: and this
was signified by those words, Mal. 2. 7.
The Priests Lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Whatsoever was doubtful,
the High Priest Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
was to determine. In this the Priests under the Law were a Type of Christ,
signifying that when Christ came, who is God's Messenger, all should receive
the Law from his Mouth, who was to be the great Interpreter of it: and
accordingly we find he opened the nature of the moral Law in Mat. 5. and other
places, showing the spirituality thereof; and how men may be said to break the
Commands against Adultery, Murder, etc. by the lusts and malice in their
hearts, tho they never actually commit either of those Sins. Nay, I know not
one simple moral Precept, which our Lord or his Apostles did not confirm or
give forth anew, who no ways extenuated the guilt of the breach of it, but with
far greater severity aggravated every transgression thereof. Romans 1. 18.
Paul shows how the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of Men.

Now neither our Lord nor his Apostles seemed to confirm or give forth anew the
old Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath; but contrariwise, as I have showed, he seemed
to excuse his Disciples when charged with the breach thereof, and allowed
others to do that which was deemed unlawful on the Sabbath Day, as bearing a
burden, etc. If our Adversaries can prove that every simple moral Precept of
the Decalogue was not confirmed by Christ or his Apostles, let them do it.

Obj. I know they say, that neither Christ nor his Apostles ever confirmed, or
gave out anew that Command, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image,
etc.

Answ. As to Idols, they are directly forbid: 1 Cor. 8. 4.
An Idol is nothing in the world; there is none other God but one. And St. John
says, Little Children, 1 John 5. 11.
keep your selves from Idols: and again, Flee from Idolatry. Now what is a
Graven Image but an Idol? Every Graven Image made to be worshipped is an Idol,
tho every Idol is not a Graven Image. Where do they read that an Image made of
Bread is forbid in Moses's Law? True, the second Command forbids all Idols, and
all Idols are forbid in the Gospel. Nay, Idols are in a more nice manner
defined and condemned in the Gospel, than by the Law of Moses. We read that a
Man may idolize or make a God of his Belly; Phil. 3. 19.
and Paul declares that Covetousness is Idolatry. Col. 3. 5.


Object. But where do we read in the New Testament that it is unlawful for a
Man to marry his own Sister?

Answ. 1. Where all Uncleanness, and Lusts of Concupiscence and Fornication are
forbid, there a Man is forbid to marry his own Sister.

2. Is not this sort of Incest forbidden and condemned, 1 Cor. 5. 1. where the
incestuous Person is condemned for marrying his Father's Wife? If it be
unlawful for a Man to marry his Brother's Wife, or his Father's Wife, it is
unlawful to marry his own Sister, because nearer of kin.

3. All manner of Incest is forbid to believing Gentiles in Acts 15. 29. this
was one of those things contained in the Law that is given forth anew to
believing Gentiles. The Holy Ghost inspired the Apostles to write to the
Gentiles to abstain from Blood, Meats offered to Idols, things strangled, and
from Fornication: now Incest is by Paul called Fornication, 1 Cor. 5. 1. I hear
there is Fornication amongst you, etc. Tho in strict speaking (say our late
Annotators) by Fornication we mean Uncleanness of single Persons, yet by this
word often in Scripture is understood all species of Uncleanness. Nor is it
probable that the Holy Ghost refers to the Uncleanness of single Persons in
Acts 15. but to somewhat more doubtful: and therefore I conceive all sorts of
Incest in this place are forbidden.

4. If any should say, How can they know it was unlawful for a Man to marry his
own Sister?

I answer: It Is not only known (as I have showed) by the New Testament, and
forbid there, but also by the very Light of Nature: for such Fornication, 1
Cor. 5. 1.
says Paul, is not so much as once named among the Gentiles; that is, among
the more civilized Heathens, who had no other Law than the Light of Nature,
which teaches Men to abhor such a Marriage. For does the Light of Nature teach
a Man that it is a shame to wear long Hair, and not teach him it is a shame to
marry his own Sister?

5. Moreover, tho I said the whole Moral Law is transferred from Moses as a
Lawgiver, to Christ as Mediator; yet the Old Testament and the Law as written
by Moses, as well as the Prophets, are of great use in many respects: 2 Timothy 3.
16.
All Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and
Instruction in Righteousness, etc.

Sixthly, The Seventh-day Sabbath proved to be a sign of the Covenant of Works.
The Morality of the fourth Commandment consists not in the observation of the
precise seventh Day, because that day was a sign or shadow of something to
come. I did at first prove, in opening my Text, that the weekly Jewish Sabbath
is comprehended in those days the false Brethren taught the Galatians to
observe; Gal. 4. 10.
and gave many Arguments to evince, that tho there is one day in seven by a
positive Law perpetually to be kept, Col. 2. 16.
yet the old Jewish seventh day from the Creation, and under the Covenant of
Works, was a shadow of things to come.

But I shall add here something out of an approved Author, further to confirm
this: That Sabbath, Warren on the Sab. against Tillam, p. 106, 107, etc.
says he, and the particular seventh day which the Jews observed, was
certainly of a shadowy nature; being instituted at first with reference to
Christ, as all other Shadows were, having a Type after fixed to it. And of this
we may safely expound that forementioned Text, Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you
in Meats or in Drinks, or in respect of an holy day, or New Moons or Sabbaths,
which were shadows of things to come: but the Body is of Christ. The only
question is, whether their weekly Sabbath was here intended. Some are jealous
lest in pressing it so far, it should prove prejudicial to our weekly Christian
Sabbath; but this is a mere causless Jealousy. For let us ponder the scope and
design of the place, and it will appear that the Apostles design is not to
level Christian Days and Duties, but such as the Jews observed, and would have
introduced with Circumcision. It Is apparent that in all those three places,
Romans 14. 5, 6. Gal. 4. 10, 11. Col. 2. 16. he cries down the Ordinances of the
Law or Old Testament, not the Institutions of the Gospel.

Look what the Jewish false Teachers cried up, St. Paul cried down. So as to
argue from hence against all difference of days under the Gospel, is evidently
to stretch the Text beyond the Scope; but to urge it against all Jewish holy
days (their weekly Sabbath and all) is not to force it. For,

1. The Apostle seems to speak distinctly and distributively, enumerating the
several sorts of days in observation among the Jews, Holy Days, New Mons,
Sabbaths: and the gradation from yearly Holy Days to monthly New Mons, and
from them to weekly Sabbaths, is visible enough to such as are not blinded with
Prejudice.

Mr. Shepherd speaks much to the same purpose: Sheph. on the Sabb. Part 2.
The plural term [Sabbaths] is usually put for the singular, the Sabbath or
seventh day, These. 20. p. 204.
now under dispute. Yea, I cannot find any one Text in all the New Testament,
where it is applied in the same number to any other day or Sabbath, but the old
Seventh-day Sabbath. Mat. 12. 15. Mark 1. 21. cap. 2. 24. cap. 3. 2. Luke 4.
31. cap. 13. 10. Act. 13. 14.
Seven or eight times the same word as is here set down in the plural number,
is used for the old weekly Sabbath, and not so much as once for any yearly
Sabbath: therefore in all reason that precise weekly Sabbath must be here (I
will not say included only, but) principally intended.

Even in the Old Testament, wherever New Moons and Sabbaths are coupled
together (unless the Phrase be figurative, as in Isa. 66. 23.) the Jews weekly
Sabbath is denoted by it, as appears by those Scriptures cited in the Margin 2
Kings 4. 23. 1 Chronicles. 23. 31. chapter 8. 13. chapter 31. 3. Neh. 10. 33. Ezekiel. 45. 17.
Amos 8. 5.
, in most of which their annual Sabbaths are excepted, and distinguished by
another name, scil. [Feasts] to which answers the word Holy Days in this place,
Col. 2. 16. For indeed the word in the Original signifies a Feast or
Festival-day. Thus let Scripture expound Scripture, and Truth will be Truth in
spite of Error: take the whole Sentence together, Holy Days, New Mons,
Sabbaths, and (if it be an Old Testament Phrase) it always implies the old
Seventh-day Sabbath; or take the word [Sabbaths] singly by it self, and (if it
be a New Testament Term, as it is like it is) it ever signifies the same seventh
day; unless when put for week, which here it cannot be. The Conclusion then is
undeniable, that the Jews Seventh-day Sabbath was a shadowy Sabbath.

Dr. Owen also repeats what some learned Men say upon this place, Col. 2. 16.
Let no Man judge you in Meats or Drinks, or in respect of an Holy Day, or the
New Mood, Dr. Owen, p. 214.
(...), or of the Sabbath, or Sabbath Days, which were a shadow of things to
come: but the Body is of Christ. From hence they affirm (says he) it will
follow, that there is nothing moral in the observation of the Sabbath, seeing
it was a mere Type and Shadow, as were other Mosaical Institutions; and also
that it is absolutely abolished and taken away by Christ. And if they mean no
more but that precise seventh Day, they were certainly right: Nay Dr. Owen
himself, as I conceive, determines the matter so as to make that precise day
refer to Moses, and his Economy.

But indeed I see some learned Men have wrote very darkly, because they strive
to preserve a Sabbath in the Gospel-day, or a day of Rest, and of solemn
Worship; and that tho not simply, yet positively moral, from the fourth
Command: and if by moral positive they mean one day in seven, which God from
his Sovereign Pleasure will have perpetually observed as a day of Rest and
solemn Worship, I am of their mind.

Quest. But since the Jewish seventh Day was a Sign and a Shadow, what was it a
Sign and Shadow of?

Answ. Before I give a direct Answer to this, let me premise one thing, which
in a special manner we ought to regard, viz. that the Law of the Seventh-day
Sabbath was bottomed upon the Covenant of Works in that Ministration of it
given to the whole House of Israel, as suting with their Ecclesiastical,
Political, and Typical Church State. And this Dr. Owen has fully proved, Dr.
Owen on the Sab. p. 221.
speaking of that Covenant: Now, says he, this is not absolutely and merely a
Law, but as it contained a Covenant between God and Man. A Law it might have
been, and not a Covenant, which does not necessarily follow upon either its
instructive or preceptive Power. Yet it was originally given in the Counsel of
God to that end, and accompanied with Promises and Threatenings, whence it had
the nature of a Covenant. By virtue of this Law, as a Covenant, was the
observation of a Sabbath prescribed, and required, as a token and pledge of
God's Rest in that Covenant in the performance of the Works whereon it was
instituted, and of Man's Interest in it -- Again, he says; Seeing therefore
that the Moral Law, as a Covenant between God and Man, required this sacred
Rest -- we must inquire what place, as such, it had in the Mosaical Economy,
whereon the true Reason and Notion of the Sabbath does depend: for the Sabbath
being originally annexed to the Covenant between God and Man The Dr. takes it
for granted, which I deny, that the Sabbath was given, to Adam.
, the Renovation of the Covenant does necessarily require a special Renovation
of the Sabbath; and the change of the Covenant as to the nature of it, in like
manner does introduce a change of the Sabbath, etc.

1. From hence note, that Dr. Owen says, the Law given Exodus 20. was a renewal
of the Covenant of Works.

2. That the Seventh-day Sabbath was given as a Token or Pledge of that
Covenant, and Rest.

3. That the Seventh-day Sabbath of Rest was not a Type of our Eternal Rest in
Heaven, but a Type or Shadow of that true Spiritual Rest we enter into under
the New Covenant when we believe in Christ; and so this Rest is the Antitype of
the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath. My Brethren, this is that Rest of God which he
referred to, and in which he takes up his delight and complacence.

Moreover, God showed his People Israel by their Sabbath, how impossible it was
for them, by the Covenant of Works, to enter into this Rest, where they should
utterly cease from sin: it was a sign between God and them, that they should
perform the whole Obedience due under the Covenant of Works, signified by that
Obligation, that in six days they should labor and do all they had to do, and
then rest, denoting that the whole Law must be kept, or no rest: the man that
does them shall live by them, or have Life, Rest, and Peace on that Condition.
This, I say, did signify Man's working for Life before he could enter into
Rest; for if they could do all they had to do, or God required of them, or
answer all the Demands of the Law, then they should have Rest, Peace, and
Justification thereby.

Here you have the Six-days Labor, and the Seventh-day's Sabbath, it being an
Epitome of the Covenant of Works: For their Sabbath, as Calvin shows, in the
tenor of it, put them upon the highest Acts of Obedience, even to live and sin
not, or cease from all Iniquity in Words, Thoughts, and Actions.

Now if this did not tend to Bondage, and so was a Law against them, and
contrary to them, nothing could; but now in Christ, who has kept the Law
perfectly for us, or has done all we were to do, and suffer, we come to have
true spiritual Rest and Peace. And,

Our Lord, no doubt, alludes to this, Man. 11. 28, 29. Come to me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Brethren, mind those two
words, labor and heavy laden. On the Jewish Sabbath no servile labor was to
be done, nor any burdens to be born, signifying that Believers in Christ cease
from laboring for Life, and must not bear any burden of Sin, either in respect
of the guilt or fear of the punishment; Christ having done all, and born the
burden of all our sins in his own Body on the Tree; so that we must cast our
Burden on the Lord, and he will sustain us.

And so we begin our Sabbath after all our Works are done, and Burdens born by
our dear Lord, and blessed Surety, on the first Day of the Week, as he has
directed us; and from hence we work not for Life and Rest, but from Life, Rest
and Peace.

Therefore to answer that Question, what was the Jewish Sabbath a sign of? you
have in part heard, but shall yet more fully hear.

1. I affirm that it was a Sign of the Covenant of Works in that Ministration
given to Israel, written and engraven in Tables of Stone. How often is that
Sabbath called a Sign between God and them; Exodus 31. 13. Verily my Sabbaths ye
shall keep; it is a Sign between me and you throughout your Generations. Again,
verse. 17. It Is a Sign between me and the Children of Israel. Ezekiel. 20. 12.
Moreover also I gave them my Sabbath to be a Sign between me and them, that
they might know that I am the Lord that sanctifies them.

But still it is enquired, what was it a Sign of? Some say that Israel were in
bondage in Egypt; others, that God created the World in six days.

Answ. I answer, but remotely, if at all, it was a Sign of either of them; for
they are laid down as the Reasons why God gave Israel their Sabbath, and not as
a Sign of those things. But let it now be well considered, that God never since
the Fall entered into a Covenant with any People, but he gave a Sign or Token
of it.

1. When he entered into a Covenant with Noah (and all the World in him) that
he would no more destroy the World by Water, he gave a Sign, viz. a Rainbow:
this was a Covenant of external Favor, without any Restipulation.

2. When God entered into Covenant with Abraham, and with all his fleshly Seed
as such, he gave them a Sign of that Covenant, namely Circumcision: this is
that which we call the Covenant of Peculiarity; tho we deny not but God entered
into a Spiritual or Gospel Covenant with Abraham, and with all his true
spiritual Seed also, which contained only a free promise of Grace in Christ:
but that Covenant with his natural Seed as such, is called the Covenant of
Circumcision, Acts 7.
because Circumcision was the Sign thereof. Moreover, they that cannot see a
twofold Covenant was made with Abraham, are strangely blinded.

3. And that there was a renewal of the Covenant of Works with the whole House
of Israel given by Moses, contained in the 20th Chapter of Exodus, is most
evident, tho not given for Life, but for other Reasons which I have mentioned:
and this Covenant contained Ten Commandments, with the promise of Life upon the
condition of universal Obedience thereunto. And to this all the People
consented, and joined in with God by mutual Restipulation: Exodus 24. 3.
And all the People answered with one voice, and said, All that the Lord has
said, we will do. And now I say, their Seventh-day Sabbath was given as a sign
of this Ministration of the old Covenant of Works: and hence also as
Circumcision, the sign of that Legal Typical Covenant made with Abraham and his
fleshly Seed as such, is God's Covenant; so the Seventh-day Sabbath is called
also God's Covenant: Wherefore the Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to
observe it throughout their Generations for a perpetual Covenant; Exodus 31. 16.
and this because it was a Sign or a Pledge to them of that Obligation they lay
under to keep the whole Law. I might here add, that the Lord's Supper is a sign
of the Gospel Covenant; and it is also called the New Testament, or Covenant in
Christ's Blood.

And thus as Circumcision bound all to keep the whole Law that conformed to it,
(that being a sign of that part of the legal Covenant to Abraham and his
natural Seed throughout their Generations) so the Seventh-day Sabbath is a sign
of the same legal Covenant in that Ministration with the House of Israel, Exodus
20. and obliged all that observe it, to keep the whole Law also. And that this
is not my Judgment alone, take what Dr. Owen has said on this account.

Whereas the Covenant which Man originally was taken into, Dr. Owen ^n the Sab.
p. 148, ^19.
was a Covenant of Works, wherein Rest with God depended absolutely on his
doing all the Works he had to do by way of Legal Obedience, he was during the
Dispensation of that Covenant tied up precisely to the observation of the
seventh Day, or that which followed the whole work of Creation. And the seventh
Day as such is a Token of the Rest promised in the Covenant of Works, and no
other. And those who would advance that day again into a necessary observation,
do consequentially introduce the whole Covenant of Works, and are become
Debtors to the whole Law. For the Works of God which precede the seventh Day
precisely, were those whereby Man was initiated into, and instructed in the
Covenant of Works; and the Day it self was a Token and Pledge of the
Righteousness thereof, or a moral and natural sign of it, and of God's Rest
therein, and of Man's with God thereby. And it is no Service to the Church of
God, nor has any tendency to the Honor of Christ in the Gospel, to endeavor
a Reduction of us to the Covenant of Works.

What is now become of Mr. Tillam's Flourish, who insults over such as call the
Seventh-day Sabbath a sign?

The Sabbath is indeed (says he) a sign of good things formerly produced,
Tillam on the Sabb. p. 18.
as the Creation, or else of good things at present enjoyed, as God's
sanctifying Grace; but never was set up for a sign of good things to come, like
the Ceremonial Sabbaths. I might here retort the vaunting Language of the
Preacher of Peter's (of cutting off Goliah's Head with his own Sword) for if
the Morality of the Sabbath cease, by being a sign to the Jews in their
Generations, upon the same account must the whole Law cease to be moral, since
God's Spirit has set it also for a sign.

Answ. 1. Tho the Marks of true Grace are called Signs, yet there is a great
difference between them, and the Signs of Covenants. Miracles also are called
Signs; and God's People are set as Signs and Wonders: but what of this?

2. He mistakes greatly when he affirms, that God says the Sabbath was a sign
of his sanctifying the whole House of Israel with his sanctifying Grace. Did
God so sanctify them, or were they spiritually sanctified? No, no, it signified
that God took the whole Nation of Israel into an external, federal, and legal
Relation to himself, or set them apart as so considered from all People in the
World, to be his own People; and in that Covenant Relation he was married to
them, as he says elsewhere.

3. To sanctify, What is meant by God's sanctifying the whole Nation of Israel.
often in the Old Testament only refers to God's setting apart a Thing, a
Person, etc. for himself, or to some holy legal Use or Service. Thus the
seventh Day was sanctified, and the Priests, and Vessels of the Sanctuary, etc.
were sanctified. And their Sabbath was a sign that they became God's People, in
that legal and typical Covenant, or upon the terms of the Covenant of Works;
they promising that all the Lord commanded them they would do, Exodus 24. 2, 3.
which confirms what we said before.

4. Let none suppose that God took the whole House of Israel into a special
Relation with himself, according to the tenor of the new Covenant, or Covenant
of Grace; or that that Covenant, Exodus 20. was the Covenant of Grace. Let them
read what the Prophet Jeremiah says: Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with
the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah: Not according to the Covenant
that I made with their Fathers in the day I took them by the hand to bring them
out of the Land of Egypt; which my Covenant they broke, although I was a Husband
to them, says the Lord. But this shall be my Covenant that I will make. --
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law into their inward parts,
and write it in their Hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my
People.

1. Had the former Covenant been the Covenant of Grace, no doubt but they had
abode in that Covenant to this day and for ever: but they are cut off, and now
are in no actual Covenant relation with God at all. Sure the Covenant of Grace
cannot be utterly broken.

2. Moreover then they should not have needed to look for the Law in two Tables
of Stone, because that whole Moral Law should not only be written in the New
Testament, the Book of the New Covenant, but in their Hearts also.

3. Now when a Covenant is abolished (as the old Covenant is) will any dare to
plead for the sign of it, which obliges them to keep the whole Law? No, plain
it is, the sign, i. e. the old Sabbath, is gone with the Covenant it self.

Quest. If the old Sabbath was a sign of that of which you say, what was it a
Type or Shadow of?

Answ. It was a Type or Shadow of our blessed Rest in Christ: Heb. 4.
For we which have believed do enter into Rest. This is the Antitype of the
seventh-day Rest, when no Labor is to be done, nor any burden of Sin to be born
by Believers; this is that Rest God is pleased with: and here we also rest from
all Labor or Works of our own, as God did from his at first. Macarius says,
Hom. 39. in Mat. 12.
that Sabbath given to Moses was a Type and Shadow only of that real Rest given
by God to the Soul.

My Brethren, what comfort is here to you that enter into this Rest? What Joy
may hence spring in your Hearts, who are delivered from Bondage and grievous
Burdens. Gal. 5. 1.
Stand (...) therefore in that Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and
be not again entangled with the yoke of Bondage, lest Christ profit you nothing.

Seventhly, I might prove that the Morality of the fourth Commandment consists
not in the precise Seventh-day Sabbath, even from that Memorandum that is fixed
in the beginning of the Command, viz. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.
Now tho one day in seven be by a positive Law made perpetually obligatory in
the fourth Command, yet that is not, as so considered, a simple moral Precept,
much less not the precise seventh Day; and this because it is brought in with
Remember, denoting clearly the difference between this Command as to any
particular day, and that which is purely moral in this Command: for that which
is connatural to us, or an inherent Law of Nature, is so engraven in our
Hearts, that enlightened Persons especially are not very subject to forget it.
But a mere positive Precept, which is not so written in our Hearts by Nature,
we are too ready to forget; therefore God (as I conceive) to this Precept added
this, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. It Is not said, Remember ye have
no Gods but me; or remember you do not take the Name of the Lord in vain; or,
remember you do not disobey your Father and Mother; or that you do not steal,
commit Adultery, Murder, etc. no such charge is given there; why so? because
these Precepts being simply moral, are written in our Hearts. The word remember
(as one notes) has not primarily any reference either to the Works of God, or
to the finishing his Works, but to God's destination of the Day to be in time
to come the Churches Sabbath. -- Not remember how your Fathers kept it, or God
instituted it from the beginning; but it is a new Ordinance, and of another
nature, i. e. the chief of all Ceremonies, etc.

Eighthly, It Is naturally impossible for all Men to keep the precise 7th day
throout the World.
To prove that the precise seventh Day is not a simple moral Precept, I argue
thus: That which all Men throughout the World are not able precisely to observe
or keep, or which is morally impossible for them so to do, can be no simple
moral Precept: but all Men throughout the World are not able to observe the
seventh precise Day from the Creation, it being morally impossible so to do;
therefore it is no simple moral Precept.

I shall not so much insist on that part, that it is impossible for any Man,
much less for the whole World, to know which is the precise seventh Day from
the Creation, as what some learned Men have shown, viz. that it is morally
impossible to keep such a precise seventh Day.

1. This must be premised, that the Saturday Sabbatarians affirm, that the
precise seventh Day is to be kept (saying in this the Morality of the fourth
Command lies) which consists of 24 hours, and has a Morning or Sunrising, and
an Evening or Sunsetting, throughout the whole year; and it was that precise
day of the week in which God rested from all his Works.

Now, Dr. White, p. 177, 178, 179.
as one observes, in some habitable Regions, and under some Climates, the year
is not distinguished by weeks, containing each of them seven days; neither are
there several natural days of twenty four hours, consisting of Morning and
Evening, by means of the rising and setting of the Sun; as these Instances and
Examples following do declare.

Continuance of the Sun above the Horizon.

1. degrees. 70. In the Southern part (...) Groinland, Finmark, Lapland: and in the
North of Russia and Tartaria, one day lasts from the 10th of May unto July
14. (...) five of our days.

2. degrees. 75. In the North of Groinland the Isle of Chery, Nova Zembla,
Lancas^er and Horse-Sounds; the day continues from April 21, until August the
2d; of our day 102.

3. degrees. 80. In the North of Bassins^Bay and Greenland, the day continues from
April the 6th, until August 17, and of our days 133.

4. degrees. 85. In Regions and Places undiscovered, the day continues from March
23. until August 31. of our days 161.

5. degrees. 90. Under this Degree, the day continues from March the 10th, until
September the 13th, of our days 187.

Now from the Premises this Argument arises.

The Law of the fourth Commandment enjoyneth the observation of such a Sabbath
day, as is distinguished from the other days of the week, by morning and
evening, by the rising and setting of the Sun, and by the presence and absence
thereof, within the space of every 24 hours.

But in many Regions of the World, and under sundry Climats, there are no
ordinary Weeks containing seven particular days, distinguished each from other
by morning and evening, and by the rising and setting, and by the presence and
departure of the Sun.

Therefore the Sabbath Day of the fourth Commandment cannot be observed in many
Regions of the universal World, by such Nations as live under a Climate where
there are no such Weeks and Days as the Law of the fourth Commandment enjoineth
to be observed. For the Subject of that Commandment is a natural day of 24
hours: and where that subject is wanting, how is it possible for any Law that
wants its proper Subject to be in force?

Now if any shall conceive, that although in the Regions and Climates aforesaid,
there be no such particular day as is expressed in the fourth Commandment; yet
there is a sufficient and equivalent space of time, which may be measured by
hours: My answer is, That the Law of the Decalogue requires the keeping holy
of such a Seventh-day, as is distinguished from the day before, and the day
after, by a new return, arising, presence, and going down of the Sun: But Time
and Hours in general, do not yield or constitute such a Day.

And says another Author; Mr. Ironside, p. 133
There is no moral Law of Nature in Scripture, but is it self possible to all
in all parts of the World, in regard of the thing commanded: But a natural
Sabbath Day, as made to consist of 24 hours, or of a Day and a Night, is
absolutely, impossible for some men in some parts of the World to be observed.

If it be objected, That this makes equally against the first Day as against
the Seventh;

I answer, We do not say the observation of the first Day is a moral Precept,
but merely positive. No doubt but the Seventh-day was instituted for Israel,
whose Habitation was fixed in the Land of Canaan.

See a late Author on the Sabbath; T. C. recommended by Dr. Bates and Mr. How,
c. 10. p. 40.
The day of God's Rest, says he, which is the seventh Day from the Creation,
is the same universal Day with all People; but it cannot be the same Day of the
week with all People. If the Day of God's Rest be Saturday with some, it must
needs be Friday or Sunday with others. So likewise the time of Christ's coming
to Judgment; if it be, says he, on the Saturday with some, it will be on
Friday or Sunday with others. This he proves, because the Earth is not plain
but round. The Jews, says he, neither did nor could keep the very Seventh-day
on which God rested in all places; but as we, according to God's Command, work
six days and rest the Seventh, so did they: And as Sunday with Christians was
ever the day following six days of labor, so was the Saturday with the Jews.
If this be so, it cannot be denied that the Seventh-day of God's resting cannot
be kept by all, nor do any know they do keep it.

Ninthly, Christ Lord of the Sabbath, can dispose of it as he pleases.
The morality of the fourth Commandment consists not in the precise Seventh-day
Sabbath, because of Christ's Lordship over it as Mediator. That Commandment
over which Christ was absolute Lord, as the Son of Man, cannot be moral: for a
moral Precept is part of God's Eternal Law, Ironside, p. 53, 54.
over which the Son of Man can have no power, says a Learned Author, being
made under the Law. But Christ as the Son of Man, Mat. 12. 8.
was Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 27.
as himself twice has told us.

Object. So it is said, he is Lord of the dead and living.

Answ. This, says our Author, is to play with the ambiguity of the words. It Is
one thing for Christ to be Lord of the Church, to guide, govern, perfect,
quicken, raise, and glorify her, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. and another to be Lord of
a Law or Constitution, to moderate, dispense with, order, alter and abolish it:
for in what other Construction can any one be said to be Lord of a Law?

Obj. Christ cannot be said to refer to this, because he had not then abrogated
the Sabbath.

Answ. 1. I have showed that spiritual Rest (signified by the seventh-day's
Rest) was given to all them that believed in Christ; so that the Antitype being
come, the Type was a flying away, and was in a dying state at that very time;
tho all typical Ordinances were not utterly abolished till his Death and
Resurrection.

2. It Is as if our Lord should have said, you magnify the Sabbath as if that
was one of the greatest Commandments, and the main end of Man's Creation; but
you must know the Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath, as
were all legal Rites and Ceremonies. And if it be thus, I that am the Messiah,
am by my Office Lord of the Sabbath; and I can and will abrogate it, and
appoint another day in its room.

Certainly Man was made to discharge all pure moral Precepts, they being
originally stamped on his Heart; as Christ, who was made under the Law, was
ordained to keep the Law for us, and not the Law made for him. Man was made in
the Image of God, and under a holy Law, and Covenant of perfect Obedience, to
serve his Creator; and by the observation of that holy Law written in his
Heart, as the Law of his very Creation, he bore the Image of God in the World,
Mark 2. 27.
serving him in Righteousness and Holiness to the Glory of his Name, and for
this he was made; yet Man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for
him, i. e. for his good, in respect to his Body and Soul: (1.) As to his
outward Rest, etc. (2.) As a help to discharge all Duties of instituted Worship
the better for the good of his Soul: (3.) And chiefly to point out or shadow
forth to him the true Rest by Jesus Christ; and so that typical Sabbath was to
remain no longer than till that true Rest was come and finally established, for
then it could be of no further use to Man, for which end it was chiefly
appointed for him.

Object. I know some object from these words* the Sabbath was made for Man,
that therefore it was for every Man.

Answ. The Woman was made for Man also, but must every man have a Wife
therefore? God never designed that for such to whom he has given the Gift to
live without marrying. So neither were all Men to have this Sabbath; no, none
but they to whom it was given: tho it was made for Man, yet not for every Man
in the World, but only for the whole House of Israel, and the proselyted
Stranger within their Gate, as I shall show in the next place.

Tenthly, The pure Morality of the fourth Command consists not in the
observation of the precise Seventh-day Sabbath, The simple Morality of the
fourth Command lies not in one day in seven.
because it lies not in one day in seven, but in a sufficient time for Rest,
and the Worship of God; tho I do assert, and steadfastly believe, that by a
positive Precept contained in the fourth Commandment, one day in seven God will
have observed to the end of the World, which I think is the sum (...) what the
Learned mean by a Law positive ^^ral: Not that precise day; for mind the words
Exodus 20. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. In this Clause it does not
directly point at one peculiar day more than another: the Light of Nature
requires a time, and God positively lays claim to a seventh day, or one day in
seven, perpetually to be observed as a day of Rest and solemn Worship. And tho
the last of seven was that precise Day enjoined under the old Covenant upon the
People of Israel, yet that Sabbath was not to continue longer than till the
Antitype came; and it being a sign and shadow, it is, as I have proved, done
away.

Dr. Owen, Page 301.
speaking of the Seventh-day Sabbath, says, That Day was not directly nor
absolutely required in the Decalogue, but consequentially, only by way of
appropriation to the Mosaical Economy, whereunto it was then annexed. The
Command is to observe the Sabbath Day; God blessed the Sabbath Day. And the
mention of the seventh Day in the body of the Command fixes the number of the
Days in whose Revolution a Sabbatical Rest returns, but determines not an
everlasting order in them, seeing the order relating to the old Creation is
inconsistent with the Law, Reason, and Worship of the new. And if the seventh
Day, and the Sabbath, as some pretend, are the same, the sense of the Command
in the enforcing part of it is, but the seventh Day is the seventh Day of the
Lord thy God, which is none at all.

So, as he and all learned Men generally say, it is not the precise seventh Day,
but one day in seven, which is perpetually obligatory in the fourth
Commandment. Mind the words again, wherein the substance, or the essential part
of this Command is expressed: Six days shall thou labor, but a seventh is a
Sabbath; it is not in the original [the seventh] but seventh, denoting not a
monthly or yearly, but a weekly Sabbath: the Phrase is exclusive, Mr. Warren,
p. 48.
as one observes, implying thus much, i. e. Thou art not bound to keep the
sixth day, or one in six, or the tenth, or one in ten, but the seventh, that
is, one in seven, or one in a week. The term seventh is opposed to all other
numbers, either ninth, or twentieth, as also to the six working days, which
clearly intend such a number, as six in seven; so the seventh, as one in seven.

Suppose I give or lend a poor Man seven Pounds, on condition that he improves
one Pound for me: now by the seventh is intended one in seven; so does God here
intend one day in seven for a holy Rest to himself.

Tho I deny not the last of seven, or one after six working days was given to
the People of Israel; yet it was a sign they should keep the whole Law, and was
a shadow of that spiritual and antitypical Rest we have in Christ; and so was
upon a special occasion imposed on them, with the greatest strictness and
severest Penalty.

But let it be considered, that which is signified in the fourth Command, as
perpetually obliging us, is, that we observe one day in seven as a day of Rest
to the Lord. Let me give you one parallel case more, viz. the Law of Tithes.
Now God required the tenth of their Increase: but will any Man say, God
intended any one precise tenth? No, begin where you will, the tenth Sheaf or
Lamb is the Lord's. So here, God will have one day in seven; but the reason why
he fixed on the last of the seven under the old Covenant, I have showed; and
shall further show why he chooses the first of seven in the new Covenant,
neither being expressed in the essential and first part of the fourth Command.
Had God chose now one in six, or one in nine, he had altered, as one observes,
the substance of this Command.

It is needless to recite the words of all Owen, Twiss, Shepherd, Walker,
Palmer, Hughs, Dod, Wallis, Durham, B. of Dorchest. Weemse, Baxter, Bunyan, etc.
those who hold that one in seven, not the precise last day of the seven, is
perpetually to be observed, and that the old seventh Day is abolished: but I
shall observe what Mr. Warren says, viz. Thus I grant the time of Worship, a
Sabbath it self, being an inseparable Adjunct of solemn Worship, is perpetual:
but the old Day, the seventh from the Creation, was made mutable -- and we have
a Sabbath still, a literal Sabbath; but the old Sabbaths and old Sacrifices
being Twins, tho both honorable and serviceable in their Generations, as they
lived together and died together, let both together in God's Name be buried in
the Grave of Christ, so as never to rise up again: but let our Gospel Worship
and Gospel-Sabbath take life from our Savior's Resurrection, which brought
with it a new Creation, a new World, making all things new.

But to wave this a little, it is well observed by Dr. Wallis: He Will say perhaps
[i. e. Mr. Banfield] the Jews observed such a seventh Day from the Creation,
and that was their Sabbath: But that is more than he or I know, or any Man
living. They had I grant a circulation of seven days, but from what Epoch we
cannot tell. And when Moses tells them on the sixth day, To morrow is the Rest
of the holy Sabbath, it seems to be the fixing of a new Epoch from the first
raining of Manna; and then all his Arguments from the continual observation of
the Sabbath from the Creation till that time, are at an end, i. e. whether this
from the first raining of Manna be the same with that from the Creation: And
there is six to one odds, that it is not.

1. Observe, Mr. B. of Dorchest. p. 31.
that at the opening and giving forth of the Command, Exodus 20. 8. it is said,
Remember the Sabbath Day, that is, the day of holy Rest of God's appointing.

2. In the Conclusion of the Command, v. 11. Wherefore the Lord blessed and
sanctified the Sabbath Day; it is not expressed the seventh day, but the
Sabbath Day of holy Rest: this is evident, that neither in the opening nor
shutting up the Commandment (where we have the moral substance of it) is there
mention of any particular Day at all.

3. What intervenes and comes in by way of explication, or inforcement of
Obedience, between the opening and shutting up of the Command, ought to be
observed; as,

1. In what Revolution of time God had appointed this day of holy Rest to be
observed, and that is one whole day of seven; of every seven days six for
Labor, one for Rest -- not one in ten, or one in twenty, but one in seven, one
day in every week.

2. I observe the inforcement of Obedience to the Command from God's resting
the seventh day: Here I acknowledge the last of seven is mentioned, but not as
any branch of the unchangeable moral substance of the Command, nor the
observation of it directly, but only consequentially, being instituted before,
as is acknowledged by all. And it must be owned that the last of seven here
mentioned, had first of all the honor to be the day of God's appointing, and
accordingly was observed till the time came that another day, the first of
seven, was to succeed in the rome of it. Note,

1. As was said before, neither in giving forth, nor shutting up the
Commandment, is there any mention of a precise, or particular Day.

2. Nor in any thing that intervenes between.

3. Nor in any thing that expresses the Revolution of Time, wherein the day of
holy Rest is to be observed. Six days shall thou labor.

Thus I understand this Limitation, or Rule for Direction.

1. Six days shall thou labor, unless God otherwise appoint; and he did appoint
in the old Administration other days to be kept holy, which tho not always, yet
some times fell out on some or other of the six working days, etc.

2. Further, Six days shall thou labor, no excluding the solemn Worship of God
out of those six days; for it would be no Sin to hear a Sermon, or set some
hour apart for Prayer any of these six days, as it is for a Man to work upon
that day of seven which God sets apart for himself.

3. And yet further, which is most of all to be taken notice of; six days, etc.
rest one, not injoyning the last of seven (which was instituted before) but
only six parts of the time shall be for your selves, the seventh shall be mine:
So Genesis 47. 14. you shall have four parts, says Joseph, the fifth shall be
Pharaoh's; let all be divided into five parts, four shall be for your selves,
the fifth shall be for the King; not telling them which fifth, but only one of
five. Thus Lev. 23. 27. let all be divided into ten, you shall have nine, the
tenth shall be the Lord's; not appointing them which tenth, but only one of ten
-- So here I find not one word for the last of seven.

Moreover, I perceive nothing at all in God's Example for it, nothing there but
one day in seven: but when the last day of seven is required of Israel, that
refers to the Covenant of Works, their laboring first, doing all they had to
do, and so to rest, which was a sign (as I have proved) of the Covenant of
Works, and a Pledge of their Obligation in their Restipulation with God,
according to the Tenor of that conditional Covenant: hence their Sabbath was
called a perpetual Covenant, Exodus 31.
and with that Covenant it is gone for ever.

Yet one day in seven, as a day of Rest and solemn Worship, is still to be the
Lord's by virtue of the fourth Command: and tho God's Example of resting is
mentioned, yet it must be acknowledged to relate to some special end and
purpose, which may not only refer to Man's good, but to God's ceasing from the
Work of Creation for ever; which being the first and greatest Work then done,
the day of his finishing his Work was to be observed upon that reason.

But when Christ God-man came, and also had finished the Work of Redemption,
and ceased from his Work, as God did from his; there is the same moral reason
why the Day in which he rested from redeeming, i.e. the first day of seven,
should be our day of Rest, because this is a far greater Work than that of
Creation, as shall be made plain and clear hereafter. For we in Gospel-days (as
foretold) shall not remember the old Heavens and the old Earth any more, the
new carrying away the Glory of that; i.e. remember them no more by the
observation of that old seventh day. To this purpose Mr. B. of Dorchester.

Now I say God's Example under the Covenant of Works in working six days, and
then resting, is no ways obligatory on us, tho it was on Israel under the same
old Covenant. But we must ground and bottom our Observation of one Day in seven
upon Christ's ceasing and resting from his Works, and his Institution of a new
Day upon the tenor or nature of the Covenant of Grace, to rest first, and then
work six days, not for Rest, or to rest, etc. but from that Rest Christ entered
into on the first day of the week, when our Rest and Justification was
completed, which we enter actually into when we first believe.

Now the reason (says Mr. B. to Mr. Banfield) why herein I dissent from you,
Mr. B. of Dorchest. p. 40.
it is this, God blessed the seventh Day and sanctified it, but not as it was
the last day of the seven, but as it was the day of his Rest, declaring thereby
Creation-work to be perfected. Neither was his resting, so far as I can see,
the ground of his blessing and sanctifying it, but as considered in conjunction
with the reason of his Rest, i.e. his finishing his Creation; and also with the
Result and Consequence of his Rest, viz. his magnifying and honoring that day,
for the time being, above all other days, for the greatest work in being. For,

1. God's resting cannot refer to any thing but his ceasing from creating-work;
because otherwise he cease not working My Father, says our Lord, works
hitherto, and I work.
; and his Example of resting, as some learned Men observe, is not alleged here
to lay an obligation on our Conscience, that that same Day we must observe for
ever.

2. It seems to relate to what God himself did, rather than any way propounded
as an Argument to prove that for which it is urged. Take a parallel case, 1 Cor.
11. 23. where we have the Institution of the Lord's Supper repeated out of the
Evangelists, and Christ's Example is related as to the time when, which was not
only in the Night, but that particular Night in which he was betrayed. Now this
is not recorded as a binding Rule on us for our Imitation. That is historically
related, and so may this of God's Example in the fourth Commandment. There is
one thing more worth noting.

Dr. Twiss, Dr. Owen, and many other learned Men cannot see how it can be said
that God sanctified the seventh day, Genesis 2. but that it must refer to Adam in
Innocence, as his duty to keep it, and not that God then only by Destination,
Decree and Purpose, set it apart for his Church and People to observe in
aftertimes -- Now grant it was, as I have last hinted, pray do not they say as
much as this comes to in respect of the Gospel-Sabbath? Do not they say, that
in the fourth Command (both in the first part, and close of that Precept) God
only set apart or sanctified one day in seven, and so conclude the original
Sanctification of the first day of the week is comprehended in the fourth
Commandment? (which I will not deny) but was not this near 2000 years before he
designed his People should observe it, or that it was the absolute Duty of any
so to do?

And as there was an interval from Adam to Moses, of such a state of God's
People and things, as rendered them not capable to observe the Seventh-day
Sabbath according to the Law of it; so there was an interval of such a state of
the Church and things under the legal Covenant, from Moses to Christ, as
rendered them not capable to observe the Lord's Day according to the design and
purport of God therein, tho that Day was by God's Destination set apart long
before.

Eleventhly, Whatsoever is a simple moral Precept, or one of the ten
Commandments, as materially so, the Holy Ghost does convince all Believers of
now under the Gospel (as I have showed before) and also he reproves them for
the neglect or breach of all such Precepts: but the Holy Ghost does not
convince Believers it is their Duty to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath, for
reprove them for the neglect or breach of ^t, tho they work and bear Burdens on
that as well as on any other day of the week; therefore it is no moral Precept.

Twelfthly, That which is a pure moral Precept is written in the Hearts of all
true Believers by the Holy Ghost. God promised in Gospel Times he would not
write his Law in Tables of Stone, put in the fleshly Tables of our Hearts: now
the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath is not written in the Hearts of Believers by
the Spirit, therefore it is no moral Precept. Tillam says, the moral Law is
written in the Hearts of all Believers, and so says Mr. Soarsby, and they say
right; yea even the whole moral Law, we being created again in Christ Jesus in
the Image of God: but no Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath is written in our
Hearts; Ergo,

To conclude, we may hereby learn to distinguish between those parts contained
in some of the ten Commandments that are simply moral, and oblige us as the Law
is in Christ's hand, and what was judicial. For, 1. The Preface to the whole
Ten was Judicial. 2. The second Command obliged the Jews to observe the whole
Ceremonial Law; and that part of God's visiting the Sins of the Fathers on the
Children unto the third and fourth Generation, belonged to the Covenant of
Works, and not to us. 3. That in the fourth Command also of the seventh precise
day belonged to the Covenant of Works, and so to them only. 4. The Promise
annexed to the fifth only belonged to the Israelites that inherited the Land of
Canaan. 5. In the tenth Commandment, Usury or Interest of Money, Houses, etc.
was forbid to the Jews from their poor Brethren; but that was only a Judicial
Law, and is no Law to us. Thus we may see that the moral Law is only a Law to
us as in the hand of Jesus Christ.

SERMON VI.
Proving that the Law of the Decalogue was given to no People but the People of
Israel: That the Moral Law is transferred from Moses into the Hand of Christ as
Mediator.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, etc.
THat it is not the Duty of believing Gentiles to keep the old Seventh-day
Sabbath, I have proved by many Reasons: The fourth was, it is not their Duty by
virtue of the Decalogue given to the People of Israel in Exodus 20.

First, Because the precise Seventh-day Sabbath is not the moral part of the
fourth Commandment; this I have proved by Twelve Arguments. I shall now proceed
and give you the next Reason why it is not the Duty of believing Gentiles to
keep the Seventh-day Sabbath from hence.

Secondly, The Decalogue given to none but the Jews, as written Exodus 20.
It cannot be their Duty to keep that Day from thence, because the Law of the
Decalogue (and particularly the Seventh-day Sabbath mentioned therein) was
given to no People or Nation, but the People of Israel only, and the proselyted
Stranger.

1. I shall prove this directly from express Texts out of the Old Testament.

2. From direct and express Texts out of the New Testament.

3. I shall answer some of the chiefest Objections brought by the Seventh-day
Sabbatarians against what I shall say.

But before I proceed let me premise two things.

1. That all the World were under the Law of the first Covenant as made with
the first Adam, All the World under the Law of Works in the first Adam.
the common Head of all Mankind; and that the substance of that natural and
simple moral Law is written in the Hearts of all his Offspring, tho much
darkened by the Fall and actual Sin, especially in some.

2. That whatsoever is naturally or simply Moral, contained in the Decalogue,
is given forth by Jesus Christ anew in the New Testament, as I have proved; and
as so considered, the sum or substance of those Ten words are obligatory on all
Mankind. Now,

First, As to the Proofs out of the Old Testament.

1. The very Preface to the Decalogue declares to whom all the Commandments
contained therein was given, Exodus 20. 2.
viz. those very People God brought out of the Land of Egypt; that People which
he sanctified or set apart for himself above all People on the Earth; as also
by the promise annexed to the fifth Commandment, viz. That thy days may be long
in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. This shows the Laws of the
Decalogue were only given to the People of Israel. Again,

2. It Is said, Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
What Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous,
as this Law which is set before you this Day? Now if this Law was given to all
People in the World, or to any one Nation or People besides Israel, then the
whole World (or that particular People as well as the Israelites) had Laws and
Statutes as great and righteous as Israel had, tho they might not have them in
so clear a Revelation or manner as they had.

3. It is expressly said, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
He showed his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: He
has not dealt so with any other Nation, and for his Judgments they have not
known them. Praise ye the Lord.

How vain as well as sinful is it to go about to contradict God's Word? Here it
is laid down Affirmatively and Negatively, It was given to Israel, and not to
any other Nation, etc.

Dr. Chamberlen says, See Mr. Ives's Saturday no Sabbath, p. 18, 19.
It was given to Israel as a Privilege only, and to other Nations by way of
Punishment to judge them by it.

Answ. Men may say what they please after this manner: But I shall prove that
no Nation or People but that of Israel (who were under that Law) shall be
judged by it.

4. How often does God by Moses, and other of his Servants, Exodus 31. 17.
declare that the Sabbath was given to Israel? It is a Sign between me and the
Children of Israel, Neh. 9. 14.
etc. Also Nehemiah speaking of Israel, says, God made known to them his holy
Sabbath: To them; and the Psalmist says, not to any other Nation.

Take two or three Arguments further to evince this.

1. The Law of the Decalogue was given only to a People in covenant with God:
The Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai given only to the House of Israel.
and because the whole House of Jacob were taken into that legal typical
Covenant which peculiarly referred to that People; therefore God gave them that
Law, and the Sabbath, as a Sign that God sanctified and set them apart to be a
peculiar People to himself; and as a Sign also of that Obligation they were
laid under to keep it, as I have proved. But God entered into no such Covenant
with any other People or Nation under Heaven; therefore the Law of the
Decalogue could not concern any besides the House of Israel only.

Were the Heathen Gentiles, or Believing Gentiles, under that ministration of
the Legal Covenant given by Moses to Israel? No, until Christ came, no other
People were in covenant with God at all.

2. Because it is expressly said, that the Sabbath, Exodus 20. was given to the
Jews and Proselyte Stranger; To thee and thy Manservant, and Maidservant, and
Stranger that is within thy Gate: Not any Gentiles, or Strangers without the
Pale of the Jewish Church, but only them who were within their Gate. So that
God does implicitly declare he injoyns none else to observe it.

3. The Law of the Decalogue could not be given to all or any other People,
because God did not give any Command to Moses, or to any of his Servants, to
promulge, declare, or make known that Law, or the Sabbath, to any other People
in the World but the Jews only.

No Law can bind without Promulgation: the Gospel is of a large extent, as
appears by the Commission, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
Go into all the World, etc. Go teach all Nations, etc. Thus our Lord has
appointed the Promulgation of the Gospel, but not a word of any such Commission
for the Promulgation of the Law of Moses given Exodus 20.

4. Because Moses was never made or appointed a Lawgiver to any other People
but Israel only: Moses no Lawgiver but to the Jews.
He was a Ruler over none but the Jews, and the Decalogue was but part of the
Jewish Law as written in Tables of Stone. Others may say, Who made thee a Ruler
over us, or a Legislator, or deputed Officer from God to us?

4. The Decalogue, and consequently the Sabbath, could not be given to any
other People, because it referred to a People in a Church State, having many
other Laws, Statutes, and Judgments annexed unto it; the punishment for the
breach of each Precept thereof being death: he that broke the Sabbath must die.

Now certainly if that Law had been given to other Nations or People, God would
have put them also into such a Church State as the Israelites were, and have
given them like Statutes, Judgments, and Officers to execute those Judgments:
but this he did not do.

5. Besides (as one observes) there were Ceremonies belonging to the Sabbath,
that were essential to the right keeping of it, which were not enjoined on the
Gentiles, except Proselytes. That Law given to all People, must have the same
Services, Rites and Ceremonies essentially annexed to it, given to them also;
but those Services, Rites, and Ceremonies, were given to none but the Jews.
Otherwise, as he observes, there would be two sorts of Worship acceptable to
God; and then it would follow also that God was more severe to Israel than to
others, by imposing more hard and costly Services on them than on the Gentiles.

6. Take here what Mr. Bunyan has said: Good Nehemiah threatened the Gentiles
that were Merchants for lying then about the Walls of the City, for that by
that means they were a Temptation to the Jews to break their Sabbath; yet he
still charges the breach thereof upon his own People, Nehem. 13. 16, 17, etc.

Can it be imagined, had the Gentiles been concerned by a Divine Law to keep
this Sabbath, that so holy and good a Man as Nehemiah would let them escape
without a rebuke for so notorious a Transgression?

Moreover, in the Prophet Ezekiel, chapter 20. 10, 11, 12. it is said, I gave my
Sabbaths to be a Sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the
Lord that sanctified them.

Before I close with this, take what two or three learned Writers have declared
in confirmation of what I say. Heyl. on the Sabb. p. 65, 66.
A Law which in it self was general and universal, equally pertains to Jews and
Gentiles; the latter, which knew not the Law, doing by nature the things
contained in the Law, as St. Paul has told us: but this Law published on Mount
Sinai, and as delivered by the hand of Moses, obliged those of the house of
Israel only.

Take what another says:

As neither the Judicial, Zanchius de redempt. l. 1. c. 11. Tom. 1.
nor Ceremonial, so nor the Moral Law contained in the Decalogue, does concern
us Christians, as given by Moses to the Jews, but only so far forth as it is
consonant to the Law of Nature, which bind all alike, and was afterward
ratified by Christ our King.

The Reason he asserts this, was to prove the Gentiles were never obliged to
observe their Sabbath. Let me add what Mr. Baxter has wrote: Baxter on the
Sabb. p. 74.
He says, That the Fourth Commandment of Moses binds us not to the
Seventh-day Sabbath, because that Moses's Law never bound any but the Jews, and
those Proselytes that made themselves Inhabitants of their Land, or voluntarily
subjected themselves to their Policy. For Moses was Ruler of none but the Jews,
nor a Legislator or deputed Officer from God to any other Nation. The Decalogue
was but part of the Jewish Law, if you consider it not as written in Nature,
but in Tables of Stone; and the Jewish Law was given as a Law to no other
People but to them. It was a national Law, as they were a peculiar People and
holy Nation; so that even in Moses's days it bound no other Nations of the
World; therefore it needed no abrogation to the Gentiles, but a declaration
that it did not bind them.

7. To close with what we find in the Old Testament about this: It Is worthy our
noting, that God told the Israelites that those Seven Nations of Canaan, whom
they should drive out, This is a full Answ. to Mr. Soarsby, who has filled many
Pages of his Book to prove the Decalogue Law was given to all the World.
were defiled with all those Sins and Abominations that he commanded them to
abstain from; i. e. they had violated all natural or simple moral Precepts. But
God never charged them with the Sin of breaking the Jews Sabbath: So that from
thence I infer the Decalogue was not given to them, and so not the Sabbath.

Secondly, I shall prove out of the New Testament, that the Law of Moses, i. e.
the Decalogue, was given to none but the Jews or People of Israel.

1. See Romans 9. To whom pertains the giving forth of the Law, etc. speaking
of the Israelites: to whom, that is by way of contradistinction to any other
People; or to them and none else.

2. Upon this very account Paul shows that the Jews had the advantage of all
other People; Romans 3. 1.
What advantage then has the Jew? etc. Much every way, chiefly because to them
were committed the Oracles of God. Now Stephen shows by the Oracles of God are
meant the Ten words, Act. 7. 33.
who told the Jews, Their Fathers received on Mount Sinai the lively Oracles,
to deliver them, says he, to us, i. e. us Jews.

Now I argue thus: If the Gentiles had the same lively Oracles, or Oracles of
God given to them, then in this the Jews had not the advantage above the
Gentiles. He does not speak of the Advantage the Jews had as to the clearest
Revelation of those Oracles to them, above the Gentiles, but of the giving of
them to the Jews and not to the Gentiles.

3. Again, two or three times Paul expressly affirms that the Gentiles had not
the Law, and were without the Law: For when the Gentiles which have not the
Law, etc. Romans 2. 14. What is more plainly expressed? The Gentiles, he says,
had not the Law, that is, as given by Moses, tho they had the Law written in
their Hearts.

So elsewhere he says, 1 Cor. 9. 21, 22.
Unto the Jew I became a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are
under the Law, as under the Law, etc. to them that are without the Law, as
without the Law; being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ;
that I might gain them that are without the Law. Three times he here affirms
the Gentiles are without the Law.

Object. He means the Ceremonial Law.

Answ. True, they were without that Law as well as the Decalogue Law: but he
cannot here refer to the Ceremonial Law, because it is such a Law as the
Gentiles were under to Christ, or as it is in the hand of Christ; which must
intend the Moral Law, for no Gentile Believer or Unbeliever was under the
Ceremonial Law to Christ, because utterly abolished, but so is not the Moral
Law: in which sense we are without the Law to God, but under the Law to, or as
it is in the hand of Christ.

4. Take this Argument: The Gentiles shall not be judged by Moses's Law.
That Law which the Gentiles shall not be judged by, they were never under; but
the Gentiles shall not be judged by the Law of Moses, therefore they were never
under that Law.

For proof of the major Proposition, see what Paul says: Romans 2. 12.
For as many as have sinned without Law, shall be judged without Law; and as
many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. By the first he
means the Gentiles, and by the latter the Jews. And from hence the Apostle
proceeds to evince, that as the Gentiles showed the Works of the Law written in
their Hearts, they should be judged by that Law, but not as that Law was
formerly written by Moses in two Tables of Stone, ver. 15.

As to the minor Proposition; can any suppose, that if the Gentiles had been
under Moses's Law, yet they should not be judged by it? Sure none can.

Obj. If the Gentiles were not under the Law, Christ came not to redeem them;
for he came to redeem none but such as were under the Law, Gal. 4. 5.

Answ. The old World was under the Law and Covenant of Works, and the Curse
thereof, in the first Adam: it was his first Transgression that brought all the
World under the Curse of the Law, or breach of the first Covenant; and not the
Law as given by Moses, tho that Law, it is true, pronounces that Curse afresh
on those that continued not in all things contained therein.

For by one Man's Offense Death reigned by one, Romans 5. 1^* 17, 18.
etc. By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin -- Therefore as
by the Offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, etc. Thus we
were all under the Law of the first Covenant, and as the Law is written in our
Hearts; but we were not all under that Ministration of the Law given by Moses.

Obj. If all the World became guilty by the breach of Moses's Law, then all the
World was under it: but this Paul affirms, Romans 3. 19. Now we know whatsoever
things the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law, that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before God.

Answ. Paul in the precedent Chapter, and what goes before in this, had proved
that the Gentiles were under Sin, and were all guilty before God for violating
the Law written in their Hearts: See Chap. 2. 12. and 3. 10.

Well what of this? the Gentiles then were cast and found guilty that way; yet
they were not all, but part of the whole World.

And from hence he in this 19th Verse comes again to speak of the Jews who were
under Moses's Law, and says, What the Law (that is Moses's Law) says, it
says to them who are under it (meaning the Jews) and what the Consequence of
this is he shows, i. e. that every mouth might be stopped; not the mouths of
the Gentiles only, but the mouths of the Jews also, that so all the World, that
is both Jews and Gentiles, might become guilty before God. I hope all are and
will be convinced that this is directly the meaning of Paul, if they consider
the scope and coherence of the Text.

And thus I have clearly proved that the Law of the Decalogue, or Moses's Law,
was not given to any but the Jews and proselyte Strangers; and therefore from
that it cannot be the Duty of believing Gentiles to keep the Seventh-day
Sabbath.

Object. But it is again objected, That the Apostle James injoineth the Royal
Law upon believing Gentiles; and the Royal Law is the Law of the Decalogue,
therefore all were under the Law of the Decalogue, which forbids Adultery,
Murder, etc.

Answ. 1. It is a hard case that Men, Jam. 2. 8, 10, 11, 12. about fulfilling
the Royal Law, opened.
to prove their fond Notions, should put such an Interpretation on a Text of
Scripture, as is directly contrary to other plain Texts: for unless they can
prove we mistake those Scriptures newly mentioned, which say that Moses's Law
was only given to the Jews, and not to the Gentiles, besure they urge this to
no purpose, but mistake the sense of the Apostle, as others do about what he
says concerning Justification.

2. We never denied, but readily grant that all believing Gentiles are obliged
to keep the whole moral Law, or all simple moral Precepts, as they are in the
hand of our Lord, that one Lawgiver, of which this Apostle speaks: but I have
proved that the precise Seventh-day Sabbath is not a simple moral Precept, nor
any part of the Morality of the fourth Commandment, and therefore not intended
here. Therefore it follows, that Man may fulfill the Royal Law according to
the Scripture, and yet not observe the Seventh-day Sabbath.

3. The Apostle James clears the matter himself: So speak and so do, as they
that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, ver. 12.

He can refer in these words to no Law but that of Christ, or rather Christ's
Gospel; or to the Law as in his hands, who has fulfilled the whole Law for us
by his own perfect Obedience: and hence we are delivered from the Law as in the
hand of Moses; because as so considered it was not a Law of Liberty, but a Law
of Bondage, or that which gender'd to Bondage.

And he shows it is a Rule of Righteousness to us only, as Christ is our
Lawgiver, whose Law is a Law of Liberty: but as he that offended in one point,
was guilty of the breach of the whole Law; there he clearly alludes to the Law
as in Moses's hand, and as a Covenant of Works.

We are not to do, nor speak, nor live, as the Law in Moses's hands directs, or
as he was a Lawgiver; for then we should be under perpetual Bondage: and
nothing is more plain, than that Moses's Law, as to the strict observance of
its Precepts, brought the Jews into Bondage; it is called a Yoke of Bondage,
Gal. 5. 1, etc.

But so speak, and so do, as they who shall be judged by the Law of Liberty,
that is, the Gospel; for not by the Law as in Moses's hand, but by the Gospel
we shall be judged at the last day, who live only under that Ministration.

And from hence let such as keep the Seventh-day Sabbath, take heed lest they
are brought into Bondage, by obliging themselves to observe the whole Law;
since I have proved it was appointed as a sign or pledge of the Covenant of
Works, binding them to universal and perfect Obedience, who were on their
Sabbath Day not to think their own Thoughts, nor speak their own Words, but to
make the Law of God their delight so as not to sin; which none ever did, or
could do, save Jesus Christ, who thus kept the Sabbath, even as long as he
lived for us on the Earth, that we might enter into his Rest, or into the
Anti^^pical Sabbath.

Thirdly, The third Argument to prove it is not the Duty of Gentile Believers
to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath from the fourth Commandment in the Decalogue,
is, Because that Law, as there written and given, is taken out of the hand of
Moses as a Lawgiver, as well as it was a Covenant of Works, and put into the
hand of Christ as Mediator.

My Brethren, The moral Law taken out of the hand of Moses as a Lawgiver, and
put into the hand of Christ as Mediator.
could our Adversaries prove that the Law on Mount Sinai was given to all the
World, and so to believing Gentiles (which I have shown it was not) yet this
would not in the least do their business: for the believing Jews are now no
longer under the Law, no not as the moral Law was given by Moses as a Rule of
Life, any more than they are not under it as a Covenant of Works.

1. Indeed my Work is partly done in this respect already, by what I have said
in opening the plain sense of the Apostle James in that place just now
mentioned.

2. This appears, because we have but one Lawgiver, Isa. 33. 22.
namely Jesus Christ: The Lord is Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, he will save us; that is, Jehovah our Righteousness, who came to save
us.

There is one Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12.
who is able to save and to destroy. Now is not this our Lord Jesus Christ?

Obj. He does not say we have but one.

Answ. But it is implied. Paul says, there is one God, and one Mediator: Does
not this imply that there is but one God, and but one Mediator?

Who are you now that will introduce another Lawgiver, a Co-partner, or a
Co-rival with Christ, to partake of part of his Honor?

3. Because our Lord declares that all Power is given to him in Heaven and
Earth, Mat. 28. 18, 19. all Power considered as Mediator: for as he is God, it
was not given to him, but was his own essentially. But this is a Power
delegated to him, i. e. all Power as sole Lord and Lawgiver to his Church, who
only is the Head thereof: therefore we must look to him for Laws, and how to be
governed. He governed by a Substitute before, but now being come himself, the
Substitute is utterly divested of his Power.

4. The Moral Law as a Rule of Righteousness, must only be in the hand of
Christ, because our Lord says, the Law and the Prophets were until John, Luke
16. 16. that is, Moses and the Prophets were as Teachers, by whom God spoke to
the People; that is, at the time of their Ministration and Prophecy: but now
the date of their Ministration is near expired; they have Moses and the
Prophets. But in the Transfiguration (which was a Figure or Representation of
Christ's glorious Gospel Church or Kingdom, and his Ministration) Moses
disappeared with Elias, who being one of the chiefest Prophets, might signify
all the rest, and John also.

The Disciples would have three Tabernacles, one for Moses, one for Elias, and
one for Christ: i. e. they would have been under their Ministrations as
Lawgivers and Teachers, and would have them to share with Christ of that Glory.

But lo, a Voice was heard from the Cloud saying, This is my beloved Son, hear
him; and when they lifted up their Eyes, they saw no man but Jesus only. Moses
and Elias were gone; and tho the Writings of Moses and the Prophets are of
great use still for Comfort and Instruction, Heb. 1. 1, 2.
etc. yet now God only speaks to us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of
all things.

On him all the Father's Love and Glory does terminate: no Lord, no Ruler, no
Lawgiver but he is to be heard; he being the Truth it self, and having received
the whole Counsel of the Father, has revealed all things that we are to believe
and practice.

He is the great Prophet Moses spoke of, whom we are to hear in all things.
Acts 3. 22, 23.
Must we (...) to Moses to know how Christ is to govern ^s Church, or take any
Law from him? No, ^is would be to eclipse the Glory of Christ.

5. Because the Servant was not to abide in the ^ouse for ever, viz. as a
Lawgiver: that is, ^s Ministration of the Law was to cease.

6. Because the moral Law (or the Decalogue) (...) delivered by Moses, had
several things in it ^at only pertained to the Israelites, or to the ^gal
Church State of the Jews, and was given ^y him as a Covenant of Works: mind the
Preface to that Law, Exodus 20. and the Pro^ise annexed to the fifth
Commandment, Ho^our thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days ^ay be long in the
Land which the Lord thy God ^veth thee. These things show that the Law ^ven by
Moses was not to last but till the end (...) that Dispensation, and
Church State.

7. Because we are not come to Mount Sinai, Heb. 12. 18.
^ot to receive the Law as there delivered; but ^e are come to Mount Sion, to
the Gospel-^ispensation, Ver. 25.
and so to hear him only that speak^h from Heaven. But such as keep the old
Sabbath, go for it to Mount Sinai, and are ^earers not of Christ, but of Moses
in that ^ase.

8. Because the whole Law is changed, or the ^^d Covenant; and all the Laws and
Precepts that belonged peculiarly to that, as the old Sabbath did, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
are abolished. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is of the new Creation,
or (...) new Creature: Old things are passed away, and behold all things are
become new. The old Church and old Church Membership, Rites, Privileges, and
Ordinances, both the old Jewish Worship, and old Day of Worship, are gone for
ever; and a new Church State, new Ordinances, a new Worship, and a new Day of
Worship are introduced in their stead.

Now since the old Sabbath was a Sign of the old Covenant, nay called the
Covenant, be sure that is gone: Exodus 31. 16.
wherefore the Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath throughout their
Generations for a perpetual Covenant. It belonged to the old Creation in a
peculiar sense; and from hence, upon the bringing in the new Creation, and
making all things new, this Sabbath cannot remain; the old Jewish, Legal,
Typical Church-Worship, and Day of Worship went off all together.

Can any think that the old Sabbath still remains, which was the sign of the
old Covenant? This is strange; if it does remain, be sure the Penalty annexed
for the breach of it remains also: but the Penalty cannot remain, therefore the
Sabbath is gone. Take away the Penalty of a Law, and what is become of that
Law? is it not abrogated? Now the Penalty being corporal Death, the Sabbath is
gone, because the Gospel Church has no such Policy or political Power to
inflict any such Punishment on Sabbath-breaking.

A Sabbatarian being in Prison with Mr. Tho. Grantham, he professed much Love
to him. Ah, said Grantham, thou would kill me. Who I, said he, what kill my
Brother? or to that effect. Says the other, Had you the Power of the Civil
Magistracy in your hand, and should I break your Sabbath, what would you do
with me? Said he, I confess Justice must take place. It is well they have not
that Power in their hands.

9. Because Christ as a Testator has made another Will, which is his last Will
and Testament; and this makes all Precepts void that were given in the Old
Testament, and are not given forth or repeated in the new.

All know that no Legacy bequeathed in a former Will, that is left out in a
last Will, is recoverable. Upon this account it is you have argued that the Law
for Tithes is not in force now, nor Infant Churchmembership, nor an external
Canaan flowing with Milk and Honey; or have Ministers Sons a right to succeed
in the Ministry, and many other things, because they are not Legacies left in
Christ's last Will and Testament, tho they were in the Old Testament. So the
old Sabbath, being left out in Christ's last Testament, is no Legacy left to us.

10. That the Decalogue-Law is transferred from Moses to Christ, appears by the
manner of the writing of the one and the other.

Moses had it to give as it was written in two Tables of Stone by the Finger of
God: Christ has wrote it not in Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of our Hearts
by the Holy Spirit; which was signified by God's writing of it with is Finger,
the Spirit being called the Finger of God: If I by the Finger of God cast out
Devils, etc.

To close this, take what Mr. B. has said, viz.

The whole Law of Moses, B. on the Sabb. p. 77, 78.
formally as such, ^s ceased or abrogated by Christ; I say as such, because
materially the same things that are in that Law, may be the matter of the Law
of Nature, and the Law of Christ, of which I shall speak anon.

That the whole Law of Moses as such is ab^ogated, is most clearly proved:

By the frequent arguings of Paul, who ever speaks of that Law as ceased,
without excepting any part; and Christ says, Luke 16. 16. The Law and the
Prophets were until John; that is, were the chief Doctrine of the Church till
then. Joh. 1. 17.
The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. No Jew
would have understood this, if the word [Law] had not contained the Decalogue.
So, John 7. 19, 23, 24. Acts 15. 5. it was the whole Law of Moses as such,
which by Circumcision they would have bound men to, Gal. 5. 3.

The Gentiles are said to sin without Law, even when they broke the Law of
Nature, meaning [without Moses's Law.] In all these Scriptures it is not part,
but the whole Law of Moses which Paul excludes; which I acknowledged to the
Antinomians, tho they take me for their too great Adversary. Romans 3. 19, 20,
21, 27, 28, 31. Chapter 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. Chapter 5. 13, 20. Chapter 7. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Chapter 9. 4, 31, 32. Chapter 10. 5. Gal. 2. 16, 19, 21. Chapter 3. 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
19, 21, 24. Chapter 4. 21. Chapter 5. 3, 4, 14, 23. Chapter 6. 13. Ephesians. 2. 15. Phil. 3. 6,
9 Heb. 7. 11, 12, 19. Chapter 9. 19. Chapter 10. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 21.
.

3. More particularly, there are some Texts which express the cessation of the
Decalogue as it was Moses' s Law, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 11. Not in Tables of Stone, but
in the fleshly Tables of the Heart -- But if the ministration of Death written
and engraven in Stone was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his Countenance, which
was to be done away (or is done away.)

They that say the Glory, and not the Law, is here said to be done away, speak
against the plain scope of the Text: For the Glory of Moses's Face, and the
glorious manner of deliverance, ceased in a few days, which is not the
Cessation here intended.

But as Dr. Hammond speaks [that Glory, and that Law so gloriously delivered,
is done away] and this the 11th Verse fully expresses: For if that which is
done away was glorious, (or by Glory) much more that which remains is
glorious (or is Glory.) So that as it is not only the Glory, but the glorious
Law, Gospel, or Testament which is said to remain; so it is not only the Glory,
but the Law which is said to be done away: And this is the Law which was
written in Stone. Nothing but partial Violence can evade the force of this Text.

So Heb. 7. 11, 12. [under it] (the Levitical Priesthood) the People received
the Law -- And the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law. Ver. 18. For there is verily a disannulling of the
Commandment going before, for the weakness and the unprofitableness thereof:
For the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing a better hope did. And so
much was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament. In all this it is plain,
that it is the whole Frame of the Mosaical Law that is changed, and the New
Testament set up in its stead.

Heb. 9. 18, 19. Neither was the first Testament dedicated without Blood: For
when Moses had spoken every Precept to all the People according to the Law,
etc. Here the Law, before said to be changed, is said to contain every Precept.

And, Ephesians. 2. 15. it is the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances,
which Christ abolished in his Flesh; which cannot be exclusive of the chief
part thereof.

Object. This is the Doctrine of the Antinomians that the Law is abrogated,
even the Moral Law.

Answ. It is the Doctrine of the true Antinomians, that we are under no Divine
Law, neither of Nature nor of Christ: But it is the Doctrine of Paul and all
Christians, that the Jewish Mosaical Law is abolished.

Object. But do not all Divines say that the Moral Law is of perpetual
Obligation?

Answ. Yes; because it is God's Law of Nature, and the Law of Christ.

Object. But do not most say, that the Decalogue written in Stone is the Moral
Law, and of perpetual Obligation?

Answ. Yes; for by the word [Moral] they mean [Natural], and so take Moral not
in the large sense, as signifying a Law de moribus, as all Laws are whatsoever;
but in a narrower sense, as signifying that which by nature is of universal and
perpetual Obligation. So that they mean, not that it is perpetual as it is
Moses's Law, and written in Stone formally, but as it is that which is natural:
And they mean, that materially the Decalogue contains the same Law which is
the Law of Nature; and therefore it is materially in force still.

But they except still certain Points and Circumstances in it, as the prefatory
Reason, I am the Lord your God that brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and
especially this of the Seventh-day Sabbath.

Quest. How far then are we bound to keep the Law?

Answ. (1.) As it is the Law of Nature.

(2.) As it is owned by Christ, and made part of his Law: And therefore no more
of it binds directly, than we can prove to be either the Law of Nature, or
the Law of Christ. -- Thus Mr. B.

Object. But Christ says, he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but
to fulfill them; and that not one jot or tittle of the Law shall pass away till
all be fulfilled.

Answ. The whole Moral Law Christ has fulfilled in our Nature, for us, and in
our stead, in his Life: And by his Death, he has antitypically fulfilled all
the Prophecies concerning himself in reference to such things; and has
abolished the Ceremonial Law also; for till then not a tittle of that could
pass away.

Is a fulfilling the Law a destroying it? Besides, all simple moral Precepts of
the Law (as in Christ's hand) stand firm for ever; therefore he came not to
destroy the Law: yet is he the end of it for Righteousness to every one that
believes; Romans 10. 4.
tho as a Rule of Life in his hands, it obliges them perpetually.

Moreover, Chapter 5. 20.
Brethren, it is said, the Law entered, Chap. 7. 9.
that the Offense might abound, etc. and the Commandment came, etc. Now this
entering of the Law, and coming of the Commandment, The use of the Law at in
Christ's hand.
chiefly refers to the Law as it is in Christ's hand, set home with Power by
the Spirit upon the Conscience. The bare entrance of the Law on Mount Sinai, as
in Moses's hand, was with Thundering and Lightning, but without Rain, I mean
without Contrition or Brokenness of heart. Men may read Moses's Law, and hear
it preached every day; nay write it on the Walls of their Houses, and carry it
in their Bosoms; but yet it may have no operations on their Hearts: no, it is
the Ministration of the Law in Christ's hand by his Spirit, that wounds the
Conscience, pierces and melts the hard Heart, that God's Law may be written
there. The Ministration of the Law in Christ's hand answers the chief design of
God in giving it forth, and renders the Minstration of it by Moses of little or
no use: for as in his hand, it is done away; but the Law by the Spirit greatens
Sin, or makes Sin abound, and Grace superabound. Sin thus by the Law becomes
exceeding sinful; and it does not only wound, but slay the Soul: Sin taking
occasion by the Commandment, Romans 7. 11, 12.
deceived me, and by it slew me: Wherefore the Law is holy, etc. O blessed be
God for the Law as it is in Christ's hand! Thus Sin revived, (...) I died,
says Paul; I died as to any hope of Justification, or eternal Life by the Law.
The Jews who had the Law only as in Moses's hand, were puffed up or filled with
Pride: they (as Paul before Conversion, or the coming of the Commandment in and
by the Spirit, as in Christ's hand) were alive; so he thought himself alive, in
a justified state; but when the Commandment came, it was then quite otherwise
with him.

So that Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and also to make
it of great use to all that receive the Spirit of Christ: which Spirit is a
Spirit of burning, before it is a Spirit of Consolation; or a Spirit of
Bondage, before it is the Spirit of Adoption, and so a Schoolmaster to bring us
to Christ. Gal. 3. 24.


Thus we do not make void the Law through Faith, but establish it. God in
Christ has magnified the Law, and made it honorable, and that three ways.

1. In sending his own Son in our Nature to keep it perfectly, and to die for
our breach thereof; Christ was made under the Law to this very end. O how does
it magnify the Law, to see Godman thus conform to it, and die to bear the
Penalty thereof for us?

2. He magnifieth the Law in putting it into the hands of his own Son, as
Mediator, to give it forth. Does not the Dignity and Glory of the Lawgiver add
to the Glory of the Law given? Is not Christ a more glorious Person than Moses?
See Heb. 1. 8, 9, 10. and 2. 2, 3. -- This Man was accounted worthy of more
Glory than Moses, Heb. 3. 3. But alas! some would have Moses partake of some
part of Christ's Glory; he must be their Lawgiver.

3. By making of it, as in Christ's hand, of far greater use to Believers, as I
have showed, than ever it was in the hands of Moses, and so to answer God's
Design in it.

Let me only add, that all Moses's Law, even the Decalogue, was political, as
one observes. God's Law was for the particular political Government of the
Jewish Nation, as a typical Church and political Body; and therefore when their
Kingdom or Policy ceased, the Law as Political, and their figurative Sabbath
could not continue any longer.

And thus I close with the fourth general Argument, viz. It is not the Duty of
believing Gentiles to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath from the Law of the
Decalogue given by Moses, Exodus 20.

Fifthly, No Precept to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath in the New Testament.
It is not their Duty to keep it by any Precept given by Christ, or Precedent
we have in the New Testament.

1. That which is urged concerning Christ's not coming to destroy the Law, etc.
we have answered; as also that of Paul, we do not make void the Law through
Faith.

That Text also we have answered, and turned the Sword against our Adversaries,
which says, the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath, and the Sabbath was
(...) made for Man.

3. And also their great Proof in that of James, if ye fulfill the Royal Law,
Jam. 2. 8, 10. This I have given a full Answer to in this Discourse.

4. I proceed to another pretended Argument, viz. Pray that your flight be not
in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day, Mat. 24. 20.

Answ. This Text some learned Men have not, I am satisfied, given the right
sense of. But let us premise three things:

1. That Christ gave the old Names to Jewish Ordinances very often, and so did
his Apostles.

2. That our Lord well knew how superstitiously zealous the unbelieving Jews
were and would remain for their Sabbath.

Now pray mind the scope of this Text: Christ shows how sudden their flight
would be, when Jerusalem was to be destroyed, ver. 16, 17. and v. 19. he says,
Woe to them that are with Child, and them that give suck in those days. But pray
that your flight be not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day: for then shall
be great Tribulation.

3. It is evident there is the same reason they should pray that their flight
be not in the Winter, as not on the Jewish Sabbath Day.

Why, not in the Winter? because of the difficulties of the Ways; they might be
deep and unpassable then, whereby their Escape might be hindered.

Why not on the Sabbath Day? because, say some, their Consciences would not
admit them to fly then further than a Sabbath-day's Journey. It is strange to me
that our Lord should tell them a little before, that it was lawful to save the
Life of a sorry Animal, a Brute, on the Sabbath Day, and bid a Man take up his
Bed or bear a Burden on the Sabbath; and now hint that it was not lawful, or
that they would so think, to save their Lives by flying on the Sabbath Day:
believe this who will. Was it not lawful to pull an Ox, or Sheep out of a Pit
on the Sabbath Day; or for Men to carry their Goods out of their Houses on the
Sabbath Day, if a Fire should then happen? I do not think they were ever so
superstitiously blind.

Nay, to preserve human Life our Lord showed was much more lawful on that day
than the Life of Beasts.

But, say some, it would be grievous and uncomfortable to them to fly on that
day in which they used to find so much delight.

Answ. Our Lord gives a direct contrary Reason, i.e. for then will be great
Tribulation: the unbelieving Jews, should they fly on their Sabbath, would
severely handle them, may be knock them on the head; on this account our Lord
bids them so to pray: therefore this could not be the meaning of it.

Moreover, he knew his own Disciples before that time came, would be convinced
that the Jewish Sabbath was ceased with other Legal Rites.

Therefore this I take to be the direct meaning of our blessed Lord, viz.
Because on the Jewish Sabbath Day, the unbelieving Jews, among whom you will
remain (or many of you) when the Destruction of the City comes, may be so
strict and superstitious as to keep watch and ward at every Gate and Way, that
you will not be able to escape, at least not above one of their Sabbath-day's
Journey; therefore pray your flight be not on that day. This is all I can see
in this Text.

Both David and Elijah were fain to fly on the Sabbath Day. See Pet. Heylin, p.
137.
Besides, some learned Men from this Passage argue for the Christian Sabbath,
as it is not unknown to our Opponents, as Dr. Twiss, and many more; and that our
Lord alludes to that Sabbath that he knew his Disciples would observe after his
Death: but I rather adhere to the former Exposition.

Obj. But the Women rested on the Sabbath Day, according to the Commandment,
Luke 23. 56.

Answ. The Men themselves (I mean the Disciples) before our Lord suffered, were
so ignorant that they knew not their Lord should die; and some a great while
after did not know that they should preach to the Gentiles: and is it any
wonder that these good Women should not know so soon that the Sabbath was
abrogated? Some after that were zealous for Circumcision, etc. and is that an
Argument that Circumcision is our Duty? Besides, no new day for solemn Worship
was then appointed, nor till after our Lord rose from the dead.

Object. Paul, as his manner was, and other Apostles, observed the Jews
Sabbath Day; they preached in the Temple and Synagogue of the Jews on the
Sabbath Day.

Answ. 1. They never taught the Jews nor Gentiles to observe the Seventh-day
Sabbath.

2. No one Church, as we read of, ever met to celebrate any Gospel-Ordinance on
the Jewish Sabbath Day.

3. There is not one word of any Saint that ever kept it.

4. All that is on Record is, that the Apostles preached to the Jews on that
day. Why so? because they could not preach to them but when assembled together;
and having a Commission first to preach the Gospel to them, they went into the
Temple, and into their Synagogue, and preached to them on that day; and so did
Paul at Mars-hill to the Athenians, Acts. 17. 22. and 16. 13.
as well as to the Jews on their Sabbath.

It Is said, that Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, Act. 13. 14.
and three Sabbath Days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures: Acts 17. 2.
Not, says one, to solemnize the Sabbath after the Jewish manner (from the
observation whereof the Apostles, Dr. Young, p. 10, 11.
because of the Authority committed to them by Christ, were far enough)
especially when Paul himself did most severely reprove the Colossians and
Galations, because some among them stood for the Sabbath, and other Feasts of
the Jews; but because they then had a fit occasion of communing with the Jews
met together, that after the readings of the Law were over, they might preach
the Gospel with more fruit in such a concourse of People, which upon other days
they could not so easily obtain; and for no other end, as from the alleged
Testimony is evident.

Which things let the Reader seriously weigh: for at any time, or in what place
soever they could, they preached the Gospel to the Jews; therefore on the
Sabbaths, as well in their Synagogues as elsewhere: the Apostles were not
wanting in the Office of preaching; for this cause they tarried certain days
among the Macedonians, because no fit occasion for preaching the Gospel offered
-- which the Apostles every where greedily sought after: they preached Christ
on the Sabbath days out of the City, Act. 16. 13.
by a River side, to Women which resorted to public Prayers.

So Paul hastened to keep the Feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem, Act. 20. 16.
only that he might have many Jews (who lived dispersed in diverse places of the
World) there together, and so preach the Gospel to them. -- Chrysostom says,
Hom. 43. in Act.
What means Paul 's hastening to this Feast? it was not for the Feasts, but for
the Multitudes -- he made haste to preach the Word.

Now had any Text said that Paul must needs have to Jerusalem to keep the
Sabbath among the Jews, what Improvement would the Sabbatarians have made of
it? yet that no more would prove the Sabbath ought to be kept than the Feast of
Pentecost. See what Paul says, Romans 16. 8. But I will tarry at Ephesus will
Pentecost; for a great door and effectual is opened to me. This shows what his
reason was to keep that Feast, and also in preaching on their Sabbaths.

Object. But he calls it the Sabbath.

Answ. So he calls that Feast Pentecost, and Circumcision by its own Name; must
we therefore keep Pentecost, and be circumcised? It was only for
distinction-sake, the old Names of Jewish Rites being still kept up by the Jews.

Object. But the Gentiles also desired the same Word might be preached to them
the next Sabbath: Act. 13. 42.
sure if the Apostles had kept the first day, they would rather have desired
that Paul should preach to them the next first day.

Answ. Paul was but newly come into those parts, and there was no Gospel Church
there; nor can any think that those poor unbelieving Gentiles should have heard
of any other day observed than the Jewish Sabbath, for they lived among the
Jews; and if it is said, the whole City the next Sabbath came together: Ver. 44.
and no doubt but 'twas in the Synagogue of the Jews in which they met, some of
the Gentiles being Proselytes to the Jewish Religion. So that it is evident
this is nothing to their purpose; for here is no more ground from hence for us
to keep the Jewish Sabbath, than to meet in Jewish Synagogues.

Moreover, Dr. Young has one Passage worth observation: says he, Justin Martyr
had satisfied with little ado Trypho the Jew, that counseled him to observe
their Sabbath: for it had been enough for Justin Martyr to have answered the
Jew, that the Christian Church did observe the Sabbath; yet this he grants not,
but plainly denies that the Jewish Sabbath ought by the Christians to be
observed. The same, says he, do other Fathers against the Jews, etc.

There are one or two more pretended Reasons out of the New Testament, brought
to prove that we ought to observe the seventh Day: but no more at this time.

SERMON VII.
Containing ten Arguments against the observance of the Jewish Sabbath. The Law
of the Seventh-day Sabbath not written in the Hearts of Believers, or God's new
Covenant Children, which is in Answer to the sixth and last pretended Proof for
our Observation thereof. Twelve dangerous Consequences that necessarily follow
their Principle, who assert the precise Seventh-day Sabbath is a pure moral
Precept.

Gal. iv. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, etc.
BRethren, I have answered several pretended Proofs brought from the New
Testament for the observation of the old Jewish Sabbath. I shall mention one
morc, viz.

Object. 5. It is objected further, That it is certain that the Jews kept
Sabbaths at the time of Paul's writing his Epistles, and were zealous for all
the Law. Thus Mr. Soarsby.

Ans. 1. May be it is aptly enough put in Sabbaths, as comprehending other
Sabbaths as well as the Jews weekly Sabbath.

2. But were they not as zealous for Circumcision also? Nay, the Objection
allows they were zealous for the whole Law; and it is not denied but Paul was
forced to comply with their weakness for a time, till they were fully formed as
to the Cessation or Abrogation of ^ose legal Rites, nay of the whole Law as in
^e hand of Moses.

So that Paul's forbearance with them in their ^fancy and Weakness, is weakly
urged.

These being the chief Proofs I find brought (...) prove it our Duty to keep
the seventh Day out (...) the New Testament, I shall add diverse Arguments in
opposition to what they say on this ^^count.

1st. Several Arguments against the Observation of the old Jewish Sabbath.
Our Savior's Carriage and Behavior ^owards the old Sabbath, and his
Expressions about it, which I have mentioned, shows he was far from confirming
that either as a Moral, or Gospel Duty.

2dly. Paul's declaring against all Jewish Days without exception, as Shadows,
etc. may con^^nce all that he observed it not in compliance with the Law of
Moses, or as a Command given to him by Christ the only Lawgiver.

3dly. His putting the Estimation of the Jewish Sabbath Day among Meats and
Drinks, Romans 14. 5.
or as indifferent things, which a Christian may do or ^ot do, shows that
Sabbath was gone.

I do believe when Paul says, One man esteems one day above another, and
another esteems every day alike, that he intends not all days of ^he week
without exception, but every day ^ave the first day, or the Lord's Day; because
^e speaks of Jewish Rites, Days, and Scruples about Meats and Drinks among
them. For ^e gave Command about the solemn Duties and Observation of the first
Day of the week to all the Churches, as I shall prove.

1. Therefore let none once think that Paul was for the observance of no
special day above others, in the Worship of God, in the Gospel Dispensation.

2. Neither let any conclude from hence, th^^ he gave liberty to the Saints to
keep the Jewish Sabbath any further than they looked upon (...) as an
indifferent thing; nor any longer the till their Understanding was further
inlight^^^ and their Consciences better informed. F^^ how severe was he with
those (as in my Te^^ who lay any stress upon it, i.e. as a moral D^ty, or of
necessity to a holy Life?

4thly. This appears, because Christ, who received from his Father the whole
Will of God and was faithful as a Son in declaring all thing commanded him,
Heb. 2. 2.
has not commanded us ((...) given the least ground or reason for us to
believe we ought) to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath. Besides, he confirms afresh
all simple moral Precepts, etc. as I have showed Observe what he says; Joh.
15. 15.
For all things the (...) have heard of my Father I have made (...) unto you.
chapter 12. 49.
The Father that sent me, he gave (...) Commandment what I should say, and
what (...) should speak.

5thly. We read Acts 15. 1, etc. of fal^^ Brethren that went from Jerusalem,
and taugh^ the believing Gentiles, that unless they were circumcised and kept
the Law of Moses, they could not be saved; or that it was needful for them
(...) to do, ver. 15.

1. Pray observe the matter well: for no^ we may expect to hear, if ever,
whether (...) be the Duty of believing Gentiles or not (...) keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath, because th^^ was none of the least Precepts of the Law
(...) Moses; and this was one thing, no doubt which these false Brethren taught
them to observe.

2. All the great and chief Apostles meet together abont this matter, and
consulted what Answer to send; and they had the extraordinary presence of the
Holy Ghost with them, ^o dictated to them what to write.

3. And this was the Result, Act. 15. 29.
viz. For it seemed ^^d to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you greater
Burden than these necessary things, that ^abstain from Meats offered to Idols,
and from ^ood, and from things strangled, and from For^cation; from which if ye
keep your selves, ye ^ll do well. Fare ye well.

Note, these things were forbidden in the ^^w, and these things they commanded
them ^t to do; but not one word that they should ^^ep the Sabbath given in
Moses's Law: this is ^ne of those things they should observe. therefore it is
not the Counsel or Mind of the ^oly Ghost that Gentile Believers should keep at
Day.

6thly. Act. 20. 27.
Paul says positively, that he had not ^^nned to declare to the Saints all the
Counsel of ^d. Ver. 20.
And how he kept back nothing that was pro^able to them, but had showed them
all things, etc. ^ow I challenge any Man in the World to ^ew that Paul ever
made known, or showed ^em this thing, viz. that it was their Duty to ^^ep the
Seventh-day Sabbath: therefore I in^^r, this is none of the Counsel of God, nor
^ofitable to Believers in Gospel-days. From ^hence I argue thus, i.e.

Arg. 1. Paul declared all, or the whole Coun^^ of God: Paul did not declare
the Seventh-^^bbath; Ergo, that is none of the Counsel of ^od.

2. If he did declare the Seventh-day Sabbath, (...) make it known to the
Saints to be God's Coun^^, some one Man or another can show us the ^ace where
it is written: but no one Man can ^^ew us the place where it is written that he
declared or made known to the Saints that the seventh-day Sabbath was the
Counsel of God Ergo, it is none of the Counsel of God to (...) Saints or
Gospel-Believers.

7thly. The holy Spirit, says our Lord, (...) receive of mine, Joh. 16. 13, 14.
and show it unto you. Again (...) says, The Spirit of Truth shall guide you
(...) all Truth. But the Spirit of Truth neither guides Believers into the
observation of the seventh Day, etc. in the Word or New Testament; nor by his
inward Motions, Influence and Operations on their Hearts: therefore it (...)
none of their Duty to observe that Day.

8thly. If not one Gospel Church observed (...) Seventh-day Sabbath in meeting
together as (...) Church, to discharge the Duties of (...) Worship; then it is
not the Duty of Believer^ in Gospel-days to observe it. -- But not on^
Gospel Church, etc. observed the Seventh-day Sabbath, etc. Therefore it is not
Believers Duty in Gospel-days to observe it.

Let them show us where one Gospel Church did observe that day in meeting
together, as (...) Church, to discharge the Duties of Gospel Worship, and I
will give up the Cause.

So much in this respect there is in an Apostolical Precedent in my Judgment:
for what was the Practice of one Church as a Church was the Duty and Practice
of every Church.

9thly. Gentile Believers ought not to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath, because
the Churches in the Gospel time observed, in Religious Duties and Worship, the
first day of the week: and we are not required to keep two days in every week
in God's solemn Worship.

10thly. Because the Law of God written in the Hearts of all Believers, does
not teach them to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath. And this brings me to the
last general Argument.

Sixthly, No Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath written in the Hearts of God's New
Covenant Children.
If it be not the Duty of believing Gentiles to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath
from the Law written by the Spirit of the living God in the Hearts of all his
New Covenant Children, it is not their Duty to keep it, because by no other Law
I have proved it is their Duty; and now I shall prove that it is not their Duty
to keep it by virtue of this Law.

1. If it was their Duty by this Law to keep ^^t, the holy Spirit besure had
left it written in the New Testament: for whatsoever Law is written in our
Hearts, it is but the same in substance (in respect to all simple moral
Precepts) with what is written in the New Testament.

2. Consider that God expressly says in the new Covenant, Jer. 31. 33.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts. --
Says Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 3.
Written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of
Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the Heart.

This shows we are not to go to the Tables of Stone, to Mount Sinai, for the
Law of God, now the Antitype of that is come. God's Finger has wrote his Law in
better Tables; tho naturally our Hearts were like Stone, yet his Spirit can and
has written his Law there. What is God's Law but a Transcript, or a gracious
Impression of his holy Nature, or his Divine Image stamped on our Souls?

Now then read this blessed Book, ye New Covenant Saints; look within ye holy
and renewed ones, and see if you can find the knowledge of the seventh Day, or
that you have this Precept written in your Hearts and inward parts. Were you
ever by this Law led to know (or reproved for not observing) the Seventh-day
Sabbath? Let me close this with an Answer given to Tillam by Mr. Warren.

1. Tillam says, Warren on the Sabb. p. 18, 19.
It was written in Adam's Heart, and for this he quotes Romans 2.

2. That it was written afterward in Tables of Stone, for which he cites Gal.
3. 19.

3. That it is written in the fleshly Table of renewed Hearts.

To which Mr. Warren answers, speaking to the latter: The Experience of
almost all renewed Hearts in Heaven and Earth does contradict it; for to speak
in the Language of Eliphas, ^ob 5. 1.
Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints
will thou turn? either Scripture-Saints, or Church-Saints; ask St. Paul, St.
Cyprian, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and they will tell you that your
antiquated Sabbath was so far from being in their Hearts, that they have wrote
against it with their Pens. Turn over the Works of the eminent Fathers -- Add
to these the most judicious, pious and zealous Ministers and Martyrs of Christ,
who have lived, and died within the compass of these sixteen hundred years; and
most, if not all of them will tell you that they never owned your Saturday
Sabbath; they lived without it, died without it, and are, I doubt not, gone to
Heaven without it. Besides, how many faithful Witnesses of late years has the
Lord raised up to bear Testimony against it? of whom, I suppose, the greatest
part are yet alive, tho some are fallen asleep. In a word, how many precious,
and gracious, and pious Christians are yet upon the Earth, Men and Women
redeemed from the Earth, and crucified to the World (of whom the World is not
worthy) who look upon your Sabbath as a Cipher, can freely labor, and travel
upon it, buy and sell upon it, and this after accurate Inquiry about it? and to
this day their Consciences never reproach them, their Hearts never smote them
for it. What will you say? Are all these Hypocrites, unrenewed, unsanctified
ones? this were to condemn the Generation of God's Children, and canonize your
self, with your few misled Associates, for the only Saints in Christendom;
which I would hope you dare not do, tho I know Meaning Tillam.
you dare as much as another.

Well, the Adversary is brought to this Dilemma; either God has no People in
the World but such as are of his Persuasion, or his moral and immutable Laws
are not written in their Hearts; or the Saturday Sabbath is none of those Laws.
Thus this Author.

If the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath be written in the Hearts of Believers,
some one Man or another can produce some one Believer that was by the Law
written in his Heart convinced of it, without reading Moses's Law, or any Book
or Books compiled by Men about the Sabbath. But no Man can produce any such
Believer that will or can say this; therefore it is not written in the Hearts
of Believers.

Thus it appears that it is not the Duty of Gentile Believers to keep the
seventh Day from the Law of God written in the Hearts of God's new Covenant
Children, which was the sixth and last part of the general Argument first
proposed.

The last thing in speaking to the Seventh-day Sabbath I promised to do, The
dangerous Consequences of the Sabbatarian Principles.
was to show you, that as some hold and maintain it, it is a dangerous Error.

1. Is not that dangerous which caused Paul to fear he had bestowed on the
Persons he speaks of, Labor in vain? Was it not because they observed Jewish
Days, laying stress on those things?

2. Is not that a dangerous Error that leads Men to ratify or sign the Covenant
of Works, which binds them to keep the whole Law? This I have proved is the
natural tendency of this Practice; Owen on the Sabb. p. 149.
and the same thing Dr. Owen, you have heard, positively affirms also.

3. Is not that dangerous that magnifies the first Creation Work above
Redemption, It magnifies Creation-work above Redemption.
or the new Creation Work, when God began to create the new Heavens and new
Earth, which refers to the Gospel or new Creation? What says the Lord, the old
Heavens and old Earth shall be remembered no more; that is, in a day kept to
that end: for otherwise sure the great Works of the first Creation ought not to
be forgot; but the new Creation excelling the old, the new Day must be kept in
remembrance thereof, and not the old day.

4. Is not that a dangerous Error that tends, It eclipses the Glory of Christ.
as the necessary Consequence of it, to eclipse the Glory of Christ, as the
only Lord, Head and Lawgiver to his Church, and that gives part of this Honor
to Moses?

5. Is not that dangerous that tends to entangle, and bring into Bondage, and
under legal Terror, poor weak Christians, as some who have kept the Seventh-day
Sabbath have confessed, till God opened their Eyes, they fearing they broke the
Sabbath in some way or another? for indeed no Man can perfectly keep it, any
more than he can keep the whole Law, as has been hinted. I was always in a
trembling state (says one) so long as I kept it, etc. or to that purpose.

Brethren, it is not to be thought what Bondage it brought the zealous Jews
under, they not knowing when they had answered the strict observance of that
day; and if they brake it, they must die without Mercy, as the poor Man that
gathered Sticks on that day: they were not to speak their own words, etc. How
should they know when they did this? On Mat. 12. 2. p. 361.
Nay live, and sin not: They would not, Mr. Trap says, spit, nor ease
themselves on that day, which is hard to believe: tho some were superstitiously
zealous, it is true; yet others who were piously zealous, by means of the
strictness of the Precept, continually were in fear and bondage: And sad it is
for any to be entangled again thereby.

6. Is not that a dangerous thing, Jewish Sabbath genders to Bondage.
that by the necessary consequence of it leads men to observe other Legal Rites
and Ceremonies, as not to eat Swines-flesh, nor wear a Garment of Linen and
Woolen, nor mar the corner of their Beards? Nay, some of the chief of them
formerly were led to Circumcision, and to worse than that also. I saw a Book
published many years ago by two of them, in which they called themselves the
Ministers of the Circumcision.

That these things are the necessary Consequences of their Notion about their
Sabbath, appears, because they go to Moses for it as the Law was in his hand,
and believe many other things that were mere Judicial Laws to be in force now:
They are for Moses's Law, with the Statutes and Judgments, and have declared
that that Law is in force to stone to death such as break the Sabbath.

And no marvel: for if that Sabbath be in force, the Punishment is in force
also. Nay, they believe (I hear) that a rebellious Son ought to be put to death.

7. Is not that Error dangerous, It renders all that keep it not, guilty of
horrid Immorality.
and of an evil Nature, the necessary Consequence whereof renders all that keep
not that precise Seventh-day as the Sabbath (nor can be convinced it is their
Duty to observe it) to be guilty of Immorality, i. e. in breaking a moral
Precept in the very Letter of it, nay one of the Precepts of the first Table?
For it must be thus, if the morality of the fourth Commandment lies in the
observation of the precise Seventh-day Sabbath; and it must be as great an Evil
to violate it, as it is to have another God, or to bow down to a graven Image,
or to swear or profane the holy Name of God, or commit actual Adultery, Murder,
etc. and thus their Doctrine renders all true Christians to be guilty of a most
gross Immorality, who do not observe the precise Seventh-day.

Nay, the like Consequences attend their Notion, who through ignorance and an
overheated Zeal, have also asserted the same Morality to consist in the
observance of the first Day of the Week; as is evident by what some Ministers
in their Parish-Churches did formerly affirm: One in Oxfordshire said, That to
do any servile Work on the Lord's Day, is as great a Sin as to kill a Man.

Another in a Sermon in Norfolk, See Dr. White on the Sab.
said, To make a Feast or Wedding-dinner on the Lord's Day, is as great a Sin,
as for a Father to take a Knife and cut his own Child's Throat.

A Sabbatarian also, I am told, did lately say, (having a Child to put out an
Apprentice) he knew not any that kept the Sabbath whose Trade he liked; and to
place him with one that would cause him to work on that Day, was as bad as
Adultery or Theft, or to that effect.

Another lately told us, that we in not keeping the Sabbath, or fourth Command,
broke all the rest; or words to the same purpose.

8. And from hence also, which is the plain and necessary Consequence of their
Principle, either such must perish who live and die in a palpable violation of
this pretended simple moral Precept without any sorrow or repentance; or else
that Men may be saved, who live and die under the guilt of immoral Evil in the
grossest sense.

For tho it is granted that a true Christian may be guilty in some sense of an
Immoral Evil, and who is not? yet if a moral Precept be broke in the Letter of
it, or in the grossest sense, as he that commits actual Adultery or Murder; can
such be saved, living and dying in those Sins, without any true sight of the
Evil of them, or Repentance for them? nay, that do not only live in the literal
breach of this moral Precept (as they call it) but teach men so to do?

Object. But they do it ignorantly.

Answ. Ignorance of any Human Law, tho the breach of it be death, will not
excuse any Man, because the Law is published, or they may know it. So ignorance
cannot excuse a man that breaks any Precept of the Moral Law of God.

9. This Notion and Principle of theirs seems not only to admit of such
Consequences naturally to attend it; but they indeed express themselves very
directly on this occasion, even to shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven all that
keep not the Seventh-day Sabbath, or at least such who teach men to break it.

See what Mr. Soarsby says, New Testament Sab. p. 54, 55.
viz. The Decalogue in the New Testament -- is abundantly confirmed by many
places in the Gospel, which establish the Authority of the Law, and
Commandments of God to Christians, both Jews and Gentiles: Our Lord came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

Some men, says he, affirm, contrary to both, They who teach and do these
Commandments, shall be great in the Kingdom of Heaven; but such as break the
least, and teach men so to do, shall be least in it (that is, have no part in
it); for unless Christians keep them better than the Scribes, there is no
entering into Heaven, Mat. 5. 20. The Summary of the two Tables, are the great
Commandments on which hang all the Law and the Prophets. The doing of these, as
written and read in the Law, is the way to Eternal Life, Luke 10. 26, 27. Again
he says, It is not the Hearer of the Law that shall be justified amongst the
Romans as well as the Jews, etc.

Two things note here:

1. He takes it for granted, that the precise Seventh-day Sabbath is one part
of the Moral Law; and so his design is (as I conceive) to show that such as
violate this Sabbath, and teach men so to do, have no part in Heaven.

2. He says, The doing of these is the way to Eternal Life, mistaking the
purport of our Savior's words to the young Man, who spoke to him as one under
the Covenant of Works, to discover his Ignorance of the way to Heaven, which is
by Christ alone, not by doing those Commands as written and read in the Law;
it is not do, but believe, etc.

Is not this Man ignorant of the way to Eternal Life; did our Lord come to
ratify the Decalogue for us, to keep and fulfill in our own Persons, thereby to
be justified and saved? Here is not one word of the Righteousness of Christ.
No, no, but that Righteousness that must exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes, is our own inherent Righteousness only. True, we say a sincere
inherent Righteousness we must have for a meetness for Eternal Life; but that
is not our title to it, or the way to it, but the Righteousness and Merits of
Christ alone.

Does he not establish the Covenant of Works and Justification by the Law? What
Popish Doctrine is worse?

Also in a printed Paper given one Lord's Day at the Door Of our Meeting House.
Page 1, 2.
by some Sabbatarian, you have these words; Christ died to procure Grace to
enable men to fulfill this Law, Romans 8. 3. (not that it is fulfilled in us, that
is in our head, i. e. by Christ in our Nature for us) but in us, that is, by
us. O woeful stuff!

Besides, does Christ help us to fulfill the whole Law perfectly? If so, it is by
the Law thus fulfilled that we are justified; and then also it is not by the
Obedience of one Man that we are made Righteous. Romans 5.
Do not these men, Romans 10. 3.
like the Jews, go about to establish their own Righteousness? Moreover, their
Doctrine renders all that keep not, or violate their Sabbath, to be guilty of
the breach of the whole Law, which they affirm this is one Point of (i. e. a
simple moral Precept) and not the least Command neither I fear with these men.

Now, my Brethren, how are these young Men and others blinded, who out of
mistaken Zeal strive to bring in a Jewish Rite, or the observation of the old
Legal Sabbath; in promoting of which Error they disperse such pernicious Books
and Pamphlets as tend directly to establish the Covenant of Works, to the utter
destroying the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the free Grace of God in our
Justification by the Obedience of Christ alone, and to the palpable hazard and
perdition of their own and other Peoples Souls. These Persons seek to sacrifice
all that is truly valuable, to the blind observation of a Day that obliges them
to keep the whole Law.

10. That the natural Consequence of their Principle and Practice, P. 405, 406.
Their Principle tends to harden the Jews.
as Reverend Dr. Owen shows, tends to the great scandal of the Christian
Religion, and to the hardening of the Jews in their Infidelity, is apparent to
all: For the Introduction of any part of the old Mosaical System of Ordinances,
is a tacit denial of Christ's being come in the Flesh, at least of his being
King and Lawgiver to his Church. And to lay the Foundation of all religious
solemn Worship in the observation of a Day, as the Seventh-day precisely had no
relation to any natural or moral Precept, nor was instituted or approved by
Jesus Christ, cannot but be unpleasing to them who desire to have their
Consciences immediately influenced by his Authority in all their approaches
unto God. But Christ herein is supposed to have built the whole Fabric of his
Worship on the Foundation of Moses, and to have grafted all his Institutions
into a Stock that was not of his own planting.

11. Moreover, it is evident that the Consequence of their Opinion concerning
the necessary observation of the Seventh-day Sabbath, as the Doctor says, It
tends to Schism.
tends to the increasing and perpetuating of Schisms and Differences among
Christians. And those are the worst, says he, and most pernicious, which
occasion or draw after them any thing whereby men are hindered from joining
together in the same public solemn Worship, whereby they yield unto God that
reverence of his Glory -- But now upon a supposition of an adherence by any
unto the Seventh-day Sabbath, all Communion among Professors in solemn
Gospel Ordinances is rendered impossible: For if those of that Persuasion do
expect that others will be brought unto a relinquishment of an Evangelical
observance of the Lord's Day Sabbath, they will find themselves mistaken. The
evidence which they have of its appointment, and the experience they have had
of God's presence in its religious observation, will secure their practice in
this matter, etc. The Seventh-day Sabbath men on the other hand, supposing
themselves obliged to meet for solemn Worship on the Seventh-day (which the
other account unwarrantable for them to do on the pretense of any binding Law
to that purpose) and esteeming it unlawful (says he) to assemble religiously
with others on the First Day, on the plea of Evangelical Warranty, do
absolutely cut off themselves from all possibility of Communion in the
administration of Gospel Ordinances with any other Churches of Christ. And
whereas most other breaches as to Communion are in their nature capable of
healing, without a renunciation of those Principles in the minds of men, which
seem to give countenance to them; the distance is here made absolutely
irreparable, while the Opinion maintained is owned by any. I will press this,
says he, no further, but only by affirming that Persons truly fearing the
Lord, ought to be very careful and jealous over their own Understanding, before
they embrace an Opinion and Practice which will shut them from all visible
Communion with the generality of the Saints of God in the World.

To which let me add, How can they have Communion with us, if they consider and
observe the Consequences of their Principle? Are not we guilty of absolute
Immorality, i. e. the literal breach of one Precept of the first Table? Can
they, or we have Communion with such as bow down to a graven Image, or profane
the holy Name of God, or are guilty of Murder, etc.?

And thus you may see what the natural and genuine Consequences of this
Principle are, and that it not only tends to lay the Generation of the
Righteous under the guilt of the breach of a moral Precept, and renders them
guilty in their sense of the breach of the whole Law, but has other bad
Consequents attending it also.

And this may tend to convince all (that consider of what I say) that the
Morality of the fourth Commandment does not consist in that precise Seventh-day
Sabbath, and discovers how blind these Men are.

Brethren, tho I believe many who keep this Day, and affirm it is a moral
Precept, are very pious and good Christians, Some of them are for free Grace,
etc.
and do not affirm what I say, nor may be see it not to be so, or will not say
thus: What then? yet I will appeal to all thinking impartial Persons, whether I
do not infer the direct natural Consequence of their Principle.

Moreover, let me ask here this Question, how it can stand consistent with a
good Conscience for a Minister to forbear preaching in any Congregation some
part of Morality, or a moral Precept. I grant that Love, Wisdom, Charity,
Peace, etc. may prevent some Men from preaching some Duties of mere positive
right, for a short time at least, that are disputable, and not Essentials of
Salvation. But what are such things to a simple moral Precept, both materially
and formally one of the Ten Commandments, as they affirm their Sabbath is?

Suppose a Minister preaches to a Congregation that he knows are generally
guilty of worshipping a Graven Image, or of profane Swearing, or of Adultery,
or of killing their innocent Neighbors; would not he preach against these
horrid Evils, for fear he should offend the Congregation? or if he forbear so
to do, would he not be shamefully guilty of great Sin, and of their Blood also?
Happy is the Man that condemns not himself in the thing he allows.

I know what some have said about Polygamy: if they answer me, let them use
that Argument; I am prepared to reply.

But let none think I speak thus to expose any of them out of Prejudice; for I
can appeal to Almighty God I have none against any of their Persons: But it is
to expose their Principle and Practice, in love to their Souls, and to the
Souls of other Persons.

But before I conclude with this old Sabbath, I must add one dangerous
Consequence more of their Principle.

12. Is not that a dangerous Error that reflects, nay casts Contempt upon the
Holy Ghost, in respect of his Work and Office, which is to convince Believers
of all Sin, especially of all immoral Evils, under his most clear and glorious
Ministration, since our Savior's Ascension into Heaven?

Now I ask our Opponents, Whether the holy Spirit does convince all Believers
that they ought to keep the old Seventh-day Sabbath, or reprove them for
Immorality in the non-observance thereof?

Sirs, as these things aggravate their Evil in what they affirm, so it clearly
tends to overthrow the pretended Morality of that precise Seventh-day Sabbath:
for the holy Spirit never convinces Believers of any such Duty, nor reproves
them for working on that day, or for bearing of Burdens on it, any more than on
any other day in the week, to their dying day. But it lets them silently fall
asleep, without the least sense of any such pretended immoral Evil.

Besides, the generality of Believers after their utmost inquiry, search, and
seeking to God in all sincerity, cannot be convinced it is their Duty to keep
this Day.

Would the Holy Ghost thus leave the Generation of the Godly under Sin, and
such Ignorance (think you) were this a moral Duty? And as to such as do observe
it, I am satisfied the Spirit of God never taught them so to do. But they in
this are left to themselves, and have a Zeal, but not according to knowledge,
which God in time I hope by his Spirit will convince them of.

Quest. If it be thus, what think you of them that observe this Sabbath?

Answ. As to such gracious Christians who observe it out of Conscience, and
because it is put into the fourth Commandment, do think it may be their Duty so
to do, but attempt not to affirm it is a moral Duty; nor dare they neglect to
observe the first Day, provided they are in a Capacity (being not Servants) to
observe both Days, and make no noise nor disturbance about it, but keep it to
themselves: I think it may be (as to them) a harmless Error.

And as to others, I must leave them to the Lord, and judge them not, tho I judge
and must condemn their Principle. And let them take heed how they judge us in
respect of the non-observation of a Jewish Rite, etc. or of Jewish Sabbath Days.

PART II.
The Gospel-Sabbath; or, The Lord's Day of Divine Institution. Containing four
Sermons lately preached on a special Occasion.
SERMON I.
Showing that our Lord Christ did certainly give Directions to his Disciples to
observe the first Day of the week under the Gospel. That Pentecost was the
first Day of the week; and that then the first Day was confirmed to be the day
of Gospel Worship.

Mat. xxviii. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the World.
OUR blessed Lord as Mediator, having received all Power in Heaven and Earth,
as King, Head, Governor, only Sovereign and Lawgiver to his Church, gave forth
here his great Commission to his Disciple^. In which, 1. (As our Annotators
note) He asserts his own Power. 2. He delegates a Power to his Disciples. 3. He
subjoins a Promise to them.

It Is a Power to congregate Churches, and to proclaim free Justification and
remission of Sins, through his perfect Obedience in his holy Life, and through the
Death of his Cross; as also Power to give forth Laws and Ordinances to his
People, and to give eternal Life to whomsoever he pleases.

This Power was essentially and inherently in him as God over all blessed for
evermore; but given to him as Mediator, God-man, our Sovereign Lord and
Redeemer; given him when he first came into the World, but more especially
given and manifested, and confirmed to him when he rose from the Dead. In which
words we have,

1. A Command expressly given, Teaching them, etc.

2. The universality of this Command, all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.

3. A gracious Promise annexed by way of Encouragement; and lo, I am with you
always, etc.

Doct. That many things Christ commanded his Disciples to teach others, The
Doctrine raised.
are included or comprehended in this his great Commission, which are not
expressed.

This is evident; so that if we would know what these things are which are not
expressed, we must have recourse, 1. Either to what things they doctrinally
preached, or by their Example led the Gospel Churches into the practice of.
But, 2. Let it be considered, that we are obliged to believe that whatsoever
the holy Apostles did teach, Whatsoever the Apostles preached, Christ gave them
Command so to do.
or lead the Churches into the Practice of by their Example, were such things
as Christ commanded them; and this Paul does positively declare: For I will not
dare to speak of any of those things, to make the Gentiles obedient by word or
deed, which Christ has not wrought in me, See 1 Cor. 14. 37.
or commanded me.

And indeed should it be thought otherwise, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
it would render the Apostles unfaithful, and guilty of bringing Innovations
into the Churches; either in respect of any one precise day of Worship, or any
matter or part of Worship to be performed. I speak not now of the mode of
Worship, but any essential part thereof.

Now that Paul, who was the Minister and great Apostle of the Gentiles, did
teach the Churches to observe the first day of the week, by assembling together
to discharge the Duties of Religious Worship, is evident.

Nor can it be once supposed, since he endeavored to take the Churches off
from the observance of the Jewish Sabbath (as I have proved) that he should not
direct them, or discover to them what day of the week Christ had commanded his
People to observe in the time of the Gospel: they knowing especially that one
day in seven the Lord declared in the fourth Commandment he would have
perpetually sequestered to his Service, as also the reasonableness or
equitableness thereof.

Therefore, my Brethren, as I have endeavored to answer all the pretended
Arguments brought to prove that we ought to observe the old Jewish Sabbath, the
simple Morality of the fourth Commandment, they say, consisting in the
observation of that precise day: So I shall now, God assisting, attempt to
prove that we are obliged to observe the first day of the week as a day of
Rest, and solemn Worship to God; while I esteem such as are for no special or
particular day to be observed by Divine Authority both in private Families and
in Church Assemblies, to be strangely left of God, and to be no friends to our
sacred Religion, but such as open a door to great Licentiousness and
Profaneness.

If therefore any should say, that there is no one precise day in seven of
Divine Authority under the Gospel Dispensation, but that the Church may appoint
what day she pleases: I reply.

1. What force or authority can such a human Precept have upon any Man's
Conscience, To appoint a weekly day of Worship is not in the power of the
Church, etc.
i. e. the observance of one day in every week free from all worldly Business,
if God requires it not?

2. Then also it would follow, that God does admit vile Man to share, or
partake of equal Honor with himself; i. e. that tho he will appoint the
Ordinances of his own Worship, and have all that Glory to himself, yet Man
shall have the honor to appoint the precise, constant time of his Worship,
which is next in point of honor to the other.

3. And by granting Men that Honor and Dignity, it may let in by parity of
reason, a Power to alter, and change, if not add new Laws and Ordinances of
Worship also.

4. Besides, it will also follow, that the Church on the first day of the week
does not meet together by Divine Appointment, if all days are alike, but only
by human Authority.

5. Moreover, perhaps one part of the Church may be for one day in four; and
another less zealous may be for one day in a fortnight; nay, one day in a month
some may say is sufficient. So that it would put all things into confusion; for
how can a human Law, or the bare Authority of a Church, without the Divine
Appointment of Christ Jesus himself, awe the Conscience? Moreover, perhaps some
would be for no day at all; and what then would become of the public and
private Worship of God?

That Notion therefore, that every day is alike, is most hateful to God no
doubt: for as soon as he established a visible Church, giving a stinted, stated
Worship, Laws and Ordinances, he appointed himself the precise time of Worship
under the Law; and the equitableness, as well as the Divine Authority of one
day in seven, is, as I have proved, perpetually obligatory upon all his People.
For the further clearing of this, pray consider that,

1. Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, and of that Day God would have observed
under the Gospel: and tho he has dispensed with the observance of the seventh
Day, or abolished that, yet as Lord and Lawgiver he has instituted a weekly
day of Rest for his People, and for his solemn Worship in Gospel Times. And
none have this Power but himself alone: For shall the Servant appoint what
precise time his Master's business shall be done, or set the times when his
Master's Family shall have their distinct Meals, or be fed? No certainly.

Therefore, Christian Sabbath, p. 127.
as Reverend Dr. Twiss observes, if any pretend that Christ has delegated this
Power of his to his Church, it stands upon them to make it good.

What times God himself took to work in, or to rest after Creation, the same
proportion of time (as Dr. Lake hints) did he assign to Men, and made his
Pattern a perpetual Law. So then of our time God reserves a seventh part for
his Service.

The reserving (says he) a seventh part I hold to be God's Ordinance, who is
not variable in his choice, but as everlasting as the World.

And so should the hallowing of the Seventh-day from the Creation have been,
had it not been for Sin; for what could have altered it but a new Creation?

2. But Man having sinned, and so abolished the first Creation de jure, tho not
de facto, God was pleased to make by Christ an instauration [or renewal] of the
World (he means, as I conceive, God so abolished the old Creation, that no
precise Day remains to be observed in the remembrance of it) and by Christ in
redemption has made a new Heaven and a new Earth; and old things being passed
away; all things are become new: Yea, every man in Christ is a new Creature (or
of the new Creation.) And as God when he ended his Work of the first Creation,
made a Day of Rest, and sanctified it: So Christ when he ended the Work of
Redemption, made a Day of Rest, and sanctified it; not altering the proportion
of Time which is perpetual, but taking the first of seven for his portion,
because it suits with his new Creation, and with his entering into it through him;
that old being a Legal Rite, and suting with the Covenant of Works, which is
abolished with the Covenant it self; but the new, the first of seven, remains
for ever.

3. For the further clearing of this matter, consider, that under the first
Creation God required one Day in seven for himself: The equity of Precepts may
abide.
But the precise Seventh-day being a Judicial Law, is gone; yet the equity or
equitableness of one Day in seven as due to God, to be improved to his Glory
for ever, remains.

4. God then gave poor Servants and Cattle, Servants and Cattle still have one
day in 7. to rest in.
one Day of Rest in seven; the last Day of seven is gone, but the equity or
equitableness of one Day in seven for a day of Rest for Servants and Cattle,
remains for ever.

5. God required his People to give his Ministers under the Law the Tenth of
all their Increase: the Law of Tithes is gone, but the equity or equitableness
that his Ministers under the Gospel should have as sufficient a maintenance,
remains for ever.

6. Under the Law God required his People to meet together in his material
Temple; the Temple is gone, but the equity or equitableness of assembling
together in some place or another for Public Worship, remains for ever.

7. Under the Law God's People in their Prayers offered Incense: Incense was
typical, and is gone; but the equitableness of our Duty in making our Prayers
to God, and confessing our Sins, remains for ever.

8. They under the Law had Instruments of Music when they sang God's Praises:
Instruments of Music were typical, and only served the Jewish Worship; but the
equitableness of the Duty to sing God's Praises with Grace in our Hearts,
remains for ever.

9. Also note, that the second Commandment (as given by Moses) injoined the
Jewish Nation to observe the whole Ceremonial Law, and all other Precepts of
the Mosaical Economy. But as the Moral Law is in the hands of Christ, the
second Command does not enjoin on us the observance of those Precepts, because
abolished; but it injoyns on us the observance of all Ordinances whatsoever
Christ has commanded us. Also that Clause in the second Commandment, viz.
Visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers on the Children to the third and fourth
Generation; doubtless belonged to the Covenant of Works, and was a temporal
Punishment. Does God do thus under the New Covenant? Moreover, the Promise
annexed to the fifth Commandment, shows that the Law, as given by Moses, only
appertained to the People of Israel; as also the Preface to them all, Exodus 20.
2. does the like.

10. So the fourth Commandment (as in the hand of Moses) enjoined the People of
Israel the observance of the Seventh-day: But as the Law is in the hand of
Christ, it does not enjoin us to observe that day, but being a Shadow is
abolished. But it does enjoin us to observe the first day of the Week, which
Christ (as the Lord of the Sabbath) has instituted under the Gospel in its
room, tho not to be observed with that legal strictness and penalty as the old
Sabbath, which was a sign of the Covenant of Works, and gendred to bondage.

Object. But where is there a Divine appointment of the first Day of the Week;
and by whom was it required?

Answ. This is the cry of our Adversaries: and I answer, that I doubt not but
our Lord and Savior at this time did institute it, and also gave command to
his Disciples to observe it. I know some others have cried, Where is laying on
of hands either upon Elders, or baptized Believers as such commanded? and so of
diverse other things: as if every Precept of the Gospel must be laid down in
express words of command because some of them are.

1. But to proceed; Let it be well considered, that as I have proved from the
fourth Command, that a Time, a sufficient Time for Rest, and in the solemn
Worship of God, is a simple Moral Duty:

2. And that God also has there, by an express positive Law, laid claim to one
Day in seven, as perpetually obligatory on his People. And as I have also
proved, that the last Day of seven was only given to the Jews, or People of
Israel; and that it is utterly abolished, it being a sign of the Covenant of
Works:

3. So I shall now prove that our Lord has appointed the first day of the Week
for us to observe under the Gospel. For,

First, Consider, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as Mediator, is the only Head,
Sovereign Lord, and Lawgiver to his Church; and therefore it may seem strange,
that the special Day or Time of Gospel Worship in his own Kingdom-state, should
not be given forth by himself. But that Moses should have that Honor ascribed
to him, and that we should commemorate the glorious Work of the New Creation,
or Redemption on the old Day, which was partly appointed for remembrance of the
Work of the first Creation, Isa. 65. 17.
is very strange: for the Prophet tells us, that upon the creating of the new
Heaven and the new Earth, the former shall be no more remembered; that is, (as I
conceive) not in such a way of remembrance, i. e. by the observation of that
former Day appointed in part on that very account. For certainly God's glorious
Works of the first Creation shall otherwise be never forgot, and it is evident
the Text refers to the Gospel day. Jerusalem Paul applys to the New Testament
Church.

Secondly, Now in my Text our blessed Lord gives forth his Commission: Go and
teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. and then these words are added,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. What many
of those Commands were, we know not. It is also said, Acts 1. 2, 3. that he was
with his Disciples forty days and forty nights, having given Commandment to his
Apostles whom he had chosen. Yet neither in this place are those Commandments
expressed, only he bid them not to depart from Jerusalem till they received the
promised Spirit, and were endowed with Power from on high. Now no doubt but
during these 40 days, he fully settled all things appertaining to his Spiritual
Kingdom, and instructed them in all matters they should both do and teach. And
can any rationally judge, that he did not then command them which day in seven
he would have observed as a Day of Rest and solemn Worship?

Thirdly, In the pursuit of what I aim at, consider, that from the day of his
ascension into Heaven, till the day of Pentecost, there were but ten days,
during which we do not read they had any special general Assembly for Religious
Worship, tho on the two first days some were together, and on both those days
he appeared to them. And remarkable it is, that there were two Jewish
Sabbath Days between his Ascension and the day of their first general solemn
meeting. Now had not the old Sabbath been gone, certainly they had assembled on
both those days: but no doubt our Lord had told them on what day they should
first meet together, in expectation of the Gift and Promise of the Father;
which day he purposed to ratify as the only Day of Gospel Worship, by a
mavelous effusion of the Spirit. To me nothing deserves more to be observed
than this, viz. on what day of the Week the first general Gospel-Assembly was
held, after our Lord's Resurrection, and just upon (or soon after) his
Ascension: for no doubt that was the day which Christ did settle in his
Gospel Church. And that they were bid to be altogether on this day, and to wait
till it was come, seems plainly employed in the very words of the Text, Acts 2.
1. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come; fully come, does not that
denote they waited for it?

Quest. Well, and what then?

Answ. Why, they were all with one accord in one place. Certainly this Assembly
of the Church on this day was by divine appointment; and our Lord might order
their first assembling together then (I mean on this first day of the Week)
because Pentecost fell out then, and because he knew that great multitudes
would be together then to celebrate that Feast.

And therefore, as S. Chrysostom notes, God sent down the Holy Ghost at that
time of Pentecost, because those men that did consent to our Savior's death,
might publicly receive rebuke for that bloody Act; and so bear record to the
power of our Savior's Gospel before the World.

This day, I say, was the first day of the Week; and then the mighty effusion
of the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, etc. and no less than three thousand
Souls were converted on this Day. These were two of the most wonderful things
that ever were done by our Lord. And thus our Lord first ratified and confirmed
the precise Day, which no doubt he had command his Disciples to meet upon, as
the Day of Gospel Worship, before he in any mavelous manner confirmed any
Ordinance pertaining to Gospel Worship after his Resurrection. The Jewish
Sabbath, I must tell you, never was after so glorious a manner confirmed. And
remarkable it is, that God first gave the Sabbath to the Jews, Exodus 16. before
he gave any written Laws of Worship; they had their Sabbath a month before they
came to Mount Sinai, where the Law was given. So Christ first confirmed the
Gospel-day of Worship, before he confirmed any Gospel-Ordinance of Worship
after his Resurrection.

Obj. But we deny that Pentecost was the first day of the Week, because the
Jewish Rabbis suppose that by Sabbath, Lev. 23. 11. is not meant the weekly
Sabbath, but the 1st day of unleavened Bread, wherein they are followed by some
Christians also.

Answ. I shall prove that Pentecost was the first day of the Week;

1. By the Word of God.

2. By Universal Tradition.

3. By the Testimony of most approved Writers: and then what will become of
your fabulous Rabbinical traditional Jews, or of such Christians who too fondly
admire their Writings which contradict the Holy Scripture?

Now, The day of Pentecost the first day of the Week.
I say, the day of Pentecost was not, as Tillam and others pretend, the
seventh-day of the Week, or the Jewish Sabbath, but the first day, or the
Lord's Day. But let me premise,

1. That Pentecost is the same which is called the Feast of Harvest, Exodus 23.
16. and the Feast of Weeks, Deuteronomy. 16. 10. this all agree in.

2. That it is called by a Greek name Pentecost (or the fiftieth day) because
always to be observed on the fiftieth day from the offering of the wave sheaf,
as we read Lev. 23. 15, 16.

3. Now that this day of Pentecost was not upon the Jewish Sabbath, but on the
day after it, is expressly asserted in the last mentioned Text, Lev. 23. 11. And
he shall wave the Sheaf before the Lord to be accepted for you; ^n the morrow
after the Sabbath the Priest shall wave it. And in ver. 15, 16. they were
commanded to count from thence seven Sabbaths, and on the morrow after the
seventh Sabbath to keep the fiftieth day or Pentecost. The Wave-offering was
the morrow after the weekly Sabbath.
Observe, the Sheaf was to be waved the day after the Sabbath; this is spoken
in contradistinction to the Feasts spoken of in the 2d Verse, which are
elsewhere called Sabbaths: but here is an Emphasis laid on the word [the
Sabbath] i. e. the Sabbath spoken of ver. 3. And that it is not meant of any of
those forementioned Feasts, appears in that there are not any particular
Feasts mentioned, but there is a Command to observe them, and the word is in
the plural number there. Therefore no particular Feasts, as the first day of
unleavened Bread, but the Seventh-day Sabbath is directly here meant. For
wherever there is mention of the Sabbath without a restriction to any other
Feasts, it is to be understood of the Seventh-day Sabbath, as Exodus 16. 15. To
morrow is the Rest of the holy Sabbath: the Emphasis limits it to the
seventh-day Sabbath, and that because there is ^o other Feast particularly
spoken of.

Secondly, Tradition has handed it down to us that the day of Pentecost was the
first day of the week; and it is the day called Whit-sunday. Now if Tradition
has failed here, it fails also as to their seventh day: for how do we know this
is the first day, or yesterday was the seventh, but by Tradition?

Thirdly, Here I might mention many learned Writers; yea all generally do
affirm that Pentecost was the first day of the week.

Thus Dr. Heylin, Hist. of the Sab. par. 2. p. 13.
who was no friend to the Lord's Day or Christian Sabbath, says that Pentecost
was the first day of the week.

Mr. Durham says the same. On the ten Command. p. 263.


Mr. Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer say, that Pentecost was the first day of the week,
and answer the Arguments brought against it. Sab. Rediv. p. 491.


Dr. Wallis says, Christ. Sab. p. 37, 38.
Pentecost was the first day of the week, and proves it from Levit. 23. 15. The
morrow after the Sabbath the Priest was to wave the Sheaf-Offering. And then he
proceeds, ver. 15, 16. To the Feast of Pentecost or Feast of Weeks, ye shall
count unto you from the morrow of the Sabbath from the day you brought the
Sheaf of the Wave-offering; seven Sabbaths shall be complete, even unto the
morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye number fifty days* inclusively taken,
as the manner of the Scripture reckoning is, and must needs be so here. It was
called the Feast of Pentecost, or the Feast of Weeks, as Deuteronomy. 16. 9, 10. which
Feast was the morrow after the Sabbath, i. e. on the first day of the week.

Dr. Owen says, Owen on the Sabb. p. 289.
Pentecost was the first day of the week. When the Lord Christ intended
conspicuously to build his Church upon his Work and Rest, by sending the Holy
Ghost with his miraculous Gifts upon the Apostles, he did it on this day, which
was then among the Jews the Feast of Pentecost, or of Week* Then were the
Disciples gathered together with one accord in observance of the day signalized
to them by his Resurrection, Acts 2. 1. And by this does their Obedience
receive a blessed Confirmation, as well as their Persons a glorious Endowment
with Abilities for the Work they were immediately to apply themselves to. And
hereon did they set out to the whole work of building the Church on that
Foundation, and promoting the Worship of it, which on that day was especially
to be celebrated. Thus Dr. Owen.

Mr. Rich. Baxter likewise proves that Pentecost was the first day of the week,
Baxt. on the Sabb. p. 168.
when the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles: and, says he, it is not a trifle
that the first Sermon to the People was preached by Peter on that day, and
three thousand converted by it, and baptized.

Dr. Usher also fully clears that Pentecost was the first day of the week
always, as you shall near by and by, who has finally resolved this Doubt.

4 I have another Medium by which to prove it was on the first day of the week
that ^he Sheaf-Offering was to be waved before the Lord; which is this: No
doubt but God did hereby signify that our Lord Christ should on that day rise
from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.
who is said to be ^he first fruits of them that slept. The Wave-Offering was,
I say, a shadow of Christ's Re^urrection. The Wave-Offering was a Sheaf of the
first ripe Fruits of Harvest, and was to be offered the morrow after the
Sabbath. So Christ ^s the first fruits of that great Harvest of the Saints
blessed Resurrection; and he rose again ^n the morrow after the Sabbath, and so
answered the Type.

Here we have the Gospel Sabbath, or Gospel-day of Worship, confirmed by our
Lord Jesus Christ.

As for those who assign the Institution of his day to the Apostles, It is not,
as Reverend Owen observes, Owen, p. 293.
to be imagined that they knowing ^he day observed under the Law of Moses was
^emoved, would fix on another day without immediate direction from the Lord
Christ. For indeed they delivered, says he, nothing to be constantly observed
in the Worship of God, but what they had his Authority for, 1 Cor. 11. 23.

But to return back, because the Sabbat^^i^^s deny that Pentecost was the first
day of the week, I shall here endeavor further to confute them and finally to
resolve this Doubt, recite some Pages out of a Reverend Author, Mr. Warren.
the substance o^ which I perceive he took out of a printed Letter wrote by the
famous Usher to Dr. Twiss, who has, I think, put an end to this Controversy.

That Pentecost is the first day of the week, is generally taken by Christian
Writers, Proofs that Pentecost was the first day of the week.
and so it may be evidently proved by the Scripture. Let plain Scripture
determine the matter: I look into the Statute Laws of Moses concerning (...)
Feast of Pentecost.

Exodus 34. 21, 22. Six days shall thou (...), but the seventh thou shall rest,
both in earing-time and in Harvest.

And thou shall observe the Feast of Weeks, of the first fruits of
Wheat-Harvest.

Lev. 23. 10, 11, 12, 15. When ye are come (...) the Land which I give unto
you, and ye shall reap the Harvest thereof, then ye shall bring (...) Sheaf of
the first fruits of your Harvest to (...) Priest; and he shall wave it,
together with (...) offering of a Lamb without blemish: on the (...) row after
the Sabbath he shall wave it.

And ye shall count unto you from the morr^^ after the Sabbath, from the day
that ye bring^^^ the Sheaf; seven Sabbaths shall be compl^^ even to the morrow
after the seventh Sabbath, ye shall number fifty days.

So Numb. 28. 26. Deuteronomy. 16. 7. Seven weeks shall thou number unto thee; begin
to number th^^ seven weeks from such time as thou begin^^ (...) put the Sickle
to the Corn.

From the Harmony of which four Te^^^ (...) appears, that this Feast had three
(...) Names, which were all made good at that solemn Pentecost, Acts 2.

1. It was called the Feast of Weeks or of sevens, because from the waving of
the Sheaf they reckoned as many weeks to this Feast as there be days in seven
weeks; which evidently shadowed out some weekly Festiyal under the Gospel, the
day whereof was noted by that Pentecost, Acts 2. 1, 2.

2. It was called the Feast of First Fruits, and of Harvest; because as they
began their Harvest upon the first of the fifty days when they offered the
Sheaf of First Fruits, so they ended it upon the fiftieth day, which was
properly the Feast Day: Upon which they offered the Wave-loaves. And these
fifty days or seven weeks were the appointed weeks of their Harvest; and by the
offering of the Sheaf at the beginning of their Harvest there, their
after-Fruits were sanctified. And the offering of the ^oaves on the fiftieth
day was not only an Eu^haristical Oblation, but also a token of the Harvest
being finished.

3. It is called the Feast of Pentecost, Deuteronomy. 16. 9.
because it was ever kept the fiftieth day; the fiftieth, ^ow reckoned? from
the morrow after the ^abbath (that is, the first day of the week) ^ut what mark
had they to know their morrow (...)? Moses tells them, when you shall reap the
Harvest of your Land; or when you begin to ^eap it, for so it is expounded in
Deuteronomy. 16. 9. Begin to number the seven Weeks from such a ^ime as thou beginnest
to put the Sickle to the ^orn. So, that when they began their Harvest, they
must begin their account of fifty ^ays.

And the first of the fifty was the morrow of the Sabbath, or the day following
the Sabbath, namely the first day of the week: Dr. Usher in his Letter to Dr.
Twiss, p. 91, 92.
and as they began, so they must end their account on the same day; as the
first, so the fiftieth day, or day of Pentecost, must be on the morrow of the
last Sabbath, Levit. 23. 15, 16.

And this is enjoined by the express Command of God, to be observed as a
Statute for ever throughout their Generations.

This is the plain Scripture-account; and who can but observe the Wisdom of God
in ordering the matter thus? viz.

That this Feast of Weeks should never fall upon the seventh-day, but always
upon the first day of the week, the morrow after the Sabbath, or the day
immediately following it, if at least his Statute Law had always been observed.

And what else could this presignify, as Dr. Usher speaks, but that under the
state of the Gospel the Solemnity of the weekly Service should be celebrated
upon that day?

Now I hope that famous Pentecost, Act. 2. 1. will be no Parable, tho we state
it (according to the Divine Oracle) upon the first day of the week, the morrow
after the Jews Sabbath. We need no Almanac to help us here, the Bible is
sufficient. Nor, say I, do we need the Traditions of the blind doting Rabbis.

But (to proceed) because the Sabbataria^ stand so much upon supposed Mysteries
in the Feast of Pentecost, See Dr. Usher's printed Letter.
according to their Traditional Account, I shall acquaint them with the real
Mysteries of Christ accomplished exactly according to this Scriptural Account,
where they may see the Type and the Truth admirably concurring: For as at the
time of the Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, and lay in his Grave the whole
Jewish Sabbath following: So on the morrow after the Sabbath (when the Sheaf of
the first Fruits was offered to God) Jesus Christ rose from the dead, 1 Cor.
15. 20.
and became the First Fruits of them that slept; and many of the Saints that
slept rose likewise after him. Mat. 37. 52, 53.


From hence was the Account taken of the seven Sabbaths, or fifty Days; and
upon the morrow after the seventh Sabbath (which was our Lord's Day) was that
famous Feast of Weeks, that day of Pentecost, Acts 2. 1.

Upon which day the Apostles having themselves received the first Fruits of the
Spirit, begat three thousand Souls with the Word of Truth, and presented them
as the first Fruits of the Christian Church to God, and to the Lamb. Here was
the Feast of Loaves in the Antitype, that feasted some thousands of Souls.

And from that time forward do the Waldenses note, that the Lord's Day was
observed in the Christian Church in the place of the Jewish Sabbath. Thus Dr.
Usher, that Library of Learning.

Object. If it be objected, That in this Discourse he states Christ suffering
at the Feast of the Passover, and so falls in with the vulgar Opinion, which
takes the morrow after the Sabbath, Levit. 23. for the morrow after the
Passover Sabbath.

I answer, That cannot be: for he had declared before that the Sabbath there
intended is the weekly Sabbath; and the morrow after it is the first day of the
Week: And he cites Isychius and Ruportius in interpreting it so before him; to
whom I shall be bold, says Mr. Warren. Nazianze^ Orat. 44.
he, to add Nazianzen who was before them all, who speaking of the Feast of
Pentecost, says, This Nation (meaning the Jewish Nation) uses to consecrate to
God, not only the first of their Fruits, and first born, but the first Fruits
of their Days and Years also. Thus the illustrious number of Seven has carried
the honor of Pentecost: for Seven being composed upon it self, makes fifty
wanting but one day, which we have taken from this future Age, being both the
eighth and the first Day.

His Argument is clearly this, that the Jewish Pentecost was fain to be
beholden to the Christians eighth day, or first day of the Week, to make up the
complete number of fifty days.

And the like he says a little before concerning their Jubilee every fiftieth
year: for seven times seven makes but forty nine; to perfect the number, they
borrowed the first day of the Week, and so consecrated to God the first of
their Days as well as of their Land.

So that this computation of the fifty days to Pentecost, from the morrow of
the Sabbath, wants no Authority to back it, either divine or humane.

But the Word of God is our best Warrant; and we may be satisfied that Dr.
Twiss was no Child at Argument, nor one that would be persuaded on slight
grounds; but upon Bishop, Usher's discovery of this Truth by the forementioned
Scripture-evidence, he professed he received great satisfaction, and
acknowledges that the mystery of the Feast of first Fruits was opened to the
singular advantage and honor of the Lord's Day.

Object. The only Objection against this Interpretation, is the Judgment of Mr.
Ainsworth, and our English Annotators, who take the Sabbath, Levit. 23. for the
Feast of the Passover Sabbath.

Answ. 1. Herein they are led by the common Opinion of the Hebrew Doctors, who
indeed are excellent Guides when they keep the beaten Road of Scripture; but in
many things made void the Commandments of God by their Traditions. Let this
Mistake lie at their door; for certainly a mistake it is, and that the morrow
after the Sabbath could not be the Passover, is clear, because,

2. It must be such a Morrow after the Sabbath as never falls upon the weekly
Sabbath: the reason is plain, because it is the beginning of Harvest, when they
put in their Sickle to the Corn, or their Harvest, Levit. 23. 10. Which the are
expressly forbidden to do upon their weekly Sabbath, Exodus 34. 21, 22. Six days
thou shall labor, but on the seventh thou shall rest, both in earing Time and
Harvest. And see how this is coupled with the Feast of first Fruits in the very
same place, Thou shall observe the Feast of Weeks, etc.

3. Observe it, if the morrow after the Sabbath, Levit. 23. had been the Morrow
after the Passover, this would often have fallen on the weekly Sabbath: for the
Passover being fixed upon the 15th of Nisan, whenever this 15th of Nisan fell
upon the Friday, the morrow after it must be Saturday, and so they must begin
to reap their Harvest on the weekly Sabbath against the express Command of God.

The Hebrew Doctors foresaw this Inconvenience, and had no other way to salve
it, but by affirming that this reaping did drive away the Sabbath, and that it
was lawful on the Sabbath Day. A most impious Opinion! for it crosses the very
Letter of God's Law, in ^aring-time and harvest thou shall rest.

4. The morrow after the Sabbath, at the beginning of their Account, must be
such a Morrow as concludes it, Levit. 23. 15, 16. therefore it could not be the
morrow after the Passover-Sabbath, or any Festival; for there was no such
Sabbath at the end of any Account whatsoever.

5. The Passover-Sabbath was fixed to a certain day of the Month, namely, the
15th of the first Month; Numb. 28. 17.
and thus all their other Festivals had their fixed days.

But this Feast of Pentecost is no where affixed in all the Books of Moses to
any certain day of the Month: Nor indeed could it be, unless God should make a
Ceremonial Law to cross the Law of Nature; or rather limit the course of Divine
Providence, to ripen their Corn just against such a day of the Month: which, as
Dr. Usher observes, is a very great presumption that the Feast of Pentecost was
a moveable Feast, but immovable as to the day of the Week; so varying, that it
might always fall upon the day immediately following the ordinary Sabbath.

6. The Antitype is the best Key to unlock the Type: And this is clear in the
New Testament; for that Christ was our first Fruits in reference to his
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 20.
St. Paul assures us; and that he rose from the dead on the morrow after the
weekly Sabbath, all the four Evangelists do inform us. And Tho. Tillam has
granted, that these things must be punctually fulfilled by Christ, as well in
the Time Truth or Antitype.
as in the Type.

From his own Grant therefore I conclude, that the Day of first Fruits was the
first day of the Week, and therefore was the Day of Pentecost, to the
everlasting honor of that Lord's Day, and the Glory of God the Holy Ghost, who
sanctified it by his Presence and Power, sending down a new supply of Tongues
from Heaven (as if all the Tongues upon Earth were not sufficient) to sound
forth the Praises of this Redeemer, and spread the Gospel all over the World on
the first day of the Week, as an earnest whereof there was a glorious beginning
made on this Day.

The Gospel was now published to some of all Nations, there being a great
concourse even of every Nation under Heaven met at Jerusalem, Acts 2. 5. and at
this Meeting three thousand Souls were converted and baptized, ver. 41. A
double Baptism was indeed dispensed this Day; the Apostles were now baptized
with Fire, and three thousand Converts with Water; which was such a Solemnity,
as the Church of God never saw the like to that day, nor since.

Our Adversary Tillam Confesses, Page 81.
that this was the most glorious Sabbath that ever the Church enjoyed; only he
persuaded himself and others it was the Saturday-Sabbath: but herein he befools
himself, and deceives others.

5. It Is strange indeed any should once suppose the Feast of Pentecost could
ever fall on the Seventh-day Sabbath; because as the Wave-Offering was to be
offered the morrow after the Sabbath, so from that very day inclusively they
were to count seven Sabbaths, and then the morrow after the last of the seven
was the fifth day, i. e. Pentecost. I need not say any more to this.

To conclude, after all attempts to the contrary, the Glory of the Spirit's
Mission rests on the first day of the Week: This day the Church of Christ was
visited from on high, the Promise of the Father was sent, the blessed Spirit
came; the Disciples were assembled, Peter preached, and three thousand were
converted and baptized; and all this is written: Why the Church assembled? (as
Mr. Sprint argues) Why on this Day? Why the Holy Ghost? Why preaching, why
conversion, and administration of the Sacraments? Why the Promise of Christ
accomplished all on this Day? but still to declare the Will of Christ in
appointing, blessing, and sanctifying of this Day to his Church, and making it
a day of public solemn Worship, as a Day in all its Prerogatives above all
other Days: A Day of Christ's Resurrection, by which we are justified, in which
he ceased from his Work, as God did from his on the Seventh, and so has the
same reason for a Day of Rest: the Day (...) the Holy Spirit's descension, by
whom we are sanctified: a Day of assembling and preaching, on which Sinners
were converted, and Believers edified; by which the whole Trinity is glorified.

And where is he now, who said, none can prove one whole first Day was kept in
religious Worship in all the New Testament? Was not this first Day so kept, and
established for us to observe and keep from morning to evening?

SERMON II.
The Institution and Foundation of the first Day, proved from Heb. 4. 8, 9,
etc. That it is the Day which the Lord has made for Divine Worship. That the
Disciples and Primitive Churches assembling together upon that Day, is a full
proof of the same.

MY Brethren, I have endeavored to prove, that the first Day of the Week our
Lord Jesus Christ has appointed to be the special Day of Rest, and for the
Worship of God under the Gospel*

First, By virtue of his Command, who was with his Disciples forty days giving
them Commandments, etc. before his Ascension, which are not expressed.

Secondly, Because Pentecost was the first day of the Week, when this Day was
confirmed by the miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost. But to proceed:

Thirdly, My next Argument shall be taken from Christ's Resting, or ceasing
from his Works upon that day, as God did from his.

And this indeed I take to be the Foundation of the observance of the first
Day; and that which I mentioned last is a clear confirmation thereof.

In order to do this, consider, that each Day to be observed, either under the
Law or Gospel, must be comprehended in the fourth Command* and that the change
of the old Day takes not away the perpetual Obligation of one day in seven, nor
the reason of that positive perpetual Law.

Now there are but two great and general Instances in which God is said to
rest, viz.

1. That after the first Creation was finished, God rested from all his Work,
namely, from Creation-work, so as he never will create any material thing again
to the end of the World. As to his creating the Soul, that is not the creating
of any new Species of Beings.

2. The Rest of God-man, after he had finished the Work of Redemption, or the
second Creation, which is never to be repeated. Now there is a moral Reason
which is deducible from the fourth Commandment, that whenever God rests, there
is a Foundation of a day of Rest for Man, comporting with the nature and
tendency of each Covenant to which that Rest does refer.

[Thou shall do no manner of Work, etc. for in six days, etc.] The word for
implys a moral Reason, which makes it applicable to any Rest of God, therefore
to God's Rest from the Work of Redemption, I mean that of Godman, which is also
deducible from Heb. 4 Christ rested from his Work, as God did from his.

Therefore there remains a Rest for the People of God: Heb. 4. ^. 10. (...)
(...).
for he that is entered into his Rest, has also ceased from his Works, as God
did from his. Here is the Institution of the Lord's Day: For tho this Rest has
a particular relation to the Gospel-day of Rest, i. e. of that Grace, Rest, and
Peace Christ procured for us, by his doing all that we had to do, and of that
burden of Punishment he bore, which we had to undergo for our Sins; yet not
exclusive of a particular Sabbath or day of Rest; but it is directly intended
here as the Foundation and Institution of it, because that Rest in the former
Verses, which has a more particular respect to the Rest in Canaan, is spoken of
not excluding God's resting the Seventh-day.

Now in pursuit of this I shall here cite some material Passages out of Dr.
Owen on the Sabbath, who has fully confirmed what I here assert.

How the Creation of all things was finished, Dr. Owen on the Sab. p. 256.
and the Rest of God and Man that ensued thereon, has been (says he)
declared. It has also in part, and sufficiently as to our present purpose,
been evidenced, how the great Ends of the Creation of all, in the Glory of God,
and the Blessedness of Man in him, with the Pledge thereof in a sabbatical Rest,
were for a season as it were defeated and disappointed by the entrance of Sin,
which brake the Covenant that was founded in the Law of Creation, and rendered
it useless unto those Ends --

Hence it could no more bring Man to rest in God; but yet there was the
continuation of the obligatory Force of the Law and Covenant, and hence of the
Sabbatical Rest in the Church of Israel, with the especial application of its
Command to that People --

In this state of things. God had of old determined the Renovation of all
things by a new Creation, a new Law of that Creation, a new Covenant, and a new
Sabbatical Rest to his Glory by Jesus Christ --

And this Renovation of all things accordingly to be accomplished in Christ. 2
Cor. 5. 17, 18.
It Is said, Old things are past away, and behold all things are become new; the
old Law, the old Covenant, old Worship, Page 258.
old Sabbath, and all that was peculiar to the Covenant of Works as such, in
the first Institution of it, and its renewed Declaration on Mount Sinai, all
are gone and antiquated. -- And what now remains of them as to any usefulness
in our living to God, does not abide on the old Foundation, but on a new
Disposition of them by the Renovation of all things in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 10. --

A new Law of Obedience is introduced by the new Creation in Christ Jesus --
And there is a great Renovation thereof showed in God's writing his Law in our
Hearts, not here to be insisted on -- God brings over That is, God brings over
the Law (as given on Mount Sinai) into the hands of Christ.
in this State the use of the first Law as renewed, and represented in Tables
of Stone, for a directive Rule of Obedience to the new Creature, whereby the
first original Law is wholly supplied. Hereunto he makes an addition of what
positive Laws he thinks meet. -- So the Moral Law, tho materially always the
same, -- yet this old Law as brought over into this new State, is new also; for
all old things are become new.

And it is now the Rule of our Obedience, not merely to God as Creator, but to
God in Christ bringing us into a new Relation to himself, in the Renovation of
the Image of God in our Souls, and the transferring over of the Moral Law as a
Rule, accompanied with new Principles, Motives and Ends.

And now observe, all the Rests of God are founded in his own Rest in his
Works; for a pledge hereof a day of Rest must be given and observed -- But as
the Apostle tells in another case, Page 262.
The Priesthood being changed, Heb. 7. 12.
there must also of necessity be a change of the Law -- so the Covenant being
changed, and the Rest which was the end of it, being changed; and the way of
entering into the Rest of God, being changed; a change of the Day must of
necessity thereon ensue.

And no Man can assert the same day of Rest precisely to abide as of old, but
he must likewise assert the same way of entering into ^t, which yet, as all
acknowledge, is changed. The day first annexed to the Covenant of Works (that is
the seventh day) was continued under the old Testament, because the outward
Administration of the Covenant of Works was continued. -- But now the new
Covenant being absolutely established, and the other abolished, both as to its
Nature, Use, Efficacy and Power, no more to be represented nor proposed unto
Believers, even the whole of it: Yea, and its renewed Administration under the
Old Testament being removed, taken away, and disappearing, Heb. 8. 13. the
precise day of Rest belonging unto it was to be changed also, and so it came to
pass.

On these Suppositions we lay, Page 164. 7.
and ought to ^ay the observation of the Lord's Day under the New Testament
according to the Institution of ^t, or Declaration of the Mind of Christ, who
^s our Lord and Lawgiver concerning it.

A New work of Creation, or work of a new Creation, is undertaken and
completed Isa. 65. 17. chapter 66. 22, 23. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1. Romans 8. 19.
20. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15.
. This new Creation is accompanied with a new Law and Covenant, or the Law of
Faith and Covenant of Grace, Romans 3. 27. chapter 8. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 31. 33, 34. Heb.
8. 8, 9, 10, etc.

To this Law and Covenant a day of holy Rest unto the Lord does belong, which
cannot be the same with the former, no more than it is the same Law or same
Covenant which was originally given, Heb. 4. 9. Rev. 1. 10.

That this day was limited and determined to the first day of the week by our
Lord Jesus Christ, is that which shall now further be confirmed. --

First, Page 366.
On this day he rested from his Work by his Resurrection, for then he laid the
Foundation of the new Heavens and new Earth, and finished the Works of the new
Creation, when all the Stars sang together, and the Sons of God shouted for Joy.

On this day he rested from his Works, The drift of the Apostle here is to show
how the first day is established as our day of Rest under the Gospel.
as God did; and was refreshed, as God was: for tho he works hitherto, in
communication of his Spirit and Graces (as the Father continues to do in his
Works of Providence) after the finishing of his Works of the old Creation, tho
these Works belong thereunto; yet he cease absolutely from that kind of Work,
whereby he laid the Foundation of the new Creation: henceforth he dies no
more, and on this day was he refreshed in the view of his Works, for he saw it
was exceeding good.

Now as God's Rest, This the Doctor. shows the Apostle chiefly intends.
and his being refreshed in his Work on the seventh day of old, was a
sufficient Indication of the precise day of Rest, which he would have observed
under the Administration of that original Law and Covenant; so the Rest of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and of his being refreshed in and from his Work on the first
day, is a sufficient Indication of the precise day of Rest to be observed under
the Dispensation of the New Covenant, now confirmed and established.

And the Church of Christ could not pass one Week under the New Testament, Page
267.
or in a Gospel-state of Worship, without this Indication.

For the Judaical Sabbath, as sure as it was so, and as sure as it was annexed
to the Mosa^^l Administration of the Covenant, was so far abolished, as not to
oblige really the Disciples of Christ in Conscience to the Observation of it,
whatsoever any of them might for a season apprehend. And if a new day was not
now determined, there was no day or season appointed for an observance of an
holy Rest unto the Lord, nor any pledge given us of our entering into the Rest
of Christ. --

Accordingly this Indication of the Gospel-day of Rest, 10.
and Worship, was embraced by the Apostles, who were to be as the chief Corner
Stones in the Foundation of the Christian Church. For immediately they
assembled themselves on that day, and were confirmed in their Obedience by the
Grace of our Lord in meeting with them thereon, Joh. 20. 19, 26.

And it appears on this day only he appeared to them, when they were assembled
together, although occasionally: he showed himself to sundry of them at other
seasons. -- Moreover, from this time forward this day was never without its
solemn Assemblies, as shall further be cleared afterward. Thus the Doctor.

He then proceeds further to prove more fully from this of Heb. 4. the
Foundation and Institution of the Lord's Day; in which he has certainly not
only outdone all Expositors before him, but has made it very plain that the
first day is here by the Apostle declared to be established by Christ's Rest,
and our resting in him; and to be the day of Rest and solemn Worship under the
Gospel, as God's resting from his Work was the Foundation of the old Sabbath.

He cites Heb. 4. 3 -- 11. moreover, he opens the many Rests mentioned, Page
269, 230, 231, etc.
and proves the Rest spoken of in the Psalms to intend the Rest of Christ and
his People in the Gospel Dispensation; and not the eternal Rest above, but that
Rest which all that believe do enter into, after Christ had done all our Work,
and ceased, or finished his Work for ever, as God finished his; and as a pledge
of his Rest, has left us a day of Rest: There remains therefore a Sabbatism
for the People of God. Here is both the Foundation and Institution of the first
day as a day of Rest, or a Gospel Sabbath; and the manner of our entering into
it, as well as the abrogation of the old day.

The Foundation, Page 279.
says he, of the whole is laid down, ver. 10. For he that is entered into his
Rest, 20.
has ceased from his Works, as God did from his: i. e. that as God ceased
working, rested, and took satisfaction and complacency in his Work, never
working any more in creating, and so a Rest followed on that day; so Christ
ceased and rested from the Work of Redemption on the first day, and a Rest
followed for us on that day, he taking Rest and Complacency in his Work.

There is the Rest of the one and the other; and these (says he) also have
their mutual proportion. Now God rested from his own Work of Creation,

1. By ceasing from creating, only continuing all things by his Power in their
order and propagation to his Glory.

2. By his Respect to them, and Refreshment in them, as those which expressed
his Excellencies, and set forth his Praise, and so satisfied his glorious
Design.

1. So Christ also must cease working, i. e. he must die no more, suffer no
more, but only continue the Work of his Grace and Power in the preservation of
the new Creation, and the orderly increase and propagation of it by his Spirit.

2. He takes delight and satisfaction in the Works he has wrought; for he sees
of the travel of his Soul, P. 284.
and is satisfied. -- In brief, all that he did and suffered in and from his
Incarnation to his Resurrection, as Mediator of the Covenant, with all the
Fruits, and Effects, and Consequences of what he so did, whereby the Church was
built, and the new Creation finished, belongs to his Works.

His Rest that ensued on these Works, has two parts: (1.) A cessation from his
Works, which was eminent, and answered God's Rest from his Works. (2.)
Satisfaction in his Works, and the glorious Product of them, as those which had
an Impression on them of his Love and Grace, Psalm. 16. 7.

Now lest any should suppose that Christ rather ceased from his Works, Christ
ceased from his Work on the day of his Resurrection. P. 284. Sect. 23.
when he died, because it is said it is finished, etc. which certainly refers to
all those things that were Types or Prophecies of him to that time; for the
Work of Redemption could not be finished till he rose from the dead: Take what
the Doctor further says to this. It remains, says he, only that we enquire
into Christ's entrance into his Rest, both how and when he did so, even as God
entered into his on the Seventh-day. For this (says he) must limit and
determine a Day of Rest to the Gospel Church. Now this was not his lying down
in the Grave. His Body indeed there rested for a while: But that was no part of
his mediatory Rest, as he was the Founder and Builder of the Church. For,

1. It was part of his Humiliation: Not only his death, but his abode and
continuance in the state of death was so, and a principal part of it: For after
the whole human Nature was united to the Person of the Son of God, to have it
brought into a state of dissolution, or to have the Body and Soul separated
from each other, was a great Humiliation. And every, thing of this nature
belonged to his Work, and not to his Rest.

2. This separation of Body and Soul under the Power of Death was penal, a part
of the Sentence of the Law which he underwent. And therefore Peter declares,
that the Pains of Death were not loosed but by his Resurrection, Acts 2. 24.
This therefore could not be his Rest, or any part of it.

3. Nor did he first enter into his Rest, at his Ascension: then he indeed took
possession of his Glory -- But to enter into his Rest is one thing, and to take
possession of Glory another. -- And it is placed by the Apostle as the
Consequent of his being justified in the Spirit. 1 Timothy 3. 16.


But this his entering into Rest was in and by his Resurrection from the dead:
-- For,

1. Then and there he was freed from the Sentence, Power, and Stroke of the
Law, being discharged of all the Debts of our Sins, which he had undertaken to
make satisfaction for, Acts 2. 24.

2. Then and therein were all Types, all Predictions and Prophecies fulfilled,
which concerned the Work of our Redemption.

3. Then and therein his Work was done, which answered to God's Creating-work.

4. Then and therein he was declared the Son of God with Power. Romans 1. 4.
--

Thus did the Author of the new Creation, P. 286. Sect. 24.
the Son of God, the builder of the Church, having finished his Work, enter
into his Rest: And this was on the morning of the first day of the Week.

And hereby he did limit and determine the Day for our Sabbatical Rest under
the New Testament: for now was the old Covenant utterly abolished; and
therefore the Day which was the Pledge of God's and Man's Rest therein, was to
be taken away, and accordingly was, as we have proved. --

And this is that which the Apostle affirms as the substance of all he has
evinced, P. 287. Sect. 25.
namely, that there is a Sabbatism for the People of God, (...); the word is
framed by our Apostle from an Hebrew Original, with a Greek Termination; and he
uses it as that which is comprehensive of his whole sense, which no other word
would be, for he would show there is a Sabbatical Rest founded in the Rest of
God, [God-man] remaining for the Church; and therefore makes use of the same
word whereby God expressed his own Rest, when he sanctified the Seventh-day for
a day of Rest thereon.

Again he further proves, that the Apostle asserts an Evangelical Sabbath, or
day of Rest, to be constantly observed in and for the Worship of God under the
Gospel. Thus far and to this effect speaks Dr. Owen.

It Is, my Brethren, the Apostle's business in this Chapter, as the Doctor has
proved, to show an Institution of the first day of the Week, and this upon the
great Work of Redemption, and Christ's resting from his Works, as God did from
his; as also the manner of his entering into his Rest, which was not till all
our Work was done by our Surety, and our Burden was born by him for us; for
till then we could not enter into his Rest.

And being in his Rest, he has appointed this Day as a Pledge thereof, that we
may begin with God, give him the first Day, and so seek first the Kingdom of
God. First as to the early days of our Life; first in the Day, and first in
every day of the Week. Brethren, we have Rest before we work, or labor for it,
and so work from Rest, Life and Peace, and not work for Life, or to enter into
Rest that way, as they were to do under the old Covenant. Remarkable is that
passage of Paul, As many as walk according to this Rule (that is, the Rule of
the new Creature, or new Creation) Peace be on them. And as in matters of
Worship, so in respect to the new Day of Worship, the Apostle pronounces Peace
to such, etc.

And thus I have showed how the first Day was confirmed by the miraculous
effusion of the Spirit, and also the Foundation and Institution of this Day, as
here laid down by the Apostle.

Fourthly, The first Day made by the Lord for a Day of Rest, Joy and Gladness
in God's Worship.
My fourth Argument to prove the Institution of the first Day of the Week,
shall be taken from Psalm. 118. 22, 23, 24. The Stone that the Builders refused,
is become the head Stone of the Corner. This is the Lord's doing, and it is
mavelous in our sight. This is the Day the Lord has made, we will be glad
and rejoice in it.

1. Pray observe that our Lord became the Head-stone of the Corner on the day
of his happy Resurrection; on this day the Gospel Church took its beginning: On
this day he entered into his Rest, and was invested with actual Victory over
all his Enemies, and clothed with Sovereign Power and Authority as King and
Lawgiver.

2. Well, and what says the Holy Ghost? This is the Day the Lord has made.

1. He speaks, as all Expositors note, of the particular day of Christ's
Resurrection.

2. And that this is the Day which the Lord has made: How made? God created
that, and every day of the Week at first. But this Day is constituted or made
for some special end and use, above any other day in the Week: Nothing lies
more plain in the Text than this.

3. The Lord has made it, i. e. instituted or appointed it to these great
Ends; not the Apostles, not the Church, not Man, but the Lord himself has made
it.

4. And then the Gospel Church, and all Gospel-Believers signified by this word
[we] resolve upon this Great Authority to observe it; we will rejoice and be
glad in it. Here it is foretold that God has singularly made, created, or
instituted this Day for us, to meet together, and to worship him with joy and
gladness of heart; and accordingly we have proved it was confirmed.

I challenge any man to show us a Reason why any day besides this can be here
intended.

Obj. The Prophet alludes to the general Gospel-day, or else only to that very
precise day on which Christ rose; not that that day should successively be kept.

Answ. We deny not but that the general Gospel-days of Grace came in with this
day: but in the days of the Gospel this Text also shows God has made or
appointed a particular Day to be observed with rejoicing and gladness of Heart,
not the seventh but the first Day. For it is evident this day was the day when
our Lord was made or became the Head-stone of the Corner, viz. the day of his
glorious Resurrection. Where is the general Day of the Gospel called a Day
made? Is not this as much as that at the beginning the Lord blessed and
sanctified the seventh day? It Is not there said he sanctified it for men
successively to keep. Now (1.) Here is expressed a particular Day; and what day
it is, the Verses going before show. (2.) It Is a day made or instituted for
singular use. (3.) It is a day made by the Lord to that end. (4.) For us to
worship God in, or to rejoice in before him with gladness of our Heart. God
meets him that rejoiceth, and that remembers him in his ways.

1. God has made or instituted this Day for singular, nay for the highest and
chiefest End and Purpose.

2. And what day have we cause to rejoice in, keep and observe like this day?
For has not Redemption-work the preference of Creation-work? The Glory of
Creation-work was marred by Sin; but Redemption-work, Redemption-Grace, restores
the Image of God to us again, and puts us into a far better condition than we
were in at first.

In Redemption-work the glory of all God's Attributes shines forth, so they did
not in the first Creation.

The day of Christ's Resurrection is the day of our deliverance from Sin, the
Law, Wrath, Death, Devils, and all Enemies for ever. This is the Day the Lord
has made more honorable and glorious, and more to be remembered than God's
creating the Heavens and the Earth. Are there any dare say that the first
Creation ought more to be remembered than the second or the new Creation* Or
does the Covenant of Works excel the Covenant of Grace, or the Law the Gospel?

Did God's finishing his Work call for a day of remembrance, and does not
Christ's finishing his Work call for the same? Certainly it does; and therefore
this is the day the Lord has made, and we will rejoice and be glad in it^ And
does not the Apostle say, Heb. 4. 9. upon the same foot of account, There
remains (...) Rest (i. e. a day of Rest) to the People of God?

This is the day in which Christ our Surety received for us our free
Justification, i. e. our discharge from the Curse of the Law, from Sin and
Eternal Wrath. On this day Christ made an end of Sin, finished Transgression,
and brought in everlasting Righteousness; therefore this is the day the Lord
has made, and we will rejoice and be glad in it.

1. The Lord made and created the Seventh-day, and afterward made it a Sabbath
to answer the end and design of the old Creation and old Covenant. So the Lord
created the first day; and when the new Creation was brought in, he made it for
a day of sacred Rest, and for his solemn Worship, answering the end and design
of the new Creation.

2. The Seventh-day Sabbath was made for Man under the legal and typical Church
of Israel; so the first day was made for Man, the new Man, or for all the true
Israel of God, under the Gospel, or for the Gospel Church.

3. God made the Seventh-day an honorable day, answering his design in the
first Creation; and Christ has made this day a more honorable day, answering
his design in Redemption, or new Creation.

4. God made the Seventh-day a day of Rest, because in it he ceased for ever
from first-Creation Works, and took complacency in his Works. So the Lord
Christ has made the first day a day of Rest, because in it he ceased for ever
from the Works of Redemption, never to die or offer any more Sacrifice for Sin,
and took complacency in his Work. This is therefore the day the Lord has made;
and we will rejoice and be glad in it. How made? says one, not by Creation,
for so it was made before.

5. And as the seventh Day was instituted and confirmed before the Law was
given to Israel, Exodus 16. so the first Day was confirmed, Act. 2. by the
mighty effusion of the Spirit, before any other Gospel-Precept was confirmed
after the Resurrection of our Lord.

It is called, Dies Dominicus, p. 71.
says Dr. Young, Dominicum, because, as Austin notes, -- the Lord made it:
this, says he, perhaps will be of no great weight with some, since the Lord
made all days; but he seems to have made this day after a special manner,
namely, by his Resurrection from the dead (the Commemoration of which Benefit
exceeded the Memory of the old Creation) -- or else because it was destinated
for worshipping the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Thus it was prophesied what Day Christ would ordain for his Service under the
Gospel, and which Believers should observe with Joy in his Worship.

Psalm. 118. compared with Acts 4. must needs, says Mr. Warren, be meant the
day of Christ's Resurrection; and does not the Spirit speak expressly, this is
the day the Lord has made? it is a day of the Lord's making; and will he [that
is Tillam] make nothing of that? what else can be made of it, but a Prediction
of a Divine Institution, which is equivalent to a Precept; especially when it is
expounded by an Apostolical Practice, as this has been? what can a day (made
long before in respect of Creation) be styled the day which the Lord has made
then in respect to a Divine Institution? an Institution then it is, and that on
the occasion of Christ's Resurrection.

Fifthly, My next Argument to prove that the Lord has appointed the first day
of the Week as a day of Rest and solemn Worship, shall be taken from those
clear Examples we have in the New Testament of the Disciples, and Churches of
Christ meeting together in God's Worship upon this day.

1. Let this be considered, That that day which the Saints and Churches in the
Apostles time observed, must be the precise day in every week, which ought to
be kept till our Lord comes again. And,

2. That an Apostolical Precedent or Example is equivalent, or of like
Authority with an Apostolical Precept: so that had we no more than this, it
would be a sufficient warrant for the observation of this day.

Now as the observation of the first day, as I have proved, has its Rise,
Foundation and Institution from the Resurrection of our Lord from the dead; so
we find on that very day the Apostles were assembled, Joh. 20. 19.
tho Thomas was not there; and our Lord on that day appeared unto them: first
in the morning of that day, to Mary Magdalen, Mark 16. 9. and after that
(perhaps about Noon) he appeared in another form to two of them as they walked
in the Country: And in the Evening of the same day he appeared to many of the
Disciples together. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the
week, when the doors were shut where the Disciples were assembled for fear of
the Jews, Ver. 19.
came Jesus and stood in the midst of them, and says unto them, Peace be unto
you. Observe how the Holy Ghost records it, the same day; again, the first day
of the week is twice mentioned, that we no doubt should take notice how he
approved of their assembling on that day, and of his honoring this precise day
by his appearing three times to one or another of them upon it.

And then after eight days, again his Disciples were together, and Thomas with
them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you, Joh. 20. 26.

Observe, that here was one seventh day or Jewish Sabbath, between the time of
their first assembling and his appearing to them, and the second assembling and
his appearing. And I shall prove anon, by an express Text, that he did not
appear on any other day of the week betwixt these two first days.

Object. It Is objected, It was not the next first day, but after eight days.

Answ. 1. Tho this makes nothing for their seventh day, yet would they have it
to be on the second day of the week, rather than on the first, having no mind
to honor that Day Christ has honored.

2. But this pretended Objection is a mere Figment or idle Dream. Their second
meeting, says Dr. Young, Page 5. Cyril, l. 12. in Joh. p. 10, 26.
was the eighth day from the first inclusive. Cyril affirms it was the eighth
or Lord's Day, the first and last being included.

What tho it be said after eight days? is it not also said that Christ after
three days should rise again? Mark 8. 31. yet our Lord rose from the dead on
the third day of his Burial, not after the third day.

So also it is said, Luke 2. 21. When eight days were accomplished for the
circumcising of the Child, i. e. on the eighth precise day; it was not on the
ninth, for the Holy Ghost speaks of the eighth day current, and not finished.
So here, after eight days, or on the eighth day, is all one.

It might also be on the evening of the eighth day. But see what Dr. Wallis
says to this, who gives many Instances to the same purpose: Christian Sabb. p.
20, 21, 22.
What we call (says he) a third day Ague, the Latins call a Quartan; and what
we call every other day, they call a tertian. Joh. 2. 19. Destroy this Temple,
and in three days I will raise it up again; that is, on the third day. They
tell Pilate, This Deceiver said, After three days I will rise again (meaning
thereby the third day after inclusively) and therefore they pray that the
Sepulcher may be made sure till the third day, not longer.

After eight days, Jewish Sabb. p. 170.
says Mr. Warren, were come, that is, on the eighth day, which reckoning the
Resurrection-day inclusively, was just that day sevennight, or the next first
day of the week.

Moreover, let it be considered, that this was (as I hinted before) the second
solemn Apparition of our blessed Savior after he rose from the dead. For read
Joh. 21. 14. when he appeared the next time to them, it is said, This is now the
third time that Jesus showed himself to his. Disciples after he was risen from
the dead: tho this was not on the first day (I mean the third time he appeared
to them) for they were then a fishing. Yet note, that they neither met
together, nor did he ever appear to them (as we read) on the seventh Day: no,
he was far from honoring the old Sabbath now abolished, after any such manner.

Nor do we read of any solemn assembling, and of his Apparition to them but on
the first day only.

And ought not this duly to be considered? Has the Holy Ghost left this on
record for no purpose? Therefore note, that here are two Precedents or Examples
for our Imitation, to meet or assemble together on the first day of the week.

Were there but one such Precedent that they assembled together, and of our
Lord's owning them in it by his most gracious Presence, and by breathing on
them, upon the seventh day, (as I have said) we should not further contend with
our Brethren in this matter.

Moreover, the third time of their general assembling together, or all with one
accord in one place, was I have proved on the first day of the week also,
namely on the day of Pentecost.

Object. Tho they did meet together on the first day of the week, yet it was
for fear of the Jews, and so no Rule for us.

Answ. 1. Evident it is that the Apostles and Primitive Christians did
celebrate the first day; and this was either by Divine Appointment, or for some
other Reasons peculiar to themselves. If by Divine Appointment, then it is a
Rule and Warrant for us; but if for some Reasons peculiar to themselves, then
some can assign those Reasons.

The principal Reason alleged is, you hear, for fear of being persecuted, and
therefore they could not meet on the seventh day, and this made them observe
the first.

2. Persecution must not hinder us in our Obedience to God; what, disown God,
or his Day of Worship, desert his holy Sabbath? No, had the Seventh-day Sabbath
remained, they could not have done thus without great Sin, tho it cost them
their Lives.

3. And can it be once imagined, had they by slavish fear neglected to keep
that Sabbath, and changed the only time of meeting together to another day,
that our blessed Lord would have owned them in so doing, or vouchsafed his most
gracious Presence to them? no certainly, he would (had he appeared to them)
rather severely have rebuked them for their great Iniquity, and not have said,
Peace be unto you.

4. Besides, it would have been a very absurd method to avoid Persecution not
to meet on the Jewish Sabbath, because they knew how superstitious the Jews
were, and that they would not attempt any such thing on their Sabbath Day, I
mean to persecute, imprison, or any way molest them, had they met on that day.
And,

5. Of all days of the week they might rather expect to be disturbed,
persecuted, or imprisoned, had they met together on the first day, especially
on that very first day our Lord rose from the dead; because the Guard of
Soldiers were commanded to be together till that day, and besure would not
soon, or just on the morning of the third day be discharged. Besides, their not
finding the dead Body might inrage the Soldiers against the Disciples, should
they have been together on that day.

6. We will grant the privacy of their meeting, and shutting the doors might be
indeed for fear of the Jews: but yet meet they would, and did; and certainly
they were led so to do by the Holy Ghost, in that Christ appeared in the midst
of them on both those days, when they were so assembled.

Before I close with this, I cannot omit what a Reverend Author has said about
the day of our Lord's Resurrection.

It was, says he, a remarkable day in many respects.

1. It was the eighth day in a continued reckoning of days, which was a number
of greater Perfection than seven in some respects, witness Circumcision -- The
Ancients insist much that this Circumcision on the eighth day was a Type of
that eighth day on which our Lord rose again from the dead. Thus Cyprian.

Moreover, The first day of the week a day of great Renown many ways.
the first day of the week is a day of greatest Renown, being first in order of
Creation, and the first in dignity by our Lord's Resurrection; the first fruits
of time, and the first of days, and the only day in which our Lord became the
first fruits of them that slept, and the firstborn from the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence: And, say I, the first day of the new
World or Kingdom of the Messia, or Gospel Dispensation. -- Again, we have, Mr.
Warren, p. 169.
says he, another conspicuous Mark to note this day by, above all other days
in the week.

1. That these glorious Apparitions of our now glorious Redeemer were no common
Favors, but choice and special Evidences of his owning Providence, both as to
Persons and Times -- for as he appeared not to all sorts of Persons, but to
some select chosen Witnesses, who were either eminently devoted to his Service,
or designed to teach others -- so neither did he appear to those Persons every
day, but principally and most usually upon the day designed by the Prophets to
his Worship and Service, and now consecrated by his blessed Resurrection.

2. Although it be said that he was seen of his Apostles forty days between his
Resurrection and Ascension, yet was he not seen every day during those forty --
that is, by the space of forty days at times, for some times he disappeared.

3. However it may be supposed that our Savior did appear on other days (as
once upon a working day) yet no other day of the Week has he honored to be
denominated as the day of his appearing, but the first day of the Week only.

Not on the second, third, fourth, much less the last of the Week, the seventh
day: But the first is expressly and emphatically noted by name, the same day,
the first day of the Week Jesus came and stood in the midst of them. Joh. 20.
19.


4. It Is evident that our Lord appeared often on this day, gracing it with his
Divine Presence: In the morning to Mary Magdalen, and the rest of the Holy
Women; in the evening of the same day to the eleven Disciples, when gathered
together in the nature of a Church-Assembly.

After eight days, Mr. Warren, p. 175.
or after daylight of the eighth day was past, he appeared again. Christ
appeared in the morning of the Resurrection-day, as well as at the evening;
very early as well as very late; to teach us that that whole day is his: It Is
that day which the Lord has made; not a piece of the day. Thus (says he) I
remember Dr. Hakewell long ago stopped the mouth of this Objector Tillam.
, Joh. 20. 19. The same day at evening, being the first day of the Week. He
calls it the first day of the Week, tho the evening; to put the matter out of
doubt, that this evening was part of the first day of the Week -- Thus the Holy
Ghost provides against future Errors. Mr. Warren, p. 178.


By Christ's second appearance that day seven-night they might be better
instructed, witness their assembling on that day, Act. 2. 1. and Acts 2o.

To conclude this, why our Lord should neglect the Jews Sabbath, and afford his
glorious Presence in Christian Assemblies on the First Day of the Week, thus
often, and thus eminently, but to establish this day for Sacred Assemblies, and
to teach us on what day especially we may expect his Presence and Blessing, I
confess I am to seek.

4. We may take notice of the gracious Speeches, Actions, and Transactions of
Christ at his several appearings, tending partly to prove his Resurrection, the
Ground of our Hope, and the Hinge of the Day. To this purpose, how did he
condescend to his poor doubting staggering Disciples, manifesting himself on
this day to all their Senses -- distinguishing it from all other days by
Sabbath-exercises?

1. By his Heavenly Instructions opening the Scriptures, Luke 24. 46.
and preaching Peace to his Disciples, and to us as well as them; Ephesians. 1. 16,
17.
Having slain the Enmity by his Cross, he came and preached Peace. On this day
he came with his Olive Branch in his mouth, saying, Peace be unto you.

2. By giving forth Commissions to his Disciples, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. John
20. 19. As my Father has sent me, so I send you. Whose Sins ye remit, they are
remitted, etc. and then breathing upon them the Holy Ghost.

3. By convincing demonstrations of his Resurrection, John 20. 26.
to strengthen the Faith of Thomas.

To which some add,

4. His celebration of the Sacred Supper according to that Promise, Mr. Warren.
I will no more drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day I drink it new
in the Kingdom of God: That is, after I rise from the dead, which therefore
it is like he then did; yea, then he broke Bread, and was known of his Disciples
in breaking of Bread as he sat with them (not at Meat, Luke 24. 30.
as we read it) the word only implys his gesture of sitting. Thus Mr. Warren.
(...).


It Is probable he did again celebrate the Sacred Supper among them; for
breaking of Bread commonly alludes to that: and his being known to them in
breaking of Bread, may denote that Ordinance. But this is very doubtful.

Another indelible mark of Honor fixed upon the First Day of the Week, is the
Mission of the Holy Ghost, or the sending the Promise of the Father as a Royal
Gift of Christ upon his Coronation-day; such a Gift as was never given before:
And that the day of Pentecost was the First Day of the Week I have fully proved.

SERMON III.
Proving the First Day of the Week to be the special Day of Solemn Worship
under the Gospel, from Acts 20. 7. and from Rev. 1. 10. in which last place it
is called the Lord's Day.

HAving passed through five Arguments to prove the First Day of the Week to be
the day which Christ has appointed for his Solemn Worship under the Gospel, I
shall proceed to the next Argument.

Sixthly, Because the Churches and Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ met
together upon this day to break Bread, etc. Acts 20. 7. And upon the First Day
of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread. This was the day,
it appears, on which they met together, not only for preaching, hearing,
praying, etc. but also to celebrate the Lord's Supper.

1. Observe, it is said in the Context, that Paul stayed at Troas seven days.
And by the way note, that he was there upon one of the Jews Sabbath Days, but
then the Church met not together; and it is evident also that Paul waited till
the First Day came, that he might not only preach to them when they were
generally assembled together, but also celebrate the Lord's Supper before he
departed.

Now that this was the First Day of the Week, none can reasonably deny: But
since Mr. Banfield, Mr. Smith, Mr. Soarsby, and others, do doubt of it, take
what diverse Learned Men have said; and first Dr. du Veil.

Upon the first day of the Week; Duveil on Acts 20. p. 150, 151.
that is, that day, as Sozomon says, which is called the Lord's Day, which the
Hebrews called the first day of the Week, Hist. Eccl. Chapter 8.
but the Greeks dedicated it to the (...) the Table of Canons lately publised
by the famous John Baptist Cotelerius: It was not before Christ's Resurrection
called the Lord's Day, but the first Day; but after the Resurrection it was
called the Lord's Day, the Lady of all Days, etc. We have the name of the
Lord's Day in Rev. 1. 10. in Ignatius his Epistle to the Trallians and
Magnesians: And sometimes in Clement's Institutions; also in that place of
Ireneus, which the writer of the Answers to the Orthodox in Justin Martyr has
preserved to us --

When the Disciples came together -- from this place, and that in 1 Cor. 16. 2.
is gathered, that the Christians did then use upon the first day of the Week to
keep up solemn Meetings. Justin says, Upon the day called Sunday, all that
live in Citys or Country meet in one place.

This Meeting (another says) was upon the first day of the Week (...):
Shepherd on the Sab. p. 215.
Which phrase, tho Gomarus, Primrose, Heylin, and many others go about to
translate thus, viz. upon one of the days of the Week, yet this is sufficient
to dash that Dream.

That (...) signifys on the first day of the Week, Baxter in answ. to our
Opponents, p. 157.
the generality of the Ancients both Greeks and Latins agree; whose Testimony
about the sense of a word is the best Dictionary. And the same Phrase used of
the day of Christ's Resurrection by the Evangelists, proves it. Had it been
said that Paul abode seven days at Troas, and on the seventh day of the Week
when the Disciples came together to break Bread, no doubt but these
Sabbatarians would have made this no small proof to observe the old Jewish
Sabbath; and I confess it would have been a good Argument for their practice;
or had Paul (...) the Churches observed the seventh day: and yet they will not
allow it to be a proof for the observation of the first day.

Dr. Wallis tells us, Christian Sabbath, p. 30, 31.
that Mr. Bamfield urged, that (...) is Greek for one, and therefore (...) may
as well be rendered one day of the week, as the first day of the week.

Answ. Surely (says the Doctor) he is not in earnest; such trifling does more
hurt than help his Cause. No doubt but when they met, it was one day of the
week, we need not be told it; nor need the word week be added, he might have
said one day; nor need he have said so much: But this Author cannot think (nor
does he) that (...) does any where signify other than the first day of the week.

In the whole Story of Christ's Resurrection, and what followed on that day, in
all the four Evangelists, we have no other word but (...).

The Latin word pridie is a derivative (or compound rather) from prae, prior;
and postridie from post, posterior: and accordingly (in Latin) pridie
Calendarum must signify a day before the Calends. But can any man think it is
meant of any day? No, but the next day before.

So if we say, Christ was crucified one day before the Sabbath, and rose again
one day after the Sabbath: This one day is the next day. And so any man who
has not a mind to cavil will understand it. And so (...), one day after the
Sabbath, must needs be understood of the next day after the Sabbath, nor is it
ever used in any other sense. If it were to be unstood of any day indefinitely,
it should be (...), some day after the Sabbath; not (...), one day after. Thus
Dr. Wallis.

See how hard these men are put to it, in laboring to cast away, nay tread
under-foot the glorious day of our Lord's Resurrection. And it is strange to see
how men, to maintain their Errors, will quarrel and find fault with the
Translation of our Bible.

It Is manifest therefore, Dr. Wallis, p. 32.
that there was a Religious Assembly of the Christian Congregation at Troas, on
the first day of the week, for celebration of the Lord's Supper, and preaching;
and Paul with them: which I take to be the celebration of the Christian Sabbath.

Obj. However this, Mr. T. Bamfield says, is but one Instance.

Answ. True (says the Doctor) this is but one (but we have heard of more
before, and shall hear of more by and by) yet this one is more than he can show
for more than two thousand five hundred years, from God's resting on the
Seventh-day, Genesis 2. 3. till after Israel was come out of Egypt, Exodus 16.
during which time he would have us think the Seventh-day was constantly
observed. And if he could show any one Instance of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, or
others, where such a Religious Assembly for the Worship of God was held on the
Seventh-day in course from the Creation, he would think his Point well proved,
tho no more were said of it than is of this.

Whereas now as to the time from thence to the Flood, he brings no other Proof,
but that Abel, Enoch, and Noah were good Men (as no doubt but they were) and
therefore it is to be presumed they kept a Sabbath, and that upon the seventh
Day: which is to beg the Question, not to prove it. Thus the same Author.

Object. But it is objected that it was an occasional and accidental meeting
for common eating.

Answ. 1. It was a full Assembly, that is evident: for some were fain to get up
into the Windows three stories high, as Eutychus, ver. 8. the lower Room would
not hold them; therefore it was no small meeting.

2. It Is said, they came together to break Bread. What, is Paul so thoughtful
of eating and drinking, to refresh his Body with them, as to stay seven days
for that? No, no, it was a better Feast he hunger'd after, See Mr. Warren, p.
201.
to break Bread, says the Text; to receive the Eucharist, says the Syriac
Translation, that is, to receive the Lord's Supper upon the Lord's Day.

3. But why must Paul break the Bread to them? ver. 11. had it been common
Bread, no doubt but good Manners had prevented that, and not put him upon any
such Service as to cause him to carve for them all.

4. We know the celebration of the Lord's Supper is called breaking of Bread,
Acts 2. nor is there reason to conceive it was any other sort of breaking of
Bread, but that this is meant here.

That it was no festival Day, not the first day of unleavened Bread, Mr. Hughes
has proved. But there is reason, Hughes on the Sab. p. 160, 162.
says he, to believe this was sacramental Bread; for the Church came together
to break this Bread (so they were never said to do in breaking any other kind
of Bread) and Paul brake that which was properly Bread among them; but for
breaking of Bread to the hungry, it is not always meant of Bread literally, but
of means whereby they may procure them Bread and Necessaries. Neither, says
he, did the Church purposely come together for this, but rather sent it from
House to House. Nothing hinders then but that this Bread broken, put
synec^ochically as a part for the whole, does note the Lord's Supper. Take what
Dr. Du-Veil has said.

To break Bread; Du-Veil on Acts 20. 7.
to wit, that was consecrated to be a Symbol of the Body of Christ, offered for
us upon the Cross. Hence the Syrian render it, That we might break the
Eucharist. The Arabic, that we might distribute the Body of Christ. The
Ethiopick, To bless the Table. All understood it of this holy Rite, by which
the Lord Jesus would have the memory of his bitter Death to be celebrated by
his Disciples. Compare this with what he says on Acts 2. 42, 46.

Object. Again it is objected, That they did not break Bread on the first day,
because Paul continued preaching till midnight.

Answ. 1. It was principally to this end they came together on the first day,
which shows it was their usual Practice so to do.

2. They might break Bread first, and did no doubt; and then Paul might renew
his Speech, and continue preaching till midnight. The order of words in a
historical Relation are not always to be followed.

3. They did break Bread; and if it was after midnight, yet that extraordinary
occasion of Paul's preaching, being ready to depart, might be by the Lord
dispensed with, tho the proper season to administer that Ordinance be on the
first day of the week. For who will say, that Ordinance upon an extraordinary
occasion may not be administered on another day of the week? so that tho this
should be granted, I see not how it hurts our Cause.

Object. The Greek reads it first of the Sabbaths; and say what you will, it is
doubtful what day this was.

Answ. Dr. Wallis has said enough to clear this to all that are willing to be
satisfied: Dr. Young's Lord's Day, p. 69.
yet I shall add another learned Writer; Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. in which
place (he shows) it is the same called by the Evangelists (...) Mat. 28. 1. Mark
16. 1. Luke 24. 1. John 20.
: so in those places una Sabbatorum must be expounded by the Lord's Day, says
Chrysostom Hom. 45. in 1 Cor.
, whose Interpretation Hierom allows, and expounds the reason thereof; ad
Hebidum quaest. 4. because, says he, every week is divided into the Sabbath,
into the first, and second, and third, and fourth, and fifth, and sixth days;
which the Heathens called by the names of their Idols and Elements: and
therefore in those Fathers opinion, una Sabbatorum (by Enallage of the plural
number for the singular; for it is seldom read in the singular number in the Old
Testament, which the Writers of the New Testament do imitate) and prima
Sabbatorum are all one: for the name of Sabbath among the Ancients denotes not
only the last day of the week, but the whole week. -- The Hebrews called the
whole week Sabbath. And in this sense is the Pharisee to be understood about
the Sabbath -- he glories of fasting (...), quasi twice a Sabbath: There by
Sabbath we must of necessity understand the whole week, by an Hebraism, and not
the last day thereof. For the Pharisees (as most learned Searchers of Hebrew
Antiquities have often observed, which thing Epiphanius put us in mind of)
instituted two Feasts every week, Cont. Haer. l. 1. c. 10.
namely on Monday and Thursday: therefore the Lord's Day was called (...), or
una Sabbatorum, as in the Evangelists and Apostles, so in the Writers of the
following Age. He that will look into their Writings, shall find Examples
enough.

Thus this place does sufficiently tend to prove, with (...) other Text before
mentioned, that the first day of the week the Gospel-Churches did observe as
the special day of sacred Worship; and that it was the first day of the week,
the generality of the Ancients both Greek and Latin, it is evident, do agree.

Moreover, here are many things worthy of our Consideration.

(1.) That this meeting was for public Worship, as preaching, breaking of
Bread, etc.

(2.) That the Holy Ghost on purpose records the precise day; Paul having
waited at Troas the six former days, till this day, the first day of the week,
came: tho no doubt they might have some other private occasional meetings on
other days before, for Paul besure was not idle.

(3.) That their coming generally then together, was not new, nor occasional,
but their common practice, or usual day of assembling together, to preach and
administer the Lord's Supper.

(4.) It is clear, that by a special applying of these Exercises to that Day,
and by mentioning that Day to this end, it was their most solemn Day in season
to meet upon, and that the old Sabbath was not, but was abolished with the
Covenant of Works.

(5.) Nor is it likely that Paul would have stayed there, who was ready to
depart, had not that day been the day of solemn Worship, when perhaps many in
the adjacent places came together. Nor would they have slipped over the seventh
Day, without any notice taken of that; for it necessarily shows they had no
regard to the old Sabbath: which the Disciples would besure never have done, if
there had been so great a Sanction for that day as for the first day of the
week.

(6.) As Dr. Owen notes, On the Sab. p. 390.
the Disciples came together without an extraordinary warning, or being sent
to, or called together in answer to their Duty; which they were accustomed so
to do. Such, says he, is the account that Justin Martyr gives of the Practice
of all Churches in the next Age, i. e. on the day called Sunday there is an
Assembly of all Christians, whether living in the City or Country; and because
of their constant breaking of Bread on that day, it was called Dies Panis.
August. Epist. 118. And Athanasius proved that he brake not a Chalice at such a
time, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22.
because it was not the first day of the week when it was used.

And whosoever reads this Passage without prejudice, will grant, that it is a
mavelous, adrupt and uncouth Expression, if it do not signify that it was the
common observance among all the Disciples of Christ, which could have no other
Foundation, but that only laid down before, of the Authority of the Lord Christ
requiring it of them.

And, says he, I doubt not but Paul preached his farewell Sermon (after all the
ordinary Service of the Church was performed) which continued till midnight.
And all the Objections I have met with against this Instance, amounts to no
more than this, i. e. that the Scripture says that the Disciples met together
to break Bread, yet indeed they did not so. And this, by what the Doctor says,
vanishes into Smoke.

1. From the whole I may argue: If the Apostles and Primitive Christians did
observe the first day of the week as their prime and chief time for solemn
Worship in season, and passed over the old seventh Day; then is the first day
of the week, and not the seventh, that precise Day Christ has appointed to be
observed in his solemn Worship under the Gospel. But this was the prime and
chief time for solemn Worship in season, etc. Ergo.

2. And if those meetings on the first day were not such as used to be formerly
on the seventh day, I desire to know a reason, 1. Why their Meetings on the
first day should be particularly recorded, rather than their Meetings on the
seventh. 2. And why also the one is so often mentioned, i. e. their Meetings on
the first day, and no mention at all that they met on the seventh day in the
New Testament, from the Resurrection of Christ, as a Church-assembly to worship
God, or discharge any part of Religious Duties; nor of their meeting on the
second, third, fourth, etc.

Object. But it seems as if they came not together till the evening of this
day, tho it was the first day of the week; and so it proves not that this whole
day ought to be kept in solemn Worship.

Answ. For this there is not the least shadow of Proof. What tho Paul continued
his Speech till midnight; might not some other Ministers spend the former part
of the day in Preaching, Exhortation, or in Prayer? Or, might not Paul (as some
of us do) preach twice himself on that day, and they refresh themselves about
the middle of the day? I find one Author speaking thus: Durham on the Ten
Command. p. 264.
Paul spending this whole day in that Service, and continuing his Sermon till
midnight (yet accounting it still one day) in solemn meeting, does confirm this
Day to be more than an ordinary day, or than other days of the week, as being
specially dedicated to these Services and Exercises, and totally spent in them.
It is said, that they came together on the first day of the week; and no doubt
but it was in the morning of that day, for so we find they did on the same day
of the week, Acts 2. 1, 2. for when Peter began to preach, it was but the third
hour, which is our nine of the Clock in the morning.

Sixthly, The Lord's day the first day of the week, Rev. 1. 10.
My sixth Argument to prove that the first day of the week ought to be observed
as a day of Rest and solemn Worship under the Gospel, shall be taken from that
Appellation given to this day, Rev. 1. 10. where it is called the Lord's Day; I
was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day. Surely this Royal Name or Title adds no
small honor to this illustrious Day: as it was the first day of Time mentioned
in the beginning of the first Book of the Bible; so it is the last day of Fame
noted in the beginning of the last Book of the Bible, to the Praise of him who
is our Alpha and Omega. The very Name speaks the Lord Christ to be the Author
of it, Mr. Warren, p. 191.
who upon the day of his Resurrection was declared both Lord and Christ. I
find, says my Author, an elegant and pious Poem written by Sedulius an Ancient
Christian Vid. Sixti Senensis Biblioth. Sanct. p. 308.
Jerome's Junior, being by him translated to this effect: After sad Sabbaths the
happy Day did dawn,
Whose lofty Name from Lord of Lords is drawn:
A blessed Day, that first was graced to see
Christ's rising, and the World's Nativity.


I shall endeavor to prove that after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension
there was a peculiar Day belonging to the Lord above any other day of the week;
and that this Day was not the old Jewish Sabbath Day, but the first day of the
week.

1. That there was a peculiar Day, or one precise Day of the week observed to
the Lord, in which the Churches assembled together for the Worship of God, none
will deny: God lays claim to one day in seven as his Day.

2. And now that this was not the seventh day of the week appears, because we
no where read that any one Gospel Church ever assembled together on that day
from the Resurrection of Christ. Now if that had been the Day the Lord Christ
had appointed as Mediator and Lawgiver, besure we should have had it mentioned
in some place, as the very day in which the Churches, or at least some one
Church did meet together: but this we do not find, therefore that is not,
cannot be the day.

3. We read of their meeting together no less than four or five times, from our
Lord's Resurrection and after his Ascension, on the first day of the week, Joh.
20. 19. and ver. 26. Acts 2. 1, 2. chapter 20. 7. to which I might add 1 Cor. 16.
1, 2.

4. No doubt the Apostle John, when he says on the Lord's Day, refers to a
certain particular Day well known to all the Churches to whom he was to write,
nay known to all Believers and Saints of that time.

5. And evident it is, that the Jewish Sabbath Day is no where, either in the
Old or New Testament, Isa. 58. 3.
called the Lord's Day, tho it is called the Lord's Sabbath, and the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. Lord in the Old Testament (as one observes) is the usual name
of God indefinitely, Dr. Walls, p. 46.
without particularizing this or that of the three Persons: And the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God, does not appropriate it to the second Person, more than to
the first or third. And tho the second Person, or Christ considered as God,
made the World, and gave the Ten Commandments, as well as he gave forth all the
Ceremonial Law, the three Persons being the same one God; yet Christ is
contradistinguished, i. e. referring to his Human Nature, or the Anointed of
God, as Mediator or Godman: And (...), the Lord in the New Testament is
commonly and peculiarly applied to our Lord Christ, as 1 Cor. 8. 6. But to us
there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, etc. So Ephesians. 4. One Lord -- one God and Father, etc. and
to this Lord does the Day here refer. I^ the fourth Commandment, that which is
called the Sabbath of the Lord thy God (speaking of Israel) is meant of God
indefinitely, and not of one Person contradistinguished to the other Two.

The Work of Creation is commonly ascribed to God the Father, and so the old
Seventh-day Sabbath is properly the Father's Day, not Christ's, tho all the
three Persons created the World.

6. This day is called the Lord's Day, in a like sense as the Holy Supper is in
some places called the Lord's Supper; 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22. chapter 11. 27.
in which places is meant the Lord Christ, God and Man. This may answer their
common Objection, viz.

Object. It might be called the Lord's Day in respect of God the Creator, not
of Christ the Redeemer; and therefore may be meant the Seventh-day Sabbath:
Besides, the World was made by Christ, and he gave the Law on Mount Sinai.

I further tell them, this Name or Appellation [Christ] refers to our Lord as
Mediator, or as he is God and Man: But the second Person was not God and Man
when the World was made, or when the Law was given on Mount Sinai. Tho the
second Person, or Christ as God, created the World, and with the Father and
Holy Ghost is that one God that gave the Law; yet Christ the Anointed, or as
Mediator, God in our Nature, actually existed not till the fullness of time was
come.

(2.) And why may not they call the Lord's Supper, and the Lord's Table so,
with respect to God the Creator, or Christ as Creator?

(3.) Consider that in the New Testament Christ as Mediator is actually exalted
to be Lord of (...); of all Persons, Men and Angels, and of all things: For to
this end Christ both died, and rose again and revived, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and living, Romans 14. 9.

(4.) So that as the term Lord is peculiarly ascribed to Jesus Christ as
Mediator, so certainly is the day here called his Day. And as the Supper is
called the Lord's Supper, because he instituted it, and it wholly refers to
Christ; so the first day is called the Lord's Day, because the Lord Christ
instituted or appointed it as the special Day of his Worship, and as it refers
to his glorious Resurrection.

Object. If the Scriptures be the Rule to judge whether that day be not the
Lord's Day, which (and which only as distinguished from other days of the Week)
the Son of Man is Lord of?

Answ. 1. Christ is Lord of all days no doubt, because he is Lord of all
things; but the Seventh-day Sabbath is no where appropriated to Christ as
Mediator, nor ever called the Lord's Day.

(2.) When it is said in the New Testament, that the Son of Man is Lord also, or
even of the Sabbath Day; he shows that it was in his power to dispose of it,
for he gives this as a reason for his doing that which the Pharisees counted
Sabbath-breaking, and by which he oftentimes offended them. And so it is far
from being a reason of his establishing it to abide a Sabbath in his
Kingdom-state. And, as one well observes, it seems plainly to mean, that that
being a positive Law belonging to Moses, our Lord had power to change it, or
dispense with it, as well as other Positive and Mosaical Laws. As it is said,
Ephesians. 1. 22.
He has made him Head over all things to the Church, not Head to all things:
So he is Lord over all Days, but all are not separated to his Worship.

As it is said, Joh. 17. 2.
Thou have given him Power over all Flesh -- So it may be said, thou have given
him Power over all Days, that he may sanctify one to his own peculiar service
and use, and leave the rest common to us to work in.

7. There is, On the Sab. p. 223.
says Mr. Shepherd, no other day on which mention is made of any Work or
Action of Christ, which might occasion a holy day, but this only of his
Resurrection, which is exactly noted of all the Evangelists to be the first day
of the Week; and by which work he is expressly said to have all Power given him
in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18.
and to be actually Lord of the dead and living. Romans 14. 9.
And therefore why should any other Lord's Day be dreamed of? Why should Mr.
Brabourn imagine that this day might be some superstitious Easter Day, which
happens once a year? The Holy Ghost, on the contrary, not setting down the
Month, or Day of the Year, but the Day of the Week wherein Christ rose;
therefore it must be meant of a weekly Holy Day, here called the Lord's Day.

8. This was the day in which Christ ceased from his W^^k, and rested, as the
Father ceased from his Work, and rested on the Seventh-day; and therefore this
is his Day, as the other was the Father's Day; there being a day remaining to
him, and to us through him, from the same foot of account in the times of the
Gospel, as we have proved.

9. That it is this day which is called the Lord's Day, because of his frequent
appearance on it after his Resurrection, and because after his Ascension he
crowned it with that miraculous effusion of the Holy Spirit, to put a Glory
upon it, and to confirm it as that day appointed for his People to wait upon
him in.

10. John, Owen on the Sab. p. 292.
in calling it the Lord's Day, did not surprise the Churches with a new Name,
but denoted to them the time of his Vision, by the name of the Day, which was
well known to them. And there is no solid reason why it should be so called,
but that it owes its preeminence and observation to his Institution and
Authority.

And no man who shall deny these things, can give any tolerable account how,
when, and from whence this day came to be so called: it is the Lord's Day, as
the Holy Supper is called the Lord's Supper, by reason of his Institution.

11. Because (as I have proved) the Lord has made it, therefore it is called
the Lord's Day. This is an Argument (says a Reverend Author Mr. Will. Fenner
on the Sab. p. 81.
) used by the Church of God in all Ages, for twelve hundred years. St. Austin
used it in his time. The Psalmist prophesies of the Resurrection of Christ;
^sal. 118. ^4.
The Stone which the Builders refused, is beeome the Head-stone of the Corner:
This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Our Lord (says he)
expounds it of his Crucifixion and Resurrection; This is the Day the Lord has
made. And we desire to be built upon this Cornerstone; We will be glad and
rejoice in this day, we will keep it as a glorious day, a day of Thanksgiving
and rejoicing in God --

Again (he says) it was prophesied that the first day of the Week should be
the Sabbath Day, i. e. the Lord's Day: Isa. 11. 10.
In that day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand up for an Ensign
to the People; and to him shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be
glorious. Not only the Father's Rest shall be glorious, as when he had created
the Heaven and Earth, and rested on the Seventh-day; but Christ's Rest shall be
glorious: for all Divines agree that the Prophet speaks of the Rest of Christ
from the Work of Redemption. As God the Father rested from his Work, and his
Rest was glorious for four thousand years together; so Christ's Rest from his
Work shall be glorious. Thus Mr. Fenner.

Object. Perhaps some will say, This only refers to the Gospel Spiritual Rest
which we have by Christ, and not to a peculiar Day of Rest.

Answ. The Rest spoken of here may be meant of that; and from thence we have
also a day of Rest allowed us: And by comparing this with Heb. 4. I cannot see
but it clearly has respect to this Day of Rest, the Lord's Day, because the
Seventh-day is called the Father's Day of Rest; and the day of Christ's
Resurrection is also Christ's Day of Rest, as we have proved.

Object. It may refer to the Great Lord's Day, Rev. 20. 12.
the Day of the last Judgment: I saw the dead, etc. for a thousand years with
the Lord is as one day. Thus the Sabbatarians.

Answ. (1.) These men would have it to be any day, rather than the very day the
Holy Apostle means, i. e. the First Day; one while it is the day of Christ's
Birth, or the day of his Death, or some Feast Day, or else the day of Judgment:
whereas we find the Gospel Church observed no day but the First Day of the
Week, the day of our Lord's Resurrection.

(2.) There is a great difference between these two Phrases, the Lord's Day,
and the Day of the Lord: for such an Interpretation of the Lord's Day would
render it an uncertain time, and so directly cross the scope of John in setting
down, Mr. Ley Sund. Sab.
(1.) The Place where. (2.) The Day when. (3.) The Vision it self. And, as one
observes, it is void of all judgment to take it for the Day of Judgment: for in
the readiest construction of the words, St. John spoke of a Day that was in
being before he had the Vision, and a Day well-known to the Churches at that
time. But was the Day of Judgment then come, or has it yet been? There are
more than a thousand years since John was on that Day in the Spirit, etc. This
is an idle dream: Mat. 24. 36.
for of that day and hour knows no Man.

A Learned Writer answers four Questions on this Text, Mr. Geo. Hughs of Plym.
Aphorisms of the Sab. p. 135.
Rev. 1. 10.

(1.) How will you prove this to be the First Day of the Week.

(2.) How will it be made good that this Name imports a Sabbath?

(3.) How can it be declared (or proved) that the Lord himself imposed this
Name?

(4.) What influence had John upon him in declaring this Name?

He gives excellent Answers to all these Querys: I shall cite but a part of
them.

(1.) No indefinite or undetermined time is meant by this day, as some would
have it; but it is a distinct and determined day, owned by the Lord: the word is
plain, the Lord's Day, noting one single day.

(2.) Neither can it refer to the Seventh-day: it is as irrational to say this
Lord's Day is the old Sabbath, as to affirm the Lord's Supper means the
Passover. -- This Lord's Day was revealed after his coming in the Flesh, but
the Seventh-day long before. As he was revealed newly in the Gospel, to be the
one Lord Jesus Christ, our Mediator; so a new day of his was revealed also,
which the Church never knew before, viz. his Resurrection, which was
notoriously known to be the Lord's Day.

(3.) He proves it cannot be attributed to the day of his Nativity.

(4.) That this Title, the Lord's Day, was not imposed upon any extraordinary
time, by reason of the great Revelation given out to John therein.

(1.) He was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, before he received those
Revelations, therefore they could not be the ground of this Appellation -- To
pretend to Prolepsis here, is a miserable shift.

(2.) He writes to the seven Churches in Asia, and informs them of the Time
known to them when he had these Revelations, viz. the weekly Lord's Day -- It
is the Day which he himself made to declare himself to be the Son of God, the
chief Cornerstone, the Foundation of the Church.

Secondly, He answers the second Question, viz. That this Title imports a new
Day of Rest to be his, P. 140.
for four Reasons: One is this; The word used here denoting the Lord's Day, is
but once to be found in the New Testament, where we read of the Lord's Supper,
and all grant it signifies an Ordinance wherever the word is used; and
therefore so here.

Thirdly, That the Lord Jesus himself put his Name upon this Day.

(1.) The giving or bestowing of God's Name on any time, thing, or person, is
reciprocal with himself; therefore none but the Lord could put his Name upon
this day: Who has the disposing of the Lord's Name but himself? -- Will you
say the Apostles, or the Church might do it? What, without the Lord's
Commission or Command? They would not, they durst not; God never entrusted any
of them to bestow his Glory, or call his Name upon any thing, but only
declaratively from himself.

(2.) All Power in Heaven and Earth was given to the Lord Christ, to settle his
Church, and to appoint Ordinances, and to change Times according to the
Father's Pleasure: therefore he only authoritatively could change the Sabbath,
and put his Name upon this Day.

Fourthly, To the fourth Query he says, The Influence of Power which the
beloved John had in naming this Day, is only ministeral or instrumental; the
Lord Jesus gives it, and he wrote it. This is the highest of their claim, who
are Ministers, by whom Souls are brought to believe the Gospel: And no more was
he but a faithful Messenger to declare that to be the Lord's Day, upon which
the Lord himself had fixed his Name.

And thus enough has been said to prove that this day, called the Lord's Day,
was the first day of the week: but to put it further out of doubt, in the last
place,

12. The Ancient Fathers, whose Credit and Authority I see no cause to doubt,
have positively declared that it was the first day of the week that John called
the Lord's Day.

The first I shall mention is Ignatius, Epist. ad Trall. and Magnes.
who was John 's Disciple, and writes thus: Let every one that loves the Lord
Jesus Christ, keep holy the Lord's Day, which was consecrated to the Lord's
Resurrection.

Ignatius, says my Author, was not only contemporary with St. John, but was
his Disciple, or Scholar: now John, according to the best account we can have
from Chronology, Dr. Wallis Christ. Sab. Part. 1. p. 48, 49.
wrote his Revelation in Pa^^os, whither he was banished by Domitian, in or
about the year of our Lord 96; after which he wrote his Gospel, and died anno
98, or 99. and Ignatius died a Martyr under Trajan in the year 107. -- How long
before his Death Ignatius wrote his Epistle to the Magnesians, Dr. Young cites
the same Passage also of Ignatius, p. 53.
we are not certain; nor is it material. In that Epistle to the Magnesians,
even according to the genuine Edition published by Bishop Usher out of an
ancient Manuscript, not that which is suspected, he does earnestly exhort them
not to Judaize, but to live as Christians -- not any longer observing the
Jewish, but the Lord's Day, on which Christ our Life rose again. It is manifest
therefore, says he, that within eight or ten years after John's writing, the
Lord's Day did not signify the Jewish Sabbath, but the first day of the week,
on which our Savior rose again. -- Why should any longer doubt in this matter?
besure Ignatius well knew what day it was that John called the Lord's Day, who
for some years conversed with that beloved Apostle and Disciple of Christ.

I might to this (says this Author) add the Testimony of Polycarp, Polycarp.
who was also a Disciple of John, and collected and published these Epistles of
Ignatius, and knew what St. John meant by the Lord's Day.

He proceeds to Justin Martyr, Justin Martyr an. 129. his second Apology.
who says, He was not converted to the Christian Religion till about the year
129. about thirty years after St. John 's Death; yet he lived so soon after,
that he could not be ignorant of the Christian Practice, and what they
understood St. John to mean by the Lord's Day; and how that Day was observed.
On that day commonly called Sunday, there is held a Congregation or general
meeting together of all Inhabitants, whether of City or Country; and there are
publicly read the Memorials or Monuments of the Apostles, or Writings of the
Prophets. -- Again, the day called Sunday we do all in common make the
meeting-day, for that the first Day is it on which God from Darkness and Matter
made the World, and our Savior Christ did rise from the dead, etc.

In which places, says he, tho it be not called Dominica The Lord's.
, but Dies Solis Sunday.
, (because speaking to a Heathen Emperor) yet it was then solemnly observed. --

It Is manifest therefore that the Lord's Day, (...), Dominica, or Dies
Dominicus, was the known name of a Day so called when John wrote his
Revelation; that it was a day of Religious Worship, contradistinguished to that
of the Jewish Sabbath, and so observed, and so called by Ignatius within eight
or ten years at most after John's writing that Book; which he would not have
done if he had not thought it to be so meant by his Master St. John.

And in what manner it was observed in their solemn Religious Assemblies,
Justin Martyr tells us, He also adds Clemens, Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, etc.

To which I might add Pliny that lived under Trajan, who, tho a Heathen, could
observe how these morning Stars used to meet early on this day, Warren on the
Sabb. p. 195, 196.
and sing Hymns to Christ; and not only sing his Praises, but celebrate his
holy Supper on the Lord's Day.

And it is known to have been the common Question put to the Christians by the
Pagans, Do thou observe the Lord's Day?

The usual Answer was, I am a Christian, I dare not intermit it. -- O blessed
Souls! (says my Author) because they were Christians, they durst not intermit
the Lord's Day, tho they lost their dearest Lives for keeping it. --

The learned Dr. Du-Veil cites not only Ignatius and Clemens, On Act. 20. p.
150, 151.
but Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, to the same purpose; also Sedulius,
and diverse other Ancient Fathers, as Austin, Maximus, Isidore, and Gregorius
Turonensis, who speaks thus: This is the day of the Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which we properly call the Lord's Day. -- Eusebius says, We keep
holy the Lord's Day.

Dr. White cites Ignatius his Epistle ad Magnes. Ep of Ely on the Sab. p. 74.
Instead of the Sabbath, let every Friend of Christ keep holy the Lord Christ's
Day -- in memory of his Resurrection, Note, there is a Treatise of Ignatius
that is excepted against (called his Epistle to the Philippians) as spurious:
see Mr. Perkins Prep. to the Them. of the Prolem. This was also approved by Dr.
Twiss, after compared with the Latin Translation, and two Manuscripts at Oxon.
the Day wherein spiritual Life received beginning, and Death was vanquished.

This Encomium, says the Doctor, which this holy Martyr Ignatius has stamped
as an honorable Character upon the Lord's Day, declares what Esteem the
Primitive Church entertained of this day.

Moreover, Theodoret has this material Passage, that they did no longer keep
the Sabbath, but led their Lives according to the Lord's Day, in which our Life
arose, meaning our blessed Lord.

Dionysius, See Mr. Warren 's Jewish Sabb. p. 22, 23.
Bishop of Corinth, says, We have spent holy the Lord's Day (or passed through
it) to the end.

Tertullian, who flourished about the year 200, says, On the Lord's Day we
hold it lawful to feast Or unlawful to fast.
, because it is a day of Joy and Gladness: so that in his time the Title of
Lord's Day was appropriated to the first day of the week.

Origin says, Origin an. 226.
The Lord rained Manna from Heaven first upon the First Day, which is the
Lord's Day, Alsted.
and upon the Sabbath none. Let the Jews understand that even our Lord's Day
was preferred before the Jewish Sabbath. Chron. Patr.


Athanasius 's Testimony is also full: Athan. an. 326.
The Sabbath was of great esteem among the Ancients, but the Lord has changed
the Sabbath into the Lord's Day -- not we by our authority have slighted the
old Sabbath, but because it did belong to the Pedagogy of the Law: when Christ
the great Master came, it became useless, as the Candle is put out when the Sun
shines. He affirmed also, that the Sabbath and Circumcision were both of them
legal Observances.

Moreover, I might cite Austin, Ambrose, Hierom, and many more, who all testify
that the Lord's Day was the first day of the week, and observed as the special
Day in God's solemn Worship. And so all along down to this day 'twas kept, and
observed even by our blessed Reformers, as the Lord's Day, or a Day of his
appointing, etc. Therefore from the whole we note, it was no Popish Innovation,
nor, as Tillam falsely affirms, a Device of Antichrist, who changed Times and
Laws, etc. But no more at this time.

SERMON IV.
Proving there is one day of the week in season to preach the Word, and that it
is the first Day. That Collections by Divine Authority are to be made every
first Day, etc. and that the Churches did meet on that day. That God has
inflicted dreadful Judgments on such as have profaned the Lord's Day. Several
Arguments further urged, showing when the Lord's Day begins, and how it ought
to be observed.

SEventhly, The Lord's Day is that Day in season in which the Word ought to be
preached, etc,
Another Argument for the observance of the first Day, shall be taken from
Paul's Charge to Timothy: Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of
season, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 2. From whence I note, there is one day above all others
in the week, as the day in season when the Word is to be preached.

1. In season, implies a fit time for doing a Work; and so here a particular
day Christ has appointed for his Worship, Prayer, Preaching, and
Administration of all other Ordinances.

2. But if there was not one precise day appointed by Christ to the end, and
all days were alike under the Gospel; then on all days the Word would either be
in season, or out of season: but since there is a time in season, and times out
of season, I argue, there is one special Day appointed for those great things
to be done upon.

3. Solomon says, Eccl. 3. 1.
to every thing there is a season, and a time to every Purpose under Heaven; i.
e. a certain set time appointed by God to be observed with the greatest
diligence to the end for which it is ordained. And has God set a time to every
thing, and for every Purpose and Work; and yet set no particular time for his
Worship? This cannot be, for we have proved one day in seven he claims from the
fourth Command; and in Gospel Times it must be the first Day of the week, (1.)
Because the old Sabbath is gone. (2.) Because on this day Christ rested from
all his Works, as God did from his. (3.) Because this Day he owned and
confirmed by the miraculous effusion of his Spirit. (4.) Because on this Day
his Disciples met together, and he approved it by his gracious appearance, and
preaching Peace to them. (5.) Because it is called the Lord's Day. (6.) Because
no Church met in a special manner on any other day, in the New Testament. So
that this Day is the day in season, or there is none at all; but that cannot be,
because there is a special season appointed to every thing and purpose under
Heaven.

4. This Day is the day in season, because it suits with the state of
Gospel-Believers; we first entering into Rest through Jesus Christ, who has
done for us all we had to do, and born all those Burdens we were to bear in
order to our entering into Rest: therefore it cannot suit with us to keep the
old Sabbath, which enjoined the Creature to do and live, i.e. to labor to do
all that God commanded, in obedience even to the whole Law, if ever they would
have Rest and Peace. So that the Jews Day showed they were to work for Life
according to the tenor of the first Covenant; but our Day shows we work from
Life, and we have Rest, Life, and Peace first, or are justified, and so obey;
and this from better, more Evangelical Principles. So that in Comparison of
this day, this special season, all other days of the week are out of season for
Gospel-work and Service.

Eighthly The first day of the week is appointed by Christ under the Gospel to
be observed, Collections for the poor Saints to be made upon the first day of
the week.
because all the Gospel-Churches were required this day to make Collections for
the poor Saints; 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. As I have given order to the Churches of
Galatia, even so do ye: upon the first Day of the week let every one lay by him
as God has prospered him, that there be no Gatherings when I come.

1. Observe what was the Practice of one Church as a Church, was the Practice
of every Church. Besides, Paul says, that the same thing he had given Orders
about in the Churches of Galatia, and so no doubt in all Churches.

2. Paul in causing the Churches to be obedient in this matter, received this
Authority from Christ, as he intimates plainly enough in 1 Cor. 14. 37. If any
Man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the
things I wrote unto you are the Commandments of the Lord. And elsewhere he
shows that without the same Authority he durst not make the Gentiles obedient
either by word or deed.

3. Here is a Duty enjoined then by Christ's Authority on all the Churches, and
not by Paul any other ways than ministerially; which is upon every first Day to
make Collections for the poor Saints: they must deposite their Alms all on the
same day, which could not be done unless the Churches did assemble upon that
day; and besure it was enjoined on that day, because they then did meet
together for solemn Worship, and because such Acts of Mercy suited
Sabbath-Duties, and were well-pleasing to God.

4. Besides, no Man can assingn a reason why the Churches should be required on
every first Day to make Collections for the Poor, if it were not the usual Day
in which they assembled themselves together.

Object. That (...) is Greek for one, and therefore (...) may as well be
rendered one day of the week as the first day of the week. Thus Mr. Bamfield on
Acts 20. 7.

Answ. Take Dr. Wallis's Answer, Christian Sab. p. 30, 31, 40, 41.
viz. Surely this Author cannot think that (...) does any where signify other
than the first Day of the week. Moreover, all who well understood the
Greek-Tongue, agree that the word is here the same as in Mat. 28. 1. Mark 16.
2. Luke 24. 1. Durham on the Commands, p. 269.
It Is clear, says one, to be the first Day of the week, since the same Phrase
used by the Evangelists is made use of here by the Apostle, who no question
follows the Evangelists.

Moreover, our Adversaries acknowledge, and cannot help it, that by that Greek
Phrase used by the Evangelists, is meant the first Day of the week, tho called
one of the Sabbaths, or the first from the Jewish Sabbath: therefore this is a
mere Cavil.

Now every one knows (who understand any Dr. Wallis.
thing of this nature) that (...) is the proper name of the very day next after
the Jewish Sabbath, as much as one a Clock is the proper name of one hour,
which is next after twelve: It must be great ignorance, or somewhat worse, thus
to object. I will appeal to himself That is Mr. Bamfield.
, whether ever he met with that Name in any other sense.

Object. They must on that Day lay by them as God had blessed them, i. e. then
cast up their Accounts, tell their Money, reckon their Stock, compute their
expenses, etc. and not collect Money, or lay it together on that day.

A wise Objection, says Dr. Wallis; as tho all this could not be done before
(so far as necessary) and they on Sunday put so much into the Poors Box, or
give it to the Deacons, etc.

2. According to this childish Objection, they were but bid, as it were, to
take so much Money as they purposed to give out of one Pocket on that day, and
put it by it self into another. But I will appeal to them whether this would
have prevented any gatherings when the Apostle came to them; and no doubt Paul
here put them in mind of some extraordinary Occasion, that they might have more
Money collected and put together against he came than usually on that Day they
might collect: yet it is clear it was all the Churches practice, by the
direction of the Holy Ghost, on every First Day when the Churches met together
for solemn Worship, to gather Money for their poor Brethren and Sisters.

3. The constant day of the Churches solemn assemblings, Owen on the Sabb. p.
391.
being fixed, says Dr. Owen, Paul here takes it for granted, and directs them
to the observance of a special Duty on that day.

Object. But here is no mention made of any meeting that was, or was to be at
this Season, or the least prescription binding the Conscience to the weekly
observation of the First Day, for a Sabbath by divine Appointment.

Answ. As the Doctor says, this and other Churches were before fixed on the
constant observance of the First Day of the Week for the solemn Worship of God;
and his directing them upon this Day to make Collections for the Poor, even
every First Day, etc. does fully show that it was the precise Day of
Church Assemblies, and that among all the Churches. It Is enough that on this
day the Churches met, not to preach only and make gatherings for the Poor, Act.
20. 7.
but to administer the Lord's Supper: and we read of none that met as a Church
to do any of these things on the Seventh-day. Besides, it is called the Lord's
Day; our Lord Christ allows us all the other days to work in, but this is his
Day, wholly to be sequestered to his Service, and therefore of divine
Institution: Had it been said, on every Seventh-day let every one lay by him,
etc. our Opponents would have urged it as a great proof for their Sabbath.

What some except, Owen, p. 391, 392.
says Dr. Owen, that here is no mention of any Church-Assembly, but only that
every one on that day should lay by him what he would give, which every one
might do at home, or where they pleased, is exceeding weak, and unsuitable to
the mind of the Apostle. For to what end should they be limited to a day, and
that the first of the Week, for doing of that which might as well, and to as
good purpose and advantage, be performed at any other time, or on any other day
of the Week whatever? Besides, it was such a laying aside, such a treasuring of
it in a common Stock, as that there should be no need of any Collection when
the Apostle came. --

And now if this Practice and Example of the Primitive Churches be no Rule to
us, or bind us not, certainly nothing they did or practiced as Churches, can
oblige us: Nay, if so, worse will follow also for if their Example in observing
the First Day be no warrant for us, nor it is not our duty from any thing that
has been said, to observe the Lord's Day, it will follow that we in
Gospel Times are not obliged to keep any special weekly day at all; seeing we
are by no Precept nor Precedent obliged to keep the Jewish Sabbath. So that
these men from hence appear the chiefest Enemies to any Gospel-Sabbath, or day
of Rest and solemn Worship in the World.

Note also, Dr. Wallis.
that this day was not observed, or to be observed once only, but as a thing in
course, and so presumed by the Apostle when he gave particular Directions
concerning a Collection for the poor Saints to be made weekly on that day: And
in like manner in the Churches of Galatia, with like direction to them. And we
have reason to believe, that it was observed in all other Churches also: for
Paul in another case says, 1 Cor. 7. 17.
as he ordained in all Churches of the Saints: they all walked by one and the
same Rule, and observed besure one and the same day, and discharged the same
Duties upon that day.

The First Day of the Week therefore being that on which Christ rose from the
Dead, and upon which the Churches met together in one place to break Bread,
Acts 2. 1, 2. and 20. 7.
and which is called the Lord's Day, and on which they were injoined to make
Collections for the poor Saints, besure is that day which our Lord commanded
them to observe, while he was with them forty days, giving Commandments to his
Apostles about things pertaining unto the Kingdom of God, and settling the
Affairs of the Christian Church. And no doubt the observance of the First Day
was one thing he commanded, because on that day they afterward met together,
and were most eminently owned in so doing, Acts 2. 1, 2.

And what signifies their Objection, There is no express Command to observe
this Day? As if it must be expressed, as one observes, be it enacted. My
Brethren, an approved practice in God's Worship, frequently repeated, attested
by Miracles, encouraged by Christ's own Example, with that of the Apostles and
Christian Churches, and continued ever since, is evidence sufficient that it is
the Will of God that this Day ought to be observed: and such as cannot see it,
must remain blind.

As to such as still question whether this was the First Day of the Week, let
me note one thing more. Beza One or two Learned Men mention this.
had an ancient Manuscript where it is called the Lord's Day: Let every one on
the Lord's Day lay by him, etc. But enough was said to that before; it was the
First Day of the Week, and therefore the Lord's day.

And if this day had not been more holy, or more fit for this Work of Love than
any other, Shepherd on the Sab. p. 219.
Paul durst not have limited them to this Day, nor have honored this Day above
any other, yea above the Jewish Seventh-day. Moreover, says Mr. Shepherd, the
Apostle does not in this place immediately appoint and institute the Sabbath,
but supposes it to be so already (as Mr. Primrose is forced to acknowledge) and
we know Dutys of Mercy and Charity, as well as of necessary Piety, are
Sabbath-dutys: for which end this Day was more fit for those Collections than
any other day, being then generally together, and their Hearts warmed under the
Word, etc.

There must, says another Mr. Durham.
, be some peculiar thing in this Day, making it fit, yea more fit for such a
purpose as doing Works of Charity on it, rather than on any other: And the
Apostle commanding this in all the Churches, does necessarily presuppose a
Reason why he does it, as drawn from some fitness of this Day above another.

Now if we will, says he, enquire, no reason can be given but that the
Seventh-day Sabbath was expired, and the First Day instituted in its place, for
otherwise any day was alike; yea, the 7th day being the last of the Week, and
whereon men usually reckon their week's success, it would seem more reasonable
that at the close of the Week they should lay up by them as God had blessed
them, than reserve it to the beginning of another Week. The fitness then flows
from this, that the First Day being the day of their solemn communion with God
and one another, and of their partaking most liberally of Spiritual Blessings
from him, therefore they should be most warmed in their Affections, and most
liberal in their Communications to such as wanted, especially considering the
Jews were to partake of this their Charity, whose Debtors the Gentiles were,
according to that in Romans 15. 26, 27.

I shall close this with what another notes on this place: Young on the Lord's
Day, p. 27.
The Apostle did ordain in the Church of Corinth, when they met for Religion
weekly (as the Lord's Days returned) Alms should be collected for the Poors
use; and what they seem privately to have laid aside, as their condition
permitted, to bestow for the comfort of the Poor; and that which was thus laid
aside, they kept with themselves till the First Day of the Week, when they
deposited it with the Rulers of the Church for the Poors use. He that shall
more considerately weigh the Apostle's Phrase, may well enough see this was his
meaning: for he says (...), etc. i. e. against the First Day in every Week, or
when the first of every Week comes; so as it is said among the Grecians, (...),
i. e. Water ready for washing ones hands. In like manner the Alms which were
privately laid aside of every one, were deposited on the First Day of the Week
for the help of the needy; and then when the Church met, are said to be
gathered, because their Collections were made (of those who privately had laid
it aside) on the Lord's Day, or on the First Day of the Week.

Leo admonished his Hearers, because on the Lord's Day there should be a
Collection, to prepare themselves for a voluntary Devotion, and that every one
according to his ability might have fellowship in that most Sacred Oblation.

From which Testimony one may easily gather, that the Christians laid aside by
themselves their Collections against the Lord's Day, which they deposited with
the Rulers of the Church to be bestowed. Thus Dr. Young.

So that it appears it was on the close of the 7th day, or at the weeks end,
that they cast up their Accounts, computed their Stock, and not on the Lord's
Day; 'twas not then to be laid aside, but what they had over night laid aside,
on the Lord's Day they put into the Deacons hand, and so prevented gatherings
when Paul came.

9. And lastly, Those fearful Judgments inflicted by God on such as have
profaned the Lord's Day, show it is of Divine Institution. Can any think that
Jehovah would punish any Person for neglecting or violating an Humane
Tradition, or an Ordinance of Man?

1. A Husbandman grinding Corn in a Mill upon the Lord's Day, I find 2 or 3
Authors citing these very Judgments.
had his Meal burnt to Ashes.

2. Another carrying Corn on this Day, had his Barn and all his Corn in it
burnt with Fire from Heaven the next night after.

3. A certain Nobleman profaning the Lord's Day usually in hunting, had a
Child by his Wife with a Head like a Dog, and with Ears and Chaps crying like a
Hound.

4. A covetous Woman at Kingsta^e in France, 1659. using to work with her Maids
on the Lord's Day on Flax, Fire seemed to issue out of the Flax, yet did them
no harm, and was quickly quenched: But taking no warning, the third Sunday
after it took fire again, and burnt the House, and so terribly scorched the
wretched Woman and two of her Children, that they died the next day; yet a
Child in the Cradle was taken out of the fire alive, and unburnt.

5. In Paris Garden, 1582.
at a Bear-baiting on the Lord's Day, the Scaffolds fell down and slew eight
Persons.

6. Stratford upon Avon was twice almost consumed with Fire for profaning the
Lord's Day.

7. There was a Market kept at Tiverton on the Lord's Day: And their Godly
Minister told them, some Judgments would fall upon them, which fell out, for on
the third day of April 1598 the whole Town (save the Church and a few poor
Peoples Houses) consisting of 400 Dwelling-houses, were consumed to Ashes: And
again in Aug. 1612. not reforming their evil Practices, the whole Town was
again consumed by Fire, save about thirty Houses of poor People, with a
School-house and Almshouse.

8. Mr. Fenner says that he remembered above twelve Judgments were showed
within half a year for the breach of the Lord's Day. On the Sab. p. 83, 84.


9. Another Divine says that a Miller had his Mill twice burned down for
grinding on the Lord's Day.

Sirs, let all tremble that despise, neglect, or profane the Lord's Day. But
pray who can show one instance of any Judgment of God that ever since Christ's
Resurrection fell upon one Person for working, or bearing Burdens on the Jewish
Sabbath Day. True, while the seventh Day continued the Lord's Sabbath, there
are on Record Judgments that fell on such as profaned it, but never since.

And tho God does not usually this way punish Sinners for their bold and daring
Sins, and so not some that slight and contemn this Day, yet there is a day
coming in which God will reckon with them and set all their Sins in order
before their Eyes.

But one thing I have omitted, viz. I find these Sabbatarians would make great
Improvement of the Records of Parliament, in which Saturday is called Dies
Sabbati, the Sabbath Day.

In Answer take what Dr. Wallis has said in his Rejoinder to Mr. Bampfield.
Page 32.


I remember you tell us, Enqu. p. 117, 118. and you mind me of it, p. 40, 75.
that I say nothing to it (being it seems a thing on which you lay great weight)
i. e. that in the Records of Parliament, and the Courts at Westminster,
Saturday is called Sabbati, or Dies Sabbati. True (as supposing by Tradition
this day of our week to be what the Jews called the Sabbath in their week) but
do you not know also in the same Records Sunday is called Dies Dominicus, the
Lord's Day? And if those prove Saturday to be the Jewish Sabbath, why should
not these as well prove Sunday to be the Lord's Day? All the difference is, as
to that you were quick-sighted, but blind as to this. You may observe also that
the one is Sabbati, or Dies Sabbati (in the Genitive case, in the same form
with Dies Saturni, and as the other days are) but the Lord's Day is Die
Dominico in the Ablative, meaning (I suppose) that Saturday is the day which
had been the Jewish Sabbath, but this the day which is the Lord's Day. Which
different Construction seems plainly to intend in our Law a different import of
the words: by Dies Saturni, or Dies Lunae, we do not mean a Day instituted by
Saturn or the Moon, as by Dies Dominica we do mean the Day instituted by our
Lord; like as by Coena Dominica we mean the Supper instituted by our Lord* So
that these Records do you no Service at all, but Disservice.

I shall here, before I close, add a few Syllogistical Arguments for our
Opponents to answer.

Arg. 1. If the holy Spirit does write the whole Moral Law of God in the Hearts
of all true Believers, but does not write the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath in
their Hearts; then the Seventh-day Sabbath is no Moral Precept: but the former
is true, Ergo.

Arg. 2. The holy Spirit does convince all Gospel-Believers of all immoral
Evils, or of every simple moral Precept; the holy Spirit does not convince all
Gospel-Believers it is an Evil not to observe the seventh Day as a Sabbath, nor
that this is a moral Precept: Ergo, It Is not an immoral Evil to work upon that
day, etc. Or thus,

Arg. 3. The holy Spirit guides all true Believers into all Truths that result
from the holy Nature of God, or that are good, and therefore commanded; the
holy Spirit does not guide all true Believers to observe the seventh Day as a
Sabbath: Ergo, the Seventh-day Sabbath is no such Truth; etc.

Arg. 4. If the New Testament be a perfect Rule of Faith and Practice, and
there is no Precept nor Precedent for the observance of the Seventh-day
Sabbath; the Seventh-day Sabbath ought not by us to be observed: but the former
is true; Ergo, it is not our duty to observe that Day.

Arg. 5. If Christ and Paul after him, have made known or declared the whole
Counsel and Will of God, or whatsoever we should believe, observe and practice;
but have not made known or declared it is our duty to observe the seventh Day,
then it is not our duty to observe it: but the former is true, Ergo.

Arg. 6. If the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath, as given by Moses, belonged
wholly, or was annexed to the Judgments of the Mosaical Economy, and the
Judgments of the Mosaical Economy belong not to the Gospel Church; then the
Law of the Sabbath, as given by Moses, belongs not to us, but this is so,
because Death was the Penalty of the breach thereof; Ergo.

Object. What if we grant that all the ten Commandments belonged, or were
annexed to the Mosaical Economy; are all the ten Commandments abrogated
therefore, or not in force to us?

Answ. I have showed that the whole Moral Law is given forth by Christ
considered as Mediator; and that we are not obliged to observe them as given by
Moses: and the precise seventh Day being no simple Moral Precept, but merely
Judaical, pertaining to the Covenant of Works, our Lord has not nor could
confirm that Precept in the Gospel: so that it appears the Sabbath only
belonged to the Mosaical Economy, and will you affirm that of all the Ten.

One Sabbatarian Mr. Edw. Stennett on the Sab. p. 50.
says, That all the ten Commandments had the Penalty of Death annexed to them
to be inflicted by the Magistrate: which, says he, is an evident distinction
between Moral Laws and Laws Ceremonial, etc. Again he says, Page 53. See the
Snare broken.
the Sabbath having the same Penalty that the other nine have, it convincingly
proves the Morality of it.

Answ. 1. This shows that none of the ten Commandments, as given by Moses, are
in force to Believers, or oblige the Gospel Church, but only belonged to the
Jewish Policy as formally delivered, Exodus 20. and tho the Moral Law given by
Christ as Mediator, does oblige us, yet the precise seventh Day being no Moral
Precept, but only Judaical, is gone, it not being given forth anew in the
Gospel, nor could be given with its old Sanction, viz. the Penalty of Death to
be inflicted on such that break it, because the Gospel Church is no Political
Body or Civil State, they cannot inflict Death on such as transgress this, or
other Precepts.

2. Nay, nor ought such to die that profane the holy Name of God, or disobey
their Parents, or commit Adultery, etc. by any Law given by Christ in the
Gospel And do not such as affirm otherwise, strangely Judaize?
, those Temporal Punishments only belonged to the Mosaical Economy: many in
the Gospel Church, before called, were guilty of the gross breach of diverse
moral Precepts, yet were not to be put to death, Christ came not to take away
Men's Lives, but to save them both from temporal and eternal Death.

3. Moreover, it is a grand mistake to say, that the Penalty of Death
distinguishes Moral Laws from Ceremonial: for he that in the days of Atonement
did not afflict his Soul, Levit. 23. 29.
must die, or be cut off; and whosoever touches the Mount, shall be surely put
to death. Exo. 19. 13.
And he that was not circumcised, must die, or he cut off; so for diverse other
Sins Exodus 30. 33, 38. Lev. 7. 20, 21, 25, 27. and 17. 4, 9.
that were not Moral Precepts. Pray read Heb. 10. 28. Paul shows that in this
respect we are not come to Mount Sinai, but to Mount Sion, Heb. 12. 18. and sad
it is to see any so left, as to endeavor to carry the People back again to
that fiery Law, which was so terrible, as the Apostle shows, ver. 21. But it is
no marvel they do thus, when they that intimate the Law and Covenant, Exodus 20.
was the Covenant of Grace. If I have an Answer (God sparing my Life) you shall
see what some of their chief Writers have said as to this, and some other
things, that may seem more distasteful to all pious Christians.

Arg. 7. If the first Day was observed as a day of Worship by the Apostolical
Church, and no other day of the week; then the first Day is that day of Worship
which we should observe: but the first Day was so observed, etc. Ergo.

Arg. 8. If Moses as a Lawgiver abode no longer than till Christ put an end to
his Ministration, See Isa. 33. 22,
and Christ as Mediator is our only Lawgiver under the Gospel, yet has not
commanded us to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath; then it is not our duty to
observe it: but Moses as a Lawgiver abode no longer, etc. Ergo.

Arg. 9. If all Sabbaths given to the Jews, without exception, were shadows of
things to come, whereof the Body is Christ; then was their weekly Sabbath a
shadow: but all their Sabbaths without exception were shadows, etc. Ergo.

Arg. 10. Whatsoever Practice it be that opens a door to Judaism, and genders
to Bondage, can be no Truth of Christ; but the observation of the old
Seventh-day Sabbath opens a door to Judaism, etc. Ergo They plead for the Law
as given in Horeb, with the Statutes and Judgments.
.

Arg. 11. Whatsoever Principle and Practice reflects upon the Honor of Christ
as Mediator, King and Lawgiver to his Church, who was more faithful than Moses,
can be no Truth of Christ; but the Principle and Practice of the old Jewish
Sabbath reflects, etc. Ergo. evident it is Christ has nowhere taught or
commanded it; so that if it be our duty, we must go to Moses's Law for it: and
it is foolish to say, Christ as Mediator gave the Law of the Decalogue, tho as
God he gave not that only, but the whole Ceremonial Law also.

Arg. 12. That Principle and Practice that has many evil and dangerous
Consequents attending it, is no Truth of God; but the Principle and Practice of
some who keep the seventh Day, is so attended, etc. Ergo.

To conclude, Let no Christian any more doubt, that the Lord's Day is that day
we ought to observe to him in all Sacred Devotion and Piety. Consider,

1. God has built all things upon Jesus Christ, and so this Day of Rest;
wherefore it stands as fast as its Foundation.

2. God the Father declared, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
(that is, from the dead) and this was on the First Day of the Week.

3. This was the First Day of Christ's Kingdom.

4. This Day Christ rested from his Work, therefore this day remains as a day
of Rest to us.

5. This Day our Redemption was finished, and Christ received our discharge
from Sin and Wrath for ever.

6. On this Day the Typical Sabbath was ceased, and all Shadows of the Law
vanquished.

7. In him whom the old Sabbath shadowed forth, must we seek our Rest, and a
day of Rest; we in him being freed from all legal Labor, servile Fear, and
from the burden of all Sin and Misery.

8. On this Day the Disciples met, and Christ preached Peace to them; and on
this day millions of Souls have been converted.

9. On this Day John saw Jesus Christ walking in the midst of the seven
Churches in Asia.

10. This Day was confirmed by the miraculous effusion of the Spirit.

11. On this Day the Gospel-Churches met together to break Bread, and to
discharge all parts of Gospel Worship.

12. This is the Day when preaching the Word is in season.

13. On this day Collections were made for the Poor in all the Churches of the
Saints.

14. This is the Lord's Day; all other days he allows us to do work upon, but
this is wholly his own Day; he lays claim to this only, O give it wholly up to
him

15. This Day all the Godly have observed in every Age of the Church to these
present Times.

16. For profaning this Day, God has inflicted many sore and fearful Judgments.

And thus I shall close what I shall say at present for the observation of the
First Day of the Week, as a Day of Rest and solemn Worship.

When the Lord's Day begins.
1. Some think we ought to begin it at the time when the Jews began their
Sabbath; When the Lord's Day begins.
others from Midnight to Midnight; others from Morning to Evening. Take what
Dr. Owen says to this, which I think is very full and clear.

Some, Owen on the Sabb. p. 323.
says he, contend that it is a natural Day, consisting of 24 hours, beginning
with the evening of the preceding day, and ending with the same of its own; and
accordingly so was the Church of Israel directed, Levit. 23. 32. Although that
does not seem to be a general direction for the observation of the weekly
Sabbath, but to regard only that particular extraordinary Sabbath which was
thus instituted, namely the day of Atonement on the tenth day of the seventh
month, verse. 27.

However suppose it to belong also to the weekly Sabbath; it is evidently an
addition to the Command particularly suited unto the Mosaical Pedagogy, that the
Day might comprize the Sacrifice of the proceeding Evening in the Service of
it, from an Obedience whereunto we are freed by the Gospel. Neither can I
subscribe to this Opinion; and that because in the Description and Limitation
of the original Seven Days, it is said of each of the Six, that it was
constituted of an Evening and a Morning; but of the Day of Rest there is no
such description, it is only called the Seventh-day, without any assignation of
the preceding Evening unto it.

2. A Day of Rest, according to Rules of natural Equity, ought to be
proportioned to a day of Work or Labor, which God has granted unto us for our
own use. Now this is to be reckoned from Morning to Evening, Psalm. 104. 20, 21,
22, 23. Thou make darkness, and it is night, etc. -- Man goes forth to his
labor until the evening. The day of Labor is from the removal of darkness,
and the night by the light of the Sun, until the return of them again; which
allowing for the alterations of the day in the several seasons of the year,
seems to be the just measure of our Day of Rest.

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who in his Resurrection gave beginning and being to
this especial Day of holy Rest under the Gospel, rose not until the Morning of
the First Day of the Week, when the beamings of the light of the Sun began to
expel the darkness of the Night; or when it dawned toward Day, as is variously
expressed by the Evangelists: This with me determines this whole matter.

4. Mere cessation from Labor in the Night, seems to have no place in the
spiritual Rest of the Gospel to be expressed on this Day, nor to be by any
thing distinguished from the Night of any other day in the Week.

5. Supposing Christians under the Obligation of the direction given by Moses
beforementioned, it may intangel them in the anxious scrupulous Intrigues which
the Jews are subject unto about the beginning of the Evening it self, about
which their great Masters are at variance: which things belong not to the
Economy of the Gospel. Upon the whole matter I am inclinable to judge, and do
so, that the observation of the Day is to be commensurate to the use of our
natural strength on any other day, from morning to night; and nothing is hereby
lost that is needful to the due sanctification of it: For what is by some
required as a part of its Sanctification, is necessary and required as a due
preparation thereunto.

1. From what the learned and pious Doctor says, I infer, that these
Sabbatarians do not only Judaize in respect of the Seventh-day it self, but
also as to the time when they begin their pretended Sabbath.

2. And as to what he says about the beginning of the Lord's Day, I see no just
cause to dissent from him, provided none from thence take liberty to end the
Day too soon. And I think it would be a reproach to any Person to begin to work
before midnight of the Lord's Day, or to suffer their Servants to work after
twelve a Clock on the Seventh-day at night; nay, it might be better if they
left off sooner, that so they may not be hindered in God's Service on his Day:
for the natural Day with us begins at midnight, and ends at midnight; and tho
it is the Lord's Day, not the Night, we are to observe in his solemn Worship,
yet must we have time for preparation, and after the Day is gone, for
Meditation, Prayer, etc. And let none mistake the Doctor, he hints plainly
enough, that by way of preparation we ought to begin sooner, and then certainly
to continue our meditation after the day is past, till it is fit to go to our
natural Rest: and the contrary is a scandal and reproach to Religion and true
Piety.

How the Lord's Day should be kept.
Certainly since the Lord's Day, or the First Day of the Week, is the Day of
holy Rest and solemn Worship in Gospel Times, it behooves us to know and
consider well how we should keep it, or observe it to the Lord.

1. Evident it is that some are carried away by delusion, who believe all days
are alike, and so every day should be kept as a Sabbath; which is nothing less
than the design of the Devil, who if he can persuade men that there is no such
thing as a Sacred Rest, or any one day required by Authority from Christ, will
soon bring them to observe no day at all; and so all Gospel Worship, Religion,
Piety, and the special Day of Worship will soon fall together.

2. Nay, and I am satisfied, that one grand cause of the lamentable decay of
true Zeal and Piety, and of the grievous witherings among us in these days, is
that sad carelessness and looseness about a due and religious observance of the
Lord's Day: For when more Conscience was made of the Dutys of this Day, how did
Religion and strict Godliness flourish in this Nation, and in the Churches of
Christ and godly Families? Nor will it be better till a Reformation be attained
in this case.

3. Yet, On the Sab. P. 317.
as Reverend Owen observes, several Instances there are of the Miscarriages of
men on the one hand and on the other: Some formerly, and may be now, think they
are obliged to keep the Lord's Day after the manner the Jews kept the old
Sabbath. To which I might add, some are too Pharisaical in this matter. There
has been (says the Doctor) some excess in directions of many given about the
due sanctification of the Lord's Day, which indeed he calls severe directions
about Dutys, and manner of performance; on which some others have taken
occasion thereby to seek Relief, and have rejected the whole Command. So that
it appears in this, as in many other cases, men are ready to run into extremes
on the one hand or the other.

Directions, Page 21.
says he, have been given, and not a few, for the observation of a Day of holy
Rest, which either for the matter of them, or the manner prescribed, have no
sufficient warrant or foundation in the Scripture.

Whereas some have made no distinction between the Sabbath as Moral That is,
one day in seven, as he calls it, a moral positive elsewhere.
, and as Mosaical, unless it be merely in the change of the Day; and so have
endeavored to introduce the whole practice required on the latter into the
Lord's Day.

Nay, as I shall show you, they have asserted the simple morality of the fourth
Commandment to consist in the observance of the precise First Day of the Week,
or the Lord's Day, as the Saturday Sabbatarians do on the Seventh; which is no
small Error on both sides, and is attended, as I have proved, with great
Absurdities, and dangerous Consequences.

Therefore if any ask how should we observe the Lord's Day; for we are fully
satisfied, say they, that is the Day the Lord has made as the Day of Rest and
solemn Worship under the Gospel.

I answer, First Negatively, not after that legal, severe, or strict manner, as
was the Jewish Sabbath under the Law. I am persuaded some good Men in the last
Century have by an overheated Zeal, stumbled many godly Christians, by pressing
the Lord's Day observance just after the manner of the old Jewish Sabbath; as
if one precise Day of Worship was a pure moral Precept. But if the morality of
the fourth Command consisted not in the observation of the precise Seventh-day,
as I have showed, besure it does not in the observance of the First Day, tho it
be our Duty, by mere positive Right, to keep it wholly to the Lord. And should
we press the observance of the Lord's Day with that severity and strictness the
Seventh-day Sabbath was to be observed, we should bring our People into equal
bondage with the Jews of old.

But let us avoid all Extremes on either hand; for as I hinted, some Learned
Men formerly And there are too many of this sort also in our days.
opened a door to looseness and licentiousness on the one hand, by not allowing
the First-day's observance to be of Divine Institution, and so allowed of
Sports and carnal Delights on the Lord's Days: I might mention Mr. Primrose,
Dr. Heylin, Pocklington, etc. So others it is evident have exceeded as much on
the other hand; but it is best to keep in a medium betwixt both.

Therefore in the Negative,

1. I do not believe it is unlawful to kindle a Fire on the Lord's Day, because
it is not forbid in the Gospel, as it was under the Law on the old Sabbath Day.

2. I do not believe it is unlawful to travel further than a Jewish Sabbath Days
Journey; whether to to hear a Sermon, or to visit a sick Person, or the like.

We have no bounds under the Gospel, On the Sab. p. 353.
says Dr. Owen, for a Sabbath Days Journey, provided it be for Sabbath Ends. In
brief, all Pains or Labor that our Station and Condition in this World, as
Troubles may befall us, make necessary, as that without which we cannot enjoy
the solemn Ends and Uses of this sacred Day of Rest, are no way inconsistent
with the due observation of it. It may be the lot of one Man to take so much
pains, and to travel so far for and in the due Celebration of the Lord's Day,
as if another should do the like without his Occasions and Circumstances, it
would be a profanation of it.

3. I do not believe it unlawful to dress a Dinner or Supper on the Lord's Day.
Refreshments helpful to Nature so far as to refresh it, that it may have a
supply of Spirits to go on cheerfully in the Duties of holy Worship (says the
Doctor) are lawful and useful: to macerate the Body with Abstinences on this
day, is required of none; and to turn it into a Fast, or to fast upon this day,
is generally condemned by the Ancients. Wherefore to forbear provision of
necessary Food for Families on this day, is Mosaical; and the enforcement of
the particular Precepts about not kindling a Fire on this day, baking and
preparing the Food of it the day before, cannot be insisted on without a
Reintroduction of the seventh Day precisely, to whose observation they were
annexed, and thereby of the Spirit of the old Covenant.

1. Provided always these Refreshments be seasonable for the time of them, and
not when public Duties require our attendance on them. And,

2. Accompanied with singular regard to the Rules of Temperance; As (1.) That
there be no appearance of Evil. (2.) That Nature be not charged with any kind
of Excess, so far as to be hindered rather than assisted in the Duties of the
Day. (3.) That they are accompanied with Gravity and Sobriety, and Purity of
Conversation. --

To which let me add, certainly Masters of Families ought to take heed they do
not put their Servants upon greater Labor on that day Nor their Beasts
neither, since God allows them this one day of the Week for Rest.
than needs must, so as to hinder them from a due attendance as often as
possible on God's public Worship.

Now what Dr. Owen says, quite differs from that overheated Zeal which
appeared in some Godly Ministers in former times.

What think you of what Dr. White Bishop of Ely on the Sabbath, p. 235. Mr.
Tho. Rogers Pref. before the Articles.
relates in his Treatise of the Sabbath, concerning some Zealots in his time
about sixty years ago?

I have read, and many there be alive which will justify it, how it was
preached in a Market Town in Oxfordshire, that to do any servile Work or
Business on the Lord's Day, is as great a Sin as to kill a Man, or to commit
Adultery.

It was preached in Somersetshire, that to throw a Bowl on the Sabbath Day, is
as great a Sin as to kill a Man.

It was preached in Norfolk, that to make a Feast, or Wedding Dinner on the
Lord'sday, day, is as great a Sin as for a Father to take a Knife and cut his
own Child's Throat.

It was preached in Suffolk, (I can name the Man, and I was present when he was
convened before his Ordinary for preaching the same) that to ring more Bells
than one on the Lord's Day to call the People to Church, is as great a Sin as
to commit Murder.

Such unaccountable Zeal has done no small mischief to the Cause of Christ.

Two things I observe from what the Doctor notes:

1. That these Men thought we are under the like Obligation in observance of
the first Day, as the Jews were on their seventh Day.

2. That they thought the Morality of the fourth Commandment consisted in the
observation of the Lord's Day, or the first Day of the week, and so is a pure
Moral Precept; both which I utterly deny, and the contrary I have proved.

Secondly, in the Affirmative I do say, that the first Day, tho it be of mere
positive Right, ought to be observed wholly to the Lord: He that observes a
day, let him observe it to the Lord; and day, much more the Lord's Day.

(1.) To the Lord, not to our selves, i.e. for our external Profit, or Pleasure.

(2.) To the Lord, that is, the whole day; not a part of it, but the whole day
from Morning to Evening.

III. That we begin the Day early in the Morning, first in private, and then in
Family Devotion. 1. In reading some part of God's Word; and, 2. In Prayer,
laying aside all worldly business but what is of absolute necessity, and as
much as in us lies, all worldly Discourse, and earthly or worldly Thoughts;
that the Lord on his Day may have our Hearts as well as our Ears, Tongues and
Feet: and then to attend the public Worship, and that early; on the first Day
of the week to seek Jesus, as Mary Magdalen did.

Certainly it is a horrid shame in any to take more liberty for Sleep, or
otherwise to gratify the Flesh on this day than they do on other days of the
week, when employed in doing their own Business.

Do Men require the whole Day, and with the greatest care and diligence, to do
their Work? And does not the holy God require our utmost care and diligence in
his Work and Service? Mal. 1. 14.
Cursed is the Deceiver which has in his Flock a Male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing, etc. Again it is said, Jer. 48. 10.
Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord negligently or deceitfully; that
is, with a cold and careless Spirit.

My Brethren, God is a great King, and a jealous God for his Name, and sacred
Worship: Levit. 10. 3.
and he will be sanctified by all that draw near to him. And we must, I say,
show greater Care and Zeal in our serving him on his Day, if possible, than in
doing Work for Man. (1.) He requires it of us: Eccl. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might. (2.) He more deserves
it from our hands: Should a Servant come to his day's Work at ten a Clock,
certainly his Master would soon turn him off. O take heed lest God severely
rebuke you for your sloth and carelessness in not attending early on his public
Worship.

IV. In the Evening to close the Lord's Day in reading, instructing our
Families, and in repeating what we have heard, or in meditating thereon, and in
Prayer, and singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. Thus the Primitive
Christians kept the Lord's Day Read Dr. Young on the Lord's Day of the next Age
to the Apostles.
.

V. Preparation for the Public Worship is very necessary; therefore besure you
always come into the Church from your Closets, bearing your Ministers upon your
Hearts, that so the Word of God may run and be glorified, and your own Souls
secretly fed and edified together. And let no small matters hinder you, neither
the length of the way, nor weather; say with your self, Sure I would not make
these a plea or excuse, were I to receive some great earthly Profit.

VI. As to the Public Worship, that consists in reading God's Word, Preaching,
Prayer, and singing of Psalms, with a free and charitable contribution for the
poor Saints on every First Day of the Week; and if our Congregations do not
need such a weekly Collection, yet it ought to be made for others who may need
our help: In which Contribution every one, save Receivers, ought to be Givers,
according to their Ability, tho it be but two Mites; and often on this day also
the Lord's Supper is to be celebrated. These were the practices of the
Primitive Christians, as Dr. Young abundantly has showed out of the Writings
of the first Ancient Fathers, as Ignatius, Justin Martyr, etc.

VII. Meditation is a great Duty on the Lord's Day, On the Sab. p. 345.
as Dr. Owen shows; and this, (1.) In respect of God himself, whose Glory we
must make our end in all we do. We ought to meditate on the Majesty, Greatness,
Omnisciency and Holiness of God, in our Approaches to him in Prayer and hearing
his Word, etc. and so on all the days of our lives.

(2.) We ought to meditate on Jesus Christ in a peculiar manner, as the special
Author of that Ordinance in which we approach to him, and come together to
celebrate. Consider his Rest: God takes up his Rest in Christ, his Satisfaction
and Complacency in him, and in the Way and Covenant of Rest, for us through him;
therefore this is a suitable Subject of Meditation on this day.

(3.) Let us meditate upon the Glory and Excellency of Christ's Person, and of
his wonderful Love.

(4.) The Day it self, and its sacred Services, are to be meditated upon, and
those Privileges we are partakers of. On this Day our Rest was perfected; for
then Christ rose again for our Justification, and spoke Peace to his Disciples;
and so he does to us. On this day we were justified in Christ, accepted in
Christ, pardoned in Christ, as in our Head and Representative on that very
First Day he rose from the Dead. Therefore let Faith on this day be exercised,
and let us labor for thankful Hearts, and rejoice with singing on this day
which the Lord has made to this end.

Caution. Let all take heed that none profane the Lord's Day, nor any way cast
contempt upon it; which may be done many ways.

1. By doing servile Work on this day out of a covetous mind; How some profane
the Lords Day.
and so instead of doing the Lord's Work on his day, they do their own.

2. By walking in the Fields for their own carnal pleasure and recreation. O
this is an abominable Evil.

3. In gaming, and playing, or sporting on the Lord's Day.

4. In taking upon them needless Journeys to visit their Friends, because they
cannot, they pretend, spare any other day to do it, for fear of outward loss to
themselves and Families; Christ shall suffer the loss of his Honor and
Service, rather than they will lose any part of one of their own days.

5. Some will not spare time on working days for themselves or Servants to take
a Potion of Physic to remove Distempers of the Body, but refer it to the
Lord's Day; which certainly is a horrid Evil: And can they think God will bless
that Physic?

Is it not Sacrilege to rob God of his Day (for any external advantage) which
he has dedicated and set apart for his own Worship? etc. He that converts any
time of the Lord's Day, Watson 's Body of Divinity, p. 335.
says one, to worldly Business, is a worse Thief than he that robs on the
Highway: for such a Thief does but rob Man, but this Thief robs God, he robs
him of his Day.

6. Such as spend part of it in casting up their Debts, or setting their
Shop-books right.

7. Such as take liberty to lie long abed on the Lord's Day, and prefer their
carnal Ease above the Honor of Christ and his sacred Worship, to the reproach
of his Church, and grief of his Ministers.

8. Such as spend more time on the Morning of the Lord's Day, to dress and trim
their Bodies, than they take in Prayer, Reading, and Meditation, to prepare
their Souls for God's holy Worship: These should be taken notice of and
reproved; perhaps all the Morning is spent thus, and not two Minutes either in
Prayer, Reading, or Meditation.

9. Such as neglect coming into the public Worship of God on the Lord's Day,
till perhaps near half the Dutys of Worship are over: by this God is provoked,
and shame attends our Assemblies, and our Sacred Religion is exposed to
reproach. How far do the Papists for Zeal in their false Religion outdo many
who would be thought the most refined Protestants? How early are they at their
Devotion on this day, as well as on other days of the Week?

Let us reform in this case for the Lord's sake, or else throw off our
Profession: God's Soul loathes lukewarmness; let us either be hot or quite cold,
lest God spew us out of his Mouth.

10. In worldly and needless Discourses: how much time on the Lord's Day is
this way idly wasted, and the day this way profaned, as well as in many other
ways, which I shall now omit to mention.

To close all, Let us make due preparation for the Worship of God on his Day,
and rejoice at the approach thereof, wherein we have a Prize for our Souls put
into our hands, and may enjoy God's Presence if not wanting to our selves. This
is the Queen of Days (as Ignatius called it) which God has crowned with
Blessings; on which day the Spirit most gloriously descended, and the dew of
the same Spirit still falls upon our Souls, and we may write, This was the day
of our new Birth, and in which Christ often carried our Souls into his
Banqueting House, and also feasted us with the fat things thereof. This know
assuredly, as you grow cold in respect of the day of Worship, you do certainly
grow cold as to the Worship it self: and in this lies one of the great Evils of
our present Day.

What Zeal did attend Christians in this Nation in former times! and how
religiously did they observe the Lord's Day! Let us call to mind our espousal
Love, and do our first Works, lest Christ remove our Candlesticks out of their
places.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE confession of Faith put forth by the Elders and Brethren of many
Congregations of Christians baptized upon Profession of their Faith in London
and the Country: The Third Edition, with almost forty of the Ministers Names
prefixed to it: As also the Catechism agreeable to the Confession of Faith,
owning Election and final Preseverance; necessary for the Instruction of Youth
in the Fundamentals of Religion. The Remainder of the Impressions of these two
Books, with the full and true Right of printing of them for the future, are
sold to the Bookseller Mr. Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street, London:
It is desired that all Persons that are desirous to promote such useful Books,
may apply themselves to the said John Marshal to be furnished with them.

Books printed for and sold by John Marshall in Grace Church Street, writ by
Mr. Benj. Keach.
THE Display of Glorious Grace, or the Covenant of Peace opened, in fourteen
Sermons lately preached: In which the Errors of the present day about
Reconciliation and Justification are detected.

The Breach Repaired in God's Worship; or, singing of Psalms, Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, proved to be an holy Ordinance of Jesus Christ: Wherein the
chief Arguments of many Learned Divines who have wrote on that Subject are
recited, as Mr. Cotton of New England, Mr. Sydenham, Dr. Roberts, Dr. Owen, Mr.
Caryl, Dr. Du-Veil, Mr. Wells, etc. With an Answer to all Objections. As also
an Examination of Mr. Isaac Marlow's two Papers, one called a Discourse
concerning Singing, etc. the other, An Appendix; wherein his Arguments and
Cavils are refuted.

Spiritual Songs, being the Marrow of the Scripture in Songs of Praise to
Almighty God, etc. with 100 Divine Hymns on several occasions, as now practiced
in several Congregations in and about London: The second Edition, with a Table
of Contents.


