Count Conningsmark's LETTER To the Lady OGLE, From FLANDERS;
Faithfully Translated out of the Original French.
Madam,
DID I not know you are born in a most kind forgiving Country, and for your
Birth, Beauty, and Divine Goodness, of the Noblest Extraction in it, I could
not have the vanity to hope your Pardon, for were not England the most Merciful
Kingdom in the World, and most obliging to Strangers, I could never hope to be
forgiven so unhuman a Crime; but have taken a gentle Swing with my Noble
Friends and Murderers. That I loved you is a sufficient proof, that I could
venture so far as to be hanged for you, and so well that I would Sacrifice a
thousand Rivals at the same rate, were I sure to meet with the same kind usage.

Madam, My Principles are more Honorable, and I have a greater sense of a
Kindness, than to upbraid any for their Civillity, but certainly were it not
more their goodness than my Innocence, I should have gone the Honorable way of
my Accomplices, and a halter put a period to my Passion. But hanging goes by
Destiny not desert; for had every man his Due, I must confess I had as just a
claim to a Rope as the best of 'em. Yet (Madam) tho I am willing to do my self
that justice which the World denied me in Condemning my self, I would likewise
do you that Right in clearing you of those Aspersions which the world has cast
upon you on my behalf.

I have sent a Challeng to the Lord M. and Lord C. to meet me in Flanders,
where I will give them that honorable a tisfaction they demand, without a
Pistel or a Blunderbus.

I resolve to kill them both or die by it, which I could not do with a safe
Concience till I had asked you Pardon for my last offense, which at this good
time I humbly beg, and will submit to whatever penance you will inflict upon
me, provided it be not to sculk Six Days in Tarpolin Breeches, and pay homage
to the head of a Constables staff, which I dread more than a Legion of Pikes or
Canon.

I here some Malicious people do accuse you as privy to the Death of Mr.
Thynne, and that some audacious Libellers have Exposed you in their Pamphlets
as a Procatartick cause.

I am sorry my Respects for you should Expose you to that unjust Censure, and
to do you Right, I do declare before God and the World, you knew nothing of it,
nor was any way ayding, consenting or abetting in it, but utterly as Innocent
and Ignorant of what happened on that Account, as he on whom it fell till the
fatal blow was given.

Nor was it my least design it should ever come to your knowledge, whose gentle
Nature I knew so avers from an act so Horrid and Barbarous, that I could never
Expect your Pardon much less your Consent to so foul a Crime.

As for those Vile, base and Infamous Libellers, now you are in England you
have Law and Justice oh your side, prosecute them to the utmost severity, or
send them over to me, I shall find more Vratz and Boraskys that will not stick
to do us Right on our Enemies, Gerne Bleu (Madam) were they such as durst
appear bravely in the Field, and give the satisfaction of Gentlemen, I would
scorn to stoop to so base a Revenge, but he that will affirm with his Tongue
what he dare not Justify with his Sword, Borasky for that. And were I there, I
would not stand to serve them the same Sauce. But I dare not Venture my self
over again into England, for tho I have not much Reason to Complain of their
hard Dealing by me, I should be loath to trust them a second time, I find the
most Innocent Person may be wrongfully accused, Sworn out of their dear Lives,
and many an honester man has thus lately falen amongst them. But this I must
needs say in honor of the People and Laws of England, that an Alien or
Stranger shall find more favor then their own Countrymen, and a Foreign
Criminal sooner acquitted than a Native Innocent. It was my own Case, but
Footra the Whig, my Noble Friends, cleared me, and the Laws acquitted me; I
only beg you may forgive me, and since all other hopes and future pretentions
are laid aside, let me only Entreat this one favor (which is the last I shall
ever beg) that you will allow me at this distance to bear the Title of

Your Servant Conningsmark.

LONDON, Printed for J. S. 1682.


