FOUR SERMONS Publicly delivered at several times in ECCLESFEILD Church in
YORKE-SHIRE.

By IMMANUEL KNUTTON Preacher of GODS Word there.

Galat 6.17. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the
Bible on Ludgate Hill. 1655.

To all true hearted Israelites, who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, Immanuel
Knutton wishes all present happiness, and future blessedness.
DEAR CHRISTIANS,
MY hearts desire is, that you may be saved; for your sakes I have published
these four Sermons, to direct and encourage you in the right way to life
eternal: our souls are of great value, and the salvation of them is not easily
attained unto, all our care and pains for them is little enough, for strait is
the way to life, and few find it. If you please to read, remember, and practice
these Sermons, I hope, with Gods blessing, you shall reap much benefit to your
souls; while you and I live upon earth, remember me in your prayers, that we
may all grow fruitfully in saving grace, and may have a joyful meeting in
heaven at last, which God the Father grant us for his dear Sons sake: So
prays,

Yours truly in what I am able. IMMANUEL KNUTTON.
from my house in Ecclesfeild.
SERMON I.
Text, JOHN 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat
which endures unto everlasting life.
IN the former part of this Chapter, from the first verse to the fifteenth, we
have a relation of Christ feeding five thousand men with five loves and two
fishes, thereupon in the fifteenth verse, the people would have made him King,
from the sixteenth verse to the six and twentieth Christ withdrew himself, and
walked on the Sea to his Disciples; where we see the people in verses 24. and
25. seeking for Jesus, not out of a spiritual appetite after the celestial food
of their souls, but out of a carnal appetite after the transitory food of
their bodies; Christ, who knew their hearts, reprehends them for this, verse
26. and in this 27. verse exhorts and directs them what food to seek after,
namely, the everlasting food of their souls; Labor not for the meat, etc. in
which words are contained two parts.

1. A Dehortation; Labor not for the one at which perishes.

2. An Exhortation; But (labor is understood) for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life.

Before I come to the point I must answer an objection.

Object. But Genes. 3.19. God there commands Adam to eat his bread in the sweat
of his face; and in the fourth Commandment its said, Six days shall thou
labor.?

Answ. I answer it two ways: 1. There is the care of diligence, a lawful care
joined with faith, and a care of diffidence, without faith, or having a very
weak faith in Gods promise and providence; now when God commands us to labor
six days, its meant with the care of diligence, in obedience to his command,
and in affiance of his promise; but in my Text when he says, labor not, etc.
he means with the care of diffidence, not distrusting Gods promise.

2. Here our blessed Savior speaks comparatively, as if he had said, labor
not for the meat which perishes, in comparison of the pains you must take for
that meat which endures unto life eternal. You must take pains for this
outward perishing food, but chiefly take your greatest pains for Christ and his
heavenly graces, labor for this with all your might, night and day even to
your dying day.

What that meat is which endures everlastingly, you may see Christ declaring
it to you in the next words, Which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him
has God the Father sealed. This enduring food is Christ himself, with all his
saving graces and comforts.

Christ here calls himself the Son of man for these reasons.

1. He calls himself the Son of man in the singular number, because he came
from man only in regard of his humane nature, but we are called the sons of
men because we proceed from both parents.

2. That so Christ might show us the great benefit which we have received by
his taking our nature upon him.

3. That his humane nature might be distinguished from his divine nature.

4. That we might acknowledge him to be true man as well as God.

5. The true reason is gathered from the Hebrew phrase, it is an Hebraisme, it
is Ben. Adam, the Son of man, this phrase imports contempt sometimes, Job 25.6.
yet Christ so called himself.

So in the verses. 35: 48: 51. Christ shows, that he is this durable food.

I might observe from the former part.

Doct. That we must not labor for the food that perishes, namely, with the
care of diffidence. But the point that I desire to insist upon is,

Doct. That we must labor for Christ, who is everlasting food. This point
consists of two branches:

1. That Christ is everlasting food; which appears four ways.

1. By the merit and efficacy of his person. By his merit and absolute
worthiness he has purchased infinite comfort and happiness for us; John 6.55.
My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; that is, by the merit
and efficacy of it. Besides the merit of his person, there is a spiritual
efficacy and virtue flowing from him to nourish true beleivers unto eternal
life.

2. By his sacred Word is Christ everlasting food, Jer. 3.15. And I will give
you pastures according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding; which phrase implies, that the Word of Christ is the food of the
soul. The same is implied in Amos 8.11. where he threatens them with a famine
of hearing the words of the Lord. Job 23.12. I have esteemed the words of his
mouth more than my necessary food, and his Word is heavenly nourishment to true
beleivers.

3. By the Sacrament of his last Supper, 1 Corinthians. 11.24, etc. Christ by that
blessed Ordinance feeds the hearts of the faithful.

4. By the saving graces and comforts of his holy Spirit, Luke 1.53. He has
filled the hungry with good things, that is, with heavenly graces and spiritual
comforts, Math. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled, that is, with heavenly graces and
consolations.

Reason. 1. Because such as feed upon Christ shall never hunger and thirst
again; John 6.35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall never hunger, and he that beleiveth on me shall never
thirst. There is a double thirst; a thirst proceeding from a total want and
loss of Christ; now this kind of thirst they shall never have that are truly in
Christ, for John 4.14. But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give
him shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a
well of water, springing up into everlasting l^fe. where Christ teaches, that
saving grace cannot be totally and finally lost, for he will for ever supply
his people with his Spirit. Nextly, there is a thirst proceeding from a
spiritual delight in Christ, and this all true Saints have, 1 Peter 2.2, 3. As
new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby;
if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. Where the latter is the
ground of the former, if they had tasted how gracious, sweet and pleasant the
Lord Jesus is, they would exceedingly desire the pure milk of his word, and
more intimate communion with him; for there is such a deal of soul-satisfying
delight in Christ, that the more a sanctified soul tastes and enjoys, the
more earnestly it desires and longs after him, and is never at rest until
it enjoy him in heaven; the words in the original are, (...), very earnestly
desire the reasonable milk without deceit, where he shows what kind of desire
we must have after Christ his word; not a weak desire for a short fit, but an
earnest desire, above all things desire it, as David did, Psalm 42 1:2. As the
Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. My
soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before
God? The Apostle also shows the nature of the Word, it is like milk for
sweetness and nourishment; then its sincere, without the poisonous dregs of
error, its without deceit, it will not deceive any that rely upon it; this
double thirst is by the learned thus expressed: sit is totalis indigentiae, and
sitis spiritualis complacentiae, such then as eat and drink Christ shall have
the fountain of consolation in them.

Reas. 2. Because such as spiritually feed on Christ, have eternal life in
them, John 6.51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if a man
eat of this bread he shall live for ever: and in verse 54. Whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the
last day; such have one foot in heaven already, they shall never enter into
condemnation, yea, they have a heaven upon earth, they have in them Christ the
Author of eternal life, they have, through him, the precious graces and
consolations of his Spirit.

2 Branch. The second branch of the point is: We must labor for Christ this
everlasting food; the word (...) imports, we must work and take great pains for
it, Matthew 6.20. but treasure up for your selves treasures in heaven; so the
word (...) imports, which is all one in sense with this, to labor for this
everlasting food; he that lays up a treasure for himself, is very studious and
industrious how he may compass it; the like pains, care and study must we take
for Christ.

Reas. 1. Because Christ this durable meat will give us full satisfaction, this
David shows, Psalm. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. Psalm.
63.5. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. See likewise what
satisfaction the Church took in Christ, Cant. 2.3, 4, 5. I sat down under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. He brought me
to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love. Stay me with
flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. Where we see the holy
Ghost compares Christ in his Ordinances to marrow, which is very fat, sweet and
nutritive, so is Christ to true beleivers, more fat than marrow, more sweet
than wine, more nutritive than any food: the Holy Ghost also compares his
Ordinances unto a banqueting house, wherein are plenty of wine to comfort, and
strengthen, and refresh a drooping soul, and that true beleivers might with
spiritual security and joy feed their souls with these heavenly dainties; the
Holy Ghost assures them, that Christ displaies the banner of love over them.

There were four special uses of the banner.

1. By the sight of the banner displaied, every soldier might know how to
repair to his proper colors, Numbers 2. so Christ in his Gospel sets out his
love to us, he displayes the banner of love, that we may know how to be
gathered to him as to our General; it teaches us how to follow Christ; the
Gospel is the displaying of the love of Christ; Isa. 11.12. And he shall set up
an ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and
gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth;
which is meant by his Gospel.

2. Another end of the banner was to be a terror to the adversaries, Cant.
6.10. Terrible as an Army with banners. Revel. 6. in the second verse he
compares Christ, displaying the banner of his Gospel, to a Warrior upon a
white Horse; then verses 4:5:8. he shows how Christ punishes his enemies that
will not obey him with war, verse 4. and with famine, verse 5:6:7. and with
death, verse 8.

3. The next use of the banner was to add courage and confidence to the
soldiers when they see their colors; so does Christ his love in the Gospel
add invincible valor and undaunted courage to his true hearted soldiers, Romans
1.16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that beleiveth, Acts 20.23, 24. The Holy Ghost
witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me, but none
of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I
may finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

4. The last use of the banner was, to be set upon the tower or wall of the
City or Hold which was taken by conquest, that all passers by might know, that
such and such a people were now possessed of that place; Psalm. 20.5. And in the
name of our God will we set up our banners. Psalm. 60.4. Thou have given a
banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displaied because of the truth:
Selah. That is, thou have manifested thy love to thy people, that thou may
glorify thy truth, in making that good which thou have promised.

Nextly, in this place, Cant. 2.5. the Church cries, Stay me with flagons,
comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love: having tasted of Christ, she was
sick of love to him, nothing could satisfy her but more inward fellowship with
him; she compares his love to flagons of wine; so Cant. 1.1. Thy love is better
than wine: this would revive her fainting spirits, and would please her better
than any delicate spiced wine. She compares his love in his Ordinances to
apples for the comfortable taste, smell and relish that apples have: some say he
alludes to the tree of life, whith they say was an apple tree, however, as
apples are comfortable to the stomach, so is Christ in his Ordinances to a
sanctified soul most comfortable and sweet, insomuch that such as enjoy him may
say with more comfort, than Esau said to Jacob, I have enough.

Reas. 2. Because this enduring meat is of infinite worth and excellency, its
worth all our labor, pains and care, we may repent our pains and care for
worldly food, but we shall never need to be sorry for our pains for Christ: We
may say of him as the Israelites did of David, he is worth ten thousand of us;
and as the Church, Cant. 5.10. He is the chiefest of ten thousand: Prove. 8.11.
Wisdom is better than Rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not to
be compared to it: in which place by wisdom Divines understand Christ: and
truly if we could view him with the eye of faith, we should admire his
transcendent luster and excellency: as Plato said, if one could see the form of
virtue, it would wonderfully excite men to the love and study thereof.

Reas. 3. Because this everlasting food is not easily obtained, gold and silver
will not purchase it: Simon Magus could not buy the gifts of God with money:
Isai. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money
and without price, in which words the Holy Ghost alludes to haven towns by the
seaside, where ships come in richly fraught and laden with excellent
commodities, where you may buy the best at the first hand and most cheap; the
Prophet says, buy, come and buy, in regard that we must take pains for Christ,
yet he says, buy without money and without price, because nothing in this
world, no outward excellency is of equal worth and value to be given in
exchange for Christ.

Reas. 4. Because we have exceeding great need of this enduring food; John
6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man; and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you: If we feed not upon Christ, we are dead in sin, and are like to
be undone for ever, for without Christ we can have no true hope of life and
peace, our journey is long, as far as from earth to heaven, we have many
dangerous enemies in the way, whom we can never vanquish, without the spiritual
efficacy of this divine food.

Use. It serves to inform us of one chief cause why true Christians do
persevere and hold out in the way of grace to the end, the main reason is,
because they are fed with this celestial meat which will renew their strength,
as the Prophet speaks, Isai, 40. last, Elias walked forty days in the strength
of the meat the Angel gave him, but Christ's true members feeding daily upon
him, do continue in his way to their lives end; the same power that raised
Christ from the dead the third day, the same power raises all true Christians
from death to life, Ephesians. 1.19:20. and though we had the best food in the
world, yet sickness, old age and death may take away our stomach that we cannot
eat of it: but by eating of this divine food we shall increase when nature
decreaseth, Psalm. 92.12:13:14. The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree,
he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; those that be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth fruit
in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. 1 Corinthians. 15.45. The first man
Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit; in
which the Apostle intimates, that Christ communicates life to his, and
confirms them in it against final apostasy, and supplies them with a continual
renovation of this spiritual life unto eternal life, which Adam would not do
for his posterity. Christ is so able, faithful and careful over his members,
that none can pluck them out of his hands: John 10.29. he nourishes them so
effectually with himself, and his Ordinances, and his blessed Spirit, so that
it is as impossible for true beleivers to perish, as for Jesus Christ himself
to perish, for God has loved them with the same love wherewith he loved
Christ, John 17.23. and has ordained Christ to be the principal means for
their redemption, conversion, justification, adoption and glorification, Ephesians.
1.2: to the 10. Galat. 3.26. Colos. 1.27 therefore in Psalm. 40.7. In the volume
of thy Book it is written of me; by book there is meant Gods eternal dectee,
and according to the original, it is properly in the head or top of thy book,
where the Holy Ghost imports thus much to us, that the chiefest thing which God
intended before the world was, was, that Christ should be the Savior of his
elect for his glory.

Use. Secondly, It serves to inform us of the excellency and dignity of true
Christians, who only eat of this everlasting meat, Revel. 2.17. Christ
promises to such as overcome, to give them to eat of hidden Manna, which is
himself, he is hidden from others: true Christians have such meat to eat as
others know not of: Psalm. 78.24, 25. God is there said to have fed the
Israelites with Angels food, that was, Manna, a type of Christ, but so called
by way of eminency, to denote with what excellent food he fed them; but what is
the shadow to the substance, the tipe to the truth? No food in the world
comparable to this bread of life; an humble heart feeding daily upon Christ,
has joy unspeakable and glorious, when the voluptuous Epicures of this life
have no solid comfort, for they have no more than the creature can afford them;
though the righteous endure outward poverty, and seem miserable by reason of
many adversities, yet they are better in their worst estate than ungodly men
are in their best estate, in regard they feed upon this divine Manna, they,
like Daniel, look better with pulse than others who feed only upon earthly
dainties.

Use. The next use is for reproof, I shall spin the rest of the Uses out of
those four heads in the first branch, which will run, like a thread, through the
web of the whole point.

1. I told you in the first place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the merit
and efficacy of his person: This serves to reprove such as labor not for
Christ's merits for their justification in Gods sight, and these are the
Papists, who seek for, and teach justification by works, so by this means they
derogate from Christ's merits, and put themselves into a miserable condition,
for upon this ground conceive, that a Papist living and dying a Papist cannot
be saved. St. Paul, Philip. 3.9. renounceth all confidence in his own merits in
point of Justification, And be found in him not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith. The Papists allege that place for
their merit, Colos. 1.10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, etc. therefore
we may merit at Gods hand, say they, but know that there is a two fold
worthiness, the worthiness of merit, which is not in us toward God, we may
merit earthly wages and rewards of one another for outward service, but we
cannot by our worthiness merit at Gods hand.

Nextly, there is the worthiness of congruity when we walk agreeable and
answerable to Gods Word and Nature, and that is here meant, that ye might be
suitable to Gods will and nature, to be perfect as he is, that ye might walk as
becomes his people: A spice of this popish heresy is in our common people,
for they say they must addle heaven by their good deeds, such strangers they
are to the merits of Christ.

2. I told you in the second place, that Christ is everlasting meat by his
sacred Word; this Use still serves to reprove all such as labor not for Christ
in his Word; many are content to live at home under a dumb dog, in darkness
where no vision is, they can travel many miles to markets and faires for to get
worldly wealth, but will not travel a mile or two for their souls advantage,
these will bewail their laziness and folly when it is too late; many care not
how seldom they hear the word, if they might have bodily food no oftener than
they desire the word, they could never live. Oh how flat and dull are their
desires and affections when they come to hear, either they sleep out the Sermon
hour, or their heads are full of earthly distractions, their minds are
wandering after their worldly business, that if one should ask them, where was
the Text? what points had the Preacher? they are not able to give any account
of what they heard; this is a main cause why they are no more changed, nor
reformed in their lives, but are as ungodly as Heathens: if their bodily food
did their bodies no more good than the word of God does to their souls, if it
strengthened and nourished them no more, they could never be able to stand upon
their legs, they would look pale and thin, and fall down for want of strength.

Hear this ye stupid children of Adam, God has sent you many precious
Prophets, who like candles spend themselves, their gifts, their time, and their
strength, to lead you the way to heaven, yet how careless and regardless have
you been of their pains, little have you profited; know this, that if you heed
the Word no better, the worst for your selves is behind, you must be countable
for every Sermon you have heard at the day of judgment: in many places Christ
by his Messengers has all the day long stretched forth his hands unto a
disobedient and gainsaying people.

3. I told you in the third place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the
Sacraments of his last Supper; this Use still serves to reprove the profaneness
of many in coming to this spiritual banquet, they never examine themselves
before they come, they come ignorantly, they know not the nature of this
mystery, they discern not the Lords body, they come without the hand of faith
to lay hold on Christ, they come without repentance, its hidden from their
eyes; hearken to this you careless sinners, 1 Corinthians. 11.29, 30. He that
eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords body: for this cause many are weak and sickly among you,
and many sleep. Oh how full are your hearts of impurity, covetousness, pride,
malice, etc. doubtless this unworthy receiving provokes God very sore to anger,
and kindles his wrath against you, so that you go from the Lords Table worse
than you came to it, as Judas did after he had received the sop, this your
ungodly manner of receiving is worse for you, than if you had eaten a morsel of
Ratsbane, and drunk a cup of poison.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the
saving graces of his holy Spirit, this Use still serves to reprove the
profaneness of many who are bondslaves to sin and Satan, cannot endure
holiness nor the means to obtain it; they hiss at godliness, deride the way of
God, they had rather loose their lives than part with their lusts. Consider
this you wicked wretches that God will turn the wicked into hell, and all that
forget God; you deride and hate that now, of which you would be glad to enjoy
the comfort and benefit in another world. Others are blameworthy, who rest in
civil honesty, and think they have grace, but know not what belongs to it,
they are not such gross sinners as others, but live more orderly, they run not
into excess of riot, but carry fair to the world, pay their debts, relieve the
poor, none can say, black is their eye, in this they rest and pride themselves,
desiring to go no further, but with the young man in the Gospel, they think
they are perfect enough, and cry, what lack I yet? but understand this, that
bare honesty will not bring you to heaven, without holiness you cannot see the
Lord to your comfort; honesty respects man, and holiness respects God, many see
a necessity of honesty, but they see no need of godliness. Oh how ungodly are
many, though they live under excellent means, sufficient to bring them to
admirable perfection? If they should grow no faster in natural stature and
strength than they do in grace, it would be fearful to behold; it would be a
rueful sight to see a child no bigger at twenty years old than he was at his
birth, how could that child work for his living, maintain himself, or defend
himself against dangers? such is the miserable condition of diverse that never
truly labor after, nor desire Christ and his saving graces, they are grown
nothing better since their birth into this world, but much worse; though they
often had a price in their hands to get wisdom, yet they had no heart to it;
though they had many opportunities of advantaging their souls, yet they slept
out the season of grace, and are far worse at forty or fifty years old then
when they were Infants. Consider this you foolish Virgins, that sleep many
years in carnal security, either awake in time, or else when the Bridegroom
comes the gate of mercy will be shut against you, then you may stand long
enough knocking but shall never enter.

Use. The next use is for comfort to all such as labor truly for this durable
meat. I told you in the first place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the
merit and efficacy of his person: this Use affords singular comfort to all such
as rely upon the precious merits of Christ for their justification and comfort,
his blood can wash thee from all sin, John 1.17. thy sins are many in number,
yet they are as easily removed by his blood, as a spark of fire is extinguished
being cast into the midst of the Sea. It may be thy sins are bloody sins, of a
crimson color, and of a scarlet die, yet Christ can make thee by his merits
pure and white as any snow and wool, Isaiah 1.18. there is more merit in
Christ, than sin in thee, for his merit is the merit of him, who is God man,
but thy sins are the sins of man only: Remember, for thy comfort, thou
contrite in spirit, that Christ pardoned as great, and it may be greater
sinners than thy self: he purchased pardon for Paul a bloody persecutor, for
Magdalen a strumpet, it may be thou have never committed such great sins as
these: now these are written for thy learning, that thou through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope and confidence in thy Redeemer.

I told you in the second place, that Christ is everlasting meat by his sacred
word: this Use still serves for comfort to all such as love Christ dearly, and
labor for him, they are in a blessed condition for their souls, however it
goes with their outward man: this holy word of God will be unto all such a
special guide, a shining light to their feet, it will be unto thee that love
it dearly a blessed stay in adversity; David said, If my delight had not been
in thy Law, I had perished long since in mine affliction; this word does good
to you that walk uprightly, it will resolve your doubts, raise you being
dejected, guide you when you wander, comfort you when you are perplexed, and at
last will lead you straight to heaven; the Prophet said, Psalm 73.24. Thou
shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. All the
commands and directions in the word will teach thee thy duty to God and man,
and lead thee in the right way: the threatenings of the word will keep thee in
awe of God, and restrain thee from presumptuous sins: the exceeding great and
precious promises in the word are, Yea and Amen to thee through Christ 2 Corinthians. 1.20. they will give thy faith sure hand-hold in all straits, whereby
thou may overtop all difficulties; they will delight thee more than honey
and the honey-combe.

3. I told you in the third place, that Christ is everlasting food by the
Sacrament of his last Supper: this Use still serves to comfort all gracious
souls, who hunger and thirst after him in that Ordinance, it is a seal of
righteousness and of Gods love to them. Hear this you true beleivers that
discern the Lords body, you receiving the Sacrament do renew your fellowship
with your Savior, he will strengthen your faith and hope in him, and will
nourish your souls unto everlasting life, there you may by the eye of faith
discern his blood poured out and shed for the remission of your sins, you may
come to this spiritual banquet with much delight and joy, for your blessed
Redeemer proffers himself to you. This sacred Ordinance is an emblem to thee of
thy future estate with Christ in heaven, while it is so sweet to taste how
gracious he is here in his Ordinances, how unspeakably sweet will it be to thee
to enjoy Christ immediately in heaven without these Ordinances and signs? your
journey to heaven is long and full of difficulties, yet this bread of life will
nourish and enable you to hold out to the end.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the
saving graces and comfort of his holy spirit: this Use still serves to comfort
all such as earnestly labor for, and hunger after the saving graces of Christ
his Spirit: Blessed are you that hunger and thirst after these, you shall be
abundantly satisfied. Christ will satisfy you with the fatness of his house,
and make you drink of the river of his pleasure; he has done much for thee to
beget in thee such fervent desires after grace, for its a sign thou art born
again, and it will much conduce to spiritual growth, as a little babe the first
year after his birth, by reason of his daily sucking and sleeping grows
exceedingly, so the more thou desire the graces of the Spirit, the more
fruitfully thou growest in grace, for Christ will fill the hungry with good
things, that is, with saving graces and satisfactory comforts.

Object. But thou will say, Alas I feel little or no growth in my self, me
thinks I am as dead-hearted as I was, my knowledge and other gifts are very
poor and weak.

Answ. I answer, look upon thy self, and compare thy self, now even this day,
with what thou wast a week or a month since, and it may be thou shall find
very small growth in goodness, and small strength against corruptions; but
compare thy self now with what thou wast two or three years, or four or five
years since, and thou may find, through Gods blessing, a sweet fruitful
growth, formerly thou was extremely ignorant, had no gift of prayer, did
not delight much in Gods service? wast not very hungry and greedy after grace?
could not mourn much for thy failings? but now God has been gracious to
thee, he has given thee some insight into his ways, he has poured the Spirit
of grace and supplication upon thee, he has given thee delight in his Worship,
he has endued thee with an appetite and thirst after grace and holiness, and
he has melted thy heart with godly sorrow for thine imperfections; now these
are good beginnings of eternal life in thee, and though thy beginning be small,
yet thy latter end shall greatly increase; he that has begun this good work in
thee, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; thou art a living stone,
built upon the chief corner stone, all the powers of darkness can never pull
thee out of the spiritual building; thou art Christ his spouse, Satan can never
alienate his heart from thee, nor divorce thee from him, thou art a branch of
Christ the true Vine and root, thine enemies can never cut thee off; thou art a
member of his mistical body, nothing shall separate thee from his love.

Use. The last use serves for direction and exhortation jointly; I told you in
the first place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the merit and efficacy of
his person: this Use serves to direct us how to labor for the comfort and
benefit of his merits.

1. First we must renounce all confidence in our own merits and righteousness,
alas we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags, our goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it passes away:
Phillip. 3.9. we see the Apostle durst not confide in his own righteousness for
to be justified by it.

2. Rest upon the merits of Christ only for justification, as St. Paul did,
Phillip. 3.9. But that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith; his merits are of infinite value to justify thee in
the sight of God, and to procure acceptance in his sight; he is the Fathers
beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased; trust wholly and only on his merits,
which are of infinite value, sufficient to justify thee before God.

2 I told you in the second place, that Christ is everlasting meat to the soul
by his sacred Word; this Use still serves to direct us how to labor for him in
his Word.

1. Hear the word of God with reverence, for God will look to him that is of a
contrite heart, and trembles at his Word, Isa. 66.2. then we shall serve him
acceptably, Hebr. 12. last, he is a mighty, great and terrible God, therefore
serve him with fear, and rejoice in him with trembling.

2. Hear the Word as often as you can, the oftener the better, Timothy was
enjoined to preach in season and out of season, then by good consequence we
must hear in season, and out of season; we had need to hear more than we do,
for we know but in part, we believe but in part, we love but in part, frequent
and conscientious hearing is a good means to raise us up to higher perfections
in grace and knowledge; many say, we have preaching enough, unless we could
follow it better, but I say, because we follow it so little, and our practice
of piety is so imperfect, therefore we had need hear the Word oftener than we
do, we had need have it daily sounding in our ears, saying to us, this is the
way, walk in it.

3. Hear the Word with faith, or else it does you no good, Hebr. 4.2. the Word
profited not the Israelites because they heard it not with faith; why are many
living under precious means of grace, so wicked in their practice, so
heathenish and unreformed in their life? but because they believe not the Word:
did such as live in unclean and beastly lusts believe the Word, saying,
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, they durst not continue in them:
did the profane swearer believe the Word, saying, that the flying roll with
the curse shall enter into the house of the swearer, and consume it, he durst
not so ordinarily take the Lords name in vain: did ungodly persons believe the
Word, saying, that the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget
God, they durst not be so wicked and lewd as they be: we loose much benefit by
the Word for want of faith, therefore hear with faith.

4. Pray to God to bless the Word to thee, and to make it prosperous to thy
soul, Is. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit, which
leads thee the way that thou should go. Paul may plant, and Appollos may
water, but God that must give the increase: Desire him often therefore to
direct his Messenger to speak to thy necessity, and to water the Word, spoken
to thee, with the dew of his Spirit, that thou may grow fruitfully under it;
for the holy Spirit is the life of the Word.

3. I told you in the third place, that Christ is everlasting meat by the
Sacrament of his last Supper: this Use still serves to direct us how to labor
for Christ in that sacred Ordinance.

1. Examine thy self about thy knowledge, whether thou have any knowledge of
spiritual things or not; a blind man cannot judge of colors, an ignorant man
cannot discern the Lord Jesus in this Ordinance, he sees not the divine
benefits of this Sacrament, for its a great mystery to him, and is spiritually
discerned: you ignorant creatures, who have lived in blindness ever since your
birth, come out of your ignorance, content not your selves with your ignorant
and blind devotion, but come out of that dungeon of darkness, suffer not the
devil to lead you to hell hoodwinkt, least you be there before you be aware:
ignorance is the road way to eternal misery, Christ will come in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, learn therefore in these days of
knowledge to know God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to know the Covenant of
grace, and the miserable estate of all by nature, and the means how to come
out of it.

2. Examine thy self about faith, be sure to come with a lively faith in Christ
his blood, Romans 3.25. to wash thee from sin, faith is the hand of the soul to
receive Christ, John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name: where note,
that Christ intimates, that receiving of him is by beleiving on him: so
likewise faith is the mouth of the soul to eat Christ, and to feed upon him,
John 6.47, 48. etc. He that beleiveth on me has everlasting life, I am that
bread of life: by the coherence of those words with what follows, it appears,
that we must feed upon Christ spiritually by faith; therefore come with faith,
or else you come without your hand and mouth.

3. Examine thy self about repentance; busy not thy self about the present
controversy, whether faith or repentance go before, as many talkative
Pharisees now adays do, insomuch that they dispute faith and repentance quite
away, but exercise thy self seriously in the practice of true repentance, when
thou come to the Lords Table, where thou may see thy dear Savior
crucified, and his blood shed for thy many and great sins: Oh let thy heart
bleed for thine abominations! these, these, I say, were the nails that peirct
him: the Passover was to be eaten with sour herbs, signifying that we must
come to the Lords Supper with broken hearts.

4. Come with a spiritual appetite to this heavenly feast, ones meat does them
most good when they have a good stomach, you will receive more comfort and
satisfaction when you hunger and thirst after Christ, if you desire him
earnestly, as new born babes desire the breast; set thy soul a longing after
him, turn the stream of thy desires toward him alone, then may thou seek for
comfort in wealth, wit, honors and worldly favor, but they will answer, its
not in me: Oh let thy heart return to Christ as Noah's Dove did to the Ark, and
then shall thou find rest and peace, yea, the Lord will deal bountiful with
thee.

4. I told you in the fourth place, tha^ Christ is everlasting meat by the
saving graces of his holy Spirit: this Use still serves to direct us how to
labor after spiritual graces and comforts.

1. First we must conscionably and constantly frequent the means of grace, God
will be found in his own way; we look for a friend in his house, we look for
fishes in the water, for birds in the wood, let us seek after Christ and his
graces in his Word and Sacraments; excellent is that promise, Isai. 64.5. Thou
meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness, those that remember thee
in thy ways: Christ's Ordinances are his ways, such as rejoice in these his
ways he will meet them, and touch their hearts with his holy Spirit: watch
daily at wisdoms gates, and wait at the posts of his doors, then thou shall
find him whom thy soul loves.

2. Be very humble, be nothing in thine own eyes, fot God resists the proud,
but gives grace to the humble.

3. Pray earnestly to God for his spiritual graces, as the Apostles prayed,
Lord increase our faith, and David prayed, Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and renew a right spirit within me. Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? When our dear Savior was
upon earth, he was bountiful to such as earnestly desired his Spirit, but
afterward he ascended on high to give gifts to men, he is now in his
glorification, and is no niggard of his divine graces and comforts, but will be
very bountiful to thee if thou beggest them earnestly at his hands.

SERMON II.
Text, GENESIS 5.24. And Enoch walked with God.
THese words are a brief, but yet a sweet relation of that dear servant of God,
Enoch, the seventh from Adam, as may be seen by the genealogy of the Patriarchs
from Adam unto Noah, here in this chapter, the memory of the just is blessed,
says Solomon, so is it here, in the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Enoch is there recorded to his everlasting honor, that he had this
testimony, that he had pleased God. Jude also in his Epistle records his
prophecy concerning the day of judgment to come, for the comfort of the
righteous, and for the terror of the wicked: here in my Text observe these
parts.

1. The person mentioned, viz. Enoch. 2. His commendation in the latter words,
he walked with God. His practice and life is here propounded, as a president,
for us to imitate.

For those examples in Scripture, which the Spirit of Christ commends, are
obligatory, his commendings are virtual commandings, and we ought to follow
whatsoever is praiseworthy, especially in Gods account.

Those examples in Scripture are obligatory likewise, whose ground, reason,
scope or end are obligatory, and of a moral nature, and as much concern one
Christian as another; so here Enoch his walking with God is of a moral nature,
and necessarily concerns us all; he is here propounded as a pattern for us,
that we should do the like; there is in Scripture sometimes the example of
caution, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, 11. such as were punished for sin; and thus we must
learn to improve the bad examples of such, and make the best use of their falls
and miseries for our good: There is also the example of imitation, such as are
recorded in holy Writ, for us to follow, so here Enoch is set down for an
example of walking with God.

Doct. Hence observe: That all true Children of God must walk with God: verse
22. of this chapter its said, Enoch walked with God, Genes. 17.1. God said to
Abram, walk before me and be thou perfect, Isaiah 38.3. Remember now I beseech
thee, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. In handling this point I shall
observe this method. 1. I will show how many ways a Christian must walk with
God. 2. I shall give reasons. 3. I shall teach you how to use this Point. For
the first head.

A Christian walks with God eight ways.

1. By acquainting himself with God, and making his peace with him, Job 22.21.
Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto
thee. Amos 3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? and the more
inward with God any Christian is, the closer he walks with God.

2. A Christian walks with God by doing all his actions as in Gods sight and
presence, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me. Acts 2.25. I
foresaw the Lord always before my face: whereas an Atheist thinks God sees him
not, and thinks to commit his wickedness close from the all-seeing eye of God.

3. A Christian walks with God by referring all his actions to the glory of
God, 1 Corinthians. 10.31. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God; for God made all things for his glory, now when you aim at
this, you walk with him in aiming at the same end.

4. A Christian walks with God by a strict invitation of God according to the
rules of his holy Word, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
children; thus he walks step by step with God, and the more he resembles God,
the closer he walks with him.

5. A Christian walks with God by daily observation of the passages of his
providence toward him, whether they be passages of mercy or of justice, Psalm
77.11, 12. I will remember the work of the Lord, surely I will remember thy
wonders of old. I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy doings;
when a mercy comes he observes it, and says, this the Lord has sent me; or if
a correction be inflicted on him, he says, God has laid his hand on me.

6. A Christian walks with God by having his conversation in heaven, Philip.
3.20. Our conversation is in heaven, for God is in heaven, and he that would
walk with him, must ascend thither in affection, and set his heart on things
above.

7. A Christian walks with God by frequent and fervent prayer, expecting an
answer to his prayers: David prayed seven times in a day, and Daniel three
times: prayer is a sweet talking with God; though God be in heaven, and a true
Beleiver upon earth, yet he can talk with God as if he was in heaven with him.
Yea, prayer is a corner of heaven to a gracious walker with God; likewise he
expects a return of his prayers, Psalm 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will
speak, and this is a chief part of walking with God.

8. A Christian walks with God by the life of faith, Hab. 2.4. the just shall
live by faith; for faith is a resting upon God and his gracious promises; now
the faster a man adheres to God, the closer he walks with him.

Reas. The first reason is, because if we walk with God, then he will take us
to himself when we die, so its said, Enoch was not, for God took him, that is,
to heaven; at our death we shall change our place, but not our company; walking
with God is the way to heaven, such as are strangers to him, how can they hope
to be with him? its better being with God in heaven, then here below. David
accounted, that a day in the Lords Courts were better than a thousand
elsewhere: Oh then how infinitely far sweeter is it to be in heaven eternally
then to be here on earth a few days? as ever you desire to go to heaven when
you shall depart this world, walk with God whilst you live upon earth.

2. Because this will be an extraordinary comfort and honor to us, both here
and hereafter, Hebr. 11.5. By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death, and was not found, because God had translated him, for before his
translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God: Its a great comfort to
a friend to walk often with his dear companion, much more to walk intimately
with God. Jacob after he had wrestled with Christ comforted himself thus, I
have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved. Likewise its the greatest
honor in the world to walk with God, it made Enoch his memory to be blessed
until this day, and so it will be to the end of the world. So it was to
Hezekiah in his sickness, he said not, remember, Lord, that I have been a man
honorable, rich and famous in the eyes of the world, that I have been an
earthly King, but that, I have walked before thee in truth; as ever you desire
to have solid joy in your consciences, and everlasting renown, make it your
daily care and study how to walk strictly with God.

3. Because God is Almighty and Alsufficient, therefore walk with him, Genesis
17.1. if thou shall straggle from him like a wandering sheep, he is Almighty,
and so able to correct thee severely, as he did with the Israelites very often,
which you may read in Psalm. 78. if thou keep close to him, he is Almighty,
and so able enough to reward thee, as he did with Enoch, Abraham, Job, David
and others.

4. Because this will keep one from the common errors and corruptions of the
times. Psalm 119.1, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the way; who walk, in the
Law of the Lord, they also do no iniquity, they walk in his ways; that is,
they make not a trade of sin, they get no habit of it, they do it not with
their whole heart, and full consent of will. Philip. 3.19, 20. Who mind earthly
things: for our conversation is in heaven; as if he had said, that is our
preservative against earthly mindedness. In the time of pestilence if one could
live high in the fresh air, he might be free from the infection; now to walk
with God is to live in heaven, high above the earth, and such as do so escape
the pollutions of the world; this will keep the pure in an impure generation,
like fish that is fresh in the salt water of the Sea: for God is a pure and an
holy God, and the nearer and closer any walk with him, the more he imparts his
divine nature to them, infusing his blessed Spirit into their souls; now his
grace is sufficient enough to fence and fortify them against the contagious
corruptions of the times; as ever you desire to escape the infection of those
sins which others daily run into, walk with God all your days.

5. Because God is our best friend and guide, Ps^lm 73.24, 25, 26, 28. Thou
shall guide me with thy council, and afterward receive me to glory: whom have I
in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee: my
flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever: but it is good for me to draw near to God. We meet with many false
hearted in the world, but we shall find God a faithful fast friend for ever. We
have followed false guides to long, but follow God, and you will find him a
sure guide, he will never leave you till he has brought you to heaven: None of
us, but we desire to walk much with a dear friend whom we love as our own soul;
What friend have we like to God? Who can do that for us which God has done,
and does daily, and will do for ever, if we can walk constantly with him?

6. Because this will make us walk uprightly and justly toward one another, as
becomes Christians, Micah 6.8. The Lord does require of thee to do justly, and
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God: This last is the ground of the
former, for a man cannot do justly, nor love mercy, in obedience to God
requiring these, nor with respect to his own souls eternal good (which is
there meant) until he walk with God; for such as walk with him, to them he
shows his secret will, and teaches them, by walking with him, to walk
uprightly toward men: Now this is profitable, comfortable, and commendable for
us. What is the reason that many live so unjustly, care not whom they abuse by
fraud, violence and other wicked ways? its because they walk not with God; God
never taught them to do thus: exact walking with God would prevent this;
sometimes Gods own Children some of them fall into some acts of injustice and
cruelty toward others; as David gave Mephibosheth his estate to Ziba; caused
Vriah to be set in the place of greatest danger: Lot abused his Daughters; but
this was not because they walked with God, but because they walked no closer
with God. As ever you desire your memory should be blessed by upright carriage
and just walking toward men, be sure while you live to walk with God, then
your memory shall be blessed, when the name of the wicked shall rot.

7. Because this will move God to bless you with multitude of mercies, which
you may see promised to Abraham, Genes. 17. I am the Almighty God, walk before
me, and be thou perfect, and I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and I
will multiply thee exceedingly; and so forward in the rest of the Chapter, he
is very bountiful and liberal, and if we have hearts to walk with him, he cares
not what mercies he bestows on us: we give special tokens of love to such as be
our dear friends, the like will God do to his.

Use. I told you in the first place, that a Christian walks with God by
acquainting himself with God, and being at peace with him: This Use serves to
reprove such as make no peace with God, but run into all wickedness, provoking
and offending the Majesty of heaven; their care is how to curry favor with the
world, but peace with God they undervalue.

Consider this you ungodly sinners, that if great good shall come unto such as
are at peace with God, then great vengeance shall come to such as be his
enemies; what will you do in the day of judgment, when God shall summon you
before his dreadful Tribunal?

2. I told you in the second place, that a Christian walks with God by doing
all his actions as in Gods sight and presence: This Use still serves to reprove
all such as walk not with God this way; they are most profane Atheists,
thinking God sees them not, therefore they rush presumptuously into sin, as the
horse rusheth into the battle, because God is not in all their thoughts; Job
24.15. The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, no eye shall
see me, and sets his face in secret: but know this you ungodly Atheists,
that the all-seeing eyes of God are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun,
they are like to flames of fire, and will epsy out your naughtiness, for he is
of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity; though you
foolish Atheists say in your hearts, there is no God, and therefore are corrupt
and do abominably, yet the Lord looks down from heaven upon you, and will
reward you accordingly.

3. I told you in the third place, that a Christian walks with God by referring
all his actions to Gods glory: This Use still serves to reprove such as walk
not thus with God; very few aim at this most noble end, though they were made
for it; the most look at their own ends, at their own profit, own pleasure, at
their own credit and honor, to be seen of men, and to be commended by others:
doubtless this is one reason why there is so much hypocrisy, and so little
sincerity, if all men would earnestly seek the glory of God in all their ways
and actions, there would be no hypocrites, for this is a sure mark of an
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile; doubtless this disrepect of Gods
glory is the chief cause of so much contention and division about Religion and
worldly matters, this is it that hinders reformation every where; if Gods glory
were dearer to all of us, we should agree better in points of godliness, we
should not so easily rush into such frivolous suits and quarrels about a little
white and yellow earth.

Consider this you self-seeking hypocrites, who look only at your own ends,
because you seek not now to glorify God, he will (except you amend) curse your
posterity, he will cause your name and memory to rot, you shall have no solid
comfort here, nor eternal peace hereafter. Remember Jeroboam the Son of Nebat,
who made Israel to sin, he sought his own ends in setting up Calves at Dan and
Bethel, but this renderd him odious ever after. Remember John in throwing down
Baals Idolatry, he sought his own ends, he aimed not at Gods glory, his
hypocrisy was at last detected and accordingly rewarded. Remember Balaam went
with Balacks Messengers, nay he went in pretended obedience to Gods Command,
but he aimed at his own ends, he went for the wages of unrighteousness, then
the Lords anger was kindled against him, and afterward he perished by the
sword. Remember Judas served Christ, but it was for his own ends, to get money,
he repined at Mary when she anointed Christ's feet, pretending that ointment
might have been sold for much, and be given to the poor, not that he cared for
the poor, but because he was a theif and bare the bag, but his hypocrisy could
not long lurk in secret, at last he sold his Master for thirty silverlings,
which amounts to three pounds and fifteen shillings, then fell into despair and
hanged himself, and his belly burst, and his bowels fell out, signifying, that
such a wretched miscreant was unworthy to be born into this world, and because
he had no bowels of love to his Master, his bowels burst and fell out. Now all
these things happened unto them for examples; and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come; wherefore let him that
thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that a Christian walks with God by an
exact imitation of God, according to the rules of his Word: This Use still
serves to reprove all such as walk not with God this way; the most follow the
multitude to do evil, but alas how few follow God? the vain customs of the
country, and the idle traditions of many of our ancestors are in greater
request with many than the Scripture; reprove diverse people for notorious vices
out of the Scripture, yet they allege, they do but as the most, and according
to the fashions of the times, but know, that if you will do as the most, you
are like to be hereafter where the most must be, and that is not in heaven I am
sure: exhort diverse to necessary duties of godliness with Scripture Arguments,
tell them they must be followers of God as dear children in these and these
graces: they allege that this is not in request with many, there are but few
that take this way, they think they may save all this pains, and yet do well
enough: Oh what enemies are the most to themselves! they follow the devil and
know it not, he leads them hoodwinkt to destruction: Look about you notorious
sinners, many of you have followed Satan forty, fifty; or sixty years, by
living in ignorance and all manner of profaneness; you cry, God forbid. But I
say, whom do you serve and follow when you swear, lie, steal, are drunk,
profane the Sabbath, prate against godliness? I appeal to your consciences; do
you think you serve God and imitate him? where did the Lord ever teach you
these sins? flatter not your selves, you follow Satan, and to him you must go
at last, if you repent not in time.

5. I told you in the fifth place, that a Christian walks with God by daily
observing the passages of his providence to him, whether of mercy or justice:
this Use still serves to reprove all such as walk not with God this way; when
the hand of God is lifted up they will not see, neither will they behold the
Majesty of the Lord; if he send them many blessings, they sacrifice to their
net, and burn incense to their drag; they thank their own wit, strength,
industry and care; if God afflict them with miseries, they impute all to luck,
chance, and fortune; this Atheistical blockishness keeps them from true
repentance, for they turn not to him that smites them: understand ye brutish
among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? If now ye will not take
notice of divine providence, you shall hereafter be forced to acknowledge the
hand of his justice, when you shall lie perpetually under the weight of his
wrath.

I told you in the sixth place, that a Christian walks with God by having his
conversation in heaven: This Use still serves to reprove all such as walk not
with God this way, many men have some cold lazy wishes after heaven, desiring
to be thereafter death, but they have no heart after heavenly things now in
their life; its to be feared they have no treasure in heaven, because their
hearts are not there, for where their treasures are, their hearts will be there
also; they desire heaven for the happiness of it, but if they were there a
while, they could not long endure to be there for the extraordinary holiness of
it a unworthy are many to be men and women, to have reasonable souls, because
they pitch their thoughts daily upon this worldly pelf, the world ingrosseth
their thoughts, word and deeds, they have no leisure to meditate on Gods Law,
nor to discourse about spiritual things: how skilful are they to drive a
trade? and how eager are they in pursuit of worldly profit, but in heavenly
matters they are as silly as little Infants: such as these are penny wise and
pound foolish, and if they look not to it in time, they will one day lament
their folly, in that they had no more care over their souls, when they come to
find this true by their own experience, that it will be no profit to gain the
world and to loose ones soul.

7. I told you in the seventh place, that a Christian walks with God by
frequent and servent prayer, expecting an answer to it: This Use still serves
to reprove all such as call not upon the Lord; they perform some lip-labor,
uttering some cold wishes, but they know not how to pour out their souls in
zealous suites, it seems their hearts were never broken with grief and sorrow
for sin, because they never had the Spirit of grace and supplication poured
upon them; if they draw near God with their lips, their heart is far from
him; oh how weary are they of prayer and other holy duties? Certainly they will
never endure to be in heaven, for there is everlasting singing of Hallelujah
without ceasing; if the Lords service here tire them out in two or three
hours, much more will they be weary of being in heaven so holy a place.

Consider this you ungodly wretches, who have opened your mouths in swearing,
and cursing, and ungodly talking against the way of holiness, and blaspheming
of God, but could never to this day pour out a fervent prayer to God; doubtless
God will not hold you guiltless for these sins, but in the day that he visits,
he will visit these sins upon you, you hypocrites, you generation of vipers,
how hard will it be for you to escape the damnation of hell! you are quickly
weary of the Lords service, and cry, what a weariness is it? but you are not
weary of your sins; look to it betime, and have a care to amend, or else these
great sins will burden your souls, and lie very heavy upon them when you die.

8. I told you in the eighth place, that a Christian walks with God by the life
of faith. This Use still serves to reprove all such as walk not with God this
way; this life of faith is a riddle and a mystery to the most, few understand
and practice it; the most men live by their wits, shifts and policy, but to
live by faith in God they know not; they say they believed ever since they
could remember; but that was not in God; for if God deprive them of his
blessings, and afflict them with miseries, they presently distrust, repine and
run to unlawful means; they can trust God no farther than they see him helping
them with second means, but if outward means be gone, their faith is gone
also, so they trust not God but the means: these do much offend God by
distrust and unbeleif, as the Israelites did in Psalm. 78.

Use. The next Use is for comfort to all such as walk with God.

1. I told you in the first place, that a Christian walks with God by
acquainting himself with God, and being at peace with him: This Use serves to
comfort all such as walk thus with God; happy are you in any condition God
shall lead you into, you may look upward with joy, for though men frown at you,
yet the Lord from heaven smiles upon you, you having peace with God shall have
peace in your own consciences, which will do you more good than millions of
gold, you shall have peace with the blessed Angels, they shall pitch their
Tents about you for your safety: as when one is at peace with the Master of a
family, his servants are ready to do him good: you shall have peace with other
creatures, Job 5.23. Thou shall (...) in league with the stones of the field,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee: (...) is the portion
of all such as are at peace with God, this honor have all the Saints.

2. I told you in the second place, that a Christian walks with God by doing
all his actions as in Gods sight and presence: This Use still serves for
consolation to all such as walk thus with God: two privileges belong to all
such, Psalm 16.9, 11.

The first is in verse 9. Therefore mine heart is glad, and my glory (that is
my tongue) rejoices: This will be a matter of great joy unto thee, to have God
thy dearest friend ever in thine eye. Jacob had enough when he saw Joseph: thou
have enough in seeing thy heavenly father; thou live as do the glorious
Angels, for they continually behold the face of our Father in heaven: God is
ever within the sight of your faith, and within the cry of your prayers. Jacob
having seen Christ, and wrastled with him, was filled with joy, saying, I have
seen God face to face, and my life is preserved: he had special assurance of
protection against Esau his fury, by the clear sight of Christ, which made him
exceeding joyful.

The next privilege is verse 11. Thou will show me the path of life: God is
the good man's guide, the closer you walk with him, the surer he will guide you
to glory: as the Star led the wise men to Christ, and as the Cloud conducted
the Israelites from Egypt to Canaan, so God will never leave thee until he
has brought thee to heaven; the wicked wander in the darkness, and stumble,
but you that walk with God, walk uprightly and surely, you avoid many sins and
punishments which others run into, blessed are you, dear souls, that ever God
inclined your hearts to walk with him.

3. I told you in the third place, that a Christian walks with God by doing all
his actions to Gods glory: This Use still serves to comfort all such as walk
with him after this manner: you blessed Christians, who look at this noble end,
you may confidently expect a noble end of your lives, even glory, honor, and
immortal life in another world: so did our blessed Savior, John 17.45. I have
glorified thee on the earth, and now, O Father, glorfie thou me with thine own
self: God will honor you that honor him, both here, but chiefly hereafter:
the men of this world will speak all manner of evil of you falsely, but God,
with whom you walk, will bring forth your righteousness as the light, and your
judgment as the noon day: you are here defamed and reputed as the filth of the
world, and the offscouring of all things; yet by advancing the glory of God,
your memory shall be blessed, when the name of your enemies shall rot.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that a Christian walks with God by a strict
imitation of God according to his word: This Use still serves to comfort all
such as walk with God this way; herein lies your happiness, in that you
resemble God the most perfect example, which will move him to love you most
dearly, for likeness is the cause of love; this is the reason, why the
righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 12.26.
because he is so like to God, he is made a partaker of the divine nature, which
is the highest privilege in the world, by virtue whereof a godly man being a
god-like man, is worth ten thousand reprobates, Christ would not part with such
an one for all the wealth in the world.

You heaven-born Saints, who walk with God by imitating him, his heart stands
most to you, and he will own you for his at the last day, when others shall be
rejected and condemned.

5. I told you in the fifth place, that a Christian walks with God by his daily
observing the passages of divine providence, whether of mercy or justice: This
Use still serves to comfort all such as walk with God this way; happy are you
that are thus qualified, God has opened your eyes to see the holy One of
Israel, you may see many tokens of Gods favor to you, which will confirm your
faith in his promise and providence, Isai. 26.8. In the way of thy judgments
have we waited for thee: you wait for God in the way of his judgments,
therefore he will meet you in every cross, and sanctify it to you, that it
shall leave you better than it found you, he will mitigate the smart of his
rods to you, and enable you to bear them, and at last he will give a gracious
issue out of all crosses, Psalm 123.2. So our eyes wait upon the Lord our God,
until that he have mercy upon us: you gracious Christians, wait for the Lord
in the way of his mercies likewise, doubtless mercies shall be mercies indeed
to you, you may see love in a little, you may perceive the love of God in small
favors, because the mercies of God come to you by the merit of Christ's blood,
and through the conduit pipe of divine promises, you walking so exactly with
God, he sends you many blessings in his special providence to maintain you in
your journey until you come to heaven, where you shall have enough.

6. I told you in the sixth place, that a Christian walks with God by having
his conversation in heaven: This Use still serves to comfort such as have their
conversation there; you sweet souls, you may expect your Savior confidently
to come from thence to change your vile bodies, and to make them like to his
glorious body: oh blessed are you that ever you were born, but especially, that
ever you were born again, you shall flourish like the tree planted by the water
side, you shall bring forth fruit in season, your leaf shall not wither, and
whatever you do it shall prosper; you live more like blessed Angels than men
upon earth, your life must needs be the sweetest life of all, for you converse
with Christ, and are most inward with God; you taste those sweet comforts and
have a glimpse of those glorious joys, which the earthworms of this world
never see: I am persuaded you would not change conditions with the wealthiest
worldling upon earth; I honor your holiness, I admire your happiness.

7. I told you in the seventh place, that a Christian walks with God by fervent
and frequent prayer, expecting an answer: This Use still serves to comfort all
such as walk thus with God, you may take much comfort to your selves, in that
God has given you the spirit of supplication, your prayers are sweet music
and delightful melody in Gods ears; so Christ speaks to his Church, Cant.
2.14. O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of
the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is
thy voice, and thy countenance is comely: A father delights more to hear the
prattling of his little child, than the bawling of many beggars at the door; God
regards not the howling of hypocrites, but for you that walk with God, your
prayers are as sweet incense in his nostrils, though you chatter like a
Swallow, and cruttle like a Turtle, yet the Spirit helps your infirmities, and
God, who knows the meaning of the Spirit, accepts of your desires, though you
can utter but nonsense in words, and broken English, yet God will make good
sense of your suits, because he delights in them. Prayer is a corner of heaven
to you, your petitions shall not come weeping home for want of answer, but God
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will hear their cry, and will
save them, for he is nigh unto them that call upon him in truth.

8. I told you in the eighth place, that a Christian walks with God by the life
of faith: This Use still serves to comfort all such as walk with God after this
manner. You blessed Christians, that live by trust and confidence in God, you
live the surest life for comfort of all people in the world, you are seated
upon the Rock of eternity, let the world be changed, and turned upside down,
yet you stand safe, you may see the rising and falling of many, but you shall
hold your hold, for you have the surest hand hold by the hand of faith upon
Gods all sufficiency that is in the world; when the creature is drawn dry, and
these broken cisterns can hold no water of consolation for you, then shall your
faith find super-abundant comfort in God the fountain of living waters, Habak.
3.17.18. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vines, the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat, the stock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no heard in
the stals; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation: the holy Prophet foreseeing, by the Spirit, the fearful desolation
that the Babylonians should make in the Jews Nation, comforts himself and other
true beleivers in this, that when all livelihood is wasted, and outward
maintenance perished, when the Babylonian had plundered their Nation, had not
left them an house to dwell in, nor any provision to nourish and relieve them,
yet by the strength of his faith, he assures both himself and others of
comfort, provision and nourishment enough in God. The life of faith is a most
secure life, when a man by reason of want is ready to sink, then faith holds
the head above water, and makes one to see contraries in contraries, as fullness
in want, health in sickness, life in death, vivitur ingenio, is the life of
worldly men, but vivitur fide, is the life of righteous Saints.

Use. The last Use serves for exhortation to stir us up to walk with God as
Enoch did.

1. I told you that a Christian walks with God by acquainting himself with God,
and being at peace with him: This life serves to exhort us all to walk with God
this way: consider the pathetical motives the Holy Ghost uses in Job 22.24.
etc. Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones
of the brook. Ophir was a place in India, where the purest gold in all the
world was gotten; Merchant-ships coming to the foot of the chiefest hill in
Ophir waited their opportunity, when the Lions and other wild beasts in it were
gone to seek for prey, then they went a shore and got much precious gold. Now
if thou be at peace with God, God will not let thee want, if thou can eat
gold thou shall have it, he thinks the gold of Ophir too little for thee, thou
shall not want, for the Lord Jehovah shall be thy Cator, ver. 25. Yea, the
Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of silver: thou
needst not fear any danger whilst the Lord is thy defense: verse 26. For then
shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto
God: its a sweet thing to solace ones soul in God, and to bath ones Spirit in
the streams of his love, such have comfort which is not to be found in the
creature: verse 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear
thee, and thou shall pay thy vows: This is a mercy worthy gold, to pray, and
be heard, to unlock heaven gates by the key of prayer, and fetch mercies
thence: verse 28. Thou shall also decree a thing and it shall be established
unto thee, and the light shall shine upon thy ways: God will fulfill thy
desires, and not frustrate thy expectation, and the light of his countenance
and precious providence shall shine upon thy ways: verse 29. When men are cast
down, thou shall say, there is lifting up, and he shall save the humble person:
Though good men may be cast down sometime by the hand of violence, yet thou by
the strength of thy faith, having peace with God, shall be assured of rising up
again. Let these golden privileges of a Christian incite thee, with all
earnest care and pains to be inward with God; make peace with him though you
have little peace with men, for this is the ground of your hope and happiness,
this is that will afford you the greatest security and sweetest contentment in
the evil day.

2. I told you in the second place, that a Christian walks with God by doing
all his actions as in Gods sight and presence: This Use still serves to exhort
us all to walk with God after this manner, whatever you take in hand, ever set
God before your eyes; his eyes are always upon you, let yours be always upon
him, this will keep thee from revolting and apostatizing from him, Psalm 16.18.
I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved: as if he had said, neither by Satan, nor by the world, but I
shall stand fast against all mine enemies, nothing shall draw me away from him:
if the most would eye God in their ways, they durst not rush into presumptuous
sins so often as they do, but because they do think that God sees them not,
therefore they wax bold to break his Laws: in every way and work be sure to
consider Gods omnipresence, and his all-seeing eye, and it will restrain thee
from many slips.

3. I told you in the third place, that a Christian walks with God by referring
all his actions to the glory of God: This Use still serves to exhort you all to
walk with God after this manner; let this glory be dearer to you than your own
ends, then will you be more firmly united in the bond of peace, for then the
glorious Spirit of God will tie your hearts together in spiritual unity;
self-seeking is the greatest cause of most dissentions both in Church and
Commonwealth: let it be your chiefest study and care how to promote the glory
of God, and then your particular ends shall sooner be attained, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me I will honor: God there promised; David endeavored to
honor God, so did Hezekiah, Josiah, Job, Joseph, Daniel and others; and in
holy Writ you may find recorded how much God honored them with blessings
spiritual and temporal; this is the surest way to eternize your good names, and
to render your memory blessed, by seeking to advance Gods glory.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that a Christian walks with God by a strict
imitation of God according to the rules of his Word: This Use still serves to
exhort you all to walk with God this way; nature teaches thee to imitate thine
earthly parents, and have thou not so much grace as to imitate thy heavenly
Father? thou have imitated the sinners of this world too long, thou have
wearied thy self to commit iniquity with them; what fruit had you in those
things whereof you shall be ashamed, if you be not already? for the end of
those things is death: read the Word, search the Scriptures, and they will
teach thee what a One God is how holy, merciful, wise, just and perfect, let
him be thy daily pattern, and thou shall sooner attain unto perfection; the
less you imitate him, the more imperfect you are, and the more you imitate him,
the more perfect you are: Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
children: he will not lead you to any thing hurtful and dangerous to your
souls, but follow and imitate him as exactly as you can, and he will lead you
at last into fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

5. I told you in the fifth place, that a Christian walks with God by daily
observation of the passages of his providence to him: This Use still serves to
exhort us all to walk with God this way, this is a sign of a wise man so to do:
Hosea 14.9. Whose is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and
he shall know them? that is, the promises and passages of his providence and
love: this will much confirm thy faith, and comfort thy heart. Much water runs
by the Mill that the Miller never sees, so there are many precious passages of
divine providence which pass by diverse that they never take notice of; look
therefore at God in every mercy and correction, look higher than second causes,
and say within thy self, here is a token of my heavenly Fathers love, here is a
gift from heaven, this mercy, or this correction, comes from my God: so did the
godly formerly, Genes. 48 9. Joseph said to Jacob, they are my sons whom God
has given me. Job. 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away. Learn to
say and do therefore as the godly did in Psalm 123. Unto thee lift I up mine
eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens: Let no passage of divine providence
go by thee without diligent observation.

6. I told you in the sixth place, that a Christian walks with God by having
his conversation in heaven: This Use still serves to exhort you all to walk
with God this way, thy chiefest treasure is there, thy best friends are there,
why then do thou set thine heart here upon things beelow? God has given
thee an upright body, so as thou may look often up toward heaven, that
thine heart may be lifted up thither; aquila non capit museas, scorn to imbase
thy noble soul by doting upon things of the earth, a little means will suffice
nature, thou need not be so greedy after gain; had thou a whole Lordship,
nay a whole Kingdom, yet thou can dwell but in one house at a time; had
thou the richest Wardrobe in the world, thou can wear but one suite of
apparel at a time; had thou thy Table furnished with all varieties, thou
can eat but a bellifull of meat at a time, enough is as good as a feast. Oh
let thine heart mount up toward heaven daily upon the wings of divine
contemplation, then thy soul shall go thither at last; its no easy thing to
get thither, the way to hell is down the hill, and down the stream, but the way
to heaven is up the hill, and against the stream, rightly said the Poet: --
facilis descensus Averni,
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,
Hic labor, hoc opus est.
Therefore look upward often whither thy Redeemer is ascended; the sight of the
outside of heaven here below should draw up our hearts thither, and make us
less regard these worldly delights, for if the outside of heaven be so
glorious, that is bespangled with the Sun, Moon and Stars, how glorious is the
inside of it? you are daily within the sight of heaven your Fathers house, Oh
let your hearts be there till your souls be there for ever: lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths for your feet;
loose not heaven for want of pains and labor, you may buy gold too dear, but
heaven you cannot.

7. I told you in the seventh place, that a Christian walks with God by fervent
and frequent prayer, expecting an answer: This Use still serves to exhort us
all to walk with God after this manner, pray continually, ply the Throne of
grace hard, give the Lord no rest until he has brought thee to sing
everlasting hallelujah in heaven. God has in many places of his Word promised
to hear and grant the suits of his people, if thou be one of his, thou
may pray with confidence to be heard. Moses talked with God in the Mount
until his face shone, be thou also frequent in fervent prayer, and it will make
thy soul to shine in grace. Jacob wrestled with Christ by prayer until he
halted, be thou likewise earnest with God until thou have weakened thy
corruptions and made them lame; thou that have the spirit of grace and
supplication, have such a treasure to enrich thee, such a weapon to defend
thee, as no worldling has, thou may by the key of prayer unlock heaven
gates and fetch mercies thence, in any place wherever thou live, for the way
to heaven is as near to a true Christian in one place as in another: its a
sweet thing to talk often with God, and to be inward with him, he will give no
little joy to such.

8. I told you in the eighth place, that a Christian walks with God by the life
of faith: This Use still serves to exhort you all to walk with God this way,
let your life be a continual dependence upon him, trust in the Lord for ever,
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, he is faithful that has
promised, he never deceived any that trusted in him, this is your sure hold,
true faith in his promises and providence will not fail you, you will find
friends, riches, pleasures, honors and other delights of this world to be
miserable comforters, but rest upon God by faith, and you will find him a fast
friend, and a sure comforter; endeavor daily to rest upon him with such
strength of faith, as that when all outward helps fail, you may not doubt, nor
fear, but may in patience possess your souls, and quietly rest upon God for
releif and succor, not seeking after indirect means for your help; if you can
attain to this life of faith, you will find more comfort in want, than others
in their wealth, more comfort in sickness, than others in their health, it will
make you better in your worst estate, than unbeleivers are in their best
estate, you are better in disgrace, than they are in honor, you are better in
bondage, than they are in liberty; when thou wast a little child thou could
sport and play, and tookest no care for maintenance, but did rest upon thy
earthly parents for food and raiment, and now thou art come to years of
discretion, wherein thou should have attained to knowledge and faith, have
thou not yet learned to trust thy heavenly Father for body and soul? why do ye
doubt, oh ye of little faith? cast thy care wholly upon God, and he will care
for you; thou pretendest thou can trust God for thy souls everlasting peace,
and can thou not trust him for thy present bodily mantenance? ^oul the weight
of all thy cares wholly upon the Lords blessed providence, live the life of
faith, and thou shall die the death of the righteous, yea, thy last and shall
be like his.

SERMON III.
Text, JOHN. 13.8. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me.
WE are all by nature polluted with iniquity both in soul and body, and have
need to cry with the Leper, unclean, unclean; if this sinful pollution be not
washed away, it will prove destructive to our souls and bodies eternally; the
only means to wash away this pollution is the precious blood of our blessed
Redeemer, which he does by the merit and efficacy of it; for if he wash us with
his blood we shall be Kings and Priests unto God, Revel. 1.5, 6. but if he wash
us not, we have no part with him.

Touching the occasion and coherence of these words, we read in the first verse
of this chapter, its said. Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus
knew that his hour was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the
Father, etc. verse 2. and supper being ended, etc. verse 4. he rises from
supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towell and girded himself:
verse 5. After that he pours water into a basin, and began to wash the
Disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girded: verse
6. Then comes he to Simon Peter, and Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou
wash my feet? verse 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, what I do thou know
not now, but thou shall know hereafter: verse 8. Peter says unto him, Thou
shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou have no
part with me. Christ washed their feet, partly to show his admirable love to
them, partly to give them an example of humility, and love one to another; and
lastly to intimate, that he only cleanses us from our sins, 1 John 1.7. when
Peter said, Lord, do thou wash my feet? this he seemed to say, as fearing it
had been too much dishonor for Christ, the Son of the immortal God, to wash a
sinners feet, not then fully understanding as after he did, 1 Peter 1.19. that
he came to redeem us with his own precious blood; in effect he said, O my Lord,
do thou wash my feet with those sacred hands, with which thou did open the
eyes of the blind, heal the sick, and raise the dead, etc. I am unworhty to
perform this office to thee, and would thou do it for me? Christ told him,
verse 7. What I do thou know not now, etc. as if he had said, Peter thou
do not as yet understand the reason of this act of mine, thou shall in due
time know upon what ground I do it, but in the mean time it behooves thee to
submit thy self with all humble obedience to this work I have in hand, for if I
wash thee not, thou have no part with me: the meaning is, if I do not wash thee
both by my blood, shed for the expiation of man's sin, and by the sanctifying
power of my Spirit (which I would represent unto thee by this washing) thou
can have no part of glorious comfort with me, no interest in me, no benefit
by me: afterward, verse 12. Christ sat down with his Disciple to the Passover;
where by the way observe: That Christ celebrated four Passovers.

The first was mentioned in John 2.23. which as the learned conceive, was
celebrated on the sixth day of April.

The second Passover they conceive is mentioned John 5.1.

The third they conceive is in John 6.4.

The fourth here mentioned in this chapter, and in Math. 26. Mark 14. Christ
kept his Passover the fourteenth day of the first month, called in the Hebrew
Abib, Exodus 13.4. in the Chaldee tongue Nisan, Esther 3.7. containing part of
March, and part of April, for that indeed was the proper time first appointed
by the Lord, Exodus 12.6. he did not tarry the other two days, as the Jews did
before they kept it. The tenth day every one was to begin to prepare, and so
Christ did by coming to Jerusalem, for he came thither six days before the
Jews kept their Passover, the first of which answered to our Monday, and the
fourth to Thursday. That the Jews kept not their Passover till two days
after, it is plain, because he being taken by them that night, and brought to
the judgment Hall next morning, being Friday, it is said, that they would not
go in, because it was their preparation to the Passover, John 18.28. so they
kept not the Passover till the next day, being our Saturday, but their Sabbath.
That Christ kept his Passover before the Jews kept theirs, is expressly noted
in this chapter, for his last Supper is said to be before the Passover: but
this by the way.

These words in my Text contain two parts.

1. A Supposition, If I wash thee not.

2. A Position, Thou have no part with me.

Doct. From hence observe this Doctrine, That if Christ wash us not, we have no
part with him, that is, no part of grace, glory, comfort, or spiritual benefit
with him; what he spoke to Peter, he spoke to us all. This Point has two
branches.

The first is, That Christ washes us, and that he does five ways.

1. By the Sacrament of Baptism, Math. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water,
etc. but he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire: that is, with
the holy Ghost like to fire in operation and effect; Titus 3.5. But according
to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost: that is, by the renewing of the holy Ghost, which is like a bath of
water, whereby our filthy sins are washed away, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. whereof
Baptism is a sign and a seal: in the original it is, by the laver of
regeneration, he alludes to the laver of brass, Exodus 30.18, in which the
Priests washed themselves when they ministered in the Tabernacle.

2. By his blessed Word, John 15.3. Now ye are clean through the Word which I
have spoken unto you? that is, the Word which I have spoken to you was
accompanied with such power of the Spirit, that like water it cleansed you from
corrupt affections.

3. Christ washes us by the merit and efficacy of his precious blood, 1 John
1.7. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, namely,
by the merit and efficacy of it.

4. Christ washes us by the saving graces of his holy Spirit, Titus 3.5. and
renewing of the holy Ghost: Ezekiel. 36.25. Then I will sprinkle clean water upon
you: that is, the saving graces of the holy Ghost.

5. Christ washes us by his gentle corrections and trials sanctified to us;
afflictions are compared to water, Psalm 66.12. We went through fire and
through water: Psalm 42.7. Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water
spouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me: as if he had said, one
affliction (like so many waves) comes in the neck of another, and in a
miserable succession, as it were, calls for the next, upon the predetermination
of these my adversities, which do, as it were, gush out from thee, by those
conveiances which thou have ordained; now the fruit of these afflictions
sanctified is set down in Isaiah 27.9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin.

Reas. Because God ordained and sent him for this end, John 6.27. For him has
God the Father sealed: that is, ordained and authorized him to be the only
means to wash and cleanse us; such as seek by other means to get their sins
washed away, and not by his blood, will loose their labor, and such as seek to
have them washed away by his blood, shall certainly enjoy this mercy, because
God has ordained him to this work, and he will do it perfectly.

2. Because he only can do it, he has infinite merit and efficacy in him; it
belongs to his priestly office to wash our sins away, Hebr. 9.14. How much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit (that is his
Godhead) offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead
works, etc. all doctrine belongs to his Prophetical Office, all merit belongs
to his Priestly Office, all efficacy belongs to his Kingly Office.

3. Because Christ purchased and procured pardon of sins, and peace with God
for us; therefore he is said, 1 Corinthians. 1.30. to be made to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: God the Father is every true
beleivers portion, Christ by his blood has purchased this portion for them,
and the holy Ghost seals this portion to them, Ephesians. 1.13. Ye were sealed
with that holy Spirit of promise; that is, which Christ promised to send to his
Elect, in John 14. and 16. chapters.

The second branch is, If Christ wash us not, we have no part with him: 1 Corinthians. 6.10, 11. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God: and such were some of you, but
ye are washed, etc. implying, that such wicked persons for want of this washing
are like to be damned.

Reas. Because no filthy unclean thing can come into heaven, for God is of
purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity: now such as be not
washed with Christ's blood are very filthy; heaven is a place of infinite purity
and holiness, on earth unclean persons are suffered to dwell, but into heaven
they shall never enter.

2. Because if Christ wash us not we have no peace with God, for all true peace
with God arises from Christ his washing us, Romans 5.1. Therefore being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ:
Justification is Gods gracious sentence, whereby (for Christ apprehended by
faith) he absolves a beleiver from sin and death, and reputes him just to life;
for in justification Christ's blood by its merit washes away sin, which
provokes God to anger, but when that is removed, we have peace with God; but
such as have no peace with God, are never like to have part with Christ.

3. Because if he wash us not we shall never enjoy the precious benefits of his
death, resurrection, ascension, and intercession, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. As Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself (viz. to death) for it: that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word: that is, by
baptismal water, and his word taught; for whom he washes, they enjoy the
spiritual benefit of his death, resurrection, etc. and as Paul proves at large,
Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Colos. 3.1, 2. yea, this washing is a sure sign of his love
to us, Revel. 1.5. unto him who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood; but such as have no right to the death, resurrection, ascension
and intercession of Christ, cannot be saved.

Next I shall teach you how to use this point. The Uses I shall draw out of
those five ways mentioned, whereby Christ washes us.

Use. I told you that Christ washes us by the Sacrament of Baptism: This Use
still serves to reprove all such as were never washed inwardly, as never felt
the spiritual fruit of baptism in their hearts and lives; they content
themselves with the bare outward washing, and would be accounted Christians,
but no life of Christ appears in their lives; such as were baptized into Christ
have put on Christ, Galat. 3.27. but these never put on Christ, they go to hell
with a Trumpet before them, proclaiming their leudness openly, they declare
their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, they have not crucified their old man,
nor destroyed the body of sin, neither do they walk in newness of life: Simon
Magus was baptized, yet was in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; so
are these, they show themselves to be servants of sin, and their end is like to
be according to their works.

2. I told you in the second place, that Christ washes us by his sacred word:
This Use still serves to reprove such as never felt the lively virtue and
working power of the Word upon their own soul; the Word preached to them was
like water poured upon a Rock: God would have purged but they would not be
purged, therefore they shall not be purged any more, till he cause his fury to
rest upon them; the Word they heard did not profit them, because they did not
believe it, it seemed as a fable to them, had they regarded it, they would have
reformed their lives by it more than they did: but they are so wedded to their
wicked ways, that Gods Word has no place in them, but they are like a Smiths
Anvil, more hardened by many blows: so be they by frequent preaching, they
please themselves in that they can sometimes weep under a cross, but stone walls
can sweat against rain and yet be hard within, so are their hearts as hard, and
their lives as wicked as any heathen; Christ may say to them as he did to
Jerusalem, Jerem. 13.27. Woe to thee, will thou not be made clean! when shall
it once be?

Object. But many such will say, They hope to do as well as the best, for God
is merciful,

Answ. Will ye live in swearing, whoredom, drunkenness, sabbath-breaking,
contempts of godliness, blaspheming Gods people, lying and deceit, and yet say,
you hope for mercy? are these the ways to find mercy with God? if you look no
better about you then thus, but live and die in these sins, you are as sure to
damned, as you are to die, John 8 24. there Christ threatened the Pharisees,
that they should die in their sins, which is the most fearful kind of death
that can be: we account hanging a dogs death, pining a most painful death, or
to die in a stinking dungeon a miserable death, and so they be, yet one may die
any of these ways and his soul be saved, but they that die in their sins
cannot be saved, for they die out of Gods favor, they die enemies to God.

3. I told you in the third place, that Christ washes us with the merit of his
precious blood: This Use still serves to reprove such as never seek to have
themselves washed with it, but still lie under the guilt of sin, they content
themselves with a little overly knowledge of Christ, and with a bare historical
faith, but they never apply Christ's merits to their souls for justification;
their consciences are extremely defiled, they are more full of filthy lusts
than a Serpent is of poison; the Papists teach, that a Christian may merit
heaven by good works, so they offer horrible indignity to Christ precious
merits and many carnal Protestants follow them, thinking they can addle heaven
by their good deeds and good meaning, but all this while they endeavor not to
be found in Christ, that they may be clothed with his righteousness; at their
death, and at the end of the world, they will find their sins the heaviest
burden they ever bare, and then for ever will they be ashamed of their ugly
lusts and filthy sins, which were never washed away with Christ's blood.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that Christ washes us with the saving
graces of his holy Spirit: This Use still serves to reprove such as were never
thus washed; too many loose and profane people, who have not so much as a form
of godliness, these hate and deride holiness, they believe not those places,
Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that
forget God: Hebr. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord: but they
shall find these places true, when they find these judgments threatened
executed upon them; too many be there, who rest in bare civil honesty and in
some outward form of holiness, but are as dead in sins and trespasses as the
other sort be; if there were as many people upon earth naturally dead, as there
be spiritually dead, it would be very sad, fearful and doleful; you may hear
them wish for grace, but they take no pains for it, their hearts rise against
such as are gracious, when they be in health, though in sickness they desire to
die the death of the righteous; its very sad to, see how long many have lived
graceless under excellent means of grace; if a man fall into a swound, and we
pour Aqua vitae into him, we rub him, and use means to recover him, but we
perceive in him no heat, sense, nor motion, we conclude he is dead, the like we
may say of very many, who have been long rubbed and stirred by powerful
preaching, but there appears in them no motion toward holiness, no warmth of
love to Christ and his image, no sense of grace, but coldness in their hearts
and lives, doubtless these men are dead, having no life of God in them.

5. I told you in the fifth place, that Christ washes us by gentle corrections
and trials sanctified to us: This Use still serves to reprove such as be
nothing bettered by afflictions, many crosses has God laid upon them to humble
and reform them, but they, like wicked King Ahaz, sin more in their affliction,
2 Chronicles. 28.22. Jerem. 5.3. he complains of the Jews for their perverseness, O
Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken them, but they have
not greived, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction, they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to
return. In Amos the fourth chapter, God by him complained of the Jews, how he
had many ways afflicted them, Yet ye have not returned unto me, says the
Lord: To many plunge themselves deeper into wickedness when Gods hand is upon
them, they are incorrigible, and grow more obstinate, proud, profane, worldly
minded, and malicious against the truth; to such, lesser crosses will prove the
beginning of sorrows; thou can complain of bitter troubles and smarting
miseries thou have suffered, but what change have they wrought in thy heart and
life? have they made thee more fearful to offend God, and more studious and
careful to please him? then thou art in a blessed condition if it be so; but if
thou be more hardened in sin by afflictions, then know to thy terror, that
the worst is behind; Hosea 5.12. God threatens to be unto Ephraim as a moth,
and to the house of Judah as rottenness; that is, he would try them with lesser
afflictions, and wast them by degrees; but if those did them no good, he
threatens verse 14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion
to the house of Judah, I, even I will tear and go away; I will take away, and
none shall rescue him: that is, he would come with more fearful and terrible
judgments to destroy them, forbearance is no forgiveness, though God have
leade^ heels, yet he has iron hands, easy warnings neglected ever end in
destruction; you that have been oftentimes crushed and pressed with heavy crosses,
yet you are nothing better, but wax worse and worse, your judgment lingers
not, your damnation slumbers not.

Use. 2. For comfort: I told you in the first place, that Christ washes us
with the Sacrament of Baptism: This Use serves for singular consolation to all
that be thus washed, you are happy, and have cause to rejoice: for,

1. First you were baptized into Christ his; death, Romans 6.3, 4. you are buried
with Christ by baptism into death, your old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth you should not serve sin;
now his death will destroy your corruptions, as Irish earth kills venomeous
creatures applied to it; sin may dwell in you, but it shall not have dominion
over you, it troubles you like a tyrant, but it shall never be laid to your
charge; you by faith applying Christ's death to your souls, shall find your
corruptions weaker, and your hearts rising against them; as David's house waxed
stronger and Saul's house weaker, so shall grace grow stronger and sin weaker in
you.

2. You are planted together with Christ in the likeness of his resurrection,
that ye may walk in newness of life; you live above others, in a far more
excellent way than they do, blessed are you that ever you were born, but
chiefly that you were born again; you are more excellent than your carnal
neighbors, you are such, of whom the world is not worthy, you are precious in
the eyes of Jehovah, and he will honor you for ever, your life is gracious,
and your death shall be glorious.

3. You shall have the answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto even
baptism does also now save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good conscience, etc. Here Peter has respect to that
custom which was used in the baptism of those who were of age, the person
baptizing asked the person to be baptized, Whether he believed? and he
answered, I believe, etc. hence by the answer of a good conscience, we may
understand that unfeigned faith, whereof they made confession at their baptism,
and whereby their consciences were purified, and whereby they received
remission of their sins, testified by Christ's resurrection from the dead;
also we may understand that covenant whereinto they entered at their baptism,
the embracing whereof they testified by their unfeigned confession of their
faith; this benefit you shall receive by baptism, by applying unto your souls
the power of Christ's resurrection, your consciences shall be both quieted and
assured of pardon and favor, and is thereupon enabled to treat for, and expect
mercy from God, and reconciliation with him, and so the faithful soul, in the
confidence hereof, boldly questioneth with God about his favor reconciled unto
him by Christ's death, and testified by his resurrection, saying, has not
Christ reconciled thy favor unto us by his death to endure for ever? certainly
it is so, for his resurrection does testify it, seeing that unless he had made
a perfect expiation of our sins by his death, and reconciled thy favor unto
us, he could not have risen again to life and heavenly glory.

2. I told you in the second place, that Christ washes us with his sacred
Word: This Use still serves to comfort all such as are washed it by, these
benefits thou shall enjoy by it.

1. You shall ask what you will (if it be according to Gods will, and for his
glory) and it shall be done unto you, John 15.7. which is an high privilege;
prayer is the wing of the soul, wherewith it flies up to heaven to Christ, it
peirceth the clouds, it is a corner of heaven to a gracious soul, it has a
kind of omnipotency in it, it is the key of heaven gates to unlock them; this
is a sign of Gods great favor to you, when he graciously hears and grants
your suits; its a sure sign of an upright heart hating all sin, Psalm 66.18. If
I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me: verse 19. But verily
God has heard me: therefore he might safely conclude, he regarded not iniquity
in his heart: friends will say to one another, you shall prevail with me sooner
than others shall: I will do more for you than for others, doubtless its a sign
you are good friends when you find good hearing and granting your prayers; so
our Savior calls them friends, John 15.14, 15.

2. You shall abide in the love of God, John 15.10 If ye keep my commandments,
ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers commdements, and
abide in his love: what greater happiness can you desire in this world? you
need not fear the malice and fury of devils and wicked men, you need not fear
famine, sword pestilence, poverty, nor death it self, whilst you abide in the
love of God; his loving kindness will be better to you than life, for in his
love is life, yea, it is better than wine, his love will make every thing work
together for your good, it will sweeten crosses and want to you; what if you
loose your outward estate, your liberty, your favor with the world, yea, your
bodily life for Christ, yet your continuing in Gods love will make amends for
all, it will repair your losses, renew your comforts, establish your hearts in
grace, and promote you to glory; you cannot be in a better condition, than to
abide in the love of God.

3. Christ will present you glorious to God, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. That he might
sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by the Word: that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle or any
such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish: as if he had said,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it by his holy Spirit working in us, by his
Word, and by his Sacrament of baptism, as the means thereof, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, etc. Christ presents his Church to God
at three several times.

The first time was, when he was upon the cross, 1 Peter 2.24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree, etc. for he died for all the elect,
and the Lord said upon him the iniquities of them all: the merit of his blood
then shed, and the power of his death extends to all the elect from the
beginning of the world to the end of it, and God looks upon them washed with
that blood, and reconciled to himself by his death.

The second time is from his death to the end of the world, now he is
interceding in heaven, Romans 8.34. Who also makes intercession for us: Christ
is our intercessour four ways:

1. By appearing for us in the sight of God, Hebr. 9.24. he is gone before us
to prepare a place for us, John 14.2. and Hebr. 6.20 Whether the forerunner is
for us entered, even Jesus, etc.

2. By the force of his sacrifice once offered to make full satisfaction to
Gods justice; Hebr. 10 12, 14. Christ presents his merits as a public
satisfaction for the debt of sin, and as a public price for the purchase of
glory, for the justice of God was not to be entreated or pacified without a
satisfaction, and therefore where Christ is called an Advocate, he is called a
propitiation too, 1 John 2.1, 2. because he intercedes for us in the right and
virtue of the price which he paid, for the Lord spared not his Son, Romans 8.32
but dealt in the full rigor of his justice with him.

3. By his constant will, that for the merit of that sacrifice, God would be
pacified to wards the elect, Hebr. 10.10. John 17.24.

4. By the assent and agreement of the Father resting in this will of his Son
for us, John 11.42 Math. 17.5.

The third time is at the day of judgment, when he will say, Behold I, and the
children which thou have given me; then the dead in Christ shall rise first,
then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord;
then Christ will say to his true Members, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world: then shall true
Christians have boldness in the day of judgment, 1 John 4.17. because as he is
so are we in this world: that is, our hearts tell us, that we desire to be
every way conformable to his will, laboring toward that holiness and
perfection which it in him; we are as Christ was in this world, when by the
mortification of our sins we represent Christ dying for us, and by true
brotherly love we come as near to him as we can.

3. I told you in the third place, that Christ washes us with his precious
blood: This Use still serves to comfort all that be so washed; these blessed
privileges belong to you:

First, its a sure sign that Jesus Christ has loved you, Revel. 1.5. Unto him
that has loved us, and washed us in his own blood: If he had not loved thee,
he would not have washed thee; this is thy great honor and comfort, to be
beloved of him; it is a true proverb, he is rich whom God loves, and poor who
God hates; the love of Christ is better than wine, its the ground of all other
comforts, thou need not fear the malice of devils, and wicked men, for the
love of Christ can do more for thee, than their malice can do against thee,
devils are mighty, wicked men are mighty, and sins are mighty, but Christ is
Almighty, for he is God over all blessed for ever, neither can any thing
separate thee from his love, Romans 8. last.

2. A second privilege is, thou art a spiritual King and a Priest, Revel. 1.6.
And has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: that is, as he
redeemed us by his blood, so he has regenerated us by his Spirit, 1 John 5.6.
and made us Kings to rule over the devil, the world and the flesh, and priests
to offer up to God the personal sacrifice of our selves, Romans 12.1. the verbal
sacrifice of praise, and real sacrifice of alms, Hebr. 13.15, 16. what though
thy outward estate be mean and low, thou art nothing set by, yet thou art
honorable, because thou art precious in Gods sight, Eccles. 10.7. I have seen
servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth; yet they
are Princes still, for the righteous, though he be low and contemned, is better
than his rich neighbor that is wicked and lewd, though the world look upon
thee with scorn and hatred, yet God and his glorious Angels behold thee with
delight, for the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope
in his mercy, Psalm 147.11.

3. A third privilege is, thou shall serve and glorify God in an acceptable
manner, Hebr. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit (that is his Godhead) offered himself without spot to God,
purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God? namely, in an
acceptable manner: Revel. 7.14, 15. These are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb: therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Temple; and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them:
that as the waters of the Sea, though they be salt and brackish in their own
nature, yet by running through the veins of the earth loose their
brackishness, and become pure and sweet; so though our service we perform to
God be weak and polluted with sin, yet being presented through the intercession
of Christ, and persumed with his merit, it becomes pleasant and acceptable to
God; and that as David loved lame Mephibosheth for Jonothans sake, even so will
God take in good part thy weak service for Christ's sake.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that Christ washes us with the saving
grace of the holy Ghost: This Use still serves to comfort all such whom he has
thus washed.

For first, he will give thee a new and a tender heart, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Then
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you: a new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh: This is
an excellent fruit of his spiritual washing you; it is a greater blessing than
a house full of gold: David earnestly desired God to create a clean heart in
him: happy for ever art thou that have a tender heart, forthy service performed
to God will be pleasing to him, thou art freed from the dominion and damnation
of sin, thou art more fearful to offend God, and more careful to please him
than others.

2. Now thou shall be able to walk in Gods ways, and to keep his Statutes;
verse 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them: This is a great
happiness, for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in
them, but the transgressors shall fall therein, Hosea 14.9. and blessed is
every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways for these are ways
of pleasantness, and paths of peace; carnal people know not these ways,
neither can they walk in them, but God has given thee life to walk in them
without weariness and fainting, for the way of the Lord is strength to the
upright; now thou walk with God, and to God thou shall go at thy latter end.

3. God will be thy God, and will bless thee, Ezekiel. 36.28, 29. And ye shall
dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I
will be your God: I will also save you from all your uncleanness, and I will
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you. He is God
Almighty, and can do more for you than you can ask or think; he is God
infinitely merciful and pitiful, and therefore will do more for you, than any
enemy can do against you: if you have him to be your God, what can you desire
more? he is the God of all grace, mercy and glory, all happiness is in him, he
is the fountain of all blessedness, happy is that people that is in such a
case, happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

5. I told you in the fifth place, that Christ washes us by gentle corrections
sanctified to us: This Use still serves to comfort all that be cleansed by
afflictions sanctified to them.

For first, Christ will keep thee safe in the midst of great calamities and
dangers; thou shall be mediis tranquillus in undis: Job 5. 20, 21, 22. In
famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword:
thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, neither shall thou be afraid
of destruction when it comes: at destruction and famine thou shall laugh;
neither shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth: He will show his power
most, in preserving thee when thou art exposed to extreme calamities; as he
kept the Israelites at the red sea, the three Children in the fiery furnace,
Daniel in the Lions den; and though Christ works not miracles ordinarily now,
yet he can preserve thee by ordinary means, as well as by miraculous means;
let the means be what it will be, yet thou have the same almighty power and
fidelity of Christ to save thee.

2. Thou shall have peace with his creatures, Job 5.23. For thou shall be in
league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at
peace with thee: that is, all creatures, who are engaged in the quarrels of
their Maker, shall now stand in good terms with thee, and join together to thy
use and service; the blessed Angels have a charge too keep thee in all thy
ways, Psalm 91. so they delivered Lot out of Sodom, and Peter out of prison,
they saved Jacob from Esau; The stars in their courses fought against Sisera,
and helped Deborah and Barak, Judges 4, and 5. the waters of the red Sea gave
way to the Israelites to pass over safely: now you are at peace with the
master of the family, all his servants shall be at your service.

3. Thou shall know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shall visit
thy habitation and shall not sin, Job 5.24. that is, thy family shall live
peaceably with thee, and one with another, all thine shall be safe, and all
thou have shall prosper; thou shall look into the state of thy family,
requiring an account of thy children and servants, how they have carried
themselves, and how things committed to them prosper; and thou shall not be
deceived of thine expectation, but shall find things as thou think, and as
thou would have it, and that thine have been faithful, and thy affairs
prosperous.

4. Thou shall know also, that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as
the grass of the earth, Job 5.25. that is, thou shall live to see thy childrens
children, and shall leave a great posterity behind thee like the grass on the
earth, for a good man being in covenant with God, leaves Gods blessing for a
legacy to his children, when wicked men leave Gods curse to theirs.

5. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes
in in his season: that is, as full ripe corn is made into shocks, and carried
into the b^rn, so thou shall die in peace, and shall not be as wicked men, cut
off in their sins, thy last day shall be thy best day, and the day of thy death
will be better than the day of thy birth; whosoever closes thy bodily eyes at
thy dissolution, the eye of thy soul shall see Christ in his glory; whosoever
bears thy body to burial, the blessed Angels shall bear thy soul to heaven.

Use. 3. For direction, I told you in the first place, that Christ washes us
by baptism: This Use serves to direct us how to get our souls washed by
baptism.

First, remember what a solemn promise we made in our baptism, and how often
we break it; this will be a good means to humble us, and to make us more
careful to keep our covenant.

2. Repent for the frequent breach of it, else it will lie very heavy upon your
consciences at the hour of death, we would be ashamed to break our peace so
often with man, as we have done with God; let Gods faithfulness to us make us
be ashamed of our perfidiousness to him.

3. Labor to feel the efficacy of your baptism, by faith in Christ endeavor
to feel corruption mortified through the power of Christ's death, and your soul
quickened with grace through the spiritual efficacy of his resurrection, then
you put on Christ to your eternal comfort.

2. I told you in the second place, that Christ washes us by his Word: This
Use still serves to direct us how to get our souls washed by it.

First, We must hide it in our hearts, Psalm 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee: and when it cleanses thy heart,
which is the fountain, then it will cleanse thy words and actions streaming
from it.

2. Hear it with a purpose to practice it, Psalm 119.33. Teach me, O Lord, the
way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end: verse 34. Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole
heart: what good will the best meat do to an hungry man if he eat it not? Or
what good will an excellent plaster do to a wounded man if he apply it not? So
what is a man better for hearing and reading Gods Word if he do it not? Micah
2.7. Do not my words good to him that walks uprightly? but if he walk not
uprightly, they are not like to do him good.

3. Make use of it upon all occasions, then as Christ said, John 15.3. ye shall
be clean through the word spoken to you: obey the precepts of it, apply the
promises, and stand in awe of the threatenings, that your profiting may appear
to all: live by the rules of it, walk in the light of it, that you may be such
as God would have you.

3. I told you in the third place, that Christ washes us by the merit of his
precious blood: This Use still serves to direct us how to get our souls washed
by it; that must be by faith, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. We read in the
New Testament, how our blessed Savior healed many that believed in him; there
is mighty efficacy in a true lively faith, to cleanse the soul by applying the
merit and efficacy of Christ's blood; believe steadfastly in the Lord Jesus with
all your heart, and you shall find the strength of sin dying in you.

4. I told you in the fourth place, that Christ washes us with the saving
graces of his holy Spirit: This Use still serves to direct us how to get our
souls thus washed.

First, Get a clear sight of the worth and necessity of them, then you will
pray to Christ with Peter, Lord, wash not my feet only, but also my hands and
my head: there is no desire of a thing unknown; grace is so exceedingly sweet
and lovely, that the spiritual sight of it will set the heart a longing after
it.

2. Hunger and thirst exceeding fervently after grace, and you shall be
satified and washed: Christ is very bountiful of his blessings now he is in
glory; for Revel 22.17. he freely invites us, And let every one that is a
thirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take the waters of life freely: The
more you thirst after these living waters, the faster will they flow into you.

3. Labor to grow in these graces, that you may be perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect, and holy, as he that calls you is holy: think not that a
stock of grace at your conversion, without daily growth, will bear you out to
your latter end, as many in their youth provide worldly riches enough to
maintain them in their old age; you must be always adding to your stock; if a
child were no bigger at twenty years old than when its new born, how could it
help it self? how could it maintain it self? defend it self against dangers? so
if you grow no better after the receipt of Gods abundant mercies, and in
particular, under the plentiful means of grace, how will you be able to serve,
please and glorify God? how will you be able to suffer for Christ? to work out
your salvation with fear and trembling? therefore grow in grace, and then you
shall be more clean from iniquity.

5. I told you in the fifth place, that Christ washes us by afflictions
sanctified to us. This Use still serves to direct us how to get our selves
washed by them.

First, Labor to know the right cause of them; this course is prescribed in
Lamen. 3.39, 40. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: that
is, let us not repine at Gods hand in correcting us, but let us search and try
our ways to find out our sins, our personal and particular failings, which
provoked God to afflict us; this course if we take, we may find cause enough in
our selves to justify Gods righteous hand in afflicting us.

2. Let afflictions drive thee to repentance, to make thee a partaker of Gods
holiness, Hebr. 12.10. But he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness: then they are sanctified to thee, and will tend to the health of thy
soul, as physic that works kindly proves healthful to the body: let crosses
make thee more penitent, more holy, more heavenly, more upright, then it will
be comfortable to thee in thy latter end.

3. Pour out earnest prayers, and hearty suites to God in miseries: this course
Gods people took formerly, Isaiah 26.16. Lord, in trouble they have visited
thee; they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them: pray to our
Redeemer to be with thee in all afflictions, never to leave thee to thine own
weakness, nor to the will of thine enemies; beseech him to mitigate thy
miseries, to sanctify them to thee, to cause them to yield thee the peaceable
fruit of righteousness, to teach thee to make an holy use of them, and to give
thee a gracious issue out of them in his good time, then you may say as Psalm
49.5. Wherefore should I fear in the day^s of evil, when the iniquity of my
heels shall compass me about?

Some may object, What, is there not cause to fear, when the iniquities of our
heels compass us about?

But I answer: That the word in the original (...) which is translated heels,
may signify supplanters, and is read interrogatively, thus, shall the iniquity
or malice of my enemies compass me about? shall they have their will upon me?
his meaning is, they shall not; and the words following in verses 6, 7. favor
this sense. Use all these means to be washed from your iniquities, that you
may have part with Christ; let the world plod, carke and care for profit,
pleasure and preferment (the worldly man's Trinity) as ever you hope and desire
to see the face of Christ to your comfort, and to live with him eternally, I
beseech you now and ever to think of these things, for if Christ wash you not,
you have no part with him.

SERMON IV.
Text, PSALM. 4.3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that is g^dly for
himself.
THis Psalm was penned by David, as the title prefixed shows, and was by him
commmitted to the chief Musician on N^gin^th, to be sung in the public service
at the Tabernacle, and afterward at the Temp^e; for among them that were
appointed to sing the Psalms, and to play on the Instruments, one was
appointed chief, to set the tune, and to begin, who had the charge, because he
was most excellent, as you may see in 1 Chronicles. 15. 21. and 23.4. for the word
Neginoth, the godly and learned lights of the Church, understand it to be meant
of musical instruments, and in particular, of stringed instruments, which were
played on with the hand only, as Harps and Cymbals, Nehiloth were wind
instruments; in those days the Priests and Levites used diverse musical
instruments in Gods worship, and that only in the Temple at Jerusalem, (not in
the Country Synagogues) both to cheer up, and to stir up the attention and
affection of the hearers to the duties then in hand, and to typisie the sweet
spiritual melody and comfort Christians shall have by Christ and his glorious
Gospel now in the New Testament; therefore those musical instruments in Gods
worship, were part of the ceremonial Law, (being used in the Temple, which was
a type of Christ's body, John 2.19, 20.21.) and therefore ought not to be used
in the Gospel Worship now a days, because the ceremonial Law was abolished by
Christ, therefore we must not revive it; also because the Primitive Church
never used such music in Gods worship. Austin conceives that David penned all
the Psalms, but that is not like; those Psalms which he made have his name
prefixed in their title, yet some Psalms which have no titles prefixed, were
made by David, as the ninety fifth Psalm, verse 7, 8. compared with Hebr. 4.7.
where its proved, that David made that Psalm, and its probable he made more
Psalms that want titles prefixed. The Psalms are not placed in order as they
were made, but as they were found by Ezra the Scribe, after the Jews returned
from the Babylonian captivity: the 72. Psalm verse 20. says, The prayers of
David the Son of Jesse are ended: that was the last Psalm that David made, but
was there placed as it was found: the 144 Psalm (as the learned conceive, and
probably) was the first Psalm that David made, to praise God after he returned
from the slaughter of Goliath, though it be placed toward the latter end of the
Psalms, for it was placed there, as it was found, not when it was made. This
Psalm (as some conceive) was made by David, when he prayed for deliverance from
Saul, when he and his Army had almost compassed David in the wilderness of
Maon, 1 Samuel 23.25.26. the purpose of David in this Psalm was, to show his
confidence in God for safety, when his enemies troubled him; and this
confidence he showed by three effects.

1. By a general deprecation of the danger which was near him, verse 1.

2. By a grave expostulation with, and instruction of his enemies, ver. 2, 3,
4, 5.

3. By a solemn profession of his dependence on God alone, ver. 6, 7, 8.

In his speech to his enemies are the words of my Text, which are a reason
moving them to desist from their purpose of abusing David, and turning his
glory into shame, verse 2. as if he had said, O ye proud enemies, that pride
your selves in the favor and countenance of Saul, how long will ye vainly
endeavor to disappoint that glory, that regal dignity, which God has by his
Prophet fore-promised unto me? which reason is drawn from the cause of that
glory which they opposed, which was Gods decree, whereby this dignity was
conferred on David: in which words are:

1. An Admonition, But know.

2. A Proposition, having the nature of a Promise, That the Lord has set apart
him that is godly for himself: Hence observe.

Doct. That God has set every godly man apart for himself: 2 Timothy 2.21. If a
man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work. 1
Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, etc. Reas. Because every godly man is a godlike man, he has
part of God in him, the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
show his handy work, but every godly man shows forth the virtues of him that
called him out of darkness to mavelous light; he shines with the beams of
Gods Spirit, and is a partaker of the divine nature, therefore he follows God
as a dear child: Parents by nature beget children like themselves, much more
will God by regeneration make his children like himself: a godly man resembles
his heavenly Father, for where God loves, he loves, where God hates, he hates:
Nature cannot stamp Gods image upon him, for he is a heaven-born Creature.

2. Because every godly man sets his heart upon God, the stream of his
affections runs to him, his heart opens to him, as the Marigold to the Sun: in
what condition soever he is, his heart is still with God, and he cries with the
Prophet, Psalm 73. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee: Prosperity draws him not, adversity drives him not
from God, he is no vassal to sin, Satan, or the world.

3. Because a godly man endeavors to do every thing that God commands him,
according to his knowledge and abillity, he makes Gods will the rule of his,
and his word the rule of his life: God puts every godly man into a general and
particular calling, and teaches him how to behave himself in these callings;
this makes him a man after Gods own heart, as David for this cause was so
called, Acts 13.22.

4. Because every godly man is Gods factour, he lies ligier for God, as
Merchants have their factors beyond sea, to lie ligier for them, to truck and
barter for them, so does every godly man for God, he trades for him all he can,
Romans 14.8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we die, we
die unto the Lord: Phillip. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is
gain: that is, the end and scope of my life is to honor and exalt Christ.

5. Because a godly man is best fitted and prepared for Gods work and service;
he is one of Gods peculiar people, zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. Gods work
is a pure and cleanly work, and should be done with pure hearts and clean
hands; in the time of Moses Law, the Priests only might offer sacrifice, and
before they did it they might wash their bodies: so a godly man is washed with
the blood of Christ, and the grace of the holy Ghost, by virtue whereof he is
the fittest to do Gods work: it is not for slovenly clowns to wait upon great
men, the work of the devil is filthy, nasty and beastly, wicked men delight in
it, and are the fittest for it.

6. Because only the heart of a godly man will bow and bend to Gods work; it
is a work requiring much labor and self-denial; one must stoop low to take up
this burden: he that loves God truly, loves him with all his heart and
strength, only the godly man does this: he that serves God truly, is fervent
in spirit, serving the Lord, only the godly man does this: he that keeps Gods
Commandments aright, has respect to all his Commandments, and Gods
Commandments are not grievous to him, only the godly man does this. The Jews
say, there be three hundred sixty five negative precepts in the Law, according
to the number of days in the year; and two hundred forty eight affirmative
commanding precepts, according to the number of bones in a man's body, whereby
they would signify, that we must no day do those things which God has
forbidden; and that with all the bones and members of our body we must do all
those things which God has commanded, only the godly man endeavors and
desires to do this.

7. Because God can trust none but the godly man, for the godly man is the
faithful man; let an hypocrite have excellent parts of knowledge, he will set
up himself, and seek his own ends, as the Pharisees, Mat. 6. gave alms, prayed
and fasted, but did all to be seen of men; like an idle unfaithful servant,
that works one hour for his master, and two for himself: but the godly man
resolves to defend Gods cause to the utmost of his power, and to bring all the
glory he can to God: Numb. 12.7. Moses was said to be faithful in all Gods
house, the Martyrs would not for fear or favor of the world betray Gods cause,
but parted with their lives, liberties and estates to glorify Jesus Christ.

8. Because none will do Gods work so well as the godly man, none have so much
care to please God as he; hypocrites slubber over the Lords work; in prayer
they draw near to God with their lips, but their hearts are far from him; when
they hear his Word, their hearts go after their covetousness; in receiving the
Lords Supper, they discern not the Lords body, but receive only the outward
signs: but a godly man prays in prayer as Elias did, James 5 17. (...); his
heart is fixed with David, trusting in the Lord: in hearing the Word, his heart
burns with holy zeal in him, he will be careful and studious both to hear the
Word and do it: in receiving the Lords Supper, he will examine himself before
he eat of that bread and drink of that cup: he will do Gods work according to
Gods will.

Use. The Uses I shall spin out of the Reasons: the first reason is, Because
every godly man is a god-like man: the first Use springing out of this Reason,
will be for consolation to all that be truly godly; its ground of great comfort
to thee that thou art like to God; now thou may be assured of Gods dear
love, that he has loved thee with an everlasting love, which is better than
life: likeness is the cause of love, this godliness is an infallible fruit of
thine election, and once elected, always beloved: as earthly parents most
affect those children which resemble them most, so will thy heavenly Father
exceedingly love thee for being so like to him; the world derides and hates
thee for godliness, but be not dejected, for godliness will be thine eternal
honor and comfort.

2. It may serve for admonition; take heed of despising any man for being like
to God, for in despising him for godliness you despise God, because godliness
is his image.

Many excuse themselves, and say, they hate not a godly man for his godliness,
but for his hypocrisy.

I answer: 1. Why do thou not hate hypocrisy in thy self, and in others,
who make no show of godliness, but live in hypocrisy, and openly declare it?

2. Godliness with some hypocrisy is better than hypocrisy without any
godliness at all; as corn with chafe is better than chafe without corn; gold
with dross is better than dross without gold; you have more reason to love and
honor them for their godliness, than to hate them for hypocrisy, because they
hate hypocrisy and strive against it, but they love godliness, and labor to
grow in it.

3. It may serve to exhort you all to endeavor to be like to God in godliness
both in heart and life.

Consider 1. what an honor it will be to you, it will make your memories
blessed, when the names of the wicked shall rot: very honorable and precious
to this day are the names of Abraham for faith, Moses for meekness, Joseph for
chastity, Job for patience, David for zeal, Daniel for integrity of life, Paul
for love to Christ, Peter and Magdalen for godly sorrow.

2. Consider what a comfort it will be to your consciences, when you follow God
as dear children, so that God is in you of a truth: it was a greater comfort to
blessed Hezekiah, that he had walked before God in truth with a perfect heart,
than that he was honorable and wealthy: none have so much cause to rejoice and
to be of good cheer as the godly man, for he is the friend of God, his sins are
pardoned, Christ is his treasure, the holy Ghost is his Comforter, and heaven
is his inheritance: Psalm 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous;
and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.

Use 2. I told you the second reason was, because every godly man sets his
heart upon God: The Uses arising out of this Reason, serve, first, for
information, to let us see the reason why Gods children enjoy such precious
peace of conscience, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory;
namely, because they set their hearts on God, and their entire love to him will
assure them of his eternal love to them; Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me:
now this is the principal ground of true peace and joy: worldly favor makes
carnal people merry outwardly, and feeds them with vain hopes, it makes them
build Castles in the air, and puts them into a fools paradise; but the
assurance of Gods love fills the heart of the upright with such joy as no man
can take from them, John 16.22. wicked men may take their lives from them,
their estates from them, their liberty from them, but true peace and joy they
cannot take from them, for they set their hearts on the God of hope, who fills
them with joy and peace.

2. It may inform us one reason why Gods children will not be drawn away from
him and his ways, because their hearts are set upon God, and they account it
their best way to draw near to God: all the wealth and honor of Egypt could
not draw Moses from God and his People; the King of Babylon with all his power,
terror, and policy could not make the three Children worship his Idol, nor
restrain Daniel from praying to God.

3. It serves to exhort you all to get your hearts fixed on God, let out all
your love to him in as ample a manner as you can, let your love be so hot as
many waters cannot never quench it, nor floods drown it.

To move you to it, consider, first, how infinitely amiable and perfect God is;
when you understand, that from everlasting to everlasting he is God, without
beginning, mutation and end, strive to love this eternal God: when you consider
that God fills heaven and earth, yea, inhabiteth eternity, no place can
comprehend his incomprehensible essence, set your selves to love this
omni-present God: when you see how easily, powerfully and wisely God made
heaven and earth with all things else strive to love this omnipotent God: when
you see how God pitties, releives and succors his people in their misery, and
gives them help in their time of need, O set your heartiest love upon this
merciful God.

2. Consider how eternally and unchangeably he has loved thee, Jerem. 31.3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love: before thou wast born he loved thee,
yea, when thou wast his enemy he loved thee, and he will love thee for ever,
nothing in this world, nor in the world to come, shall separate thee from his
love.

3. Consider what comfort thou shall have by loving God, 1 John 4.16. God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him: happy is
that soul that has such a guest, for God will make any place a heaven to it:
Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me: thy true love to him will assure thee of
his love to thee, which worldly wealth and honor cannot do, Psalm 91.14.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: God will be
thy defense against danger, he will be a wall of fire about thee. Romans 8.28.
And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God:
nothing shall fall out amiss to thee, but God by his wisdom and power will give
thee an holy comfortable use of all mercies, with an holy use of, and a
comfortable issue out of all miseries.

Use. 3 I told you the third Reason was, because the godly man endeavors to do
every thing that God commands him: The Uses springing out of this reason serve,
first, to inform us, the reason why the godly man is a man after Gods own
heart, namely, because he sets himself to do all Gods will; for this cause
David was so called, Acts 13.22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man
after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will, O that every one of us
had an heart to do all Gods will, then we should be such as God would have us
to be; a hypocrite does but some part of Gods commands, therefore he is not a
man after Gods own heart.

2. It informs us one Reason is, why God so willingly hears and grants the
prayers of his people, that is, because they endeavor to do all Gods commands,
1 John 3.22. And whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his
commandment, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight: Humanity
teaches friends to grant one another suits, when they please one another,
much more will the God of nature, grace and glory, graciously answer the
prayers of his people that study to please him.

2. It serves to exhort us to endeavor to do all that God requires us to do.

Motives. 1. All his commands are holy, just and good, Romans 7.12. Prove. 30 5.
Every word of God is pure: though carnal nature may cavil against some of Gods
commands because they cross it, yet there is no defect in them, but the Law of
the Lord is perfect.

2. To do all Gods will is the ready way to prosperity, Job 36.11. If they obey
and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in
pleasures: God is the best Master to serve, his work is the best, and his pay
is the best: And above all Gods commandments, I exhort you all to keep the
Lords day holy, because he in the fourth Commandment bids us remember to keep
it holy. 2. Because in Isaiah 58.13, 14. he makes it an excellent way of
honoring him, and promises spiritual and temporal prosperity to such as do
it; but if that place be meant of an extraordinary Sabbath, that is, a fast
appointed by man, then doubtless the Lord would have us much more keep holy the
ordinary Sabbath appointed by God.

If any object, Col. 2.16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink,
or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days?
verse 17. which are a shadow of things to come, etc.

I answer, he means, he would not have them observe the Jewish ceremonial
Sabbaths of days, as the three great feasts, Passover, Pentecost, and
Tabernacles, and the feast of blowing the trumpets, and the feast of expiation;
he would not have them observe the Sabbath of years, which was every seventh
year, Levit. 25,4, 5, 6. nor the Sabbath of sevens of years, the Jubilee, verse
8, 9, 10, 11. which returned every fiftieth year, but he speaks not here of the
Sabbath day that is moral: 1. Because the word is in the plural number,
Sabbaths. 2. If he had meant the moral Sabbath, and consequently the Lords day
now observed, then it would follow, that it is unlawful to observe the Lords
day, now under the Gospel, for an holy Sabbath to God, because he says, Let no
man judge or condemn you in meat or drink, etc. where Paul shows, that we are
delivered from the bondage of the observation as of meats, so now of Sabbaths.
But such as oppose the morality of the Sabbath, hold it not unlawful to observe
a Sabbath now, but only indifferent and arbitrary: likewise the Apostles kept
the Lords day, John 20.19. Acts 20 7. 1 Cor. 16.2. therefore the Sabbath day
was mutable from the last day to the first day of the week, and that by the
authority and power of Christ, for he is Lord of the Sabbath, and he only has
power to appoint and change it, which it is like he opened to his Disciples,
Acts 1.3 or if the Apostles altered it, they did it by authority and direction
from him, for Christ promised, John 16.13. the Spirit should guide them into
all truth, therefore into this truth: the Sabbath was not cerimonial, for the
word ceremony comes from (...) cherem, which is a thing consecrated and devoted
to God, typifying something to be accomplished in the new Testament; but the
Sabbath day was no type of the Lords day: Paul said, the Jewish Sabbaths were
shadows, but the body is of Christ, Col. 2.17. or else the word ceremony comes
(...) because ceremonies were to endure but for a time, therefore remember to
keep holy the Sabbath day, now called the Lords day, and God will bless you
with great prosperity and comfortable success the week following.

Use 4. I told you the fourth Reason was, because every godly man is Gods
factor; the Use arising out of this Reason serves to exhort you all to lie
ligier for God, be his faithful factors.

Motives. 1. Consider God has few godly servants in many places, Psalm 12 1.
Help Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the
children of men, and where they be wanting Satan's followers sow the tares of
error and impiety: from the days of the Prophet Malachy until the birth of
Christ were four hundred and fifty years, during which time the Jews had no
extraordinary holy Prophet to guide them, then sprang up the three sects of
Pharisees, Sadduces and Essenes.

2. Consider how many trade for Satan; in most places many swear oaths, few
fear oaths; many profane the Sabbath, few keep it holy; many hate and
persecute holiness in Christians, few do love and honor them for it: Christ
has been persecuted three ways. 1. In his person, when he lived upon earth,
we read how his enemies abused him many times. 2. In his name, for three
hundred years after his ascension, such as bare the name of Christians
suffered much misery during the ten persecutions under those bloody Emperors
of Rome. 3. For the power of godliness is Christ persecuted in his members, and
that is now adays; for our enemies, Papists and Protestants at large, put on a
form of godliness, and would be accounted Christians, but the life of God, the
power of godliness, they hate in the righteous, and persecute their persons for
it.

3. God gives you gifts of knowledge and grace for this end, to trade for him,
employ your talents diligently for your heavenly Masters honor, and at your
death he will say, Well done, good and faithful servant, etc.

Use 5. I told you the fifth Reason was, because the godly man is best fitted
and prepared for Gods work: The Use springing out of this Reason, serve, first,
for comfort to the truly godly.

For first you shall find God ready to save, succor and defend you in time of
distress, Psalm 32.6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in
a time when thou may be found; surely in the floods of great waters they
shall not come nigh unto him: and though thine enemies be mighty to wrong thee,
yet God is Almighty to protect thee. Three kinds of afflictions Gods children
meet with here: first, corrections or chastisements which God inflicts upon
them for their sins: next are trials which God inflicteth on them to try the
truth of their graces, as he dealt with Job: Last are persecutions when God
suffers wicked men to abuse them for holiness, yet God in his wisdom uses
these three kinds of afflictions to drive them farther from sin, as Jonathan
shot three Arrows to warn David to beware of Saul, 1 Samuel 20.20.

2. You have the promises of this and a better life; you are heirs of them,
and they are your portion, Hebr. 6.17. and they are a worthy portion, 1 Timothy 48.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come.

2. It may serve to exhort you all to labor to be fitted for your heavenly
Masters use, and prepared to every good work: the way and means is in 2 Timothy
2.21. If a man therefore purge himself from this, etc. that is, from these
cursed heresies, and corrupt teachers, and keep himself unspotted from the
world, by the grace of the holy Ghost dwelling in him, then he shall be a
vessel unto honor, be like the Sun, whose body stays in the heaven, yet his
light shines upon earth, neither can any stinking dunghill, on which it shines,
infect it: live so purely, that such as be without may in time honor and
affect thee for thy virtue, not infect thee with their vice.

Use 6. I told you the sixth Reason was, because only the heart of a godly man
will bow and bend to do God his work: The Uses arising out of this Reason
serve, first, to reprove the pride and stubbornness of such hearts as will not
bow and bend to do Gods work, but say as the Jews to Jeremiah, Jer. 44.16. As
for the word that thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee: these pray in the Lords Prayer, Thy will be done in earth,
as it is in heaven, yet in their lives they set themselves to do their own
wills, and to cross Gods will: what cursed dissembling hypocrites are these?
they cry out of Gods service, what a weariness is it, they think his service an
irksome yoke, an intolerable burden, but these that will not obey Gods word,
shall feel his power.

2. It may serve to exhort you all to bow and bend heartily to do Gods work,
withdraw not your shoulder from it, but be forward to do it with all your
might, think it not too mean, for it is the work of God; think it no loss or
prejudice to do it, for God will reward thee.

Directions to help you: 1. Set your love exceedingly upon God, and it will be
your meat to do his will, and finish his work; love makes labors light:
endeavor to be able to say truly as the Prophet, Psalm 73.26. My flesh and my
heart fails: that is, for love of the Lord; of the same sense with the
Churches speech in Canticles, I am sick of love: if thou had ten thousand
hearts, they are too little and too few to love God with; if Christ should ask
thee as he asked Peter, Do thou love me more than these do love me? let thy
heart answer truly without guile, Lord, thou know I love thee.

2. Deny thy self in all things that be near and dear to thee; our Savior,
Math. 16. couselleth every one that would follow him to deny himself: from
whence we may observe, that a man's own self is the greatest enemy to himself:
self-denial is a preferring of God before ones self, a preferring Gods command
before thine own will, and his glory before thine own ends.

3. Have respect to the recompense of reward; this will encourage thee against
all difficulties you shall meet withal in Gods work; hope of spoil makes the
Soldier venture his dearest blood; hope of gain makes the Merchant venture
over the deep seas: let the Papist with all his merits pass through Purgatory
to Heaven if he can, look thou, and labor thou for an eternal habitation in
the highest heavens by the merits of Christ alone: the Papists to prove
Purgatory urge that in Math. 5.26. Thou shall by no means come out thence,
till thou have paid the uttermost farthing But if this place be meant of
Purgatory, then these words are taken either in a metaphorical sense, or in a
litteral: if in a metaphorical sense, then purgatory fire is but a metaphorical
fire, that is, none at all; but if these words be taken literally, then let any
Papist answer me these two questions: first, how much money will serve to pay
for ones ransom out of Purgatory? for here is the uttermost farthing to be
paid. 2. How must poor people do that go into Purgatory, but want money to pay
for their ransom? this place is meant of civil debts in this world between man
and man, Christ would have debtors to pay what they owe to their creditors, for
fear of imprisonment; but this by the way.

Use 7. I told you the seventh Reason was, because God can trust none but the
godly man; the Use from hence arising, serves to exhort you all to be faithful
to God in all the works he sets you about.

Motives, 1. A faithful man shall abound with blessings, Prove. 28 20 Joseph was
faithful to God and to his Master Potiphar, and God raised him to great honor
and wealth; Jacob, Nehemiah, David and Daniel, were blessed men of faithful
spirits, and you may read in the Scripture how God blessed them.

2. Consider what a comfort and honor it is, here in thy life, and will be at
thy death, when the Lord shall say, Well done, good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Math. 25.23. Hebr. 3.5. Moses verily was
faithful in all his house, etc. its recorded to his honor.

3. Consider how few are faithful to God, we may cry out, Psalm 12.1. The
faithful fail from among the children of men: for in many places, all seek
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's* let the perfidiousness of
others incite you to faithfulness; betray not Gods cause, if you have power and
opportunity to advance it; rob not God of his honor, but whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God.

4. Consider what a blessed friend God is to you; has he not made you?
redeemed you? a long time preserved you from many perils? enriched you with
many spiritual and earthly blessings? can you have an heart to deal
perfidiously with him? when your earthly friends forsake you, God fails you
not, he will be a friend in need, and a friend in deed to you; let all this
make you trusty and faithful to him.

Use 8. I told you the last Reason was, because none will do Gods work so well
as the godly man: the Use springing from hence is, to exhort you godly ones to
do Gods work as exactly and as completely as ever you can.

Directions: 1. Do his work according to his word, for that is the rule of
righteousness, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, etc. rule all
your thoughts, words, and deeds by this word, Isaiah 8.20. to the Law and the
Testimony, etc. that is, to the Gospel, which is called Testimony in John
32.33. to these must we repair for direction about the doing of Gods work; and
this is called our reasonable service, Romans 12.1. that is, such a service as we
can give a reason for, out of Gods word: it is opposed to will worship, which
is a serving of God after the invention of man, not according to Gods word: let
the holy Scriptures be your directory, if you do not, you will never please God.

2. Do Gods work for his own glory; his glory is his infinite worthiness,
whereby he does far surpass the worthiness of all creatures; it is so dear to
him, that he ordained and made all things for it; he would not have made the
world but for it; he will not give his glory to another, Isaiah 42.8. he gives
us the comfort of all his mercies and blessings, but the glory of them all he
reserves to himself; matter not what becomes of your own ends, so that Gods
glory may be advanced; think it your greatest honor to honor God: the
Pharisees gave alms, fasted and prayed, and all to be seen of men, but Christ
called them hypocrites for it.

3. Do Gods work constantly, for to them who by patient continuance in well
doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2.7. Col
1.23. Continue in the faith. Col. 4.2. Continue in prayer. Hebr. 13.1. Let
brotherly love continue. 2 Timothy 3.14. Continue thou in the things thou have
learned, and have been assured of. Acts 13.43. Continue in the grace of God.
Titus 3.8. I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in
God might be careful to maintain good works: a hypocrite can do some works for
a fit and a start, but when tribulation or persecution arises because of the
word, by and by he is offended.

4. Do Gods work with an upright heart, then he will make thee ruler over much;
blessed is that servant, whom when his Master comes shall find so doing: a
hypocrite can do Gods work with his hand, but not with his whole heart; but
this God chiefly requires: a hypocrite is like a windmill, whose sails turn
about, but the body of it stands still; so a hypocrite serves God with his lips
and hands, but his heart moves not, it is dead within him: but a child of God
is like a ship sailing on the Sea, whose sails and body both move together; so
his heart, hands, lips and tongue go together about Gods work, and he is better
within then he seems to be without; whatsoever work of God ye do, do it
heartily as to the Lord, Col. 3.23. 2 Timothy 2.22. call on the Lord with a pure
heart: Hebr. 10.23. draw near to the Lord with a true heart: 1 Peter 1.22. love
one another with a pure heart fervently: Romans 6.17. obey from the heart that
form of d^ct^ine which was delivered to you: Math. 22.37. love the Lord with
all thine heart: Luke 8.15. having heard the word, in an honest and good heart
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Labor to be of one heart, and of
one mind, and serve God with gladness and singleness of heart, then your heart
shall rejoice in God, and your joy shall no man take from you.

(...).

FINIS.

