THE Samaritan Rebels PERJURED, BY A Covenant of Association: DISCOVERED IN A
SERMON PREACHED At the ASSIZES holden at Northampton, March 30th. 1682.

By JOHN KNIGHT, M. A. late of New-Inn-Hall in Oxford, and now Vicar of Banbury.

Printed for William Thorp Bookseller in Banbury in Oxfordshire, and are to be
Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, London, 1682.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHRISTOPHER Lord HATTON, OBRIAN Lord CVLLEN; The
WORSHIPFUL, HARVEY EKINS, Esquire High Sheriff of the County of Northampton; And
the Right Worshipful, Sir JOHN EDGERTON, Bart. Foreman, with the Rest of the
Baronetts, Knights and Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest, for the Assizes holden
at Northampton, March 30th. 1682.
Right Honorable, and Much Honored,
IF it might be a competent Atonement for my Inflexible Disobedience to your
just Commands, I am not only willing to acknowledge my Fault, but I have here
published my Discourse to evidence my Repentance.

I no sooner, indeed, returned from my Attendance upon your Honorable
Assembly, but shameful Reflections upon my Rudeness, dogged me to my Home.

It Is true, your inimitable Indulgence allowed me to Capitulate, when I should
have Obeyed: And I had leave to Try my Discourse by the Judgment of the Right
Reverend Bishop of Oxford (an Ordeal I well hoped would have burnt it:) But tho
I have some Years lived upon the Excesses of his Charity, and have been
surprised with Instances of his Favor, too great for any thing but Heaven to
recompense, yet now I found a Censure I did not look for; I found, He had too
high an Opinion of your Judgments, to suffer or allow me, even to seem to
distrust them. And now,

My Lords, and you Right Worshipful,

Prompted by the Patronage of so much Piety as Mortality can pretend to (for
such is his) and actuated by so great a sense of Duty, as I am capable of
conceiving, the necessity of my begging your Protection is doubly superseded. I
will be bold therefore to put this Print into your hands, merely with that
design, with which 'twas dictated to your Ears; only to Inform, Convince, or to
Confirm. The Argument (I hope) will defend it self, whatever Enemies it may
meet to oppose it: That it will find none, I am not so fond to imagine, having
already heard the Echo of their Calumnies; Complements peculiar to some men,
Quod scelus perpetrari, cum de talibus been audiam?
whose kind Resentments of an Honest Discourse, are enough to blast its
deserved Reputation.

There is a Praise which sheds a disgrace, a villainous Commendation, that
ruins the Credit it offers to support; as an Encomium upon Religion given by
an Atheist, is a mischievous Satyr against all Virtue.

Wherefore, as I can scorn their Flattery, so can I bid defiance to their Envy;
having the Felicity of a Forehead of Flint to obviate those of Brass. But,
since the Reverence I had for Truth, and the Awful regard it influenc't me
with, in the composing and speaking this Sermon, as also the Deference made to
it by that Honorable and Reverend Assembly it was spoken to: Since I have
found all these too thin a shield to defend either my self or it, I will here
offer at a justification of both.

My design (it is said) was my own Preferment, not charitable Edification, nor
the Glory of God: My Matter and Managery too intolerable to endure the Hearing.

As to the First, tho I have ever been a Dissenter from the Doting World, and
thought such Shrines too poor for such a Sacrifice as my Conscience, yet I have
no provocation to invade the Honor of the Almighty with them, by searching (to
find out the Hypocrisy of) their Hearts.

But however, I am glad to hear, that they grow Jealous, Religious Loyalty has
such Encouragement; for it is not long since, things looked as if That Virtue had
been the wrong way to promotion. And had not the Star that directed me been in
Heaven, there was a Sun newly Or rather Setting; For we that are on this side
the Line, can behold the Sun in such a Position only, as that its Rising and
Motion is from our Left to the Right Hand; But the Medal shows it so, as past
the Meridian, and in its Declension. From whence I collect, That either this
Planet of the Gravers was to be supposed to be of an Irregular motion, and
unheavenly, or 'twas designed for a Foreign Plantation under or beyond the
Line, where it might be imagined Rising, and so Adored, (as Carolina or those
parts of the World;) or else the Almighty was so concerned at the Carvers
Blasphemy, that he thought fit to overruled the Project, and make the Frame it
self the Prognostic of the Idols fall.
Risen, whose Votary I might have been, with greater assurance of a Popular
Reputation: I mean that Idol lately out in Plate; which presents you with a Sun
breaking out of a Cloud (suppose it a Cloud of Guilt;) and a magnificent City
under it, beneath which you read, Laetamur, as if their Dwellings had been but
Triumphal Arches Erected to the Honor of the Malevolent Planet, and the very
Foundations of their Houses joyfully affected with the Reappearance of their
Guardian Deity. Now if this Comment be Analogous to the Text, then is it
possible for the Metropolis of the Land, to Honor the Genius of a profligate
Rebel, more than they Revere the Lord or his Anointed. And consequently the
likelier Doctrine to have got Preferment, had been the Reverse of this I have
here published. These Samaritan perjured Tribes should have had my
Justification, and the Villainy I censure, should have been celebrated by my
praise.

As to the Matter I delivered, here it is, and more; for I was so strictly
cautioned against a tedious Discourse, that I omitted some few Periods, which I
have here supplied; but not a Tittle of that I heard objected to, by my
Audience. If there be any Error, it is not malicious; and therefore, as I will
gratefully resent Conviction, so by the Charter of Humane Society, I will
demand a Pardon. The Truth is, the Enemies I have known to speak against this,
or the last Discourse I delivered in the same place, upon the same Occasion,
are such as are desperately guilty, or men that show you Heads (like those upon
Clipped Money) without Letters.

Nor can I conceive there are any so lewd, as to Remonstrate against what I
have here said concerning Perjury by a Covenant of Association; but such as
have been disciplined under the Paedagogy of the Delphick Devil, and therefore
are never to be reclaimed by any Dictates from the Oracles of God. Wherefore,
as Constantine once Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 7.
said to Acesius, the Heretic, Quaere tibi Scalam, and ad Coelum solus
ascend; so must I declare, That be the Advocates of Perjury and Rebellion what
they will, I would not be in Heaven in their Company, except those Impieties
were Repented and Forgiven. And now,

My Lords, etc.

If I have not more trespassed upon your Honors by an unnecessary Vindication,
than I did when I delivered the ensuing Discourse, I am happy above
Disturbance. Your acceptance of all I have done, I am loath to question; and
your Experienced Goodness prompts me further to beg, I may be Reputed,

Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, AND Much Honored, Yours in the Humblest
And most Faithful Obedience, John Knight.

HOS. 10. the former part of Verse. 4. They have spoken Words, Swearing falsely
in making a Covenant.


IT were a disingenuous Reflection upon the Providence of God, to bewail our
Lot, because it is fallen in an Age which seems to Answer the 2 Timothy 3.1.
Characters of the last.

FOR I take it to be as utterly unaccountable, as that the hindmost Vessel
should envy that which outwent her, though her Pilot was thereby warned of that
Rock upon which the foremost Split.

IF therefore the Malignity and Calamity of succeeding Times, be really greater
than of those we have overpast, let it be imputed only to their Iniquity and
Folly, who by copying out the Miscarriages of their Ancestors, Provoke God to
make their Lives somewhat more than the Transcript of their Miseries.

FOR tho 't had never been told us, that old Occurrences (the Sins I mean of
the Ages past, and the direful Issues of them) were written for our Caution;
yet being registered, what can they be reckoned, but as so many Appeals to our
Consciences, that we should Improve them to our Safety?

IT IS true indeed, that Corruption is propagated to Posterity, nor is it more
natural to Plant our Species, than to derive upon them the degeneracy of our
Natures; But why that (like a River) should swell bigger still the further it
runs from its Springhead, is a Paradox which though now our Wonder, will be at
last our Confusion.

FOR tho we carry about us the seeds of our Parents Sins, yet are we furnished
with the Annals of their Sufferings: If Traduction conveys their Lusts to us,
yet Tradition Informs us of their Plagues too; and by this means, though their
Concupiscences are entailed, yet it is our Privilege to hear of the Judgments
they Provoked, that what was the matter of their misery, might be a Motive to
our Amendment.

AND indeed, In all Arts and Professions (save that of an Holy and a Virtuous
Life) we are seldom arrived to a Sagacity to discover, but we become careful to
Correct the Faults of others.

ONLY Errors of Conscience prevail by Custom, and plead Prescription. The
Vices only and Immoralities of our Progenitors we Exemplify, their Sins and
Failings we Study to Improve, and as if our Interest consisted in keeping up
Antipathies to Virtue, we Emulate nothing but to grow worse and worse.

NOR is this the Perverseness only of a few; Alas! It Is Epidemical, and the
Contagion's Popular.

THE little forsaken Tribe, that dares be Honest, can scarce amount to an
exception against the degenerous Universality.

BUT of all Societies, Immanuel's Land (the Israel of God) yields the saddest
Contemplation.

THAT a People who were Privileged with the Conduct of the wisest Laws, with
the peculiar Patronage of a Gracious God, should yet have every one a Lustful
Genius, to whose Government alone they would show true Allegiance! what
Reflection can equally with this amaze us? It gives a Temptation to revive that
old Heresy, that Iniquity thrives by the fatality of a positive Decree; and
Marcion's Blasphemy (That a Cruel Omnipotence, a Diabolical God, has a peculiar
Province,) seems to challenge a Canonical Veneration.

AND how harsh soever this charge may sound, yet want I no Instances to make
good the Plea.

LET Israel be one (the ten Tribes especially,) who tho they were a People on
whom Gods Holy Name was called, favored at that time above all the Sons of
men, ( Judah alone excepted) yet against all the Allurements of Divine Love,
the Mercy of Divine Long-suffering, the Memory of Divine Vengeance executed
upon their Fathers, and against all fear of it threatened to themselves, did
their Iniquities still abound: in short, as if they resolved to vie Miracles
with Omnipotence; Their Stupendous Guilt, with his Astonishing Goodness. They
were no sooner delivered from distress by the true God, but they make their
Acknowledgments and Offerings to false ones; according to the increase of their
Fruits, Verse the first of this Chap.
( v. 1.) they multiplied their Altars and their Gods too; and that they might
effectually make themselves the loathed Objects of Almighty Wrath, and of
Pagans Scorn, they repeated their Apostacies as often as they renewed their Vows
either with God or man, which is that Abomination of which the Prophet here
Impleads them, They have spoken words, Swearing falsely in making a Covenant.
--

FROM which words, had I time, I might raise Discourses of very different
Designs: I could take occasion to Treat of Oaths, their Religion, their Nature,
Lawfulness, Usefulness and Necessity: I could read a Lecture also upon Perjury,
show its Aggravations, how many ways it may be Committed, and the horrid
Consequences that attend its Guilt.

BUT I hope to find my self better Employment, than to haunt our Heretics with
the Truth they fly from.

THO perhaps it were time well spent too, to Vindicate the Lawfulness, and
prove the Necessity of an Oath; a Discourse that does it, Arraigns an Herd
that is grown formidable to the Government, I mean the Anarchical Anabaptists,
and those other Monsters engendered by them; a People that thrive and grow warm
by an odd Antiperistasis, even by the coldness of the Magistracy that Lives
about them: for if Flattery and Fair words are Arts most used when Fears are
just, I have reason to think those Wretches are grown a Terror to our Councils,
and our State; or they who have lost the Civility of Men, and abandoned the
Christian Name and Thing, would not have been Complemented under the Style of
Protestants: But I forbear; nor,

2. SHALL I stay to censure all those Oaths that fill the Air with Vapor, and
the Land with Atheism; the Vanity and Debauchery of which Swearing, tho void of
Perjury, (which is (...). Hiero. in Car. Pythag.
impossible) does yet reach the Guilt on it; for the Difference cannot be great
between Invoking God to attest our Lie, or Patronize our Hypocrisy, and that
Insolent contempt of his Sacred Name, which should never be mentioned without
Reverence and Dread.

THIS is that Diabetica Passio, by which the Spirit of Piety is insensibly
exhausted, under which Religion Languishes; that levelling Vice that makes
every Peasant a Person of Quality, for whose Cure (tho I know its Simptomes,
yet) I yield my self an Incompetent Physician; and shall therefore pass by that
too, and come to Treat of the words according to their strictest sense and best
Construction.

WHICH what it is, I have with care searched after, and from the disquisition
which I have faithfully made, I will humbly offer you this following
Conjecture, wherein I expect to have more Followers than Leaders, being
constrained by the force of Reason to follow thoroughly no one of my
Commentators.

WHEREFORE as I will freely acknowledge wherein I agree, so I hope to show
cause why I venture to dissent.

AND (First) That the time which the Prophet points at when this Covenant was
made, was in the conclusion of their last Kings Reign, is generally allowed;
for tho Hosea the Prophet lived in the days of Hosea 1.1.
Jeroboam the Son of Joash, between whom and their last King Hoshea, there were
2 Kings 14.15, 16. chapter
five, yet is it a warrantable License to Prophecy of things to come in the
Preter-Tense, Ob Evidentiam and certitudinem summam. ( Glassius de verbo canon.
46.
Glassius.)

2. THAT this Covenant was a Political one, is agreed on by the most; I am sure
by the (Reputed) best Commentators upon the place: But with whom it was made,
their Conjectures differ.

FOR there are those who suppose the Prophet Taxt Israel of Perjury, when they
refused to pay Homage to the Assyrian King, after he had long claimed and
received it; the Story to which this referrs, is 2 Kings 17. But this conceit
is not only spoiled by the silence of that Narrative in the 2 Kings,
(forequoted) which says nothing of Isreal's making a Covenant with Shalmaneser
the Assyrian; as also by the Verse foregoing my Text, (as I shall show anon)
but by the expression of the Text it self: For, they could not be Impleaded so
properly of Perjury for the making, as for the breaking of a Covenant made;
except this Covenant was a Renunciatory Instrument of their old Fidelity; but
this appears not: For we are no where told the People of Israel had sworn any
to the Assyrian; and if they had, yet the making a Covenant with him after, and
against their first Oath, is Nonsense to suppose; for how unlikely is it, that
he (the Assyrian) should be a party with Israel in a Covenant against himself?
If it be urged that their Swearing falsely consisted in their making a Covenant
with Shalmaneser, while they had yet a King of their own, and so that Covenant
was Perjurious, being a breach of their Fidelity to Hoshea: To this we Reply as
before, that the Text is silent, and the Opinion is inconsistent with the
Story, (in the 2 Kings) and with the Context in this Prophecy; for this
Covenant provoked a Judgment, of which the Ver. 5, 6, 7. of this Chapter
Assyrian was the dreadful Executioner, and he might have spared his Siege, had
they taken this course to testify their Subjection.

IT IS true, the Text may be (as it often is) Implicit, and the breaking of a
Covenant might be supposed, but where the sense does not of necessity require
to be supplied, I take it to be safest to be ruled by the Letter. Hoshea indeed
became the (2 Kings 17.3.)
Servant of Shalmaneser, and paid him Tribute, which at last he withheld; but I
cannot find that Israel either was under Covenant with him, or could be accused
of Perjury for their Kings Conspiracy. But,

2. THERE are others (among whom stand Grotius) who Imagine this Covenant was
made with their own King, and afterward was treacherously broken; but neither
to this can I assent: for but just before ( v. 3.) the Prophet tells us that
Hoshea was the object of the Kingdoms Scorn; nay, by being under Tribute to the
Assyrian, his Subjects gave out his Regal Jurisdiction ceased; For now they
shall say, We have no King, ( These words extorted from them. English Annot.
because we feared not the Lord) what then should a King do to us? Their
Language was, Non curamus Oseae Imperia. (Grot.) Sumus perinde ac si Regem non
haberemus. (Drusius and Alii.) So that to make a Covenant with a King, of
paying Homage and Duty to him, after they had vilified him like a Puppet, is
scarce to be Imagined of such a mutinous saucy People, as once had slighted the
Government ot their God. Moreover, I cannot conceive how natural Liege men
should break their Faith by making a Covenant with their natural Liege Lord;
for a Covenant so made must be supposed to corroborate, not to violate their
Fidelity.

THESE then being hitherto the two current Opinions upon the place, and for the
Reasons given neither being now passable, I come (Right Honorable and
Reverend!) to suggest my own, and it is this.

THAT the Covenant here meant, was the very thing which according to the Style
of our days must be called an Association; which to Evince, I humbly offer you
this brief Paraphrase.

THAT Israel was divided, is evident from the Context, and one part siding with
their King, in giving Countenance and Toleration to the Worship of God, (and
'twas no more;) the other stuck fast to their Idolatrous Imaginations, and the
Rent being made thus, first for Religion, it became impossible to be united in
their political Affairs. The Assyrian took the Cue, improved the occasion, and
no sooner came up, but Hoshea became his Servant; whereupon the Factious Band
quickly withdrew their Tribute from Hoshea; We have no King, (say they;) He we
had can neither Protect nor Harm us; there are enough of us to disown his
Prerogative with Impunity, for in his present circumstances, What can he do
unto us? v. 3.

IT IS true, we are by nature, and we have by Oath bound our selves unto
Allegiance, ( Grot. in Loc.
Uti moris erat;) a thing of ancient custom among us, as Grotius observes; but
we have now no way to prove, but to enter upon a solemn Covenant of
Association, Swearing to one another our mutual assistance, for our mutual
defense, and vowing to assert our Rights and Liberties, in defiance to the
Prerogative of our pageant King, as well as to the Title of the Assyrian
Usurper.

IN this desperate Pinch, the poor King was forced to take desperate measures;
He therefore sent to the 2 Kings 17.4.
Egyptian Monarch to solicit his Alliance; for being denied the Tribute of his
Subjects, he could not make good the Payment to the Assyrian; which when
Shalmaneser had plainly Discovered, he presently shut up Hoshea in Prison, and
brought Samaria into a straight Captivity.

THUS upon comparing this of the Prophet with that Historical Narrative in the
2 Kings, no other sense can I make than this on it; and I only humbly beg that
this might prevail, till some body offers a better to supplant it; which I
cannot fear, since the Septuagint Version seems also to favor me: For whereas
we say, They have spoken words, Swearing falsely; they thus, (...): The Prophet
(they found) had censured their Traitorous Covenant, and they put it off with a
lying pretense, and a false excuse, which Hier. in Loc.
St. Jerome Imagines to be this, viz. They Pleaded for themselves, that what
between their own Kings wants, and the Usurpers demands, (those dura majorum
Imperia,) they were forced to engage in a seditious Association.

THE words thus opened, and their genuine Import I am persuaded given; I pass
on to prosecute my further design, pursuant to which I shall hold my self
accountable for these three things.

1. TO demonstrate that no Leagues, Covenants or Models of Associations can be
made or contrived by Subjects among themselves, subsequent to their Oaths of
Fidelity to their King, and intrenching upon his prerogative Rights, without
flagitious Perjury; yea whether they have sworn Fealty or no, they cannot so
Associate without traitorous Sedition.

2. I shall clearly state, and as clearly reply to all those pretenses that
Subjects may make to excuse their Perjury.

3. I shall enquire into the preparatory Qualifications which adapt men to, as
also the Issue of this sort of Perjury, especially which consists in the
violation of Fidelity to the King, and the Observations I shall make hereupon,
shall be such as the Context does suggest; and my plainness herein shall
supersede my necessity of becoming your Monitor by a particular Application:
For though Samaria be the Scene, and Israel the Actors in that impious horrid
Plot which I am now to censure, yet my Animadversions may with ease be extended
to reach all Conspiracies of like complexion: Of these in their order, with
that brevity that may bespeak my regard to your Patience, and your Business.

1. FOR the First, in which Proposition there are two things I may be urged to
explain.

1. WHAT I mean by Leagues or Covenants. (2.) What by Prerogative Rights of the
Crown, or King.

BY a Covenant then I mean, a plighting of our Fidelity to another in that
particular, which is the object matter of our Covenant; and this may be done,
(1.) By simple Promise, as if a body of men should gather together, and
stipulate their word and truth for the defense and assistance of another or
others, with their Lives and Fortunes. Or (2.) By an Adjuration added to the
Promise, i. e. by the solemn Intervention of an Oath, which makes God a party,
and calls him to attest the Integrity of the Promise: now either of these ways
a Covenant made by Subjects among themselves, for mutual defense, exclusive of,
or repugnant to that Interest the Magistrate has in them, becomes perjurious.

2. AS for what I mean by the Prerogative Rights of the Crown, our Laws (both
of Nature and of the Land) Inform us, and the constant Claims and Customs of
the Kings of Israel, would suffer none to be Ignorant of what theirs were: In
short, I mean the Homage of our Persons, and the Tribute of our Estates
according to the proportions which the Laws allott, and the eminent exigencies
of the Government do require, of which the Magistrate is the proper Judge.
These things premised, I thus ratify my Position, viz. That a Covenant among
Subjects, made to the prejudice of those Rights of the Crown, does Ipso facto
make them Perjured.

1. BECAUSE their Oath of Fidelity to the King, by which they were preingaged,
is violated and broken; for the formality of Perjury consisting in the Veniendo
contra Juramentum, Lynw. de Offic. Archipr. Tit. Ignorantia. ver. perjurio.
Breach of an Oath; by such a Covenant or Association, that Oath of Fidelity is
actually broken, and consequently the Covenanting persons Perjured: For that
Oath of Fidelity to the King being plainly promissory, we call God to witness
these two things:

1. THAT at the same time we swear, we do intend to perform all that we swear
to do, or (which is the same thing) we design to hold our selves obliged
conscientiously and religiously to do all that we then engage for; so that it is
necessary, (in order to the taking that Oath in Truth) that our words do agree
with our Thoughts.

2. THAT we will to our uttermost endeavor for the future to fulfill And what
it is, see in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
what we engaged upon Oath for; and this Obligation is only discharged, when
our Deeds are congruous and agreeable to our words. By the first we hold our
selves bound to promise all that we intend, and all that we clearly profess: by
the second we hold our selves obliged, to do all that upon Oath we promised:
According to that of Moses, Numb. 30. 2. If a man Swear an Oath to bind his
Soul with a Bond, he shall not break his word, but he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his Mouth.

BUT now this promissory Oath must be actually broken, when we make a Covenant
contrary to the Matter, and counter to the Ends on it. I cannot Covenant to
disband or dispatch those Guards that Law has made necessary, and Necessity has
made lawful for the defense of the Crown, after I have Sworn to assist the King
to my power, and give him always the defense of my own Arms. My first
Obligation was undoubtedly Religious, and to all lawful purposes eternally
Irrevocable: Religious (I say) and Irrevocable, because in Swearing I Invocate
God as a Witness to Attest my Truth, and as a Judge to Revenge my Falsehood, by
which means nothing but Revelation can dissolve the Bond; yea the Oath must
prevail against Gods Precepts, when they are not Moral, and our observance of
that can warrantably supersede our Obedience to these; and of this Joshua 9.
Joshua's League with the Men of Gibeon is an Instance unquestionable; for tho
he had a V. 24.
Command from God to root out them as well as the rest of the Inhabitants of
the Land; yet having Sworn to Spare them, (tho his Oath was extorted by a
subtle false Insinuation from him) he knew his Promise was made to the V. 19.
Living God, and therefore to be kept Inviolate, tho Sworn to Men that were
Worshippers of the Devil.

NOW if the For so was Joshua.
King of Israel had no power of Revocation, when he swore to protect those whom
God had charged him to destroy, yea tho the Gibeonites were not the men he
Intended to swear to; How much better was Hoshea's claim to the defense of his
Subjects, which they could not deny him, without perfidious Treachery, tho they
had never sworn Allegiance to him? For,

2. THE Oath they made unto the King passed over to him no new Right to their
Allegiance, but the Obligation of their Oath was founded upon his Due. All the
Homage we Swear to give the King (or as the Apostle says to Romans 13.7. Render
to all their Due; as our Savior also, Luke 20.25. To Caesar the things which
be Caesar's i. e. The Tribute and Homage due to him as Caesar, (the King) which
gives him a Right Antecedent to our Oath, because King he is, before we Swear.
Render him) is, and was his Natural Right, not Founded in, but declared, and
corroborated by the Solemnity of an Oath. For otherwise, how could he require,
and exact an Oath? This being a portion of that Tribute which ratifies his
Claim, and doubles the Security of his Title to the rest. Yea, Hence it is
manifest, That he has not only a Right to our Homage, but such an One, as makes
us from our Birth incapable of making an Engagement to pass any on it away.

WHEREFORE, when the Supreme is not only in Pacto prior, but also, in Jure
Solus, in reference to all matters falling under his Prerogatives, the very
Attempt of the People to defraud him, by making those Regalities over to other
men, or reserving them to themselves, is an Incroachment upon his Right, and a
Violation of their Oath.

BY the Oath we swear to defend his Rights, by the Covenant we engage to spoil
them. By the Laws of Nature, the Jews without an Oath, were bound to Assist
Hoshea, by the Association they vow to Employ their Wealth and Weapons only for
themselves.

THE Folly of which was as Desperate and Rash, as it was Flagitious and unjust;
For if Rei illicitae, nulla sit Obligatio; If whatever is unlawful is held
Impossible, the Covenant made to the prejudice of their Oath, was a Bond only
binding to Interdum scelus est Fides. Seneca.
the guilt and punishment of Perjury, and of no force to oblige them to the
thing they promised. For,

3. 'TWAS Impossible the Covenant so made, should obtain any obligatory force,
or be made valid by the consent of the King himself. For upon supposition, that
Hoshea (for any persuasion) should have quitted his Right to the Defense of his
Subjects, and by an open Declaration, have bidden them to be only Faithful to
one another; yet this had been no Absolution from their Allegiance, nor had it
given any virtue to their Federal Association; it being not in the Power of the
Prince to evacuate and null their Obligation (by Oath) to Allegiance. The
Reason of which seems to be Founded not only in the Formality of the Oath,
which makes God concerned in the Bond, and therefore must he be in the
Dispensation too; but also in the unalterable Laws of Nature, and on the
positive Institutions of God: Unalterable (I say) and no more repealable, than
the Jewish Corban could null the Fathers Right to the Child's Obedience; no more
than the Parent can give up his parental Jurisdiction, and License his Son in
an unnatural Rebellion; no more than the Husband (the Woman's Lord) can absolve
her after Marriage from her Conjugal Duty, and bid her be disloyal. For (as
these Relations, so) that between the Magistrate and the Subject, is the
Institution of God; whereby the Sovereign is not only Invested in a Dignity,
but obliged to a Duty, and bound to Govern till he has a call from God to
relinquish his Dominion; and indeed his Prerogatives are inseparable from his
Person, and not grantable to his Subjects, because of their incapacity also to
receive them.

THE Lords Anointed cannot Retreat or sink from his Office or his Honor, so as
to devolve them on one or more of his natural Subjects, no more than his Oil
(the Emblem of Supremacy) can Subside or Incorporate with the Liquors under it.
For they were born to Obey, and therefore he can no more make them Supreme,
than Reverse their Birth, or make that Oath that was declarative of their
Homage, when broken, to be no Perjury.

WHEREFORE that Treachery or Violence which strips the Crown of its
Prerogatives, must be such as masters Religion and the Laws of God too, since
the King himself neither by his Grace nor for his Pleasure may warrantably put
them off. And this holds always true, except the Authority be relinquisht to
the next Heir, who is therefore (I think) capable of receiving the Regalities,
because his Blood and Birth (bespeaking him somewhat more than a Subject) do
naturally qualify him for the successive Rule: But in this I subscribe to the
Oracles of the Laws.

THE Position being thus maintained, I shall only stay to reflect upon the
Sottishness and Iniquity of that (...), that Romish Dotard, who by a kind of a
religious Errantry, assaults our Kingdom, and undertakes to dissolve the Bonds
both of Oaths and Equity, of Justice and Religion; and is not this literally to
2 These. 2.4.
exalt himself above all that is called God? within whose Omnipotence it lies
not to consecrate the Witchcraft of a Rebel, to make Perjury to be no Sin, nor
the Breach of Lawful possible Oaths to be no Perjury. But to show you the
weakness and the wickedness of his pretense at once, I will clearly evince

THAT any Bull or Instrument of his, which pretends to Absolve any English
Subject from his Oath of Allegiance, is,

1. VAIN and Impertinent; for if the Rights of the Crown are Feudatory to, and
justly invested in him, our Oath of Allegiance to the King is actually void,
and can pass no Obligation; and if no Obligation, there is no need of any solemn
Absolution; for the Oath it self would bind to nothing but Repentance. But if
in Justice what he claims be yet the Kings, as it is most certainly, (for whom
the admirable E collatione duarum Potestatum, egregie conficitur, Regiam aeque
a Deo institutam fuisse ac spiritualem, and solidam humanarum rerum
administrationem illi demandatam. Petr. De Mar. Archiep. Paris. lib. 2. de
concor. and Imp. c. 2.. 1.
De Marca is an Advocate in this matter) then his pretenses to absolve from the
Oath, which promises to render them, is,

2. IMPIOUS and unnatural, for no power can take another Right without
Injustice, nor can any man Absolve me of a Debt, the Creditor to whom it is due,
denying to quit his claim. But of this enough, for I have neither time for, nor
pleasure in exposing the Nakedness of such a Communion, whose Zeal is Cruelty,
whose Worship's a Profanation, and whose Proselytes are in truth the Trophies
of the Churches Fraud or Violence, and the wretched Monuments of Apostasy from
Religion. It Is no Calumny, but this Character De Magistratibus Eccles. Lib.
Vanit. Scient. cap. 61.
Corn. Agrippa, a learned man, and a Friend to some of their very absurdities,
has utterly superseded by one much Sharper.

COME we now

2. TO examine the pretenses that Israel or any other People may take up to
Countenance their Perjury, i. e. their entering into a Covenant of Association
for mutual defense, against, or without a regard to their Sovereign; and here I
confess I ought to rank them together, and show them in their united force;
that if possible they might (like their Doctors and Fautors) be valued for
their Numbers, they being very inconsiderable for their Intrinsic worth.

I am in earnest, I have seen and examined mighty Labors in Vindication of
Anarchy, Levelling, Sedition and Rebellion, (tho these perhaps are not ever
their Christen-names) and all together they make a Mist thick at some distance,
and seemingly impassable, but when you are in it it clears up, and there is no
Impediment; but to heave twice at a Molehill, would give Suspicion it were
weighty: Wherefore since this Discovery has been already my task in this place
upon like occasion, I will only touch at no more of that Argument than what
may be considered under my third particular; which was,

3. TO inquire into the Original, Progress and Issue of this breaking Fidelity,
or this Perjury, by a supervening Covenant. And because the Order undoubtedly,
as well as the Mind of the Text is Sacred, I am not to be persuaded that these
words have this place in the Prophets reproof without a mystery; for they seem
to express that consummate Iniquity, to which the Israelites could not arrive,
without they had advanced by these four degrees.

1. BY Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, Employed in these words, Israel is an empty
Vine, v. 1. Symachus his Apud Hieron. in Loc.
Version, calling it (...), a Vine luxuriant with fruitless branches, is fitly
accommodated to this meaning. For its shoots were as forward, its Shade as
pleasant, the Show it made, as plausible, as well might be. God could not
visit, but they were all humbled: In Bonds they mourn, look sad and penitent,
but after Redemption they are the same. When Calamity has Invaded them, they
have howled, but none of their Cries are from their heart. They Return, but not
to me, (says God) Hosea 7.13, 14, 16. They feared God, but no more than was
consistent with their 2 Kings 17.33.
serving Idols. All the pains they were at in matters of Religion, were only to
contrive how to put Ironies upon Omniscience. Their whole Religion would be
staked down at any time, to serve a Turn or a Lust. Their stated
Mortifications, and holy Severities, were but direful Prognostics of an after
Riot. Their being Jews (they thought) was enough to bear them out, though they
were Immoral below the Heathen: Now when men have got this Art; when they can,
as the Cynic said, Vertutis stragula pudefacere, when Virtue is made only the
Midwife to bring Villainy to the birth, and the Witchcraft of a Rebellious Itch
has brought them to this, even to cloth their Devil in the Prophets Mantle,
things are fairly a preparing for an Association. For what can men want to
ripen all their Mischief, when they have already mocked and despised their God?
Turned all his Precepts, and their Piety into Landschape; as if the Dictates of
the Sacred Canon had been no more than Directions to the Painter: And when,
after, God has dressed, and the Heavens have bedewed it, their Vine has born
nothing but equivocate Fruit; Like the Apples of Sodom, Fair, but Rotten.

2. ANOTHER Step by which they advanced to this formed Sedition, and Rebellious
Covenant, was by being an Empty Vine in another sense; Dum Vitis evacuat
Israelem, (as a Critic in loc.) The Prophetic Spirit (before he thus
arraigned and condemned Israel) had observed a Party among them, who set up as
well for open Debauchery and brutish Riots, as another that cherisht Impious
Hypocrisy, and a Rebellious one. They were such as perhaps loved the King; and
to prevent all suspicion, that they were no Conspirators against the Crown,
they proclaimed to the World, that they hated Thinking. But these also carried
about them the dreadful Symptoms of a public Ruin: For when Loyalty went no
further than the Health, and a Tavern-fierceness was all their Courage; when
all their Spirits were such as Wine not Virtue raised, the Nakedness of the
Government was near uncloathing; It being Impossible the Fabric should be
supported, when the Pillars Reeled: For such as loved at least the show of
Religion, must needs hate and scorn them who openly did dishonor it, and hence
they commence into distinct Factions, and each applauding himself in the Marks
of discrimination from the other, they all made a

3. THIRD Advance, for their V. 2.
Hearts were divided, and their V. 1.
Altars multiplied; some erected for Sacrifice to Bacchus, others to sober
Idols. By this time the Administration of the Government was in the Hands not
of Councils but Clubs, Plots in one, and Sots in to other; these hating them as
Rebels and Traitors, and they despising these as Beasts and Idiots.

IN short, the whole Nation was reduced to nothing but the miserable pieces of
a broken People, who were universally Deaf, to all the Charms of Honesty and
Reputation; and how could there be hopes that such dishonorable enterprises
should end in Safety?

AND here I cannot omit a Conceit of the Jewish Rabbis, described by Comment.
in loc.
St. Jerome, who do generally Report, that the only Reason, why the Captivity
was not brought upon them in the time of their worst Kings Reign, but reserved
till Hoshea's days, the Kings 17.2.
best of all their Catalogue, was this, viz. That he was inclined to encourage
the true Worship of God, and restore again the old (tho the long despised)
Profession of Religion; but this the People would by no means Brook, whereupon
they divided, and statim eum a Rege discutit populus venit Interitus.

BUT be that as it will, in the circumstances the Kingdom then stood, it was
impossible to prevent Invasion: For when one (and that a numerous) side,
resolved to Licentiate all Religions but the right; (making that Sacred thing a
Refuge for their Sin, as the Philosophers did occult Qualities for their
Ignorance) and to that end would Court all Heresies and Factions into their
Alliance; and the other, tho Professing well, yet would live a Reproach to the
Religion they professed: in such a posture of Affairs, God will not, and the
Math. 12.26.
Devil cannot support a Kingdom upon its Legs: For if Satan be divided against
himself, how then shall his Kingdom stand? Whence we may note, that Union of
Hearts and Judgments must be of great Importance to the very being of a
Christian Commonwealth, when Christ borrowed an Argument to urge it from the
economy of the Damned.

WELL, upon this division, they who before would scarce venture to show their
Teeth, did now unmask and make bare their Faces, and came openly to Declare

4. THE Nullity of their King, v. 3. Now they shall (or will) say, We have no
King: the Pretender is become the Vassal of a Foreigner, and his Title is lost,
which he cannot hold, we will therefore regard none of his Commands; he is an
Innovator in Religion, a Betrayer of his Country, an Enemy to the Public; his
Title was gotten by Parricide and Cruelty, and our Allegiance extorted by Force
and Necessity; our Counsels are Rejected, our Properties Invaded, our Liberty
Destroyed; and shall such a man Reign over us? No, if any, Let it be a King
that we may trust, a confiding man that we may all depend on.

NOW after these Pretenses made by a People prepared to think them valid, tho
they had been more Absurd, they forthwith renounce all Allegiance to the
Prince, and solemnly engage in a Rebellious Association. And tho these were all
their Pretenses they had then to urge, (excepting only their obstinate Will,
which was beyond all Argument, and made all the other but pretenses) yet these
were enough to engage the Faction. They had then none of the Reasons ready,
which have been since in Fashion. There was then no Though the Levity of Greece
was such that they shifted their first Monarchy for a Government by many, yet
that was so natural to them, that the Cretian Boys could not play without
their (...), Monarchs to rule each company. Ex Herac. de Polit. Cretens. apud
Aelian.
State of Venice or Amsterdam to give a President of Democratic Confusion, or
Aristocratic Ambition: they never pleaded against the Divine right of Monarchy
and Kings, for they knew they 1 Samuel 8, 5.
begged one at the Oracle of God; they knew too that 'twas for the Prove. 28.2.
Iniquity of a Land that many were the Governors thereof; so that if there had
been no Sin in any Nation, no Nation would have had more Governors than one,
at once Supreme, and consequently Government by plurality is not originally
from Nature, or from God, but from Iniquity and Transgression, and therefore
Monarchy is peculiarly Divine. Again, can I believe Israel could remonstrate
against their King for Invading of their Rights, after they had so eagerly
Solicited they might have a King, even against all their Precautions of the
severity of his Rule; and after Samuel had told them what the 1 Samuel 8.
Jus Regis was, what Inviolable Claim and Title their King had to them? Can we
Imagine they thought his different Opinions, his strange Religion, would give
them Warrant to seize his Throne; that the Violations of his own Engagements
unto them, would justify their resistance against him? No, they knew that if
these were perswasives to Rebellion, the best of Men and Kings would be
obnoxious to feel their Arms: for a Libel upon his Fame, or Jealousies fomented
by Letters to Friends, weekly Intelligences, seditious Courants against his
Administration, would be enough to Stimulate the People into a Rebellion, tho
the Prince were Numb. 16.1, 2.
a Moses, 2 Samuel 15.13.
a David, or 1 Samuel 8.7.
a God: They knew Obedience followed the Paternity, not the Man, and that a
morose Parent remained a Parent, i. e. Invested still in his Right to Govern,
tho his Regiment were Intolerable; they knew the Charter of Subjection was not
for Liberty but Obedience; (...). ( Homil. 6. Ad Popu. Antiochenum.
Chrysos.) After this rate, could I destroy all the force of those Arguments
which have been ever since obtruded upon the World. I Will Instance in one more,
than which I know no Pretense for an Association, more plausible or more
rational, and it is this: that the Laws of Nature countenance it, when it seems
necessary for our self-preservation. (Tho I believe this in Samaria had no
Foundation real, there being no mercenary Forces about the King to strike a
Terror into the good People:) Now I would fain ask, whether it be a Law of
Nature that men should form an unnatural Conspiracy, only for fear their
Persons may be harmed? or whether it be more natural for me to go to a Witch
for Counsel, rather than trust Omnipotence for my Protection? whether it be
Natures Law that I think Ill of my own Head, Conspire against the Breath of my
Nostrils, whom I am positively forbid to Curse, even in my Thought? It is a
repeated Precept this, of Divine Authority: And if after all it be Natures Law
to make me Jealous, Envious, False and Treacherous against my Parent, and my
Sovereign, Gods positive Laws are a contradiction to his Laws of Nature;
reconcile the Blasphemy then, or abjure the Association.

MUCH such another Weapon have I seen sharpened for Resistance, by a Scotch
Philistine, (but no Giant,) I mean Buchanan, a leading Leaguer: he Buchan. de
Jure Regni apud Scotos, p. 50, and 56.
says, the Primitive Christians showed no Resistance, only because they were
too weak to maintain it.

OH the Hypocrisy of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, if this were true!
yea, which of all Gods Precepts either Moral or Evangelical could find
Observance, if they were designed to oblige such only as were Incapacitated to
break them?

IT IS as if the Prohibition of Adultery had been Dictated to the Sick, and
violent Assaults were forbidden only the Bedrid and the Cripple. This indeed
gives Indication that their Spirit of Enthusiasm, is that which works in the
Children of Disobedience. This shows what Fathers taught these men, for none of
the Primitive ones, but would have Scourged their Blasphemy; and for this, let
those who have leisure consult the 5th, 6th, and 7th Homilies of St.
Chrysostom to the People of Antioch; and Tertullians Apologeticks, where they
shall find 'twas not Cowardice nor Weakness, but Piety and Courage engaged them
to Subjection: and Tertullian tells us, that in his days the Christian
Martyrs, were enough to Conquer all their Tyrants, tho they had used no other
Weapons than the Stakes they dyed at.

IN short, such Doctrines rifle the Tombs of Saints, and rob them of their
Crowns of Martyrdom, as well as aim at that other Sacrilege of Stripping
Kings of their Crowns of Honor. Nor is such Divinity less absurd than the
Roman Legends; for to reconcile Piety to God, with disloyalty to his Ministers,
to Incorporate Perjuries and Seditions with Authentic Canons, is as odd a
Conceit as that other Miracle in Masquerade, their Trasubstantiation.

TO conclude, if such Enemies to the Government had not somewhat more to trust
to beside their Arguments, their Cause would vanish; there being no fear of a
real Tragedy, when the Actors and the Instruments are all Theatrical.

FOR neither Reason nor Religion give any thing away from the Lord to the
Servant; he might Rob him of somewhat, by denying his Obedience, and defending
his Guilt by an Association; but his Disloyalty must press him with a
complicated Guilt, and consequently Subject him under Gods Curses in
Proportion: For as it takes rise in Hypocrisy, Hatred, and unnatural Impiety,
so it ends in Ruin, Shame, and Captivity; and the Rebel Associates are by
their Covenant linked only to Miseries Epidemical; for says our Prophet in the
last Clause of this Verse, Their Judgment comes up as Hemlock in the Furrows of
the Field: Which is such an Issue of Perjury and Sedition we ought to dread,
and with all Intention of Devotion deprecate, for the sake of that Prince of
Peace, who shed his Blood for us, even Jesus Christ, To whom with God the
Father of Mercy, and the Holy Ghost the Spirit of Concord, be all Honor, etc.

FINIS.

