THE KNAVERY OF ASTROLOGY DISCOVERED, IN OBSERVATIONS Upon Every Month, of the
Year 1680.

TOGETHER With the Nature of the Seven Planets, etc.

By Tim. Tell-Troth, Star-gazer to the Great MOGVL.

Almanack-makers you may go Sh --
Your Prognostications never will hit.
LONDON, Printed for T.B. and R.E. 1680.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
I Have a mind to speak to thee a word or two in sober earnest: For though I
have indulged to a little Mirth in my Observations, yet now I must desire thee
to be serious with me a few Minutes. If thou have been used to be a Querent in
these matters, that is, gone to Astrologers to know of their Wisdoms, when and
whom thou shall Marry, when thy Affairs in the world will mend; that is, when
thou shall more mind thy business, and have more wit than to ask such simple
Questions: Perhaps the buying this Pamphlet will save thee some Shillings in
thy Pocket, besides easing thy head of Superstitious Conceits.

As to the Antiquity of Astrology, I cannot but acknowledge it exceeding great:
For the first Founder of it, the Devil, knew how advantageous an Instrument it
would prove to the promoting his Interest in the world; therefore he would not
neglect, by the hand of Astrology, to lead People betimes into as gross
Superstition as might be. It Is so apt to infect with Superstition, that the
Artists themselves cannot avoid it: For they cannot help, for their lives,
depending more on the Transits or Aspects of the Planets, than the Providence
of the All-seeing God. How will a cross Transit of Saturn or Mars make them
tremble, almost at their own Shadow? And how will a Kind Aspect from the
Fortunes give them unreasonable assurance beyond measure? The one makes them
timorous and neglective of their Affairs, the other gives them more Confidence
than Discretion will allow.

Perhaps some will wonder that I fancy rather the Devil, than Ptolomy, to be
the Author of Astrology: If this place were proper for so long a Discourse, as
the proof of that would bear, I would not doubt persuading you to be of my
mind. No body else could have put so many absurd Conceits into so good a method
of Chance-medley, as to make them hit often enough to persuade a knowing man to
believe them. Therefore let me advise thee, have a care of indulging this fond
Superstition: Think not to know more of future things than God will suffer
thee, or thinks fit for thee. You pretend to ask Questions in Jest, but soon
believe the Resolutions in Earnest: And why should thou desire to know thy
future Fate? If it be good, comfortably expect: The surprise of a blessing will
add to its value. If it be bad, 'twill come soon enough, without giving
warning, and doubling thy Torments beforehand. I speak this out of Charity to
thee; for God never blesses those that are so over inquisitive in future
Events. Thou have a Power to be Virtuous, be so, and thou need not fear.

And now Friend, as I have taken upon me seriously to admonish thee, so I must
(whether in jest or earnest, I leave it to thee) desire one thing of thee by
all means, that if thou should chance, before I Am aware, to know who I am,
what I am, or where I live, thou wilt be so kind as to conceal me from the
knowledge of Astrologers: For they would presently Erect such a wicked Scheme
of my Nativity, that I might lose thy good Opinion for ever afterward. Fare
thee well.

The Nature of the Seven Planets.
SATURN
WAS of a cruel Devilish humor while he lived upon Earth, and Astrologers
make him still as bad for all he is in Heaven. But I wonder why they would Exalt
him at that rate to the superior Seat in the Heavens; was it for his wickedness
that he deserved so well?

When he is well Dignified, he is pretty well pleased (as people indeed generally
are, when every thing happens to their minds) nay he is then supposed to be a
very solid notable old man: But when ill Dignified, he is so ill natured and
mischievous, there is no bearing with it; he would out your Throat, break your
neck, poison ye, any thing; therefore away with him, and let us hasten to
Jupiter.

JUPITER
Is thought to be as good as good may be, and has the Character of a very
worthy good Gentleman, and is mightily beloved by all; for he, they say, is the
bestower of Wealth and Riches; and for that Reason, more than for his goodness
perhaps, is called the Greater Fortune: Nevertheless, if he is not Honored and
Dignified too, as they call it, he can be as angry and vexatious as another.

It Is a General Rule, that all the Planets are Ambitious, and delight in
Honor; if you set them in the Midheaven, oh how you please them, how kind
they will be to you! But if you put 'em into Prison, or make 'em Sick, by putting
them in the 12th, or 6th, House of your Figure, I assure you they will prove no
good Friends.

Jupiter has abundance of excellent Qualities: he will comfort your stomach with
the Spices he governs; he gives you no less than Partridge and Pheasant for
your meat, loves the Church mightily, and brings us good weather: Therefore all
the Planets love him, besides Mars.

MARS
Is a bold swaggering Huff, that despises every body besides himself; and it is
very unfortunate to meet him in a cross humor. When he is well pleased with
Dignities he can make an excellent Soldier, and loves War rather than Duels;
but vex him once, by putting him out of his places, or disbanding him, and
he will turn Thief, and bid you stand; prove a hot-brained male content, a Knight
of the Post; and in this angry mood he will have at his heels a Shole of
Marshals-men, Sergeants, Bailiffs, Chemists, Cutthroats of all sorts. He Is as
hard as Iron, governs Wolfs, Tigers, and Vultures; and notwithstanding all
this, is not thought to be so bad as Saturn. He is but the lesser Infortune.

The SUN
Signifies Majesty, Kings and Emperors, as well as Nobles, and should
therefore be spoken of with care and reveronce. It Is to the Sun's real
Influences, by a kind and gentle heat, that we owe our Spring, and all benefits
of Nature. He gives life to many Creatures by his sole power. And yet for all
this, Astrologers say, that if he does but chance not to sit in his Throne with
all his splendor and glory, if he chance to lose some of the Dignities they
have given him, he is then but a Cracker, a Puff, a kind of proud Coxcomb: But
in troth they deserve to be called to account for it, for so great a Scandalum
Magnatum.

VENUS
Is a Nocturnal Planet, and therefore loves the works of Darkness; when she
lived upon Earth, 'twas in Quality of a pretty little Whore; her company was so
well liked of by the Astrologers, that they translated her into the Heavens,
and gave her the finest and most delicate Star our Eyes can behold. How her
Profession made her a Goddess, I cannot well tell: It Is certain she had most
excellent Fortune to be so advanced; where Mars is as obliging to her as her
heart can wish. When she is Dignified, and has her best Ornaments on, she is
contented only to make a man a merry, brisk, Pot Companion: but once out of her
Geer, and meanly placed, she produces very sad scandalous Fellows, the very
(...) of lewdness and debauchery. Nevertheless she is a Lesser Fortune, and
happy is the man to whom she happens to bestow a Beam of her Goodness.

MERCURY
Is neither Fish nor Flesh, good nor bad, but according to the Company he is
in. If he sees Saturn, he is sour and morose; if Mars, he quarrels and swears
Dam me; if Venus, he is presently her humble Servant, and on how sweet! he is
naturally a very aerie Youth, and loves Fairs and Ordinaries, as much as Venus
does a Dancing-School. Give him but the upper-hand, and show him Honor, and
he will talk excellently well, 'twould do one good to hear him; but if you offer
to Degrade him, he will set the Company a chatting as wisely as Gossips
altogether at a Christning; he then inclines people from Astrologers to turn
downright Conjurers; from tolerable company to turn insufferable Newsmongers,
and, when the Press is open, wretched Pamphleteers.

The MOON
Was formerly the great Goddess of Conjuration, when there were such things in
the world, for now Astrologers are no Conjurers I am sure; yet they are very
observant of every the least motion she makes, and give her some signification
in every thing that happens. To tell you the truth, she is a true Lady of the
Times, she knows not her own mind two Minutes, loves Novelties dearly, and
invents new Fashions. Sometimes she shows her broad face, and is all in her
hair; anon she is all of a Black-patch, that you can see nothing of her Face;
and will sometimes wear the Horns her self in a Frolic: For my part I would
not trust her of all Women I know; she is as changeable as the Wind, a mere
Jilt, I know not what to make of her, nor she her self. Yet she signifies all
Women, from the Queen to the Oyster-Woman. If she is ill Dignified, nothing can
signify worse, a sottish, drunken Woman.

Observations on January, 1680.
AT the beginning of this Month and year, Venus, being in sweet and kind Aspect
to Mercury, should render Ladies very flexible, but grim Saturn about the
latter end, being in direct Opposition to the charming fair one, whole looks
are said to be fortunate to all she bestows them upon in any kind way, quite
contrary to the nature of other Whores; this mischievous Saturn, I say, may
blast the hopes again of all Venus's Adorers, unless they chance to have
Jupiter on their side, who, about the same time, as Saturn so frets and frowns,
does endeavor to cheer up the hot Lady by the most submissive complemental
Trine Addresses he is able to make: but poor Mercury, I pity him this Month, he
is most sadly afflicted indeed, Jupiter, Mars, and the Sun, conspire against
him; besides he is Retrograde, and would hardly be able to stand, were he not in
a Sign a little of his own Nature, which may signify that Astrologers,
Thieves, and Tailors will have but very little to do; that Querents about
Matrimony will now be very few; how do we know but it may be so ominous, as to
tell us, that many Gentlemen, signified by Mercury, may now lose a considerable
Match at Bowls or Tennis, or there may be breaking of Pates at an Ordinary? nay
perhaps that the very Art of Astrology shall begin to be suspected by some who
have been along time wonderful Admirers of it.

2.. 28.. 30.. 2. R. 9.. 10.. 7..
Observations on February, 1680.
SAturn, though he is as weak as an old man with three Legs, and commonly as
frappish and surly, yet being kindly aspected this Month by the Sun's excellent
Majesty, by Mercury pricking up his Ears again, and by his Fellow-makebate
Mars, walks the grand Paw as stately as any Monsieur on Horseback; being in
Cancer, it sometimes makes him clap his Breast with a strained Hum, and cry
sound Boys, sound. It Is seldom the old man happens to be in a better humor,
therefore perhaps he may make the Brick-layers and other Workmen, whom he
naturally signifies, to have one Grain of Honesty, for a Fortnight, about the
middle of this Month, which is more than it is possible they ever had since they
learnt their Trade. Therefore, O ye, all the Lovers of Building, who will needs
undo your selves without any manner of peradventure, hearken to my
Instructions, make use of this juncture of time, perhaps you may not meet with
the like again. One grain of honesly in Brick-layers, and that for a fortnight!

. 10.. 12.. 28..
Observations on March. 1680.
AStrologers! a word of comfort to ye! your Father Mercury is pleased, and
laughs, whether at you, or for you, I matter not much. Bear up as craftily as
ye are wont, seem to know and foretell all things: Learned Jupiter looks
favorably upon you; but what then? for one word good, I can tell you two or
three bad. Mars, near the middle of this Month, is in Conjunction of Mercury,
which will most certainly make Astrologers at this time right Artists at
picking o Pockets; nay, if a man chance to be born at this time, there is no
truth in Astrology, if the Native does not prove either a Thief, or an
Astrologer, or both. Again, he is Combust, and Saturn squares him; that is, his
little nimble Sons will be trampled upon by Great Men, and despised by those
who know the world never so little. Good people, you are advised this Month to
brew good store of Drink, to make much of your selves, and to lie with your
Wives lovingly and boldly, notwithstanding the Conjunction of Mars and Mercury.
It Is a good time, let me tell you: Who knows what they will be doing, when your
Children come to be Natives; or whether they will be playing the Rogue, playing
the Fool, or not playing at all.

3.. 12.. 15.. 19..
Observations on April. 1680.
VEnus being now in her Exaltation in Pisces, and the season of the Year
beginning to warm her Veins, she sends forth many a sigh for the longed
Conjunction, next Month, with her Servant and Stallion Mars. But Jupiter does
his best to satisfy the Extravagance of her Appetite, and closely embraces her
about the Neck, kissing her over and over for a few days. For though Jupiter,
well Dignified, signifies a Chaste, Virtuous Man, yet being weak, as he is in
Taurus, his weakness ('it is true Astrology, I assure you!) makes him the
stronger and more rampant at a Woman. When Jupiter has done, Saturn takes her
to task, squares and squints at her, and is very angry, he knows not why, or
wherefore; but I am apt to guess, it is because he is too Old to do any thing
with her. Now it is very strange by the by, that it should be thus the humor of
all old people, to envy the pleasures of younger. But that they may neither
despair themselves, nor hinder other people from following the Fashion of these
Excellent Times, I Will tell them, that of late years there is a neat Invention,
called Flogging, invented on purpose to pleasure Old Fumblers, or weak
Youngsters: what it is, they may easily learn at Betty B -- 's School, or
Moor-fields.

2.. 17..
Observations on May. 1680.
NOW Venus rejoices, for before this Month is over, she is to enjoy the
Embraces of her dearly Beloved, Stout, and Lusty Mars. And though indeed it
does not happen, 'till toward the end, yet for the sweet Subjects sake, because
it is such acceptable News to all Sons of Whores, I cannot choose but begin with
it. One thing is very Observable, that whenever the Astrologers, who write
Ephemeris's, and teach people to Conjure, do find Mars and Venus in
Conjunction, they will not let them separate so soon as other Folks, but keep them
a day or two longer in Conjunction than they need to do. I am afraid if the
truth were known they like the sport a little too much themselves. The
Malevolents look a little wishfully upon one another. Perhaps there may be some
friendly Correspondence between Rogues, and Knaves, in order to do some notable
Mischief. But the Sun's coming into Gemini, Londons Significator, may possibly
warrant its Shining upon this City this year, as much as it did the last. For
it will continue in that Sign, just as many Days, Hours, and Minutes, as it
uses to do. Mercury cannot forbear being burnt again in the Rays of the Sun,
and runs backward into the danger rather than escape it: which signifies, that
some Astrologers will be so bold a to expose their Ridiculous Conceits in the
Eyes of the World, and before persons of Judgment and Authority; which may
prove their Ruin beyond hopes of recovery. For while they Sneak in holes, and
corners, and only tempt those unhappy Women who have lost their Sweet hearts,
to come and ask when they will return, or when they shall have new ones, there is
no great harm. But have a care of the Sun. 'Twill Burn, if you approach too
near.

27.. 5... R.
Observations on June. 1680.
JUpiter, Venus, and Mercury, all in Conjunction in the beginning of Gemini,
may signify more than Haly, or Albumazer have thought on. Tradesmen may leave
off Cheating and Lying; Whores may a little forbear scouring Fleet Street and
the Strand; Sluts may look cleanly; your true Coffee-men may talk Loyally and
Peaceably; your Smoakers may be as wise as they seem; But Courtiers will not
forsake the Ladies Company, nor Fops the Play Houses. That Is plain.

Mars afflicting Jupiter this Month, may show, That Ecclesiastics will not be
had in so great Veneration as they were in the times of Popery. What if some of
them, who have used themselves to Coaches a long time, should be forced to try
how they can walk a-foot. No less than seven Conjunctions of six Planets, and
not one other Aspect! You know what Conjunctions signify with us: perhaps the
heat of the Season may incline them to sympathise with us: Venus makes three of
them, and would have been contented with all the rest, if the coldness of old
Saturn could have pleased her better.

2.. 3.. 11.. 12.. 23.. 28...
Observations on July. 1680.
I Hear Astrologers by this time taking me to my Task, and wondering I forgot
the Moon, their chief Goddess, all this while. Shall I tell you then? The Moon
would take up so much time to mind all her Motions, the Trines, Sextiles,
Squares, and Oppositions, she makes to every Planet, several times every Month,
that I should not have a minutes leisure to observe the Addresses of her
betters: She is such a strange odd Woman, that I care not how little I have to
do with her; there is hardly a day sometimes passes in a whole Month, but she is
making of Courtesies, tempting or provoking some of the Planets; nay I have
known her sometimes in one day have something to do with every one of them: One
she lies with, a second claps her on the Breech, a third kisses her, she huffs
a fourth, squints at a fifth, and declares open War, the utmost enmity, to the
sixth, and, in a few days, rings the Bells backward, shows her good and bad
side to 'em all; but Astrologers are not of my Mind, they will hardly stir abroad
unless the Moon be in some good Aspect: when she beholds Jupiter or the Sun,
then they will be so bold as confidently to wait on Persons of Quality.

Observations on August, 1680.
THE Sun and Venus being by this time far advanced together in Leo, may be apt
to make several phoud Sons of the Whore of Rome look as high above Protestants
as they did before the Plot broke out: but before the end of this Month Jupiter
comes and squares the Sun, which may notably foretell, that Popish
Ecclesiastics will, by an over weaning Opinion of their own Capacity in
Politics, run themselves into some further prejudice with this Nation. A
little before the Murder of Sir Edmund bury Godfrey, there might have been some
such ill Aspect, for they were then strangely out in their Politics, and
through mistake may prove to have blasted the fair hopes of every Papist in
this Kingdom, and hung themselves in a string, instead of destroying that
Worthy Gentleman. A little before the mentioned square, Saturn and Mars, the
great Contrivers of Milchief, meet together to consult, and it being in Cancer,
a crabbed Sign, we have all of us reason to fear the worst.

.. 28. 20. in.
Observations on September. 1680.
MArs and Venus meet again in a kind loving way this Month, and the Sun gets as
close to her, as it is possible: They are both such hot Blades, that I cannot
warrant her from catching a Clap; only we may hope well of her side, because
she is at home in Libra, in her own House, where she may take as much care of
her self as she pleases. The Sun is in his Fali, and his Reins weak: The
overgreat heat of the Summer, and his many leacherous Conjunctions, may have
much occasioned it. It Is Mars that helps to spit Fire from Leo: Therefore I
would by all means advise our Ladies of Pleasure, to have a care how they
bestow themselves about this time; for if they should catch a Mischance, they will
be apt to meet with an ill cure, by taking some ill Preparation of Mercury, he
being now Retrograde, and out of humor. Besides, Saturn Squares the Goddess
they pay their Devotion to; so that if Jupiter does not help with his most kind
Countenance, I know not what will become of her. He is in a double-bodied Sign
indeed, and is naturally of a very sound temper of body; so that it is likely
enough he may do the Harlot some remarkable piece of service.

10.. 12. in. R. in. 26.. 21.. in. in.
Observations on October. 1680.
MErcury is all this Month in leacherous Signs; so that Astrologers will be
hot, though the Weather be cold: But have a care, I warn ye, what ye do, while
Saturn is in an ill humor. The Old Man has been a long time in a Paw-Sign, and
is well enough inclined by this time, but he is apt to be Envious; yet being
told by one of the wisest of his Admirers, that he shall shortly enjoy a very
pretty Lady, and have more vigor than his Age will allow, he grows
extraordinary well pleased before the Month is over, and makes a Trine to
Mercury: with a great many thanks. Well, but Mars and Venus, Lovers, fall out:
I wonder at it, because Venus is got into Scorpio, which signifies the main
thing that he loves her for, and it is one of his Houses; so that he is very rude
and ill-natured, to have no more respect for her at such a time, and in such a
place. Mercury is Combust, and in Scorpio too; so that Astrologers should look
to it, that they don't meddle too much with the Girls that come to ask them
Questions. But it is no great matter if they be bit by the Scorpion; they
pretend to have the Faculty of curing themselves: For Culpepper has made
Physicians of many an Old Woman, as well as Astrologers.

in. 5.. 31.. 24..
Observations on November. 1680.
HEat and Cold, Saturn and the Sun are very obliging and Complemental, the
beginning of this Month; but I fancy, it is only Courtiers kindness, your Humble
Servant a thousand times over, when they hate and despise you at Heart. The
Sun, Venus, and Mercury, are all in Opposition of Jupiter; so that I cannot tell
what to think of the Bishops. Three to one's odds, Man, Woman, and Child, say
you? I wish their Lordships well in health, and well to pass. The Moon does
even the same things she uses to do: Whether she is most apt to make the Weather
Cold now, or Rainy in September, I leave the Learned to consider. If
Astrologers, would believe more in God, than they do in her, I should not be so
angry with 'em: but I warrant they will set a Figure to find me out; I fear 'em
not, S -- himself knew nothing on it, when a man lay with his Wife. Let them
disprove my Observations if they can, I dare vindicate the truth of them by
keen dint of Pen, against e're a He amongst. 'em: But then they must write
mighty soberly, or else they will hardly tempt me to lose my time with 'em.

4.. 6.. 13.. 22..
Observations on December. 1680.
GEntlemen, you are very welcome to the last Month; in troth I Am a'most tired,
the have cost me a full mornings work, and it is not good to surfeit. If you are
not quite tired too, I would tell you a little more News before we depart.
Jupiter and Mars are in their hottest loves with Venus this coldest time of the
year, but Saturn is as cold to her as the Weather. It Is very likely Astrologers
may get a Shilling for a Figure, and a Groat for an Vrinal upon the Trine of
Mars and Mercury; the direction happens twice this Month, so that 'twould be
very probable they would get enough to pay for Meat, Drink, and Lodging, if
Saturn did not oppose it, as he does twice too. Last Month I told you how kind
and Ceremonious the Sun and Saturn were, I told you 'twas but
hollow-heartedness, for now they are passing at one another with all the
eagerness that can be. And now, my dear good Reader, I hope I have diverted
thee a little, but shall not much concern my self to know too much of thy mind
in that point; please thy self, and thou please me.

1.. 20.. 7.. 18.. 12.. 18.. 29..
THe Stars, Ethereal Bard, to thee Shine clear,
And all our future Fates thou make appear.
But that thy Wife is Common all men know,
Yet what all see, there is not a Star does show.
Saturn is blind, or some long Journey gone,
Not able to discern an Infant from a Stone.
The Moon is fair, and as she is fair, she is Chaste,
And will not behold thy Wife so lewdly embraced.
Europa Jov^, Mars Venus, she Mars Courts;
With Daphne Sol, with Hirce Hermes sports.
Thus while the Stars their wanton Love pursue,
No wonder, Cuckold, they will not tell thee true.
More's Epigram.
FINIS.

