The mind of the Frontispeice.
WE here exhibit to Ingenious men
The Lucky and Unlucky Citizen:
The first of whch is manifest in (one
Unparalleled) Sr: Richard Whittington:
Who by the prosperours venture of a Cat
Climbed to the Chair of Londons Magistrate
And from the sordid Scullery did spring
To represent the Person of a King:
As (if you please to cast your eyes upon it)
You Will see in the Supreme part of this Front.
Not Care or Wit advanced him to this State
But as he was the Favorite of Fate.
By downright Prudence Men do rarely rise
To Greatness, He that is Fortunate is Wise;
He that is Vnluckly (though the Ball^ at's foot
Shall never kick't, but see another do it;
How many have on raging Seas been ^^st,
And at the last in their own Harbor lost.
The Author does in this express his sense
From the smart Learning of Experience:
Not that he ever ventured on the deep
In any Ship, but fatal Surety-Ship,
A^ (if you fix your eye on the Right Hand)
You Will see, a Lucky Alderman does stand:
Charged with a bagg of Money Lent to one
Upon a Paper Obligation;
Which stands upon the left, This makes him Cap^t
To have Gold and Silver for a sheet of Paper.
But in the Basis of this Frontispeice
You Will see a strong Stone doublet lined with Lice.
That having gotten him upon the hip
Does squeeze him in the Horn of Surety Ship
A place called Ludgate where men only free
Are priviledg'd to lose their Liberty:
In a dark dismal den filled with Confusion
Such is the Unlucky Citizens Conclusion.
FK Citizen of London Aetat: 41 1673
portrait of Francis Kirkman

THE UNLUCKY CITIZEN: Experimentally Described IN THE VARIOUS MISFORTUNES Of an
UNLUCKY LONDONER.

Calculated for the Meridian of this City but may serve by way of Advice to all
the Cominalty of England, but more perticularly to Parents and Children Masters
and Servants Husbands and Wives.


Intermixed with several Choice Novels.

Stored with variety of. Examples and advice President and Precept.


Illustrated with Pictures fitted to the several Stories.

Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. London, Printed by Anne Johnson,
for Fra. Kirkman and are to be Sold at his Shop in Fan-Church street over
against the sign of the Robin-Hood near Aldgate and by most other Booksellers
1673.

G. STEEVENS.

THE UNLUCKY CITIZEN by F K
The lucky have their days and those they choose
The Unlucky have their honers and those they loose
THE LUCKY


THE UNLUCKY


beware of Suretyship take heed of pleasure
you may go in with ease get out at leisure*




I have taken out the Portrait of Francis Kirkman. Abi, successor, et plora!

Geo. Steevens. 1788.

I have restored the Portrait ((...)) of Francis Kirkman.

Geo: Daniel 1838. (...)

The Preface.
IT is usual for most Readers, so soon as they have read over the Title of a
Book, (and that but by halves too) to skip over the Epistle and Preface (if
there be any) and immediately jump into the matter: so that I doubt I shall be
so served and lose my design in writeing one, and then I will assure the
Reader, he will not receive that s^tisfaction in the Book I intend him: and as
to this point in general although many are guilty of it, yet let me tell them
it as an Error, when the Preface or Epistle is unread for they ought in my
opinion to be twice read over: both before and after the reading of the Book,
or else the intent and design of the Author is unknown, for you may give a
shrewd guess of the worth of the whole price, by the essay of the Authors
judgment. And now I have bespoke you to read the Preface, if you are gone thus
far, I question not but you will proceed: and so will I, lest I be counted
impertinently tedious.

This Book having so unlucky a Title, some will noe sooner cast their eye upon
it, but they will cast it down again, with this or some such like expression,
What Is here an unlucky Fellow, if he be so I will have nothing to do with him,
lest I be infected? and thus this Fools bolt is soon cast: he not remembering
what he learnt at School. Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, happy are
they whom other men's harms do teach to beware, and this is my chief end in
this Treatise that others may beware by my misfortunes, and that I have some
years sailed in the Sea of this World, have sometimes met with storms, been in
sight of rocks, engaged with Enemies, and very little part of my life in fair
weather, assisted by a fresh Gale of wind, and these other attendances and
assistances to the Performance of a prosperous and lucky voyage: and that I
having been often in danger of Shiprack and destruction; may show you how to
avoid those many dangers I have so often fallen into and now at last I hope
happily escaped. None can describe a storm so well as those that have bin in
one, and those men that use the Sea all their life time, and met with all the
uncertain casualties that watery Element produces, and many Enemies abroad too:
yet they have the good luck so to come off, as to gain large Estates, and in
their old Age dye at home in peace, and be carried to their graves with all
their limbs and bones, in as much perfection as they were born. Such luck or
better had he on whose Gravestone in Stepney Churchyard, it is thus enscribed.

Eleven Sea sights fought with the common Foe,
Yet nere received he wound or overthrow:
Him God reserved at home in peace to dye,
Though dead we will hope he lives eternally.
On the contrary some have so bad luck, and meet with so many misfortunes in
their youth, that they are disenabled from gaining any thing to support and
comfort them in their old age; which if they live to, they become very
miserable, and such an example I can give you, and that one of the same
quality, a Saylor, of the same Parish of Stepney, and partly one of my own
Family, for his Sister is my present maid Servant. This man of whom I write had
seen some foreign parts before he was twenty years of age, and he being of a
Robust healthy constitution, and in every respect fit for the Sea employments:
there was great expectations of his good success, for he was in general as able
a Seaman as ever came between two ends of a Ship and capable of performing any
charge in a Ship he had resided some years at the East Indies, where it is
usual for most of our Countrymen of any ingenuity, to make themselves some
considerable Fortunes, but he gained nothing: but in his return homewards,
being very active upon all accounts, and there being an occasion for one to go
into the Sea, to do somewhat to the Ship he being well skilled in swiming,
leapt in, and having done what he attempted, and making toward the Ship boat
a Shark bit of his leg above the knee, he has often told me that he felt it
not when it was done, and was only sensible of some pain under his arm,
however he threw himself into the boat, and from thence was hoisted into the
Ship: the Shark having fared so well, still followed the Ship under Sail, and
being greedy of more prey, was the next day caught with one of the Ship-hooks
baited with a piece of beef, and being opened the leg with the stocking was
found whole undisgested in his maw. I will not bounce or romance and tell y^u
it was sewed on again, and he has still the perfect use of it, no, that I
suppose is impossible, and he not so lucky, but thus he lost his leg, and was
brought home without any estate or fortune, only being thus disabled: the East
India Company in whose service he received this misfortune, settled a pention of
half a Crown a week upon him which is duly paid, he being thus disabled from
going abroad, and having this pention persuaded a young Maiden my Tenants
daughter to be married to him; and with his pention, and her winding of silk,
they pretty well maintained themselves till a Child was born, and then the
Mother soon after dyed our lame Seaman being a single man adventured again to
try his fortunes at Sea; the child by reason of his Pention money fared well
enough, but so did not the Father, for he was still unlucky, and now had as
bad, nay worse luck then before: for shipping himself for his old Voyage East
India, he sailed thither well enough, but in his return which was the last
Summer, although all our other East India Fleet came safe home, yet the Ship he
was in had the misfortune to be taken by a Dutch Privateer, and although there
was but little fighting the Captain and his Son being both killed in the
beginning, yet our unlucky Seaman received a wound in his face, that bath put
one eye quite out, and with the other he can only distinguish light from
darkness: and now is both lame and blind, and has no mayntenance for himself
and child but 2 s. 6. d. a week, is not this an unlucky person? and is he not
likely to lead a miserable life, he being not yet above 30 years of age, and
his child not above 5. and as if misfortune were entayled on his family, he
has but one Brother about 16 years old, who likewise going to Sea, was about
twelve months since taken by a Turns man of War, and is now in slavery.

I have given you these two examples of the lucky and unlucky and nothing but
such like matter is this Book compiled of most indeed is of my own misfortunes,
which I think have been as numerous as any man's ever were; only as God did not
permit Satan to act any thing against Jobs life: so it has been with me: God
has spared me that although I have been sensibly afflicted in body and mind,
and I like Job having born my afflictions with patience, am in good measure
restore and relieved. The considerations of my many misfortunes, occasioned me
to write this Treatise: being miserable, I considered and capitulated with my
self how I became so, and wherefore I could not (u^^^ (...) examination of all
my late actions) find that I was guilty of my own misery by my ill husbandry:
or that I was then more criminal than formerly, but considering with my self
that I ought not to look on the stone, but the hand of the flinger: that I was
to look back on my former course of life, I considered with my self whether the
sins of childhood, disobedience to my Parents as a Child, Crimes of more years,
disobedience to my Master as a servant; or those of a latter standing; as I was
Husband to a Wife, or as a Father to a Child, for I had bin in all these
capacities, or my general transactions in my calling were the cause

By this means I recollecting all the remarkable passages of my life, found
that in all conditions, and in all capacities, I had generally been unlucky;
that my life had not been so much as equally Checkquered: there had not been so
many whites as blacks in it, and that for one year of quiet and handsome
enjoyment. I had had seven years of trouble, I did consider in general, that in
my child hood I was bred up and educated by severe Parents, and a harsh
Schoolmaster; that the time of my Apprentiship was an absolute Bondage, under
a rigid Master, and far worse Mistress; and that since I became Man, and had
dealings in the World, all the World had been too hard for me, But when I came
to consider my present condition, I was not able to support my self; in the
contemplation of it, I was all in despair, nothing but black melanchelly
thoughts possessed my mind, all the faculties of my Soul were numb^d and
deaded, and I was a very lump or Chaos of confusion to my self.

About Twelve Months since I being in this disorder, of Spirit, began this
Treatise, and that you may know the Reasons for this my disquiet and how the
case was then with me I will give you a general account, but that you may the
better understand it, I must acquaint you with some of my preceding actions. I
had for some years lived very handsomely and plentifully to the eye of the
World, (although I was always in some distress or other,) until the late great
sickness, year 1665. when leaving the Country, and settling near London, in
fitting up a house for my dwelling, I had devoured all the ready money I was
Master of: the Sickness growing hot, and most of the monyed People leaving
London, carried so much ready money with them that it was so scarce a commodity
in the City, that I wanting some to defray my necessary expenses, could not get
the Gold smith to buy some Plate of me which I offered to sell, this is a
certain though strange truth: I therefore trying what the Broakers would do
found that they being still covetous of trade and gain, (though no clothes
would be accepted of with them, for they were as they said infectious) yet on
Plate, and at half the worth they would lend money, I was forced to accept of
this, or any terms, and so was furnished, but I had so many extraordinary
charges came daily on me, for I had a Father in Law, Brother in Law and his
Child and so many several Cosins and Friends were sick and dyed of the
Contagion, (neither was my own Family free from it,) who had great part of
their subsistence from me, that my money was soon gone, however that and some
rents I received held out to the last* these were my afflictions for that year.
The next year 1666 being the Fire year was worse, for although I had not the
^lluck to have any one of my Tenements burnt though the fire was nere to one,
yet before the year went about I had a very sensible misfortune: for one of my
Debtors dying in the former year, and oweing me 100 l. I in hopes of hedging in
that, engaged to pay 200 l. and upwards, that he owed to others, and taken what
estate he had left, but that proving much less then I expected, I lost above
150 l. besides all my trouble, which I would not undergo again for 500 l. and
do here profess that I would not owe 200 l. for one year together to several
persons, and to have it always due, and be continually dun'd by them, and be
in danger of being arrested and sued, not to have 100 l. clear profit at the
years end; so that let me advise you by my own experience never to be indebted,
and always if possible to keep ready money by you. I was long since told this
Proverb, My Son keep ready money in thy Pocket, and that it was Solomon's, but
although it is not his as I can find, yet I am sure it is as true and as
necessary as many that are his. Pardon this excursion and I shall thus proceed
I was engaged to pay 200 l. and it becoming due in November after the fire, and
I failing in payment, in December I was arrested (because I could not bleed
sufficiently) turned into B^shops-gate prison the then Counter, I was there
forced to keep my Christmas, being there Prisoner four days before, and four
after Christmas day, in all nine days, and then obtained my liberty with much
charge and trouble, for I had four Actions of 100 l. a piece, being each 50 l.
princical debt, to one I paid 20 l. and he withdrew his Action, and to another
I did the like, to the third I gave Morgage of houses, and to the fourth
nothing would serve but a warrant to confess a Judgment. I being bound to the
sower Apple Tree was forced to do it: but as the Dutch man says, one mischief
seldom comes alone, I being now ready to come out there was another Action
against me of 6^ l. entered by one who had little cause for it indeed: I owed
him 30 l. but he had plate for his security however his interest was unpaid,
and I was forced to satisfy him before I could stir, and this and the charges
together so fleeced me, that I was forced to part from some movables a Watch
and a Ring for some days till I could gather in money.

This was the misfortune of the year 1666, and the times proving hard, and my
Rents coming in very slowly, and my Debts worse, it was 1669 ere I had with
much trouble and difficulty paid all these Debts: but then being pretty clear,
and having a stock worth 2 or 300 l. to begin to trade with, and being above
all things desirous to live in a new house in London: I endeavored to get in
moneys that were oweing me, among other Debts I had 400 l. due in one place,
which although it was secure in future, yet at present I could not get a penny:
I labored all I could, and a Gentleman that was somewhat concerned in it, did
after my much importunity, promise to pay me 200 l. of the money at present,
and the rest afterward. I took his promise for current payment, (and thereupon
engaged to take a house) but it did not prove so: and after long attendance I
lost the bargain of that house, and took one of him that had so long promised
me the money*: did believe it to be in a place fit for my purpose, in general,
and expected great employment from my new Landlord in particular; I was to give
40 l. fine and 40 l per annum, and indeed I did not pay, but receive money for
he paid me 60 pound in money, the 40 l. fine made 100 l. and the rest of the
200 l. so long promised me was to run out of the rent: this was our agreement,
I settled my self accordingly; when I first came thither, all the Neighboring
houses were tenanted, and as I thought well too, but in few months it proved
otherwise: for most of them were broken and gone within the year, and I left
almost alone; I in hopes of a trade, had disbursed all the ready money I could
make, and had run my self 100 pound in debt, and all to enlarge my stock: but
for all that it came to that pass at last, that I could not take money enough
in my shop to maintain my Family, and some old and now Creditors beginning to
come upon me, I knew not which way to turn me, this distracted me in my mind,
neither was my body free: for finding there was little good to be done at home
in my shop, and I went to try what I could do abroad* and walked about the
streets in the dirt, so long that I got so violent a cold that I could not
speak, and this being neglected and slighted, has continued with me ever
since, and doubt will to my grave, whether I suppose it will bring me sooner
then I expected. The case being thus with me, I being well stockt with
commodity and not having sale for them in my old shop, I found out a new one in
such a place as I did not question but would do my business: I took that and a
Chamber for 30 l. per annum. attended it with all diligence, but to as little
purpose as the former, and the winter being cold as well as my trading my
distemper so increased upon me, that I was forced to keep my chamber, and soon
after to leave shop and chamber and retire to my Country house: which I always
kept and still live in. It was in this retirement that I began to consider how
the case did stand with me, and I think it was bad enough, for thus it was. I
had one house which I had lately left of 40 l. per annum, and lay dead on my
hands, my new shop and Chamber together with my servants wages stood me in 30
s. a week, where he did not take 10 s. I owed 100 l. of new debts, several
other old debts, but above all 100 l. an old debt for which there was a
judgment against me, (this was more terrible to me then raw head and bloody
bones to children:) and I knew not how soon execution would be served, either
on my wares in my shop in London, or goods at home; I was frighted by every one
that knocked at my door at home, and every day expected no good but ill news
from abroad, had I not been so sick that I could not possibly keep my shop my
self, I should and would have withered the point, done well enough with all these
concerns but my distemper made very weak and sick in my body, and my disordered
and distempered estate had made me worse in my mind I had estate more then
enough to pay all, but then attempting to sell my Commodities, I was offered
less by 5 s. in the pound then they cost me, and indeed some gaped to buy them,
and made themselves cock sure of a bargain in hopes of my death or ruin: this
was the true case of my affair, and thus was I troubled and grieved both in
body and mind; when I began this ensuin* Treatise, I proposed to my self, some
satisfaction in recollecting all the chief actions of my life: I find that I
had bin sometimes up and sometime^ down but that then I was lower than ever, I
had brought a noble to nine pence, and that to was going to nothing, for in the
year 1663 I was worth of clear estate as I then reckoned, and can still show
above 4000 l. and now I know not but of little that I could call my own, and if
the judgment of 200 l. should come against me, either at my shop, it would
sweep away all there: or at home, it would leave me an empty house and it may
be take houses and all too, and turn me and my family into the street, It was
to little purpose now to consider, but in regard that was all I could do, I
began and ripped up my whole course of life: and then I found that I my self had
been chief^y in fault for I had committed crimes even from my infancy that
might still call for justice, although I had been unlucky in general, yet I my
own self caused that unluckyness, these were my thoughts, and this I have set
down in this ensuing Treatise, and that I may divert and please my Self and the
Reader, and not altogether play upon that one string of my own unluckyness. I
have related several stories of others, who have been as unlucky as my self,
and having by this means found out my faults and confessed them: I propose my
advice to you to amend and avoid the like, I have I thank God received some
benefit by it already: for no sooner had I reckoned up my faults, but I had
some present case in my mind, and I hope I had a pardon, for I am sure I have
had a blessing, for my mind is quieted, and that not without cause: for, all
those many encumbrances that were then upon me are now over; at the very time
whilst I was writing at home in my sickness, I was discharged of some: and
since I have been so well as to walk abroad, I have rid my self of the rest;
and that particularly thus: I first got cleared of my unprofitable shop and
servant, which stood me in twenty shillings a week next I discharged my self of
the greatest of my new debts by exchange and sale of Commodities. for which I
had an honest profitable rate: and then walking abroad I first got rid of my
house of forty pound per Annum. although at 200 l. loss, and glad I came off so
to; my terrible judgment of 200 l. is discharged, and so are several other
debts new and old, so so that I now owe less then ever, and no more then what I
can at any time pay at ten days warning, and can without fear whet my knife at
the Compter-gate, I have a stock as well worth 500 l. as any man that consists
in that kind of commodity; and that commodity for which in my sickness I was
offered five shillings in the pound loss. I have since sold for ten shillings
in the pound gain. I have a 1000 l oweing me abroad, and besides my own
dwelling and goods I have yearly rents enough to maintain me without much
trouble: and I am not so unmindful of the old proverb, of keeping ready money
by me but that I have a penny laid up against a rainy day, SOLI DEO GLORIA, and
this I reckon to be the effects of my repentance in this Treatise. Now if the
Reader do but reap as much benefit and satisfactien by reading, as I did by
writing, the buying of this book will be a happy purchase. I have calculated
the discourse for the Meredian of this City, chiefly for City Readers. I would
not have the Town or Country wits to meddle with it. It is of a strain much too
low for them neither does it concern them, I do not profess my self to be
guilty of much wit at the best much less when I was at the lowest condition: I
had little to heigthen my fancy, for in four months together, which was the
time of my retirement and writing of this I, d^ank but one glass of wine:
therefore it is not suitable to those sparkling fancyes, which are every day
heightened with the delicacies of high feeding and large drinking; it is only
fit for such whose wit a^e of the same assize with my own, and yet I despair
not of having readers enough, such as are Citizens Sons, Citizens servants, or
Citizens themselves: it is useful for, and of like use it may be for the honest
Countryman. I shall not at ^^d comm^nd it, nor get others to do so: but such
as it is you have, and as you like it you may have more, for although I am now
forty years old, yet this reaches not much above twenty years, and my last
years experiences a^e the best and most useful: if it may be of any advantage
to the Reader, I have my ends, and shall endeavor to please them further
hereafter, and in the mean time rest

F. K.
Feb. 2, 1672.
READER
THis Book was intended to be published last Easter Term, and was in such a
forwardness, thet I could not reasonably expect any thing to hinder it; for two
third; of it was Printed, and Copy and Papers was in the Printers hands to
finish the rest, neither was money wanting to pay him, for he was paid before
hand, and the Press went currantly: so that I certainly expected to see the
fruits and effects of my labors and disbursements. And indeed the whole state
of my condition was very serene and quiet I was in a very secure C^lme, I
supposed my unlucky days were at an end, and that I should enjoy some lucky
houers at the last: but I was mistaken, I reckoned without my host, I could not
see the storm that was coming, or el^e I might easily provided against or
avoided it: I was blinded with some late good success, and thought to proceed,
but was thus hindered. My P^inter after a long lingering distemper dies, he
having a Nurse or housekeeper, she conceals his death from me and others, and
conveyes away all my white paper, to the value of about 10 l. which I could
never si^c^ hear of, and the Printer being much indebted one of his Creditors
having a Judgment against him, serves it upon his goods, and se^zes them, and
also my Printed sheets. This deceased Printer, had formerly bin my great and
unlucky confident, one in whom I much trusted, for at the time of his death he
owed me above 200 l. which I knew was all lost, neither was that all my loss,
for besides that 200 and odd pounds, and my Books and Paper, I was bound for
him for 50 l. and knew not what was paid of it.

This I think was a very sensible misfortune, but however I being accustomed to
the like, did bear my affl^ctions with a generous constancy. The printed sheets
of this my unlucky Book, I was forced to redeem with a sum of money, choosing
to do so rather than spend money in an uncerttain Lawsuit; and being Master of
them, I endeavored to finish the Book, that I might raise money to discharge
my self from the 50 l. for which I was engaged, and to that end I had disbursed
all the ready money I could raise, but before I could perfect my intentions, I
was arrested for it and clapped up into Prison. I thought it severe dealings to
be arrested by my fellow Citizen without any notice; when as I did not conceal
my self, but was every day to be found and spoken with, but so it was, and I
was confined six days in an absolute uncertainty, for what for I could not
possibly all that time, get my Adversary to come to me, or send me word what
was owing. It was resolved I should suffer, and so I did with much patience,
till at length my inportunity prevailed, and I knew what I was to pay: this
much satisfied me, and indeed then my Adversary was extremely civil, and upon
reasonable terms discharged me, and I design and hope ere long to be wholly
discharged from that debt, which I thank God is the only debt I was ever bound
for, and is the only bond that remains unpaid by me; so that I may and do again
hope for lucky days: I fear nothing but the anger of some great men, who are
displeased with my charitable inclination, and because I endeavor to do good,
they imagine evil against me: but I hope he who is the Ruler of all hearts,
will change theirs and incline them to let me live out the rest of my days in
peace; I design nothing but quiet, not to disturb or prejudice any. I have had
many changes in my fortune, I have lived in many places in and about London, by
my last misfortune at the three Kings on Ludgate hill, but am now by a strange
providence, come to live in the same house where I drew my first breath, and
this present day it is forty one years since I was born there; there I would
willingly spend the residue of my days that I may be near the place where I
intend to have my bones laid, with those of my nearest Relations. This is my
design and desire, but although we know where we began, we know not where we
shall end our lives, and no man can reckon himself happy before his death. If I
cannot attain to that happiness, or quiet in this life which I desire, I hope I
shall in the next: and if God shall spare me with life, and thou do accept of
this Treatise. I shall prosecute it with various stories of my misforune,
designing all for the glory of God, and the good of my charitable Reader: this
is the utmost ambition of

Thy Friend. F. K.
August 23. 1673.
To the Reader instead of the Errata.
IF you have read the Preface, you will find that the Author and this Book
have both been so unlulucky as to fall into Knaves handling; from whence with
much cost and trouble they are but lately redeemed, the one at present freed,
and the other which much ado finished; but not so perfect as was intended for
it it has been such an unlucky extravagant as to wander to four Printing
houses, whereas it was designed to be printed at one, by which means it has
gathered more faults and errata's then ordinary. Indeed the Book is wholly
composed of the errata's of the Author, to which the Printers have added so
many, that they are not easily to be corrected, wherefore as the Author has
here exposed the faults and errata's of his Life to your view, that by them you
may correct and amend your selves: so the Printers are necessitated to leave
their errata's to your correction and amendment, without which you will hardly
understand the true sense of the Author, who adds this request to his former,
promising amendment for the future.

THE UNLUCKY CITIZEN
CHAP. I.
The Author gives his Reason for the Title, Unlucky Citizen, and his intended
manner of Writing. He treats of Lucky, and unlucky Persons in general; and
reflecting on his own particular Misfortunes, resolves to give an Account of
them.

BEfore I begin my intended Discourse, it will not be amiss to say somewhat
about the Title of it, and why I call it the Unlucky Citizen. Truly, my Reason
(in my Opinion) is very good; and in short, thus:

You will find the whole Subject of this Treatise, to consist in a plain
Recital of my Misfortunes, which I may very well term Unlucky; and I apply
them to the Word Citizen, because such an one I am, being so born and bred; And
as he is reckoned to be a right Gentleman, that is so by three Discents, so I
by that Rule may reckon my self to be a right Citizen; and most, if not all the
Misfortunes that have happened to me, were in or near the City, within the
Sound of Bow Bell: And therefore the Scene lying there, and my Quality being
such, I may not unfitly term it Citizen. And now having in few words satisfied
you in my Reason of the Title, I shall fall upon the matter in Hand, but I must
tell you, that you must nor expect any laborious Piece, or rhetorical
Expressions; you shall not find my English, Greek, here; nor hard cramping
Words, such as will stop you in the middle of your Story to consider what is
meant by them; you may read all that is here written without the use of a
Dictionary; you shall need none, no not so much as an English one; and the
Truth is, if I had a mind to confound you with hard Terms; I Will assure you I
cannot, having not been bred so good a Scholar: Here you shall only read a
plain Story, such as you would have told; for I intend to write as freely and
as naturally as I would tell a Tale to you; and such kind of Language I think
to be the fittest for this Discourse, which thus I shall begin.

Not long since it was my Fortune (whether good or ill I know not) to drink a
Glass of Wine with an old Acquaintance; (I know not yet whether I may term him
Friend) and he having lately fallen into a very deep Misfortune, from which he
was not then disengaged, was therefore complaining of his hard Fortune. I
hearing him thus complain for one bad Bargain, (for to my knowledge he had
lately much inbettered his Condition in the Main,) and knowing my self to be
much more unfortunate than he, (for I presently told him of many Losses and
Crosses had happened unto me since I last saw him.) I therefore made slight of
his present Mishap; and he and I discoursing upon that Subject, he recited to
me these two Lines: The lucky have their Days, and those they choose,
The unlucky have but hours, and those they loose
I was very much taken with the Sense of these two Lines, and the consideration
of the truth thereof, at that time did much affect me, so that we did again
enlarge upon that Subject, and by many Examples did make out, that as the old
Wife says, Give a man Lu^k and throw him into the Sea: The lucky man does as he
pleases, he has the World in a string, he can be rich when he will, and though
he has bin a Spendthrift and a Prodigal; nay although he has broke twice or
thrice, yet when he takes up, if he has a mind to an Estate, it is but wishing
for it and he has it, and many Examples we had to that purpose; When as on the
other side, to the Unlucky every thing goes cross and retrograde, let him rise
early, and lie down late, pinch his belly and spare from his back, and in all
things play the good Husband, yet he is never the better. This discourse took
up some time, and so we parted; but although I left his company, yet I carried
the aforerecited two Lines with me, which made a very great impression on my
mind, and my Spirit has bin troubled about them; for considering with my self,
the Misfortunes that have befaln me, I concluded that I was one of these
Unlucky persons, who having but Hours of good Fortune had lost them. And then,
falling into consideration of this matter, I could not find many, if any good
hours that had happened, and still being alone, I considered of this Subject,
and did believe that if I should collect the Misfortunes and Troubles that I
had waded through, and the little good Luck I had, it would be very admirable,
and I might then conclude my self one of these Unlucky Ones.

Werefore I looked back, and revolving in my mind, and having sum'd up all
those considerable Actions that I had done, ever since I could remember, I
found them to be very numerous and various; and might, if well digested and
ordered, be of good use; I then had a fancy of printing them, but upon second
thoughts I found it might redound to my disadvantage, especially if it should
be public, because I should discover many Secrets which were not convenient
to be known to the World. To avoid which Inconvenience, I propounded several
ways to my self: First, as to change the Scene of the Place, and to alter my
true Quality, and so disguise things, that thereby I might be rendered unknown,
but that appeared to be such an endless piece of Work, and withal so
difficult, that I declined that Course, and was resolved to be plain and
sincere; especially when taking a View of my Actions, I could not find my self
guilty of any thing I ought to be ashamed of; but then again, having occasion
to recite the unjust and hard Dealings which I have found from some; and
reckoning of them up and mustering them together, I found that I had not only
out lived the most part of all my Friends, but also my Enemies: And as for
those few that were yet in being, doubting that they might allege, that I was
satirical and libelled against them; I sought a Remedy for that, and thus
resolved that I would name no Persons nor Places, and therefore it would not be
generally known who was mean; but if they who were really intended, did read,
and out of a sense of their Guilt found themselves touched, they might make
good use and amend.

Having thus to my self cleared these, and several other Scruples that arose, I
did resolve to write, and that the Truth, naked as she was; and having already
been in Print, in writing somewhat of this Nature, I was the less concerned at
the common Vogue of the people; neither did I much value it, so as I might gain
by them, and that so considerable, that I might have occasion to unsay what I
now write, and term my self the Lucky Citizen: In hopes whereof, and for the
other Reasons aforesaid, I once again put Pen to Paper; and shall give you a
Taste or brief Account of my Misfortunes, whereby it will be no hard matter to
make good Proof of the Truth of this Title, The Unlucky Citizen.

CHAP. II.
Who, and what were his Parents and Relations, and the manner of his Education,
his small Encouragements to Learning, and his great inclination to read Books
of Knight Errantry, of which he gives some particular account, and what
fantastical Humors they raised in him. The strange Fancies of a Fanatical
Philosopher. And his own conceited Reflections on Knight Errantry.

BEfore I shall begin the Relation of my own Misfortunes, I shall not (as it is
usual in Books of this nature, viz. Gusman Lazarillo de Tormes, or our late
English Rogue) give you any Account of the Miscarriages of my Parents, because,
for ought I know they were without any (except those of humane frailty) for my
Father was, though not born in the City, born a Citizen of London, his Father
being one before him, and by right he was admitted a Freeman, as I was also
after him. My Mother was born of honest and wealthy Parents, whose Predecessors
had several other Children, and I can reckon that from them have proceeded
above two hundred souls, a third part of which are alive, and in prosperous
Condition: some of them arrived to Eminency in Church and State, and so their
Successors continue.

Such were my Parents who bred me up in my youth, with care and tenderness. I
was designed to be a Churchman in Quality as well as Name; for one of my
Mothers Brothers being an eminent Person in the Church of England, intended to
educate me as a Scholar, but his Death put an end to that Design; so I reckon
his death the first of my Misfortunes: However, I was kept at School, and
instructed in the Latin Tongue, but by a rigid Master, and receiving slender
encouragement from a sparing Father, I profited little therein; but yet in time
I was able to make half a dozen Latin Verses, which he showed to my Father,
telling him he must encourage me with money, but he being loath to part with
that, gave me little, and being asked, he replied, a half penny; which caused
my Master to laugh then at me, since when he has told me the Story* saying, he
could not expect me to be very much in love with the Muses when I received so
small Encouragement. And therefore Reader, I tell thee, thou art to expect
little Poetry in this Discourse, since I had so small a Reward for my first
Essay therein.

Thus was I bred till it was time to be an Apprentice, and in all that time I
do not remember that I was Master of any money only once I happened upon a Six
Pence, and having lately read that famous Book, of the Friar and the Boy, and
being hugely pleased with that, as also the excellent History of the Seven wise
Masters of Room, and having heard great Commendation of Fortunatus, I laid out
all my money for that, and thougth I had a great bargain, conceiting that the
Lady Fortune would one time or other bestow such a Purse upon me as she did on
Fortunatus; now having read this Book, and being desirous of reading more of
that nature; one of my School-fellows lent me Docter Faustus, which also
pleased me, especially when he traveled in the Air, saw all the World, and did
what he, listed; but I was as much troubled when the Devil came to fetch him;
and the Consideration of that horrible end did so much terrify me, that I
often dreamed of it. The next Book I met with was Friar Bacon, whose pleasant
Stories much delighted me: But when I came to Knight Errantry, and reading
Montelion Knight of the Oracle, and Ornatus and Artesia, and the Famous
Parismus; I was contentented beyond measure, and (believing all I read to be
true) wished my self Squire to one of these Knights: I proceeded on to Palmer^n
of England, and Amadis de Gaul; and borrowing one Book of one person, when I
had read it my self, I lent it to another, who lent me one of their Books; and
thus robbing Peter to pay Paul, borrowing and lending from one to another, I in
time had read most of these Histories. All the time I had from School, as
Thursdays in the Afternoon, and Saturdays, I spent in reading these Books; so
that I being wholly affected to them, and reading how that Amadis and other
Knights not knowing their Parents, did in time prove to be Sons of Kings and
great Personages; I had such a fond and idle Opinion, that I might in time
prove to be some great Person, or at leastwise be Squire to some Knight: And
therefore I being asked, What Trade I would be of? first scorned to be any,
hoping that I was not born to so mean a Quality; but upon second thoughts, I
resolved to be a Surgeon, and that for several Reasons; as first, because I
often found them mentioned in Books of Knight Errantry; and secondly, that I
might travel, and thereby see all these several Countries of Constantinople,
Trebizond, and I know not what Places; and then I did judge that if I were a
Surgeon and did travel, and meet with Knights Errant who were wounded; I
should be very necessary and useful in dressing and healing their Wounds,
therefore a Surgeon I was resolved to be, and the only Reason why I would
be so, was that I might travel; which my Mother understanding, and not being
willing to venture me abroad, would not permit me to be of that Trade,
wherefore I was to think again, and then I could not think upon any Trade that
would please me so well as a Bookseller, because, by that means I might read
all sorts of history Books, and thereby please my self with reading, but I was
mistaken therein, for as the Proverb says, Who goes worse Shooed than the
Shoo-makers Wife? So I, since I dealt in Bookselling, have read fewer Books
than formerly: but my Father would not allow of this Trade, because he who had
never made use of any Book, but the Bible and Practice of Piety, and knew no
more but some School Books, did suppose it to be an unprofitable Trade, and
profit it was he aimed at. I took my pleasure, delighting in nothing but those
sorts of Books, so that I wonder I did not become another Don Quixot. It was
fear and want of years that hindered me from searching the fields for Knights,
I had a great desire to see one, supposing him to be more than a man, soon
after having a sight of one, he being only in Doublet and Breeches, with a
Sword by his side, I could not believe him to be a Knight, for I expected him
to be armed Capa-pee, with a Lance in his hand, and mounted on a prancing
Courser, for such I had read of, and seen at the Tower among the Arms. I
believed, though we had not many Knights in England, yet they were plentiful in
other Countries; and as Histories were most in other Languages, so there were
most in France. I having read five parts of Amadis de Gaul, in English,
procuring a Dictionary, began to hammer out the Sense of some part of it; and
finally, I took so much pains therein, that I attained to an indifferent
knowledge of that Language, and getting some odd Books that were French and
English, I made my self a kind of Dictionary from them (I being forced to
restore the borrowed one) so that with a little pains taking, I could pretty
well understand a French Author; especially if it treated of Knighthood, of
which sort of Books I was so great a Lover, and had so firm a belief of the
truth of them, that I reckoned them to be Chronicles, and believed them before
Stow, Holingshed, or Speed; and because upon search I could not find Palmerin
of England, nor no other of our English Knights Errant, I wholly slighted them
as erroneous; and so great a mind I had to be a Knight, or at least a Squire,
that it puts me in mind of a fantastical, or rather fanatical conceited
Opinion, of one of my Acquaintance. But before I tell you the Story, it will
not be impertinent to give you an Account of the Person.

He had been a Book-binder, which Trade had, as he said, kept him very poor, so
that he was forced oftentimes to pawn his Cloak to buy Leather, and when his
Work was done, and he carried it home on a Saturday night, expecting money to
buy his Sundays Dinner, he went often without; and was put to many hard Shifts,
so that he studied out some other ways to get Money: At length, it being in the
late time of Rebellion, and Liberty, and he understanding that the Preaching
Trade was in most Vogue, and most profitable, he studied some Points of
Divinity; or rather, fantastical Inventions of his own; and being thus
furnished, away he goes to one of the Conventicle Meetings, where he opposes
the present Preacher, or Prater rather; and broaching some new Notions, he was
generally well approved of by all, but cried up chiefly by his Female Auditors:
And now having made so good a beginning he was resolved to proceed, and being
sufficiently endued with convenient boldness, and as confidently ignorant as
the best of them, he became a Preacher, and maintaining his new Notions, he was
so cried up for a New Light, that their old Preacher was slighted, and he
admitted in his place: His chiefest ends being to get Money, he took the course
to do it by getting in with his Female Auditors, who imparted of their Husbands
Goods to him, and he held forth to them in the best manner he could; but he
being but poor, and by this means wholly leaving his Work, for all the Forenoon
he lay in bed to study how to prate in the Afternoon; this took up all his
time, and he began to want, and although the Good Wives would frequently feast
him with the Good Creature, yet little money came from them, so that he was
weary of his new Employ, and resolved to quit it; but before he left them, he
put one Trick upon them, for pretending that he was arrested for Twenty Pounds,
rather than let him be carried to Prison, the Congregation raised so much money
for him; but when he was Master of so tall a Sum, he left them and that
Quality: in which, as he told me, he had still continued, had he found a
sufficient Maintenance, but that failing, he quitted the other; and from that
was resolved on another Course, and the Gospel having failed him, he was
resolved to try what the Law would do; wherefore he professing Knowledge
therein, became a Solicitor, and that he might be thought a man of great
Business and Practice, he would appoint his Clyents to come to him in a
Morning, and lying in Bed till Eleven of the Clock, he would pretend
Multiplicity of Business, and then rising he would come out with his Papers in
his Hands, and pretend so great haste, that he would not stay, unless it were
to take their Money; and then telling them their Business should be dispatched,
away he would hasten to Guild Hall, to the Sheriffs Court, there he pretended
to do business, when as he understood it no more than the Sheriffs Horse, as he
has often told me; but this his Practice did not do his Business, his time to
thrive was not yet come, or this was not the way that he was to take; but soon
after he fell into it, and thrived sufficiently; for having a small Stock of
Moneys, he did so turn it, and wind it by buying of Bargains, that although he
had but little Skill, yet he often doubled his Money; and his lucky Days being
come, he made his own Choice; for although he still lay in Bed till Noon, and
then only eating, went to the Alehouse or Tavern, doing nothing, nor taking no
Care, yet whenever he had a mind to it (he still keeping ready Money by him)
would go and buy a Bargain that should be considerably profitable so that in
short time he that was not worth a hundred Pence, could boast of several
hundred Pounds of his own, and in his Quality and Condition I knew him when he
would sometimes reflect and look back upon his former life, and tell me the
former stories; but amongst all the stories of his life, his strange opinions
were the most remarkable, for he would pretend to know every thing; he could
resolve those Questions that Aristotle was ignorant in, and he from a precise
Preacher became a gross Atheist, alleging that all things came by chance, and
that there was no beginning, nor would there be no ending of the World nor
nothing in it: Saying, that the wise man said, there was nothing new under the
Sun; and that as Corn when it dies and rots in the ground so it springs again,
lives, and is more glorious: And so, said he, is man, for he never dies, only
being buried and laid in the earth for a time, he lives again, and is by his
second life more pure than he was before, and thereupon it is, that we have
those Improvements in Arts and Sciences; I laughed at his Conceits, and asked
him if he were ever alive before? he replied, yes, he beheved he had bin, but
that it was so long since that he could not remember it. He seriously
discoursing after this manner, and I laughing at him, but for all that he would
go on, and aver that this was sound Philosophy: I replied that however it was
not sound Divinity; to this he answered, that Divinity was not to be concerned
in a Philosophical Discourse; for that the one was grounded on Faith, the other
on Reason. But I shall proceed no further in this Discourse, for he made no
great progress in it, for in short time after he died to experiment his
fanatical Philosophy.

And now I have done with him, I shall tell you the occasion of bringing him in
here: It was for his Opinion's sake, for e're since he urged it to me, I have
bin thinking with my self whether I was ever alive in this World before this
time, for if I was, I cannot remember it, sure it was a great while ago if
ever, sure it was when Giants lived here, and Knight Errantry was publicly
professed, when Amadis was King of Gaul, and Lisvart King of Britain, as the
story relates; and then as sure as Death, I was either a Knight or Squire at
the least, so great an affection have I always had for Knight Errantry. I can
not absolutely affirm that I was a Knight, (although I very much honor and
love that Quality for the fair Ladies sakes,) for I am not at present Master of
so much Valor as many of those Knights I have read of, especially Don
Bellianis of Greece, who in my opinion was the most valiant, most adventurous,
and greatest Kill-Cow of them all; for he made nothing of killing Knights by
hundreds, and Giants by dozens; some with Blows downright, cleaving them in
twain, and cutting others off in the middle, although he himself has been
foundly banged, which Sport I never liked by any means; but however, I wished
him well, and have done more for him than any body else; for I have finished
his Story in a Second and Third Parts; and therefore he is more beholden to me
than to Don Quixot, who although he had a mind to it, yet he never did it. If I
was alive, in former Ages, and was that very valiant Don Bellianis, it may well
be, for else how should I be so well acquainted with his Story; but I am rather
inclined to believe that as some Cunning-man, as Friston the wise, or Sage, as
Bellon^a or Urganda the unknown? and others did formerly write the worthy
Histories of the Knights of their times by Inspiration; even so have I done,
for I cannot persuade my self that I e're was a Knight, especially so valiant a
one, as to stand half a day in a Field cutting and slashing of Knights and
Giants in pieces, and have large Collops cut off from my own Sides; No, I deny
it, I rather incline to believe that I might have been a Squire, and have been
made Governor of such an Island as Sir Amadis his Squire Gandelin was, or as
Sancho Pancha, Don Quixot's Squire was, for I am wholly for the Peace, and love
the long Robe, and not the long Sword, but whatever I was formerly, I am sure I
lately was what I first writ down, The Unlucky Citizen.

But hold, say some Readers, What is all this for, what does the Author mean?
He promised in his Title and Preface to tell us of his Misfortunes, and we
expected to have heard them by dozens, and have laughed, and here is no such
matter, for he is gone quite beyond his Text, he is beside his Cushion, and
tells us only a Tale of Amadis de Gaul, Palmerin, Don Quixot, and I know not
who, nothing to purpose, I tell thee Reader, it is to purpose, for if it does
not please thee, I am pleased to write of that which I have loved so well; and
as for Misfortunes, I hope you would not have them befall me when I was a
Schoolboy, I am no further yet, but if you will have a little Patience, you
shall have enough of them, they will come thick and threefold, I am sure they
befell me so, and I hope e're you have done you will say it is enough of all
conscience, but that we may come to the desired matter, I thus proceed.

CHAP. III.
The variety of good and bad Fortune that did befall one who was reported to be
Atheistical, and his own Reflections thereupon. His Misfortune while he was a
Schoolboy, and how he narrowly escaped drowning when he went with his Father
into the Country on foot to buy Land, which he rid on Horseback to sell, and
how at his Return he was placed out to be Apprentice with a Scrivener.

THe Goodwife's Proverb is, that one Shoulder of Mutton drives down another, so
one story of an Atheist puts me in mind of another supposed one, so that before
I proceed to my subject, I pray give me leave to enlarge a little further.
'Twas reported of a rich Citizen that is reputed to be Atheistical, that he
said, so long as he went to Church and served God, he could not thrive. I knew
the time his Estate was far short of what its now yet he has bin far richer
than now, he has had several turns of Fortune, sometime being on the right side
of Fortunes Wheel, mounting up with the Motto Regnabo, I will reign; soon after
on the Top, with the Regno, I do reign; by and by, tumbled to the left side,
with the Motto Regnavi, I have reigned; and then again, quite cast down to the
Bottom, with the Motto Sum sine Regno, I am without Kingdom or Government. In
short, I first knew this man in a thriving Condition, many Adventures at Sea,
and as many Purchases on shore, so that he might properly enough say Regnabo;
In short time after I knew his Adventures plentifully returned with Success,
and his Purchases on shore, bravely built on, and very well Tenanted, and he
wanted nothing that Fortune could give him, for as his Estate was plentiful, so
he had plenty of Children of both Sexes, and those very hopeful ones, and he
was purchasing a Coach, and every day expecting to be an Alderman, and ride the
great Horse, so that he might properly enough say Regno: Long had he not sat
on the Top of Fortunes Wheel, but he was tumbled down to the left-side, and
that by two great and considerable Losses; the one was by fire, which burnt
down most of his late flourishing Buildings: And the other was by the Loss of a
Daughter which he had not long before given in Marriage, and with her a
considerable Portion, which by her death was lost, so that I think then he
might conclude on that Motto Regnavi. And not long after he received a more
sensible loss, for he was quite cast down to the bottom by the merciless fury
of that raging Fire, which again burnt all his Tenements, as it did the most
part of our flourishing City, so that he was then at the utmost bottom of
Fortunes Wheel, for as the Motto says, Sum sine Regno, I am without a Kingdom,
so was he without Houses: But God be praised, the Wheel is again turning about,
his Estate is in good Condition, and with the rest of his Fellow-Citizens
built, though not well Tenanted, which is at present the chiefest Defect of the
whole City; and were this man but young again, he might arrive at the Regno of
Fortunes Wheel, but such is the frailty of humane Nature that by such time as a
man has lived long enough to be wise or rich, he dies. It is a great rarity to
have any man twice rich, if he is, the Wheel moves apace. I could ^ay somewhat
more of this man, but I shall desist, only concluding this, that as I know not
whether he was wrongfully, charged with the former Atheistical speech about his
thriving; so this I know, for I have heard him speak it, that So many and
various have been the Misfortunes of my life, that if I might choose, I would
not live over my life again to be a Prince at the end of it. He might in
respect of his many Misfortunes say this reasonably enough, but if he did
consider that he never wanted, he always had a plentiful Estate, and wherewith
at the worst to keep the Wolf from the door: and how many in City and Country
are at the best of their Condition far below him when at the lowest, in respect
of Estate; then methinks, this Saying seems unreasonable, to me it does, for I
have always comforted my self with the remembrance of this Saying, Solamen
miseris socios habuisse dolores. And with this Consideration, that let me go
where I would, there were still as many if not more, below me in Condition, as
there were above me, and that it might be yet much worse than it was. And now I
have done with this Story, which I hope is pertinent enough, since it only
treats of the various turns of changeable Fortune, and proves that he was
sometimes the Unlucky Citizen.

And now I will to School again, where before I leave it, I shall tell you some
of the Misfortunes that happened to me whilst I was in that condition.

My Father being very sparing of his Money to me, so that sometimes I wanted
Pens, Ink, Paper, and other Necessaries, and I destroying a great deal of them
in composing my new French Dictionary, especially Paper; I bethought me of a
way how to get some, and though my Design was good and plausible, yet I ought
not to have taken dishonest or unlawful ways to prosecute it, but I was like
the roguish Boy that stole a Prayer Book to learn his Prayers by; for I robbed
every Boys Copy-book in the School, by cutting out several of the middle Leaves
of Paper from them, so that I supposing they would not be missed, made bold so
often, that at length I I was found out, and I very well remember my Buttocks
were torn and cut sufficiently, for tearing the Boys Books, so that I had no
mind to purchase Paper at so dear a Rate again. Whether I may reckon this as a
Misfortune I know not, although it was so to my Buttocks at present, yet I
suppose it was the better for me, for by this means I had no inclination to
filtch any thing for the future. This was a Misfortune in jest, but about the
same time I was like to have had one in earnest, and that such an one, as would
have hindered me from relating, and you from understanding any more of my
Adventures, and thus it was,

My Father being grown wealthy, and having purchased several Tenements in
London, was desirous to have some Land in the Country, and hearing of a
Purchase, and agreeing on the Price in part, he determined to take a journey to
the place where it lay, and seeing and liking it, to conclude the Bargain. The
place being not above twenty miles from London, the Seller was to go with him,
and I and some others were to bear them company; my Father was not so ill an
Husband as to take Horses or Coach for us, but there being a Convenience of
going half the way by water, we did so, and footed it the rest of the Journey;
we being come within five or six miles of the place, and I being somewhat
tired, staid at a Friends House, and with me a Young man of about twenty two
years of Age. who had come with us, and my Father proceeding in his Journey we
walked about the Town, till at length coming to a River side, at a little
distance we saw several Boys bathing themselves therein.

The Young Man who was with me had a great mind (the weather being hot) to go
into the Water, but he did not like the place because it was too public
amongst so many Boys, wherefore we going farther up the River to a place he
thought convenient, he stripped himself, and I by his Example did the like, both
plunging into the water, but he, for his part, never came out again, till he
was fetched out, and that stark dead, I remember I was very near bearing him
company, for the place where we went in being near a deep Hole or Whirlpit,
drew me as it had done him thitherwards, and down I flounced to the very
bottom, I could swim no more than a stone, but whether it was with struggling,
or as they say, the nature of Drowning-people is to rise three times, I know
not, but rise again I did to the top of the Water, but I was instantly down
again, my Eyes being open, I could see where I was, but I had no time to
consider what to do, only still continued struggling, whilst the water
continued guggling down into my Belly, it finding passage enough through my
Nose and Ears, but chiefly my Mouth, I rose and sunk twice, and was come up the
third time, when struggling with my Legs and Arms, I accidentally caught hold
on a Fishing rod which a young Lad held out to me, and so was drawn out of the
Water. I was no sooner on the shore, (but thanking God for my Deliverance) I
was showed where my Friend lay at the bottom of the water, where it being
somewhat shallow, we could see him, for the violence of the Stream had forced
he and I both into the Whirlpit, and had driven him past it, so that I saw him,
and by the help of a Boat that was fetched from the Town he was taken up stark
dead, and although he was held up by the heels and other remedies used, yet all
to no purpose. Thus did he perish and I escape, yet I was very near a
Misfortune.

My Father soon returning from his Journey heard of what had happened, and that
whilst he was purchasing Land, he had bin like to have lost his Heir to it, but
he was glad to see me alive. I had good store of Wine poured into my Belly to
expel the Water that was entered. We staid there longer than was intended, for
we attended the Burial of our friend, who having an Estate, had some time
before made his Will, and made my Father his Executor, so that it was Gain and
not Loss to him; he then had his lucky days, and he seldom mist of them, but
he being buried* we returned for London, in the same manner that we came,
footed it* and that puts me in mind of another Proverb, that the Father goes on
Foot to buy Land, and the Son rides to sell it. And so in truth it fell out,
for he, as I told you, footed it thither and home again; I since his Death did
ride to sell it, and he was not so earnest in the buying, nor so well pleased
in his Purchase as I was in the selling, and I had some reason on my side, for
he gave it me by his Will, but charged with such an Encumbrance and Payment
which was to be made out of it, that it was little worth, and I meeting with a
man who had some other Estate adjoining, and who had less need of ready money
than I, gave me a great price for it, so that I never wish to sell any thing
dearer than I did that.

But to return, we being come to London, and I returned to School, I had not
continued there long, before I was in earnest to resolve what Trade I should
be, for to be an Apprentice I must, and seeing that I was refused to be either
of these two Trades that I had liked and named, would name no more, but left my
self to my Fathers disposing, who having of late had many occasions to use a
Scrivener in his Purchases, knowing that Trade to be not only very useful, but
profitable, he proposed that Trade to me, and I liking well the proposition was
soon provided of a Master.

CHAP. IV.
Being placed out as an Apprentice, he gives an account of his Petty-services,
and how the Maidservants though never so beggarly Baggages, have command over
the Apprentice, and the Inconveniences that thereupon happens. He complains
to his Father of his hard Usage, but fares the worse at present, and is soon
after turned out of an Employment that had been of great Credit and Profit to
him. He being found tardy in a small Misdemeanor, is utterly disgraced. His
Mother dying after a strange manner, and he thereby losing his best Friend,
resolves to run away. He descants upon this unlucky Resolution, and advises all
Servants to perform their Duties and truly serve out their Times, lest they
falling into the like Misfortune as he has done.

THe Master whom I was to serve demanded thirty Pounds in Money and eight years
Service, or forty Pounds and seven years Service, besides sufficient Apparel: I
who was then sixteen years old, was unwilling to serve eight years; but my
Father being willing to save ten pounds, did overruled me, so that I was bound
for eight years, and my Father was bound in a hundred pound Bond for my truth.

All the good or ill fortune of my life depended upon my serving this eight
years, which my unlucky Stars would not permit me to do; and indeed I had some
kind of reason on my side, which ought to have been weighed and considered
before my binding; for my Master had two Apprentices more, and although he had
a full employment, yet it was very improbable that he would take any more
suddenly, so that I was to be youngest Apprentice for most of my time, nay and
it may be for all; for besides the two other Apprentices who were elder than I,
my Master had a Son about three years younger than I, whom he also designed to
be of his own Trade, and by such time as I reasonably expected to have an
Apprentice to come under me, my masters Son was to supply that place, so that I
was likely to be undermost all the time, and so it happening, that was the
cause that I left my Master. But before I leave my Master, give me leave to
tell you how I behaved my self in his Service, and several passages that I
think worthy of note.

I was no sooner bound, but I was told and showed by him whom I succeeded what
was my particular work, for besides my Writing I was to do other Petty
services. I was to make clean the Shoes, carry out the Ashes and Dust, sweep
the Shop, cleanse the Sink (and a long nasty one it was) draw the Beer, at
washing times to fetch up Coals, and Kettles, these were the within doors
employs, and abroad, I was to go of all errands, and carry all burdens. I
dispensed with all these matters, being told thereof by my Father and Mother
before I came, wherefore I was content, and did undergo all very willingly,
till I had served about three years, and then being grown up to some maturity
and understanding, I began to grumble; I had Money given me which I always laid
out in purchasing of Books, especially such as treated of Knight Errantry, or
else in buying somewhat to make me fine, and Money coming in pretty plentiful,
I had bought me a very good Suit of Clothes to wear by the by; and withal,
being desirous to appear in every thing like a Gentleman, I had a Watch for my
Pocket; being thus accoutred, I sometimes went abroad with our
Neighbour-Apprentices and others, and being thus fine, it troubled me that I
must still carry Burdens, for whoever went empty my Mistress would still take
care that I had my Load to carry Working day and Sunday, from our London to our
Country house, and rather than I should want a Burden, I was to carry earthen
Pots and Pans, and Ox Livers, and Bones for the Dog, this I grumbled at, and
when I have bin seriously a drawing Writings in the Shop, and studying and
contriving how to order my Covenants the best way, a greasy Kitchin-wench would
come and disturb me with one of her Errants, and tell me I must fetch a
farthing worth of Mustard, or a pint of Vinegar, or some such mechanical Story;
nay, my Mistress has sent me for a Pint of Purl, which when she has warmed
and tasted of, and not liked, I must carry it again to change it. And I being
the youngest Apprentice was to be commanded by every one, the two eldest would
appoint what I was to do in the Shop, and the Kitchin-wench would when she
pleased, command me into the Kitchen, so that I must be here and there and
every where; and above all things, I must humor and please the Maid, or else
she would pick Holes in my Coat, and tell Tales of me to my Mistress, who would
not let me live a quiet hour. And now I am at this Point, give me leave to give
you my Opinion in the Case: Me thinks it is a very unhandsome and unequal
thing, that Apprentices should be thus used, for he that is an Apprentice at
present, in short time he is to be out of his time, and then he is a Companion
for his Master, and it may be a better man than he; and why then should he be
thus tumbled and tossed, and put to those unhandsome Employments? Why must the
saucy Kitchin-wench command him, whom in few years she would be glad to serve?
And she will be obeyed or else she will be gone when she pleases; when as the
poor Apprentice is bound and must obey, he must stay his term out, and be
obedient to the next Gilly-flurt that comes; and this is the reason that many
times an Apprentice of very good and rich Parentage, to be rid of these slavish
employments, and taken-off from them, or be eased by the Maid, or have leave to
make a Sop in the Pan, or for some such greasy Cupboard-Interest, falls into
her Quarters, and then they make a marriage together, to the destruction of the
poor young man, who does it that he may with the more ease pass over the
slavery of his Apprenticeship, whenas thereby he enslaves himself for ever.

This is common between the Apprentice and maid; but the Commands of the
Daughters (if there be any) are much more insupportable, unless by chance, they
be good natured, but commonly your Citizens Daughters are better fed than
taught, and by their Fathers and mothers Examples are surly and insolent
enough, so that during all the time of the Apprenticeship, an Apprentice dares
not look upon them, they are so proud and lofty that you can hardly reach their
Ar -- ses with a Pitch-fork; and if when the Apprentice writes Man, and wears
good Clothes, and Money in his Pocket, and comes near to the conclusion of the
Story, that his time is almost out; and then Courts them, feasts and flatters
them, yet they will still scorn him; but if they should proceed to Marriage,
and if at any time after he offers to cross or offend her Ladyship, then she
rants and rayls, and tells him He is a saucy proud Fellow, and that she took
him from cleaning her Shoes to be her Husband, She made her Dish dout her
Table-Cloath; And must she be thus used by him? No, she will not endure it; but
he must, or else she will make his Cash fly, if she can come at it, to spend
upon good Fellows that will humor her, or else she will throw up her Heels to
the next good Fellow she meets with, that he may spend upon her: And these are
the Attendants of a London Apprentice.

But for all that and notwithstanding all that I have said, or can say, yet I
wish that I had weathered the Point, that I had continued still on, bore the
Apprenticeship to the end of the voyage; but it was my misfortune I was to be
Unlucky, and therefore Unluckily I acted: For as I told you, my Masters Son
growing up, and being almost fit for business was taken home, and employed in
it, and just when I expected an Apprentice to come and be under me, in steps he
and was above me: This vexed me heavily, but much more when he became so
insolently proud, as to command me to make clean his Shoes, and do more for
him than formerly; So that I saw if the Dice did run so, that I was to be a
Slave for all my time; I could not help it, I was bound to the sour Apple Tree
and there must abide by it, there was no Remedy but Patience, at which I was
very impatient. And now my case was worse than before, for the eldest
Apprentice being lately out of his Time, and our Employment being great, I had
been kept close to my Writing, and ceased from going on Errants, I had had a
little cessation. But when my Masters Son came into play, his putting in, was
my putting out, I was again sent to carry Bones to the Country Dog, and such
kind of idle scurvy Employments. I remember my Mistress came one day to me and
says, Sirrah, (for that was my Title with her) Come, leave your scribbling, for
the Maids must wash to morrow, and therefore you must go and carry the foul
Clothes to the Countrey-house. I durst not deny her, and therefore I arose, and
went to take a view of my Luggage; It was large enough of all conscience, but
she causing me to put on my Cloak, and finding that it was possible for me to
carry more, called for all the dirty Clouts about the House, and thrust them in
too: I seemed to grumble and mutter something, but she soon took me off by
telling me I was proud and idle; so that I seeing it must be so, up I took the
burden, and away I went, but not to the Countrey-house, but made a shorter
trip of it, I made my Journey somewhat shorter. I had often told my Mother of
my grievances, and especially that of carrying Burdens, but she would not
believe that I was put to do more than was fitting; wherefore I was minded now
to show her, and therefore went straight home to her House, and laying down my
Burden, I asked if she would now believe me, and whether I was put to
Apprentice to carry such Burdens? She seeing the bulk and weight, and
concluding it was unfit for me to be so used, bid a poor Journyman of theirs to
take it and carry it form. He throwing it on his Shoulder, we merrily trudged
on together; when I came to the Country house, I took it and carried it in,
and my Mistress not being there, I had the good luck to return empty handed,
which was a thing befell me very rarely, and had not been so then, had she been
there; and we returned merrily back, for I was then Master of Money enough, and
therefore to a Two-Pot House we went, and I gave my fellow traveller his skin
full of Ale; he being thus feasted, promised his good word to my Father; for,
says he, it is not fit that you should carry such Burdens; I seeing him in the
Cue, told him of many other grievances, all which he said were not to be
endured, and that he would so acquaint my Father with them, that they should be
remedied; thus was I in hopes that my Father would take some care in it, as I
presently found he had, but I was little the better for it; for no sooner was I
come into my Masters House, but he seeing me, enters his Closet, from whence
fetches a lusty Ba^toon Cane (the ordinary Weapon with which I was used to be
disciplined) and without by your Leave, or with your Leave, he takes me by the
hand, and lifting up his Sword Arm like a Fencer, he gives me a lusty Thwack
over the Shoulders, and without any warning given, not so much as the least
word of Defyance, that I might know his Anger, or the cause of it; he follows
that blow by a second and a third, and many more, so fast, and so long as he
could lay on, till he being out of breath was forced to give over, and then so
soon as he had recovered the use of his Tongue, he thus breaks silence, Sirrah,
I Will teach you to run and make Complaints to your Father: I now having heard
him speak, knew where abouts he was, but methought the News was strange and
sudden, and somewhat I began to mutter, but my Tale would not be heard, he
prosecuted his business with the Second Part to the same Tune, both upon my
Sides and Shoulders, till he was again weary, and then there being a cessation
of Arms down I sat me not daring to speak a word, but though I said nothing,
yet I paid it with thinking, but all to little purpose, he was Master, and I
found so he would continue.

I was now in bad plight, being afflict in Body by my Rib-roasting, and in mind
to consider that by seeking a Remedy, I found the Cure worse than the Disease.
And my Master not thinking himself sufficiently revenged in what he had done,
was resolved to proceed further, and afflict me in the most sensible part, so
that all that was past was in comparison to it, but a Flea biting.

I have told you that my Master had a large Employment, and withal, a place
which he officiated, which brought in his greatest profit. To the management of
which he kept a Clark under him, which at present was my self; for when my
preceding Fellow prentice, who had assisted him in it before me, was by means
of the profit he gained in it grown proud and high flown, he then turned him
out, and put me in, and now was I served in the same manner, I was turned out,
and his Son entered: Here I was the most sensibly afflicted, for I had my profit
and credit both taken from me at once; but it could not be helped, and
therefore Patience was my only Remedy: Neither was this all my Misfortunes;
for when I went to my Fathers house, I was like to have had as much from him as
I had of my Master, for if my Father made one Complaint, my Master had told him
of twenty of my Faults; as that I was proud, idle, negligent, cross, and many
more such kind of rascally Epethites; so that I found that when I came to my
Fathers with my Burden, I had bin better to have taken a Coach and have
carried it that ways, as I had done many times before, but I being unlucky ran
my self into this Misfortune, which being followed by another that caused me to
leave my Service; I being thus turned out of my place of profit, was both
troubled and angry, and was every day more and more afflicted, especially by my
Mistress, who pryed into all my Actions to find somewhat wherewith to accuse
me, and it was not long e're she found somewhat that she thought was very
considerable, we had made some Conveyances of Land for a Gentleman, who belike
had not very well pleased my Master in his payment, for he having occasion to
have them copyed, and desiring my Master to get them done for him; my Master
refused it, telling him we were so busy that it could not be done. I hearing
this, took the matter at the Rebound, and privately told the Gentleman, that if
my Master would not, yet I would get them done, and that by his time, and by
this means, I intended to hedge in half a piece into my own Pocket; the
Gentleman and I agreed, and I undertook the business, but in regard the
Writings were large, I could not conveniently do them all at home, I gave out a
part to be done by another hand; in my Masters absence I writ some of these
Writings, and still as I did it, I locked it up in a Trunk, which being not
above a foot long, I kept it still by me, and in it was all my Money and
Treasure; I did not carry my business so cunningly, but my Mistress who watched
me, saw what I did, and my Master coming home acquainted him with it, he being
desirous to discover this Mystery, sent me abroad on a pretended Errand, and in
the mean time seizes on my Trunk; I while I was forth, met with one to whom I
owed some Money, who I bid come home with me, and I would pay him, but when I
came home, I could find no Money nor Trunk, I tumbled and tossed, but to no
purpose, I fretted like gum'd Taffata, considering that if it should come to my
Masters Hands, he would make a bad construction of my Actions if he should see
what was in it; my Master all this while seeing how I was teez'd, laughed at
me, and at length asking me what was the matter? I told him I had lost my
Trunk, in which he knew my Money was; well, said he, if that be all, sure you
can remedy yourself, you have studied Astrology, you were best to cast a Figure
for it; I replied that although, indeed, I knew somewhat in that Art, yet I was
not so good a Proficient as to answer such a Question: Well, said he, If you
cannot I will help you, do you but cast a Figure for the Key, and I will cast
one for the Trunk. I hearing him say so, and then knowing very well, what of
Course must necessarily follow, and that I should be discovered in my
Contrivance, I was as blank as a Bell-founder, but he by my unwillingness
believing the matter to be greater than it was, was therefore the more earnest,
and I was forced to deliver him the Key, with which he opening the Trunk,
discovered about six sheets of Paper of my thus Copying: How now! What means
this? said he, I thinking it was no boot to make Excuses, told him the whole
truth, but as I made it at the best, it was a heinous matter to him, and no
less than Felony in his Wife's opinion; I was forced to let them say all that
they would, and give them the hearing; but however, I did not think my self to
be so errant a cheating Rascal as they said I was. The business is plain, I
leave it to the Readers to judge, and so I will have done with this passage,
which was enough for them to tell my Father of when ever they should see him.

But now about this time, one of the greatest Misfortunes of my life befell me,
for I lost my loving and dear Mother, and that after a strange manner.

She was desired by one of her friends to go with her to the Hospital, to see
her Maids Breast (which was cancer'd) cut off; she went and saw it, but took
such a conceit with it that cost her her life, for she presently at the very
instant of cutting off the Maids Breast, felt a pain and pricking in her own,
which increased every day, and though her Friends and Relations did all they
could to persuade her to leave this Conceit, telling her that it was only so,
yet she would not be wrought upon, but being given to a religious melancholy,
this Conceit so wrought upon her, that it proved what she conceited it, and her
Breast was really cancer'd, and that in such manner, that notwithstanding all
the Remedies she took, it in few Months killed her.

Thus did I lose a dear, loving, and indulgent Mother, and one whom I have
often bewailed, yet never sufficiently, and here in this very place, I should
again bewail her in verse, but that as I have told you, I was so slenderly
encouraged in verfifying, that they always come hard-bound from me, and
therefore my Muse not being free, and I being in haste, I will omit them.

My Mother being dead, it was not tw^ Months before my Father was re-ma^ried,
and then was my Nose out of joyn^ for although my Father by his Marr^age
imbettered himself, and leaving o^ his Trade became a Gentleman, yet (...) was
miserable and more a Slave than ever, and my Mother was dead to who^ I was wont
to complain; and there wa^ every day so many faults found with m^ at home, that
I sed a wearisome life^ my last great fault was always laid in my Dish, and I
was disgraced before all manner of company, so that I was resolved to be gone;
and I had rather run any Fortune than live at that rate. And was not I a very
unlucky Fellow to take thi^ resolve? For whither to go I knew not nor what to
do; but the Devil owed me a Shame and then he paid me home. And now give me
leave to descant a little upon this Action, this unlucky, this undoing Action,
which was my absolute and utter Ruin; I was lately on the Top o^ Fortunes
Wheel, and proudly cried, Regno. I rule and command. I had as I tol^ you, my
change of Habit, my Watch* and my Gold in my Pocket; and now by this Action I
was soon deprived of all; my small Stock was not a Mine, it was soon wasted, I
turned out of my Place, and all I could now say was Regnavi, I was in better
State and Condition; but now Repentance comes too late. And all this happened to
me because I was an inconsiderate Coxcomb; I was grown too proud, and it was
very true as my Master said: I wanted neither Meat, Drink, nor Apparel, I was
in a place of Credit, and lost all for a proud peevish Humor, because I could
not have my will, and that is commonly the ruin of all People, and yet every
one desires it.

The Child would have his will, and rule over his Parents; the Servant would
have his will, and command his Master the Citizen; the Citizen would have his
will, and command the Magistrate; and the Magistrate would have his will, and
command his Prince. This is a perfect truth, and we have had the sad experience
of it, and know that it brought ruin upon all. This was occasioned by self
will, and pride, and that was my ruin, but unlucky I was, and therefore this
came upon me, I had not then my lucky Days, not so much as hours, and if I had,
I lost them, and by losing this Master, I lost all my hopes; for I ran my self
upon an hundred Inconveniences which I never then dreamed of; and let me tell
thee, Reader, whoever thou art, if an Apprentice, that I consider the Tie of an
Apprentice to be, for the time, as solemn as that of Matrimony; for we should
resolve to live together as married folks do, for better for worse, for rich or
for poor, in sickness and in health. This is the Duty of married Folks, and
ought to be that of an Apprentice to a Master; and therefore let me advise thee
if thou expectest a Blessing, to perform this Tie, for it is thy Duty, learn
good out of my harms; for I Will tell thee, if I had served my Master all my
time, I should have had his good will, and my Fathers blessing; my Father would
then have provided me a House, or at leastwise a Shop, near to where I was an
Apprentice, which was in the most eminent place of the City; I might then have
expected some Trade with some of my Masters Clyents, who seeing me hopeful and
orderly, would have given me encouragement; I might then have expected that in
due time I might have had a Wife with a considerable Portion offered me, my
Father assisting me, and imparting some of his Estate to me; whereas now I mist
of all these blessings, for when I went to set up for my self, which was about
eighteen Months after, I was forced to be contented with a little Dog-hole of a
Shop, at the utmost Skirts of London, where being wholly a Stranger, I could
not expect any considerable Practice, for who would trust such a Scapperb^yling
young Giddy braind Coxcomb as I was? None but Fools and Madmen, or such young
Scatterbrains as my self, who alas! had little employ for a Scrivener.

I could only expect to write a Letter for a Seamans Wife or Sweetheart, and
now and then make a Letter of Attorney, or a Deed of Gift, Deed of Shift, I
should say, or some such Twelve penny Jobbs; and this was my Lot, this was my
Fortune, or rather my unlucky Fate, thus at one Cast to lose all these good
things, and fall into all these and many more Evils which I shall hereafter
acquaint you with, wherefore let me here conclude my Story and Chapter
together, I left my Master and so became Unlucky.

CHAP. V.
Having left his Master, and being on his Ramble; he happens o^ strange
Company, and a more strange Adventure in an Inn, which occasioneth the recital
of some pleasant Novels.

I Left my Master at such a time as my Father with his Wife my new
Mother-in-law, were gone into the Country to take their pleasures; I
understanding this, was resolved to have a little of mine, and go to them, and
did hope that I might work somewhat there upon my Father, and bring him to my
Bow better than in London, where he would have been sure to have made me have
gone home again; but there he could not so soon, nor so well do it, being among
Friends, some of which Chap. 5

I did believe would take my part. In this resolution I hyed away to
Queen-hithe to take Boat, for I was to go Westward hoe; when, look you what
happened, such an accident as might still have redeemed all, had not the Devil
owed me a spite, and resolved that I should be unlucky; for just as I went in
great haste to take Boat, I saw my Father coming up the Stairs, as being newly
landed; I had just time enough to see him, and so to avoid him, but I wish
since I had been blind for that instant, and then I am sure he would have
caught hold of me, and returned me to the place from whence I came, or else to
a stronger house than ever he builded for me; which would have been the better
for me; but he was then landed, I seeing too well faced about, and marched off
at present, and let him pass by me.

He being gone, I did not take much time to consider what was best to be done,
for I was resolved to proceed in my Voyage, and have a little sport and
pleasure, and took his being returned from out of the Country, to be a very
good providence for me; for I judged I should be the welcomer to those friends
I intended to visit, and did suppose that my Father understanding I was gone to
look him, would not take it much amiss, and that he would in my absence
discourse with my Master, and it may be conclude upon terms to my advantage.

These were my thoughts, and therefore having taken a Boat, which was ready to
put off, away we went, ten Miles we were carried by water, and then I intended
to foot it, for it was to Windsor, the same place where I had formerly escaped
drowning; and now being on shore, I found there was three of the Passengers,
viz. two Men and a Woman that were to go to the same place, and intended to
foot it as I did; whereupon being glad of each others company, away we put on,
we traveled very merrily, I cast away care and was blithe and bonny, for having
Money in my Pocket, I thought my self to be as good a man as the best.

One of the two Men was somewhat melancholy, and he told us the cause was thus.

Said he, It is not three Months since I traveled this way with a merrier
heart and better Equipage, for I being a Citizen of London, went bravely
mounted and accoutred, traveling all the West parts of England where I dealt,
to visit my Chapmen, and gather in Moneys, which I did in a good moderate
manner, but not so considerably as the necessity of my Affairs required; for no
sooner was I come to London, but I had all my Creditors came upon me, and
dunn'd me so desperately, that all that I could do at present did little with
them, so that I had Actions daily, and at length a Statute of Bankrupt came
upon me, that like a Deluge swept away all, only I saved one Chapmans Book,
and thereby have some hopes that those Chapmen that owe me Money, and which my
Creditors know not of, will be so honest and kind to me as to pay me, with
which I intend to set up in some other place.

He having told his Tale, I looked earnestly upon him, and could not ghess him
to be what he said he was, a Citizen, for he was in a very different Habit,
being Forrester like clothed all in green, but he assuring me that the Case
was just so, and relating to me several particulars of his Misfortune, I
concluded him to be an Unlucky Citizen.

With this my Green Citizen, and the other man, who was a London Cook, and his
Wife; we designing all for one place, Windsor, and having come by Water to
Brainford, and now having two Miles to Hounstoe, I was resolved to continue my
Journey, but we all concluded to stop there for that Night, and the next
morning to proceed on our way; wherefore we took up our Quarters at an Inn, and
having eaten our Supper, went to Bed; the Man and his Wife in one Bed, and I
and the green Citizen in another; I having cast away care, slept soundly till
it was near morning, when I was disturbed with a very loud and shrill Shriek,
and the noise of women's tongues which immediately followed, and were indeed
mixed with it. I being thus awakened, listened to hear what was the matter, but
although the noise was close by, as but in the Gallery at our Chamber door, yet
I could understand but little what they said, and less what they meant; but the
Cooks Wife who lay with her Husband in the same Chamber with us, told him, that
if she were not mistaken she knew the voice of one of them and therefore she
would rise to see what was the matter; so thereupon slipping on her Pettycoats
and Shoes, opening our Chamber door, went to them; when she was come thither,
one of the women seeing her, began to shriek out again; but our Chamber-fellow
told her she needed not fear, for it was she her Neighbor; O Lord Neighbor!
said the other, I have bin almost frighted out of my wits; so be like, said the
Cooks Wife, you would not have made so great a noise else: By this time several
other Guests of the House being awakened with the clamor, were also come to see
what was the matter; whereupon our Cooks Wife being a witty Baggage, and being
less concerned than the rest, and therefore her judgment more free to know what
was most convenient, desired all the parties concerned to take their Chambers,
or some one Chamber to retire from the company, for the woman who seemed to be
most frighted was almost naked; this proposition being thought convenient, they
went into a Chamber, and the strangers retired, only our Cooks Wife staid with
them. This passage I heard as I lay in Bed; and now it being day light we all
arose, and our Cooks Wife came into our Chamber to put on her Clothes, we all
asked her What was the matter? But she could not tell us for laughing, we
wondering at what had happened, importuned her to acquaint us with the Adventure;
she answered, she could not do it fully as yet, but did not question but she
should by and by, and all that we could get from her at present was, that two
Women were scared with living Ghosts; this was all she told us, and so having
hastily dressed her self, she went again to her affrighted Acquaintance; and I
being curious to know the truth of this Affair, went into their company, but I
was never the wiser, all that I could observe was, that the Company consisted
of an old Man, a Citizen, two young Women, and two young Men, who although they
kept at a distance from the rest, and they two were like Strangers to one
another, yet I supposed that they were somewhat concerned with the Women; I
found that although one of the Women and one of the Men, had designed to go
with the Carrier to London, yet they did not, telling him that they would go by
Water, this was all I could discover while we staid there; but we having broken
our Fasts, and being resolved on our Journey, away we marched; no sooner had we
left the Town on our Backs, and we entered Hounsloe Heath, but we all three at
once renewed our Requests to the Cooks Wife to acquaint us with the truth of
the Adventure; she laughing refused us, and our, nor her Husbands importunity
would not for a long time prevail; but at length we so importuned her, that she
consented; but when she went to begin, she could not say one word for laughing;
this heightened our expectations, and much concerned we were to know that which
for a long time she could not tell us, but at length having settled her self,
and bethinking what she should say, and how to begin, she did it in this manner.

I know not whether I shall give you the satisfaction you expect, for I Will
assure you though I think I know all my self, yet what I do know is so
confused, that I can hardly tell how to begin my Discourse, nor when I have
begun, how to continue it in any Method to your satisfaction, but if you will take
the good Will for the Deed, I shall give you all the content that I can.

And thus (said she) it is, I suppose (said she) to her Husband, that you know
that two of the Parties, viz. the old man, and one of the young women, are Mr.
such a one and his Wife, our Neighbors; yes, replied the Cook, and I
understand the other young woman is her Sister, and this is all I know or can
understand, although I believe the two young men are of their company; you are
in the right, said the Good-wife, and now you know thus much, I will tell you
the rest.

One of these two young men (continued she is a Sweetheart or Servant, what
you please to term it, of the old man's Wife, and has courted her for
enjoyment, whether they were ever at the sport or no formerly, I know not, but
last night I believe they were, for I understand the matter to be thus:

This young woman having agreed to content her Servant, and they intending to
have a Frollick together, she has persuaded the old man her Husband, to give
her leave to take a journey into the Country, to see her Sister, which is the
other young woman; the Husband for a long time either refused her, or made
excuses that he would in short time spare so much time as to go with her; but
she not being desirous of his company, had purposely asked him at the time of
his greatest employ, when he could not be spared from his business, and did
importune him so much, that in the end she gained his consent; and he like a
loving Husband, since he could not spare time to go with her all the journey;
did however, resolve to accompany her the first days journey, and there to
leave her to travel with other good company: She acquainted her Gallant with
this Agreement, and they two concluded, that so soon as the old man, her
Husband left her, he should meet her, and accompany her the rest of the
journey, where they passing for Man and Wife, might lie together upon the way,
and frollick it to their own hearts content.

Thus I understand was this Design laid, and yesterday it was put in execution;
for the old man and his Wife came last night to our Inn, as you well know, and
were there met by the young man, the Gallant; who although he seemed before her
Husband* not to know her, but yet they had together their private Conference,
and he not having patience to stay till the old man left her, importuned her so
hardly, that in the end (his Lodging-Chamber being near hers) she promised to
take her opportunity, and leaving the old Man's Bed, come to Bed to him: In
order to which, she thus managed her Affairs.

The old Man was very weary with his unaccustomed travel, and withal sleepy,
desirous to go to Bed, but she kept him up, pretending much care and love of
his Health, made him drink mull'd Sack, and when he was in Bed, caused him to
eat a Sack-posset, and all such kind of things, as intricating his Brain,
should cause him to sleep the more soundly; she had her desires, for no sooner
was his Head laid on his Pillow but he fell asleep, and although she made haste
to undress her self, yet when she came to Bed, he snored, and was as fast as a
Pillar; she lay still for some time, but he sleeping on, and she attempting to
wake him, but in vain, she thought it a convenient time to perform her promise
with her Gallant; wherefore turning out of the Bed, and only putting on a
white Smock-pettycoat, she left her Husband asleep, and leaving her Chamber
door put to a char, she went to her Gallants Chamber door, and found that in
the same condition, and him ready to receive her; she without many persuasions
went to Bed to him, but what they did together, or whether he pleased her or
not, I Will leave you to consider and judge; for there she staid until it was
almost morning, and then in the same Equipage she left his Bed and Chamber to
go to her Husbands; but although it was not far off in the same Gallery, yet
just as she was at our Chamber door, being in the middle way, she was met by a
man, who having a Candle in his hand, was followed by a woman in a country
Habit ready dressed; she seeing this, and looking earnestly on the
Countrey-womans face, and withal knowing it, for it was her Sister, that very
Sister she was going to visit; she being amazed at the encounter, gave a great
Shriek: The Country woman hearing the Shriek, partly knowing the voice, and
with earnestness looking on the face, and seeing it all in white, did also
shriek out: You may imagine the cause of both their shrieking; for the old Man's
Wife seeing her Country Sister at that time and place, thought it was her
Ghost, which came to meet and chide her for playing that foul play (...) her
Husband, which she had so lately done.

And on the other hand, the Country Sister being of the same Mettle, for there
was never a Barrel better Herring, who had also been guilty of the same fault;
for she as well as her City Sister, had had her Gallant, not only that night,
but many more, during all the journey, having set out from the good Countreyman
her Husband upon the same terms as her City Sister had done. This good
Countrey-woman, I say thus meeting with a thing all in white, so like a Ghost,
at such an unseasonable time, and so unexpected a place, she was stricken with
fear, and smitten in conscience, conceiting that this was her Sisters Ghost;
(for she believed her dead) that came to chide and correct her for her
disloyalty to her Husband.

This (said the Cooks Wife) was the cause of their sudden and shrill shrieks,
and their fear and astonishment was so great, that they were not out of it till
I came to them, and caused them to enter their Countrey-womans Chamber, which
was thought the most convenient for that purpose.

Now being come thither, it was then a long time before their fear was over,
and that they had so far recollected themselves as to know what had happened, and
then they both knew of their own guilt, but not of one another; but I having
asked them several Questions, which they so unhandsomely and uncertainly
answered, that I having at length got hold of the Thread in the end from the
Needle, and being acquainted with part of their Stories, knew the rest; for my
Neighbor, the Citizens Wife enjoining me to silence, told me her naked Story;
and as for the others, I could not miss of it, because the Tapster,
Chamberlain, and others of the Inn, termed the young Man that was with the
Countrey-woman, her Husband, for such they had passed, and lain together since
their first coming out.

This was to be concealed from the old Citizen, who knowing his Brother-in-law,
the Countreyman, was not to be deceived with this young man; wherefore they
contrived the matter so, as all was to be concealed from him, as indeed it was,
and he being now up, and told of his Wife's being frighted; she made an Excuse,
and said, she only did rise to go into the Gallery and see if it were day, and
what weather it was; and there, and upon that occasion it was, that she meeting
her Sister was so affrighted, as occasioned this alarm to the whole house.

This passed for a very good excuse to the old man, and he was very well
content and pleased that they had so luckily met his Wife's Sister there, and
thereby saved his Wife a journey, and him much money, that would have been
spent in that visit.

But if he was pleased, I believe his wife and her Gallant were of another
mind; they were troubled that their whole designs were crossed; but they may
thank themselves, their over much haste was the only cause of all, for it they
had had so much patience, as to have lain asunder for that night, all this had
not happened; for the Country Sister would have been gone with the Carrier
toward London long before they had risen, but self do, self have, it has
happened cross upon their own occasion.

And thus did the Cooks wife finish her story, to our great admiration, and her
great joy, for she again fell a laughing, and we accompanied her in the same
exercise, many times descanting on the several particulars of this Adventure.
She having finished, and we having spoken all that was convenient on that
occasion, I did conclude that I might very well reckon, our old man that had
this light-heel'd Wife, to be an unlucky Citizen.

And now all being silent and we marching on our way, our unlucky green Citizen
thus speaks to us.

My friends, this Adventure of the Inn has been very pleasant to you all; but
although I have laughed at it, and have seemed to be as well pleased with the
re^^ (...) as any of you, yet it is otherwise, I laughed but with one side of
my Mouth; for the story is so like one wherein I was concerned, that I cannot
choose but remember it, and thereby renew my sorrows, for by that Adventure I
was very much introduce to my late Misfortunes.

The Cook and I hearing him in this Cue desired him to acquaint (...) with this
Story, for we told him if it were any thing like the Adventure of the Inn, it
must needs be pleasant: He replied, that it was not only very like it, but
that to us it might be as pleasant, although it had been unlucky and
unfortunate to him, but said he, since you desire it, and that we may pass away
our time the better, and so finish our journey with the less weariness, I shall
obey you, and then he thus began.

I have already told you, that about three Months since, I took a journey into
the West of England, and that I was then in a very good Equipage, for indeed;
my Habit was far different from this, because it was then black like a Citizen,
and now it is green like a Wood man; I did judge I had occasion more than
ordinary to wear black at that time, and so indeed I had to mourn for the ill
Luck that has since befaln me; but I made that Habit, and then wore it for
another reason, an occasion suitable enough, as I thought, and thus it was.

Chap. 5.



There came some few days before I began my Journey, a man to me in a very good
Habit, but like a Countryman, and he asking if my name were Mr. R --? I told
him yes; then said he, I have a Letter for you, and putting his Hand into his
Pocket, he pulling one out from thence, delivered it to me, which I having
opened, found therein the words, or others to the same purpose.

Loving Brother,
AFter my Love to you, this is to acquaint you that after a small sickness,
your Brother is dead; but before he died, he being in perfect mind and memory,
made his Will, whereby you are joined Executor with me; and what he died
possessed of, he has given between us; therefore I pray you make what haste
down you can, that we may take some course in the settlement of his Affairs;
the Bearer hereof my Neighbor, can acquaint you with many more particulars; he
is a person in whom I much rely, and what friendship you show to him, I shall
reckon as done to

Your loving Sister, A. R.


This was the substance of the Letter, which I having read, the Countreyman
said,

Sir, I know I have brought you ill and sudden News, but it cannot be helped, we
must all die; my Friend your Brother is but gone before, to show us the way we
must all follow; and many other words to this purpose.

I answered, that indeed the News was very unexpected, and that I was much
troubled at it; I prayed him to come in, and told him he was welcome; he said
that although he had brought me sad News, yet he had done but his part, he
could not help it, and that he loved my Brother so well, that he would have
done any thing to have saved his life; but since he was dead, he should for his
sake, be as ready to assist me and his Wife: I kindly thanking him, again told
him he was welcome, and that I would go to my Sister with all speed; I desired
this Countryman to remain at my house whilst he staid in London; he kindly
accepting of my offer, told me that he should stay about two or three days, and
in that time he hoped I would be ready to go with him; I understanding by him
that my Brother was buried, thought that I might stay the longer, and being
determined when I was out, to travel farther amongst my Customers and Chapmen;
I therefore sent presently to a Tailor to make me some Mourning, I also being
much in debt, sent to my Creditors, and told them that my Brother was dead, and
had left me half his Estate, that I was to go to Oxford where he had lived, and
look after it; that I intended to go further and gather in debts, and that I
hoped by this journey, to gather in Money enough to satisfy them all.

This News pleased them well enough, and I prepared for my Journey.

My Countreyman having staid two nights, would needs the second morning be
gone, telling me that some urgent Affairs of his had called him away; wherefore
since I could not so soon go, he would go before and acquaint my Sister that I
was coming.

I being loath to prejudice him in his Affairs, permitted him to go, and it was
fou^^ days after before I could dispatch all my business, and then I set out
for Oxford: Leaving London on the Afternoon, I traveled no further on my way
the first night than to Uxbridge, where taking up my Quarters at an Inn, I
resolved to stay that night: I being weary of the business of the day, and my
little travel, made haste to Bed; being lodged in a Room where there was
another empty Bed, I went into mine, and being alone, began to consider of
various Affairs in this world, and how that the badness of the times had very
much endamaged me in my Trade, and outward Affairs.

Now considering that if I did not receive Money very freely and abundantly of
my Chapmen, I should return with a heavy heart, but then bethinking my self of
my Brothers sudden death, and withal of the Estate he had left me, I was both
sorry and pleased; sorry because of his loss, and pleased with the conceit of
increasing my Estate, which I thought would be very considerable by that
Addition, and thus ruminating upon these things at length I sell into a slumber.

I had not slept long before I was disturbed with the noise of two Men that
entered the Chamber; one I knew to be the Chamberlain, and the other being all
in black, I knew not by the Backside, but when he turned about and saw his
face, I cried out O Lord! and gave such a Shriek as the Women did this morning,
and he in black hearing the noise, and looking very earnestly upon me, who was
by this time risen upright in my Bed, gave as great a Shriek as I had done
before. The Chamberlain hearing this, asked what was the matter? To this I
replied, Do I sleep, or do I wake, surely I dream? or else this is my dead
Brother, Dead, said he, truly I did imagine you to be so, and that was the
cause of my amazement, but Heavens be praised, it is otherwise.

We now having heard one another speech, and by that knowing that we were not
Ghosts, we joined hands, and embraced with much affection; saying at once, Oh
my dear Brother! this being over. The very next Minute we at once said, How
came this Mistake? My Brother being up and ready, soon clapping his Hand into
his Pocket, and drawing from thence a Letter, and giving it to me, said, look
on that, and then you will soon find the cause of my Mistake; I took his
Letter, and opening it hastily, therein read thus, or words to this effect:

Sir,
AFter due respects to you, this is to acquaint you that my Master your Brother
is dead; but before he died, he being in perfect mind and memory, made his
Will, making you his sole Executor, giving you all he has; therefore I pray
make what haste you can up to London, that you may take order in his Affairs:
The Bearer hereof, our Neighbor, can acquaint you with more particulars, he is
a person whom your Brother did very much respect and is at his request come on
purpose to you; This is all from

Your humble Servant, L. M.


I was amazed at what I read, wondering to what end all this would come, and
taking my Breeches, and drawing from thence the Letter I had received, I gave
it to my Brother, saying, read that, and then cease wondering at what I have
said.

He soon read over the Letter, and then cried out as well as I, What means
these two Letters, somewhat there is intended, although the story be false,
somewhat is designed? And at the bottom of the story, hereupon I told him of
whom I received my Letter, and all the circumstances; he told me his, which
were much the same, for upon description we found the Messenger to be one and
the same party, all that differed in either of the Stories was this; He had
importuned my Brother to be gone the next morning* because I lay unburied. That
he entertained him in his house one night, and the next day giving him twenty
Shillings as for his Charges, he departed well contented.

Now could not we tell what to imagine was the business, for we could not think
that any fellow for the getting of twenty Shillings (for that was all that we
could reckon off) would trouble himself to contrive these two Letters, and be
at the Charge and trouble to ride or go from London to Oxford.

We knew not what to resolve on, nor indeed to think; but we resolved on this,
that for that night one Bed should serve the turn, and we would lie together,
and consult what was to be done against the morning; whereupon he undressing
himself came to Bed to me. But although we spent much time that night in
discoursing on this subject, yet we could find neither Head nor Tale in it;
wherefore we went to sleep as well as our Cares would let us, and the next
morning awaking, and consulting what was necessary to be done, we both resolved
to continue our Journeys, he for London, and I for Oxford, for he had some
business that engaged him to go to London, where I desired him to cause my
Servant to examine both Shop, Warehouse, and House, to see if he did not miss
any Goods, for I began to suspect that our Messenger might have had some Design
upon them, which he might conveniently act whilst he remained in my house.

My Brother did accordingly, and I being necessitated to proceed in my Journey
to my Chapmen did so too, promising my Brother to make the same inquiry at his
House, as he was desired to do at mine.

And thus did we part, and I making very great haste arrived the same day at
Oxford.

But when I came to my Brothers house, and saw his Wife sitting in the Shop,
and that she saw me, she again shrieked out, as being extremely surprised too
with the sudden sight of him whom she certainly believed to be dead; but I
knowing the cause of her fright, soon put her out of it, telling her all that I
could on that occasion; she being come to her self; and I having acquainted her
with our fears and doubts of having been robbed, presently caused a private
search to be made, when to her sorrow and mine too, she soon missed a Box of
Rings worth fifty pounds, my Brother being a Goldsmith. Though privy search was
made for them, yet to no purpose, for gone they were, and we ghessed who was
the Carrier; they were stolen, but although we knew the Thief, yet we know not
how to come by either them or him; we knew that we knew nothing; I then did no
longer question our Messengers business, and much doubted that his Errand to my
house, was much to the same purpose as it had been to my Brothers; but I was in
good hopes, I being a Linen Draper, and that my Commodity being Linen Cloth,
and that not being so portable as Rings, I should come off the easier; but
being desirous to know how I sped, and to acquaint my Brother with his loss, I
sent him this Letter.

Loving Brother,
UPon search of your House and Shop as we agreed upon, I found that you have
lost a Box of Rings worth fifty pounds, the loss is great, but it is some
satisfaction that you know which way they went, though you know not when you
shall be paid for them; I hope you have suffered all the loss, and that the
Messenger finding his attempts vain at my House, only plundered yours, and I am
induced to believe so, because my Commodity was not so easily to be conveyed
away as yours, but if any mischief be done, as I much doubt it, I pray send
word thereof, to

Your loving Brother, T. R.


My Letter to my Brother had not been gone many hours in the way toward him,
but one from him came to my hands, which so soon as I saw, and had opened (...)
found therein these Lines.

Brother,
YOur suspicion that you had been robbed was not amiss, you were in the right,
for you have suffered the wrong; I imagined our Letter-Carrier paid himself for
the News he brought you, since you did not; I hope he was so civil with me, as
not to be his own Carver and pay himself, since I paid him as I thought, to his
content; In fine, Brother, we found that he disfurnished your Warehouse of a
parcel of your finest Linen, worth (as your Servant says) forty Pounds: He
took the best because it was of easiest carriage, but that being of so great
bulk, that he could not conveniently, nor indeed possibly Codpiece it: I know
not which way he conveyed it away, unless like your cunning men, he dealt by
confederacy, and in the Nightime threw it out of the window to some of his
Companions; this is my opinion, and this is a true account of your Affairs, and
now I expect the like account from you of mine, but I hope he has been more
favorable to

Your loving Brother, F. R.


Thus did I receive the sad account of my disaster, which although I was sad,
yet I found that my Brother was pleasant at his writing the Letter, but I doubt
his Tone was changed, when by my Letter he should find that he had had the
worst on it. But however he rellisht it, I am sure I took it very heavily, and
found it a sad Omen of my future Misfortunes; I con^eited I had not habited my
self in mourning for no purpose, but considering that what was passed could not
be helped, I proceeded on in my journey, wherein, ^lthough I succeeded
indifferently, yet at my return, my Creditors became very clamorous, and
expecting great matters from me by reason of my Brother, death, but I telling
them how, and than I was cozened, and they doubting that I would cozen them,
they served me as I told you, and swept away all my Estate, turning me out of
doors to seek my fortune.

Thus did our Green Citizen conclude his Story, which he finished with some
Sighs that he fetched at the remembrance of what was past; and I thereby, as
formerly, concluded him to be a very unlucky Citizen.

Chap: 6



CHAP. VI.
The Author according to agreement tells his Tale of a Gamester that supposed
himself to be a Cuckold of his own ordering, and the Cook relate^ how a Wench
was fitted for her liquorishness.

WE who were the Auditors had received more content in the hearing, than the
Relator had in the relation of his last Story. And the Cook understanding that
he had finished, he thus began.

I must confess that this Story somewhat resembles that of the Inn, but that
Adventure was more pleasant because there ^^re women in it, and the Mistake was
^ade by them; after some pleasure they ^ore surprised.

I replied, that I was of his mind, and did not so well approve of his
melancholy Story, and that that first Story had put me in mind of a Story, a
brave lusty one, that befell a couple of Females by a Mistake too, but such a
one as is not common, for here the Women knew o^ the Mistake only, and they
were obliged to conceal it, and in my Story, all but one party, and they bound
to conceal it from him.

They hearing me thus discourse in general, desired me to come to particulars,
and acquaint them with the Story: Nay, hold a blow there, said I to the Cook;
since your Wife has told one Tale, and our Companion another, I will tell mine
also, on condition, that when I have finished, you shall begin, and tell us
yours; he having consented to this fair proposition, I thus began*

This Story that I shall tell you happened in a Gaming House, for one of the
parties was there all night, whilst the principal Action was acted at his
House. I was in the Christmass-time, when people spend the long nights in
Gaming; b^^ before I proceed in the Story, it will be very convenient to give
you some account of the Actors.

A wild young Blade that had nothing but his handsome outside, and a large
stoc^ of Confidence, having spent all his Patrimony on young Women, was forced
(for Estates sake) to be at last contented with an old one, for such a one at
length he married; by which means he had not only a fair Estate with her, but
she having a young Kinswoman to whom she was Guardian, he also in right of his
Wife, had her to dispose of; and her Estate being two thousand Pounds which was
likewise in his custody.

He having known the want of Money, although he was now Master of enough, yet
was unwilling to part from so great ^^am, wherefore he thought of several ways
how to retain this two thousand Pound Portion, or the greatest part of it. He
having thought of many ways, at last resolves upon one, the wickedest of any he
could imagine (but all ways were alike to him, so as he might thereby attain
his ends.) He concluded that if he could but Whore the Kinswoman, he might save
the Portion, or at the worst, put her off with a part. To this end he courts
her himself, and tells her, that the love to her caused him to marry with her
Cousin and Guardian, and used many Arguments to this purpose.

She being of a virtuous inclination, and abhorring his proposition, gave him
such an Answer as did become a modest Virgin to return to so foul a Question;
but he continuing his purpose, did so continually prosecute and persecute her,
that she acquainted his wife therewith; but to little purpose; for in stead of
being daunted when his Wife told him of the lewdness of his Design; He
commanded her on her obedience to him, to assist him if ever she intended to
live in quiet.

His Wife understanding how wickedly he was bent, took a resolution with her
young Kinswoman to manage Affairs so, as to gain both their contents, and in
the end, as they hoped, reclaim him; and thereupon it was agreed, that at his
next Address to her, she should be more kind to him than formerly, and give him
hopes of attaining his desire.

The young Maiden (though unwilling) consented hereto, leaving the rest to time
and her Cousins discreet management thereof.

This Maiden was not only young, but handsome; so that she was not without her
Servants that would willingly court her, but could not, being hindered by this
her lewd Kinsman; among the rest, there was one who loved her, that was much
such another Blade as himself, for he was young and handsome, of good
Parentage, and well bred, only he had been debauched with company; and among
others; with this of our wild Guardian. This young man frequenting the house to
visit him, had the greater liberty of seeing and courting her; but he knowing
in part, the intent and purpose of his Companion the Guardian, durst not be
open in his courtship, what he did was closely, but withal, with pretty good
success; for the Maiden was indifferently satisfied in him, and some Love she
had for him, and more it would have been but for her Guardians sake, doubting
he might prove as bad as he.

Thus hid matters depend between all Parties for some time; but our Guardian
still prosecuting his design still courted his young Kinswoman in the vicious
way; I have told you, she by his Wifes directions admitted of his courtship,
and at length agreed to let him have his will with her; the night, and time of
night was agreed on, as also the place her Chamber, the Terms were, that all
silence should be used on both parts, no light, not no other ways to discover
her.

The day was come that was to precede this night, as also the evening, when he
as I have already told you, was engaged at his ordinary Receptacle, the Gaming
House, there was with him his Companion that courted the Maiden. Various were
the successes of the Gamesters; but it was the good fortune of the Suitor to
win the most Money, and he being so wise as to know when he was well, he had
the grace to give off a winner, and not to tempt the Dice further, so that he
in good time left off; our Guardian had lost all his money, and fresh Gamesters
came in that had good store; but our Suitor who had won, would not engage
further; our Guardian who loved the sport, was angry that he had no Money,
wherefore he sollicites the winner to lend him some; he did so, and then he
began, a fresh, in which he was so deeply engaged, that although he remembered
the assignation with his Kinswoman, and that the hour was come, yet go he could
not considering he had lost so much money, and might renewing his play recover
it, but he was more certain he might have the wench, on the one hand he had
Covetousness, on the other Lechery, but all things considered, Money weighed
the heaviest, and he was resolved to let go the present enjoyment of the Wench,
in hopes of recovering his Money, he considered that another time might serve
the turn with her; but then doubting if he lost this opportunity and disappoint
her, she might resolve to be honest, and so he lose his design, again wavering
in his resolution he thus considered, that if she were Whor'd he had his ends,
that he might not fail of this, he resolved to let his friend who lent him the
money take his turn, and have the use of the Wench, let him have flesh for his
money, he therefore calls him aside, in short tells him the Story, and to
recompense his kindness tells him he should go in his stead, gives him the Key,
and instructs him how he was to behave himself. This was as it should be, and
our winning Suitor rejoiced at his good luck, his lucky night was come, he had
two fortunes at once, he had gained Money, and now was about to gain a Wench
to^ and such an one as he had a long time courted and desired, he wondered at
the manner, and her temper, but was resolved to prosecute his good fortune any
way, and before he left her, to acquaint her with his Quality, and then he
doubted not but she would accept him in the honest way of Marriage. These were
his thoughts, these were his resolutions, and so he went to try his Fortune.

How he succeeded you shall know by and by; in the mean time the Gamester
failed of his purpose, it was his unlucky hour, nay, night, and he prosecuted
his ill fortune, and before Morning lost all his borrowed Money. This
displeased him, and made him very melancholy; but the next morning when he saw
his adventurous Companion, that had taken his turn, and saw him all blithe,
jocund, and merry, he was then sad at the heart, to think how he had fooled
himself. After the ordinary Salutations had passed between them, they enquired
of each others success; Mine is as bad as bad can be, said the Guardian; for I
have lost all; and mine pleasant, said the other, exceeding all expectation, Oh
the bravest Bed fellow that ^^er man had. The best woman that ever was seen!
Seen, replied the other, I hope you did not come to that, for then I am undone;
No, replied the other, all the Articles were exactly performed, we had no
Light, nor no Speech passed between us, but that was done that makes me
conclude her a brave, fine Woman; and I a fine Fool, said the Guardian; yes, if
you knew all, said the Adventurer; for though I have had pleasure in my days,
yet never, never so sweet a Skirmish! how like Ivy she grew to my embraces! not
a kiss but had Elysium in it.

This language was like so many Needles stuck into the flesh of our Guardian,
who too late repented of his folly, but he was resolved to put in for a share
in the pleasure.

Whilst these two were in their discourse, they were disturbed by arival of the
Guardians Wife, at whose approach the Adventurer made his exit.

She was not only in her Dress, but also in her Countenance more pleasant and
sprightly than usual. She coming up to him, saluted him most kindly, enquiring
how he sped the last night? He replied, not well, for he had lost his Money;
It Is not that Game I mean, said she, the other; wherein I hope you were
pleased, and now you have had your ends you will turn honest; honest, said he,
Who charges me with dishonesty? That may I, said she, unless you will say it is
honest to leave my Bed and lie with my Kinswoman: By Heavens, said he, it is
false I did not; How truly do you swear now (said she) unknown to you, for I
am sure you did suppose you had her all night in your Arms, but I out plotted
you, and wrought so with my honest Cousin, that I supplied her wanton place,
that with some shame at last I might deceive your hard heart into kindness. He
hearing her thus discourse, grew mad with rage and anger to consider what a
Coxcomb he had been, and how he was fitted with a pair of Horns of his own
making, and did so rant and storm, that his good Wife mistaking his cause of
anger, and judging it had been against her, when it was only against himself;
for his folly she told him, that since all that she could do would not work
upon him, she would acquaint the World with the whole story; he knowing that
would be the only way to disgrace him, was forced to entreat her into silence,
promising an amendment. And now he being satisfied what a Beast he was, and
doubting that it would e're long be the Town-talk, he plotted how to patch up
the matter, he again finds out his late Adventurer, and tells him he could not
think his Kinswoman so sweet a Bedfellow, the other still commending her to
the highest; he at last breaks out and makes this Proposition, That if he did
so like her, and would take her to his Wife, he would so manage the matter,
that she should accept of him for her Husband; Nay, but replied the other, I
shall not like her in that Quality, for a Mistress she is excellent, but I know
her too well to trust her with my Honor, especially considering how well she
loves and likes you; if it were so, I should be sure to be dubbed Knight of the
forked Order.

Our Guardian hearing him thus descant in these terms, sighed to think that he
had so well described his condition, and telling the other that he had now
thrown off all vicious thoughts, and that if he would marry her and be silent,
all should be well, and he should have her full Portion.

Much discourse concerning this Affair they had, and many Arguments were used
to persuade our Adventurer to that which he very much desired, but seemingly
slighted, and that so, that in the end they agreeing on these terms, and he
having free access to the Maid, gained her good will, and being married, had
her whole Portion paid him.

Here I put a stop to my discourse, and then the Cook who had listened very
diligently and with attention to my story, thus began:

I marry Sir, this is a Story indeed* this is worth the hearing, here was a
brave Coxcomb that was finely fitted, and he desired it should be so, for he
that will not leave all Game and Gain for a pretty Wench, truly he deserves to
be made a Cuckold.

As well pleased as you are with his being made a Cuckold, (said I) if you will
have a little patience, you shall find the Case quite altered, you
disappointed, the man undeceived, and the woman hone^^ How can that be? said
the Cook; it is (...) difficult matter said I, to make all this possible and
feisable and so you will conclud^ when I shall tell you that all this last pa^^
of the Story was contrivance; for you must know that when the Adventurer came
into the House, Chamber, and Bed of the supposed Maid, and was with all
diligence searching for his Bed fellow, on a sudden a Light appears, and with
it two women, one the Wife, and the other the Kinswoman, they both approached
the Bed, but were surprised with their Mistake, for they expected their Husband
and Cousin; when they beheld his Companion so great was the amazement of all,
that at present they could not speak; but at length they opened, and the whole
truth was disclosed, the two Women saying that they came thither expecting
their Husband and Cousin; to surprise and chide him into more honesty: Our
Adventurer seeing that their Design was virtuous, told them, that although his
friends were vicious, yet his was honest, coming thither with much satisfaction
to enjoy her whom he desired to make his Wife. The Maid hearing his just and
honest expressions, and having love for him believed him, and there they
contrived the future management of the whole Affair, which you have ^^derstood
was to the content of three of the parties, all were pleased but the Guardian;
but the Wedding being over, and every person assured of their conditions, to
set him to rights again, they all agreed to acquaint him with the Story, and
they did so, averring it to be so true, that he was much amended, leaving off
those two Vices of Gaming and Wenching, contenting himself with his own Wifes
chas^ embraces.

And now said I, my Stories ended, and the Case is altered; the Woman's honest,
and the Man no Cuckold.

The Cook replied, that indeed the Story was good, but not so pleasant as the
Adventure of the Inn, for there had been some sport in earnest, whereas this
had been in supposition; and now his tur^ being come to tell his Story, then he
thus began.

I shall not lengthen out my Story with Speeches, and Suppositions, Plots, and
Contrivances; mine is only of a Wenc^ that was caught napping, and she soundly
paid for it, the manner thus:

A wild young Blade such another a^ your last Guardian, was like him match^ to
a woman old enough to be his Mother he loved her for her Money, but courted
others for his pleasure; and although he had his choice abroad, yet he was very
desirous of having one at home.

He had many Maidservants, for it was somewhat difficult to please him and his
Wife; for she would turn them away if they were not good House-wifes, and he if
they were not handsome.

At length they happened on a Servant that pleased them both, only her Mistress
complained that she was liquorish: Nay, then said the Master to himself, I have
some hopes of this Wench, for if she has a liquorish Tooth, I know she has
something else that is so.

The Mistress complained still of this fault; for she could not lay any Sugar,
Honey, Sweet meats, or Wine, out of her Hands, but the VVench would have a
taste, which caused the Mistress Anger, and the Masters laughter; for he
desiring by all means to gain his will on the VVench, and to have a lick at her
Honey-pot, rather took her part than otherwise, by which means he gained the
wenches good will; but when he proceeded farther, and would kiss her in a
corner, she would flounce, struggle, and away she would get from him. He finding
her so skittish had hopes of attaining his ends, but the Wench understanding
his intent, and partly knowing the danger and the shame that would follow, and
she being perfectly honest, did by all means avoid his company, and still fled
from him; and when he made any lewd Propositions to her, she would hardly give
him the hearing, and if she were forced to it, she would tell him that she
would if he continued these courses, tell her Mistress. He to attain his ends
on her, knowing her liquorish temper, would present her with Sweet meats and
such like Junkets; but although she loved them well enough, yet she would not
take them at his Hands; he seeing that, would leave them carelessly about, where
she might find them, and then she would be nibbling, making good the Proverb,
that stolen Meat is the sweetest. Her Mistress kept her in great awe, and
endeavored to catch her in these petty Theft^, that she might shame her, and
thereby to break her of her liquorish temper.

Among other Junkers which they kept in the House to regal and treat friends
with, there was a Cask of Canary Win^ the Wench hearing it commended, would
needs taste of it, and before it was broached went so to work, that she got
some out, and well likeing it, made bold so often, that when it came to be
broached her Master found a considerable quantity wanting, he wondered at the
matter, acquainted his Wife with it, they stranged at the Story but could not
find out, or imagine which way it went; they could not suspect the Wench
because it was not broached, and besides, that it had been always locked up;
however they challenged the Wench with it, but she stoutly denying the fact,
they concluded that the Cask had leaked: The Vessel being broached, the Wench
when she went to draw for her Master or Mistress, was sure not only to take a
good swoop, but also fill a Bottle and hide it for a reserve, so that the Wine
decreased apace: The Master and Mistress both understanding it, again charged
the wench, the Mistress telling her that if she found her guilty, she must go
before the Justice, who would send her to Bridewel, and there she would be
utterly disgraced, threatening her very hard, but the Wench still out-fac'd the
matter.

The Master continually prosecuted the VVench with his unlawful desires, but
she was firm to her resolution, and as formerly, still denied him. He watching
all opportunities to have his ends on her, would often watch and dog her, and
one day having sent her down into the Cellar to draw Wine, his Wife, being
engaged in some affairs in the Kitchen, he followed the maid close at her heels
into the Cellar, and placing him self in a private corner, he espied her
action, for she did as formerly, no sooner was the pot full, but she took a
lusty swigg of it, filled it again, and then having her Bottle at hand, filled
that also and hid it in her usual place.

All these passages did her Master see, and observe, and seeing she had done he
appeared.

The VVench being affrighted began to cry out; but he told her if she did so it
was the way to be undone; for he had seen all, would tell his Wife, and then
she knew what would follow. The poor wench hearing this, and doubting the
truth, fell down on her Knees to him to ask forgiveness* No, said he, I Will be
as hard hearted as you have been to me, but however rise, and if you will yield
to my request, I will forgive and concea^ this, and all other faults from your
Mistress; the VVench was in a Peck of troubles, she knew not what to do, she
was surprised, which her Master seeing, prosecuted his ends, the wench not
daring to resist him; He being thus employed in the Cellar with the VVench, the
Mistress came to seek him, and coming to the Cellar door, called Sweetheart;
this was such an alarm as had like to have spoiled all, and relieved the
VVench; but he being resolved to proceed, answered, what say you? Why do you
not come up? said she; I am busy, said he, for I have found where our Wine
went out, I am glad on it, said she, I pray mend it; I am about it, said he; and
is the VVench with you? Yes, said he, and she is a helping me; that is well,
said the Goodwife, make haste and come up, and so away she went, giving him
liberty to finish what he was about, after which he followed her.

Thus was this VVench paid off for her liquorishness, and thus said he, have I
told my Story, and then he fell a laughing, in which exercise we altogether
accompanied him.

And now our Stories being all ended, we came to a place where we made a halt
and baited, and then put on, so that in short time we arrived at our Journeys
end all but the green Linnen-Draper, who being to travel further, only staid
with us that night, and the next day proceeded on his Journey.

The Cook and his Wife had as little business at Windsor as I, only he had a
mind to spend a few loose Corns, to dispose of a little waste Money, and see,
and be seen; a friend he had whom he visited, but his house was neither
convenient nor large enough to entertain him, so that he continued with me at
an Inn where I took up my Quarters; we were merry together, and I staid a few
days in this Town, spending my Money and Time, in such foolish manner as shall
be told you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
He is outwitted by a blind fellow in the Country, likely to be cheated in
his return, when taking up his quarters at his fellow Travelers the Cooks, he
idly and foolishly spends his time and Money.

ANd now Reader, let me tell you, that by what you have read hitherto, you may
ghess what you are like to have for the future, this that I have written
already, is an Essay of what I intend for you, by this piece of Stuff you may
judge what Garment you shall have; you have my unlucky Adventures mixed with
these of others: I think variety will best please you, and therefore here as at
a well furnished Table, you shall have some Kickshaws as well as substantial
Victuals, some to fill the Belly and nourish the Body, and others to please the
Appetite; but look you be not too liquorish lest you be caught as the ^oor
Wench was; if you are more taken and better pleased with my idle wanton
Stories, than with my sober advice to you, and practice them more than my good
Counsel, you my chance to pay dear for it, as as you may find by the foregoing
Examples. In all that I write I intend your profit, and that the Examples I
give you, may serve as Sea marks to show you how to steer your Course, so as to
avoid those Rocks and Shoals that I and others have fallen upon.

This is the end I aim at, I would both profit and delight you, I therefore
thought good to mix those of others with my Misfortunes, all the Stories that
you have been told, are to my Subject, Unlucky* I think the Adventure of the
Inn was so to all parties concerned in it; that of the Draper and his Brother
was Unlucky enough to them both, especially to the poor Draper, for that very
misfortune hastened his ruin, and caused us to have his company in the
Equipage I have told you. The story of the Guardian was Unlucky enough to him,
especially as he believed it to be till the Catastrophe, the conclusion of all
and then he found all right again; if he had the grace to mend it was well, and
I hope by his Example you will learn to avoid those two dangerous Rocks of
Wenching and Gaming; one spoils the Pocket, and consumes money and time; the
other the Body and Reputation here, and the better part, the Soul, hereafter,
if not timely repented of: but so much for that.

And as for the last Story, which is indeed the idlest, of the poor Wench and
her Master, she was Unlucky enough, for by seeking to avoid one Shame, which
would soon have had an end, she fell into another which brought a lasting Shame
upon her, she did not rightly consider the Proverb, of two Evils take the
least, but although she did not choose, yet she permitted the greatest, and
thereby, as to the other Stories, I may give that the Title of Unlucky.

I thought it convenient for varieties sake to clap in these Stories, and I
knew not where better, than in our Journey over Hounsloe Heath, they may pass
for good Pastime, and for such you may take them, applying them aright as I
told you.

When I have the same convenience you may have more of them; but now I will
proceed further in the Thread of my Story.

All I had to do in the Country was to eat, drink, and sleep, spend my time
and Money, and I did both at a strange rate; I had several Friends and
Relations there some whereof welcomed and cherished me, but the wiser sort
schooled and chid me, advising me to return to my Master, or at least to my
Father; but although he sent for me, I was deaf to his Call, and had not
finished my Ramble yet, therefore I staid there still, there was no employment
for me unless I would exercise my self i^ that Porterly Game of Nine-pins, and
those were still kept in action by the Bumpkins whose skill was better than
mine, so that I durst not undertake to play with any o^ them: But they seeing I
had Money, and being resolved to have some of it, or a^ least to drink of my
cost, they brought i^ a fellow that was stark blind, and engage^ him to play
with me; I thinking my sel^ cock sure to beat him, accepted the Challenge, and
agreed to play for six Pence Game to be spent; I did so, and he permitted me to
beat him the first and second Games, at which I being Cock a hoop, bragged and
crow'd like a Dunghill Cock, I str^^^^ like a Crow in a Gutter, but my boasting
was to little purpose, for he again challenging me and I accepting, and
agreeing to play six Pence wet and six pence dry, he soon put me up for all the
reckoning, and carried away some of my ready money, it was not much, for I do
not remember that I ever lost five Shillings ready Money at gaming in all my
life, but however little or much, beaten I was by the blind Fellow, and he
having gotten the better of me at this sport, challenged me at any sport or
exercise whatsoever; I would not undertake him at any, but suffered my self to
be laughed at by the Bumpkins, and thought it better to do so, than engaging
with any of these exercises which he named, viz. Wrestling, Cudgel-playing, or
the like, to be worsted and laughed at too; wherefore I would not accept of
any: But he being a cun^^ng Rogue, and resolving to out wit me, and run me
down, he made one of the boldest, and methought the strangest Propositions that
might be, and what was it? think you, but that he being stark blind, would run
for a Wager with me to a place at a Mile and a halfs distance. This Proposition
was very strange and caused much Laughter, which I at first could hardly bear
withal; but the Cook taking my part, I was content to engage; our Wager was
five Shillings to be spent, all the odds that was on his part was, that the
place being already appointed, he was to appoint the time, and that I should be
ready in any time at an hours warning, within three days then next following:
This I agreed to, and we both deposited our Money into the Tapsters hand: But
how do you think this blind Rogue served me, he outwitted me the most craftily
that I could imagine, and it was only in the choice of his time! for he who
could travel as well by night as by day, came one evening at nine of the Clock,
and tells me that he was ready to run the Wager; I finding that night to be as
dark as Pitch, refused it, telling him our Wager was to be performed in the
day: He denied it saying it was to be at any time when he pleased, and so said
all the Witnesses I knew not what to do, whether to give the Wager lost, or to
undertake it, but knowing that if I gave it over I should be laughed at, and if
I undertook it, I might win, I was resolved to try my fortune, and so I did,
but I was Unlucky, I had been better to have staid at home and have been
laughed at for the loss of my Money only, than to be laughed at and abused
too; for we began our Journey, and I, dark as it was out went my blind
Adversary till I came to a narrow way, and there I had my heels thrown up by a
Rope which was laid cross the way, and the two ends held by two Bumpkins on
each side.

It was so dark that I neither saw them not the Rope, but I could hear them
laugh, and feel the Rope which had thrown me into a foul myry place, and there
I lay till I heard the blind Rogue pass by me; I then arose, and let him go on
and finish his Course, doubting that if I proceeded, I might meet with some
more such Obstacles, and have my Brains beat out, or Legs or Arms broke,
wherefore I went back, and well it was for me that I did so, and my blind
Adversary fared the worse for it, for he going hastily on, met with mother
Party of those Rope-Merchants, who served him as they had done me, but when he
by crying out made them sensible of their mistake, they went before and
prevented the like in other places, where the like or some such Trick was
designed against me; I went back to my Inn, and my Adversary after he had
performed his Wager was brought in in Triumph; but for all his Brave alls, I
saw that he had met with a dirty Misfortune as well as I, at which I was glad,
but however sorry to lose my wager, and be laughed at; all the five Shillings
was spent in good Bub and Tobacco, and then again they played upon me, drinking
whole Flaggons, so that I was forced to be carried to Bed near morning, where I
lay almost all the next day, as being ashamed to appear, and when I d^^ rise
and walk abroad, the fame of my extravagant wager was so spread, that every one
pointed at me saying, There Is the Londoner that ran a Wager with blind Tom^
some would hout at me, and use me like Dog with a wicker Bottle at his Tail,
and (...) abused I was, that I was ashamed to wa^^ the Streets, and now my
Money also gro^ing low, I was resolved to return to London my Cook and his wife
had brought th^^ Pockets to as low an Ebb, and were willing to be gone, so that
we making up our Awls, packing up our foul Linen, we took our leaves of those
few friends that we had, and away we troop'd on toward London; but we met with
no such Adventures in our return, as we had in going thither, for we came back
another way; we now studied which way was cheapest, and convenientest, not the
pleasantest; and knowing that we might return by Water all the way in the Barge
for twelve Pence a piece, we were contented with the Inconvenience of being
crowded amongst I know not who, and sitting up all night; but the night was
spent by diversion of some old Women, and other Travelers that were used to
the business, in singing of Psalms, and telling old stories of I know not what,
that had neither Head nor Tail in them.

Morning being come, and we arriving at a convenient place, those who had a
^^nd to it, might walk about three Miles, whilst the Barge went six or eight; I
was glad of this, and made one of the Walkers; I was pleased that my heels were
at liberty again, but sorrowful and melancholy to think whither I was going; I
do verily believe that if any Gypsies, Beggars, or any Rogues whatsoever, had
then met with me, they might have made me one of their fraternity with a we^
finger.

And I narrowly missed one Misfortune, one Cheat that was intended me, one
Snare that was laid for me, as the Designer thought subtly enough.

I have told you that my Money was almost gone, but I had still a Treasure, I
had a Reserve, I was no Chapman bare, for what I wanted in Money was supplied
in Ware; I had two Watches in my Pocket, and those I knew would be ready Money
to me at any time: I was so vainglorious as oftentimes upon every slight
occasion to draw out first one Watch, and then another, and show them to the
company, and always be praising them for their true going.

This Action of mine was observed by a young fellow who sat near me, and he
asked the price of them both? The one I prized at three pounds, the other at
five pounds; he had a great desire to have one or both, he cared nor which, and
offered me some Money for one, but it was too little as I thought, therefore I
would not hear him; he understanding that, plotted how to have it a cheaper
way, and therefore went out of the Boat as well as I, to walk with the rest of
the company: He told me it would be convenient to make haste, because we might
have time to drink a Pot of Ale at the Water side, where we were to take Boat
again: I followed his advice, and went with him before the company; being
arrived at the place, he called for a private Room, and such a one we had, he
walked up and down, and asked the people of the house, how long they supposed
it would be e're the Barge came? They answered an hour; how said he, shall we
spend so much time? and so he calls me to him, saying, look you what is here,
showing me a Pair of Cards that lay on the side of the Chimney; I believed
that, as he said, they were there by chance; but I understood since that they
were of his own putting there, and no otherwise.

He invited me to play, I consented, provided we exceeded not our present
Reckoning, which he very civilly suffered me to win of him, and then he
challenged me to further play, but I refused it my Eyes began to be open, and I
who alway^ dreaded Gaming, could not be wrough^ upon to play for one farthing
more, h^ offered me odds, but I would not accep^ of any; he then produced his
other tools Dice, but I told him I understood them not he would play and
venture Gold against my Watch, but he had been as good t^ have said nothing,
for I was resolved to be deaf to all persuasions; and to avo^^ his importunity
I sneaked down Stairs* and went to the Water side, there to attend the arrival
of the Barge that came in short time after, and then I took my place with the
rest, and so we made on toward London.

I have since considered of this Action* and how narrowly I escaped, and
reckoned that to be one of my lucky Hours, as indeed I ought, for although I
gained nothing yet I saved what else I should have lost, and then according to
the Proverb, six pence ^aved is twelve Pence gained, I might conclude that I
had gained.

But now were we come near London, I knew not what to do, I feared every thing
I doubted that if I went to Queen-hithe with the Barge, either my Father or
Master, or both, would be there ready to catch me and carry me away; wherefore
seeing that some who lived at Westminster, and those parts, did call for Boats
to go a shore there, I thought it would be best for me to do so too, and so I
landed; but when I was ashore, I knew not whither to go, nor what course to
take; and in these uncertain resolutions, I wandered up and down the Streets
till it was dark, and then I was somewhat more bold, and entered London; I
approached near my Master's house with some fear, looking still behind me, lest
somebody pursued to take me, and in this case I being muffl'd in my Cloak came
near my Masters house, I durst not look in, nor go on that side of the way, but
passing on the other side, and seeing one of my Comerades in his Masters Shop
alone, I stepped in to him; he was glad to see me, and entered some discourse, but
I thought him tedious, lest my Master should come by, or his Master either, for
I knowing my self to be guilty, being a Runaway, feared that every body that
knew me would seize on me, and carry me to my Master; I therefore caused my
Comerade to make short of his Questions, referring him for Answer to our next
meeting, which I desired might be that evening, at an usual place where we met;
he promised he would not fail, neither did he, for he came presently after, and
then we took more freedom; he enquired where I had been? I told him truly, and
all the pleasure of my Journey, I acquainted him with all my good Luck, but
never a word of my blind Wager.

I so pleased him with my discourse, that he complaining of his Masters hard
usage, told me he intended to follow my Example and leave him; I encouraged him
in his purpose, telling him that there were a hundred ways to live besides
being an Apprentice, although I knew it to be a lie, for I was not sensible of
any, but I being undone my self, was resolved to bring others into the same
condition.

He hearing me promised me his company within a few days, and then I told him
it would be a brave life to travel, especially in other Countries, and more
especially beyond Sea, in France, and those Parts, and that if he had a desire
to go thither I could do very well there, knowing the language, when as I lied;
for although I had skill enough to read and understand a French Author,
especially if a Romance, yet if I heard any speak French, I understood them no
more than if ^^^y had discoursed in Hebrew, or the A^^^hick: But I would gladly
have company, and therefore persuaded him to any thing.

Some time we spent in these consultations, resolving to meet again the next
night, and then conclude further on the matter, and so for that time we both
parted.

I had by this time considered of a lodging, and my fellow Traveller the Cook,
having told me where he lived, I went thither, where he was come before me, and
he welcomed me kindly, inviting me to that which I wanted, a Lodging; I
accepted of that, and called for some Drink, and so we discoursing of our late
Journey, passed away the time till we went to Bed.

My Head was not so greatly troubled with Care, but that I slept soundly enough
till morning, and then examining my Pockets I found them almost empty, I was
sorry and heavy for their lightness, and knew there was a necessity to
replenish them, and bethought how: I had but two ways, the one, borrowing of
some of my old Comerades, in which I was uncertain, and the either was to sell
one of my Watches, this was most feisable, and therefore this I resolved to do,
and that suddenly; there was no great difficulty in doing it, for my Comerade
whom I had the last night spoken with, was a Watch-makers Apprentice, of him I
had bought the Watch and he I knew could soon sell it for me again.

I staid all day in my Quarters, and evening being come, like the Owl, I began
my walk, I passed by several persons that I knew, but durst not speak to them;
I went to the place appointed for our Rendezvous, and there I had not staid
long before I was visited by my Watch-maker, who brought with him several other
of our Comerades and Acquaintance; they were all joyed to see me, and I told
them all the pleasure of my Journey; we called for Drink and Victuals, and very
merry we were, the company increasing still as we staid, for they had told one
another, and all the Apprentices of our acquaintance came to see me, they were
all in one ^une, complaining against the severity of their Masters, but none of
them had been so much a Coxcomb as my worship, to run away and ramble.

I told my Watch-maker, that having two Watches, I was willing to part from
one; he hearing me say so, found me out a Customer of one of the company, who
gave me to a farthing what it had cost me.

All this was well, and so like to be, for when the reckoning came to be paid,
although it was considerable, yet I was to be excused, and not suffered to pay
a farthing; the world went well on my side at present, for I was beloved by my
Neighbors, who all treated me with much kindness, they desired to see me again
the next night, and so for the present we parted.

I went home to my Quarters with a light heart, being very well supplied with
Money, I was such a Coxcomb as to think that this would last me a long time, I
did not consider that it would waste apace, and that in short time these my
Comerades would be weary of my company, especially if when my Money was spent,
I should fall a borrowing of them; I did not consider that they were furnished
with Money by serving their Masters, and that I was fallen from that condition,
and out of all ways of getting any. These things I never thought of, all my
study was to spend my Money in the idlest company; for none but such Idle-packs
as my self would keep me company, and such I daily met with. I remember one
Morning two fellows came in to my Landlords, and they comeing to drink their
Mornings-draughts, and having as little business as my self, I joined in
company with them; we called for one pot after another till we were all bubby,
and then we neither knew nor cared what we did, for we three drank on till we
had for our Mornings-draught thrown down into our Bellies three Gallons apiece,
I am sure the Reckoning being six Shillings, I paid two of it, and we had all
in dry drink; I suppose our Landlord did not cozen us, he was too good a
fellow, he only now and then drank one Cup with us, which we forced on him,
for he knew whatever the Guests did, yet it was necessary for the Master of the
House to keep himself sober, and so he did; but I was so fluster'd, that I lay
down to sleep, and after a Nap of two hours, I was not so sober, but that I
made as ill an Afternoons work as my Forenoons had been before.

I having well drenched my Guts in the Morning, was desirous of some Provant,
and asked my Landlady what she had in the House? She answered me that she was
at that time but slenderly provided, I had slept away my Dinnertime, and that
then there was nothing left in the House but Bread and Butter.

I being very much troubled at her answer, for my Guts grumbled, Colon would be
satisfied, and Bread and Butter was but slender fare.

Whilst I was thus disputing with my Landlady upon these affairs, there entered
the room a neat spruce young Wench, I having often seen her to trip it up and
down, making many flurting Errands into our house; I understood that she lived
at the next door, and was a Working woman, either a Bonelace maker,
Button-maker, or Bandstring-maker, one of these three Trades I remember she
was; as also, that she was then spruce, neat, and tight, she had a face as smug
as if she had been used to wash it with Beef broth, or Puppy-dog Water; but
above all, her forehead shined and was as slick, as if it had been rubbed with a
Slick-stone.

This pretty little Calf with a white face entering the Room at such time as I
was disputing the case about Victuals, and understanding that there was none
that I liked, she told me that if I loved Cakes, I might have very good ones
three Doors off

I hearing her Proposition, and observing her Countenance, and now having drink
in my Brain, had a months mind to be kissing of this Harlotry; wherefore I soon
replied to her, that although I did not much care for Cakes, yet I would send
for some, provided she would stay and help to eat them; she answered, that she
would bear me company; and so I saluting her, caused her to sit down by me. I
sent for half a dozen Cakes, but could not at present have them, because they
were then in the Oven, but would be instantly ready, wherefore in the mean
time, I called for a Pot of Ale, and drank to my pretty little Mistress; she
pledged me, and by that time the Ale was off, the Cakes were brought in piping
hot, I seeing that, called for the Butter, and fell too, and so did she so
lustily, that in a pair of Minutes our six Cakes were invisible, I
understanding that they were but penny Cakes, called for a dozen more, and
those held us tack for a while, but soon after, one of my little Baggages
Companions coming in, and putting her helping hand to the work, they all
vanished in a moment.

I being resolved to have enough, called for six more to make my Money even,
they were brought, and then my Landlady put in, and all was quickly gone and my
company not satisfied, their Bellies were not full they told me, then they
shall said I, if all the Cooks Cakes can do it, and thereupon I sent for the
whole Batch: ^t was instantly brought me, and all being six dozen, amounting to
six shillings; I paid down the Cole, and then we renewed our eating, all my
Guests consisting of my young Mistress, her Companion, and my Landlady, laughed
at the frollick, and said they should not know what to do with so many, but I
found that they lied, for in less than one hours time, they with their nimble
Chops, and lighter fingers, had so played Legerdemain, that they were all
invisible, not one left to throw at a Dog, some they eat, and the rest they
pocketed, and made a clean riddance of all, and soon after I was rid of my
Wench; for she seeing there was no more employment for her Chops or Hands, she
gave me the go by, and marched off.

And thus did I finish my days work, which was none of the worst that I have
had, but I remember this for the Cakes sake, and the Wenches together.

And now truly Reader I have much wondered that I should so perfectly remember
this Adventure of the Cakes, being so inconsiderable a foolish Story, and done
so long since, for it is above twenty years ago: But here some waggish Readers
will be apt to measure my Corn by their Bushel, and to judge that I had some
cause to think of this story, and that more for the Wenches sake than the
Cakes, and that it is possible that if I gave her Cake-bread, she was so
charitable as to give me flesh in exchange; I tell thee Reader, it was no such
matter, I utterly deny it, for I do not remember that I ever kept company or
drank with her before or after; it may be I might if I would, there wanted
nothing but a little entreaty, but assure your self I proceeded no further; I
always dreaded that sort of Cattle, such as those that were Maids, or did pass
for such, and were of a lower form such as were servants, and had nothing but
what they wrought for; I had this always in my eye, that I should one day have
some Estate, and that a considerable one, if my Father and I did not wholly
fall out, and I knew that if I should deal with those kind of Gypsies, and they
should prove, and I by fair means or foul should be drawn to marry them, that
then I should lose my Father for good and all: I had the grace to have these
two thoughts, or else I had been caught while I lived at my Masters, for there
we had a Maid or Woman servant, who would hear my Tale, and take part with me,
she would discover my Master and Mistresses Designs whatsoever against me, and
all the secrets of the House were laid open to me, she would also be sure to
lay by many a good bit for me, and make many excuses for me; by this means she
wriggled her self into my favor, and I accounted her my very good friend, and
as occasion offered treated her abroad; she aiming at somewhat further, was as
free with me as I could wish or desire, and we often sported and toy'd
together; we proceeded so far that I knew she had a Blot on her Tables, she had
a Point open, and she knew that I had a Man to enter, and so I might if I would
but I durst not, but shutting up the Tables, proceeded no further in the Game.

I was fearful of what I have told you, and durst not meddle, and it was well I
did not, for if I had, I had been caught: The Baggage vexing heartily at my
departure, and giving out somewhat of me though untruly; for I protest she and
I gamed no further; I knew if I won at first, I might, nay should lose at last;
I knew the quality of those kind of Cattle too well; for if any young man, an
Apprentice, be so silly as to fall into such a Wenches Quarters and marry her,
if an old rich fellow gets to bed to his Servant-maid, or any of these unequal
matches happen, as they do too often, that man is sure to be undone, these
beggarly Baggages are presently Cock-a-hoop, set them a horseback and you know
where they will ride; my good Angel still kept me from such kind of ill luck; I
had Misfortunes enough besides that, and that only I avoided, and so I advise
thee to do, and thus I conclude the Adventure of the Wench and the Cakes.

CHAP. VIII.
He resolving on another Ramble, is put to his shifts to raise money and get a
Horse to ride on, which he being furnished with, is stopped from his journey by
his Fathers seizing him.

BUt as wise as I was in this Case, I was still fool enough in the main, I
still held out in my stubborness, I would not go near either my Master or
Father, but sitting at home at the Cooks house all day, and spending my Time
and Money in smooth Ale, and in the evening taking a turn to our Rendezvous,
and meeting some of my Comerades, this was my whole employment; some of my
Comerades complained so heavily of their Masters severity, that I expected them
to take the same course as I had done, and keep me company, and so they
promised me, but they had more Grace.

I enquired how my Master took my absence, of some of our neighbors, but they
could not tell me any particulars, but they told me if I had a mind to see, and
speak with my fellow Apprentice, he should give me a meeting; I was willing
enough to see him, but fearful of being betrayed to my Master, but they engaged
the contrary, and I consented: The next night he came, and said he was glad to
see me, asking me how I fared? I made the best of a bad Market, and bragged of
the brave life I led, he seemed displeased, wishing he had taken my turn, I to
myself wished it with all my heart, and began to repent; but when he told me of
passages betwixt my Father and Master, (for they had met and discoursed the
matter) then I was terrified beyond measure, it appeared to me like raw Head
and bloody Bones; for my Father said, my Master must and should receive me; my
Master replied, that I should first take a turn in Bridewel: I was accused and
threatened on all sides; my Father demanded his son, and said he would force my
Master to find and keep him; then it shall be in Bridewel, said my Master, and
still the burden of the Song was Bridewel. I hearing this, and understanding
that they both knew of my being in Town, was resolved on another journey,
hoping at my return to find them both agreed, or at worst, in better temper; I
wanted nothing but the principal Verb, Money, neither was I in any great want,
for I had three pound of the five pound I sold my Watch for, in my pocket; but
however, not knowing my own mind, whither I should go, or how long I should
stay, I thought it convenient to see how much more I could raise by borrowing;
and therefore putting on a bold face, I asked one to lend me forty shillings,
that was a sum he could not spare, but if half a piece would do me a courtesy
I should have it; I accepted it of him; and so of several others, some a Crown,
some an Angel. but I having begun this course with them, they began to flight
me, to shun my company, and to break up their accustomed meeting that they
might avoid me; I seeing this; purposed to be gone but however, I was resolved
to try one friend more, and that was the Victualler* the man of the house where
we met, he had been always loving and kind to me, and I had been his very good
Guest, and many a fair pound he had taken of me, and through my means; I did
not question but he would lend me even what I would ask of him; I was therefore
considering what tall Sum I should desire of him: I remembered that when one of
my Comerades bought my Watch, he not having five pounds about him, borrowed
four pounds of our Host, who gave it him at the first word, I was therefore
resolved to ask him for just such a Sum; I believed my credit was better with
him than the others, but I found my self mightily mistaken; The Tale was then
of another Hog; for when I asked him to lend me four pounds: He cries out, How
friend, four pounds! Do you know what you say? Do you think me mad to part from
four pounds so easily? I know better what to do with my Money than to lend you
four pounds: Why, said I, and star'd on him, Is four pounds such a Sum for you
to lend me? you know that I have been Master of a greater sum than that e're
now: Yes, said he, time was that you lived well at your Masters, but that time
is past, then indeed I should not have scrupled to have lent you four pounds or
a greater sum, for then I knew you were in a condition to pay me, but now you
are gone from thence where should you get it to pay me? I tell you, in the
condition you now are, I will not lend you four Shillings, unless it were to
march you quite off, that you may no longer come to my house, for I am
sensible, that your coming hither has driven away most of my Guests, who
forbear coming to my house, that they may avoid your company. I know the crafty
Rogue said true, and did believe that it would be to no purpose to importune
him, for I found it would be labor lost, and that my Cake was Dough, but
however resolving not to stoop to such a Rascal as he, I told him it was but a
Copy of my Countenance, I did but ask him to try his Constitution, to feel his
Pulse beat, for I knew it was convenient to try a friend before I needed him,
and that I thanked my Stars, I had no need of his friendship yet, for I have
Money enough, and thereupon drew out above five pound which I had about me, and
my Watch: Nay then, said he, you are a better Husband than I expected, you have
made your Money hold out bravely, but take my word, if you take this course it
will waste, and that quickly, and since you have not been quite so bad a
Prodigal as I thought you were, let me give you some good advice.

Take up in time, you have rambled long enough in all conscience, therefore
leave and submit to your Father and Master, who both wish you well, better than
you do your self: And now let me ask what you resolve, or indeed think to do,
and what course you intend to take? your money will be gone, and then how will
you get more? If you continue in this course, you must and will fall into some
ill company, who will promise you fair at first, but will be your ruin in the
end.

I hearing mine Host catechize me, could not answer him one ready word, but
told him I knew well enough what I had to do, but I lied, I knew no more how to
dispose of my self than a Child of six years old, and indeed I have often
considered of it since, that it was a great mercy that I did not fall into lewd
company, for I verily believe I should have hearkened to any that had asked me
the Question.

If I had happened among Beggars or Gypsies. I had been like enough to have made
one of the Canting-Crew, and then it may be my Adventures amongst them might
have pleased the Reader far better, but I think our English Rogue has
sufficiently described the various humors of that sort of people; if I had met
with Pick-pockets, Shop lifters, or plain Highway Men, I might have served
with, and have learned their several Qualities, and described those various
Cheats to you, but they as the former, are all sufficiently described in the
Book aforementioned. But it was my good luck to miss of all these courses, and
run different ways though unfortunate enough, as you shall hear by and by.

And now I having heard my Hosts advice, and given him the answer I told you, I
left him, being resolved to come no more there.

His discourse had made me somewhat melancholy, and therefore I withdrawing to
my Quarters, went to Bed, there I ruminated and considered with my self what I
should do, and it was long e're I could fix upon any thing.

I had my pocket pretty well furnished with Money, and as long as that lasted I
resolved to continue my Ramble, and not knowing whither to go, for I was no
great Traveller, having never been above three Miles from London, except to
Windsor as aforesaid, and therefore I concluded to go thither again, and it may
be as my mind served to go a little further.

I had been there lately before, but it was on foot, but now I intended to go
Gentleman like on Horseback. I told the Cook my Landlord of my Design, and he
knowing I had no business there, wondered at me, but he considered that as I
was upon the Ramble, I was never out of my way, I had told him of my purpose,
because I would have him get me a Horse, or pass his word for one, but he not
knowing my intent, and doubting that I might wander further, and it may be sell
the Horse, and so leave him the Horse to hold, to pay for a Horse, he desired
to be excused; he told me that I needed not have any body pass their words for
me, since I had a Watch in my Pocket, which would be a very good pawn, and that
never shames his Master, and if I would leave that, he would speak to a friend
to furnish me with a pretty Nag* I was vexed to think I must part with my Watch,
my pride, for that was my best Gentility, but such a desire I had to be a Cock
horse, that I consented, and then going to his friends Stable, we agreed all
matters thus:

I gave twelve shillings for the use of the Horse for six days, for so long I
supposed to stay out, and left my Watch for security of the Horse, which I
suppose was worth about fifty shillings, so that what would come, the owner was
sure to lose nothing; if I staid longer than six days, I was to pay further two
shillings a day. And thus was I fitted with a Horse, and I reckoned that if I
staid out to spend all my Money, yet I had a Watch at my return would yield me
more, and these being my thoughts and resolves, the next day I began my journey
I mounted nimbly, and rod on courageously, but whether the Cook for some ends
of his own, gave intelligence, or how it happened I know not, but I was prevented
of my journey, for alighting in a Street in London at a Milliners Shop, to buy
me some Ribbonds for my Hat, I let my horse stand at the Door, but he was soon
seized on, for my Father took hold of his Bridle and gave it to my Brother, a
Boy that was at hand, and seized me fast by the Arm.

CHAP. IX.
He is discharged from his Master, descants upon that Action, describes the
cunningness and hypocrisy of his Mother-in-law, and is placed with a second
Master.

ANd now Reader, judge you if I was not in a pitiful pickle, and if I did not
think my self to be in a sad condition, the truth on it is, I expected my Father
would first have fallen about my ears, and buffeted me soundly, then send for a
Constable, and drag me to my Masters, with a hundred Boys at my heels, for I
saw some such kind of cattle, some of the young fry gather about the door, and
then carry me before a Justice, send me to Bridewel, all these things and worse
came into my head, so that I thought before night I should be beating Hemp. All
this I expected, and indeed well deserved, but to prevent it, my whole study
was to give my Father the slip, and show him a pair of heels, but there was no
need of any of all this, matters went much better than I thought on; for my
Father was in a good humor, and not at all so passionate as I supposed, for as
I said, he taking me by the arm led me further into the Shop, and then he thus
began:

Son, whither in Gods Name are you going, is not your Ramble done yet? sure you
should be weary of this course of life; fie, fie Son, I am ashamed to think you
should have so little Wi^ or Grace, to give me so much trouble to hunt after
you in this manner.

These were the words which he in very moderate manner spoke to me, and the^ he
was silent expecting my answer.

But I because I could not give a good, or a wise Answer, gave none, but
continuing silent, he proceeded.

Do you think you have not done well and wisely in leaving your Master in this
manner, can you give me any reason for it?

I hearing him proceed thus moderately, thought it would not be amiss to say
somewhat, and therefore I replied, That I had reason enough to leave my Master,
because I was abused and wronged.

Well, said my Father, suppose you were wronged, must you be your own Judge,
and because things were amiss, must you make them worse by these unlawful
courses; it is not well done indeed: but come, said he, I Will see and set all to
rights if I can, if you will be ruled by me, all may be well again.

My Father by this time had with his sober and tender expressions, so mollified
me, that I could hardly forbear putting finger in eye, which he seeing, and
finding me flexible, again asked me if I would be ruled by him? Yes Sir, said
I: Well then, said he, you shall go home with me, and I will take a time to go
to your Master.

I hearing that I might go to his house and not to my Masters, was well enough
contented, and so my Father and I walked homewards, and my Brother by my
Fathers directions went with the Horse from whence he came, so that I did
verily believe that the Cook my Landlord had betrayed me.

I went home with my Father, where I had not much said to terrify or affright
me: My Mother in law telling me that she was glad to see me, and all was as
fair and smooth as could be.

I having eaten and drunk with them at convenient times, went to Bed; it was
then when I was alone that I had time to consider what condition I was in, and
the consideration of it very much troubled me, But however my Father being so
fair, I intended to leave all to his discreet management; I have several times
since considered the great fear I was in all the time of my Ramble, of meeting
with my Master or Father; no deep indebted and almost bankrupt Citizen, could
be in greater fear of a Sergeant or Bailiff, I went no where if in the day
time, but I had my eyes every way, I looked fore-right and on each side me, and
oftentimes behind me, if any person brushed by me my heart was presently at my
Mouth, thinking that it was one of them that came to seize me, if I heard any
making haste after me, I mended my pace, and looked back ready to run faster, I
was full of fears dreading every one I met; by this I know that as the
contemplation and thoughts of a happiness or good, is more than the thing it
self when enjoyed, so the fear and cares that attends the expectation of a
danger, is more than falling into the danger it self; for as I have fancied the
great pleasure and happiness I should have and enjoy, if I could but have such
a desire of mine fulfilled, and when it has happened as I wished, when I have
enjoyed what I so earnestly desired, I then found no such great pleasure or
content in it, the fruition was not half so pleasant as the contemplation; so I
have again thought that if I should be so unfortunate as to be thrust into a
Prison how miserable I should be, and that having fal^ upon me, although I have
been very impatient during the time of my constraint and confinement, yet the
affliction has not been so horrible as I have imagined it but I shall have
occasion hereafter when I come to discourse of the Misfortunes which I have
suffered in that nature to be more particular in it, and therefore close it up
at present with this conclusion, That the fear I was in of my Fathers anger
against me, needed not to have been so great as it was, for he was more
moderate than I expected, and by what I understood afterward, I had no great
cause to dread meeting with my Master, for if I had so done, he would hardly
have took notice of me, being as willing to be ^^d of me, as I was to leave
him: No, matters were not as I expected, and there was reason for it that I
understood not, I was no Statesman nor Pollitician to look to the bottom of
things* and there see their true state and condition, as I after found them,
for afterward I understood the Case to be thus.

My Master knowing that it would be almost impossible to regulate things as he
ought between his Son and I, he was therefore willing to be rid of me, he knew
that it was unreasonable, that his Son coming three years after me, should take
place before me, and continue, so all the time, and that by that means I should
be under Apprentice all the time, he I was resolved it should be so, but he
knew that I would never admit of this, and he knew that my Father would
endeavor to remedy it, and this would make continual brauls in his House.

He also knew well enough, that if I were gone, he could not want for more
Apprentices when he pleased, and he could have considerable sums of money with
them, and therefore he was not at all displeased with my departure.

And let me tell you, that I have observed and known that some Citizens have
much increased their Estates by taking many Apprentices, for perhaps having
fifty pounds or more with an Apprentice, and being very severe and rigid, the
boy has been so hardly used, that he has run away within a year, and rather
than return again lose all his Money. I knew one that served eight so one after
another, and in three or four years, by this means gained four hundred pounds
for their diet, which they likewise earned, causing them to work like Porters,
so that I think they paid dear enough for it, they had been better to have been
boarded at the costliest Boarding-school in England; and besides the loss of
the Money, there was a worse inconvenience, for the Apprentice has been quite
spoiled, so harassed and frighted, that he has not been fit for any other
service, and for the sake of his first Master, would not be persuaded to go to
any other, a second: And besides this, it may be an After-clap has happened to
the poor Apprentice or his friends, worse than all the rest; for Bond being
given for truth, and true service, that has also been sued, and much Money
recovered that way, and then trouble and charge has fallen upon those friends
that entertained this Apprentice till agreement has been made, for the Law
gives the Master five pounds a night against any that shall entertain him.

By this means some Citizens have increased their Estates, but whoever they are
that make this their practice, let me tell them, That it is a very wicked one,
it is worse than Robbery, nay, than any kind of mischief that I know of, for it
is not only a perfect Cheat, or Robbery of so much Money, but it is the
undoing of a young man that might with good usage have made a good
Commonwealths-man, be of good use to God and his Prince in doing them Service,
but are by this means spoiled: And therefore let such Masters look to it, for
although their Money may thrive at present, yet it will consume all the rest in
time, and be as bad to them as worse gotten Goods or Estate, that is rarely
possessed to the third generation. They ought to consider that when they take
an Apprentice, they take as great ^ charge upon them for the time, as if he
were their own Child, and that their care ought to be the same, for the age of
an Apprentice is the only time of instilling good or bad into him, that is the
time of his making or marring, and what is well grounded in him and he learns
then, he will never forget; therefore the greatest care of Parents ought to be
in the choice of a good Master; you may soon discover such a one as will use
you as I have related by enquiry, whether he has ever made free any
Apprentices that have served their times out with him, and if so, do but
enquire of them, and you may ghess at the temper of the Master; but some
Parents think that if the Master they intend to place their Sons with be but a
rich man, and has a great Trade, that all is well enough; but let me tell
them, that it is not enough, several other things are to be considered, and
there has been one thing that has made much difference between Masters and
Servants, and that has been difference in opinion and judgment, for I do not
think it fit for a Boy that has been bred up in the Orthodoxal way, should be
Apprentice with an Anabaptist or Quaker; this very thing does oftentimes cause
much jarring betwixt Man and Wife, as well as Master and Apprentice; but this
Scruple or Caution is now adays almost needless, for God be thanked the
factions are much decreased, having not so much encouragement as formerly, and
the^ most of them, both in their choice of Wives and Apprentices, take this
Caution themselves, and will hardly, and very rarely marry with a Wife, or take
a Boy to be a^ Apprentice, that is not of their own Tribe, their own Gang, or
persuasion.

Much more might be said by way of Caution, between the Servant and Master but
let this suffice, and let the Apprentice after he is bound resolve to obey, let
no pretenses cause him to neglect his Duty but let him be resolved to stay out
and serve his full time whatever comes on it I give this Counsel because I know
it ha^ been much the better for me if I had done so, Experientia docet, for I
had no such absolute reason to run away but I might have dispensed withal; but
as I told you my Master had no such design of making any base profitable ends
on me, yet for the reasons aforesaid, he was content to have me gone.

On the other side, my Father had discoursed with him, and felt his pulse, h^^
knew his mind in part, and was resolved t^ make his advantage out of it, for
the more unwilling my Master was to receive me, the more forward my Father was
to press him to take me, so that if he should wholly refuse it, he might get
good part of his Money again.

These were my Fathers ends, and he managed them with all circumspection and
prudence accordingly.

He went first to my Masters, and told him that he had found his Servant,
asking what he intended to do with me? He replied, he cared not what, for he
would not entertain me; but some body must, said my Father; let who will said
my Master, I care not; well then, replied my Father, I shall have your leave to
do it if I will. Yes, yes, said my Master: This was as my Father wished, and
the danger of that was over, and then he proceeded further, urging him to
receive me: My Master refused it, and said he believed that I durst not come to
him: Yes but he shall, said my Father, and serve you out the rest of his time
if you will do him justice, and let him enjoy his right; I will not be
appointed what to do with my Servants, said my Master: But to conclude, after
many discourses, the end of all was this: I was brought to my Master to tell
him that I would, if he pleased, serve out my time with him: I had much ado to
be persuaded, to say these words, but my Father telling me his intent by them,
and what would follow, I said so, and it fell out as he expected; for my Father
well enough knowing that if I would come to him again, he could not refuse me,
and he being willing to be rid of me, answered directly that he was not willing
to receive me, and if he was compelled to it, I should suffer for it, and that
the Chamberlain would order me first to be punished.

My Father replied, not for his first fault, and he having some reason for it,
as I shall tell him.

I was pleased with this, and so was not my Master, who had said all he could
to frighten me; but I seeing my Father stood up so stiffly for me, did not fear
any thing, and my Father by this means wrought his ends, for my Master telling
me I must look another Master; my Father replied, so he shall if you will put
him in as good case as you found him, and thereupon complained of my Clothes,
and demanded Money back to give with me to another Master, they argued pro and
con, but in the end agreed, and my Master repaid ten pounds, if not fifteen of
the money he had received with me, and so we parted.

I have been very particular in this discourse, and it may be you will think it
tedious, but I hope it may be for the future good of the Reader, who may either
as Father, Apprentice, or Master, be in the same condition, and pick somewhat
out of this my relation that may advantage them; that is the chief end of my
writing it, and that my Misfortunes and Misery may conduce to the good fortune
and happiness of others. This affair was prudently managed by my Father, who
had he been severe at his first lighting on me, I had been ruined to eternity,
for I should have run away again if he had forced me to go to my Master. This
my Father judged would be the case, and therefore prevented it, but he did use
all the arguments he could raise to induce me to submit to my Master and serve
my time, and when that would do no good, he fell to threatenings, charging me on
his blessing to obey him, but I was deaf to his threatenings, and my
disobedience has since that same time wrought very much upon my spirit, and
made so deep an impression thereon, that I doubt it will never wear out, for
although it is above twenty years ago, yet I am to this day troubled at it both
day and night, and my very dreams are filled with that concern, oftentimes
imagining that I am still Servant to my said Master, and that my time will
never be out, so that because I did not serve him in effect, I still serve him
in fancy and imagination.

And this my disobedience to my Father, I judge to be the cause of those many
Misfortunes that have since fallen upon me, and therefore I can do no less than
make open confession thereof, no other satisfaction can I give him, he being
now dead.

He did I hope forgive me when living, for I was several times after that
reconciled to him, but he would still tell me my disobedience would be my
ruin, and that I did not understand the love he had for me.

I must confess that I did not look upon him to love me no longer than he was
giving to me, and when he held his hand, I thought he forgot his duty, and that
I might remit mine.

But I since find this saying of his to be most true.

That Children do not, indeed cannot distinguish or be sensible of their
Parents love to them, until they come to have some Children of their own.

I have since had the experience of his saying, and have repented of my
slighting him; all that I can say more is now to God and the World, and that I
here make my Confession, and that with Contrition, not doubting but that I
shall have Remission and Absolution in this world and in the world to come, and
hope that after all my Affliction, I may yet have some comfort and peaceable
enjoyment of my self in this life, and I have some cause to expect a future
quiet Consolation, because I hope the measure of my Misfortunes and Afflictions
(all which I judge are fallen upon me for my disobedience and other crimes) is
now full enough, and that I have already received afflictions enough, but if it
be not so, and that it is not yet enough, yet I hope, at the worst, that all my
punishment will fall on me in this life, which I beseech God to grant, so that
in the next I may enjoy the quiet and content that I have hitherto wanted, and
which all true contrite repentant sinners hope to enjoy; but I have this reason
to believe that I shall be acquitted from the ill service I did my Master, if
Retaliation be a due punishment for a Crime, for all the ill service I ever did
him, has been retaliated to me in the bad service of my Servants, for I have
had as bad as bad could be, as I shall acquaint you more particularly when I
arrive at that place of my story, and that I may come to it, I will thus
proceed:

My Father recived back either ten or fifteen of his thirty pounds given with
me, and as bad a Servant as I was to my Master, yet he also freely gave up to
my Father the hundred pound Bond he had given him for my truth, so that I was
not in the least tainted in my Reputation that ways. All that I remember was
ever laid to my charge or objected against me, was the private Copying of those
Writings I have told you of; and another time I being sent to receive two
hundred pounds, and not being so well skilled in telling Money as I ought, I
finding that he that told it to me was as quick again as I, made haste too,
that I might not be accounted dull, and thereby lost about five shillings, but
it being the first time I did so, my Master did pardon me, but withal telling
me, that if I did so again, either I or my Father should pay for it. But I from
that time became more curious, and learned so much skill as I seldom lost but
often gained thereby, as once for Example.

A great Boobily fellow, much older than my self, came to receive eight pounds
of me, it being all in half Crowns I quickly told it off with both hands; the
Receiver seeing me so nimble, and being ashamed of his own ignorance, for he
hardly knew how to tell forty shillings; he also told the Money with both his
hands, and tumbled it over in a confused manner: I observing that, was resolved
to put a trick on him and try his skill, wherefore I twice together told to him
but four pounds in stead of five; it was all as one to him, he still said it
was right, and having tumbled it all over, he gave me the Receipt, and away he
went contented: I laid by the forty shillings, not with intent to get so much
by him, no, I thought that to be unreasonable, I did not intend he should pay
so dear for his ignorance and folly; I expected and designed to have a pair of
Gloves or some Treat, and therefore told one of it that knew him, we had some
laughing, and he upon asking him some questions about the parcel of Money,
found that he wanted some, but withal he was ashamed to acknowledge how the
Mistake was, but his friend seeing his ignorance and willfulness, helped him
out, and told him all the story, and the other agreeing to give me a pair of
Gloves, and he and I, a quart of Wine, I gave him the forty shillings, advising
him to learn to tell Money better.

I being now clearly discharged from my Master, followed my Father home, where
he again thus renewed his discourse to me:

Well, now you are free from your Master, I suppose you are glad of it, you
think you have made a good days work of it, and I am not of your mind, for I
believe it to be the worst days work you ever made in your life, and that you
will have time enough to repent it.

I gave him the hearing of all this, not answering one word, and indeed, I knew
not what to say nor to do; I was not well enough skilled in my trade to think
of setting up and be a Master my self, and therefore I must resolve to have
another Master.

My Father advised me to seek out for another, as he would do, but I lost my
labor, none would take me, knowing that I had so foolishly left my Master,
they could not be persuaded that the fault was in him and therefore all Masters
of any account refused me, none but some idle young fellows would take me, and
with such a one at length I was placed.

But before I go to any other Master, and come into a new house and family, I
must give a stop, and relate some passages in my fathers.

I have already told you that I had a Stepmother, and now I shall give you her
Character.

She was to the outside of as promising a good nature as could be, she had a
very smooth smiling countenance, and always laughed or sneer'd when she talked
with me, she was a good Huswife in her house, and appeared to be a good Wife to
a Husband, and to me she seemed to be a very kind Mother-in-law, but I was
mistaken, I thought I had God Almighty by the Hand, when as I had the Devil by
the great Toc; she was a right Yorker, being of that Country breed, and as
full of dissimulation and hipocrisy as most of that Country.

This Woman had been three times married to three several Citizens; her two
first Husbands had little good luck with her all their lives time, and at last
had sudden deaths.

The first was killed in a Tavern with a quart pot which an angry friend threw
at him; this Husband had been so unfortunate, that he died worse than nothing
in Estate, for he owed more than he was worth: She caused one friend of hers to
pretend a Debt, which she as Administratrix pretended to pay to him, who
returned it to her again, and so deceived all her Husbands Creditors, and to
make a further addition to her Estate, she having thus gained all her Husbands
Stock, he that killed her Husband, agreed to renew the Lease of her house to
her by paying a Fine, if she would acquit him of her Husbands death: This was
agreed upon, and accordingly performed.

Thus was the loss of her Husband a gain to her: She had now a House and Stock
of her own free of all debts and troubles, only she had one Child, a Daughter,
by him. Being in this condition, she was wooed by, and wedded to another
Citizen of honest condition and quality, who also had by her several Children,
two which were Daughters did out live him: He had three Sons of his own by a
former Wife, whom he bred up and placed out, who also outlived him: But
although he died in a good Estate, yet his Sons were little the better for it.

This Citizen dealing much in the Country, and keeping Fairs, in his return
from one, died suddenly at an Inn on the Road. Small care was taken by her for
his burial although she knew of his death, but she had other matters in hand of
greater moment, she had other fish to fry, and so she left his burial to be
managed by a Servant.

The eldest of his Sons being of Age, enquires into his Fathers Estate,
expecting a large portion, he being the eldest Son and Heir apparent to it, but
he reckoned without his Host, and therefore must reckon twice, his
Mother-in-law had such Cards to show as would beat him out of play. She
produced a Will, but such a one as was only to prejudice her Husbands sons,
and made up wholly the Interest of herself and two Daughters.

This Will was made in one sheet of Paper in a blind manner, written by the
Servant in the House, and only witnessed by him, who was known to be her great
Confident, who was employed by her to go down and see her Husband buried, and
be sure to bring up the Seal-Ring, with which the Will was sealed, and so he
being returned the Will was produced, and in it after a few ceremonial words,
were these or to this effect:

I give and bequeath to my living Wife all these my two Tenements, situate,
etc. for the term of her natural life, and after her decease, I give them to my
two Daughters and their Heirs, etc.

Here she and hers were provided for, but not one word of his Sons in all the
Will.

The Son seeing this, demands an account of the personal Estate, but a small
matter comes to his share, she sweeps away two thirds of it, one as her due by
the Custom of the City, and another as her due in regard her Husband had not
otherwise given or disposed of it by Will.

And now let me tell the Reader by way of Caution, what it may be he is not as
yet acquainted withal, That a Citizen of London, if he has a Wife and
Children, can give away but one third part of his personal Estate: One third
part his Wife will have, another third part his Children will have, and the
other third he may dispose of as he pleases, either to Wife or Children, or
Strangers, as he thinks fit. If he dies without a Will, or such a one as does
not dispose of his third, then it goes to his Wife as she is Administratrix,
and this was the Case of this Citizen, who although he died possessed of an
Estate of Freehold, worth five or six hundred pounds, and six hundred pounds
personal Estate, yet a small matter came to his Sons, for the Freehold is gone
as I told you, and the personal Estate consisting of six hundred pounds, being
to be divided, she has four hundred pounds for her two thirds, and then two
hundred pounds being to be divided amongst five, his three Sons, and her two
Daughters, (for they came in for a share equal with the rest) the Sons have
just forty pounds a piece, and this is all they were like to have of the Estate.

The eldest Son being told that he had foul play showed him, and believing it,
he fluttered and went to Law to overthrow the Will, but to no purpose; she had
the better Purse, and such a Witness on her side as did not flinch from her, so
that all the young man's endeavors were in vain, he only made himself worse,
by spending his Money, and at last was forced to be satisfied, though he was
not contented, for in short time after, discontent broke his heart.

This and all the former passages have been related to me, and I am apt to
believe the truth of them all, because I have found the whole state and
business to be answerable to so wicked purposes; for although she enjoyed all
during her life, yet since that, their Children are dead, except one, the most
inconsiderable of all, and nothing is left of them, no not remembrance; his
Children did live and arrive to very considerable Estates, but are all since
dead, and their Estates gone, and now her Estate is in the hands of strangers,
and that Servant who was her Confident, did never thrive in body or Estate,
dying long since in want and poverty.

This was the Woman that was my Mother-in law, and she was likely enough to be
too cunning for me, having passed through these Projects with so much success.

My Father had married her upon small acquaintance, and knew none of her
Actings, he had not enquired, and therefore knowing nothing believed all to be
aright; she had a considerable Estate, and that was as much as he aimed at,
that being the chief care of most thriving Citizens to enquire into that, and
afterward to deal with them as cunningly as they can.

I being come home to my Fathers, my Mother-in law made very fair weather to
me, and gave me many good words, telling me, That she had already, and would
again speak to my Father in my behalf, and to please me the better, she was
propounding a Match for me with one of her Daughters, she having three, would
talk of matching them to me and my two Brothers (for that was our stock, there
being no Sisters) All these kind of pleasing Discourses she would have in my
Fathers absence, and before his and my face, she would incline somewhat to my
side, and take my part; by this I supposed she was my real friend, but I found
it otherwise, as I shall presently, tell you:

I lying in the Garret over the Chamber where my Father and she lay, and one
night hearing them in some earnest discourse, I supposing it might concern me,
and therefore being desirous to understand what was said, I arose, and went
down Stairs to their Chamber door, and laying my ear thereto, I could hear her
tongue utter these words:

In good truth now Husband, if you humor your Son in this manner, you will
undo him and your self too, for if he find that he can thus rule you, he will
stay with no Master you can put him to, nay, and he will run out and make you
pay for it, he will weary you; Is it not far better to pack him away to Sea?
for he will never do well with any Master here, do you think that he will serve
out his time with any Master that would not stay where he was so well used? Let
him to Sea I say, the Sea and the Gallows refuse none; let him bite on the
Bridle he deserves it: If my other Husband had not been ruled by me in the
disposing and ordering of his Son, he would have destroyed his Estate and broke
his heart too, but he took my counsel, and sent him to Sea, and then when he
came back, he was content with any thing: You have been (continued she) at the
charge to put him to Apprentice, and gave a good portion with him, that is
lost, and now he is ready for another, for who will take him without Money, and
he will stay at another place as many nights as days, and then you will be to
seek again, and be continually troubled with him.

My Father had lain still and given her the full hearing of all she had
uttered, and so had I too, but not without cursing her for a dissembling
hypocritical Gypsy, but she having done, my Father then made this reply:

But Lamb, you mistake the matter quite, things are not so bad as you suppose
them, nor my Son, as I hope, so bad as you think him; he was a little wronged
at his Masters, though he ought not for that cause to have left his service,
but his Master gained little by the Bargain, for he has paid back good part of
the Money he had with him, and that will be sufficient to place him any where
else, I do not intend to be at any fresh charge with him. I shall not need it,
and I think I know of a Master that will be willing to take him on even terms,
without any Money, and then I shall gain and not lose by the bargain.

It will be well if you do (replied she) but I should like it better if you
would send him to Sea. When you are hanged thought I, and so attending a while
longer, and hearing them silent, I though I had heard enough, and therefore
returned to my Bed.

The next morning I looked this Woman in the face to see if she still continued
her pleasant countenance to me, but I found no alteration, she still fleir'd on
me, and my Father being gone out, she caused me to fit down by her very
lovingly to Breakfast, using the kindest and lovingest expressions that could
be possibly imagined.

Oh (thought I) this Woman is a Devil! I must not trust her, I will be gone on
any terms, and so I was, for my Father that day discoursing with one that was
willing to take me, I went with him and a agreed on the matter, and so the next
day took my leave of my Mother-in-law, and went soon after to my new Masters.

CHAP. X.
He describes the lewdness of his second Master, who not having employment for
him, he imploys himself in translating Books out of French into English; he
leaves his second Master, is resolved to travel, but is first arrested.

I Was now gone to my second Master, which was indeed my last, for I would not
have you think that I should have as many as the unlucky Spaniard, Lazarillo de
Tormes, no, I had but two, and he seven, neither were mine so bad as his, I had
not a crafty blind man to back-beat me, and belly beat me, and beat my teeth
out, I wanted for to Victuals, nor Clothes that were necessary; I had not a
covetous Priest that would put me to my wits en^* ^o compass the picking of his
Loaves to get Bread, neither did I like him, serve a needy thredbare, but
withal proud conceited Squire, and be reduced to the necessity of begging
Victuals for my self and him: No. I served no such Masters, I was not pinched
with hunger or cold, nor was I afterward made a Monster of, nor tossed in a
Blanket as he was, I happened upon no such Adventures, and if you expect any
such, you are mistaken, but I was unlucky and unfortunate enough, and in the
end if you compare my misfortune and hard unlucky fate with his, or any bodies
else that you ever read of, I am sure mine exceeds and is the worst, or else I
am very much mistaken, to me they are, and have been so numerous and mighty;
and now all things considered, what good could I expect from my Father who had
such a Night-Raven as my Step-dame was, to intercede and speak for me? And what
good could I expect to have, or learn from such a Master as I was now placed
with? by changing my Masters I escaped the Thunder and came into the Tempest, I
had mended the matter well, by coming out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun;
for my present Master was such a one as I can hardly describe; I cannot say if
my other Master was bad, this was worse; no, my former Master could not be
termed bad in comparison of this, but if I may at all compare them, I cannot
more fitly than by saying that my second Master was just quite contrary to what
my first was, for to begin:

If my first Master was (as indeed he was) a sober solid Citizen, this second
was quite contrary, being a loose debauched Ruffain: If my first Master was
well known in his Trade or Practice (as I must still grant in all) this was as
ignorant, knowing little or nothing: If my first Master had a full Trade and
large Practice, this as not deserving it, had nothing to do: If my first Master
was used to stay still at home in his Closet, and do his business there, and if
sent for to a Tavern or public house, to send word he was at home, and was
there ready to do their business; this my second Master was the quite contrary,
being rarely at home, and if at home when sent for to the Tavern, he desired no
better place to do business in, but sent word he would wait on them presently,
and would be sure to be as good as his word.

As I do not remember that in all the time I lived with my first Master, I knew
him to go three times to the Tavern; so I do not remember that in all the time
that I lived with my second Master, that he was out of the Tavern or Alehouse
for three, nay two days together.

It was as common for me to seek out, and wait on him every night from a
tavern, as it was for me to wait on my first Master every Sunday to and from
Church. The credit of the one was not so good, but the other was as bad; the
one was honest, the other a Knave; for I never knew or heard that the one was
ever questioned for any unjust Action, when as I have been informed that the
other, my last Master, was not only questioned, but did also stand in the
Pillory for cheating a Carrier: To say all, the one was in every thing quite
contrary to what the other was, the one was old, and the other young; the one
rich (as he deserved) and the other poor, as it was but justice he should be. I
must confess there was some difference in the women too, but it was on the
advantage to my last Mistress, for my first was somewhat ancient, and to me
froward and ill natured, when as my second Mistress was a brave young handsome,
sprightly, beautiful woman, and as well replenished with the inward beauties
and perfections of the mind, as she was graced with these of the body. But she
having so untoward a piece to her Husband, was undone by him, and lived poor
and unhealthily, wanting and miserably, and so good virtuous woman she
patiently died. When as I think the other still lives in all possible content,
health, wealth, and plenty; I have no cause to touch upon either of their
Chastities, for I verily believe that in that point, they were both alike, and
I am confident both very virtuous.

This is the best Character I can give of my new Master, so that I may truly
say, I leaped out of the Drying Pan into the fire; nay, it is improper for me
to say so, for the Fish that leaps out of the Drying Pan where he is to be
scalded and dye, in short time by leaping out of it into the fire, is presently
burnt, and so is said that he does thereby leap out of a bad condition into a
worse, this I cannot properly say of my self, when I was with my first Master I
was not in the Drying Pan, I was not in danger of scalding and dying, I was in
no fear of ruin, but I was comparatively as well and as safe there as a Fish
in a Pond or River, so that I may say, in leaving him for the other, I leapt
out of the Water into the Fire, the place where I was well, and where I ought
to be, into that which would absolutely be my ruin if I should remain with him
my full time, and follow his wicked Example. But I took course my self in the
one, because I continued not with him above a year, and I thank God he gave me
more Grace than to put his Examples in practice.

I have told you that I continued about a year with this my second Master, I
would not have you think me to be so idle as to lose my time and do nothing, it
may be in what I did I gained nothing, but however it is good to be always in
action.

My Master had little or no employment for me, he himself rising between seven
and eleven usually went abroad, and commonly about the same hours at night he
returned; he being thus commonly abroad, and being desirous at least to be so
good a Husband as to have somebody in his Shop to answer people, took me for
that purpose.

My first business was to write blank Bonds and other Blanks of all sorts, and
having seldom any occasion to use them, I had soon furnished the Shop with as
many as were likely at that rate to serve for many a year, I had now and then
some odd blind Letters to write, and once in a week or fortnight, a Bond or
some such small Jobb to do, a pair of Leases or any such kind of Writings came
seldom, not oftener than once in a quarter of a year or thereabouts.

My Father to encourage both me and my Master, did bring us some business, but
all this did but little as to a full employment for me, so that now I had time
enough to converse with Knights Errant, in reading their Adventures. I had
still kept my Books, and by my daily additions laying out all the Money I could
spare, I had swelled them to such a number, that they looked like a Library,
and my Master permitted me so to dispose them in his little Shop, that they
were the best furniture therein.

They that came into our Shop, might by the outside of the Books, imagine that
we were well furnished with Law Books according to our practice, but if they
had searched their inside, they would have found their mistake, when in stead
of the Statutes at large, and Cooks Reports, they should see Amadis de Gaul,
and Orlando Furioso, and in stead of Brooks Abridgment, and some such old Law
Books, they would have found the Mirror of Knighthood, they would have been
much mistaken when instead of Gown-men pleading at the Bar, they found
Swordmen fighting at the Barriers. I had read these Books so often both in
English and French, that I was very well experienced in that Language, and
being desirous to appear in the World like somebody, did resolve to do the same
kindness to others as had been done for me, and as I thought would be of
public good: I did not think it fit that since I had a Talent, to lay it up in
a Napkin, but to put it to the best use I could; and besides these, I had
several other reasons to induce me to it, as the great profit I should gain by
it, and also the glory and fame I should purchase by being in Print, this was
such a desire as I could not moderate nor allay; therefore I was resolved to
begin, neither was I long in studying what Book to translate, but believing all
the world to be of my mind, Lovers of Knight Errantry, I pitched upon Amadis de
Gaul; the first five Parts being already translated, and the world wanting the
sixth, I intended to make them beholding to me for it.

I thereupon began this Adventure, whether luckily or no you shall know by and
by, and such impatience had I to see it in Print, that before I had near done
one quarter, I sought out how to get it printed, I treated with several
Booksellers of my acquaintance, but they either desiring me to finish it first,
or not coming to my terms, (I having not the patience to finish it) was
resolved to print it at my own charges. I did not as they that go to build or
to war ought to do, lay by for it, for I am sure I did neither lay by nor
provide for it; but I had so great a desire to have it done, that I was
resolved to see it begun; and therefore meeting with some that forwarded and
encouraged me, and an honest Widow-woman to be my Printer, I began: She
expected me to send in all or the greatest part of the Paper, but my Money nor
Credit would not reach to any such matter, I made a shift to scramble up so
much Money together as did purchase six Reams of Paper (when as sixty would not
finish it) and that I sent in with a promise that the rest should suddenly
follow; she either believing me, or else I believe having little else to do,
did put a man upon it, but never did Green-sickness'd Girl long with half so
much earnestness for Chalk or Oatmeal, as I did to see a sheet of this done,
that I might carry it in my Pocket, and show to some of my Comerades what a
famous fellow I was like to be.

The time did come, and I saw my desires accomplished; but before that, I had a
large contest with my self about what number of them should be printed, I was
not so great a fool as one that being to print a Book, and being as unresolved
what number to do as I was, did after much time spent and various
consultations, resolve to print twice as many as there were Parishes in
England, his reason being this, that although all the people of every parish
would not buy of them, he cause all could not read, yet the Priest and the
Clerk could read, and therefore they he thought would buy.

No, I was not so errant a Coxcomb as he, but I went another way to work, I
knew not how many people would buy of them, but I knew some Booksellers would,
because some with whom I dealt had promised me to take a dozen or a quarter of
a hundred or more apiece.

I did therefore believe that every Bookseller would, nay, must buy of them,
and therefore I took the pains to walk from Aldgate to Westminster, and reckon
up how many Booksellers there was there, and in all other places about the
Town. I was well set at work the while, and after this way of calculation I had
reckoned how many to print; But after all this extravagant pains, I was forced
to go back to another number, and be ruled by my Printer to print the ordinary
Impression of one thousand.

This being agreed upon, and the Press going forward, and I proceeding in my
translation, we quickly had a stop for want of Paper, I knew not what courses
to take, but as the most feisable I could imagine, I carried a sheet of a sort
of what was done to some Booksellers of my acquaintance, and desired them to
encourage and advance so good a Work, by depositing or lending some money to
help to finish it, and that when it was done, they should pay themselves by
Books: They would not hear of that side, they would not buy Books before they
were finished, but if I would sell them Books which they knew I had, they would
give me Money: I knowing no other way was forced to take that course, but
withal, I made this proposition That I might have my Books again when I
returned the Money with some small gain; they promised me fair, but performed
nothing, for afterward when I came to redeem my Books, they told me that they
were sold, but if I had a mind, and would give such a price, they would
endeavor to get them again: Some I had, and some I lost, but by this means I
broke and spoiled my Library, however by the sale of these Books and some
little credit I had with the Stationer, my Book was finished. Never did young
Big-belly'd Woman desire to see the Fruit and Issue of her Body, as I did to
see my Book finished, and thereby to see my Name in Print; this was the utmost
bounds of my ambition, bur Time that perfecteth all things, perfected my Book,
and I was very dilligent in publishing it, for the Titles were carefully posted
up, and I not a little proud to see them in public, walking the Streets and
showing them to several of my acquaintance: But all this Harvest produced but
little Corn, my Mountain brought forth a Mouse, for by that time the Printer
was paid, the Town was full, and I might make Waste-paper of the rest, no body
would give the first price although that was low enough in all Conscience, so
that I was forced to lower my Top-sayl, and sell for what I could get, and be
glad of any thing, and with much ado, with all this toil and labor, I again
furnished my self with Books, but nothing near so well as I had been; so that I
came off from this Adventure of Printing with a scratched face, as all others
must do that are not bred in the way of Book-selling; I know not their way of
exchanging; I gave them their full rate for what Books I had of them, and they
allowed me no more than the lowest ready Money rate for mine, and by this means
I made but a blind Bargain, but however I had attained to the end I aimed at, I
had been in Print, and now I could and did present several of my Books to
several of my Acquaintance, and much ready Money it cost me in binding those
Books that I gave away, and all this trouble and cost was I at for a little
honor, when I had been better to have sat still the whilst, but I did not
think so, but resolved now I had begun, to proceed farther; I intended to let
the world see some more of my works, and my fancy still running upon Romances,
I was minded to translate another, but by experience finding that those sort of
Romances that treated of old impossible Knight Errantry were out of fashion,
and that there were a sort of new ones crept into their places; I sought for
one, and was not long e're I pitched upon such a one as I thought would do the
business, for is was full of Lovesick Expressions, and Thunder-thumping
Sentences, there was Love and Arms, and some strange impossible Adventures, for
which I liked it the better: I did believe the Gentry of England were much
indebted to me for this Translation, for I had (like other conceited
Translators and Authors) coined several new English Words, which were only
such French Words as methoughts had a fine Tone wieh them, or such as I could
not handfomely rranslate, and therefore let them pass as English, to be
understood as well by the Reader, as by me the Translator, who knew not what to
make of them.

The Loves and Adventures of Clerio and Lozia, I began, and in short time
finished, but long before it was finished, it was begun to be Printed; I had
the same impatience as formerly, so that I did not, nor could not stay till it
was all written, but began.

I was again ttoubled about Paper, but I had some Money, my Stationer some
Faith, and the Book was much less than the former, so that finished it was, and
I supposing this Book to be more gentile than the former, gave it a more
gentile Title, and the Name of the Translator being placed on the Title Page in
large Characters, there was also added the honored Word Gent. to import that
the Translator was a Gentleman, that he was every Inch of him in his own
imagination, and did believe that the so printing that word on the Title of the
Book, did as much entitle him to Gentility, as if he had Letters Patents for it
from the Heralds-Office: Nay, did suppose this to be more authentic because
more public: And let me tell you, this is a very great Itch in some people, I
knew one that translated a Book, and caused it to be Printed merely to have the
Title of Esquire added to his Name, and now it is grown to so common a Custom, that
Booksellers usually title their Authors Gentlemen, Esquires, and sometimes
Persons of Quality, that are only poor mercenary fellows, that the Book may
have the better esteem, may sell the better.

But now my second Book was finished, the Word FINIS was printed, and just at
the same time I finished and put an end to my Service with this my second
Master, the occasions that caused us to part were several, and in short these:

My Master was as good a Husband of his time as I have told you, and most of my
time was spent in my own Affairs, either in writing or reading for my own
pleasure or walk abroad to visit the Printers; my Master knew of my designs,
and since he had little for me to do, permitted me to proceed and employ my
self that way, but although he was content, yet my Mistress was ^ot, and that
which displeased her most was my so often walking abroad, by which means I
sometimes lost the making of some Writings. I had gotten a haunt of rambling
and could not leave it, and therefore she complained to my Master of me; he
chid me, but I minded it not, and continuing so still, he complained to my
Father, and great fault was found with me, so that I was weary of his and my
Fathers Reprehensions. I saw there was nothing gained by being there, and
therefore was desirous to be gone: I had compared notes with some of the
neighboring Apprentices, and one or two having as giddy unsettled minds as my
self, we were resolved to travel.

Now we being all indifferently skilled in French, were desirous to see France:
This Design was long consulted on, and resolby me in few days to be put in
execution, when an accident happened between me and my Master that hastened it.

Although we had but little business to do in the Shop, yet my Master pretended
that he had a very considerable Practice, and several people came to our Shop
as well as to other Scriveners, to borrow Money upon Security.

I had command from my Master to entertain them all, and promise to do their
business, and some waiting their opportunities spoke with my Master in a
Morning (for afterward it was rare to meet with him) he giving them many fair
promises, they sometimes treated him at the Alehouse or Tavern, but to little
purpose; for I hardly remember any thing came to perfection but that they being
in time wearied out with attendance, at length left him.

Amongst the rest that frequented our Shop upon the borrowing Account, there
was one Gentleman that had often spoken with my Master, received fair promises
and many delays, he being very earnestly desirous to have his business
dispatched, not only treated my Master at Alehouse and Taverns, but me also,
desiring my assistance and remembrance to my Master: I promised him my utmost
Service, though I did believe all would turn to little advantage for him.

This Gentleman came so often, and had so many put-offs from my Master, that I
wondered, he being very ingenious, did not understand rhem to be flams, but he
still had the patience to come, and that so often, that I was ashamed, and
pitied him, and but that I knew I should displease him would have told him how
matters were, that he might forbear coming: I gave him several Hints, but he
did not, or would not understand them, for when he did ask me When I thought
his business would be done? I would tell him that thought was free, and I
should not tell him what I thought, but that my Master still said it should be
suddenly, he being very desirous of perfecting his business imagined (as he
wish^d and desired) that his business would be done, and that in short time,
and therefore he still waited in expectation of that happy day; but still to as
much purpose as before and when he saw my Master, he would persuade him that it
was in good forwardness: Nay, one day he told him that the Evening before he
had been in company with the Gentleman of whom he was to have the Money, and to
justify the truth of what was said, he averred that I his man had been in
company with him there.

This was a very authentic and sufficient Answer, and for such a one it passed
currantly, but I knowing what company he had been in at the night he named, did
give present Judgment that this Gentleman's business was very unlikely to be
done, and that he must be fooled. He came still, and one day having treated me
at the Alehouse, where he very ingeniously discoursed of Books, especially
Poetry and Romances, and thereby pleased me exceedingly, and then again asking
me what I thought of his business? I could no longer forbear but out it must,
and therefore I told him in plain terms, That I thought his business would
never be done, he was mighty blank at that which he said, and asked twenty
questions at once, but above all, asked me if I were not in company with my
Master one evening with the man that was to lend the Money? I was (replied I)
with my Master and some other company that evening, but I do not think that any
that were there present had any Money to lend, but that they were rather
Borrowers than Lenders, and that I supposed they would sooner take a Purse upon
the Highway, than part from any to a Scrivener to lend.

This is mighty strange replied the Gentleman, I thought your Master had not
kept any such Company.

I know not what they were, said I, but you may judge if they were
Money-lenders wen I shall tell you that I that Evening by my Mistress command
did go to find my Master, that after my usual search of most Taverns in my way,
and which I knew he haunted, I found him at one in Southwark, I was not
admitted into the Room where he was at present, because he and his company were
engaged in hot service, which they plied so hard, that after a while there was
a great silence,* and the Drawer hearing it, went in and found all the company
asleep, but at his Do you call Gentlemen? my Master awaked, and asked what a
Clock it was? The Drawer said it was late, and withal told him that his Man was
there, Bring in another Bottle of Wine, said he, and send him in, with that the
Drawer went out, and I entered.

There did I behold the Power and Strength of Wine, how it had mustered and
conquered all those that had encountered with it.

The company in all consisting of five, I saw one sleeping in a Chair, another
laid all along on a Bench, another in the same posture and condition on the
Table, the fourth dead drunk on the ground, having fallen from his Chair, and my
Master who had lately been asleep, but was now Top-heavy, the only moving
person; come, said he, we have had a merry frolliek, and they are asleep, but I
must awake them that we may be gone, but first let us drink; and thereupon
staggering toward him that lay upon the ground, and stradling over him, he
puts the Bottle of Wine to his Nose and takes a Swoop; he commanded me and the
Drawer to do the like. I know not what he did, but I fetched a large draught:
My Master then fell a leaping, staggering, and dancing about his Companions,
till in the end they awaked.

They had hardly so much senses as to know where they were, and what and how to
pay their Reckoning. I wondered how they would get home, but their Quarters were
not far off as I understood, they being all Prisoners in the King's Bench. I led
my Master home however, and now I have done my story, only give me leave to
add this Conclusion, That I hardly believe that these my Masters Companions
being Prisoners in the Kings Bench, as I suppose for Debt, have much Money to
lend out at Interest: I am of your mind, and the whole is, replied the
Gentleman, and by this I see I am led by the Nose and fooled. This is the truth
Sir, said I: I believe it, said he, but you should have told me this sooner
that I might not have lost my time, but if I l^ve I Will be revenged on him: Oh
for the Lords sake Sir, said I, take no notice of it as from me, he told me he
would not, but he did fret like gum'd Taffata, and fumed, walked, and stamped
like a mad man, and so he left me.

About three days after, I suppose this Gentleman met my Master abroad, what
greeting or converse they had together I know not, but I imagine it was none of
the civillest, for my Master came home sooner than ordinary, and seeing me, his
first words were:

Out of my doors you Rascal, you have broken your Indentures in betraying my
secrets, you are a Rogue and a Rascal, and I Will sooner trust a Thief than you
in my House. I star'd on him, but he not seeing me stir, seized on my Arm
buffeting and thrusting me, without hearing me speak, he threw me out of the
Shop.

I being now out of Doors, was resolved not to go in again, but walked directly
to my two Associates that were to accompany me in my French Journey. I had by
good chance conveyed from my Masters most of those Books and other things that
were of any worth, so that I was not wholly unprovided.

I told my Companions I had broken the Ice, and was come away to hasten them,
they promised to be ready in few days, desiring me to dispose of my self near
them: I did so, taking my Lodging at an Inn.

I was resolved not to return to my Fathers, I should be too near my
Mother-in-law, who I doubted would have some scurvy Design upon me, and knowing
that she was for sending me to Sea, I was resolved to go without her sending.

Being now settled in my Lodging, again solicited my Companions to make haste,
they promised me to do so, and that I might be sure of them, borrowed some
Books of them, especially of one of whom I had a Book worth above twenty
Shillings.

This I was resolved to keep as an Engagement for his forth coming, and did so
still importuning him to make haste, but his courage began to cool, his Itch of
traveling was over, he had cast up the many Troubles, Hazards, and Charges he
should be at, and the little he had to defray it, he was not of so Mercurial an
unsettled wandering temper as I was, and therefore made many excuses to me, and
withal desired his Book, nay thought I, If the Wind be in that Corner, and if
you will not go, you shall have no Book, but gave him Flam for Flam, one idle
pretense for another; he ghessing at my intent, was resolved to be too many for
me, and therefore next morning when I came out of my Lodging, and was walking
out of the Inn Door, I was seized on by a short stub'd Fellow, who told me he
had an Action against me, I was in a peck of fears, that it was my Master or
Father had caused me to be served so, I knew not what to think, but the
Officers, there being two, seeing that I was surpised, hurried me away to the
next Alehouse, and calling for Drink, asked me What I would do? Nay, said I,
that you must tell me. Why, quoth they, you must send for your Adversary, and
must either agree with him, send for Bail, or go to Prison: Is it come to that
thought I, must I now be stopped of my journey, and be tied by the Heels at home
in a Prison? I have done well, and brought my Hogs to a fair Market; I was
unwilling to yield to them last Proposal, go to Prison, and I thought it would
be as bad to send to my Adversary, still supposing it to be either my Father or
Master, and as for Bail, I knew not where to get any, I did not believe that
any person of Quality, or indeed Reason, would be Bail for me in such a Case as
I supposed that was: I sat very melancholy between these two Varlets,
studying what to do, while they called to know what I intended: I told them I
knew not; why send for your Adversary, said one, he lives but at the next door:
How, said I, Who is it? why it is such a one, said they, naming my Comerade of
whom I had borrowed the Book: Is it he? thought I, then I am well enough: I
being informed whose Prisoner I was, did not doubt being at liberty when I
would; I therefore drank to the Officers, and told them my Case, thinking to
make them my friends; pretending that my Adversary was in my debt, having
caused me to spend Money in waiting for him, they were well pleas^d with this
Story, hoping there would be more work for them, and that I would employ them
to arrest him, they therefore heard my tale and took my part, asking me if they
should arrest him at my Suit? Yes with all my heart, said I: But then, said
they, you must give us Money; I did not like that Money Story, and told them
that I was not of age, and therefore not liable to an Arrest, I was Lawyer good
enough to tell them this and more, but they minded me not, they were re^olv'd
to have Money out of me, and therefore demanded satisfaction for their waiting,
and that I were best to send for my Adversary and agree the Cause.

I thereupon agreed to send for him* and withal, sent the same Messenger to a
Kinsmans that was a Scrivener, who I knew if he came, would be hard enough for
all of them.

My Adversary came and demanded his Book, I answered him as I had done them
before, and told him that he must pay part of my Charges in attending on him,
and many such like pretenses I had, ready for him, we were pro and con, and he
being too many for me, I told him that I had sent for a friend, a Scrivener
that would not see me wronged.

The Officers hearing this, and doubting that if the Scrivener came their sport
would be spoiled, they therefore put us on to end our Controversy, and so we
did, for I gave him a Note of my hand to deliver him the Book in a few days,
and the Sergeants being paid on both sides, left us.

CHAP. XI.
He discourses in general of his often being wrongfully arrested.

ANd now Reader, give me leave to put a stop to the prosecution of my Story, to
reflect upon this last Action, for from this Action I may begin to reckon the
Misfortunes of my life, I have had as you have read many Misfortunes already,
but I may account this to be the worst beginning of all, for the whole trouble
and torment of my life having been solely by Arrests, and falling into the
merciless hands of Sergeants and Catch poles, I cannot but reckon this my first
arresting to be a very considerable Misfortune, and of very great remark; sure
these fellows that first arrested me used some kind of Witchcraft upon me, that
made me so liable for the future to be arrested by others: Here was an early
beginning, being before I was twenty years old, and how many men are there in
London that live to a great age and never are arrested. My Father was sixty
when he died, and lived free from all Arrests, though his Dealing were very
considerable, and I by that time I was arrived to half his Age, had been
arrested I believe sixty times: And I am very confident, that Sergeants,
Bailiffs, Marshals Men, and such kind of Varlets, have had as much Money of me
at several times, as would pay all the Debts I at present owe, and yet I have
always been sparing and played the good Husband with them, they have usually
gained no more of me than needs must, and although I now have, and ^or these
many years past have had several ^undreds of pounds owing me, yet all ^hese
sorts of Cattle have not had so many ^^illings of me to arrest others for me,
as I have paid them pounds when arrested at the Suit of others, and altho^gh
the Debts owing to me have always been more and exceeded the Debts that I owe,
yet I have expended twenty times as much Money as Defendant, as I have done as
Plaintiff: I have been so tender of the Reputation of others, and so unwilling
to put them to charge, and have found those that I owed Money to, to be like
raging Lions, and ravening Wolves, and so you will find in the prosecution of
my Story, and yet I have been as cautious and curious of running and going into
Debt as any man, and as dilligent and careful to pay; I never borrowed Money or
took up any Commodity of any man, but with a design to pay it, and hopes to get
by it, I know he that does purpose otherwise is a Knave; but if my Designs did
not answer my Expectations, or that they did not turn to account so soon as I
expected, and I thereby disappointed, as indeed it has happened many a^ time, I
have then come to the loss, and being ashamed to see those that I owed it to
because of my disappointments, I have commonly heard from them by some o^ these
Caterpillars, who have given me a Ca^ of their Office to my great cost, and
then I have been forced to be troublesome to friends for Bail, and defend my
self at Law till I could raise the sum, sometimes I have been arrested for so
small a sum as I have been ashamed off, but could not help it possibly, unless
I would leave some one business unmannag'd and undone, that would be of six
times moreloss than the sum I owed came to, and these reasons are not to be
given and made known to every man, but for my silence and non performance I
have been accounted a Knave, but I never was so, and never owed any sum of
Money, but I was willing to secure it, by assigning some Debt equivalent, or
some Lease or such Security: But sometimes again, the Debt I owed has been so
inconsiderable, that it has not been worth the while to offer this, and yet
the necessity of my present Affairs so urgent, that I could not possibly spare
Money to pay it.

Many of these unlucky Cases have happened on me, and I being thereby reduced to
so great necessity, misery, and torment thereby; for to a generous, honest,
noble spirit, nothing else can be more grieveous or intollerably miserable,
than to be put upon the necessity in these Affairs: Nay, I have been oftentimes
arrested for no cause but an humor, an absolute Design of doing me mischief,
and that in a strange unlucky manner. Would you not think it an unlucky thing
to be thus in a manner causeslessly arrested for a Book, and that before you
were twenty years old? One would think that such a matter as that between a
couple of Boys (for we were neither of us any better) might have been ended
without these Varlets, but you see so it was: Would not you think it was an
unlucky thing, that you must be enforced to part from your Clothes off your
back to satisfy a pitiful inconsiderable Debt that was never thought off, and
indeed not due? Do you not think it an unlucky thing to be arrested within a
few days after you were married, for your Wedding-Clothes? And do you not think
it much more unlucky to have those very Clothes and your Wife's too, soon after
seized on and attached for Diet and Lodging, and that when both these parties
had no reason to do it, being promised and assured their Moneys in a few days;
and which was paid accordingly, was not this such a Misfortune as would try and
vex your patience? Would it not appear to you an unlucky thing to be arrested
for Gloves and Ribbons, pretended to be delivered at your Wedding, which were
never so done, the Glover setting down almost as many Gloves again, as there
were Folks at the Wedding? Do you think it was not unlucky, that when you had
taken a new House and Shop, and had but just turned the workmen out that had
fitted it, newly swept the Shop to entertain Customers, and before you had any
entered upon that account, to have a Sergeant enter and arrest you, only at the
directions of a Servant without the Masters consent, would not such handsale as
this please you? Was it not think you, unlucky when you went to see a Prisoner,
to be made one your self, because you would not give a roguish Bailiff Money
for nothing? Would it not above all things vex you, and would you not think
your self very unlucky, that going to the Counter to see a Prisoner, at your
coming out you should be arrested in three several Fob-Actions, but however put
to charges, and staid at that very hour when you being a Widower were going to
visit a Widow, who at that instant expected you to appoint the time of Marriage
to be within two days after, would not such a Misfortune as this try all your
patience? would you not think it a pitiful unlucky story to be arrested for
five shillings by your Fellow-Citizen, which is contrary to City-Law, and by
one that was a Member of the same Company with you, and therefore enjoined in
five pound penalty not to arrest each other without leave, would you not think
this hard and unkind dealing, and forced to pay this five shillings, and
charges, though none of your own Debt, and never demanded but in jest, and at
last be made to pay it in earnest? Would not you think you had very hard luck,
if you in trusting others to receive and pay Rent for you, he should be so
negligent a Knave as to omit paying of Ground Rent, anu thereby your Estate be
forfeited, and you forced to pay all Arrears besides.

Thus have I been twice served to the loss of two very considerable Leases?
Would you not think it hard that you should be arrested for Money by a person
that owes you the same Sum, this unlucky Trick I have been often served? Would
you not think him a Cross-grained spiteful Fellow, that should go about
enquiring to whom you owe Money, and set them all on to arrest you, and rather
than fail do it without leave at his own Charges, was not this unlucky? Would
you think any man's Malice should extend so far as to pursue you ten or twelve
Mile into the country (when you might be taken any day in London) and cause
you to be arrested on a Sabbath day as you were going to Church, in some
solemnity of a Wedding, to hurry you away from friends only to disgrace and
vex you and that without all need, for when the Money was in few days after
paid, the Owner of it said, You may keep it longer if you please.

Was not this a mighty untoward and unlucky Action and full of Malice and Envy.

Was it not a most unfortunate and a very unlucky thing, when your nearest and
those that you took to be your dearest Relations and Kinsfolks that they should
cause you to be arrested and laid up there, and kept till you agreed to sell an
Estate you had no mind to part from, but by this means compelled? Would it not
vex you, and you think your self unlucky that having a hundred Pounds or more
due to you from a person that was dead, and you endeavoring to ensure that,
should make your self worse by understanding his Debts, and be arrested in four
Actions in one day on his behalf? Was it not an unlucky disgraceful trick to be
followed near fifty Miles into the Country to a Fair, and there hindered of
your business and disgraced, by being arrested, and forced to pay Money to one
who promised to repay it for you again, but did no such matter, only kept it
and spent it himself, and left you to pay it over again, would it not vex you
to be so cheated? But more especially, would it not vex you having two people
to deal with, the Mother and the Son, that you should pay Money to the Mother
in part, to her content, and she promising to stay a longer time, but the Son
contrary to this promise come and serve Execution on your Goods, and thereby
seize and carry away Goods valued at forty pounds, but really worth a hundred,
when as there was but fifteen due, and all this without any remedy, was not
this an unlucky chance, and a very knavish Trick? Would not it vex you when two
Knaves should cause you to be arrested, sued, and to pay a Debt which they, and
not you did really owe, and that one of these should afterward confess it on
Condition you would remit him his part of it.

And after all this, would you not think your self unlucky if you should employ
Officers to arrest one who really owes you a considerable Debt, and those very
Officers should comply with your Debtor, and when you come to enquire of them
what they have done, they should then arrest you in a Fobb-Action at his Suit,
and give you great charge and trouble: If this very Debtor of yours (should
pretending to bring friends to treat with you) bring in other Officers who
should in all violent and villainous manner drag you away toward a Prison,
only to enforce you to release the other.

All these unlucky persecutions have I run through, and commonly I have been as
unlucky in Suits of Law, both as Plaintiff as Defendant. In one wherein I was
engaged there was two hundred pounds spent ready money on our part, and we with
much difficulty received a hundred pound composition Money. If to have all
these Misfortunes and many more may be accounted unlucky then I am so; by what
I have reckoned up and by all that I can remember, I believe I have been
arrested on idle, foolish, unjust and false Actions twice so often as for a
real Debt, for I took all possible care to pay what I really owed, and that
without trouble, but have been many times hindered by some of these unlucky
Chances, and nothing has troubled me so much as to pay that Money to these
Varlets which would have helped to have paid real Debts: Nay, as I have said
before, I believe that the Money that I have paid on these abominable Accounts,
if now together, would pay all the Debts that I owe in the world, but I hope
now to accomplish that in little time, for I never owed so little for these
fifteen years past as now I do, and that which I owe was never in better
manner, being to few men, for I Will maintain it you were better owe a hundred
Pounds to one man than eighty Pounds to ten men, unless you have ready Money to
pay it, for let your one man be what he will, never so severe, it is much if
one of your ten, if not more of them, be not more severe than he, and then the
Charges and the Disgrace to be arrested for a little Sum, is equal to, if not
above that which is far exceeding in greatness.

I was used formerly to reckon the greatness and goodness of my own Estate to
consist altogether in the great number of Houses that I had, in the quantity of
Goods at home and Debts that were owing to me abroad, this is the ordinary way,
and this was mine, but I reckon my Estate best, because now I oweless than ever.

I had rather have an Estate of two Thousand Pounds and owe but two hundred,
than to have an Estate of four Thousand Pounds supposed, and owe one Thousand
Pound out of it; for the Thousand Pound debts oweing must be sure to be paid
and what is abroad uncertain to be gotten in: Nay, I had rather have noe
Estate than h^^ ^it so, has been my case but now though encombred. This my
Estate be less, yet I reckon it better, and much better would it have been had
I had the lucky days of some men, but my lucky time was but hours, and those
were too often lost, and I by these many Misfortunes so overwhelmed, that the
consideration whereof does at present raise a troubled Sea in my mind, which
does so swell and rage, that it is like to overflow the Banks of my
Intellectuals to consider how many Storms I have been in, and how many times
shipwrack'd! Yet Heaven be praised, I was never forced to lie by it, I never
broke, nor never had the least thoughts of deceiving any man, nor paying a
penny less than twenty shillings in the pound, nor taking Prison nor any other
Protection, no, I hate those Courses, I have still if the Debt were small
borrowed Money, or sold or pawned my Goods, if great, given other Security; I
never denied to do any thing to my power, but my power has been often
strained: It has been these unfortunate Charges and other Losses, that has
dissabled me, not my ill Husbandry* I never spent at home or abroad bey^^^ what
I thought my Estate would reasonably bear, and what I did spend was chiefly at
home in entertaining those whom I thought were my friends but I think I have
not any such in the world for they are all dead, or so to me, ungrateful, will
not own me, nor my Courtesies. To some I have lent in love what now they will
not pay me, to all I acted as a friend in doing friendly Courtesies, and in
stead thereof I receive reproach, disdain, and slights.

Oh methinks! if I had had luck and success with those Estates that I have had
in what a flourishing condition had I been in; I have used my endeavor, I have
been always industrious and laborious to get, no ill Husband in spending, only
my easiness in parting from what I had, and my unwillingness to force others to
pay me what was my due, has made me miserable, I know the truth of this, and
have of late practiced the contrary, I have studied the great Maxim of
Worldlings. My Son, keep thou ready Money in thy Pocket, this is the primum
Mobile of all their Science of thriving, this is the Compass they must steer
by, and without it they cannot sail, this will preserve you in all Tempests,
nay, make a Calm in a Storm, this will keep the Wolf from the door, a little of
this rid me of my two first Catch poles, and now having said enough of them I
will proceed to other matters.

CHAP. XII.
He advises al, persons to keep ready money by them, he is diverted from
traveling by being set up.

I Was this discharged from my first Arrest but you have heard (by what has
been said already) that it was not the last, it had been happy for me if it had
been so, but I was Unlucky and so it happned to me: and and now Reader I think
you will not gainsay what I have said, and that I may very well (or ill rather)
term my self Unluckly, but if what I have told you in gross, will not cause you
to be of that mind I am sure when I come to retayl and to insist on six
perticulers they will, for I was not only so often times Arrested and that much
oftener then I have told you, but upon such sleeveless and idle occasions so
undeserved and unlookt for, for on my part that I believe although the acting
or suffering of my misfortunes has to me bin troublesome and unpleasant, yet it
must needs be of contrary effects to the Reader, and this strange variety must
needs be pleasant and delightful: but if the recital of them will not please
you, I have somewhat else that I think will; I have some other kind of stuff in
my Budget, and it shall not be long now ere you shall see what kind of ware I
have for you: so soon as I am again in a settled place, and there-my mind fixed,
I shall tell you some more Tales, some other adventures that I hope will
delight you. But before I come to that, give me leave a little to say somewhat
to the worldlings Proverb, My Son, keep thou ready money in thy Pocket, this is
good advice, and I believe there are very few but desire to follow it, and
attain to it, all would have money; There are hardly any so ignorant but they
know the all powerful virtues of money; but who is this advice given
particularly to? if to the poor man, he can hardly follow and keep it, because
if he has any it must go, he must part from it to purchase Victuals, clothes,
and all other necessaries for him and his Family; he knows no other use for it,
neither is there any better; and by such time as and he his are fitted with
Clothing, Teething and Tooling, his money is gone, it is well if he can do all
this and pay his Landlord. If this advice be given to men in Debt, then they
must be Knaves if they follow it, for what honest man that owes money, can
endure the frequent Duns of his Creditors; some whereof demand it because they
would have it, and some because they must have it; some for occasion and
convenience, and some for necessity and need; I say who can endure this and
have money in his Pocket, surely no honest man, and if a man would be so much a
knave as to owe money and have wherewith to pay it and do not, then there is
that which will force him, a parcel of these Catchpoles will help to empty his
Pockets; if he be but able, they and the Lawyers together, will make him
willing: Therefore this advice cannot be given, and I am sure followed by the
Poor man, or the man in debt, but if by any, it must be to the Rich-monyed man,
and I say it is not good advice to him neither, for if a Rich man has money by
him and makes no use of it, he is an unprovident person, and an ill husband.
But indeed this advice is given to and may be followed by all sorts of people,
so as it be in a moderate way, the medium is to be chosen. The Rich and monyed
man may disburse and lay out his money, and yet keep some reserve upon all
occasions; and it is observable that he that puts out money to interest, or
trades with his money, shall receive 6 l. or it may be get 10 or 12 l. in the
hundred in a year, but if he keep a hundred pound continually by him, some
opportunity or other in a years time offers that he may get or save by that
hundred pound in a few days, as much or more then any one hundred pounds
brings him in a year; some bargain or other does or will happen, so that it is
very necessary for the Rich man not to put out or trade with all, but according
to the Proverb, To keep ready money in his pocket. And as for the man in debt,
he will find this advice and counsel necessary for him, and he must follow it,
or else it will be the worse for him; if he can but keep his small numerous
Creditors under, his great ones will be contented with interest-money, and he
were better to pay interest^money, and that larger than ordinary, and keep a
sum of money by him, then be quite bare and without; for besides the ordinary
expenses of his house, and other necessaryes, sometimes an unexpected Action
comes against him, if it be a small one, it is well if he has money by him to
pay it; if a great one, he must have money by him to defend himself at Law,
till he can raise it, but if ^e has no ready money by him, sorrow will be his
sops; The Catchpols will, if not well greased, be sure to lay him fast enough;
and all this might have been avoided, had there been ready money in the case.
And the truth is, this has been my very Case too often, I have paid so long
that I could pay no longer, but left my self bare and miserable, and all out of
this honest principle, of paying to all that came, so long as it lasted, and
when it has been gone, in hopes of more, and to satisfy the desires of others,
I have still promised more; but I being disappointed, have been necessitated to
disappoint others, and so perhaps I have got that Character I never deserved,
of being a Knave; But I resolve to be wiser for the future, being
experimentally acquainted with the virtues of ready money, and knowing that it
is of absolute use, not only to prevent the many Evils of this world, nay the
worst of Evils the Catchpoles, but the Devil himself; for according to the
Proverb, Ready money will make the po^ boil though the Devil piss out the fire:
And now I will have done with all these general actions, and proceed in the
thread of my Story.

I was free from any Officers, and therefore being at Liberty, went to see that
friend the Scrivener that I had sent for; I found him at home, and he thought
to find me in the Compter; for as he told me, my Father being at his shop just
as I sent the Messenger, he heard the message, but would not himself come to
me, nor permit him that I sent for, supposing the Action for which I was
Arrested to be considerable, he did believe and resolve I must be carried to
the Compter, whither he was willing I should go, that I might be humbled, or at
the best that I being a stayed man, he might know where to find me. This was his
thoughts as I was informed by my Kinsman, who seeing me enter his Shop, cried
out, Cousin, did not you send a Messenger to me but now, yes marry did I, said
I, and why came you not to me, because replied he, your Father was here then,
and would not permit me, he stayed till just now you came, and I was intended to
come to you; but where did you think to find me? truly said he by the Message
that was brought, I thought that by this time you were in the Compter; no such
matter replied I, but I believe I might have gone thither and stayed there for
any thing of your assistance; truly replied he, your Father would not let me
come, and so he told me the rest; and withal he added, that my Father was very
much incensed against me, and was resolved neither to meddle nor make with me.
Best of all said I, I shall shift well enough for my self; but what do you
intend to do said he? I intend to have no more Masters of his choosing, but
resolve to Travel and seek my Fortunes. My Cousin and I had much other
discourse, but to this or the like purpose, and so I returned to my Inn. I was
now disappointed of my Companions who absolutely denied to go along with me,
but however I still kept in the same mind of Traveling. I was visited by two
or three young fellows that were sons to a Widow, whom a Kinsman of mine had
Married; they seeing my money run away so fast in the Inn, persuaded me to leave
that place and go to their house; they did not use many words to induce me to
do that which I knew would be to my advantage, and therefore they carrying away
my movables (which chiefly consisted in Books) I soon followed them, leaving
what score I owed there to be paid by my two intended fellow-Travellers, by
whose appointment I had come thither. I went to my Cosins and lay there a day
or two in private, being welcomed by the Youths his Sons in Law, but being
discovered by him and his wife they both also welcomed me; They asked me what I
intended, I still answered to Travel, though I did not know when, or whither,
but I yet continued in my old tale, and he having been a Wanderer himself,
encouraged me in it, instructing me how to behave my self; my Father
understanding where I was, and seeing that I came not to him, out of his
Paternal love came thither to me, he first conferred with my Cousin, who told
him my intent; and afterward (...) ^ursing with me I told him the same, and
that I was resolved to have no more Masters, not in England to be sure, but to
Travel; I was asked when I would go, and whither, and what I would do when I
came into a strange Country; I was not resolved yet of these questions my
self, and therefore could not satisfy their demands, but that in general terms
I would Travel. My Father understanding my resolution left me, and I further
conferred with my Cousin about my intended Travels; he, to encourage me, told
me, that he thought he could persuade my Father to furnish me with a matter of
Ten pounds; this proposition pleased me, and I thought this would be Good fish
if it were caught: According to his promise my Cousin did speak to my Father,
and persuaded him so effectually, that he promised to deposite Ten pounds,
provided he might be sure I would go: my Cousin who was as Fickle as my Worship,
and had more conceits in his head then I, was now against giving me any money
so long as I was in England, but if I would go for France I should have 10 l.
paid me at my Arrival there; I believe my good Mother in Law had infected him,
to persuade me to be gone; I told him that this was a trick, that the money
would never come to my hands, and that I should be cheated of it; I labored
all I could to be Master of the Money, and my Cousin to keep me from it: My
design was but honest, for I intended only to be Master of it, and therewith to
take me some small convenient shop, where to set up for my self; I fancied if I
could do so, I would not Travel, and that I being free from all Commands of a
Master, should live like a Prince; and although I did not sufficiently enough
understand my Trade, yet I questioned not but I could keep a Shop for my self,
as I had done for my Master, from whom I had received very little directions;
and then, if I had no other business I might set my self to work in
Translating. Oh the thoughts of this happy life did so please me that I could
not forbear but told my Cousin thereof, he did not like it so well as
Traveling, raising many objections, but I answered them all so thoroughly that
my design seemed feasible. My Father was told of my purpose, and with some
persuasions was wrought to approve of it; then must a place be thought of, it
must not be in London, I was like young Students in Divinity, not to enter a
City Pulpit, but some adjacent small Village, so I was not to be seen in
London, but somewhere in the Suburbs, and at last the Tower Liberty was the
place pitched on, and there was a Shop found for me, I was very glad of the
news, and proud of my little Shop, for a great one it could not be of 40 s. a
year Rent. It was situate at an Alehouse door, and had served for a Drinking
room, and had a door into the house; but my Father, that I might not be too
near the Alehouse, and mistake my door and go in thither, caused the old door
to be fastened up, and a new one made another way, as far from the entrance into
the Alehouse as might be; he ordered all things as he pleased, as it was fit he
should, because he paid for all; but I gave order for putting up Shelves for my
Books, and a Table being made, the Window glazed, and a Settle-bed and small
Featherbed and appurtenances put unto it, and a Desk bought and sent in, I
entered the Shop. My Father told me that I should not enter without some money
to keep me till Tradeing came, and therefore he gave me the mighty sum of Ten
Shillings; for this was I thankful, and as well pleased as if I had been Dubbed
a Knight. Never till then did I think my self happy, and then I believed I was
so; I was free from all Commands, I could go to bed when I would, and rise when
I would, I could Eat and Drink when I pleased, Write and Read, walk abroad, or
stay at home when I had a mind to it: So great a content and satisfaction is
there in being at ones own dispose, and truly I think my condition was better
then, then since, because I was without any Control; and above all, I lived
out of Debt and danger. If I had considerable business, I could eat Roast meat,
if not, Bread and Cheese served the turn, which to a contented mind was
delicate Fare. I had read in my Romances of the Pleasant lives of Hermits, how
they lived without all trouble or care, and so did, I and was as well pleased
as might be, I had the sole Rule and Command of my Shop and Books, and tha^ I
^hought was equal to the G^^^r^^ent of any Enchanted Island. In (...), I was
never on the top of Fortunes Wheel ^ill then, and then I though^ I was, and
that I might directly and truly say R^g^^, I Command and Govern; and then i^
ever, for never till then had I my Lucky days, which were then all so, and I
made choice of them, I did what I listed, and in saying that, I say all; for
that is the All that all men, nay the greatest Princes aim at.

And now, Reader, I was so well settled and pleased in my mind, it will be
convenient for me to keep my word with thee, and to write somewhat that may
please thee, for it is my utmost aim; placere and docere, to please and
instruct. I hope I shall have my ends in both, and then I am sure I shall be as
well pleased as any of you. And that I may not go far from my shop, for in
doing so I should play the Ill Husband, I shall lay my Scene near to it, the
Tower; a place famous enough for the last Acts of many great and illustrious
Prisoners; but I shall not relate any thing to you that is Tragical, there has
been too much of that arrived to your knowledge already: if I know any thing of
good I shall acquaint you with it, but little good could be done in that place
at such a time as I Lived there, being in the Meridian of Rebellion, about the
middle of the Government of Tyrant Oliver, when that Arch Rebel ruled the
Roast; therefore you cannot expect any pleasant Adventures in that place, at
that time, unless you take delight to hear of the imprisonments and death of
several of His Majesty's best and Loyalest Subjects. But I hope my Readers are
of another ^ind, and not of that persuasion. And since I have promised to tell
you of all ^he good I knew there, I shall acquaint you with the story of one
good Man (if Man may be called so) who was a Prisoner, and in whose Release I
was very instrumental, which was in short, thus.

That Kinsman of mine, whose House I had lain in, came in Company of a Friend
of his, and acquaintance of mine one day to visit me, they had a desire to go
into the Tower, and I living so near it went with them thither: We went to the
common Drinking-House there, and soon found whom they came to seek; one of the
Warders that was Under-Jaylor Him I knew, being his near Neighbor: Their
business was to know of him, how one did that was a Prisoner; truly, said he,
he is much after the old sort, for he is still in the old place j^ they durst
not ask much more because he was a close Prisoner, and they might have thereby
been suspected: but the Jailer being gone, I was inquisitive to know the
business, and who the Prisoner was. It was not thought convenient to talk much
in that place, therefore we went out of the Tower to another House, and there I
was resolved the question I had asked; I was told the Person they enquired of
was a Prisoner, and that he had been so for some time past, that he was a
Doctor in Divinity, and Brother to my Cosins Friend; That he had been Committed
for promoting the cause of his Sovereign, and had continued close Prisoner,
that it was to be admired that he was not dead, because when he went in he was
sick, and in so deep a Consumption, that he had carried his Coffin in with him.
I was sorry for his sad case, and promised my assistance with my acquaintance,
the Jailer. Neither was I unmindful of my promise, for I soon after meeting
him, and asking him questions about him, he told me, that he was indeed close
Prisoner, but he knew not why, because there was none that did at present
prosecute him, none looked after him, neither Enemies nor Friends. Nay, said I,
I am glad he has so few Enemies, but Friends I know he has, and those that
would, if they, durst assist him; for, said I, one of those, that was with me
there was his Brother, and my Acquaintance; he hearing that, told me, that for
my sake he would do somewhat that should deserve thanks, and so ^e did; for he
by his Place having so much rule over the Prisoners as to take his ^hoice of
whom he would, he presently ^emoved him from his close imprisonment and took
him home to his House, where were only Persons of Honor. This was a great
favor, and for such a one it was acknowledged; and soon after this Reverend
Person wrought the same effect upon this Jailer and his Wife as the Apostle
Paul and Silas did upon their Jailer, in Converting him, and his Wife being
brought to Bed, and the Doctor Christning the Child, some Persons of Honor
were the Godfathers. This was a little too public, for it was reported that
he was a Papist, and had Baptized the Child after that manner, when as it was
only after the Form used by the Church of England. The Jailer made his excuses
to the Lieutenant, whose Favorite he was; and as for the talks of any others
he valued them not, and the Doctor now having the Liberty of the Tower, and
being visited by Friends, it was not long e're he, by their assistance, gained
his Freedom, and Lived till the return of His Sacred Majesty, when as a Reward
for his Sufferings and Loyalty he had very eminent preferment in the Church of
England: But as he had been slandred with the Character of a Papist, Chap: 13

so I knew some that would say he was a Glutton and great Wine-bibber, when as
I know he drank no Wine nor strong drink from the time of his entering into the
Tower to his dying day, his only beverage being fair water, or at most water
boiled with a crust of bread in it; but they that have malice against a person
or function will pretend something wherewith to defame them.

CHAP. XIII.
The Author Relates a Story of a Clyster and Collier, a Notable Revenge.

THis I could not handsomely omit; but now I shall Relate another Story that is
nothing near so serious, and therefore I hope I shall make you amends for my
lat^ tediousness; you shall have no Tragedy in it though there was much fear of
it, but if you be as loose behind as one of our Actors, and be in good humor,
have a care of your Twa^ling strings, and all your Posteriors, for they will be
in danger.

The Story that I shall relate to you, was principally Acted in the Tower, and
the principal Actors were three; and because I do not think it convenient to
give you their true names (and it may be cannot if I would) I shall therefore
Fancy other names for them, by which at this time they shall pass. Two of these
persons being Gentlemen, were part of the Retinue belonging to a Person of
Honor, they were very good friends and lived together in one House, adjoining
to that of the Nobleman whom they Attended; the one I shall name Climanthus; he
was a cunning Gamster, and so Witty, and merrily disposed, and given to
joaking, that he had rather lose the best Friend he had, then one Jest o^
Conceit; although he were very wel^ stored with them. The other Gentleman I
shall call Leander; a right Gentleman, and a Man of Courage; these tw^ had each
of them a Chamber in one an^ the same House; Leanders Chamber wa^ up one pair
of stairs, and Climanthus'^ two. Climanthus was accustomed once a Week to take
a Clyster, and commonly the Apothecaryes boys who came to bring it to him, not
being told which was his Chamber, mistook that of Leander for his, because they
first came to it; which did so anger him, that he was outrageous against them,
acquainting all Companies, where he came, of this Extravagant humor of his
Camrade, who took so much pleasure in taking Physic at the wrong end.
Climanthus was very much displeased with the Railery of his Camrade, and
knowing that he abhorred Clysters; having heard him often say that he would dye
rather then take one, was resolved to be Revenged on him, and make him take one
by force; and so to that end, he went to an Apothecary of his Acquaintance, to
whom he said, that there was a Gentleman of his Acquaintance that was troubled
with so violent a Distemper, that all Physicians despairing of his Health, had
given him over, all agreeing in this one Opinion, that he could not live above
three Months longer. But having met with an excellent Operator, he had
warranted his life, so as he would resolve to take a Clyster, without which all
other Medicines would be ineffectual, but that he had so strange an aversion
for it, that although his Kindred and Friends had incessantly layn at him with
importunities, yet it had been to no purpose, because he told them he had
rather dye a Thousand times: they knowing (continued he) that I had a very
great interest and influence upon him, desired me to persuade him; but although
I have done so, yet all that I could say has been to no purpose. I came just
now from the Operator, who being much concerned that so brave a Gentleman
should be lost by his own obstinateness, he a^ length told me that if I could
but once get a Clyster into his body, although i^ were by force, and though he
should no^ keep it there at all, yet it would be a^ sufficient Preparative for
those Medicaments that he should after use, in his Cure; hereupon I have
conferred with his Relations, and they have all entreated me that I would find
out an Apothecary that would undertake the business, they have given me five
Pieces which I here give to you, besides the Obligation, not only I, but a
great many of his Friends and Relations shall always have for you, who will be
all ready to serve you upon all Accounts.

The Glittering of the Money was so ^owerful that there needed no other
Arguments to persuade the Apothecary to ^ndertake the business; who having
^nown the Name, and place of abode ^f his new Patient, resolved that against
^he next Morning he would provide a Clyster, and that either by Fair means or
^oul he should take it. He was told that ^one lived with him but a Lacquey, who
every Morning went out and returned before his Master did arise: This
Apothecary prepared his Clyster and taking ^ix good Fellows with him, to assist
him upon occasion, they waited in the Street ^ill they saw the Boy go forth,
and then ^hey went up Stairs, the Apothecary ^eaving them upon the Stairs to
attend ^is Motion, and so enter when he should ^ive them the Signal; he himself
knocked ^t the Door: Leander who was alone in ^is Bed, cried out, who is there?
a ^^iend said the Apothecary, he hearing that, rising in his shirt and opening
the door went to bed again. He being entered, Leander asked him his business, I
am, said he, the Apothecary that have brought your Clyster, The Devil cork it
said Leander, it is not here; go up higher, excuse me Sir said he, I know that
it is here, your name is Leander, and thereupon taking the Clyster from under
his Cloak he put the pipe to it, The Devil take it said Leander, I tell you
once again that it is above, therefore be gone, Pardone me Sir, said the
Apothecary; I know the aversion that you have against Clysters, and much wonder
that you should suffer your self to perish, rather then make use of so gentle a
Remedy; I have Administered it to a child of two years old, and to a woman ready
to lie in: My Ingredients are all so good and so pleasant, that you may eat it
with a Spoon.

The poor Leander was quite out of patience at this Discourse, he called him a
thousand names, and threatened to throw him out at the Window: the Apothecary,
who was provided for this language took all in good part, and seeing he could
not by fair means accomplish his ends, he was resolved to use compul^ion; and
having given the watchword ^o his Attendants that waited on the Stairs, they
entered the Chamber: The Apothecary thus accompanied approached the Bed saying,
these speeches shall avail you little, for sure it is for your good, and if you
will not take it by entreaty, I shall force you to it; at the signal given to
his people, they all seized on the Gentleman, each took hold of a Limb of him;
but it was well for them he was in bed, otherwise they should not with such
ease have overruled him; but now he could make but little defense with his
Hands; but his tongue walked, he stormed, raged and threatened, but all to no
purpose; for in despite of him, they put him into the posture the Apothecary
required, who being ready with his Tools, did what he came for, and forced
every drop of it into his body, and being cautious lest his Patient out of
Revenge should let fly in his Face, he provided against it; and the door being
opened, he and his Assistants having done their business vanished in an
instant, shutting the door after them, and leaving the Patient to consider of
what had been done, the most out of Countenance and ashamed of any man
breathing.

He considering of many things, at last doubted that Climanthus was the Author
of this design, wherefore changing his shirt, that and his other Linen being
in a pitiful pickle, he dressed himself, and went up to Climanthus's Chamber;
but so enraged that he could hardly speak: Climanthus, who had heard all
passages, and who indeed had no more harm in him then a Devil of two year old,
made as if he were asleep, and arising as if newly awaked, let him in, asking
what was the matter. Leander was so out of temper, that he could say nothing,
bu^ with his Teeth and hands appeared in a threatening posture, the other
pretending not to understand him; whereupon he told him the story, adding, that
who ever had caused this affront, was no better than a Sott. Climanthus seemed
to be amazed, telling him that he did him much wrong if he suspected him to
have any hand in it, protesting his ignorance, offering him his assistance in
any Revenge upon those that had done it if he could discover them, and that he
himself would endeavor the Discovery and Revenge. Whereupon he left
Climanthus, who rising and being dressed, went into the presence of that Person
of Honor, whom they attended, and there he being of this Humor, that he had
rather have the Anger and hatred of all the world, then lose the Honor of
boasting himself to be the Author of so honorable an Action, bragged of it to
all the Family, obligeing them to make it a public discourse; and by this
means Leander was well enough ascertained of the Author of this Affront, and
was resolved to Revenge it, at the peril of his life or any rate whatsoever.

And thereupon he went to a Gentleman of his acquaintance, whom I shall call
Lotarius, and who was a great Favorite of the then Lieutenant of the Tower, he
acquainted this Gentleman with the Affront, which he was resolved to Revenge,
and therefore he desired him on his behalf to acquaint Climanthus that he
desired to see him with his Sword in his hand, and withal, that he would be his
Second; Latarius was no Novice in these affairs, but considering soberly of the
cause, and not being to be drawn by every Youthful Flash to an inconsiderate
Action, although he was a brave and Valiant man, and had upon several signal
occasions, given sufficient proofs of his Valor; he therefore diverted him from
these resolves, saying, That the Cause was so Ridiculous, that there would be
no Honor gained by a Combat occasioned upon so Idle, Slender, and mean
account. How then Replied Leander, must I endure so base an Affront, without
Revenge, and suffer my self to be pointed at as I walk the Streets, and be thus
outbraved. No said Lotarius, I would have you Revenged, but in its kind, we
should make use of Strength against strength, and wit against wit, leave this
affair to my management, and if I do not sufficiently Revenge you, complain on
me, Leander being satisfied, left him and his honor in his hands.

I have already told you that Lotarius was in Favor with, and did belong to
the Liuetenant of the Tower, who had so great a power in those times, that if
any spoke against him or his Master Oliver, he took course to chastise them,
without any cause of Justice. Lotarius was upon this account very well
acquainted with all the Warders, Soldiers, and Goalor of the Tower, and
therefore he was resolved to use his Interest with them to Revenge the Affront
done to Leander; he therefore spoke to a Corporal, who Commanded a Fyle of
Musqueteirs to seize on Climanthus when ever they met with him; and also he
told the Goalor that a Prisoner would be brought him, that should be kept very
close, and none permitted to see or speak with him, but by his order. The
Corporal having sure notice to find Climanthus, it was not long ere he seized
him: it was no hard matter for him to do so, because he suspected nothing; but
being taken, he demanded the cause of his Imprisonment; he was answered that he
should know that time enough, when he came to his Trial. He being thus caught,
was forced to go with them to the Tower, where the Goalor being in expectation
of him, readily received him, and put him into the place where he had designed.
Poor Climanthus knew not who to apply himself unto; he ruminated on many
things, but could not suspect for what cause he had been Apprehended: after he
had been there about an hour, Lotarius who was well acquainted with Climanthus,
being as he pretended his particular friend, came to to visit him in Prison. At
the first sight he appeared mighty sad and astonished, saying, Dear Friend, what
is the meaning of this, I just now understood that you were a Prisoner, and
therefore all business being laid aside, I came to know the cause, and to make
a tender to you of my utmost service; Oh Friend, said Climanthus, I protest I
know not for what cause I am Apprehended. If it be a Money business said
Lotarius, command all that I have, and if the sum be great, I have
considerable Friends that shall furnish me. No, no, replied the other,
certainly it is not for that, I owe none, but a little to my Landlord, and I
know he would lend me upon occasion all that he has; have you beaten any body
said Lotarius, no said he but somewhat is the matter; you are said Lotarius,
very Prodigal in your Discourse, and do not (when you are entered) care what you
say; have you not in your usual Railleries been accustomed to say somewhat
against the Protector, the present Government, or against the Lieutenant, here
I know you are a little too Lavish upon that account, and you know that in this
Age, the very thoughts against the Government are criminal, and a word against
the Protector (being Treason) is present death. At this word he was as pale as
Ashes, for being a Cavalier, and that a bold one, he had not spared to speak
what he thought against the Government: and after a little pause beleiving
himself Guilty, he putting his hand to his Mouth, and lifting up his Eyes,
cried out I am undone, this must be the cause. If it be so, said Lotarius, all
that I can do is but to pity you, because you know that you are in hands of
those that will show none, especially upon such an Offense as yours is. I
therefore will leave you at present, and see if I can serve you better abroad
then here; I will therefore go and inform my self, and return to acquaint you
of my knowledge, and then you may consider, wherein I can serve you.

Hereupon our Prisoner was left alone, who did now certainly believe that the
Protector or Leiuetenant had caused him to be Apprehended, and that he should
be in very great danger of his life; Lotarius being resolved to be fully
Revenged on him for the Abuse he had done his Friend, found out a Parson who
had been used in such Cases to Administer Spiritual comfort to Condemned
persons, and prepare them for Death: He tells this Parson that there was a poor
Gentleman of his intimate Acquaintance, without any Formality of Justice, was
Condemed to have his Head Cut off, and that he was to be Executed that Evening;
his Crime being only for speaking against those persons that had the Reins of
Government in their Power; that the poor Gentleman himself did not know of his
Sentence, and very few others; that he would be very much surprised at the News
of it; and therefore he desired him to Visit him, and prepare him in the best
manner he could to receive his Death.

This Doctor being used to these affairs, being told his Name and the place
where he was Prisoner, promised to go to him presently: But Lotarius went
before him, and entering the Prison seemed by his Countenance to be very much
troubled; Oh dear Friend, said he, I judged right enough, for I understand that
it is Oliver himself that is your Enemy, it is he that you have been too free
with, and thereby angered him so highly, that there is no Pacification: what am
I Accused of said Climanthus? I know not in Particular, said Lotarius; but I
could a hundred times easier have brought you off if you had killed twenty men,
then for this Crime against this All-powerful Person; and you know in this
case, I dare not speak on your behalf; What then said the other, in a desperate
tone, Must I dye then, at this word the Doctor entered and, hearing what he had
said, replied, and why not my good Friend; consider that our good Lord himself
was much more innocent, and he suffered Death. This discourse was very terrible
to our poor Prisoner, which Lotarius seeing, said, I pray comfort him whilst I
walk out and acquaint my self further with his Affairs.

He being now alone with the Doctor, who was deceased by Lotarius as I have
told you, he said to him, my Friend, it is no time now to trifle and dream of
the affairs of this World, you must prepare your self for Death, you have not
above two or three hours to live, you are condemned. At these words, the poor
Climantus was so surprised that he could not open his mouth, but being come to
himself, he cried out aloud, and by these passionate sallies, he made it
evident that he was not in his right senses; The Doctor seeing that, and being
expert in these affairs, endeavored by little and little to bring him to his
Wits, telling him that this life and all the enjoyments of it, were nothing in
comparison of Eternity; and such kind of Divinity he urged to him as is usual
in such cases, and wherewith I not being of that function, am not so well
acquainted; but let this suffice to tell you, that with much pains he somewhat
pacified him and brought him into a condition and temper more fit to be wrought
upon: At his second visit which he promised him should be within an hour,
advising him in the mean time to examine his Conscience; and thus he left our
poor Prisoner more than half dead, so that the Executioner should have the less
to do to finish his business. Lotarius having thus put the poor Climanthus into
these mortal apprehensions, did not think that his Revenge had as yet gone far
enough, but was resolved to proceed further in it, but so, as that Evening
should put a period to it; where again entering the Prison, and fetching a deep
sigh, he said; Ah dear Friend, I am come to tell you the sad news of your
Condemnation: I know it too well already, replied the Prisoner, and that I must
take my last leave of you and all my Friends; but let us consider a little,
replied Lotarius, for I have been thinking of a way to save your Life; at this
word the Prisoner opened his Eyes and Ears with much earnestness, listening to
his desired proposition; whereupon the other began. You are here a Prisoner for
Crimes against the State, very few know of your Sentence, the Goal of himself
is ignorant of it; now mind what I say, continued he; yes, replied the poor
trembling Prisoner. You know, continued Lotarius, that Prisoners of State do
not use to continue here for a short time; do you give out, that you believe
your Imprisonment will be long, and say, that you will make provision of Wood
and Char-coal against the Winter; do you but say so, and give me liberty to
publish it. But to what purpose, said the Prisoner? Why, I will go, said
Lotarius, and cause a Collier to come hither with Char-coal, who shall bring it
into your Chamber, and I will engage him, for a sum of money that I will give
him, to resolve when he is here to put on your Clothes, and you shall take his,
and your face being colored with the Char-coal you may have free passage; for
taking you at your return to be the Collier you may pass without any suspicion,
and this I suppose may be done without much difficulty: The Collier being
willing enough to expose himself to the hazard of the matter for so
considerable again; the poor Climanthus thought he was at Liberty already, as
we usually imagine all those things to be easy which we passionately desire;
and therefore he earnestly entreated and conjured Lotarius that he would
promise the Collier all that he had, and that he would also be beholding to him
for his Life. Lotarius went now to seek a Collier, and made choice of one that
was young without a beard, and had short hair, and having a sack of Coals on
his back, hired him to go with him to the Tower, where he being, as I told you,
very well acquainted with the Goalor, he recounted the whole story to him, and
that his whole intention was to put our Prisoner into a great fear, praying him
to assist him in the design, and to let him come out in the Colliers Clothes
without taking any notice of it. The Goalor, who would deny him nothing,
knowing he was seized on by his order, agreed to what he requested, he
therefore went up with the Collier into the Chamber, and there caused them with
all expedition to exchange Clothes. But Climanthus had a great beard, a large
Perriwig, and some Locks of his own, and all these he must part from, or else
he could not be like the Collier, and so might be in danger to be discovered.
These objections the Prisoner soon cleared by consenting to part from all, and
to do or suffer any thing else that was thought convenient; so they played the
Barber themselves, and not only so, but they discolored his face with
Charcoal; and now he was so like the Collier in every point, that there was no
doubt but he might pass all the Guards without the least suspicion. He being
thus fitted, marched on; he passed the first and second Guards without
examination, but at the third, the Goalor being minded to further the design of
his Friend, and double the fear of the Prisoner, stopped him, saying, but let us
look, is not this one of our Prisoners? Judge whether the poor Prisoners heart
did not ache for fear of discovery; but he was in a little better taking when
another replied, no, no, this is the very Collier that passed by us not long
since; let him go then, said the Goalor, and so he did with all convenient
speed; but having resolved to make toward his Lords House and secure himself
there, and it being at a considerable distance, he was doubtful if he went so
far on foot he should run very great hazard of being discovered; wherefore he
thought best to take a Boat, and therefore hied him to the stairs, but there he
was put into mortal apprehensions of danger; for a parcel of Gentlemen that
were there on purpose, said to one another, look you, that Collier is very like
Climanthus. This gave him great fear, and with much trembling he entered the
Boat, and the Gentlemen still continuing their Discourse, and pointing to him,
he doubting they might betray him, cried to them, For the Lords sake hold your
Tongues. The Boat putting off, in short time he was arrived at the watering
place belonging to his Lords House, where he Landed, and walking toward the
House, he there saw the Noblemen and several of his Friends and Attendants; who
being acquainted with the design, waited there in expectation of his coming:
Consider him then in a Colliers Habit, his face all black, his Muschatoes cut
off; and thus shamefully disguised approaching the presence of his Lord;
Climanthus seeing him, cried out, Save my Life my Lord. The Lord seeming not to
understand him forbid him entrance into his House, saying, Whither goes this
Rascal? Ah my Lord, said he, I am Climanthus, save my life I beseech you; At
this the Lord seemed astonished and surprised, but calling him to mind, asked
him the reason of his disguise, which he told him in great fear and trouble;
whilst the Auditors, who were acquainted with the story, took as much pleasure,
and dyed almost with laughter. But the end of the Adventure was this, that his
fear put him into a Fever, which kept him three months in his bed and Chamber,
out of which he durst not go till his Beard and Hair were grown again. At
length he knew the whole story, whereupon he talked of being revenged on
Leander and Lotarius; but his Friends told him there was no reason for it,
because he gave the first offense, and that he could not be justly offended if
they had outwitted him in their Revenge. In fine, the Friends of all sides
made peace, and reconciled them together; and I think that this conceit
exceeded that of the Clyster, and that Leander was doubly Revenged. If the Law
of Retaliation had been studied, Climanthus had hard measure, because he was
put in great fear of his life, when as all that was intended against the other
was but the fowling of his linen. If the Law of Retaliation was considered, it
may be it was in this point, that as the one would be necessitated to foul his
linen by the effects of the Clyster, so the other would be in the same case,
or as bad, by the effects of his fear. Whether his fear produced such effects,
I know not; but I think it was very considerable, and raised to the greatest
and highest pitch: for a man to be clapped into Prison, and detained there
without the liberty of being visited by Friends, would certainly produce much
fear and trouble, but to be told that his very life was in hazard, would much
raise it, and to be ascertained of it by Friends, and the visit of a spiritual
person, who is usually the last acquaintance a man has in this World, was so
absolute an ascertaining of the truth, that nothing could be more: it was
enough to depress and tame the most Jocose and bravest spirit in the World:
what would he not give, what would he not do or suffer to be delivered from
this fear? You may judge that as well and strangely disguised as our Prisoner
was, he wa still in great fear he could not all the time he was in the Colliers
habit, be in any rest or quiet; that which he reckoned was the cause of his
escape his, disguise, must needs give him very sad apprehentions of the danger
he was in. In fine, you may by this Story find that the bravest Spirits may be
daunted. A man that when he was in a Tavern or in his high Cups amongst his
friends despised all the world, feared nothing and contemned death at such a
rate as if he had bin a child; now when this passion of fear seizes him, might
have bin beaten by a little child; so great is the effects of fear; but when he
came to be acquainted with the management of the affairs, and how all this had
been contrived against him, you may judge that his passion of fear was changed
into that of shame, and that bred another passion of Revenge, but that was
moderated by the advice of Friends.

Chap: 14



Chap: 14



CHAP. XIIII.
The Author relates a Comical Story of a Purse of Money found in a Church; and
a Tragical story of an Archbishop and Shoemaker.

ANd now sure I have finished this Story, wherein I have had some
considerations and Reflections upon the word Retalliation, and having heard of
such a Law, it put's me in mind of a Story and that a Comical one, wherein the
Law of Retalliation was very pleasantly put in practice; the story is in short
thus; An honest Good Fellow that had spent all his Money, knew not where to get
more, nor how to bestow his time for want of that necessary Companion; for want
of which all his companions had left him, he takes the honest and Pious resolve
of going to Church, being there and kneeling at his Devotions when he had
finished them, and went to arise, he saw on one side of him a Purse, which
seizing on, by the bulk and weight, he guessed there was Money in it; he soon
opening it, and finding it to be so in earnest, you may judge he was not
displeased but joyful of his good fortune, and that he should have so
considerable a reward for his Devotion; he clapping the Purse into his Pocket,
went to find some of his Acquaintance that were in the Church, he waiting at
the door, took them up as they went out, and being overjoyed at his good luck,
he told them that he had met with a Prise, and that such a one as would make
him and them merry, and therefore if they would go with him to the Cooks, they
should be his Guests; and that he would feast them at his own Charges; this was
heard by the Sexton of the Church, but he understood not what was meant by, it.
Our Goodfellows Companions were not at all displeased with the proposition, but
went together to a house not far from that place; there they ea^, drank and
were merry, and there I will leave them at present, to tell you that this Purse
was not directly dropped from Heaven, nor laid in that place on purpose for our
Goodfellow: No, it had an Owner, who was in as great trouble for the loss of
it, as the other was joyful; for the Owner having been at Church, and that at
his Devotions in the next adjoining place to our Goodfellow, had by some
accident dropped his Purse, and going out of the Church in the crowd of People,
was ignorant of his loss, but when he came to walk alone, he was sensible that
his Pocket was lighter then it had been, and putting his hand into it, missed
his purse and money. He searched and groped both his pockets and Breeches, but
he made no discovery, and so seized he was, that he knew not what to think, nor
to imagine where or how he had lost it; He remembered he had it when he went to
Church, and therefore concluded that he must lose it there or in his return,
and that his pocket had been picked, or else, that it had dropped out. He feared
the first, and then he knew there was no remedy, no recovery; but however
having a mind that it should be so, he hoped that it had dropped out of his
pocket at Church, and that there he should find it; whereupon he hastened
thither, and finding the Sexton, tells him of his loss, who assists him in
searching for it, but in vain, at length the Sexton remembered that he heard our
Goodfellow invite his Friends to a Collation, and that he did believe he had
found it, he acquaint's the Owner of the Purse of his knowledge, who concludes
that it must be, that certainly that man had taken it up: he being told of the
house he was gone to, was resolved to go to him, but believing or doubting
there might be occasion for an Officer, he found one out and carried him with
him; being thus accompanied, he entered the house, and enquiring for such
Guests, was soon told where they were, he went to them, and thus told them his
business, that he had that day lost a Purse of money in the Church, that he
understood one of that Company had taken it, and therefore he demanded
restoration. Our Goodfellow that had found it was very blanck, but withal being
very honest, and knowing it would be a folly to be otherwise, for he had it
about him, and had discoursed too largely in the house, of his Purchase to be
concealed: he therefore ownes the finding of the Purse and Money, but withal
desires to know the Marks of the Purse and quantity of the Money; he is
particularly told the marks of the purse, and that there was in it 5 l. just;
he therefore takes out the purse, pours out the Money and tells it over, and
finding there was 4 l. 15 s. in it, he says truly Master it is very right, here
is 4 l. 15 s. and 5 s. which I have spent of it, makes it very right to a
Farthing, and therefore you may have it? Nay but said the Owner, what must I
have? all that I have said our good fellow, you can have no more, for 5 s. is
spent. I care not for that said the Owner, 5 l. there was, and 5 l. I will
have; but you cannot said one, you can have no more of a Cat then her skin, nor
no more Money of me then I have left? but I will said the other; and thereupon
he commands the Officer to lay hold on the Good Fellow, which he hearing first
lays hold of the Money and puts it into his pocket, and seeing that he must be
troubled for the money, he intended that it should not be for so small a parcel
as 5 s. but for it all; and being resolved to escape if he could; he gives them
the slip and away he runs out of the doors; he was pursued by the Officer an^
the Owner, which he seeing, makes the more have, and being hindered in his way
by an Ass that stood a cross, he took hold of the Asses tail to turn him out of
the way, the Ass was so stubborn, he pul^ so hard, that he pulled off the Asse^
Tail, and so passed on: he seeing himself still pursued, ran with suc^
earnestness, that he threw down a woman that was big with Child, and running
ove^ her, the woman was in so bad case tha^ she miscarried of her Child: and
being thus Unfortunate, he still running on, happened to run upon a Ladder
whereon was a workman mending a house, he thrust the Ladder with so great
force, that down came the workman, and fell directly upon the Officer that
pursued him, and with the weight of the workman^ body, the Officers Arm was
broken; and there was so great a hurly burly, such a noise and crowd, that he
was stopped, neither had he any great mind to proceed, lest he should Unluckily
do more Mischief: he therefore suffers himself to be seized on, and now hearing
four People that he had injured, they all complained of him, and so great was
their ^oice and confusion that they understood not one another, neither would
they agree upon any thing, but to force our Offender to go before a Justice: he
and they being come thither, they all made their several Complaints; one
demands a Purse with 5 l. in it, which he had lost, and the Delinquent had
found at Church; to this he answered that he might have had it, but would not
because 5 s. of it was wanting, he having spent it amongst his Friends, and
that the Owner should have come sooner if he intended to have had it all; the
Owner of the Ass complained against the Delinquent, that he had pulled off his
Asses tail, which was ^o his damage, and therefore he demanded satisfaction;
the Husband of the woman that had miscarried, made his complaint that his Wife
was endamaged, and he had lost a Child, and the Officer complained of his
broken Arm, and that he might have satisfaction for it. Our Delinquent knew
himself guilty of all these Crimes, and therefore confessed them; but withal,
pleaded that all was done by Chance, in his endeavoring to escape. Well said
the Judge, I shall do you All Justice, I have considered that Retalliation is
the best Law, and the most equitable; and therefore I do order, that since 5 s.
of the 5 l. is spent, and that the Delinquent cannot return the purse just as
it was, that therefore he still keep it all until such time as he has made it
up 5 l. quite, and then to deliver it. As for the Owner of the Ass, I order
that the Delinquent take the Ass into his Custody and Possession, and keep and
use him until such time as he has another Tail like the former, that it may
be restored in the same condition it was? and as for the Woman, that she may be
rendered to the Husband in as good case as she lately was, before this damage, I
order that the Delinquent take the Woman, provide for, and keep her till she is
well again, and lie with her until such time as she be as far gone with Child,
as she was before the mischief; that her Husband may have her, and a Child in
the same forwardness? And lastly, as for the Officer, since the Delinquent
ought to have the same injury of a broken Arm, and that it may be Rettalliated
and done in the same manner, I order that he ascend the Ladder, and fall down
upon the Offender, and break his Arm as the others is broken. This was the
Judgment and Order of our Justice; and now I suppose you are of my opinion,
and think that he was very well Read in the Laws of Retalliation. Whether this
his Judgment were punctually performed, I know not, neither did the Delinquent
care, for he was to be no loser; but however it went with them, I have done
with their Story; and if this Retalliation has been Comical, as in my opinion
it is, I shall acquaint you with another that was as absolute Retalliation; but
withal, it is so Tragical, that I may truly and properly term it Revenge, and
that in as great a height as ever I knew any the quallity of the persons
considered: But in relating this, and some other Stories that I have for you, I
must play the Ill Husband, and leave my Shop, I must travel into Spain, and
France, my Scene will lie there a while; I shall not tell you of any English
Stories, that you know or may have read already, I shall not make use of any
English Authors; you shall have what is Fresh, at leastwise to English men; If
I make use of a French Author, I may be excused, and that I can do in my Shop
without stirring abroad: such you may chance to find, and it may be I may make
bold with the Plot or Story of an English Stage Play, when it is fit to my
purpose. I am sure those Stories must be good, for our English Comedies and
Tragedies, exceed all other Nations now in every thing; I know that the French
did exceed us in Ornaments of the Stage, Gallantry of Apparel, variety of
Music and Dancing, pleasantness of the Scenes, and strangness of their
Machines: But now we are grown up to them, and in all things equal them in
these outside matters; and as to the inside, the soul of the Play, which is the
Plot, Contrivance and Language we still out do them and all the world. This is
my opinion; you may if you please, give me leave to be a Competent Judge of
these things, for I have been a great lover of them, a Student in, and well
wisher to these Mathematics, as I shall acquaint you anon. For now being a
Freeman, having my liberty to go and come when and where I listed, I studied my
Pleasure and Recreation; the chiefest of which, and the greatest pleasure that
I took being in seeing Stage Plays; I plied it close abroad, and read as fast
at home, so that I saw all that in that age I could, and when I could satisfy
my Eye and my Ear with seeing and hearing Plays Acted; I pleased my self
otherwise by reading, for I then began to Collect, and have since perfected my
Collection of all the English Stage Plays that were ever yet Printed, and I
have them all, and have read them all, and therefore I suppose my Judgment may
pass as indifferently Authentic. And I have had so great an Itch at
Stage-playing, that I have been upon the Stage, not only in private to
entertain Friends, but also on a public Theater, there I have Acted, but not
much nor often, and that Itch is so well laid and over, that I can content my
self with seeing two or three Plays in a Year; but I still continue in this
opinion, that they are the fittest Divertisments for our English Gentry; I know
that all sorts of people, of all quallities go to see them, and see them I may
well say, and that properly, for they do nothing else, not understanding them
at all, ask a parcel of the Vulgar, when they have been at a Play, what they
saw and observed there, and you shall have better Divertisment in their
relating; then you could have had in your seeing it your self: one will tell
you that there were a great many fine Folks, men that comb their Perriwigs, and
women that looking on their little Looking Glasses, did set their Locks and
Countenances, and that they had such and such Clothes; This is the observation
of some ask them what the Players did; Oh says one, they were fine Folks
indeed, they walked about, and talked to one another, but what said they? they
talked and made every body laugh, and there was a Lady that Danced well, In
fine, one will tell you that his or her observations, were chiefly about the
Spectators and audience; another bout the Actors persons and Handsomeness,
another about Music and Dancing, another that is a little better Learned, will
remember somewhat the Clown said; another observed the Painting, and some will
have some Hints at the Play; but few of the Vulgar understand the chiefest
Part, the end of the Play, the Soul and Plot of it, and how it is managed, so
that always Vice is corrected, and Virtue cherished. How the Poet Creates and
Destroys at his pleasure; and still keeps all within the bounds of Justice,
giving punishment to Offenders, and reward to the Virtuous. Much more I could
say upon this Subject, but I shall not enlarge, especially at this time. But
let this suffice to tell you; that as I have a very great Esteem for our
English Stage Plays; so I may chance to make use of some of them, in Reciting
some Plot or Story out of them. This will be no Loss nor Prejudice to any, but
pleasant to the Reader; who I hope will excuse these my Sallies and Freedom,
for I confine my self to no order in my Writing, but as I think convenient, so
I manage my Story; but still keeping to the Thread of it: I know I have left it
at present, and shall do so for a while, till I have performed Promise in
acquainting you with somewhat more of my two Subjects, Retalliation and
Revenge. The first Story to that purpose was Acted in Spain, a very true one as
my Author affirms; but whether true, I know not, but strange it is; and here I
shall begin.

The Archbishop of Toledo Metropolitan of the two Castiles, who is a Prelate
of so high a Reputation in Spain, over which he is Primate, that he passes for
a little Pope,; has a Million of Livers in Revenue, and in Effect is possessed
of the Richest Diocese in all Christendom; being in the City of Sevil in Spain,
caused a Shoemaker of that place to be killed, because it was reported that he
had given out some Speeches to his disadvantage. The Son of this Shoemaker who
was a Resolute person, presented him before the Ecclesiastical Judge, to have
reason or recompense for the death of his Father, of whose Murder, he gave
such clear Testimonies, that no one doubted of it: which oblidged the Judge,
the quallity of the personage considered, to condemn the Archbishop, not to
say Mass for a whole year, as a reparation of this Crime. The Son of the
Shoemaker, being dissatisfied in this Sentence, waited until the King of
Spain, who was named Don ^hap: 14

Pedro, and surnamed the Cruel came to Sevil, as the report went that he would
come in the day of the Holy Sacrament which was at hand; and as soon as he
arrived there, the Son of the Shoemaker went to find him, and casting himself
at his feet, desired of him Revenge for the death of his Father, whom the
Archbishop of Toledo had without any occasion, caused to be Murdered. The
King asked of him whether he had not already sought for Justice? Yes Sir said
he, but they made no reckoning of me, because that I am but a poor Shoemaker,
and he a Prelate of so high a Reputation; the Ecclesiastical Judge for
reparation of his Crime, has only condemned him to be a whole year without
saying Mass; which he does but laugh at, having means enough to live without
it. The King then demanded of him if this were true? Yes, on the peril of my
Life, replied the Shoemaker: are you bold and confident enough said the King to
kill him: yes Sir, said he, provided Your Majesty will command me. Go and do it
said the King, and trouble your self no farther. This Shoemaker returned very
joyful, purchased a very good Poniard; resolved to do this Execution the next
day, which was to be the Feast of the Holy Sacrament, even in the Kings
presence. He knew that this great Porcession would be the next day, which in
that Country is most Magnificent, where the Arch Bishop would appear with his
Train in Pontifical Habits, near to the Arch Bishop of Sevil, he followed him
till he came just against the Palace Royal, where the King and all the Court
were at the Windows to behold the Procession pass by. There he being resolved,
and provided, aiming right at his Heart, gave him two so great Strokes with his
Poniard, that he fell down stark-dead at his feet. The horror of this strange
Spectacle, gave astonishment to all the Spectators. He was seized on to be
carried to Prison, that he might have severe Justice. There was so great a
noise, that the King doubting what it was, asked what was the matter: He was
told of the boldness of this Wretch, who was leading to Prison. The King
commanded that he should be brought before him, and for as much as every one
knew that the King was a severe Justicer, as I have already said, having for
that cause the name of Cruel attributed to him, every one expected from him no
other thing but a Horrible punishment, for so Detestable a Crime. The King
having the Prisoner before him in the presence of this Honorable Assembly,
with a Grave voice, said to him: come hither Traitor and Wretch that thou art;
what wicked Spirit has carried you to commit so enormous a Crime, in the
presence of God and in my sight, and on a day so holy as this is. The Shoemaker
knowing the interest he had with His Majesty, was resolved to answer boldly;
wherefore without any surprise he thus replied: Wherefore Sir, had he the
boldness to cause my Father to be murdered as he did, and although I have
several times demanded Justice; I have bin denied it, wherefore have I not
reason to do it my self. Every one was astonished at this bold answer: But
those who belonged to the Arch Bishop, alleged before the King that this was
false, and that his Complaint had been heard and that Justice had been done
him. What Justice was sufficient for me, answered the Shoemaker so long as he
was alive? The King would then know what Justice had been rendered unto him, it
was answered that the Archbishop had been condemned not to say Mass for a
whole year, and that that was a very great Infamy to a person of his condition
and quality. And why then said the King was not this satisfation enough to you?
No Sir replied the Shoemaker, because he had Means enough without that. The
King asked him what Trade he was of, he answered a Shoemaker, go then said the
King, for a punishment of thy Crime; I command thee that thou be a whole year
without making Shoes; and that he might have Means to live upon, he assigned
him a good Pension for life, out of the Archbishops Estate. And now I think
here was Retalliation, absolute Revenge, Resolute, and Justice, Retribute;
whether the King did deserve the attribute of Cruel I will leave the Reader to
judge. I shall not descant upon the Circumstances, but proceed to an other
French Story, as may Author says, wherein you shall find a great deal of Malice
in a Chap: 15

Revenge, which was carried as high against Innocence, as any I have read of,
and the Story is in short thus.

CHAP. XV.
A Cutpurse Revenged of a Hangman, by giving him a cast in his own Office; and
two Cut-purses revenged of another Hangman by whipping.

IN a certain Town of Normandy, a Cutpurse having been taken in the very Fact,
was condemned to be whipped on three Market days at a Carts-tail, thorough all
the Streets of the Town. As our Delinquent was led to the Cart, he prayed the
Hangman to use him kindly; but having not wherewithal to grease him in the
hand, he caused him to know that he had a heavy one, and slashed him in such
manner, that his shoulders were Painted bravely, and he cried out loudly: when
he had been thus accomodated, he had his liberty. This Cutpurse having been
thus harshly used by the Hangman, was resolved what ever it cost him, to be
revenged. He was absent from that Country about a year, at the end whereof he
returned to inform himself of the name of this Hangman, and of all his Family;
in which he had so good Intelligence, that he could easily have renewed his
Genealogy, if in case it had been lost. He by that means, knew that he had a
Nephew, who in his youthful days went into Italy, who had left his Country when
very young, and that it had been 15. or 20. years since he had been heard of;
he likewise understood that this Nephew was about his age, and having a design
to pass for him with the Hangman his Uncle, he informed himself of several
particulars that might assist him therein: being perfectly instructed in all
things necessary, and being very well clothed, he went to find the Hangman in a
Country House which he had, and whither he was gone for his Recreation; and
believing that he needed not to doubt of being known by him, because it was a
year and more, since he passed through his hands, and that many others had had
the like Courtesy of his Office, both before and after, whom he knew not, and
that he had hardly seen any part of him but his shoulders which were
sufficiently disguised; He being come to this Country House, went boldly to the
Hangman, and in his salutation called him Uncle. The Hangman returned his
salutation but coldly, as not knowing him: whereupon the other said, I believe
Uncle that I have not the Honor to be known by you: I am the son of such a
one, I am your Nephew that am lately come out of Italy. The Hangman was
surprised as a person whom he had heard spoken of, although he never seen him,
he was astonished to see him so well grown, and kindly received him, asking him
an account of his Voyage, to whom he made such answers as he had resolved on
before hand. The Hangman calling him Nephew, asked him if he had seen his
Father; He repl'd yes, but he had been troubled for the death of his Mother.
The one enquired one thing of his Uncle, and the other asked another thing of
his Cozen; and the young man seemed to better acquainte^ with the Hangman's
Parentage, the^ himself, answering him readily to all questions. In fine, he
appeared so knowing in every particular, that if he should after that have said
he had not been his Nephew, he would hardly believe him. They supped together,
this Uncle making him very welcome; and then they went to Bed, rising early the
next morning, for the Uncle was to go to a Fair that was kept about half a Mile
off, to receive certain Rights that were due to him in respect of his Office.
This Nephew desired that he might have the honor to wait on him thither, to
divert himself at the Fair (intending there to put his Project of Revenge in
Execution, as he did.) His Uncle consenting to it, they Breakfasted, and after
that put on toward the place intended, the way being but short, they were soon
there, but stayed till the arrival of the Merchants. When he saw his Uncle busy
about receiving his Due, our Drole had a mind to put a part of his Craft in
practice, and being a very good Workman at his Trade, an able man in his
Profession; he saw a certain Merchant who came to buy Goods at the Fair, take
some Gold out of a Purse that he had about him; he was therefore resolved to
put his Skill in practice to be Master of the Purse. He followed him with his
eye, and saw him busy in selling a Sack of Corn, where he had occasion to use
both his hands. Our Curpurse seeing so fir an opportunity, was resolved not to
lose it, and being a cunning fellow at his Business, he cut the Merchants purse
so, that he nor none else that were near him did perceive it; and at that very
instant, he went to find out his Uncle; and having taken him aside that no body
might hear, he told him in his ear, that he had some Money about him which he
was afraid to lose, and therefore he desired him to keep it for him; the
Hangman willingly agreed to it, and taking the Purse which he gave him, clapped
it into his pocket without looking on it. Soon after this Cutpurse went to the
Merchant, whose purse he had taked, and taking him aside, told him he would
acquaint him with somewhat of Importance. The Merchant hearkened very
attentively, and our Gallant asked him where was his Purse, and the Merchant
searching his pocket where he had put it, and where he believed it was, was
amazed and troubled that he could not find it; trouble not your self said the
other, I know very well where it is, and showing him the Hangman at some
distance, said to him, look you, do you see that man in that place, I saw him
cut your Purse, while you were selling a sack of Wheat? Seize upon him, for
without doubt he has it in his Pocket. As soon as he had said thus, he made
his escape without being seen of any body. The Merchant finding out an Officer,
caused him to seize the Hangman, who taking by the Collar, dragged him before a
Judge; the poor Hangman was amazed at what they said and did, but the Merchant
called him Cutpurse before the Judge, saying that he had cut his, praying that
might be searched, described the fashion of the Purse, and all the several
pieces of Gold and Silver that was in it. The Judge could not refuse so
reasonable a Request: therefore commanding that he should be searched, found
the Purse such as the Merchant had specified, and the same pieces of Money
which he had named: To this the Hangman know not what answer to give, but that
this Purse belonged to a Nephew of his that was in the Fair, that he had given
it him to keep, desired that he might be sought for, describing him by his
Habit, Hair, and other marks; search was made for him on all hands, but to no
purpose, so that every one believed that this was a pretense, thinking by that
means to escape, but seeing the strings of the Purse were cut, and being
compared with those in the Merchant's pocket, they were found to be the same,
upon so clear a proof in a person so public as he, who being ordained for the
punishment of others, ought to be without reproach, the least faults that were
done by others being Criminal in him, he, was by the Judge of the place, judged
worthy of death, and condemned to be hanged and strangled; but he appealed to
the Court of Parliament at Roan which was not above seven or eight miles
distant: Our Cutpurse who was acquainted how matters went cutting off his Beard
and Hair, and putting on a different habit, and clapping a great Plaster on
one of his Eyes, went after him; he feared not to be discovered by his Uncle;
there did he wait to hear the judgment of the Court upon the Appeal, but all
the Court with one consent confirmed the Sentence; and because there was no
body to hang him, by reason he was the Hangman, this false Nephew offered his
service, saying, that if they would pay him, he desired no more but to get
money, and he would execute the Office.

There being not many who are desirous of such an Office, they were glad to
accept of him, promising him good payment; and so they sent him to the
Condemned person, who was still in one tale, protesting his innocence, saying
always that his Nephew had given him this Purse to keep, but he had been as
good to have said nothing, or have sung Ballads.

Being brought to the place where the Execution was to be done, the Ceremonies
being performed, the New Hangman mounted the Ladder, fastening the Rope, and was
in all things ready, expecting him to say his last Prayers, and take his leave
of the world; but before he turned him off, whispering him in the Ear, he said,
now my friend, do you remember that about a year ago you whipped me, and that I
promised you I would be well revenged of you, I am he that came to your
Countrey-house who passed for your Nephew, who cut the purse which I gave you
to keep, on purpose to see you in the condition you are in; when this poor
Hangman heard this, he cried out, Sirs, but the other being ready and nimble
turned him off, causing him to leave his intended speech unfinished, saying,
you have said enough already: He was blamed for being so sudden, people saying
that it may be he had somewhat of importance to confess, but our Gallant who
knew well enough that he had nothing to say but to his prejudice, replied, that
if he should have let him alone, he would have talked till to morrow, and so he
was excused as having but little judgment in such affairs; he was very well
contented for his pains, but much better pleased that he was so thoroughly
revenged.

And I think he was thoroughly revenged indeed, and that in a severe manner;
this exceeded Retalliation and was Revenge in the Highest degree: and although
this our old Hangman might have been guilty of crimes enough to have merited
this punishment, yet he did not in this particular deserve it, for he in
lashing the Cutpurse, had but executed his Office, and thereby done as he
ought; but the other was in his execution of him, guilty of absolute Murder:
But he was not the first, nor will not be the last that shall suffer
wrongfully. It oftentimes hapeneth so, and I have known in my time, that
several have been executed for those Crimes whereof they have not been guilty.
Several I say, have I believe, suffered innocently as well as our Old Hangman,
who was thus trussed up and dispatched. And now having finished his story; I
shall relate another, which was both Revenge and Retalliation, it is not much
different from the Former, although not so rigorous, but because it was between
persons of the same quallities: that is Cutpurses and a Hangman; I could not
more fitly recite it, then in this place, and thus I shall describe it.

A Gentleman assisted by two of his Servants, to revenge himself of one that
had offended him, who was not of his quality, assassinated him at a Woods side
in Lower Normandy about eighteen or twenty Miles from Roan. For this Fact, he
was imprisoned at the place, and, by the Judges there, was Condemned to have
his Head cut off; he appealing to the Parliament at Roan, was carried thither,
and there kept Prisoner with his two Servants; who, pleading that they did not
consent to the Murder, and being discharged from the same by their Master,
were acquitted, but not so, but that as they had been present at the Murder,
they were Condemned to be Whipped through the Streets, and the Sentence against
the Master, was confirmed; and it was further ordered, that his Head should be
carried to the place where the Murder had been committed. The second Footmans
Sentence, was first executed, who having not money enough to Fee the Hangman,
was finely accommodated, and came not out of his hands till the Blood ran down
their shoulders. After this execution was done: the Sentence further declared,
that they should appear in the same condition when their Masters Head was cut
off: this was likewise performed, and then they had Liberty to go whither they
pleased. They being at liberty, were resolved to be Revenged on the Hangman,
who had dealt so unkindly with them, and knowing that he was to carry their
Masters Head to the place where the Murder was committed, and that he was to
take up his Quarters for that night by the way; they resolved to follow him; he
coming to the place intended, there took up his Lodging; they saw him house,
and about an hour after, they came likewise to the same House, one of them
brought a Fardle, where was about 2 Dozen of bundles of good lusty Burchin
Rods, which they had provided for their intended design: and being very well
disguised that they might not be known by the Hangman, who had given them a
Relishing taste of his Office: they entered the Inn, and asked for a Supper and
a Bed. The House being pretty well stored with Guests, and the Hostess not well
knowing how handsomely to accommodate them; they told her that they did not much
matter it, if they had not a private Chamber to themselves, they would be
contented to lie in a Chamber where other Folks did, and that they were so
indifferent both as to their lodging, that they should be content to take up
their chamber, and sup with any other company that would accept of them. Sir
said the Hostess, it is not above an hour since a very honest man came in
hither, who is all alone and in a Chamber himself, where there is too Beds, and
I believe he will be glad of Company: you may sup together, and he shall lie in
one of the Beds, and you in the other. We shall be very glad of so good
company, said one of them, if he will permit it: the Hostess said she would go
ask him, and so she did. The Hangman considering that those of his profession
were generally hated of all the World, that every body shuns them, and that
they are always necessitated to eat alone, was very glad of this occasion, and
therefore told her that they should be very welcome; they knowing that, went up
into the Chamber with their Fardle, and courteously saluted him, he returned
their Salutation; not dreaming or suspecting, that these were they that had
passed under his Disciplination, and had marks of his kindness on their
shoulders: they drank together, and merrily quaffed off their Cups to one
another good Hea^th: when they had Supped; they caused their Bed to be
shee^ed, and whilst it was a warming, one of these Goodfellows went down, and
said to the Hostess. Madam, we and out Chamber-fellow are resolved to make
Sport together to night; therefore although you hear a voice, do not trouble
your self, or be concerned at it: For all that we intend, is a piece of Sport
and Merriment. She took no great heed to this discourse, and they when the
Beds were made, did all undress themselves to go to bed. Our two Companions who
had resolved what to do, did double lock the Chamber door, and when they saw
the Hangman unready in his shirt to go to bed; they likewise undressed
themselves, and having each of them a lusty Rod in his hand, and stripping off
their shirts being stark naked, They thus bespake their Chamber-fellow. Look
you friend, do you know us, you may see the work of your hands, and that we
carry your marks upon our shoulders; but before we leave you, you shall be in
the same condition, and with that, they fell upon him, and because they could
not pull off his shirt, they toar it: and he now being naked, Slapt and Jerkt
him with all their strength. He cried out Help, Murder, and Mercy. The Host
had a mind to go up and see what was the matter, but the Hostess hindered him;
saying, that they only passed the time in sport, which one of them had told her
of. But the cries redoubled as their blows, and as fast as they wore out their
Rods, they took fresh ones. The Host and Hostess hearing this, went to the
door, but finding it so fast and Barricadoed, asked what was the matter; one of
the Goodfellows answered, nothing, But the Hangman continuing his cries. The
Host and Hostess were resolved to enter by force, but could not until all the
Rods were almost spent, and that the poor Hangman had his shoulders handsomely
Cheaquered, and the blood ran down on all sides. The two Companions seeing that
it was almost well, and that the door would be broken open, therefore one of
them opened it: the Host and Hostess entering, and seeing them in that pickle,
wondered, look you said one of the companions, what reason he had to make such a
bauling noise, we Lashed one another for Pleasure, we have not used him worse
then he has done us, and yet he cried out the loudest. They showed their
shoulders and bid them look how he had Be-laced them. Those who were entered the
Chamber, seeing that there was but little difference between them all three,
and that they had bled alike; they went down and shut the door after them,
resolving to let them Slash one another at their pleasure, and not to take
notice of, or be concerned at what cries soever they should hear, which our two
companions understanding, they renewed their Sport to their own Content and
liking, but to the great Pain and trouble of our poor Hangman, whose poor back
and shoulders paid for all. And so having worn out all their Rods, and wearied
themselves, they were forced to give over, and so ended the Whipping Adventure.

Here again was Revenge and Retalliation? But as in the former, the poor
Hangman was Innocent, he had but executed his Office. But you see it is good to
be Kind, and not to be troublesome in any Office, lest at one time or another,
Revenge, when unlooked for, overtake them. And by this, as by my former
Stories, Revenge is much desired and thirsted afters. How many are there of all
Ages, Sexes, and Qualities, that would lose one of their Eyes, to be revenged
of another?

I shall give you two or three Examples more to that purpose, they shall be
short and sweet; but before I begin them, I shall for a reason I know of, put
an end to this Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
A Frenchman and Spaniard, number their Saints by their Hairs, and a Cordelier
Revenged of a Jacobin.

THE first Story of that, I shall tell You, is in my Opinion very pleasant;
there was but little Harm in it, nothing at all of Tragedy, though it might be
the cause of some Bloodshed, but not much, and the Story it self not long; and
therefore I shall thus begin.

A Frenchman and a Spaniard disputing one day together upon the Prerogatives of
their Nations; the Spaniard seeing himself overcome in many things by the
Frenchman, whose Nation has many advantages over the Spaniard (as my French
Author alleges.) The Spaniard therefore, took up the discourse of Religion:
saying to the Frenchman: consider if in your Country, they are not so Devout,
^hap: 16

and respectful toward God, as they are in ours? I have been in France said
he, where so little Honor is rendered to Him, that I have been ashamed. When
the Holy Sacrament is carried to a sick Person, there is commonly but one
simple Priest, who carries it with a little Clark, who sounds a small Bell
without any Train. But in Spain, when the Holy Sacrament marches through the
Streets; behold with what Pomp, Ceremony, and what Train it is accompanied: it
never goes without a great quantity of Tapers, and 4 or 500. Persons attending
all those that meet it, although their Affairs are never so urgent, they must
leave them to accompany. The King himself, and the Grandees of Spain, when they
meet it, render great Honor thereto, and think themselves highly Honored, if
they may carry one of the Staves that supports the Canopy that carries it. All
this I know said the Frenchman; but the good God knows, that in France, he is
with his ancient Servants: wherefore not doubting any thing, he matters not to
be so accompanied: But in Spain where there are so many Jews, He fears that if
he were without Company, that he should be Crucified again. How said the
Spaniard in point of Religion dare you enter into comparison with us; does not
every one know that there are more Saints Canoinzed in Spain then I have Hairs
in my Beard. The Frenchman maintained that there were many more in France; and
thereupon the Frenchman made this Proportion; you say that there are more
Saints in Spain then you have Hairs in your Bread, but I say that there are
100. times more in France then I have in my Beard and Head both. And to make it
out to you more plainly, are you willing that at every French Saint that I
shall name, that I pull one Hair from your beard; and at every Spanish Saint
that you shall name, you shall pluck one from mine? Content said the Spaniard,
poor man in a short time you will have never a one left. They put themselves in
a readiness, and staked down a good round sum of Money, which he was to lose
that was first Bald.

The Frenchman began, and plucking a Hair from the Spaniards Beard, he said St.
Denis, the Spaniard doing as much to him, said St. Ignatius; the Frenchman took
another, saying St. Martin: the Spaniard St. Xavier, the Frenchman St. Levis,
the Spaniard St. Terese, the Frenchman St. Clotilde, the Spaniard St. Isidore,
the Frenchman St. Bruno, the Spaniard plucking two Hairs at once from the
Frenchman, which troubled him, said St. Cosme, and St. Damian. The Frenchman
being resolved to revenge it, took a whole Muschatoe at once, which he plucked
off, saying 11000. Virgins.

There the Dispute ended, for the pain which he endured, was so great, that of
the two, he chose to be gone; besides, he knew not readily how to call upon
11000. at once.

Here was a fine Contest bravely managed; Here was I believe, a great Cry and
little Wool; for it was like the sheering of the Hogs, all Bristles. If they
had proceeded thus by Thousands, it was a ready way to make them as bald as
Coots. The Spaniard would lose the Glory and Majesty of his Countenance, which
chiefly consists in the stiffness of his Muschatoes: he should have no need
of Biggatederoes to keep them orderly turned up; and the Frenchman must provide
him a Perriwig. But they were weary of the Sport, it made the Tears trickle
from the poor Spaniards Eyes as freshly, as if he had crept from his Grannum;
he did not like the sport, and therefore would have no more of it.

And so shall I end the Story, that I may make have to tell you one more, and
so Conclude; lest that which I intend for your Divertisment and Pleasure, prove
your Trouble; and then it will be my Disparagement and Loss.

The next and last Story is a right French one; I am still upon that Coast, I
deal plainly and tell you from whence I have them: If any have chanced to have
heard any of them, or somewhat like them, and say they are English; I reply
that it is more than I know, I had them from a French Author, and one of very
good Esteem and Credit, one of the last, not long since Published; and indeed
the best of that Nature I ever met with: I have for your sake; picked out the
very best for you, and one which is the last I shall at present use, it is none
of the worst, besides it is to my purpose, and thus it is.

A Cordelier (which is a Friar of that order) having bin in his progress
preaching, and being belated in in a small village, he was forced to lie there,
because there was no Convent of his order, nor any Person of his acquaintance
within that Town; he was therefore necessitated to repair to an Inn, where by
chance he met with a Jacobin Friar, who had also taken up his lodging there:
and because they were the next morning to go both one way, they supped
together, and lay both in one Chamber; it had reigned all the night, but
ceasing in the morning they resolved to set forward in their journey, but they
were first to discharge their shot to pay their Host. The Codelier thought he
should be quitted, and go scot-free, as it was usual for a Dominus Retribuat,
the Lord repay you: but the Host being a Protestant which they call Hugone^, as
most in the Town were, he did not understand this Latin, but would have money;
the Jacobin paid for himself, the Cordelier praid him to lend him some money,
promising to give it him again as they traveled; but the Jacobin replied that
he could not lend him any without prejudicing himself, and ^^^t he had but
little enough for himself to finish his journey: so that the poor Cordelier wos
forced before he left the Inn, to give his Books in pawn, and leave them behind
him, which very much troubled him: and therefore he resolved to be revenged of
the Jacobin, and that before they parted if it were possible; and it was not
long ere he had an opportunity to effect his designs. Traveling together for
they both went one way, the waters were so high by reason of the rain that had
fallen that night, that they could hardly go in the foot path, but when they
had traveled about two miles, they were to pass through a place where the
water was two foot deep, and 500 foot broad: the Cordelier was not much
troubled at it, he took his sandals in his hands, trussed up his coats, and put
on to pass through it, the Jacobin who was warmly clad, and who like the Cat
was afraid to wet his foot, made sower faces at it, the Cordelier seeing him
thus troubled, said to him, what will you give me, and I will carry you through
the water upon my shoulders? Ah Brother said the Jacobin if you will do so much
for me, I promise you to redeem your Books, and pay your shot for you at the
the next Inn you come to: the Cordelier having obliged him to this by oath,
took him up upon his back and began to pass over the Water, when they were just
in the middle, the Cordelier said to him, but have you any Money to keep touch
with me and perform your promise, yes, yes, replied the other, fear not that,
and saying so, he shak'd his pocket causeing the money to gingle, that
testified he did not lie, the Cordelier (who was full of thoughts of revenge,
for the all turn he had done him in compelling him to pawn his Books,) threw
him full in the middle of the water, saying, Ah! you cause me to break the
rules of my order, we profess not to carry money with us, a^n^ if I carry you I
must, and therefore you must shi^t for your self, and saying (...) he ^^s^^d o^
soon gaining the shore, leaving the poor Jacobin droping dry to co^^^ after:
even when and how he pleased; and thus I shall leave them both, the one
satisfied with his revenge, and the other studying how to be even with the
Cordelier: but me thinks these holy Fathers that teach other things, should
practice better: had not the Cordelier have bin better to have performed his
agreement, and carried the other quite over, and have earned the money, it was
no great labor: having gone half way he might have redeemed his Books, and
have been treated at the next Inn; no this did not please him half so well as
this revenge, Oh! that was sweet and pleasing, it was like Honey and Nuts, he
would (...) Dinner and Books and all, rather then loose h^ revenge, so that you
see revenge is desired by all: th^^^^ ^^^y venture, nay, loose all other
enjoyments here may; hazard their eternal enjoyment hereafter. This passion
makes a sober man mad an honest man a knave, a wise man, a fool, and indeed
does quite Metamorph^se all that are possessed with it: they are not what they
were, and although they know the effects of this raging passion of revenge are
deadly, and som^times damnable, yet they are not considered. And now I suppose
the Reader will conclude me to be a Ramb^er indeed, having dealt with the
subject of my discourse, as some Parsons do with their Text, lay it open and
run away from it, but if you will give me the same liberty as they take, you
shall find that all that I have said is somewhat to the purpose, and that I may
prove it so to be: I must like the Parson fall to repetition, and sum up the
heads of what I have said, and then you shall see that by hook or by crook. I
shall make them serve for my turn, my intention is to describe the lucky and
unlucky persons, the days of the one, and the hours of the other; I have had
little enough hithero to say of the first, the unlucky: neither will there be
much of them said in this Treatise, I (...) unlucky my self, and therefore am
infected with th^^^ ^tories more than others; and such you will find those that
I have recited to be, as for example. First, was not Clymantus the Prisoner an
unlucky fellow to pay so dear for his joaking; although the forcing of a
Glyster upon his friend was abuse enough, yet he did not rest there, but he
must brag on it: he thought to purchase honor by disgracing his friend, but he
was outwitted, and paid home for his abuse: I could comment upon this text,
but I have spun my thread out almost to the full length, that at present I
intend it, and therefore I shall hasten, and leave this to the consideration
and applycation of the Reader, and proceed to the following stories, on which I
shall only give a touch, because I resolve to conclude-

The next story I related to you, was of a Purse of money found at Church, this
was Comical enough, but withal you may conclude there was much unluckyness in
it. First, to damage, an Ass then to make a woman to miscarry, and to break the
Officers arm, and had not the Justice resolved on a comical satisfaction by a
perfect Retalliation, our good fellows story would have bin unlucky enough,
though he at last proved a gainer.

The third was of the Archbishop of Toledo, who I think was unlucky to meet
with so resolute and implacable an Enemy as he did of the Shoemaker: and so
of the rest of the stories: I question not but you may with much ease apply
them, as I intended them to be unlucky; but I hope they will have the good luck
to please you, and then I have my ends, but it is now full time to make an end,
especially of these kind of unlucky stories, and fall into the thread of my own
misfortunes, this is that which the Reader may reasonably expect from me, but
he must at this time pardone me: I was now in a very good, and as I reckoned a
lucky condition, being as I told you a man set up for my self, sole Master of a
shop, as you may read in the twelfth Chapter of this discourse, and being thus
lucky and in so quiet a condition: I have sallyed out and related these last
recited stories, I have been so good a Husband, as not to leave my shop in
relating them, and there I intend to continue, till I shall have occasion to
make a sally in the further prosecution of my unlucky adventures; and now for
this time only acquaint you with a story or two of some late unlucky Persons
and so conclude.

The writeing of this Treatise was first occasioned by the recital of these two
lines.

The lucky have their days and these they choose.
The unlucky have but hours and these they loose.
The truth of this assertion has been already sufficiently cleared, but
however take an other story or two along with you.

About fourteen years since a Goldsmiths living in Fleet Street, rising more
early than his Neighbors as being desirous to thrive according to the Proverb,
was in a fair way to do so, his lucky day was come, for early in the morning
as he was opening his shop, a Seaman came to him with a Bag in his hand, and
tells him that in a late Voyage to Sea, he had met with a prize, of what value
he knew not; for it was stones which he there had in his bag, and drawing out a
parsel presented them to the Goldsmiths, who presently discovering what they
were, asked the saylor what he would have for them, five pound said the Saylor,
three said the Goldsmith, the Saylor understanding by this offer, that they
were of value, would have his full demands five pound: which the Goldsmith
refused to give, and let the Saylor go away; but not so far but that he had him
in call, and soon finished his bargain: no sooner was the Seaman gone, but up
goes the Goldsmith to his wife, finding her a sleep, awakes her and tells her
that she lay there at her her ease: and so she might do, and he take his for
the future, for he had that morning met with such a bargain as would keep them
and a Coach and Horses as long as they lived; the Wife was glad of this news,
and enquiers into the particulars, which he soon acquaints her with, how that
he had bought for five pounds a parcel of Diamons worth above 20000 l. great
was their joy, but little was their prudence, here was luck in a Bag, if they
could but keep it, but the Woman according to the quality of her sex: could not
be content to fare well, but she must cry roast meat; and being soon after at a
Goshipping, she there proclaims her Husbands good fortune. I may well say
proclaim for it proved so: being soon noissed about to all parts of the Town:
when mark the effects in a few days, he was taken out of his shop by a file
of Musquet-teers, and upon examination the best tale he could tell, being they
were taken at Sea, they were judged to belong to the high court of Admiralty,
and therefore taken from him; thus did he loose his Prize by his Wives tatling,
this lucky bargain was not to prove so to him, neither in the whole nor in
part, for although he had secured two or three thousand pounds worth of them
before this seizure: yet they did not thrive with him: for in few years after
he broke. Thus did Fortune show him one lucky hour, which he loosing could
never redeem, and broke, and all came to nothing: this I think is an unlucky
story of an Vnluky Citizen; so that I find I have had many Fellows, especially
about the time that my chief unlukyness began: the fire time how many were then
rich one day and poor the next; but above all the misfortunes that happened in
that dreadful calamity, none in my opinion equalled that of one of my
Acquaintance, a Merchant an honest worthy brave man, but at that time mighty
unlucky: he had by tradeing many years, at last gathered a plentiful Estate
10000 l. of which he had laid out in a purchase in the Country, and above 20000
l. more consisted in Pearls and Diamonds and other Jewels, this being in an
Iron Chest, were deposited and left at an Apothecarryes House in Fan church
street: at the time of the Fire, the Merchant was gone to visit his purchase in
the Country; there was little danger that this should be lost, for the Fire
came not to this house in three days after it began: the Chest was portable
enough: and easily to be removed, several Friends of the absent Merchants
knowing where this Treasure was, offered the Apothecarry to secure it: but he
not at least suspecting the fire to damage his house, locked up his doors, and
walked out into the fiields, as I have been told, to pray to God to cease the
Fire, and spare his Neighbors houses: but at his return, he had no house of
his own to go to, that and all his house hold goods, for he had removed none,
was consumed to ashes, and that which was above all in value was this unlucky
Chest of Jewels: here was a loss that exceeded all I ever have read of, in so
little room the value of a whole street of Houses was destroyed in a moment;
they were all spoiled; the chest upon search was found, and so where the
Jewels, but the Diamonds not of so much use as Bristow-stones, and a parcel of
Whiteings eyes were of more luster and worth then any of the Pearls that was
then found. I shall insist upon but one story more, and that a lucky one, and
conclude. This is of the famous Sir R. Wittington, coming to London in Leathern
Breeches to seek his fortune here, found a good one: being first entertained as
a scullion into a Merchants house, his Master being a great Trader, was used to
cause all his Servants, to send some adventures to Sea, when he did,
Whittington had nothing which he could call his own, but a Cat, which he
delivers to the Master of the Ship, who happening into a strange Country where
they were much troubled with Rats and Mice, could find no ways to destroy
them, this Cat proveing the only remedy against them, turned to so good an
account, that in exchange, such store of Gold and Treasure was given for her,
as raised this Favorite of Fate, to be Lord Mayor of London, as is expressed
in the Title Page or Front of the Book; where also is described: somewhat of my
own late unluckyness, that being bound for another man, entering into the Bond
of surety ship, I am as yet squeezed, and know not how to get out, such is
still my unluckynes, that when I think my self freest and least concerned, some
misfortune befalls me: for when I writ the Preface of this Book, which was
about six months since, I reckoned my self to be in a thriveing condition, and
so I thank God, I have been since, and had by my care, industry and Gods
blessing, imbettered my Estate at least threscore pounds: but before this Book
is published, even between the cup and the lip, falls out a misfortune by the
death of my Printer, as you may read in my Epistle, whereby I am 300 l. worse
then I was. By this I have again tried the uncertainty of Fortune, what and how
she has dealt with me for the first twenty years of my Life: I have in this
Treatise particularly acquainted thee, how she has been at the same
unconstancy or worse; for the last twenty one years, thou must already conclude
by what I have written in my Preface and Epistle. It will be my work (if thou
likest of this) to give thee the particulars of that, whereby I think thou
may conclude with me that hitherto I have been An Unlucky Citizen.

FINIS.

