Truth Reigns Conqueror, OR, The Light of Hidden Secrets REVEALED. SHOWING
How all men err from the ways of God, and what false Prophets are, and how
they are come into the World if it were possible, to deceive the Elect. Being a
vindication of the Truth against Popery, Heresy, or Schism.

And many shall follow their pernicious ways by reason of whom the Truth shall
be evil spoken of,

2 Pet. 2.2. Ye blind Guides, which strain at a Knat, and swallows a Camel,

Math. 23.24. Whereunto is annexed both Exhortations and Instructions to all
those who desire to stand in the Doctrine of the Truth.

By William Knowles B. of P.

London, Printed for Fr. Coals at the sign of the Lamb in the Old Bailey, 1662.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader.
I salute you here with several truths of Scripture, beseeching all men to take
advisement by my words, they are no invented conceits, but real truths; to
reach you a Religious way of Divine worship, established by the power of God,
and therefore not to be resisted by humane nature; for how dare you profess
your selves the Saints of God when you do not own the Ordinances of God, as I
will prove it and make your own tongues confess it, you cannot deny it except
ye be reprobates. Paul Romans 18.18. says Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God: whosoever resists the power resists the Ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; for Rulers are not
a terror to good works, but to evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power,
do that is good and you shall have praise of the same; for he is the Minister
of God to thee for good, for if thou do that which is evil be afraid for he
bears not the sword in vain; therefore you must be subject not on^y for
wrath, but for conscience sake. For this cause pay you tribute also, tribute to
whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor
is due, owe no man any thing, but love one another; for this is fulfilling the
Law and Gospel. So hoping the same shall work spiritually in you, I for the
same shall pray, and rest,

Your friend in Christ, W.K. B. of P.

Hearken I beseech you to my Text of Scripture written in 2 Timothy 3. and 1, 2, 3
verses to the 8.
1. This know also that in the last days perilous Times shall come. 2. For
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankeful, unholy. 3. Without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good. 4. Traitors, heady, high-minded lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof, from such turn away. 6. Of this sort are they which creep into houses,
and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts.
7. Ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.
MY dear and well beloved in Christ Jesus, I am here as one that is at all
obedience at any of your civil Command according to my weak knowledge, and that
gift of grace that God is at present pleased to bestow upon me to dispense the
same so to you, and to do not any thing to the pleasing of man in my work, that
may disbelieve in it, but to the honor and glory of God, and to the advantage
of true believers of this light; for this is a light even able to carry you out
of any darkness or misbelief, for all you that acknowledge you love God are
liars, except you love your poor neighbors; for how can you love God whom you
never saw, when you cannot love your well acquainted brother: 1 John 4.20. Love
is the fulfilling of the Law, and the light of God is to keep his Commandments,
which are not grievous. 1 John 5.3. And whosoever keeps the Word of God his
love there is perfected; it is no new Command but the Old, and the darkness is
now past, and the true light now shines; for he that professes himself to be
in the light and hates his poor brother, is in darkness till now; 1 John 2.9.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirit whether he be of God or
of Man; if he be of God, he will keep the commands of God to his uttermost
power, and then does the true light dwell in him; For according to my Text, In
the last days will come men which are seducers and lovers of their own selves,
and have these failings, Covetous, boasters, proud blasphemers, disobedient,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affections, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good; Traitors, heady high
minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, showing themselves godly
yet denies the power of God, and of such sort they be that lead silly Women
Captive to destruction, 2 Timothy 3. Chap. from the 1. to the 7. Creeping into
houses, and makes the houses of God a Den of Thieves, out of these words
proceeds streams of justifications against that person that creeps into
houses, despising God to be worshipped in any form and order; for what says
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order, for God
is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints,
ver. 33. but mark the opinions of those men that will not worship in reverence
nor in order according to the truth: you desembling hypocrites, is not this a
command of God which you disannul? O your light is gross darkness! next you will
use no persons, no prayers, but pray by your spirit and the light within you,
when St. Paul says, brethen when you come together hear a Psalm or a
Doctrine, let things be done to edifying, as sparks in a known tongue, as
beaten Greek, or Hebrew or English, yet keep you silence in the Church, and
speak to your self and to God, 1 Cor. 14.26,27,28. Next you hold it lawful for
a woman to exhort in your Churches, which the Apostle Paul condemns your
Heresy, saying, let your women keep silence in the Churches for it is not
permitted for them to speak, for they are commanded to be under obedience; as
also says the Law, Genesis 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.34. and if she will learn any thing
let them ask their Husbands at home, for it is a shame for Women to speak in
the Church; and if any man amongst the people thinks himself to be a Prophet
or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things which I write unto you are
the commandments of God, and they that deny these things has none of the
light of Christ, and they are in darkness till now; you tell us when our
Priests talk Latin how can the Church be edified? I answer if it be Latin
first and revealed in our kown tongue the Church may be edified by it, 1 Cor.
14.4. for God has set some in the Church 1. Apostles. 2. Prophets. 3.
Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, help Governments,
diversity of Tongues, 1 Cor. 13.28. are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all
Teachers, no, all has not this gift, there are diverse gifts but the same
spirit, but the manifestations of the spirit is given to every man to profit
withal: some have the gift of wisdom some knowledge, yet by the same spirit
dividing to every man severally as he will, for by one spirit we are baptized
into one body, whether Jew or Gentle, whether bond or free, and have been made
to drink unto one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. and according to his gift let him walk,
he that is a Minister, let him live of his Ministering, he that is a Planter,
let him live of his Planting, he that ploweth the Field, let him reap the
Harvest: for it is writ in the Law of Moses thou shall not mussel the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25.4. and it is written, he that
ploweth shall plow in hope to be pertakers of his hope, and you that have sown
spiritual things, it is a great matter to reap carnal things, Romans 15.27. do
you know then says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 9.13,14. that they which minister
about holy things live of the temple, of the things of the temple, and they
which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar, Deuteronomy. 18.1. even so has
the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel shall live of the Gospel,
1 Cor. 9.14. and now to you who confess your selves to be in the spirit of
light and that the light is in you, which I deny; you say we are all except we
believe on you still in darkness, when I cannot find but you are blinded in
the mist of errors; for Christ the light of the world lightneth every man that
comes into the world, and of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace, Joh.
1.16. you eclipse the light of Christ by disobeying his ordinances, he lights
all out of darkness into the perfect light of the Gospel, and how that if we
walk by the light of Christ we must keep his Commandments, else we lived in
darkness till now; you see the Apostle ordered things to be done in order in
our Church, and says, though he took no money for preaching, nor was not
chargeable to any, yet he says, God has ordained that they that preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel; then how can you be in the light when you own
not the ordinances of God, Christ is the light of the earth, you are of those
St. Paul spoke of, who make a show of godliness, but deny the truth, and follow
your pernicious ways. Paul sets you out as you are swearers, heady,
highminded, such as creep into houses, denying, disdaining, and basely
blaspheming God, in your valn babbling, contrary both to the word of God and
natural reason. Remember Abraham built a Temple to worship God in Jerusalem,
Christ threw out the money changers, saying, Do you make my house of prayer a
den of thieves; you never read that Christ threw out the buyers and sellers out
of any place but the Temple or house of God, which is the Church; but like
false prophets as you are you teach and exhort people to the contrary,
disdainfully calling them Steeple Houses, nay you will not come to hear a
learned Divine preach, but follow your own ways, which are perverse and evil:
remember Christ says, if two or three be met together in his name, he will be
in the midsts of them; he is the Light, do not stumble in the dark, do not
stumble at these things, being enemies to all authority, to the King first, and
then to his people. You professed your selves in the light when you murdered
the King and 100000 subjects, but the Gospel says, God is the Author of peace,
not of confusion; any you declared that his lawful right was lost in the
field, setting up a power of your own, and heaping to your selves preachers
after your own manner; but the author of peace in his good time brought the
blood of his people upon your own heads. So desiring of God no more the like
confusion may be among us, but that we subscribe to the lawful authority of
our superiors, the King, and other Majestrates under him, according to the word
of God, and to mind the threats of God against such as shall rebel, I wish all
people would truly understand, and hear me vindicate the truth against all
unrighteous men: and my vindications are these:

1. The Lawful authority of a King or Superior. 2. the Majestrates of
justice. 3. The Bishops approved. 4. The Church of God, and the House of Divine
Service, more fitter then a common house to worship God in. 5. Holy Priesthood
is excepted in the sight of God. 6. Tithes ought not to be denied but paid. 7.
The Lords Supper to be instituted. 8. And Lastly, Baptism of Infants,
vindicated with an Exhortation to Kings Majestrates, Bishops and Priests and
People, all in a short Volume. To proceed, let that man deny this and tell me
if Christ ever gave out a command that his Apostles or People should not be in
obedience to the higher power; yea, you should both obey and pray for them, 1 Timothy 2.12. For says the Apostle Paul, I exhort you therefore that first of
all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all
men, for King and all in authority, for it is good and acceptable in the sight
of God our Savior. So how then can you contrary to this word of truth, sooth
up your selves saying we are in the light, which path is not the light you
tread in; the keeping the commands of God and walking acceptable in his sight
is the light of Christ to walk by: Saint Paul says again in Titus 3.1. put
them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work; friends this is no old Cerimony of
the Law of Moses, but the commands of Christ and his Apostles which walked not
in darkness but in clear light; neither is these Ordinances any lets or
hindrances to your spiritual life; for I must tell you if that you truly serve
God and keep his Commandments, you will not disanul the ordinance of God,
Solomon says, Fear God and the King, and meddle not with those that are given
to change, Pro. 24.21. you know or may know that your changing and running in
opinions you are counted as a wave of the Sea that has no rest: and if you
ever mean to be in the light of Christ, you must obey his Ordinances, and look
what Christ has commanded not to be done, that is a blindness to do; but the
Lord ever instructs you to obey supreme authority with Magistrates of Justice,
seeing it is for the punishment of evil doers and for the praise of them that
do well; God says covet not any thing that is your own neighbors, but love
all men: that command was not kept by these that coveted and purloyned other
men's estates and how did they walk in the light of Christ that did so, yet were
as great professors as the Pharisees were, and him who stood up Math. 18.7. in
the Gospel saying, O God I thank thee I have done this good work, and that
good work, justifying himself; but the poor Publican smites on his breast
saying, Lord forgive me a sinner, who was rather justified then the other; No
my Friend, I tell thee be thou of what opinion so ever, never justify thy
self; yea examine thy self, and endeavor thy self to keep the commandes of
God, and then thou may assure thy self to be in the light of Christ Jesus.
So now touching the Church as I have told you already in part; the Church is a
Temple, and in the world there is several Churches, therefore I write to you
all of what Church soever you be to lay sure hold on Christ Jesus, for he is
the root and foundations of all our Joy and Comfort; yea keep his Commandments
and live, which are not grievous; but if you profess your selves to be truly
Saints, you must be truly perfect: the Apostle Paul says to the Bishop, be you
blameless, otherways you are not fit for that office: so that man that takes
upon him to be a Priest, a Teacher, or a Prophet, must be blameless not
denying the Ordinances of God, for god requires us to be subject to higher
powers, to obey Magistrates, to own Bishops and Church Government, with decency
and order, to hearken to the Priests, to pay Ticke of all, given Tribute to
whom Tribute is due, to wait at the Table and be partakers of the Lords Supper
if worthy receivers; to hinder not Children of receiving the sign of Grace,
called Baptism; and none of these will be any hindrance to your godly living;
Christ has not given us any strickt order to refrain any of these things, if
the reason of the mind will not give assistance to do it, let cautions for
quietness sake do it, for we are commanded to live peaceable withal men, did
our Priest not preach Christ, no matter to hearken after him? but Christ is
freely preached to the healing of our souls, yet will we not regard it, and
lose that opportunity of grace freely offered from Christ by the mouth of the
Ministers, we ought not to give any further ear to any other doctrine, yet may
we try the Churches and stick to that which is good; but my delight is this
with holy David, I had rather sit in the Church door, then to be the Teacher of
a sedicious people: And better it is to be the Doorkeeper of the House of God,
then to sit in the throne of an earthly Tabernacle: But you who are called
divided Sectaries do in abusable manner cry down our Church Government calling
a Steeple-house, a Popish Cathedral, and several other disgraceful speeches you
use. When Christ and his Apostles approves of the Temple of Jerusalem to be a
better place of decency than any other; and tell us what hurt you find in the
appointed House of God for Divine Service? that is an abominable action in you
disdaining of Gods Worship in any order but your own, and the Priest that is
chosen by our Government, let him be never so good a man and gallant Teacher,
you despise him if he has the name of a Priest, when there must be a Priest
after the Order of Melchizedec for ever, that is to administer the two outward
Signs of grace, called Baptism and the Lords Supper; for his order was such to
Abraham to receive Tyth of all: so long as our Priests which is chosen by
authority, preaches Christ, they may exhort, people may hearken and be edified
by their teaching: and I pray you in Christ Jesus to be reconciled to God, and
not refuse to hear; for certainly without deceit, so long as you remain at
variance, using contention of words, having evil surmisings about the Truth,
God is displeased with all such heresy: Examine your own selves and do not
have such presumptuous minds, thinking your own merits cannot be equalled by
any. Every one has a measure of grace, and a gift of the holy Ghost, only to
use it as a Talent is lent for a time; some wealthy, some poor, and according
as is meet, the administration is rewarded at the last day; what need we to
have so many Books made, which is but a weariness to the flesh, it is the
keeping of Gods Commandments that directs us to Christ, the Light of the
world which is not hid from men that seek him: Seek and you shall find; if you
never seek, you never can find. Do you think Christ is not worth the seeking
for? is not his mercy worth knocking for? nor is his glorious Throne worth
asking for? O he not so blinded, but open your eyes to the Truth, nor give no
heed no new fangled Teachers, so long as Christ is preached to you, give
attendance at the House of God, and pray night and day that you may reap
eternal salvation.

The next thing I touch, is the Office of Bishops, because they are so much
cried down by all the ignorant sort of people: but you may read in Titus, chap.
1.4. what St. Paul says to his son; For this cause I left thee in Crete, that
thou should set in order those things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in
every City as I had appointed thee, that is, Bishops as is ordained to continue
in every Bishopric; for the following Verse makes it appear: the 6 Verse, If
any be blameless, a husband to a wife, having faithful children, not accused of
riot nor unruly: Then go to the 7 Verse, And it names you the Bishops, saying
the Bishops must be blameless as the Stewards of God, not self-willed, no
striker, not given to wine, that is excessive drinking, not soon angay nor
covetous. Now Covetovsness is this, to covet any thing that is your neighbors,
but a lover of Hospitality, that is charitable to the needy, a lover of good
men; sober, just, holy, temperate, holding forth the faithful Word that it may
be able to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers not giving heed to Jewish
Fables and Commandments of men, that turn from the Truth, who profess they
know God, but in works they deny him, Titus 1.17. And Timothy says, He that
desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a good work 1 Timothy 3.1. But first let
him he proved, then let him use the Office, being found blameless, v. 10. Read
1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder but entreat him as a Father; that is, a Bishop
ought not to be rebuked; for thou may know how thou ought to carry thy
self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar of
the truth, 2 Timothy 3.15. and let the Bishops or Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine,
for the Laborer is worthy of hyre, Math. 10.10. 1 Timothy 5.17.19. for against the
Elder return no Accusation but before two or three witnesses; I therefore
beseech you brethren not to put belief in fables, and to make controversy
about the word of God, and (...) ns thus to teach and exhort, and if any man
teach otherwise, and not in doctrine according to Godliness, he is proud
knowing nothing: but doubting about questions and strife of words, whereof
comes envy, discord, evill-^rmising, perverse disputings of men of corrupt
mind, and deserters of the truth supposing that gain to be godliness, but
from such withdraw thy self, nor be not carried away with diverse and strange
doctrine, for it is a good thing to have thy heart established with Grace, Heb.
13.9. and remember the teachers of God that rule over you, and preaches Gods
Word to the end of their lives, ver. 7. These reasons and grounds of Scripture
are sufficient to prove these Truths before mentioned; for Christ says, Beware
of false prophets which comes to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
as ravenous wolves, you may know them by their fruits, Matthew. 7.15. Luke 6.43.
And spiritual fruits are these, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no law, and they
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; If we
live in the spirit let us also walk in the spirit; let us not be desirous of
vainglory, provoking and envying of one another, Gal. 5.26. Which so to be is
a turning to unrighteousness and to the works of the flesh, which are
fornication, uncleanness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, reviling, railing, murder, drunkenenness, envying,
covetousness, pride, loftiness, and such like, and they that do such things can
in no wise enter into life eternal: and Professors and People be not thus led
away by the Prince of Darkness. It Is no professing your selves to be in the
light of Christ except you walk before God as did Abraham and be perfect, Genesis
7.1. Nay you must present your self a sacrifice without spot or blemish. The
Priest next I speak, of whom that God sent Christ to be a High Priest after the
order of Melchizedec, Heb. 6.20. For it is evident that our Lord sprung out of
Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood; but we having
now a high Priest, even Christ Jesus. Now concerning the Levitical Priesthood
is now ended, it is only the Priesthood of Melchizedec's order that we attend
too. Now let me tell you what was his order, his Order was to administer the
Sacrament of Christ's body to Abraham, being as a Figure of Christ's last Supper,
which was bread and wine, Genesis 14. what recompense was admitted for Melchizedec
Priest of the most high God. Abraham the faithful gave him Tyths of all. Genesis
14. then is it not necessary that our Priests that administer the Sacrament and
attend on the service of God should have tyths of all? You Will say Priesthood was
changed, and old things became new; and how then must of necessity be a change
of the Law? yes, I grant this, but not a quit^ destroying of the Law: Christ
came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it; for the law made nothing perfect
but the bringing in of a better hope by which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. 7.16.
For when Christ came into ye world he preached Baptism of repentance, warning
all both Priest and people to hearken to his Doctrine wc was not grievous, and
to take observation by him, to walk humbly before God: the Apostle says, that
the Minister must live of his ministering; and how also the Minister of God must
be chosen and approved of his ministering. Now when that Christ came and said,
there needs must be a change of the Law, and things must become new, is thus
first the old Ceremonies of the Law are abolished, as your Tabernacle and
Candlesticks, and Shewbread, the holiest of all with the Golden Censor, the
Golden Pot, Seraphin of glory, shadowing the Mercy Seat, wherein went the High
Priest to offer the blood of Balis and Calves for himself and the sorrows of
the people, which was but a Figure for the time then present, but could never
make the service perfect Heb. 9. are to be left off by us Christians, and all
the Ceremonies that attend to the same purpose, those are to be changed and the
administration, for which the Levitical Priest which makes a change of the Law;
for when Christ came into the world he offered his own body as a sacrifice for
the people his own blood as a ransom for all: then what more is the blood of
Christ though the eternal spirit of God, better then the blood of Bulls and
Calves. Christ offered but once for all to bear the sins of the people, and
unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto
salvation, Heb. 9.28. Christ dying, leaves all to his Disciples, and ordains
them next in the Church; ^e also chused Elders, called Bishops; the Bishops
choose Ministers qualified for the Gospel: and so all along God has set in his
Church Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers, and Governors, 1 Cor. 12.28. and
ordains all: there shall be a way of maintenance for his Teachers according
to the direction of that Government that is set in the Church: so this
Government and many other before them give the Ministers of God their
maintenance by way of tyths, to preach the Gospel after the order of
Melchizedec for ever. A way of maintenance must be paid for the Ministry; then
how can it be better then by way of Tithes? for if it was put to the
Consciences of some men of resolute spirits they would pay nothing, and by such
means the Gospel of Christ would be discountenanced; or if all people should
have liberty of Conscience to do what they list, the Sabbath day would be of
little regard, and a world of evil conceits practiced, every man running after
the frowardness of his own heart; we should have murder, whoredom,
drunkenness, and woeful actions publicly committed: then all these
abominations would rely upon the Governor of the people: therefore judge you,
is it not more pleasing to God and Man to have this Kingdom established with
Truth and uprightness, and thus far I have handled Tithes and Priesthood.

Look what the King does, so far as is not contrary to the Word of God, we are
bound to be obedient to his Laws; and we had also better to rest in quiel and
peace with all men, and for quietness sake to give to men that which is not
due then to withhold the due from any man.

The next things I speak of is Baptism and the Lords Supper, approving them to
be expedient and pleasing to God, and profitable to man: As for Baptism of
Infants, it is very fit, for Christ said except you receive the Kingdom of
Heaven as this (...) Child you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Luke
18.16. Which of you that denies Baptism in Infants that ever receives the
Kingdom of God, are freer from sin then a little child: besides know you not
that the old Circumcision was a Figure of our Baptism which ought to be
administered on the eighth day, did not Paul Baptize whole Households, yea whole
Nations, whereof Gentiles were a part; and the reason (...) Circumcision was
turned to Baptism, was because that every thing containing to godliness
should be done in the Name of Christ, the Son of God; as there was a change of
the Order of Priesthood, so there was a change of the old Circumcision to
Baptism: and why men and women were baptized, was because they had received
but a Figure of so great a solemnity; and why Christ was baptized after
circumcision, was because he accepted if as pleasing to God the Father, and far
more excellent then circumcision, and to fulfill all righteousness: what good
Baptism does, is this, only a sign of grace of Gods holy Spirit, ascending on
a creature according to his external conspiration; for it is not the washing of
the body in water that washes away sin, but of Christ's only Blood that
purifies the creatures: circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing,
it is the n^wnesse of life and the continuing therein; for he that is a believer
when he is baptized, if he does not perfectly serve God, is in a far greater
error then a little child. Much more I could have spoke, but this shall serve
for the proof of Baptism of Infants. Now coming to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; Christ said at his last Supper to his Disciples, Take, eat, this is my
Body; the outward visible sign was Bread Christ brake, but his pure Body is the
saving grace and health of our soul: And as often as it is done, it is done it
is in in remembrance of Christ: In the same manner he also took the Cup,
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, and as often as you eat this
Bread, and drink of this Cup, you do it in remembrance of me, to show the Lords
Death till he come; Matthew. 26.16. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24,25 26.
Now against all opposers of this Truth that denies whatsoever in this Book I
have writ, both of the Church and her Worship, the Apostle Paul approves of
the Church, being abovesaid, saying to unworthy Receivers, Have you not Houses
to eat and drink in, or despise you the Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.22. and in the
next Verse, as much as the Apostle should say, You are a shame to good men,
shall I praise you in this, nay I praise you not, the type of the same worship
was administered to Abraham by Melchizedec, and established for ever. Jesus
Christ the eternal Priest governs this Church and people according to his
will. So desiring all people to be steadfast in the doctrine of the Truth, and
give no heed to every spirit; for that spirit that denies the Ordinance of
God, cannot be a stable spirit by the will of God; and I hope I have said
enough to convince the gainsayers of this truth.

And so to draw to my Exhortation and to the end of my Book, I beseech our Men
in Power, as our King his Council, and Parliament to execute all judgment and
justice according to equity and right; and let no honor, no bounty, no wealth,
no greatness, nor no tall Ceder have any friendship or favor in an unjust
cause, then the poorest, raggedst, meanest and simplest shrub. But that vice
may be punished and evil works, to the everlasting establishment of Truth. O
look upon the poor of these Kingdoms whom the rich man inslaves, and let the
flourishing Gospel have a free passage: O let it be poured out as Oil to our
festring sores, send out chosen and skilful Doctors of our poor souls, that may
show us a light by their zeal, and rehearse the truth with boldness from that
fountain which ever springs. O you Bishops and Ministers be you qualified
with all the properties of godliness, that by your teaching and well grounded
exhortations, we may reap profit and be edifled to the redressing of our
perplexed souls: and as you have the charge of the peoples souls in your
tuition, as the sower should sow his seed to be fruitful, so should the
well-grounded Word of God be preached abroad to the profit of all hearers. And
you professors and people that make such a great do about Religion, God will
punish your ignorance, and not let your false interpretation go unpunished; for
know you not what Paul says, There shall come such as shall speak evil of
Dignities. Jude 8. O friends speak not evil of Dignities, but be in obedience
to all men as God has commanded: Lot was obedient to the Angels at the gate of
Sodom when he rose and met them bowing himself to the ground, Genesis 19.1. The
Apostle of Christ has commanded several times all people to obey Magistrates,
and to submit to all men; that fulfills the word that says, Have no respect no
persons; feast not the rich and send the poor empty away. Though Haman was
hanged for acting evil against Mordecai because he would not obey him, and as he
would have served himself so was he served: yet this was no example for any to
continue unobedient, but an example for men not to seek a man's life, because he
will not honor them: and as for all such as goes on in these things, I durst
not bring in railing accusations, but to say, the Lord rebuke them, Jude verse
9. Esther 7.10. And indeed contrarily to the Word of God they go and speak evil
of things they know not, ye say they have the Light of CHRIST, which I have
proved so be darkness; they know not but naturally as bruit beasts: in these
things they corrupt themselves, but woe unto them for they run greedily after
the errors of Balaam; Clouds they are without water, raging waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars to whom is reserved the blackness
and darkness for ever, Jude 10, 11, 12, 13 verses.

Christian Friends, withraw your selves from those men, and hearken to the
Ministers, and walk before God, as in purity unto honor, and live under this
established Government, the Church and her Worship, worthily as Christians
ought to do, disowning of nothing in Scripture but full what I have subscribed
And if you will but learn to walk thus perfect in Love and Charity, 'twill bind
your hope to a perfect assurance of Eternal SALVATION; So the whole Trinity
enabling you, as God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, inlighten you in the
Truth, through this evil world to Everlasting Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

