THE GLORY OF A TRUE CHURCH, And its Discipline displayed. Wherein a true
Gospel Church is described. Together with the Power of the Keys, and who are to
be let in, and who to be shut out.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Mat. 18.18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

LONDON; Printed in the Year 1697.

To the Baptized Churches, particularly to that under my Care.
My Brethren,
EVery House or Building consists both of Matter and Form: And so does the
Church of Christ, or House of the Living God.

The Matter or Materials with which it is built are Lively Stones, ^. e.
Converted Persons: Also the Matter and Form must be according to the Rule and
Pattern showed in ^he Mount, I mean Christ's Institution, and the Apostolical
Churches Constitution, and not after Men's Inventions.

Now some Men, because the Ty^ical Church of the Jews was Na^ional, and took in
their Carnal Seed (as such) therefore the same Mat^er and Form they would have
under the Gospel.

But tho a Church be rightly built in both these respects, i.e. of fit Matter
and right Form, yet without a regular and orderly Discipline, it will soon lose
its Beauty, and be polluted.

Many Reverend Divines of the Congregational way, have written most excellently
(it is true) upon th^^ Subject, I mean on Church Discipline; but the Books are
so voluminou^ that the Poorer Sort cannot purchas^ them, and many others have
not Tim^ or Learning enough to improve them to their Profit; and our Brethren
the Baptists have not written (as I ca^ gather) on this Subject by it self
Therefore I have been earnestly desired by our Members, and also by on^ of our
Pastors, to write a small and plain Tract concerning the Rules (...) the
Discipline of a Gospel Church that all Men may not only know our Faith, but see
our Order in this cas^ also. True, this (tho plain) is bi^ short, but may be it
may provoke some other Person to do it more fully. Certainly, ignorance of the
rules of Discipline causes no small trouble and disorders in our Churches; and
if this may be a Prevention, or prove profit able to any, let God have the
Glory, and I have my End: Who am, Yours

Aug. ^^* 1697. Benj. Keach.

The Glory of a Gospel Church, and the true Orderly Discipline thereof
explained.
Concerning a True and Orderly Gospel Church.
BEfore there can be any Orderly Discipline among a Christian Assembly, they
must be orderly and regularly constituted into a Church State, according to the
Institution of Christ in the Gospel.

1. A Church of Christ, Act. 2.41, 42, 43, 44.
according to the Gospel-Institution, is a Congregation of Godly Christians,
Act. 8.14. Act. 19.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. ^.1, 2. and ^.12, 13, 19.
who as a Stated-Assembly (being first baptized upon the Profession of Faith)
do by mutual agreement and consent give themselves up to the Lord, Col. 1.2, 4,
12.
and one to another, according to the Will of God; 1 Pet. 2.5.
and do ordinarily meet together in one Place, Act. 5.13, 14.
for the Public Service and Worship of God; Romans 6.17.
among whom the Word of God and Sacraments are duly administered, Heb. 6.1, 2.
according to Christ's Institution.

Romans 6.3, 4, 5.
2. The Beauty and Glory of which Congregation does consist in their being all
Converted Persons, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
or lively Stones; being by the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
united to Jesus Christ the Precious Cornerstone, and only foundation of every
Christian, Col. 2.19.
as well as of every particular Congregation, and of the whole Catholic Church.

3. That every Person before they are admitted Members, in such a Church so
constituted, must declare to the Church (or to such with the Pastor, that they
shall appoint) what God has done for their Souls, Psa. 66.16. Act. 11.4, 5, 6,
etc. 23, 24.
or their Experiences of a Saving work of Grace upon their Hearts; and also the
Church should enquire after, 1 Pet. 3.15.
and take full satisfaction concerning their Holy Lives, 2 Cor. 8.5.
or Good Conversations. Jer. 50.5.


And when admitted Members, before the Church they must solemnly enter into a
Covenant, to walk in the Fellowship of that particular Congregation, Heb. 13.17.
and submit themselves to the Care and Discipline thereof, and to walk
faithfully with God in all his Holy Ordinances, and there to be fed and have
Communion, and worship God there, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
when the Church meets (if possible) and give themselves up to the watch and
charge of the Pastor and Ministry thereof: the Pastor then also signifying in
the name of the Church their acceptance of each Person, and endeavor to take
the care of them, and to watch over them in the Lord, (the Members being first
satisfied to receive them, and to have Communion with them.) And so the Pastor
to give them the right Hand of Fellowship of a Church, or Church Organical.

Of an Organical Church.
A Church thus constituted ought forthwith to choose them a Pastor, Elder or
Elders, and Deacons, (we reading of no other Officers, or Offices abiding in
the Church) and what kind of Men they ought to be, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and how qualified, is laid down by Paul to Timothy, Tit. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and to Titus. Moreover, they are to take special care, that both Bishops,
Overseers, or Elders, as well as the Deacons, have in some competent manner all
those Qualifications; and after in a Day of solemn Prayer and Fasting, Tit.
1.7. Act. 6.6.
that they have elected them, 2 Timothy 5.22.
(whether Pastor, etc. or Deacons) and they accepting the Office, must be
ordained with Prayer, and laying on of Hands of the Eldership; being first
proved, and found meet and fit Persons for so Sacred an Office: Therefore such
are very disorderly Churches who have no Pastor or Pastors ordained, they
acting not according to the Rule of the Gospel, having something wanting.

Of the work of a Pastor, Bishop or Overseer.
1. THe work of a Pastor is to preach the Word of Christ, or to feed the Flock,
1 Cor. 9.16, 17.
and to administer all the Ordinances of the Gospel which belong to his Sacred
Office, Act. 20.31 35.
and to be faithful and laborious therein, studying to show himself approved
unto God, 2 Timothy 2.15.
a Workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 2
Cor. 4.1, 2.
He is a Steward of the Mysteries of God, 1 Timothy 3.
therefore ought to be a Man of good Understanding and Experience, being sound
in the Faith, and one that is acquainted with the Mysteries of the Gospel: Jer.
3.15.
Because he is to feed the People with Knowledge and Understanding. He must be
faithful and skilful to declare the Mind of God, 2 Timothy 4.2.
and diligent therein, also to preach in season and out of season; God having
committed unto him the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19
a most choice and sacred Trust. What Interest has God greater in the World
which he has committed unto Men than this? Moreover, he must make known the
whole Counsel of God to the People. Act. 20.20, 27.


2. A Pastor is to visit his Flock, Pro. 27.23.
to know their state, 1 Thessalonians. 5.15.
and to watch over them, to support the weak, and to strengthen the
feeble-minded, and succor the tempted, and to reprove them that are unruly.

3. To pray for them at all times, and with them also when sent for, and
desired, and as Opportunity serves; and to sympathize with them in every State
and Condition, with all Love and Compassion.

4. And to show them in all respects, as near as he can, 1 Timothy 4.12.
a good Example in Conversation, Charity, Faith and Purity; that his Ministry
may be the more acceptable to all, and the Name of God be glorified, and
Religion delivered from Reproach.

5. He must see he carries it to all with all Impartiality, Jam. 2.4.
not preferring the Rich above the Poor, 1 Timothy 5.21.
nor lord it over. 1 Pet. 5.3. and 5.6.
God's Heritage, nor assume any greater Power than God has given him; but to
show a humble and meek Spirit, nay to be clothed with Humility.

The Office and Work of Deacons.
The Deacons Work.
THE Work of Deacons is to serve Tables, Act. 6.1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10.
viz. to see to provide for the Lord's Table, the Minister's Table, Acts 5.7,
8, 9, 10.
and the Poor's Table (1.) They should provide Bread and Wine for the Lord's
Table. (2.) See that every Member contributes to the Maintenance of the
Ministry, 1 Cor. 16.2.
according to their Ability, and their own voluntary Subscription or
Obligation. (3.) That each Member do give weekly to the Poor, as God has
blessed him. (4.) Also visit the Poor, and know their Condition as much as in
them lies; Acts 6.1.
that none, especially the aged Widows, be neglected.

Of the Duty of Church Members to their Pastor.
1 st. IT IS the Duty of every Member to pray for their Pastor and Teachers.
Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. ^.25.
pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may run and be glorified. Again, says
Paul, Praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of utterance,
Heb. 13.18.
to speak the Mystery of Christ. Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church
unto God for him. They that neglect this Duty seem not to care either for their
Minister, or their own Souls, or whether Sinners be converted, and the Church
edified or not. They pray for their daily Bread, and will they not pray to have
the Bread of Life plentifully broken to them?

Motives to this.
1. Ministers Work is great: Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.


1 Cor. 16.9.
2. The Opposition is not small which is made against them.

1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.
3. God's loud Call is (as well as Ministers themselves) for the Saints
continual Prayers and Supplication for them.

4. Their Weakness and Temptations are many.

5. The Increase and Edification of the Church depends upon the Success of
their Ministry.

6. If they fall or miscarry, God is greatly dishonored, and his Ways and
People reproached.

2 dly. They ought to show a reverential Estimation of them, 2 Cor. 3.19, 20.
being Christ's Ambassadors, also called Rulers, Angels, etc. they that honor
them, and receive them, honor and receive Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13.
Esteem them very highly in Love for their Work sake. Again, he says, Let the
Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5.17.
be accounted worthy of double Honor, especially they who labor in Word and
Doctrine: that is, as I conceive, such that are most laborious.

3 dly. It Is their Duty to submit themselves unto them, that is, in all their
Exhortations, good Counsels and Reproofs; and when they call to any
extraordinary Duty, as Prayer, Fasting, or days of Thanksgiving, if they see no
just cause why such days should not be kept, they ought to obey their Pastor or
Elder, as in other cases also. Heb. 13.5, 17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves.

4 thly. It is their Duty to take care to vindicate them from the unjust
Charges of evil Men, or Tongue of Infamy, Jer. 20.10. Zeph. 2.8.
and not to take up a Reproach against them by report, nor to grieve their
Spirits, 2 Cor. 11.21, 23.
or weaken their Hands.

5 thly. It Is the Duty of Members to go to them when under Trouble or
Temptations.

6 thly. It is their Duty to provide a comfortable Maintenance for them and
their Families, suitable to their State and Condition. Let him that is taught in
the Word, Gal. 6.6.
communicate to him that teaches, in all good things. Who goes a Warfare at
his own Charge? 1 Cor. 9.7, 8.
who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? etc. Even so
has the Lord ordained, ver. 14.
that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. ver. 11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall
reap your carnal things? They should minister to them cheerfully with all
readiness of Mind. Mat. 10.9, 10.
Ministers are not to ask for their Bread, but to receive it honorably. The
Ministers Maintenance, tho it is not by Tithes, etc. as under the Law, yet they
have now as just a right to a comfortable Maintenance as they had then, the
equity of the Duty is the same: Our Savior, See Dr. Owen' s Eshod, p. 21, 22.
says Dr. Owen, and the Apostles plead it from grounds of Equity and Justice;
and all kind of Laws and Rules of Righteousness among Men of all sorts calls
for it.

7 thly. It is their Duty to adhere to them, and abide by them in all their
Trials and Persecutions for the Word. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18.
Ye were not ashamed of me in my Bonds, etc.

8 thly. Dr. Eshod, page 27.
Owen adds another Duty of the Members to their Pastor, viz. to agree to come
together upon his Appointment: When they were come, Act. 14.27.
and had gathered the Church together, etc.

Query, Are there no ruling Elders besides the Pastor?

Answ. There might be such in the Primitive Apostolical Church, but we see no
ground to believe it an abiding Office to continue in the Church, but was only
temporary.

1. Because we have none of the Qualifications of such Elders mentioned, or how
to be chosen.

2. Because we read not particularly what their Work and Business is, or how
distinct from preaching Elders; tho we see not but the Church may (if she sees
meet) choose some able and discreet Brethren to be Helps in Government: Romans
12.8.
We have the Qualifications of Bishops and Deacons directly laid down, 1 Timothy 3.
and how to be chosen, and their Work declared, Tit. 1.5, 6, 7.
but of no other Office or Officers in the Church, but these only.

Quest. May an Elder of one Church if called, warrantably administer all
Ordinances to another? Act. 20.17, 27, 28.


Answ. No surely; for we find no warrant for any such Practice, he being only
ordained Pastor or Elder of that particular Church that chose him, Tit. 1.5. 1
Cor. 14.40. 1 Timothy 3.
etc. and has no Right or Authority to administer as an Elder in any other
where he is not so much as a Member.

Quest. May a Church call out a Teacher that is no ordained Elder to administer
all Ordinances to them?

Ans. You may as well ask, May a Church act disorderly? Why were Ministers to
be ordained, if others unordained might warrantably do all their Work? if
therefore they have no Person fitly qualified for that Office, they must look
out from abroad for one that is. Yet (as we say) Necessity has no Law; provided
therefore they cannot do either, it is better their Teacher be called to do it,
than that the Church should be without their Food, and Church-Ordinances
neglected; yet let all Churches take care to organize themselves, and not
through Covetousness, or neglect of Duty, rest incomplete Churches, and so
under Sin. God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33, 38.
in all the Churches of the Saints. And how severely did God deal of old with
such that meddled with the Priests Work and Office, who were not of the
Priesthood, nor called by him to administer in holy things!

Of the reception of Members.
Quest. WHat is the Order of receiving Members into the Church, Of the
reception of Members into the Church.
that were no Members any where before?

Answ. 1. The Person must give an account of his Faith; Psalm. 66.16.
and of the Work of Grace upon his Soul before the Church; Acts 9.26, 27.
and also a strict Enquiry must be made about his Life and Conversation: 3 John
9, 10. Romans 14.17, 19.
but if through Bashfulness the Party cannot speak before the Congregation, 1
Pet. 3.15. 1 Cor. 14.40.
the Elder and two or three more Persons may receive an account of his or her
Faith, and report it to the Church. Romans 15.1, 2.
But if full Satisfaction by the Testimony of good and credible Persons is not
given of the Party's Life and Conversation, Acts 11.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
he must be put by until Satisfaction is obtained in that respect. Moreover,
when the Majority are satisfied, and yet one or two Persons are not, the Church
and Elder will do well to wait a little time, and endeavor to satisfy such
Persons, especially if the Reasons of their dissent seem weighty.

Quest. What is to be done when a Person offers himself for Communion from a
Church that is corrupt, or erroneous in Principles?

Answ. 1. The Church ought to take an account of his Faith in all Fundamental
Points, and of the Work of Grace upon his Heart.

2. And if satisfied, then to send also to that corrupt People, to know whether
they have any thing or not against his Life and Conversation: If satisfied in
both these respects, the Church may receive him.

Quest. To whom is it Members ^oin themselves? is it to the Elder, To whom
Members join themselves.
or to the Church?

Answ. They are joined to the whole Community of the Church, Act. 2.47. and
5.11, 15.
being incorporated as Members thereof, and thereto abide, tho the Pastor be
removed by Death.

The Power of the Keys, with Church -- Discipline, and Members Duties one to
another.
A monthly day to be appointed for Discipline.
1. WE judge it necessary that a Day monthly be appointed particularly for
Discipline, and not to manage such Affairs on the Lord's Day, which should be
spent ^n the public Worship of God, of ^ different nature: besides, such
things may (on the account of Discipline) come before the Church which may not
be expedient to be ^eard on the Lord's Day, lest it ^isturb the Spirits of any
Members, and hinder their Meditation ^n the Word which they have ^ewly heard:
tho in small Congregations perhaps a day in two or three Months may be
sufficient.

The Power of the Keys committed to the Church.
2. The Power of the Keys, or to receive in and shut out of the Congregation, is
committed unto the Church: The Political Power of Christ, Acts 16.5.
says Dr. Chauncy, is in the Church, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3, 6.
whereby it is exercised in the Name of Christ, having all lawful Rule and
Government within it self, which he thus proves, viz.

1. The Church essential is the first Subject of the Keys.

2. They must of necessity to their Preservation, purge themselves from all
pernicious Members.

3. They have Power to organize themselves with Officers. Yet I humbly conceive
I may add, that the Concurrence of the Presbytery is needful hereunto.

4. If need be that they call an Officer from without, or one of another
Church, they must first admit him a Member, that they may ordain their Officer
from among themselves.

5. They have Power to reject a scandalous Pastor from Office and Membership.

'This Power of Christ is exerted as committed to them by the Hands of the
Elder appointed by Christ, Dr. Chauncy on the Power of the Keys, p. 335.
the due management whereof is in and with the Church to be his Care and Trust,
as a Steward, whereof he is accountable to Christ and the Church, not lording
it over God's Heritage. And that the Power of the Keys is in the Church,
appears to me from Mat. 18. If he will not hear the Church; it is not said, if
he will not hear the Elder, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
or Elders. As also that of the Apostle, in directing the Church to cast out
the Incestuous Person, he does not give this Counsel to the Elder or Elders of
the Church, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14.
but to the Church; so he commands the Church to withdraw from every Brother
that walks disorderly. 1 Cor. 5.7.
Purge out the old Leaven, that you may be a new Lump.

Of Church Censures.
NOW as to Church Censures I understand but two besides Suspension, Of
Church Censures.
viz. (1.) Withdrawing from a Member that walks disorderly. (2.) Casting out,
o^ Excommunicating such that are e^ther guilty of notorious or scanda^lous
Crimes, of Heresy, etc. o^ of contemning the Authority o^ the Church.

Briefly to each of these.

1. Suspension is to be when'^ Member falls under Sin, and the Church wants
time fully to hea^ the matter, and so cannot withdraw from him, or cast him out.

2. If any Member walks disorderly, tho not guilty of gross scandalous Sins, he
or she, as soon as it is taken notice of, ought to be admonished, and
endeavors to be used to bring him to Repentance: 2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12.
For we hear that there are some which walk disorderly, not working at all, but
are busy-bodies. Such as meddle with Matters that concern them not, it may be
(instead of following their Trade and Business) they go about from one Member's
House to another, telling or carrying of Tales and Stories of this Brother, or
of that Brother or Sister, which perhaps may be true, or perhaps false, and may
be too to the Reproach or Scandal of some Member or Members, which, if so, it
is backbiting; and that is so notorious a Crime, that without Repentance they
shall not ascend God's holy Hill. Psa. 15.1, 3.
Backbiting is a diminishing our Neighbors, or Brother's good Name, either by
denying him his due Praise, or by saying any thing to his Charge falsely or
irregularly, or without sufficient cause or evidence, Thus our Annotators. But
this of disorderly walking does not amount to such a Crime, but Evils not so
notorious; 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
Now them ^^at are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread. They must be admonished.

1. An Admonition is a faithful Endeavor to convict a Person of a Fault, both
as to Matter of Fact and Circumstance; and this Admonition must be given first,
if it be private, by that Brother that knows or has knowledge of the Fault or
Evil of the Person offending, whether the Elder, or Member; for any private
Brother ought to admonish such with all care and faithfulness before he
proceeds farther. But if it be public, the Church ought to send for the
Offender, and the Pastor must admonish him before all.

2. But if after all due Endeavors used he is not reclaimed, bu^ continues a
disorderly Person, the Church must withdraw from him. Now we command you
Brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6.
is the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Disorderly Members only to be withdrawn
from.
that you withdraw from every B^^ther that walks disorderly, and not after
the Traditions he received from us. This is not a delivering up to Satan,
Excommunicating of dismembring the Person; for this sort are still to be owned
as Members, tho disorderly ones: the Church must note him* so as not to have
Communion or Company with him in that sense; 2 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15.
yet court him not as an Enemy, but exhort him as a Brother: if any Man obey
not our Word, note that Man. It appears that such who refuse to adhere to what
the Pastor commands and exhorts to, in the Name of Christ, are to be deemed
disorderly Persons, Heb. 12.25.
as such are who meet ^ot with the Church when assembled together to worship
God, or that neglect private or family Prayer, or neglect their attendance on
the Lord's Supper, or to contribute to the necessary Charges of the Church, or
suffer any Evils unreproved in their Children; all such may be looked upon
disorderly Walkers, and ought to be proceeded against according to this Rule,
or divulge the private Resolves of the Church, as well as in many like cases.

Of private Offenses of one Brother against another.
1. AS touching private Offenses, Of private Offenses between Brother and
Brother.
the Rule Mat. 18. is to be observed, only this by the way must be premised,
viz. if but one Brother or two have the knowledge of some Members Crime, yet if
it be publicly known to the World, and the Name of God be reproached, it being
an immoral Act, (...) private Brother is not to proceed with such an Offender,
according to Mat. 18. but forthwith to brin^ it to the Church, that the public^
Scandal may be taken off.

2. But if it be a private Offenc^ or Injury done to a Brother (...) Sister in
particular, and not bei^^ a notorious scandalous Sin, tha^ Brother must not
mention it to one Soul, either within, or without the Church, until he has
proceeded according to the Rule.

(1.) He must tell his Brother his Fault. Mat. 18.15.
Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault betwixt thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother.

Thou must labor in Love and all Affections to convince him o^ his Fault; but
if he will not hea^ thee,

(2.) Thou must take one or two more, but be sure see they are discreet
Persons, and such that ar^ most likely to gain upon him; and they with thee are
to labor with all Wisdom to bring him to the sense of his Fault: it is not just
to speak to him, as if that were enough; no, no, but to take all due Pains, and
to strive to convince him, that so the matter may be issued, and the Church not
troubled with it: Mat. 18.16.
But if he will not hear thee, take one or two more, that in the mouth of two
or three Witnesses every word may be established.

3. But if he will not hear them after all due Means and Admonitions used, then
it must be brought to the Church; and if he will not hear the Church, he must
be cast out: Dr. Chauncy, p. 345.
The Elder is to put the Question, whether the offending Brother be in their
Judgments incorrigible, and refuses to hear the Church; which passing in the
Affirmative by the Vote of the Congregation, The Sisters are not to vote in the
Church.
or the Majority of the Brethren by the lifting up of their Hands, or by their
Silence; the Pastor after calling upon God, and opening the nature of the
Offense, and the Justness of their Proceedings, in the Name and by the
Authority of Christ, pronounces the Sentence of E^ communication to this effect.

The Act of Excommunication or Church-Censure.
That A. B. being guilty of great Iniquity, and not manifesting ^^feigned
Repentance, but refusing to hear the Church, I do in the Name, and by the
Authority of Christ committed unto me as Pastor of this his Church, pronounce
and declare that he is to be, and is hereby excommunicated, excluded or cast
out of the Congregation, and no longer to be owned a Brother, 1 Cor. 5.
or a Member of this Church; and this for the destruction of the Flesh, that
his Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

And this we believe is the substance of that which the Apostle calls a
delivering up to Satan, he being cast into the World, which is called the
Kingdom of Satan, where he rules and reigns.

The delivery unto Satan (says Dr. Chauncy) signifies only the solemn
Exclusion of a Person from the Communion of the Church, Page 345.
the visible Kingdom of Christ, and disinfranchizing him, or divesting him of
all visible Right to Church Privileges, casting him into the Kingdom of the
World, where the Prince of Darkness rules in the Children of disobedience. And
this being done, he is to be esteemed to be no better than an Heathen Man, Mat.
18.17.
or Publican, or as an evil Person, and not to have so much as intimate civil
Communion withal.

Of Scandalous Persons guilty of gross Acts of Immorality.
IF any Member fall into any gross Acts of Sin, Of Scandalous Crimes or Evils.
as Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, Fornication, Covetousness, Extortion, or the
like, and it is known and publicly spread abroad to the great scandal and
reproach of Religion, and of the Holy Name of God, his Church, and People; the
said Offender so charged, the Church must send one or two Brethren to him to
come before the Congregation: if he will not come, but does slight and contemn
the Authority of the Church, that will bring farther Guilt upon him, for which
Offense he incurs the Censure before - mentioned But if he does appear, his
Charge is to be laid before him, and the Witnesses called; and after he ha^
made his Defense, and said all he has to say, and the Congregation finds him
Guilty, The Church Censure on notorious Offenders is the same with that in Mat.
18.
then the same Censure is to pass upon him, to the end he may be brought to
unfeigned Repentance, and the Name of God cleared; and some time must be taken
to make it appear that he has true Repentance, by the Reformation of his Life
and holy walking afterward, before he be received again, and the Censure of
the Church in a solemn manner be taken off.

Page 343.
Dr. Chauncy puts this Question,

Quest. How is a Church to proceed in case of open and notorious Scandals?

The Answer is, 'the matter of Fact, as such, being beyond all question; the
Church is to proceed immediately to censure, to vindicate the Honor of Christ
and his Church, and to manifest to the World their just Indignation against
such Notorious Offenders, 1. Tim. 5.24. Act. 5.11. Jud. 23. 1. Cor. 5.
and wait for a well-grounded and tried Evidence of his true Repentance under
that Ordinance of Christ which is appointed to that end. 2 Cor. 7.11.


Observe, It is the opinion of the Doctor, that tho the Person be penitent, yet
because his Sin is open and scandalous, he ought to be cast out to vindicate
the Honor of Christ and the Church, as part of his just Punishment (that being
one reason of the Ordinance of Excommunication) as well as to bring the Person
to through Repentance; and we are of his Mind. Paul takes no notice in the case
of the Incestuous Person of his immediate Repentance; or if he repent not,
then, etc. But says he, deliver such a one to Satan, etc. Says the Lord, Numb.
12.14.
if her Father had but spit in her Face, should she not be ashamed seven Days?
Let her be shut out from the Camp seven Day: (speaking of Miriam) and after
that let her be received in again.

Of dealing with Heretics and Blasphemers.
Of dealing with Heretics.
AS touching Heretics or Heresy, the same Censure, when they are convicted,
ought to pass against them; Heresy is commonly restrained to signify any
perverse Opinion or Error in a fundamental Point of Religion, as to deny the
Being of God, or the Deity of Christ, or his Satisfaction, and Justification
alone by his Righteousness, or to deny the Resurrection of the Body, or eternal
Judgment, or the like. See Pool's Annot. on 1 Cor. 11.19.
Yet our Annotators say, the Word signifies the same thing with Schism and
Divisions; which if so, such that are guilty of Schism or Divisions in the
Church, ought to be excommunicated also. Heresies are called Damnable by the
Apostle Peter; without Repentance such cannot be saved, 2 Pet. 2.1.
as bring in Damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them.

Two things render a Man an Heretic according to the common signification of
the Word. Who is an Heretic.
1. An Error in matters of Faith, Fundamental or Essential to Salvation. 2.
Stubbornness and Contumacy in holding and maintaining it. A Man that is an
Heretic, Tit. 3.10.
after the first and second Admonition reject. Now that this Rejection is all
one with Excommunication, appears by what Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 1.20. Of whom is
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.
whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to Blaspheme. Their
Heresy, or Blasphemy was in saying the Resurrection was past.

Some would have none be counted an Heretic but he who is convicted and
condemned so to be in his own Conscience, mistaking Paul's Words, Knowing that
he that is such, is subverted, being condemned of himself. He may be condemned
of himself, tho not for his Heresy, yet for his spending his Time about
Questions, and strife of Words, to the disquieting the Peace of the Church; or
tho not condemned of himself directly, yet indirectly; according to the Purport
of his own Notion, or what he grants about the Point in Debate, etc. Else the
Apostle refers to some notable and notorious self-condemned Heretic. It is a
great question, whether Hymeneus and Alexander we^^ condemned in their own
Consciences, about that Heresy charged upon them, and yet were delivered up to
Satan. However the Rule is plain, respecting any that are subverted, and
resolutely maintain any Heretical Notion, i. e. after he has been twice (or
oftener) admonished, that is, after all due means used, and pains taken with
him, to convince him of his abominable Error; and yet if he remains obstinate,
he must be delivered up to Satan; that is, the righteous censure of the Church
must pass upon him, as in the case of other notorious Crimes. Heresy is a Work
of the Flesh: and hence some conceive such ought to be punished by the Civil
Magistrate.

Quest. What is an Admonition?

Answ. It is a faithful endeavor to convict a Person of a Fault both as to
matter of Fact, What an admonition is.
and his Duty thereupon, charging it on his Conscience in the Name of the Lord
Jesus with all Wisdom and Authority.

Quest. What is a Church Admonition?

Answ. When an offending Brother rejecting private Admonition by one, or by two
or three Persons; the complaint being brought to the Church by the Elder, the
offending Member is rebuked and exhorted in the Name of the Lord Jesus to due
Repentance; and if convicted, and he repents, the Church forgives him,
otherwise casts him out, as I before showed.

Quest. May a Church admit a Member of another Congregation to have Communion
with them, without an orderly receiving him as a Member?

Answ. If the Person is well known by some of the Church, and that he is an
orderly Member of (...) Church of the same Faith, he being occasionally cast
among them* they may admit him to transie^^ Communion for that time; but i^ he
abides in that Town or City remote to the Church to whom he belongs, he ought
to have his regular dismission, and so be delivered up to the care and watch of
the Church where he desires to communicate.

Quest. If an Excommunicated Person has obtained of God true Repentance, and
desires to be restored to the Church, what is the manner of his Reception? The
manner of the Reception of a communicate Person.


Answ. Upon his serious, solemn and public Acknowledgment thereof before the
Church, and due Satisfaction according to the nature of his Offense being
given, the Elder solemnly proceeds and declares in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Mat. 13.18.
that the sentence which A.B. was laid under (upon his unfeigned Repentance) is
taken off, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.
and that he is received again a as Member, 1 Timothy 5.
etc. To the Praise and Glory of God.

Q. How ought a Pastor to be ^^^lt withal, if he to the knowledge of the
Church, or any Mem^ers thereof, walks disorderly, and unworthily of his
Sacred Of^ice, and Membership?

Take the Answer of another Author here.

Answ.'Those Members, to whom this is manifestly known, How to proceed against
a Scandalous Pastor.
ought to go to him privately, and unknown to any others, (and with the Spirit
of Meekness, in great Humility) lay his Evil before him, and entreat him as a
Father, and not rebuke him as there Equal, much less as their Inferior; and if
they gain upon him, then to receive him into their former Affection and Esteem,
for ever hiding it from all others. But if after all tender entreaties, he
prove Refractory and Obstinate, then to bring him before the Church, and there
to deal with him; they having Two or Three Witnesses in the face of the Church,
to testify matter of Fact against him to their personal Knowledge.

2. But before he be dealt with they must appoint one from among themselves,
qualifyd for the work^^ a Pastor, to execute the Church Censure against him,
etc. Yet n^ doubt, ^ see not if they have none fitly qualified, but the Church
may cast him out,
the Church may Suspend him from his Communion, and exercisin^ of his Office
presently, upon hi^ being fully Convicted. But seeing in the multitude of
Counsel there i^ safety, sure no Church would so proceed without the advice of
the Presbytery, or of a Sister- Church at least.

Q. Suppose a Member should think himself Oppressed by the Church; or should be
Unjustly dealt with; either Withdrawn from, or Excommunicated, has he no Relief
left him?

Answ. We believe he has Relief; Relief for a Member unjustly dealt with.
and also, that there is no Church infallible, but may E^^ in some points of
Faith, as wel^ as in Discipline. And the way proposed, and agreed to, in a
general Assembly, held in London, 1692. of the Elders, Ministers, and
Messengers of our Churches, we approve of, which is this; viz. The grieved or
injured Person may make his Application to a Sister* Church for Communion; and
that Church may send some Brethren in their names, to that Congregation that
have dealt with him, and they to see if they can possibly restore him to his
place; but if they cannot, then to report the matter charged, with the Proofs,
to the Church that sent them: and if that Congregation shall, after a full
Information, etc. be persuaded the Person was not orderly dealt with, they may
receive him into their Communion.

Of such that cause Divisions; or Unduly separate themselves from the Church.
THis I find is generally asserted by all Congregational Divines, The cause of
Disorders in the Church.
or worthy men, i. e. That no person has power to dismember himself: i. e. He
cannot, without great Sin, translate himself from one Church to another; but
ought to have a Dismission from that Church where he is a Member: Rom, 6, 17.
Heb, 6, 2, 3
provided that Church is orderly constituted, nothing being wanting as to any
Essential of Salvation; or of Church Communion: But if not, yet he ought to
endeavor to get his orderly Di^mission.

Nor is every small Differenc^ in some points of Religion, (o^ Notions of
little moment,) an^ grounds for him to desire his Dismission.

That he cannot, nor ought no^ to Translate himself, see what (...) Reverend
Writer says: Dr. Chauncy page 337.


He cannot, says he, for many Reasons:

1. It is not Decent, much le^ an Orderly going away; but very unmannerly, and
a kind o^ running away. Phil. 1.27. Tit. 2.10.


2. Such a Departure is not approved of in Families, or Civi^ Societies. The
great Danger of making a Rent in a Church.


3. It destroys the Relation o^ Pastor and People: For wha^ may be done by one
individua^ Person, may be done by all.

4. What Liberty in this kin^ belongs to the Sheep, belongs t^ the Shepherd;
much more he man then also leave his Flock at h^ Pleasure, without giving
notice o^ reason thereof to the Church.

Romans 1.31.
5. It is breaking Covenant wit^ Christ, and with the Congregation, and
therefore a great Immorality; he being under Obligation to abide steadfastly
with the Church; i. e. till the Church judge he has a lawful Call to go to
another Congregation.

6. It Is a Schism: For if there be any such thing in the World, Acts 2.42.
it is of particular Societies. 1 Cor. 12.6, 14.7.5.1.20, 21, 25.


7. It is a despising the Government of the Church.

Heb. 10.25. Jude, 19.
8. It is a particular Member's assuming to himself the use of the Keys; or
rather stealing of them.

9. There is as much reason Persons should come into a Church when they please,
without asking Consent, as depart when they please.

10. It is very evil and unkind in another Church, to receive such an one, as
not doing as they would, or should be dealt with.

11. Such Practices can issue in nothing else than the breach and confusion
of all particular Churches; and make them like Parishes.

12. Such Departures cannot be pleaded for in the least, but upon the notion of
a Catholic visible Church, wherein all Members and Officers are run into one
Organized Church, which will, and must introduce, a Coordinate (if not a
Subordinate) Pastoral Government, by combination of Elders, over all the
Churches; and therefore by Synods and Classes.

13. It is like a Leak in a Ship, which, if not speedily stopped, will Sink at
last.

14. It tends to Anarchy, putting an Arbitrary Power in every Member.

15. It breaks all Bonds of Love, and raises the greatest Animosities between
Brethren and Churches.

16. It is a great Argument of some Guilt lying-on the Party.

Thus the Dr.

Again he says,

It is no more in the just Power of a particular Member to dissolve his
Church-Relation, than in a Man to kill himself: but by his said withdrawment he
does Schismatically rend himself from his Communion, and so Separate himself
Sinfully. Jude 19. 1 Cor. 1.10. and 3.3. and 11.18. Heb. 10.22.23, 25.


Quest. What is the just Act of the Church, that clothes this irregular
Separation, with the Formality as it were of an Excomcommunication.

He Answers. (Calling) this a mixed Excommunication i. e. Originally proceeding
from, and consists in, the act of the Brother himself, and is the Formality of
his Offense; upon which proceeds the just and unviolable act of the Church.

The Judgment of the Church publicly declared by the Elder of the
Congregation; as the Dr. words it; viz.

That A. B. having so and so irregularly and sinfully withdrawn himself from
the Communion of the Congregation, Mixed Excommunication.
we do now adjudge him a Non-member, Romans 19.17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.14, 15.
and one that is not to Communicate with the Church, in the special Ordinances
of Communion, Jude 12.
till due Satisfaction is given by him.

Yet we believe, as the Dr's Opinion is, that a Church may, (if they find the
Case to be warranted by the Word of God; or as it may be circumstanced) give a
dismission to a Member, when insisted on, to another regular Church, tho not in
every case of small Offense, or dissent in some small points of different
Notions, Let none call the Church a Prison, since all do voluntarily Covenant
with it, and it is dangerous to break Christ's bonds.
or from Prejudice; for, that may tend soon to dissolve any Church: For what
Church is it, where every Member is of one mind in every particular case and
thing about Notions of Religion?

And such that make Divisions, and cause Schisms, or Discord among Brethren, 2
Timo. 2.23.
to disturb the Peace of the Church, if they cannot be reclaimed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
must be marked, and dealt with as great Offenders: Prove. 6.16.
It being one of those things that God hates, and is an abomination to him.

Quest. What is a full and lawful Dismission of a Member to another Church,
upon his removing his Habitation, or on other warranted Cases.

Answ. We answer a Letter Testimonial, Of a Let^er of Re^ommenda^ion.
or Recommendation of the Person; and if he intends to abide there wholly, to
give him up to that Communion, and Fellowship, Rom 16.1.2.
to be watched over in the Lord. Acts 18.27.


Of Disorders, or causes of Discords, and how to be prevented, corrected, and
removed.
I. ONE cause of Discord is, through the Ignorance in some Members of the Rules
of Discipline, Mat. 18.15.
and right Government; Disorders Corrected and Removed.
particularly when that Rule in Matthew. 18. is not followed.

But one Person ^^kes up an Offense against another, and speaks, of it to this
or that Person, before he has, told the Brother offending, of it; which is a
paspable Sin, and a direct violation of Christ's holy Precept: and such must,
as Offenders themselves, be in a Gospel way dealt with.

To prevent this, the Discipline, of the Church should be taught; and the
Members informed of their Duties.

II Another thing that causes Trouble and Disorder in a Church, is want of
Love, and tender Affections to one another; as also not having a full sight and
sense of the great evil of breaking the Bonds of Peace, and Unity: John 13.12,
17, Ephesians. 4.3. Heb. 13.1. Ephesians. 4.31, 32. and cap. 5.2.
O that all would lay this abominable Evil to Heart, how base a thing it is to
break the Peace of a private Family, or Neighborhood; but much more sinful to
disturb the Peace of the Church of the living God, and break the bonds of the
Unity thereof. Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity! But, Psalm. 132.1.
O how ugly and hateful is the contrary! Jam. 3.16.


III. Another disorderly Practice is this, When one Member or another knows of
some sinful act, or evils done by one or more Members, Acts 5.3.8.
and they conceal it; or do not act according to the Rule; Levit. 19.17.
pretending they would not be looked upon as Contentious Persons: but hereby
they may become guilty of other Men's Sins, and also suffer the Name of God, and
the Church, to lie under Reproach, and all through their neglect. This is a great
Iniquity.

IV. When an Elder, or Church shall know that some persons are Scandalous in
their Lives, or Hereretical in Judgment, and yet shall bear or connive with
them.

V. When Members take liberty to hear at other Places, Acts, 4.23.
when the Church is assembled to worship God: this is nothing less than a
breaking their Covenant with the Church, and may soon dissolve any Church: For
by the same Rule, one may take that liberty, another; nay, every Member may.
Moreover, it casts a Contempt upon the Ministry of the Church, and tends to
cause such who are Hearers to draw off, and to be Disaffected with the Doctrine
taught in the Church, (they knowing these Dissenters do belong unto it.) I
exhort therefore, in the Name of Christ, this may be prevented: And any of you
that know who they are, that take this Liberty, pray discover them to the
Church. We lay no restraint upon our Members from hearing such, who are sound
in the Faith at other times.

VI. The Liberty that some take to hear Men that are corrupt in their
Judgments; and so take in unsound Notions, and also strive to distill them into
the Minds of others, as if they were of great Importance. Alas, how many are
Corrupted in these days, with Arminianism, Socinianism, and what not! This
causes great trouble and disorder.

Pet. 2.2.
VII. When one Church shall receive a Member or Members of another Congregation
without their Consent or Knowledge: Nay such that are Disorderly and may be
loose Livers, or cast out for Immorality; or Persons filled with Prejudice
without cause. This is enough to make Men Atheists, or contemn all Church
Authority, and Religion: For has not one regular Church as great Authority
from Christ as another.

VIII. Another disorder is, when Members are received without the general
Consent of the Church; Acts 9.27.
or before good Satisfaction is taken of their Godly Lives, and Conversations:
Or when a Church is too remiss in the reception of her Members.

IX. Another disorder is, when a Church shall receive a charge against a
Member, (it being an Offense between Brother and Brother) before an orderly
proceed has been made by the offended Person. Mat. 18.15.


X. When Judgment passes with Partiality; some are connived at, out of favor
or affection: Levi was not to know his Father or Mother in Judgment.

XI. Psalm. 63.1.
When Members do not constantly and early attend our public Assemblies, Cant.
7.12.
and the worship of God on the Lord's Day especially, Mark 16.1.
but are remiss in that matter: This is a great Evil.

XII. When part of a Church shall meet together as dissatisfied, to consult
Church Matters, without the knowledge or consent of the Church, or Pastor: 1
Cor. 1^ 25.
This is disorderly, Romans 16.17.
and tends to division; and such should be marked.

XIII. Another thing that tends to disquiet the Peace of the Church is, when
there are any undue heats of Spirit, or Passion showed in the Pastor, 2 Timothy
2.25.
or others, in managing the Discipline of the Church. Have we not found by
experience the sad effect of this? Therefore things must be always managed with
coolness, and sweetness of Spirit, and moderation; every Brother having liberty
to speak his mind, and not to be interrupted, until he has done; nor above one
speak at once.

XIV. When one Brother or more Dissents in the sentiments of their Minds from
the Church, in any matters circumstantial; either in repect of Faith, Jude, 19.
Practice, or Discipline, and will not submit to the Majority, but raise Feuds;
Jam. 3.14.16.
nay, will rend themselves from the Church, rather than consent.

I Quaery, what reason, or ground, has any Man to refuse Communion with a
Church that Christ has not left, but has Communion with?

XV. When any Member shall divulge, or make known to Persons, not of the
Congregation, nor being concerned in those matters what is done in
Church-meetings, the Church in this respect (as well as in others) is to be as
a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed. This often times
occasions great Grief, Cant. 4.12.
and the disorderly Person should be detected. Is it not a shame to any of a
private Family, to divulge the Secrets of the Family? But far greater shame do
these expose themselves unto.

XVI. Another disorderly Practice is this; viz. When a Member shall suggest,
and seem ^o insinuate into the minds of other Members some evil against their
Pastor, Romans 1.29.
yet will not declare what it is; 1 Timothy 6.4.
and may only be evil Surmisings, Zech. 7.10.
and out of Prejudice; and yet refuses to acquaint the Pastor with what it is:
This is very abominable, 1 Timothy 5.19
and a palpable violation of the Rule of the Gospel, and Duty of Members to
their Minister. Such a person ought to be severely rebuked, and if he confess
not his Evils, and manifests unfeigned Repentance, to be dealt with farther.
Moreover, it is a great evil in another to hear such base* Insinuations, and
neither rebuke the Accuser, and so discharge his Duty, nor take two or three
more to bring the Person to Repentance. 1 Timo. 5.19.
If he deal thus by a private Brother, it is a great Evil, but far worse to an
Elder, whose Name and Honor, ought with all Care and Justice, to be kept up,
as being more Sacred.

XVII. Another disorderly Practice is, 1 Cor. 8.14.
(which causes much trouble) When the public Charges of a Church are not
equally born; but some too much burdened, when others do but little or nothing.

^ Cor. 16.2.
And also, when every one does not Contribute to the Poor, as God has blessed
them, on every Lord's day, or first day of the Week, as he has Commanded.

XVIII. Another disorder is this* When Members refuse to communicate with the
Church at the Lord's table, because some person, or persons, they think are
guilty of Evil, Math. 18.
and yet they have not proceeded with them according to Rule: These either
Excommunicate the Church, or themselves, or those Persons at least, they
censure unwarrantably.

I beseech you for Christ's sake, that this may never be any more among you:
You ought not to deal thus with them; or refuse your Communion, (tho faulty)
until the Church has dismembered, or withdrawn from them; or at least Suspended
them.

XIX. When one Member, shall believe, or receive a report against another, Ier.
20.10.
before he knows the truth of the matter.

XX. When an Accusation is brought against an Elder, contrary to the Rule,
which ought not be without two or three Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19.
as to the matter of Fact.

XXI. When the word of God is not carefully attended upon, Isa. 55.^.
on Week, or Lecture-days, Acts 2, 1, 2.
by the Members generally; tho the said Meeting being appointed by the whole
Church. Acts, 10, 33.


XXII. When Days of Prayer and Fasting, Joel 2, 1^.
and of public Thanksgiving, or when days of Disciplining are not generally
attended upon.

Lastly, When Gifted Brethren are not duly encouraged: First privately to
exercise their Gifts; and being in time approved, called forth to Preach or
Exercise in the Church: And when encouragment is not given to bestow Learning
also upon them, for their better Accomplishment. What will become of the
Churches in time to come, if this be not prevented with speed?

What tends to the Glory and Beauty of a true Gospel Church.
What tends to the Glory of a Church of Christ.
I. THat which Primarily tends to the Glory of a Church is the Foundation on
which it is Built, 1 Cor. 3, 4.
which is Jesus Christ. Now this is a blessed and glorious Foundation.

I. In respect of God the Father, who laid this Foundation in his eternal
Purpose, Counsel, and Decree; Isa. 28.16.
Behold I lay in Sion; and this is as the result of his infinite Wisdom, Love,
and Mercy to his Elect.

II. In respect had unto Christ himself, who is this Foundation.

1. He is a Suitable Foundation.

1. In respect to the Glory of God in all his Attributes.

2ly. In respect to our Good; he answering all our wants, who are united to
him, or built upon him.

3. In respect of the preciousness of Christ, as a Foundation; a Stone; a
precious Stone.

4. In respect to the Durableness of it i. e. a tried Stone; Isa. 28.16.
a sure Foundation.

Brethren, a Foundation of a House must of necessity be laid; no House can be
built without a good Foundation, that will stand firm, and unmovable; it is the
strongest part of the Building, and it bears all the weight of the whole
Superstructure: So does Jesus Christ.

III. The Beauty and Glory of a true Church, consists in the true and regular,
or right Constitution of it; nothing being wanting that is Essential to it,
upon this account.

IV. It consists in the Excellency, Glory, and Suitableness of the materials
it is Built with, answering to the Foundation; all precious Stones, lively
Stones; all regenerated Persons. 1 Pet. 2, 5, 6.


V. In that all the Stones be well Hewed and Squared; all made fit for the
Building, before laid in. Were it thus, there would not be so great a Noise of
the Hammer and Ax, in Church Discipline, 1 Kings 6, 7.
as indeed there is. It was not thus in the Type, I mean in Solomon's Temple.

VI. It Is Beauty and Glory consists in that all the Stones being not only
united by the Spirit, to Christ the Foundation, but also to one another in
sincere Love and Affection. In whom all the Building, fitly Framed together,
grows up unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.


VII. It consists in the Holiness and Purity of the Lives and Conversations
of all the Members: Be ye Holy, 1 Pet, 1, 16,
for I am Holy. Holiness becomes thy House, Psalm 93.5.
O God, for Ever.

VIII. It consists in that sweet Union and Concord that ought to be in the
Church; all like the Horse: in Pharoah's Chariot, Cant. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.3.
drawing together: Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace. By this shall all Men know ye are my Disciples, if you Love one another.

IX. In their having the divine Presence with them: Exodus 20.24. Mat, 18, 20,
Or when the Glory of God fills his Temple.

X. In keeping out all unsanctified, or unclean Persons, or if they get in, to
purge them out by a strict and holy Discipline, or else it will soon loose it is
Beauty. 1 Cor. 5.5, 6.7.


XI. In that Zeal and Equality that should be showed in all to keep up the
Honor, Peace, 2 Cor. 8.14. Tit. 3.2.
and Comfort of the Church, and the Ministry thereof.

XII. In the Administration of right Discipline; to see no neglect nor delaying
of Justice, through carelessness, or Partiality: (1.) No ways partaking of other
Men's Sins; which may be done by Conniving at it; (2.) By Lessening or
Extenuating of it (3.) By Countenancing, or any ways Encouraging any in Sin.
(4.) By not Restoring a Brother, that confesses his Sin when overtaken. (5.)
Not bringing in a just Charge against an Offender, nor rebuking him; and yet
have Communion with him.

2ly. Not to wrest Judgment, out of it is true and right Channel: Nor to inflict
a greater censure than the Law of Christ requires on any.

3ly. Timely to acquit, and discharge a penitent Person.

4ly. Not to do any thing on^ of Prejudice, but in Love, and Bowels, of
affection; and to do all in Christ's Name, or by his authority.

XIII. To Sympathize with the Afflicted, Succor the Tempted, and Relieving the
Poor and Distressed: Rejoicing with them that Rejoice, and Mourning with them
that Mourn.

XIV. To speak evil of no Man; not only speaking no evil of their Brethren, but
of no Man, to his hurt or injury, detracting from his Worth and Honor: See
Sirach, Whether it be to Friend or Foe, talk not of other Men's Lives; and if
thou can, Eccl. 19.8. Apoc.
without Offense, reveal them not. We must not discourse his Faults, unless in
a Gospel-way; and that too, to amend the Person, and not out of Passion, or
Prejudice to expose him, but out of Love to his Soul. Yet we may speak of the
evils of others, (1.) When called to do it, in a Legal or Gospel-way; and it is
a Sin then to conceal his Crime. (2.) Or when it is to prevent another, who is
in danger to be Infected by his Company, or ill Example. (3.) Or in our own
just Defense and Vindication. Moreover, consider the evil of Reproaching of
others.

First as to the causes why some do it.

I. One Cause is from want of Love: Nay from Malice; and Hatred.

1. From the Baseness, ill Nature, and Cruelty of the accusers Disposition.

2. It Is occasioned from that itch, of talking and meddling in the Affairs of
other Men.

3. Or perhaps to raise their own Esteem and Honor, some Degrade their
Brother; which is Abominable.

Consider it is Theft, or Robbery; nay, and it is worse than to Rob a Man of his
Goods, because thou take away that which perhaps thou can not restore again.

Moreover consider, That such who reproach others, lay themselves open thereby
to Reproach.

3. Moreover know, he that Receives, or Hearkens to the Scandal, is as Guilty
as the Accuser; he is like a Person that receives Stolen Goods, and so is as
bad as the Thief.

This being one of the Grand and Notorious Evils of these Days I speak the more
to it.

If you abominate this evil, and avoid it, you will shine in Grace and Virtue
the more clearly.

Alas, in our days, some that would be thought to be great Professers stick not
to vilify Christ's Ministers, even some of the best of Men; and are so full of
Malice, they care not what wrong they do to their Brethren, nor to the truth it
self, or interest of God, and so expose themselves to a lasting shame, and
their Spirit, 3 John 9.1^.
and Practice, to an abhorrance; they are like cursed Cham who discovered his
Fathers nakedness; Genesis 9.22.
these persons violate all Laws, both Humane and Divine.

3ly. When they bear one another Burdens, Gal. 6.2.
and so fulfill the Law of Christ: And that you may do this; consider where is
that Church in which there are no Burdens to be Born.

[ Motives thus to do.]

1. Consider what a Burden Jesus Christ has born for thee.

2. What a Burden thou have to bear of thine own. 2 Gal. ^.^.


3. May not thou in some things be a Burden to thy Brethren?

4. Would thou not have others bear thy Burden.

5. May not God cause thee to bear a more heavy Burden; because thou can not
bear thy Brother's?

Romans 3.10.
6. It Is a fulfilling the Law of Love, nay the Law of Christ.

XV. The Glory and Beauty of a Congregation, is the more manifest, when the
Authority of the Church, and the Dignity of the Pastoral Office is maintained.
How great was the Evil of the gainsaying of Corah? The Apostles speaks of some
that are Selfwilled, Presumptious, Jude, 11. Numb. 22.7, 21.
who are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities.

God has put a Glory and high Dignity upon the Church and in it is Authority and
Power; Whom ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven. 2 Pet. ^.10


Moreover, the Pastoral Office, is an Office of Dignity; Rev. 2.1.
they are called Rulers, Angels, Fathers: 1 Timothy 3.5. Act. 23, 5.
For any therefore to cast contempt on the Church, or Pastor, is a great evil,
and a reproach to Christ, and tends to Disorder and Confusion.

Lastly, When Holiness, Righteousness, Psalm. 110.3. 1 Pet. 1.25.
Charity, Humility, and all true Piety is pressed upon the Consciences of every
Member, and appears in the Minister: also that all strive to excel therein,
with their uttermost Care and Diligences.

The Conclusion.
KNow my Brethren, Psalm. 87.2.
That God loves the Gates of Sion more than all the dwelling places of Jacob:
Therefore the public Worship of God ought to be preferred before private.

1. This supposes there must be a visible Church.

2. And that they frequently meet together to worship God.

3. That they have an orderly Ministry and one ordained Elder, at least, to
administer all Public Ordinances.

4. Moreover, that all Persons have free liberty to assemble with the Church,
and to partake of all Ordinances, save those which peculiarly belong to the
Church; as the Lord's Supper, Neh. 1.2.
holy Discipline, and days of Prayer and Fasting. Then the Church of Old
separated themselves from all Strangers.

How should Sinners else be Converted, and the Church increased.
Yet others may attend on all other public Ordinances with the Church; as
public Prayer, Reading, and Preaching the Word and in Singing God's Praises,
as has formerly been proved. May others my Brethren, join in Prayer with us,
and not praise God with us*

But, O my Brethren! let me beseech you to show your high Value, and Estimation
for the public Worship of God.

[ Motives hereunto.]

1. Since God prefers it thus: Or has so great Esteem of his public Worship.

2. Because he is said to dwell in Sion; It is his Habitation for ever. The
place, Psalm. 132.13. Psalm. 26.8.
where his Honor dwells.

3. Here God is most Glorified.

In his Temple every one speaks of his Glory; My Praise shall be in the great
Congregation. Psalm. 29.9.


4. Here is most of God's gracious presence (as one observes it.)

1. His effectual Presence, in all Places; Exodus 20.24.
Where I record my Name, thither will I come; and there will I bless thee.

2. Here is More of his intimate presence: Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, Mat. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them. He walks in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks. Rev. 1.13.


5. Here are the clearest manifestations of God's Beauty, which made holy David
desire to dwell there for ever. See the appearance of Christ to the Churches,
Psalm. 27.4.
Rev, 2. cap. 3.

6. In that it is said, that those that should be Saved, in the Apostles days,
God added unto the Church. Acts 2.47.


7. Here is most Spiritual Advantage to be got: Here the Dews of Hermon fall,
they descend upon the Mountain of Sion. Here God commands the Blessing, Psalm.
132.3.
even Life for evermore. I will abundantly bless her Provision, Psalm. 130.15.
and satisfy her Poor with Bread. Here David's Doubt was resolved. Psalm.
73.16.^7.


Psalm. 87.5.
8. Here you received your first spiritual Breath, or Life, many Souls are daily
Born to Christ. That good which is most Diffusive, is to be Preferred; but that
good which most partake of, is most Diffusive; O magnify the Lord with me! let
us exalt his Name together. Live Coals separated, Psalm. 34.3.
soon die.

9. Brethren (as a worthy Divine observes) the Church in her public Worship is
the nearest Resemblance of Heaven, especially in Singing God's Praises. What
Esteem also had God's Worthies of old, for God's public Worship? My Soul
longs, yea, Psalm. 84.1, 2.
even faints for the Courts of the Lord. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O
Lord of Hosts!

10. See how the Promises of God run to Sion, or to his Church: Isaiah 35.
He will bless thee out of Sion. Psalm. 128.3.
O let nothing discourage you in your waiting at the Posts of Christ's Door:
Isai. 51.3. Prove. 8.34. Psalm. 26.14.
David desired Rather to be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than to Dwell in
the Tents of Wickedness. Psalm. 87.4.
Yet nevertheless do not neglect, for the Lord's sake, private Devotion; viz.
Secret, and Family Prayer: O pray to be fitted for public Worship! Mat. 6.6.
Come out of your Closets to the Church? Jer. 10.25.
What signifies all you do in Public, if you are not such that keep up the
Worship of God in your own Families?

O neglect not Prayer, Reading, and Meditation! And take care also to Educate
and Catechize your Children; and live as Men and Women that are dead to this
World: Ephesians. 6.4. Phil. 1.27.
and walk for the Lord's sake as becomes the Gospel.

See that Zeal and Knowledge go together; a good Conversation. and a good
Doctrine go together These Two together, are better than One.

Brethren, he that makes the Word of God his Rule, in whatsoever he does,
Eccl. 4.9.10.11.12.13.
and the Glory of God his end in what he does, shall have the Spirit of God to
be his strength. This is like Solomon's Threefold Cord; that will be One, or
it will be Three; it cannot be Two; not can it be broken.

The Solemn Covenant of the Church of Christ, meeting in White-street, at it is
Constitution; June, 5. 1696.
WE who desire to walk together in the Fear of the Lord, do, through the
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, profess our deep and serious Humiliation for all
our Transgressions. And we do also solemnly, in the Presence of God, of each
other, in the Sense of our own Unworthiness, Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. 2 Cor. 8.5. Hos.
2.23. 2 Cor. 6.16.
give up our selves to the Lord, in a Church state according to the Apostolical
Constitution that he may be our God, and we may be his People, through the
Everlasting Covenant of his Free grace, in which alone we hope to be accepted
by him, through his blessed Son Jesus Christ, whom we take to be our High
Priest, to justify and sanctify us, and our Prophet to teach us; and to subject
to him as our Lawgiver, and the King of Saints; and to conform to all his Holy
Laws and Ordinances, Church Communion proved.
for our growth, Establishment, and Consolation; that we may be as a Holy
Spouse unto him, and serve him in our Generation, and wait for his second
Appearance, as our glorious Bridegroom.

Being fully satisfied in the way o^ Church Communion, Exodus 26.3.4, 6. Isa.
62.5. Psalm. 122.3. Ephesians. 2.23. Ephesians. 4.16. 1 Pet. 2.5.
and the Trut^ of Grace in some good measure upon one another Spirits, we do
solemnly join our selves together in a Holy Union and Fellowship, humbly
submitting to the Discipline of the Gospel, Psalm. 93.5. Isa. 55.8. Luke 1.74.75.
and all Holy Duties required of ^ People in such a spiritual Relation.

1. We do promise and engage to walk in all Holiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Timothy 6.11.
2 Pet. ^.6, 7.
Godliness, Humility, and Brotherly Love, as much as in us lies to render our
Communion delightful to God, comfortable to our selves, Act. 20.19. Phil. 2.3.
Ioh, 13, 34, and 15, 12,
and lovely to the res^ of the Lord's People.

2. We do promise to watch over each others Conversations, and not to suffer
Sin upon one another, 1 Pet, 1, 22, Lev. 19, 17, Heb, 10, 24, 25,
so far ^ God shall discover it to us, or any ^ us; and to stir up one another
to L^^^ and good Works; 1 Thessalonians, 5, 14, 15, Rom, 15,
to warn, rebuke, a^^ admonish one another with Meekness according to the Rules
left to us of Christ in that Behalf.

Ephesians. 6.18. Iam. 5.16.
3. We do promise in an especial manner to pray for one another, and for the
Glory and Increase of this Church, Col, 4, 12.
and for the Presence of God in it, and the pouring forth of his Spirit on it,
and his Protection over it to his Glory.

4. We do promise to bear one another Burdens, Gal, 6, 2, Heb, 12, 12, Heb,
13, 31 Rom, 12, 15 2 Cor, 11, 29,
to cleave to one another, and to have a Fellow-feeling with one another, in
all Conditions both outward and inward, as God in his Providence shall cast any
of us into

5. We do promise to bear with one another Weakeness, 1 John 3.17, 18, Gal 6,
1, 1 Thessalonians, 5, 14, Rom, 15, 12, Ephesians, 4, 31, 32,
Failings, and Infirmities, with much Tenderness, not discovering to any
without the Church, nor any within, unless according to Christ's Rule, and the
Order of the Gospel provided in that case.

6. We do promise to strive together for the Truths of the Gospel, Jude, v, 3,
Gal, 5, 1, Tit, 3, 9, 10, 2 John v, 10,
and Purity of God's Ways and Ordinances, to avoid Causes, and Causers of
Division, endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace;
Ephesians. 4 3.

7 We do promise to meet together on Lord's Days, Heb 3, 10, and 10, 25, Mal,
3, 16, Rom, 14, 18 and 15, 16,
and ^^^ther times, as the Lord shall gi^^ (...) Opportunities, to serve and
glorify God in the (...) his Worship, (...) 26,
to edify one (...) and to contrive the g^^^ (...) Church.

8. We do promise according to our Ability (or as God shall bless us with the
good things of this World) to Communicate to our Pastor of Minister, ^ Cor, 9,
7,
God having ordained that they that Preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. ^, 9, -12, 13
(And now can any thing lay a greater obligation upon the Conscience, Gal, 6, 6,
than this Covenant, what then is the Sin of such who violate it?)

These and all other Gospel-Duties we humbly submit unto, promising and
purposing to perform, not in our own Strength, being consciou^ of our own
Weakness, but in the Power, and Strength of the Blessed God, whose we are, and
whom we desire to serve: To whom be Glory now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

