GOD Acknowledged: OR THE TRUE INTEREST OF THE NATION, And all that Fear GOD.
OPENED In A SERMON Preached December the 11th, 1695. Being the Day Appointed by
the KING, for Public PRAYER and HUMILIATION. With Some Additions.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Psalm. 65. 2. O Thou that hear Prayer, to Thee shall (...) come. Psalm. 46.
10. Be Still and Know that I am GOD. LONDON: Printed for William (...)

GOD Acknowledged: OR THE The TRUE INTEREST of the NATION, and all that Fear
GOD: Opened in a Sermon, etc.
Prove. III. VI. In all thy ways Acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths.
WISDOM in this Chapter, particularly in the first Verse, gives to her Son,
most needful and necessary Counsel; which ought to be observed by all who would
be Truly Wise, viz. My Son forget not my Law, but let thy heart keep all my
Commandments. By Wisdom, in several places of this Book of Solomon, is meant
Jesus Christ; by Law, here may comprehend Christ's Doctrine, his Word and Holy
Precepts. In the second verse, he lays down a precious motive, to stir up all
understanding Persons thus to do; For length of days, and long Life, and Peace,
shall they add unto thee: That is, Length of Good Days, a Joyful Life and Peace
shall attend thee: In the third verse, He gives another Holy Precept, Let not
Mercy and Truth forsake thee; bind them about thy neck, write them upon thine
heart.

By Mercy and Truth, Is meant, That which ought to be in the heart of Man; and
as these two are frequently joined together, as they are in God, so they ought
always to be in us; not Mercy without Truth, but both together: Mercy, denotes
all that Benignity, Clemency, Compassion and Charity, and readiness to do good
to others, according to the place or station where we are set, or are placed.
Truth, may comprehend that inward Sincerity, Faithfulness and Uprightness of
heart, which should be in us to God and Man, according to the Holy Precepts of
Gods Word, and Rules of Justice and Righteousness; and these should be written
or engraven upon the Fleshly Tables of our Hearts, and so they will be as a
Chain of Gold about the Neck, or a precious Ointment to the Soul.

In the fourth Verse, We have a Blessed Motive and Encouragement to do this, So
shall thou find Favor, and a good Understanding in the sight of God and Man:
In a serious and constant Exercise of Religion, we shall meet with Gods
Acceptance, and attain unto a solid and spiritual Understanding, which will
render us Honorable among all good Men.

In the fifth Verse, He subjoyns another Indispensible Duty, Trust in the Lord
with all thine Heart, and lean not to thine own Understanding: He hereby shows,
that we should wholly rely upon Gods Wisdom, Strength, Promises and Providence,
for Help and Relief in all our Affairs and Dangers; and not to think we can by
our Wisdom (let our Understanding be never so great, acute and clear)
accomplish our Designs, or manage our Affairs.

To which he adds the words of my Text, viz

In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

In the Text are two parts:
1. We have a Duty enjoined, In all thy ways acknowledge Him. The Text Opened.
2. A Promise or Motive annexed, And He shall direct thy paths.
As to the Explanation of the Words, consider these things following:

1. The Subject, on whom the Precept or Duty is enjoined Thou my Son, or Sons;
it may refer to one single person, or to any one man that would be wise, and
succeed well in his Affairs or Enterprises, in whatsoever he takes in hand; or
it may comprehend any wise and pious community of men, Civil or Ecclesiastical;
for that which is the duty and true Interest of any one true Son of Wisdom, as
so considered, is the duty of all in every place or station where they are set,
whether in Church or State.

2. Observe the Object, Acknowledge Him; That is, the Lord; as repeated in the
Context, Trust in the Lord: So here, Acknowledge Him; i. e. He that is your
Creator, your God and only Counselor.

3. Consider the matter of the Duty, or what the Duty or Precept is, In all thy
ways acknowledge him, That is, Know him, Own him, Acknowledge his Being, his
Wisdom, his Power, his Sovereignty, and expect Counsel and Success from him.

4. The Universality of the Duty, In all thy ways Acknowledge God, Seek to him,
Consult with him, and that not only in one or two main cases, that are of the
greatest moment, or in some difficult Exigencies; but in all thy ways,
whatsoever thou attempt to do, for thy Self, Family, Church or State, thou must
Acknowledge God; Cry to him, Consult with him who sits upon the Throne, who is
the Mighty Counselor, and Everlasting Father, and only Potentate, and great
Ruler of the World.

In all thy Designs and Undertakings, whether it be about the things of this
Life, or about matters and things that concern the Life that is to come.

Secondly, You have the Motive, And he shall (or he will) direct thy paths: He
will give thee Wisdom and Counsel, and show thee a right way, and Bless thee,
and give thee good Success, in all those things thou set thy hand to do, or
in that work thou go about, wherein his Name and Glory is concerned, and thy
good.

From the words thus Opened, I shall only observe one Proposition or point of
Doctrine.

Doct. That it is the Indespensible Duty of every Man, or all Men who are Sons
of Wisdom, in every thing they enter upon or go about The Doct. raised.
to do, to Acknowledge God, which they must do, if they would Prosper or meet
with Success.

In speaking to this Proposition, I shall endeavor (God Assisting) to do these
things following.

1. Show you what it is to Acknowledgd God, or open the purport of that word
more largly.

2. Show you in what ways more particularly we should Acknowledge God.

3. Show you how or after what manner we should Acknowledge the Lord.

4. Give you the Reasons of the Point.

5. Make Application of the whole.

1. To Acknowledge God, Is to own the Being of God, or that God What it is to
Acknowledge GOD.
is, or that there is one Eternal and Infinite Being: It was a great while
before Proud Pharaoh would do this, And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I Exodus 5. 2.
know not the Lord; I am the Sovereign Lord of Egypt, and I own no other
Superior here; What Lord has Authority and Power over me, to command me? But
the Lord was resolved to make him know him and acknowledge him before he had
done with him, and therefore poured forth his Plagues upon him, and at last
overthrew him in the Red Sea: Those who will not Acknowledge God, and so
Grorifie his Dreadful Name, he will Glorify himself upon them at last in their
Destruction: And the Exodus 7. 5.
Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth my hand upon
Egypt, and bring out the Children of Israel from among them. Moreover it was a
great while before. Nebuchadnezzer would be brought to Acknowledge the Most
High God, therefore was he driven from men, and made to dwell with the Beasts
of the Field, Dan. 4. 32. 33.
and to eat grass as Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till
his Hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws.
Though this is the least degree of Knowing and of Acknowledging God, yet many
do not thus Acknowledge Him in their hearts: They Acknowledge Him with their
Lips, but by their Works deny Him: The Fool has said in his heart Psalm. 53.
there is no God.

2. To Acknowledge God, is not only to Acknowledge his Being, his The
Sovereignty of GOD to be Owned. Psa. 135. 5.
Holy Essence, or Deity; but also that he is the Absolute Sovereign of the
whole World, and Sole Governor of all things in Heaven and Earth: I know the
Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all Gods. Whatsoever the Lord
pleases, that did he in Heaven and in Earth, and in all deep places, v. 6.
There is no bounds to his Power, but his own Will; and what his Soul desires
that does he. God's Government Job 23. 13.
is purely Arbitrary, and none but his ought to be so; His Will, His Law; yet
is His Government most Righteous, because He can Will nothing but what is Just
and Good. Our God is in the Heavens he has done whatsoever he pleases: He
has Psalm. 115. 3.
Power over all both Men and Devils, over Kingdoms and Nations, to dispose and
determine them, and all things in them, as seems good to him. Who shall say
to him, What do thou? He that made all things, or gave being to all, must
needs have Power over all, and be Lord of all; it is He that makes War, and
commands Peace; that sets Up, and pulls Down; that Kills and makes Alive:
It Is the Glory of God; He has such an Unlimated and an Uncontrollable Power,
seeing he is Perfectly Just and Righteous, as his Power is Inconceivable, so
his Will is Incorruptible: I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass,
and I will do it, I will not go back. As if the Lord should say, It is my will
it should be done, and therefore it shall be done: His Counsel shall stand, and
he will do all his Pleasure.

And this Brethren we should know; and this it is to Acknowledge God. But,

3. To Acknowledge God, Is to Own and Acknowledge that all GODs Providence over
all.
things come to pass by his All-wise Providence: According to his Eternal
Decree; either by his special Commission, or by his Permission; to say all
things come to pass by Gods special Commmission, is to make him the author of
Sin; but this know assuredly, that God did Determine, before time, that he
would do such things, or permit or suffer such things to come to pass, and be
done, or else it was impossible it should ever be done: All the Motions of the
Creature, even the most violent, and to appearance, Caryl
Contingent Motions of the Creature, are under the Direction, yea, under the
Dominion of God.

All things Brethren, Move as they are Influenced by his Power, and Directed by
his Wisdom. Is there any Evil in the City, and I the Lord have not done it.
Afflictions do not rise out of the dust, Job. 6. 5. What Evil soever comes
upon Kingdoms or Nations, Cities or Families, or particular persons, it is by
God's Wise Providence: Evil came down from the Lord to the gates of Jerusalem.
Mich. 1. 12. God did not only make the World, but he disposes of all Affairs
and Matters therein, as he pleases; the government of the World is as much of
God and his work, as the making of it; there is in all Occurrences or
Transactions of Men, a Wheel within the Wheel, and this we ought to know and to
acknowledge: This is to Acknowledge God.

4. And from hence it follows, That to Acknowledge God, is The Omnisciency of
GOD.
to Acknowledge his Omnisciency: The eyes of the Lord run too and fro, through
the whole earth, to show himself strong in behalf of them whose heart is
upright toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

If God had not a perfect knowledge of all things, how could he govern the
World? the Text that I mentioned last, shows two things.

1. The perfect Knowledge God has of whatsoever is done throughout the whole
Earth.

2. His Providence over all, even over the whole Earth, in ordering and
disposing of all things therein, and particularly his care of his own People;
His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men, Psalm. 11. 4. The Lord
does not only know all things and persons, but he has a clear understanding of
them: All things are naked and manifest to his eyes with whom we have to do.
Heb. 4. 13. The Eye of God signifies the Knowledge of God, he sees as well what
is in Man, as what is done by Man; He knows our thoughts a far off, before they
are conceived, he knows what they will be; there is nothing done, nor intended
to be done, but it is known by the Almighty; his Eyes are like a flaming Fire,
of a piercing and and penitrating Nature: The eyes of the Lord are every where,
beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15. 3. Man sees the Face, the outside,
but God searches and discerns the Heart; the Eyes of Man may be deceived,
but the Eyes of God cannot; Christ it is said, needed not that any should
testify of man, for he knew what was in man, Joh. 2. 25. this shows that he is
the Eternal God, for, thou knows all things, (says Peter) thou knows that
I love thee, 21. 17. God's sight of Man, and of his Ways are Universal, and
Everlasting; he saw all things with one single look from Everlasting to
Everlasting; he knows all things past, present, and to come: For his eyes are
upon all the ways of man, and he sees all his doings; there is no darkness nor
shadow of death where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Job 35. 21,
22: and as God is a God of Knowledge, so to acknowledge him, is to acknowledge
his Omniscience.

5. To Acknowledge God, It Is to acknowledge and own his The Wisdom of God must
be acknowledged,
Infinite Wisdom; or, that he is a Most Wise God: And as he made all things in
Wisdom, so he governs all things in Wisdom also, no Men have any true Wisdom
but what they receive* from God: the In finiteness, the Omniscience, the
Unchangeableness, and the Simplicity of God, etc. are Incommunicable
Attributes; but the Wisdom of God together with his Holiness, Justice, and
Mercy, are Communicable, i. e. God does give, or communicate Holiness and
Wisdom, etc. unto Angels and Men: God indeed, is said to be only Wise, because
none has Wisdom of and from themselves but he, nor are any so Wise as he; his
Wisdom so far excells the Wisdom of Men and Angels, that none are said to be
wise but the Lord only; none are originally Wise but God; the Wisdom of God is
not a separable Quality from him, (or Caryl,
from his Being,) as the Wisdom of Man is; many (as one notes) are Men, but not
Wise Men.

6. To Acknowledge God, Is to acknowledge his Justice and God's Justice.
Holiness, Judgment and Justice are the Habitation of his Throne, Psalm. 97.2.
He can do no Man any wrong, because he is Justice and Righteousness it self;
whatsoever God brings upon a Nation, or People, or particular Person, it is
Right, or in Righteousness. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee,
Jer. 12. 1. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? Genesis 18. 25. We may
judge of his Justice and Righteousness, by considering of the nature of his
Law, that is Just, Holy, and Good; what is the Law of God, but a written
Impression of his Holy Nature; also the Justice and Righteousness of God is
seen in his punishing the Wicked for their Sin; but more especially, in
punishing his own Son when he came to stand in our stead and Law-place, as our
Sponsor and blessed Surety; he spared not his own Son, as an act of Justice,
when he undertakes to pay our Debts, or satisfy Divine Justice for our
Offenses. God will render unto every man according to the fruit of their
doings: he will not lay upon man more than is right, Job 34. 23. He has
punished us The goodness, mercy, and faithfulness of God must be acknowledged.
less than our iniquities deserve, Ezra. 9. 13.

7. To Acknowledge God, Is to acknowledge his Goodness, Mercy, and
Faithfulness, his Mercy endures for ever; There is none good but God, that is
essentially good, perfectly good, and so there is none Righteous but he; he is
a God ready to forgive, plenteous in Mercy and Goodness; who is a God like unto
thee pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, Mich. 7. There is in God not
only pardoning Goodness, but protecting preserving, redeeming, strengthening,
and comforting Goodness. God is infinitely and immutably Good.

8. To Acknowledge God, Is to own and acknowledge him to be man's God Man's
chiefest good.
chief good, and that our only Happiness lies in him, not in the Creature, but
in the Creator; not in having great Portions of worldly Goods, but in having a
special Interest and Portion in God: Many say who will show us any good, Psalm.
4. 6. What was that good? why, Corn, Oil, and Wine; but what says David, Lord
lift up the light of thy countenance upon us, thou have put more joy into my
heart, than the time when their corn and wine increases, verse 7. 8. Earthly
things may be called our goods, but not our good; they that never tasted, how
good God is, never knew true good.

That cannot be Man's chief good, that cannot answer the necessities of his
better part; namely, his Soul; God is a Soul Good, a Soul satisfying Good, a
Soul Enriching Good; the Heathens labored to find out what was the chief Good;
and finding nothing in this world could satisfy the Soul, neither Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, nor Knowledge; concluded, there was some Superior Being,
or an Infinite God, that must be Man's chiefest Good: that cannot be our chief
Good, that cannot fill our Desires, nor make us truly and everlastingly Happy.
Men may in the fullness of all their Sufficiency be in straits, and be
miserable, who are possessed of never so great Riches, Honors, and earthly
Pleasures; that which Sickness and Death may rob us of, cannot be our chiefest
Good.

Sirs We never rightly acknowledge God until we know by our own Experience, and
acknowledge him to be our chiefest and only Happiness.

9. To Acknowledge God, Is to fear and reverence his dreadful Name, To fear God
is to acknowledge him.
and serve him as our God and only Sovereign of our Souls: If I be a master,
where is my fear? faith the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 1. 6. The whole of Man's Duty
is expressed sometimes by fearing of God; said Joseph, Do thus, and live, for I
fear God; He acknowledges God this way, and himself to be his Servant; I fear
God, I cannot, dare not Sin; how shall I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? They that fear not God, are Men of no Religion: The fear of God is
the beginning of Wisdom. Pray remember to Acknowledge God, is to fear him, and
dread to offend or displease him.

10. To acknowledge God, Is to trust in him at all times, to make To a
knowledge God, when we trust in him.
him our Hope and Help, to depend upon him for Counsel and Direction in all we
go about, and submit our Wills to his Will, and patiently to take and endure
whatsoever he lays upon us.

To Trust in God, Is to have Confidence in God, it is to lean upon God, upon his
Wisdom, upon his Conduct, on his Strength, Faithfulness; and gracious Promises,
and not to depend upon our own Wisdom; see the verse before my Text, Trust in
the Lord, and lean not to thy own Understanding, acknowledge him, that is,
Trust in him. To Trust in God, is also to expect and hope from God, and to wait
for Counsel; indeed, it is the Character of a godly Man to trust in God, as
well as it is his Wisdom and Safety: We can (as one observes) never trust Man
too little, nor in God too much; Curssed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, Jer. 17. 5. but blessed is the Man that Trusts in the
Lord, and whose Strength the Lord is.

11. To Acknowledge God, Is to acknowledge Jesus Christ to be God; To
acknowledge God, is to acknowledge ledge Christ to be God.
not God by Office, but God by Nature, the only wise God, the Eternal God,
Coequal with the Father, Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the form of God, thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, though a distinct Subsistence or Person from
the Father; yet one in Essence subsisting in the form of God, imports not
Christ's Appearance, in exerting of God's Power, but his actual Existence in
the Divine Nature: To the only wise God our Savior be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, Jude 25. We are in him that is true; even in his Son Jesus
Christ, this is the true God, and eternal life, Joh. 5. 20. This it is to
acknowledge God, viz. To own Christ to be God; ye believe in God, believe also
in me, i. e. Ye acknowledge the Father is God, acknowledge the Son also to be
the same God; it would be Idolatry to give Divine Adoration to Christ, if he
was not the true Eternal God: Moreover, it would justify the Blasphemy of the
Jews, who charged him to be a Deceiver, and a Blasphemer; who, because he was
(as they thought,) no more than a mere Man, made himself equal with God; not to
acknowledge Christ to be God, is not truly and fully to acknowledge God,
because Christ is God; we ought not only to acknowledge the Being of God, but
also his manner of Being, or the three Persons in the Godhead.

12. To Acknowledge God, Is to acknowledge all the good things we receive to
come from him, whether Temporal or Spiritual, even Life and all the comforts of
Life, Wisdom Knowledge, Riches, Honors, Friends, Peace, Health, Relations,
Prosperity: And also it is to acknowledge all Afflictions, Troubles, Reproaches,
Trials, even all kind of Adversity to come from God; for whoveer may be the
Instruments, yet God is the only Agent and Orderer of them.

13. And lastly, To Acknowledge God, is to love him above all; and to seek unto
him, in all we do, and to strive to promote his Glory; he that is our chief
Good should be our last end, our ultimate end: in all we do, we should aim at
the Glory of God, and to carry on (with all uprightness) his Interest (to the
utmost Power that is in us) in the places and stations where we are set by him.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and
with all thy Strength. So much as to the first thing proposed to be opened;
namely, What it is to acknowledge God.

Secondly, I shall show you in what ways of ours more particularly we should
acknowledge God; or wherein we should acknowledge him.

1. In entering upon no Civil nor Religious Action, without In all civil and
religious Actions God to be acknowledged.
consulting with God, in and by his Word; we should put this Question to our
own Hearts, viz. Is the thing that I am a going to do good, is it warranted by
the word of God, is it according to his Will, will it tend to his Glory, is it
not only lawful, but is it also expedient, if the matter I am a going to do be
not justified by the word of God, though my end may be good, yet the thing is
evil; may I do it and not offend God, or will it not hurt my Brother, or cause
him to stumble? Were such Questions put by all Men to their own Hearts, it
would prevent many Evils in Men's Civil Actions. Also, when Men enter upon any
Religious Duty, they should consult the word of God, see whether the thing be
warranted, has God commanded me to do this thing, have I Precept, or Presedent
to justify me in doing of it?

Brethren, we are not to consult, Men, General Counsels, nor Ancient Fathers,
but the Word of God; it is not Custom here will carry the Cause, though it be of
some hundred of years standing; if from the beginning it was not so, nor is it
sufficient, though many Learned Men, nay, Holy Men, assert it to be a Truth, if
it be not written in God's Word. Where God has no Tongue to speak, we should
have no Ear to hear, nor Hand to do; but alas! some Men more consult their own
Carnal Reason and Interest, their own Profits, their own Passions than God's
Word and his Glory; many peruse their unwarrantable blind Zeal, like Paul, when
a Pharisee, who verily thought he ought to do many things against the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth, though it was to the making a fearful Slaughter of Christ's
blessed Members.

2. Men should acknowledge God in all their Purposes, or about what they think
to do, or intend to do, before they put them into Execution. Man sometimes
purpose* and God disappoints: Go to now, you that say to day or to morrow, we
will go into Jam. 4. 13. 14.
such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain, whereas
you know not what will be on the morrow.

3. Men should, before they enter upon any Action Civil or Religious, seek to
God, by Prayer, for Wisdom and Direction; and also for Strength, Aid, and
Assistance; and they that do not this, do not as they ought, Acknowledge God:
and thus, I say, in a more general way, we should do; though it be in the
smallest matters, and in the doing of things that are Lawful to be done; if
they would have Success therein.

But to descend to some few particular things and cases, about the doing, or
entering upon the doing of which, we should seek to God (and so in a right way
Acknowledge him.)

1. When any Young Men, or any Persons begin to set up for themselves, Good
Counsel is from GOD.
or to Trade in the World; they should Acknowledge God, or seek to him for
Counsel and Direction about that Affair; that they may succeed well therein,
and receive a Blessing from him; for in vain do Men rise up early and sit up
late, unless God be sought unto, and is pleased to prosper them in their
Undertakings: How was Jacob Blessed as a Shepherd? which was his employment;
who in all he did, Acknowledged God, and called upon him: Riches got, and not
by the Almighty, or in a lawful way, will prove a Curse to him that gets the
^* it is a God Provoking Evil, to say in thine heart, My power, and the might of
my hand, has gotten me Wealth; but thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for
it is he that gives thee power to get Wealth, Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18. Riches and
Honor, which are a Blessing, and tends not to puff up a Man or Woman, comes
from God.

2. Men and Women, should Acknowledge God in changing God to be be
acknowledged, in changing our Condition.
their condition; this is a great thing, and the Comfort of Men's Lives much
consist in this matter: A Prudent Wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19. 14. But
alas! now a days, People in this matter, act like to the wicked Men of the old
World; They take them Wives of all which they choose Genesis 6. 2. Which is
charged upon them as a great sin, and one cause of the Destruction brought upon
them by the Flood; How did Sampson suffer by his Dalilah, whom he chose,
because he liked her well? perhaps she was fair, but he consulted not with God:
but, How well did Abraham's Servant succeed, in obtaining a Wife for Isaac, his
Master's Son? by Seeking unto God and Acknowledging him.

You Young Men and Women, that truly Fear God, see you to it; that you in the
choice of Yokefellows, Acknowledge God; consult his Word, choose such that are
Godly, such that Believe in Christ, let his VVrod be your Rule in this matter:
Be not unequally Yoaked with Unbelievers: your Peace with God, and the Comfort
of your Lives depend on this matter; do not as the Sons of God in the old world
did, and as Sampson did, viz. Choose such as you like; but such as God likes
and approves of.

3. We should Acknowledge God, in Removing from one place to another, from one
Country to another, or from one Habitation to another, or from one Trade or
Employment to another: We should first seek the Kingdom of God. Will this
remove make for the profit of my precious Soul? Will it turn to the Glory of
God? It should not be, What Air, or what Earthly Profit may I find there, where
I am going? but is the Gospel Preached there, in the Purity of it? can I have
communion with godly Christians there? or, Will not my Spiritual Loss be more
than my Earthly gain? so in the other case; say, Will not more snares attend
that Calling I am about to enter upon? Shall I not run my self into Temptations
by doing it? Does not my present Employment bring me in Food and Raiment, and
ought not I therewith to be Content? I only mentino these few Cases as to our
paths, in respect of Civil Affairs: you may add any other way or work you go
about.

O! How does it concern us to Acknowledge God, for Preservation and a Blessing
in all things? even in taking Journies by Land, or Voyages to Sea, and when we
go out in the Morning, and return in the Evening; when we lie down, and when we
rise up, or enter upon any Religious Work.

1. About our Receiving, Retaining or Declining, of any one, or more Principles
of Religion.

We should Acknowledge God and Consult with him, in and by his Holy Word; we
ought to examine and try the Point or Principle, we are about to Receive or
Leave: Is it according to what is written? Does God's word confirm it to be a
Truth? Then receive it; but cry to God for Wisdom and Understanding in the
Case; be fully persuaded in thy own Conscience from the word of God about it:
On the other hand, if thou upon searching, can not find that Doctrine or
particular Practice, thou have received formerly, is agreeable to Gods word; or
that it is not in thy Judgment proveable therefrom; then after seeking unto God,
thou ought to reject it; though many Good Men, Learned Men, assert and
maintain it to be Truth; thou art not to consult with Men, nor acknowledge them
to be thy rule, but God's Word: To the Law and Testimony: Search the
Scripture: Gods word gives Understanding to the simple, Psalm. 19 9, 10. That
is a Lamp to thy Feet, and a Light to thy Paths, Psalm. 119. 105. Men, no not
Ministers, shall be allowed to answer for thee at Christ's Bar, about any Error
thou have received and do maintain; every one must give an Account to God for
himself; it will not be a good plea in that day, to say, Lord, such an able
Minister held this Principle, Preached it, Practiced it; God may reveal some
Truth more clearly to an Aquilla and a Priscilla, than to an Eloquent Apollo,
Act. 18. 26.

2. Thou art to Acknowledge God, and seek to him, concerning what Minister, or
Ministers, thou do purpose to hear, and know their Doctrine well, and their
Lives also; see that they Preach Christ, that they Preach the Gospel clearly;
whose main design, is to Exalt Jesus Christ and the Free Grace of God; and
particularly, that they are Sound about the Doctrine of Free Justification by
the Righteousness of Christ, as it is Imputed and Received by Faith alone,
without any mixture of Man's own Inherent Righteousness: O take heed; this day
is Perilous; there are many that are Corrupters of Gods Word, and perverters
of Christ's Gospel; thou may before thou art aware, be undone by dangerous
Heresies.

3. Acknowledge God and seek to him, when thou art about to join thy self with
some Church, in point of Communion; Examine their Faith, their Constitution,
their Discipline; see they all hold weight with God's word.

And if thou art Tempted to leave a True Church, because of some offense taken;
acknowledge God, seek to him, consult with the word of God, least it be from
Satan, a Temptation, and arises from thy own Evil Heart; say, Shall I not be a
Covenant Breaker, a Disorderly Person, and an Evil Example to others? Will it
not offend God, or stumble my weak Brother? Thus reason with thy Self; say,
Shall I consult with Flesh and Blood, and gratify my Corrupt part? This may
deter thee from it.

3. Acknowledge God and Seek to him, when thou come to hear the word of God
Preached; say, Lord it is thou must prepare my heart to meet with thee this day;
O open thou my Understanding, incline my Will, move upon my Affections;
deliver me from Drousiness, Deadness, Unbelief, and from all kind of Pride and
Conceitedness, and from Prejudice against the Minister, or any Truth that he
may deliver, that I want Light in. What I know not teach thou me. It Is not man
can reach thy heart; not the Ministers Voice, that can make thee Hear and Live;
but the Voice of Christ; it is God that can turn thee from Darkness to Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God: Thou may reform thy way, or get some
degree of Reformation, by thy natural powers improved, by the word Preached;
but it is God alone must change thy Heart; a new Heart must be created in thee
by God's mighty and glorious Creating-Power, and his Spirits operating
Influences; it is God that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, that
must shine into our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Glory of God in the
Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels,
that the excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us, verse 7. Do not
trust to thine own Power, nor rebellious Will, it is God must make thee willing;
he must draw thee, move thee, before thou can come to Christ; Faith is not of
our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. it is God must turn thee from
thy evil way, and change those vicious Habits that are in thee, and in all Men
naturally; Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, etc. Turn thou me, and I shall
be turned. O! thus acknowledge God, and cry to him who works all our Works in
us, Jer. 31. 23.
and for us; It Is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but of God
that shows Mercy, Romans 9. 17. Did Men thus acknowledge God, he would soon
direct their Path, and give Success to them in their Duties. Ministers should
also acknowledge God in their Gifts and Endowments (what have they which they
have not received) and their own Insufficiency.

5. We should acknowledge God, when we come to draw near to him in the Holy
Supper of the Lord; it is he that must prepare our Hearts, for this his sacred
Ordinance also; The preparation of the heart in man, and the answer of the
tongue are from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1. What Heavenly Comfort do we meet with,
or have we met with at one time more than at another? How lively are our
Spirits, and active our Graces, when God vouchsafes his Divine Influences, and
quickens us in our Duties? Did we muse, the Fire might soon burn: It Is God must
deliver us from vain Thoughts, worldly Thoughts, when we draw near to him, and
stir up our Affections, and raise our Spirits; therefore thus let us
acknowledge him, that we may set under Christ's Shadow with delight, that his
Fruit may be sweet to our Taste.

But no more as to these more ordinary ways of ours, whether Civil, or
Religious; but to proceed to that which is the chief Work of this day.

We ought to acknowledge God in diverse special Cases.

1. As in choice of Ministers, to watch over us, and take the care of our
Souls, we should acknowledge God who has promised to give us Pastors after his
own heart, to feed us with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3. 15.

2. In choice of Magistrates to rule us, or to represent us in National Synods,
and make Civil Laws; we ought to acknowledge God, who has promised to give
Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning. How good was
Jethros's Counsel to Moses, Exodus 18.2^. Moreover, thou shall provide out of
all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hateing covetousness;
and place such over them to be rulers, etc. Did Jethro speak this only, or has
not God spoken it also; The God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me;
he that rules over men, must be just ruling in the fear of God, 2. Sam. 23. 3.
I am afraid many Men do not in this case so consult with God, nor acknowledge
him as they ought; were such Men always chose, what a happy People should we
be, or would England be. But,

3. We should acknowledge God, and look to him, when difficult cases may be
before a King, and his People; in which the good and welfare of a whole Nation
is concerned; nay, many Nations; and not only so, but also the good of God's
Israel, as now at this day: O how should we cry to God, who only is able to
give Counsel, and direct our worthy Senators: By me Kings Reign, and Princes
decree Judgment, (says our Lord Jesus) Prove. 8. 15. All great and good things
that Kings and Princes do, is from God, and by the Influences of Jesus Christ:
God sits amongst the Gods; he can rule, and overruled Men's Hearts at his
pleasure, at such a time as this: Ezra sought a right way, to do, which, he
acknowledge God, he sought to him: We may bless God who put it into the Hearts
of the King and Parliament, to seek God at this difficult time; certainly the
Finger of God is in this matter: Says Ezra, And I proclaimed a Fast there at
the River Ahava, that we might afflict our selves before our God, and seek a
right way for our selves, and for our little ones, and for all our Substance,
Ezra 8. 21. For I was ashamed to require of the King a Band of Soldiers and
Horsemen, to help us against the Enemy, because I said the hand of our God is
upon all them that seek him for good, verse 22.

This it appears is the right way, most pleasing to God, the only way to obtain
the Mercy we want, viz. to humble our selves, and seek to God; this is that way
God directs us to take: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver you, and ye shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. 14. 50. it is the right way to
obtain Mercy, to exalt the Eternal Being, to magnify God; yea, and this is the
right way according to the avowed Principles of all true Christians: I was
ashamed, says this good Man, to ask a Band of Soldiers; because our God has
promised his Hand shall be with us for good; that he was able and ready to help
them that seek him, and put their trust in him: I might also note from hence,
that we are allowed to cry to God, not only for our selves, and little Ones;
but that God would bless and preserve our Substance also.

4. Another special Occasion that calls upon us in an extraordinary (...)
knowledge God, and seek unto him, Is in a time of great (...); when God's
People are in Distress and great Danger.

Thus did Jacob, Genesis 33. when he heard, how his enraged Brother (...) coming
out to meet him with 400 Armed Men, to cut him off, with his Wives and Children.

How did he wrestle with God? He (...) and made Supplication; and also said, I
will not let thee go, except thou bless me, Genesis 32 26 And he said, What is thy
Name? and he said, Jacob; and he said, Thy Name shall be called no more Jacob,
but Israel; for as a Prince have thou Power with God and Men, and have
prevailed, verse 27. All that thus wrestle with God, God accounts Princes; they
are Prevailers with God; they overcome God in a spiritual manner, and prevail
over Men, nay, over Devils, and all Hellish Lusts, and the powers of Darkness.
Fsau shall not hurt thee, (as if God should have said) I will prevent thy
present Fear and Danger: Thus Jacob at this time, when in great Straits and
Afflictions, acknowledged God.

This also did the Children of Israel in Egypt, under their grievons Bondage
and Misery: They cried to the Lord, and God heard their Cries and their Groans,
Exodus 2. 23. 24. and looked upon them, and had respect to them, verse 5.

Moreover, Thus Moses and poor Israel acknowledged God, when they were pursued
by bloody Pharaoh, and brought to the Red Sea: Stand still, says Moses, and
see the Salvation of the Lord; have your hope in him, trust in him, acknowledge
his Power, in this time of your dismal Danger: The Egyptian, Exodus 14. 13.
whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. Let not
your Hearts fail, sink, nor stagger through Unbelief; but with Faith and quiet
Minds look to God, and you shall (as if Moses should have said) soon see an end
of your cursed Enemies.

Also thus did Samuel with all Israel, look to God, when the Philistines came
against them, they fasted on that day, and said, We have sinned against the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 6. Likewise thus did good King Jehosaphat, when the Children of
Moab and Amon came against him, and against Judah: Jehosophat feared, and set
himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judea, 2 Chronicles.
20. 3. Moreover, when Nehemiah saw how the remnant of God's People that were
left of the Captivity, were in great Afflictions, and the Wall of Jerusalem was
also broken down, he acknowledged God, and cried to him, Neh. 1. 3. O Lord, I
beseech thee let now thine Far be attentive unto the Prayer of thy Servant; and
the Prayers of thy Servants, who desire to fear thy Name, etc. verse 1^.

Thus also did Esther and Mordecai, seek to the Lord, and acknowledge him; when
the poor Jews were in danger of being all cut off in one day, they fasted, and
prayed unto God.

5. We should acknowledge God, when we have any great Work to do for his holy
Name, as was when we are about to reform, or labor after Reformation in
Religion, or to throw down Idolatry or Superstition: Thus did good King Josias
in the twelfth year of his Reign, he began to seek after the God of David, and
to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places and the Groves, and carved
Images, etc. 2 Chronicles. 34. 4. Moreover, when Ministers enter on their Ministry,
they should seek to God, acknowledge him, wholly design his Glory, and depend
upon his Strength, for Help, and Success.

6. When great things are near at hand, or some mighty appearance of God for
the glory of his Name, and salvation of his Church, and exaltation of Sion, and
downfall of their Enemies, God should be sought unto, and be acknowledged by
his own People: thus did Daniel, Dan. 9. 2. I Daniel understood by Books, the
number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet,
that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem. And I
set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by Prayer and Supplications with
Fasting, and Sackcloth, and Ashes, verse 3.

Brethren, Thus it is with us, we understand by Books, i.e. by the Book of
Daniel, the Revelations of St. John, and by the Writings of good Men, that the
number of the years of our spiritual Captivity under mistical Babylon, is near
expired; and that glorious things are near; and therefore we should now in an
extraordinary manner cry to God, and acknowledge his Power, and Wisdom, and
Faithfulness. O look up, the Vision will (suddenly) speak.

Thirdly, How we should acknowledge God, or after what manner he How we should
Acknowledge GOD.
found in this Duty?

1. In the Sense of our Sins, and Sins of the Lord's People, and of the whole
Nation; yea, with a through sight and sense of Sin, and with self abhorrence
for the same: Thus did Samuel acknowledge God, and poured out Water before the
Lord, at Mizpah; 1 Samuel 7. 6. and thus did Daniel, he confessed his Sins, and
the Sins of the People; We have sinned, and have committed Iniquity, and have
done wickedly, and have rebelled even by departing from thy Precepts, and from
thy Judgments, Dan. 9. 5. Neither have we hearkened unto the Prophets which have
spoken in thy Name to our Kings and Princes, and our Fathers, and to all the
People. O what Sins are we guilty of, and this vile Nation guilty of, whom God
has been so good and gracious unto, and saved with an high Hand, and
delivered, when (some time ago) all was a going that is dear to us.

2. With all Humility and brokenness of Heart we should acknowledge, that
whatsoever is come upon us, is in Justice, and Righteousness; we must say with
Daniel, O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us, Confusion of
Faces, as at this day to the men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; to
all Israel that are near and far off, etc. because of our Trespasses: O Lord,
to us belongs Confusion, to our Kings, and to our Princes, and to our
Fathers, because we have sinned. How low should we lie every one of us, and
labor to find out the plague of his own Heart; and to smite on our Breasts,
and say, What have I done? we must say, It is of the Lord's Mercy we are not
consumed; that we are yet a People, and England a Nation, not yet utterly
forsaken of God; In our acknowledging of God, we should humble our selves, and
pray; and not only so, but turn every one from his evil way; so will God hear
from Heaven, and will forgive our Sins, and heal our Land, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

3. We should acknowledge God with a sense of our Weakness, Ignorance, and
short sightedness, and not trust to our own Understanding: See the Context,
Trust in the Lord with all thine Heart, and lean not to thine own
Understanding, Prove. 3. 5.

Let not Men think their Wisdom is sufficient to act and accomplish those great
Designs that they take in Hand; because they are so acute, and have such clear
natural Parts, or acquired Parts: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; nor
the strong man glory in his strength. Let not the Learned Man boast of his
great Learning, but let all know, True Wisdom is from God; it is he must guide
us in Judgment; Brethren, it is a good sign God will not leave us, in that he
has put it into the Heart of our Parliament; to acknowledge God, and seek to
him a right way: At this difficult hour, it argues that they see need to ask
Counsel of him, and would acknowledge him, from whom Wisdom, to manage the
great Affairs of Nations comes, and would not lean to their own Understanding:
God is the great Governor of the World.

4. We should acknowledge God in Christ, come to him only, God must be
acknowledged, in Christ.
and look to him alone in a Mediator; if we do not wholly acknowledge him in
the Name of Jesus Christ, all we do will be in vain; for out of Christ he is a
God of Wrath and Fury; yea, a flaming and devouring Fire; but in Christ, he is
pacified and reconciled to all that so come to him; Samuel well knew this, and
therefore he took a sucking Lamb, and offered it for a Burnt-Offering, wholly
unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 9. This Lamb no doubt tipified Christ Jesus, in and by
whose Sacrifice only, he forsaw God was appeased, and his Justice satisfied,
and the guilt of the Sins of God's Israel removed.

Christ is the only way to the Father; No man comes to the Father but by me,
says our blessed Lord, John 14. 6. This Brethren, and none but this, is the
right way: Sinners are only to draw near to God by Christ; this way is prepared
for them, cast up for them; this is that new and living way: And Saints have no
other way to come to God, nor to acknowledge God to be their God, but only in
Christ.

O Acknowledge God thus, God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, 2
Cor. 5. 19. God in Christ is strong to save, strong to help, strong to deliver:
Christ is the power of God, and and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. The glory
of his Power, Mercy, Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, are all united, and shine
forth to save Sinners in Christ, and to save Nations, who look to him, and
acknowledged him in Christ.

Almighty Power was seen in creating of the World, and his Power in conjunction
with his Justice was seen, in casting the Angels that sinned, out of Heaven,
and Man out of Paradise; and Divine Power, as it was joined with Divine Mercy,
shone forth, in saving and delivering Israel at the Red Sea; but in Christ, the
glory of his Power, Mercy and Justice, and all other of his glorious
Attributes, are united together in sweet Harmony, to save and help all that by
Christ come to him; nothing can hinder our Help and Succor, if we acknowledge
and come to him in Jesus Christ.

We should acknowledge God manifested in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. not only that
Christ is God, (as I before hinted) but the reason why he took unto him our
Nature, and what things he has wrought out for us; and how the glory of God
shines forth in him.

We never acknowledge God in the Top Glory of his Wisdom, Mercy, Love, Power,
Justice and Goodness, unless we acknowledge him in Christ; nor can we know him
any other way to be our God, nor come to him, nor expect any Help, Relief,
Pardon or Peace, from him: We must acknwledge what Christ is made of, God the
Father unto us, even Wisdom and Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption:
He is our Life, our Light, our Righteousness, our Strength, our Peace, our
Food, our Guide, our King, to Rule us, our Priest, to Atone for our Sins, and
to Intercede for us, and our Prophet to Teach us.

In him, God is our Father, our Friend, our Portion; in him, we may come to God
with holy Boldness; All the promises of God are in him, yea, and in him, amen,
to the glory of God the Father.

5. We must acknowledge God by Faith: God is never acknowledged GOD to be
acknowledged in Faith.
in Christ aright, but by Faith; we must believe, if we would be accepted, to
believe in Christ, or come to God by Faith in Christ, is the way to be
justified, to be pardoned, and to obtain all things whatsoever we want.

To Believe, is to trust in God through Christ, to rely upon God through Jesus
Christ, to rest on God's Power and Mercy through Christ, to receive him for
all, as he is offered in the Gospel, it is to depend upon God's faithful
Promises: He that comes to me, I will no wise cast out, John 6. 36. He is able
to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by him; seeing be ever lives to
make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25.

O! Remember that you acknowledge God by Faith, in the Death, Resurrection, and
Intercession of Jesus Christ: We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Whatsoever we ask in Christ's Name, in Faith,
that is agreeable to the Will of God, we shall receive from him.

6. We should acknowledge God constantly; always, from GOD to be Acknowledged
always.
first to last; not only when we stand in the greatest need, of him, when we
are Low, or Poor, but also when we are High, Rich, and in a prosperous
Condition* Hagar desired not Riches, lest he should, when full, deny God, and
say, Who is the Lord, Prove. 30. 9.

Trust in the Lord at all times, says David: Will the Hypocrite always call
upon God: No, no, in Afflictions he may, and often does, when God's
Chaistenings are upon him, then he will cry to him, and seek him; but to call
upon God, and acknowledge him, and seek his Glory, and depend upon him, and
look for Success always in all things, at all times from God; is only the
Character of a true Christian.

We can never be in so high a state, never arrive to such a degree of Wisdom,
or have Riches in so great abundance; but we have need to acknowledge God, and
depend upon him; no Man living, but stands in need of God's help.

And there is no Man so low, so poor, so destitute, but God can raise him, help
him, and relieve him: Man's Being, and well Being, is only from God.

7. God is to be acknowledged in Truth and Uprightness of GOD must be
Acknowledged sincerely.
Heart; if we fail here, all our Humiliations will be in vain; Hypocritical
Fasts are abominable to God; Is it because we have Sinned, and God thereby has
been dishonored? or, Is it not rather for Corn, Wine, and Oil, that we cry to
God this day? Is it not for a deliverance from our Miseries, rather than from
our Iniquities? When you fasted and mourned, etc. did you (says the Lord) fast
unto me? Zech. 7. 5. Let all Men see to this, for if we are not sincere, God
looks upon our Prayers with disdain: They have not cried to me with their
Heart, when they howled on their Beds, they assemble themselves for Corn and
Wine, and they rebel against me, Hos. 7. 14.

They do it (as if God should say) for Peace and Plenty; they have the World in
their Eye; not my Glory, but their own Carnal Interest, for they live still in
their Sins; and rebel against me: Let England, and the Inhabitants of this City
see to this, least they should be found in the like Abomination this day, with
Israel of old.

But to come to the Reason of this Doctrine.

Fourthly, Why we should in all our ways acknowledge God:

First, Because Wisdom and Counsel is from the Lord; none Wisdom and Counsel
from God only.
can act or do any thing for God, in a right way, and to a right end, or for
their own good, unless helped and influenced by the Almighty. There is a spirit
in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding, Job 32.
8. Who is it that teaches Senators Wisdom, but the Lord: Alas! all Men's mere
Natural Wisdom, of which they sometimes boast, it is but Foolishness; when
compared to that right spiritual Wisdom, which he can give them: Mere natural
Men, or Men without the Divine Wisdom of God, are often influenced by the
Devil: Satan is a great Politition: Go to, we will deal wisely, says Pharaoh:
Ay, but that Wisdom was from below, it was from the Devil, and such Wisdom God
can soon confound; Man's Wisdom is to take Counsel of God, and seek to him; The
fear of God, is the beginning of wisdom.

Secondly, Men ought to acknowledge God, because he does require, It (...) Man's
Duty to acknowledge GOD.
and Command them so to do: it is their Duty to do it; and their great Sin that
do not seek to him: Brethren, what Blessing can Man expect to meet with in
their undertakings, that asked not Counsel of the Lord: How were the People of
Israel blamed and punished, for doing some things without asking Counsel of
himt? Josh. 9. 14. But they asked not counsel at the mouth of God. It was about
making Peace with them that they were commanded to Destroy, and not to make a
Covenant of Peace with: God also pronounced a Woe to his People, for their
neglect herein; Woe to the rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take
Counsel* but not of me, etc. Isa. 30. 1. that walked to go down into Egypt, and
have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of
Pharaoh, verse 2.

Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50. 14. Prayer is owing to God for
every thing, (in Prayer, etc.) we should let our Request be made known to the
Lord.

Thirdly, Because God can give Wisdom, to them that are GOD can give Wisdom to
the Simple.
esteemed simple, weak and ignorant Men; he can make the Foolish, Wise, and put
his Spirit upon them: What Wisdom did he give to Moses, who kept his
Father-in-law's Sheep? and what a famous Judge and Ruler did God make him to
be? It is true, he was trained up in the Wisdom of Egypt before, but that was
foolishness with God.

What Wisdom did he give to David, who was but a Shepherd, and to Amos a
Herdsman: Moreover, what Wisdom did he give to the Disciples of Christ, who
were some of them but Fishermen, and deemed unlearned and ignorant Men; God
makes choice of the weak and base things of the World, to confound the Mighty;
and of the Foolish, to bring to naught the Wisdom of the Wise.

Fourthly, God ought to be acknowledged by all Men, in all Matters; GOD
disposes of all Affairs.
because it is by his wise Providence (as you have heard) that all things are
governed, ordered, and disposed of, throughtout the whole Earth; not only the
Affairs of particular Persons, but the Concernments and Affairs of Nations and
Kingdoms much more.

1. In all Civil Affairs in respect of Government, etc. All the Counsels of the
Mighty are influenced by the Lord: God judges amongst the Gods; the Shields of
the Earth belong to the Lord, Psalm. 47. 9. It Is by me Kings Reign, and Princes
decree Judgment; he sets up, and pulls down at his Pleasure.

2. All Military Actions of Nations, are ordered by the Almighty, War and Peace
are from him; if he take Peace from the Earth, in vain do all Counselors and
great Statesmen meet, and consult about Peace: hence God is called, The Lord of
Hosts, and a Man of War: or, The great General of Armies.

He has opened his Armoury, and has brought forth his Weapons of Indignation.
Says David, Heteaches my Hands to War, and my Fingers to Fight: He is a God
of Influence and Authority; he Commands all, and none can stand before him; at
his Command, Frogs invade Pharaoh: from hence it appears, that a Martial
Employment is very Honorable, viz. when the Cause is good, when it is for his
Glory, and for the Honor and Safety of a King, and People: God being called
the Lord of Hosts; the God of the Armies of Israel; puts a Luster and Dignity
upon a General of an Army engaged in a Just Cause.

3. In all Ecclesiastical Affairs, or Matters respecting the Church of God, he
ought to be acknowledged; nay, in this matter, before all things, we ought to
seek unto him, who is in a peculiar Sense styled, The King of Saint:, and God
of Israel. He that is the Head of the Church, is the Absolute Governor
thereof; the Spiritual Rights of his People, and the Rule of Men's Consciences,
is only under his Power and Influences; and his Laws only are the Bond and
Limits of his Government; no altering, adding to, nor diminishing from his holy
Precepts: the Power to Rule the Church, is Christ's Prerogative alone; as he is
God, it is essentially and absolutely in his Hand; and as Mediator, this Power
is given to him by the Father: All Power is given to me in Heaven, and in
Earth: go ye therefore teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Moreover, the Peace
and Prosperity of God's Church and People, as also all their Trouble and
Adversity is from him. Who gave Jacob to the Spoil, and Israel to the Robbers?
Did not the Lord against whom they had sinned? Whosoever are the Instruments in
either case, God is in a special manner the great Agent in it, it was he that
brought again the Captivity of Sion; it was God that stirred up Cyrus to
proclaim Liberty for the Jews, to Build their City and Temple.

And when he comes to build up Sion, in these last days; he will appear in his
Glory, and will undo all that have afflicted his People; for they that touch
them, touch the Apple of his Eye, Let the French Tyrant, Pope and Turk look to
it; their day is near; for God will plead the Controversy of Sion, and come
upon Princes as upon Mortar; and as the Potter treads the Clay, Isa. 41. 25.
His Sword is bathed in Heaven, God will come with vengeance; even God, with a
recempence he will come and save you, Isa. 35* 4* It will not be long before
you will hear the voice of them that flee, and escaped out of Babylon, to
declare in Sion, the vengeance of the Lord our God, the vengeance of his
Temple, Jer. 50. 28. O! therefore let us look to him, acknowledge him, for
these things are very near.

Again, as all Affairs, both Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical, are in the
Hand of God* and ordered by his wise Counsel; so are all Creatures likewise.

1. The good Angels are under his Authority and Influence, they all wait for
his Word, and obey his Command, either to protect his own People, or execute
his Wrath upon their Enemies.

2. The evil Angels are also under his Power; Satan is limited by him, he is in
Chains, God sets Bounds to him, he can go no further than his Chains will
suffer him; it is not who he will, but who he may devour; he could not touch
Job, nor any thing he had, till God gave him liberty; the Devils could not go
into the Herd of Swine, till Christ said, go.

3. All men also are subjected to his Authority, and he can at his Pleasure
restrain the wrath of wicked Men, or make it tend to his own Praise: Thou have
no Power, except it be given thee of my Father, says Christ to Pilate.

4. All Irrational Creatures are at his Command, he can stop the Months of
hungry Lions, so that they could do Daniel no hurt: Nay, and he can give David
power to destroy both the Lion and the Bear: The Lord opened the Mouth of the
Ass, to speak with Man's Voice, to rebuke the madness of the Prophet.

Moreover, He caused two She Bears to tare 42 Children, for their reproaching
of Elisha; and who was it but the Lord, that sent the Lion to slay the young
Prophet, who transgressed against him.

Moreover, Remarkable is the passage of his causing a Raven to feed Elisha when
distressed.

He has also Power over, and rules and disposes of all Inanimate Creatures,
the Winds and Sea obey him, and are at his Command; he can make the Sun stand
still, or go back, if he please; it is He that makes the Grass to grow, the Sun
to shine, and the Rain to fall; it is He that gives Rain and fruitful Seasons,
and who sometimes sinites, and brings a Blast and Mildew upon the Fruits the
Earth; therefore all ought to acknowledge him.

Fifthly, We ought to acknowledge God, because, as all Judgments All Judgments
God can soon remove.
and Plagues are from him, so he can at his Pleasure remove them. I Form the
Light, and create Darkness; I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all
these things, Isa. 45. 7. and if he gives quietness, who then can make
trouble; and when he hides his face, who can behold him, whether it be done
against a Nation, or against a Man only, Job 34. 29.

If God will give those Nations Quietness, where it is not, or continue it
where it is; there is no Power on Earth, or Hell, can hinder, or prevent it:
Who can Curse them that God will Bless? or, Bless such that God does Curse?
There is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against
Israel, Numb. 23. 23. but Woe to that Nation, or Person, God hides his Face
from; for then he withdraws his gracious Care and Protection, and then he will
not hear their Prayers also, then he will not give them Counsel; nay, but will
do more, he will leave them to their own Counsel, as he did Israel, Psalm. 81.
12.

Sixthly, We would acknowledge God in all things, because God can make unlikely
means or Persons succesful.
he can make use of unlikely ways, means, or persons to do his own Work; by the
blowing of Rams Horns, he made the Walls of Jericho to fall down, Josh. 7. 5.
He spoiled Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, by an Army of Frogs, Locusts, Lice,
Flies, etc. What wonders did he do with 300 Men? God, as one observes, can
strike a strait Blow with a crooked Stick; it is not for the worthiness of the
Instruments, that he does work, but for his own Glory.

Seventhly, Because all success in our ways and undertakings are All Success is
from GOD.
from God, Rulers of Nations, Magistrates, and Ministers, cannot do any thing
unless God Bless them, and his Hand go along with them: I have planted, and
Apollo watered; but it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6.

The Plowman plows in vain; the Tradesman buys and sells, and Trades in vain;
the Merchant and Mariners venture to Sea in vain; the Physician prescribes
Medicines in vain; nay, Magistrates rule in vain, and Ministers Preach in vain,
and the People hear in vain; if God denies Success, or prospers them not: In
vain do men rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of Carefulness;
if God does not bless the labor of their, Hands; Behold, Is it not of the Lord
of Hosts, that the people shall labor in the very fire, and the People shall
weary themselves for very vanity? Hab. 2. 13. It Is not the Care of the
Husbandman to wait for the proper Season to Sow his Seed, nor the Industry of
the Trader, nor the Skill of the Physician, nor the Wisdom and Policy of the
Statesman, nor the Learning of the Gospel Minister that will avail them, if
God do not succeed them: Many think by their Skill, by their Parts, by their
Policy, and by their Learning, to do mighty things; when, alas! they see
themselves suddenly blasted (...) a secret way, by the Hand of God, and all
their Devices brought to naught; Men of small Parts and Learning, God being
with them, many times wonderfully prosper; when Men of great Parts, Learning,
and Wisdom, are confounded, because they acknowledge not the Lord, nor seek to
him; By strength no man shall prevail: O! therefore, ye the Sons of the Mighty,
acknowledge God, and lean not to your own Understanding.

Eighthly, Men should acknowledge the Lord in all things they go about; because
they may be brought into such straits, and GOD can help in Straits.
have such difficult Cases before them, that they may see the work is too hard
for them, or they may not know what to do; their Wisdom may fail them, or Men
may be brought into such straits, as sometimes the Sea Men are, that they are
at their Wits end; but God then can help the Statesmen how to project Matters,
and order their difficult Cases; and the Seaman, when he cries to God, wants not
help, God makes the storm a calm, and causes the proud waves to cease, and
brings them out of all their troubles; read Psalm. 107. at your leisure: Men may
want Wisdom, though they have great Power; or want Power, though they have
great Wisdom, or may want time, and a sit opportunity, though they have both
Wisdom and Power; but God wants neither Power, Wisdom, nor Opportunity:
Therefore we should acknowledge him.

Ninthly, We ought to acknowledge the Lord in all our ways, because whatsoever
he has promised to do for his People, he GOD' s Promise is to them that seek
to him.
positively says, he will nevertheless be sought unto, that he may do it for
them: I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate; I
the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it: Thus says the Lord God, I will yet
for this be enquired of by the Ezekiel. 36. 37.
house of Israel, to do it for them, etc. God will justify us freely of his
own Grace, through the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; but he will have
us look to him, or believe in Christ, that he may do it for us: Moreover, he
will give us the Grace of Faith, that we may believe in Jesus Christ; but he
will have us enquire of him; we must pray to him, and attend on his Word, that
he may give that Grace and Power to us, to believe, etc. Also God will pardon
our Sins, for his own Namesake, and not remember them any more; but he will
bring us to his Feet, or humbly, with Contrition of Spirit, to cry to him, that
we may receive that Pardon: For, as a King may freely forgive a guilty Rebel,
yet he mirst come and confess his horrid Treason, and beg Pardon on his Knees;
so God will cause the guilty Sinner thus to do also: In like manner God will
perform all his Promises, and give Counsel, Direction, and Wisdom to Senators,
and to Ministers of Justice, to godly Magistrates and Preachers of his Word,
etc. but he will be enquired of, and sought unto by them, that he may do it for
them: And this he has declared, and positively made known to be his Will, and
Absolute Pleasure; therefore it would be high Presumption, and Pride, to expect
these things of him, unless we comply with him in this Matter.

Tenthly, All Men ought to acknowledge God in all their ways* because, not to
look to God, seek to God, and acknowledge him, is Brutish; it is to be worse
than Heathens and Idolators; for, they in Straits and Afflictions, or when they
enter upon Matters of Moment, will cry to their Gods; They called on the name 1
King 18. 26.
of Baal from Morning even until Noon; saying, O Baal hear us; but there was no
voice: And Elijah mocked them* and said, Cry aloud for he is a verse 27.
God, either he is a pursuing, or in a journey; or, per adventure he steepeth,
and must be awaked: Moreover, The Mariners that were with Jonah in the Ship,
(who were Heathens) in that Storm they were in; Every Man cried unto his God,
and seemed to be offended with Jonah, Jonah 1. 5.
that he did not cry to his God also: What meanest thou, O sleeper, arise, and
call upon thy God. The Israelites usually asked Counsel or God, by the Ephod,
the Grecians, by their Oracles; but Christians ought only to go to God by Jesus
Christ, and ask Counsel in his Name. Brethren, that God that brings a People, a
Nation, or particular Person into Trouble, (and sometimes for great Sins) only
knows how to bring them out of it* Such that eye not God in their Trouble,
never search into the cause of it; and as they know not, consider not the cause
of their Disease, so they are as ignorant of the Cure; and from hence apply
indirect Medicines, not to acknowledge God, is to question the Being of God:
However, it argues, they do not depend upon him, that in their Trouble do not
seek unto him: Shall Heathens give greater Glory to Dumb Idols, than Christians
give to the true and only God of Heaven and Earth.

They that depend upon their own Wisdom, do in effect, Deifie themselves; for
none has a self-sufficiency in him, or is independent, but God alone: But, how
like are some Men to the Swine, that greedily eat up the Acorns that lie under
the Trees, but never look up to the Tree from* whence they come; or like a Dog,
that seems angry, and sharles at the Stone that is thrown at him, but never
regards the Hand of him that threw it, nor knows he the cause thereof.

Eleventhly, It follows from hence therefore, that we ought in all our ways
to acknowledge the Lord; because it is hereby God is glorified: As not to
acknowledge him, seek to him, and trust in him, does detract from God, or
lessen his glory; nay, utterly rob him of that honor and glory that is due to
him alone; so hereby we give him that glory which is owing to him from his
Creatures: We by fearing him, show that he is God, that he is our Maker, our
Lord and only Sovereign; and by trusting in him alone, we acknowledge that he
is our help, our strength, our hope, and that our dependence is upon him. He is
great, and therefore to be feared; he is faithful, therefore to be believed; he
is good, therefore to be beloved, and made the only Object of our chiefest
Affection; he is our only Counselor, and therefore we should look to him for
direction, wisdom and counsel.

Twelfthly, We should seek to God, and acknowledge him, for all, and in all
things, especially in a time of trouble; bcause what deliverances, help or
succor soever we receive, it is wholly to be ascribed to him; but they that
seek not to God for direction and success, will not look upon themselves
obliged to praise God for all the mercy, help or deliverance received; they
will sacrifice to their own Nets or Drags, to their wisdom, policy, strength or
care; or to their own counsels, and so admire themselves.

But the truth is, if men acknowledge not God, or neglecct to seek to him for
the Mercy they want, the Mercy when received may prove a Curse to them instead
of a Blessing: God gave Israel Food, but sent Leanness to their Souls. To these
I might add, That Gods Counsel shall stand, he will do all his pleasure; there
is no counsel against him shall prosper; he is the great Disposer of all
Affairs of Nations, etc. and if we comply not with his Word, in acknowledging
him, he may blast all our hopes; there is no contending with the Almighty; they
that subscribe not to his wise Government, and exalt not him, he will at last
cut them in pieces. In a word, It Is for our good; Luke 19. 27.
it is our Interest to acknowledge God, as well as it tends to his Glory.

Lastly, We should acknowledge God in all our Ways, because God can do
Wonders in the way of his working for his People, when they seek to him: What
Wonders did he do of old? His Hand is not shortened that he cannot Save: When
things are Isa. 60. 1.
past help or remedy with Men, it is a fit opportunity for God to work: In the
Mount it shall be seen.

He can restrain the Passions of Men, the Waves of the Sea, and the Tumults of
the People; he changed Esaus's Heart to Jacob; he caused the Egyptians to lend
their Jewels to the Israelites; he can cut off the Spirits of Princes, or
strike them with a Pannick Fear, and cause them to fly when none pursues them:
He raised up new Troubles upon Saul, and made him cease persuing of David, when
he was in danger.

God can soon infatuate the Counsels of our Enemies, Isa. 44. 25. He
frustrateth the Tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners Isa. 44. 2
mad, and turns Wisemen backward, and makes their Knowledge Foolishness. He
can make our Enemies to act for our good; he caused Cyrus to proclaim Liberty
to build Jerusalem, and God's own Temple.

And how did he turn the Counsel of Achitophel into Foolishness, 2 Samuel 1 23.
at the Prayer of David.

These things being considered, you may find there are Reasons sufficient to
show, That it is our Duty, in all our Ways to acknowledge God; but no more as
to the Doctrinal Part. I shall now briefly endeavor to improve (by way of
Application) what has been said.

The Application.
FROM hence it appears, That it is a great and an abominable sin, not to
acknowledge God in every thing we go about.

1. Not to consult with God, is in effect to deny his Special Providence over
us; or that he orders all events that Infer. 1.
come to pass. The truth is, we here in England, of late, talk so much of
Fortune and of the Fortunate; that it seems as if we were in some Heathen
Nation. I am sure no man can, or dares consult with God, or acknowledge him in
any unlawful things, to gratify their Covetous Appeties; if they do, let them
tremble. Would they have God to Patronize their wickedness? Brethren, we should
never step one step, in doing any thing which we have cause to doubt is sinful;
or that which we cannot safely seek to God for a blessing upon.

2. Not to acknowledge God, is a kind of Atheism; sure such do not sted fastly
believe the being of God: For if there be a God that governs all Affairs, why
do they not seek to him, pray to him, trust in him as God.

3. Or at least, not to acknowledge God in every undertaking, it argues
unbelief; and it does cast contempt upon his Wisdom, Mercy, Goodness, etc.
Slighting his Sovereignty, Care and Providence over them.

Such show their Pride and Folly with a Witness, as if they were wise enough to
manage their Affairs themselves, without consulting with God, and seeking to
him a right way.

4. God may for this great neglect, and evil, refuse to appear to help men in
their necessities and great straits; when matters are too difficult for them,
God may let them fail in their Counsels, and be confounded in their Projects,
to convince them they are but Men; and that without him they can do nothing. I
am persuaded that God oftentimes (upon this Isa. 33. 11.
account) infatuates the Counsels of Men; Ye shall conceive Chaff, and shall
bring forth Stubble. Though men may like Achitophel give suitable counsel as
cunning Statesmen, yet God can obstruct or hinder such concerned to take it, or
from closing with it; but rather to take other counsel to their ruin, as
Absalem took the Counsel of Hushai, to his utter overthrow; and this was all
from God, the Lord had appointed to defeat the 2 San. 17 7. to 140
good Counsel of Achitophel, to the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon
Absalem.

5. It shows, that such think it is in vain to seek God, possibly they judge
the Almighty does not concern himself about their matters; they are too low,
too mean matters for the great God to take notice of; or else they conclude, he
is unmindful of his own word and promises to them that seek him; or otherwise,
they show they have no faith in his word, nor dependence upon God. But did they
give credit to the Holy Scripture, all their folly herein would soon vanish;
for is it not said that an Hair of our Head, nor a Sparrow falls to the ground
without God; he has interressed himself in all our concerns, and if we seek
him, he will be found, He never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in
vain.

6. It shows, that such men do not take notice of the operations of Gods hand,
nor observe what he has done in times past; nay perhaps before their own Eyes,
but a little before: Shall a Heathen, or men strangers to God, outdo such that
are called Christians. Potiphar saw and was convinced, nay and did acknowledge
that the Lord was with Joseph, and prospered Genesis 39* 3.
all things his hand.

7. It robs God of that Sacred Homage and Worship which is due to him from all
his Creatures, and so overthrows the foundation of all Religion. For by
acknowleding God in all we do, we show we own that Divine Worship, Fear and
Trust that is due to him; but they who do it not, seem to disclaim or disown
Gods chiefest Glory, viz. That Divine adoration that belongs to him alone, and
which appears not only to be his right from Revelation, but from Natural Light;
for it is a Branch of Natural Religion, to acknowledge and trust in God, and to
seek to him for all things we want, and to praise him for all things we have or
do receive.

He that is the only object of our Divine Worship, is he that governs all
things, and from whom all good comes, and delivers us from whatsoever is evil
or hurtful to us* But they that do not acknowledge God, will neither pray to
him for what they need, nor praise him for what they receive; therefore it
destroys all true trust in God, fear of God, and love to God, not to
acknowledge him: and it shows such do in effect, deny God's governing the
World, who Acknowledge him not, or Pray not to him. The Lord looked down from
Heaven to see if there were any did understand or seek God. Psalm. 14. 2.


He takes notice who they be that Acknowledge his Authority over them; or who
understands this, and so Fear him and Calls upon him, and Trust in him: But
alas! the Wicked say, Are not our tongues our own, and who is Lord over us:
They think their wisdom is from themselves, to Contrive, to Project; and their
Tongues their own, to speak and utter what their hearts conceive; and their
Hands their own, to effect what their hearts contrive, and their tongues
express.

Quest. Who are they that do not truly Acknowledge God.
Answ. 1. Such that never or but seldom think of God. David, speaking of the
Wicked, says, God is not in all their Thoughts: or in none of their Thoughts,
they think not of God.

2. Such who never consult with God in his word, about what they Undertake,
that do not enquire, whether what they are about to do, be Just and Agreeable
with the word and will of God; nor seek for a Blessing upon what they are about
to do.

3. Such who Pray not to God, or least wise, do not Pray in Faith or
Believingly.

4. Such that depend upon their own wisdom, or trust in their own Strength, or
rely upon an arm of flesh: Some trust in Psalm. 44. 6.
Horses and some in Chariots. But what said David, I will not trust in my own
Bow, neither shall my Sword save me: Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride
upon Horses. Hos. 14. 3.


5. Such who in all they do, do not chiefly seek the Honor of God, the
Interest of God, and the Welfair of his People; but in their Prayers, rather
eye their own interest, their own peace, safety and profit, or their own glory:
These do not truly Acknowledge God.

6. Such who do not Acknowledge, that all the good things they receive, to come
from God; but ascribe it to their care, wisdom and industry, or secondary
causes: as I heard of a wicked Man, who had a plentiful crop of Corn; and a
neighbor observing it, bid him Praise God for it; Praise God, said he, praise
my dung-cart (or to that purpose) Such men be sure Acknowledge not God.

7. Remember, That such who do not live by Faith on God's Promises and
Providence through Jesus Christ, or do not come to God in Christ, for all
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, or that Trust not in him at all times and for
all things, but either mur^^er against God, or despair of his Mercy in the Lord
Jesus; or whosoever do not give God the glory of his Wisdom* Mercy, Justice,
Power, Love and Faithfulness, as they shine forth in Christ; do not truly
Acknowledge God.

Exhortation.
LEt me Exhort you all (these things being so) to Acknowledge God, whosoever
you be, whether High or Low, Rich or Poor, Young or Old; the King on the Throne
must Acknowledge God, as well as him that grinds at the Mill: it is both the
duty of the Prince and of the Peasant: there are none so high, but he can bring
down, nor none so low but he can raise up

2. Pray to him in Faith, for Prayer is one way to Acknowledge him. And as for
Motives.

1. Consider, That Prayer is the Duty of all Men: though God will not hear
Sinners; yet Peter put Simon Magus upon Prayer, Pray, that the thoughts of
thine heart may be forgiven thee: Acts 8. 2.
This show; the need of Grace, of Faith, and a Changed Heart; if wicked men
Pray not, they Sin, yet their Prayers cannot please God.

2. You know that God will hear a godly man's prayer, if he prays in Faith, and
for such things that are agreeable to his will, 1 John 5. 1 15. Joh. 16. 2
but let him come in Christ's Name: Ask and ye shall Receive, that your Joy may
be full.

3. Prayer has obtained great Blessings of God; nay, it has done Wonderful
Things: I mean the Prayer of Faith and of Faithful Persons. It has opend and
shut Heaven: Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly, that it Jam. 5. 18.
might not rain, and it rained not on the Earth, by the space of Three Years
and Six Months; and he prayed again, and the Heavens gave Rain, and the Earth
brought forth. Prayer has quenched the violence Exodus Heb. 11 34.
of Fire, and stopped the mouths of Lions: Faith and Prayer divided the Red Sea,
that Israel went through it on dry ground It has put to flight the Armies of
Aliens.

4. Prayer is Gods Ordinance, it is his way wherein we ought to meet him.

5. It has his Promises, his word that is settled in Heaven; his promise is as
firm as Heaven it self.

6. Prayer Honors God many ways.

1. Hereby we Acknowledge his Omnisciency, that he knows us, and our wants and
necessities.

2. Prayer Honors God, in that by Prayer we acknowledge his Omnipotence, that
he is able to help us, let our condition be what it will: and in that he can
confound our Enemies.

3. In respect of our dependence upon God, for in Prayer we Acknowledge, we do
not know what to do, but our eyes are up to him and our Trust is in him.

4. In Prayer we Acknowledge his Authority over us, and his Love and
Faithfulness toward us: But Brethren, know that it is the Prayer of the New
Creature that prevails, that pleases and honors him; it is the voice of
the New Born Spiritual Babe, that is sweet to him; yea 'ts the voice of his own
Spirit that he hears, and which brings honor to him: Moreover know, that it is
through Christ's Intercession only, that our Prayers are heard: Christ offers up
all the Prayers of his own People Rev. 8. 3.
with his own Incense, and when he offerred up their Prayers with his Incense,
their were Voices, Lightnings and Thunder.

1. Join Confession of Sins with your Supplications: O find out, every one of
you, the Plague of his own heart, and lie low at the Foot of God; confess your
own Sins, and the Sins of the Nation, and the Sins of God's People, thus you
have heard Daniel Dan. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4.
did: Brethren, to Confession of Sin, add also deep Humiliation, this must be
joined with our Prayers and Confessions; nay, and Reformation of Life also,
every one must turn from his evil way. See 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my People that
are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and
turn from their Evil Ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their
Sins, and will be al their Land: If we regard Iniquity in our hearts, God will
not hear our Prayers: It Is true, a National Humiliation and Reformation, may
prevent National Judgments, as in the case of Nineveb: O that we could see but
such an Humiliation (as was among them) among us in England, for the Sins of
this Nation are grievous in the Sight of God, being attended with such
Lamentable Aggravations, we are a People of exceeding great Mercies; but O! the
Wickedness of these Days: God is therefore angry with us; the Inhabitants of
England may see their Sins in their Punishment: Does not God touch us in our
Trade and Coin? Is it not, because those two things have been, as it were, the
Idols of England, or of Multitudes among us? Sirs, Let us look higher than to
secondary Causes of these present distresses that are upon us; and acknowledge
God to be just in permitting these Evils to come upon the Land: If we cannot
find out the Cause of our Distempers, how shall we find out a Cure?

I am afraid least this Pretended Fast, should be but as a Mock-Fast, or a day
of Humiliation in show only, and not in heart; if we see all persons reforming
their ways, we shall have ground to hope better things.

If Magistrates do their part, not only in making good Laws against Vice and
Profaneness; but in seeing those Laws put into due execution; and they
themselves, and every man to turn from his evil ways, and from the violence
that is in his hand* then may Gods Wrath and Anger cease; but if not, his
judgment will break forth upon us.

Brethren, God is a jealous God, and will not be mocked; what men sow they
shall reap. It Is said of Niniveh, 'And God Jonab 2. 1
saw their Works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the
evil, that he had said, that he would do unto them, and did it not. It was not
their words, but their works that God looked at; it is not what we speak, but
what we do that will prevail with the Allmighty.

1. Terror and woe to them that cast off all fear of God, and acknowledge him
not, or do it not in truth and sincerity. Thou Job. 15.
casts off fear, and restrainest prayer before God. Some men look upon it
vain and uproficable to pray to God, or to acknowledge him; What profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinances, and have Mal. 3. 1
walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? But what will these men do in the
day of Wrath? Judgments shall bow them and break them, if Mercies will not melt
them.

2. Those that refuse to acknowledge God, or who follow not his Direction, and
walk not in his Ways, nor hearken not to his Voice, nor wait for his Counsel,
he will in Wrath and Judgment leave, and give them up to their own hearts
lusts, and to walk in their own counsel, as he did Israel of old; My people
would not bearken to my voice, and Israel would have none of me; so I gave them
up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsel. God may
justly withdraw all his directing influences from such, and blind their Eyes,
who, through Pride, think they have Wisdom enough to manage their own Affairs,
and direct their own Paths. God's counsel is to men, to forsake their sinful
ways, to embrace his Son, or believe in Christ, and trust in him alone, and
rest on his word, and cry to him in their trouble; but when they refuse to do
this, he oftentimes utterly leaves them, and then they fall, and bring ruin on
themselves and others, whose counselors they pretend to be, or chosen to be.
The truth is, while the Nation continues in its Rebellion against God, and all
Profaneness abounds to such a degree, as to this day it does, what can we
expect but Wrath and fearful Judgments? What signifies a few formal Prayers,
whilst men hold fast their sins? Are such Laws made and executed, to check and
restrain the cursed enormities of the ungodly? That may tend as an effectual
way to accomplish such a Reformation that God calls for. Alas, whilst every
Man's Hand at Sea and Land is up against God, fighting against him; can we
expect he should appear to fight for us? O what horrid Pride, Uncleanness,
Oaths and Blasphemy, and all Profaneness do we see and hear of every day? It Is
a wonder the Earth opens not its Mouth to swallow them up at Land (as it did
them at Jemeca;) and that the Sea does not swallow up our Ships (and those in
them) they having such a wait and load in them* Sin is a heavy burden, and our
sins are so heavy, they are enough to sink (as one observes) seventeen
Kingdoms. Moreover, what Errors and detestable Heresies do abound among us? And
also what Divisions, Discord and Animosities are there among Professors? One
set against another, little Love and Charity being now to be found in the
Earth: Much Preaching, but little Practice: Are not many Professors as Proud,
Covetous, Carnal and Loose as others. O where is the Life and Power of
Religion? What can we look for whilst things are thus, but some fearful
calamity and dissolution.

But to proceed to a Use of Comfort and Consolation, to such who do in
uprightness acknowledge God.

Observe the Motive, or Encouragement, that is laid down in the later part of
my Text, and he shall direct thy Paths.

I cannot now speak to this part of the words, as I might, for want of time;
but certainly here is great ground of Comfort to all godly Christians, yea to
all that rightly acknowledge God. For,

1. He will show us the right way, that we might, says Ezra, seek a right way;
none but God can lead us into a right way; every man's way may seem right in his
own Eyes; but no man's way is right, but such as God teaches and directs.

2. Let our Straits and Distresses be never so great, nay, beyond the wisdom of
Man to find out a Remidy, yet God can soon direct us, and all that seek to him,
in a way for present Relief; nothing is too hard for him to do, Who is
wonderful in Isa. 28. 26
Counsel, and excellent in Working.

3. God can direct and save a People, when all say, there is no hope; when
every Man despareth of Succor and Relief, and are at their Wits end as it
were. God can lead, guide and direct us Infallibly: He only gives certain and
Infallible Counsel; there are none can defeat his Counsel; no wisdom nor
craftiness of Men can stand before the Wisdom of God. There is no Prove. 21. 30.
Wisdom nor Understanding nor Counsel against the Lord: What Encouragement is
here to seek to God?

4. As he can Direct us, and none can withstand him; or give us Counsel, which
none can overthrow; so he can with ease, defeat all the Counsels of his Peoples
Enemies; nay, can turn their crafty counsel to the Advantage of his own People:
He Job 5. 13.
takes the Wise in their own Craftiness, and the Counsel of the Froward is
carried head long: or as the Prophet Isaiah says, The Counsel Isa. 44. 25.
of the Wise shall be turned bac ward. Omne Consilium Captatum in Festinatione
est Stultitia. God can mingle a perverse Spirit, and and make the Princes of
Zoan to become Fools.

5. When he is sought truly unto, he has promised to direct a People or Person
that fears him; his special care is over such that Trust in him: Behold the
eye of the Lord is over them that Fear him, upon them that hope in his Mercy:
Mind my Text, He Psalm. 37. 23.
shall direct thy Paths; the steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and
be delights in his ways. Though the Young Lions want and suffer hunger, yet
they that fear God shall want no good thing: He will lead the Blind, in ways
they knew not, etc. Though we are in our selves, Blind and Ignorant, yet if we
Acknowledge Him, He will lead us, and will not leave us to the lusts of our
Enemies: Brethren, we are still in God's hand and none can pluck us out; my,
and our times also are in his hand.

6. You that are Godly, have interest in this mighty God; He is your Father,
therefore he will Teach and Direct you; His Faithfulness and Fatherly
Affections leads him thus to do.

7. Do you also commit your selves to him and Trust in him; and will he, think
you, ever fail such that so do: The Poor commits Psalm 10 14
himself to thee: Thou art the Helper of the Fatherless: If unfaithful Man will
not fail such that wholly Trust in him; will the Faithful God not help and
direct such that put all their Trust in him; though our Sins be many, and our
miseries and dangers many also, yet Brethren, let us lie low before the Lord,
and humbly confess with the Prophet our own Insufficiency. O Lord, I know that
the way of Man is not in himself, it is not in man Jer. 10. 13
that walks to direct his Steps. Let us use all due means which God directs
us to, or be found in our duty, and leave the Issue of all to God; Men not
seeking constantly to God, nor relying on him, may be the cause they prosper
not. But,

Let it go how it will with the Land, or with the Wicked therein; yet says the
Prophet, Say to the Righteouss, it shall go Isa. 3. 10.
well with him. A dismal day must come and will come upon this Land, and upon
all Nations of the Earth; we see already Distress of Nations and Perplexities;
but these things are but the beginning of Sorrows, but do you that Fear God,
Look up, lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws near.

8. God will Bless, and give Success to such that seek to him, that humbly and
sincerely Acknowledge him, yea in their Civil Affairs; such shall find their
Endeavors crowned with a Blessing; and also in Spiritual matters God will lead
them: The meek will be guide in Judgment, and the meek will he teach his ways:
Psalm. 25. 9.
that is, the humble and lowly ones, that Acknowledge God, and submit to his
hand, and are willing and desirous to be lead, directed and governed by him in
all their ways, in doing Justice and Judgment, who are not selfish or
self-seeking persons, who lay not burdens on others to ease themselves; but
act in all right ousness and equallity in what they do, in the Station where
they are set; for as all the ways of God are Mercy and Truth, so should all the
ways of Men be, especially such that are Rulers and Magistrates, who are
entrusted with the great concerns of a Nation or People; they ought to be Men
fearing God, Men of Truth, hating Evil; if not, God may justly leave them, and
blast all their endeavors; for they are the Meek, the Humble and Righteous
ones, that God will guide in Judgment, and direct their Paths.

9. Know assuredly, That none Teaches like God: What is Job 36. 22.
Man's teaching? some Glory in their Phylosophical Learning, but that only
fills the head with knowledge; it may make Men critics, but not Christians:
others boast of the Teachings of Natural Reason, and will receive no Principles
of Religion that is above this Teacher; and thereby, they cast contempt upon
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

All True Knowledge flows from God's Sovereign Grace; he guides and teaches
whomsoever he pleases; he can speak to the Heart, nay, give a heart to
understand, as well as instruction; he can give a teachable frame, or a
teachable Spirit, as well as direct those whom he has given such a frame, or
heart, unto; therefore it follows, That to teach and direct our Souls, is the
effect of Almighty Power. Be still and know that I am God. Confess your
weakness, your Ignorance, and acknowledge my Skill, my Power; as if God should
say* No man can come to me, John 6. 45
except the Father, which sent me, draw him: What is his Drawing, but his
Teaching; Every one therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes
unto me*

Men must be Un-taught, or become* Fools, before they can be Wise; I mean,
emptied of their own Wisdom, and confess, they know nothing as they ought to
know: Christ's Office and Work, is to Teach his People: He only has the Tongue
of the Learned; therefore let all men Learn of him, Wait upon him; Acknowledge
him, to be their only Instructor and Counselor; and say with David, Thou shall
guide me with thy Counsel, and Psalm. 33. 24.
afterward receive me to Glory. And thus I shall End as I Begun, In all thy
ways Acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. Line 41. for His Will His Law, read, His Will is His Law. P. 12. L.
31. for Peruse r. Pursue. P. 13. L. 31. for Chooser. Chose. P. 21. L. 31. for
Acknowledged, r. Acknowledge. P. 24. L. 7. for Man r. Men. P. 24. L. 10. for
him^. r. him. P. 27. L. 22. for would r. should.

BOOKS Sold by William Marinal at the Bible in Newgate-Street, and John Marshal
at the Bible in Grace Church Street.
1. BAptism discovered plainly and faithfully according to the word of God;
wherein is set forth the glorious pattern of our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, the
pattern of all true Believers in his subjection to Baptism; together with
examples of Thousands who were Baptized after they Believed: By John Norcot,
Late Minister, the 3d Edition; Corrected by William Kiffin and Richard
Claridge: With an Apenddix by another hand. Price Bound 6d. You may also have
it ready Translated in Welsh, at the same Price.

2. A Treatise of Baptism of Believers: that of Infants is examined by the
Scriptures; with the History of both, according to Antiquity; making it appear,
that Infant Baptism, was not practiced for near 300 years after Christ: with
the fabulous traditions, and erroneous grounds, upon which it was by the Pope's
Cannon (with Gossips, Chrysm, Exorcism, Baptizing of Churches and Bells and
other Popish Rights) founded: and that the Famous Waldensian and old Britain
Churches, with many others, have Witnessed against it; with the History of
Christianity amongst the Ancient Britains and Waldensians: the 2d Edition with
large Additions. Price Bound, 2s.

3. A Treatise concerning Covenant and Baptism; Dialoguewise: wherein is shown,
that Believers only, are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; fully discovered: By
Edward Hutchinson, p. 2s.

4. Mr. Hercules Collins, of Believers Baptism. Price 4d.

5 There is now in the Press, and will be suddenly Published, a Book Entitled,
Light Broke forth in Wales, Or, the English Man's way to the Ancient Britains:
being an Answer to a Book Entitled, Infant Baptism from Heaven; Printed in the
Welsh Tongue; Wrote by Mr. James Owen: in which, all his 12 Arguments for
Infant Baptism, are fully Answered, both in English and Welsh: By Benjamin
Keach. Price Bound in English in Welsh 2s. 6d.

6. The Welsh Bible that was lately Printed, is Sold at a Reasonable Price.

7. You may likewise be supplied with Dr. Crisp's Works, and with several other
Authors, that have Vindicated the Doctrine of Free Grace: as, Samuel Crisp's,
Esquire (the Son of Dr. Crisp) Christ made Sin, etc. Price 2s. 6. Neonomianism
Unmasked, or the Ancient Gospel Pleaded, etc. in answer to Mr. Williams's
Gospel Truth. By Dr. Chauncy. And also Esquire Edwards's, Mr. Lancaster's and Mr.
Beverly's vindication of Dr. Crisps Works.

8. The Last Sayings of J. Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.


