Knight-Errantry; OR, DON QUIXOT Encountering the WINDMILL. BEING A Relation of
the Siege OF KNOCK.
Spectatum Admissi risum teneatis amici. Hor. Ar. Po.
THE bold Allies, whose Pride and Numbers swell,
In Peaceful Camps resolve no more to dwell;
But to direct their Fury and their Gall
A grave Cabal, They, of the Sagest, call;
Whose Teeming Brains in Copulation join,
To Procreate Some Shapely, brave design.
With an unusual stir they pant, and heave,
The Generous offspring laboring to Conceive;
Till after many Pangs, and tedious Throws
The Graceful Pregnant Hero with THE NOSE
Brought forth, to this effect, some wondrous Prose.
My Friends, it is true, some Blood the Wars have cost;
Some Treasure has been spent, and Towns been lost;
But passed unlucky Chances to redeem,
And re-instate our Lauguishing Esteem,
To Action we'll Proceed: A mighty Town
Shall be besieged, of strenght, and of renown:
From whence we'll France so forcibly invade
She Will soon disgorge the Conquest she has made;
It Is KNOCKE'S the Place shall feel our Thundering hand,
The Noblest Fortress that secures the Land.
Where, if success does with our Councils hit,
Ypre, and Dunkirk will in ^ourse submit.
Those Petty Forts will never withstand our Powers
When Knock, the famed Metrapolis, is ours.
It Is there, my Warriors, we'ell defeat the Foe;
There purchase Praise, and rich in Glory grow;
It Is there the enslaved, the wounded and the slain
Shall give an Earnest of a Blessed Campaign.
With that, to Boast his Manhood, he Assumed
A Frowning Look; and fiercely Cockt, and Plumed,
Into a sort of Warlike fit he flew,
And, in the Furious Transport, almost drew,
Then thus Proceeded --
The Stubborn murmuring Britains loudly rore
That we are in debt; but Knock shall pay the Score:
That in 7 years it is a Burning shame
We Have nothing done; but Knock shall raise our Fame:
That Mons's Loss, and two Great Cities more
It is a Deep wound; But Knock shall heal the Sore:
That of its Wealth the exhausted Realm we drain
To Feed the Allies; But Knock shall fill't again*
That Horrid Crimes we Act, They dare not Name
For fear of Law; But Knock shall Mend the Same:
Where, though we fail, the Conscious World must tell,
From vast attempts, how gloriously we fell.
At that they all out into raptures broke,
And deeply swore, the God of Wisdom Spoke.
They no sooner Agreed on this Project uncommon,
Then the Chief of the Cause showed himself not a slow Man:
For Commands to make ready for Death, and for slaughter
Flew as quick as the Bullets, that caused 'em, flew after;
And the brisk Engineers, to amazment, and wonder,
Were as Nimble as Light'ing, to rigg out their Thunder,
And Select the bold Blades, that without any Flattery,
Whole Millions of Oaths, on occasion, could scatter ye,
And of Old had been famed for Assault, and for Battery.
Those Too, that when School Boys, could craftily slip into Orchards, and steal
the Pear-main, and the Pippin;
That a Warren could Plunder, and rob a Hen-roost too,
Were earnestly sought, as the Men they must trust to:
For it is such, we must own, at the business of Storming
Are the Loons of most skill, and the Mightiest performing.
And now through the Camp rose a Terrible Tattle,
The Trumpets spoke loud, and the Drums made a rattle
To rouse up their Spirits, and call them to Battle.
And that most incomp'rable Music the Fife
In the Ears of the Soldiers was wonderful rife,
Sufficient in Cowards to put life, and mettle,
And make Guinea-Gold of a Common Brass Kettle.
On the March the Gay, witty, spruce Lads that were half in
With Beer, and with Brandy were joking, and Laughing
At Knock; In a whole Summers day one shall not see
The Like, how the Name on it tickled their Fancy:
Till at lenght they came up about 12 a Clock one day
(I think 'twas the Ninth of the Month, and a Sunday)
When at night some detached Grenadiers that were trusty
Felt the Pulse of the place; which they found to be Lusty;
Whose Fortified Caps were as thick, and as tall
As an Ordinary Gar'sons Rampart or Wall.
On the Fronts of 'em Raw head and Bloody Bones painted,
Enough to scare Men, with such sights, not acquainted,
And 'twas well for the French, that they came hitt, or miss, on
In the dark, who not else would have touched Ammunition,
Or dared to have faced such a dire Apparition.
Though some of them Knavishly Crawling, and Creeping
Into other Folks Premises, paid for their Peeping.
To be short, when the Foe had severely rebuff'd 'em,
And with multiplied infamy Kick't 'em, and cuff'd 'em,
When their Guns, that divided Men's Corpse into Quarters,
Had Canonized Saints, and made many Martyrs;
When Fatt Beef and Pudding, prized highly by all had
Been banged by Soop meager, and Thin-gutted Sallad,
When to no sort of purpose at all there, by God, They,
Had lain the third part of a Month, and an odd day,
Not to break an Old Custom, much lessened in Number,
They drew off to Dixmuyde, with their remnant of Lumber;
Where on Brown Bread, and Butter, they Manfully Forage,
And Curse their damned Foes, that are friendly to Porrage.
Thence a Mercury flew, to report the disaster,
To the JOVE (at Becclaer that lay snorting) his Master:
Who thus was informed after twenty God's Bluds, Sir.
The Place is too strong, and the Siege in the Sudds Sir.
Notwithstanding, the DON, though the Case was a sad one
Put the best Face he could on it though God knows, a Bad one;
And Said that no more such affronts he would endure,
But the Scandal of Knock, would revenge on NAMURE;
That the French (and then horribly Swore by his Maker)
Should have Cause to Confess him a Bloody Town-Taker
Now some think the Sharper, to lay his Plot Closer,
Played off a few men, with design to be Looser;
And that all was a Politic Cheat, and sham Trick
To draw in the Bubbles, and give 'em a damned Nick;
That the Fox, with a fetch most egregiously queint.
To push home at Namure, at La Knockque made a feint;
And no more meant his Fame should be murdered or wounded,
Than the Child that is unborn, or the Man in the Moon did:
Though I must declare, with a Solemn Protesting,
That I don't know what is earnest, if this was but jesting.
Or how any Wight, in his Right senses, can Sir,
Hope the Master to beat, that is subdued by the Man Sir:
For La Knock is no better, for all it is renown,
Than a Footboy, or Page to a fortified Town;
No; it is rage, and despair drives him on; It can never
Be hopes of success that inclined him; However
We Will leave Him as well as he can to Namure it,
And return to La Knocque, that took care to secure it
Self bravely; as we shall still freely Confess it
And thus, in Heroicks, make bold to Address it.
For thee, La Knoque, though small's thy space, and room;
Thy Story shall be large in time to Come;
Thy worth shall Sound on every distant shore
Loud as the Drum can beat, or Cannon rore,
Though slight in force, and of a slender Fame,
Little-Fort-Knock, has been thy former Name;
But since thou art now Baptized with BRITISH BLOOD,
And brave MONTAL for Godfather has stood,
No more with disrespect thy Name We'll treat,
But, Newly Christened, from thy Foes defeat,
Thou, for the future, shallt be KNOCK THE GREAT.
July 4th. 1695
FINIS.
Printed the Year 1695.


