THE TRUE Interest of Families: OR, DIRECTIONS HOW PARENTS May be happy in
their Children, AND CHILDREN In their PARENTS.

To which is annexed a Discourse about the Right Way of Improving our Time.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

With a Preface by A. HORNECK, D. D.

London: Printed for J. Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and J.
Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, 1692.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of the ensuing Treatise, having thought fit to recommend his Papers
to ^ty perusal, I was willing to usher them into the World, with some remarks
upon his pious design, and the usefulness of Tracts of this nature.

The plainness of the style must be no discouragement to the Reader, nor must
Truth be therefore laid by, because it comes not dressed in a Vesture of Gold, or
wants the Curiosities of Embroidery.

Truth needs no borrowed Beams, its natural Light is enough to strike the
Senses. If it be Truth, it is no matter whether it is presented in an Earthen
Vessel, or in a Silver Dish.

The serving of it up according to the Mode, may indeed please sickly Fancies,
but is no great Charm or Motive to inquisitive, or rational Men, who love
Beauty without painting; and are more taken with the natural mixture of white
and red, than with all the artificial Washes, which are used to make the
Features amiable.

Plat. l. 2. de Republ. Aristot. l. 6. Politic. c. 1.
The Welfare of a Commonwealth does in a great measure depend upon the Duties
of the Relatives here treated of, and did Parents and Children conscientiously
discharge all the Obligations incumbent upon them by the Law of God, and
Nature, the World could not be so wicked as it is. Education makes the first
impressions upon the Souls of Men, and were care taken, that the ground be
impregnated with good Seed, such a Harvest might be expected from it, that
Posterity might be the better for it.

I am sensible that Conversation and the Humor of the Age, is apt to make
strange alterations in the Principles we imbibe, yet something will stick, and
when the thoughts are cool, and Men come to reflect, the Principles they have
learned when the wax was soft, will recoil, and oblige them to return to their
Duty.

Of this we have experience; and though there is no rule so general, but admits
of exceptions, yet it is enough that this effect does frequently appear, which
is no inconsiderable Motive to the serious consideration of a thing of this
importance.

It was a wise answer, which one of the LXXII. Interpreters gave to Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus, who asked him, what was the greatest negligence? The neglect,
says he, of the good Education of Children. It is so, and the hurt that is done
by it, both to them, and to the Public, is unspeakable.

Whence is it that there are so many Prodigals? that so many come to an
untimely end? that so many run into excesses, which destroy both Soul and Body?
From want of pious Education.

It was a severe Censure, which Carneades the Philosopher passed upon the
Children of Rich Men, that they learned nothing but to ride well.

Indeed it is to be wondered, that Rational Creatures should be so careful to
breed up their Progeny to sensuality, and neglect the cultivation of that which
makes them differ from Bruits, and shows, they are Creatures of a nobler
extract: Can any thing be more reasonable, than virtue and the fear of God? Is
not this it, which both Scripture and Philosophy teaches? Do not we our selves
confess so much, and do not most Men acknowledge it when they come to dye? And
yet that we should make this the least part of our care in the Education of
Youth, is wondrous strange!

Some seem to fancy, that sending their Children to School, or to teach them
their Catechism, is all the Care that is incumbent upon them. Though I cannot
say, but that this is a Duty, yet it is so imperfect, that I can scarce honor
it with the Title of doing it by halves, it being but the beginning, or the
least part of it. Instruction, Precept, and Example are the mighty Engines and
Instruments in the promoting and accomplishing this Work; and perhaps nothing
has a greater influence than Example; for all the Moral Precepts of the
Parents, are like Water spilt upon the Ground, where Example does not
concomitate the instruction.

How shall the Child learn Sobriety, where the Father is often drunk? Or how is
it possible, the young man should be meek and patient, where the Father is
Choleric, and has no command of his passion? I do not restrain the Grace of
God, and am sensible, that the very impiety of the Parents has sometimes
contrary Effects upon certain Children, and they learn to be good by the
Wickedness of their Superiors; but this is an extraordinary Providence, which
God exerts sometimes to manifest his Omnipotence, and to let men see that he
can bring light out of darkness, but the ordinary way of Edifying those under
our Charge, is to teach them by Example.

And though even this proves ineffectual sometimes, yet it is enough that it is
our Duty, and that we have discharged it, and have taken that way which was
most rational, and of God's prescription.

Hierom Ep. 7. ad Laetam.
I am so pleased with St. Ierom's Advice to Laeta concerning the Education of
her Daughter, that I cannot forbear to transcribe part of it.

I will let you see, says he, what Education you are to give to a Daughter,
whose Soul ought to be the Temple of God. Let her hear nothing, learn nothing,
speak nothing, but what may inspire the fear of God into her. Let her not
listen to profane Discourses, nor be enamoured with Love Songs or amorous
Ditties. Let her use her self at certain hours, to sing Psalms; let none be
about her, but sober Servants, and keep her from running into Company light and
vain, where she will learn more ill than good. Use her to reading, and to work,
and labor, and promise her Rewards, and incite her to Emulation; excite her to
Virtue by praises and Commendations, and make her ambitious to excel others in
Virtue and good Works. Let her learn Scripture Sentences by heart, and choose
her a Master, that may not only teach her to read, but instruct her in good
manners. Give her a Nurse neither debaucht nor tatling, nor given to strong
Liquors; and let her Habit be modest, and such as becomes her Christian
Profession. Let her not bore Holes in her Ears for Pendants, neither let her
use any Paint or Wash to beautify her self. Let her not be nice in ordering
the Hair of her Head, neither suffer her to adorn her self with Gold or Pearls
or precious Stones, except you design her for Hell fire: When she comes to
riper age, let her go with her Parents to the Temple, but let her not return to
the Gayeties of the World. Advise her to keep her self in her Chamber, and let
her not go to Feasts, and merry Meetings. I would not have her use too much
Fasting and Abstinence, which may hurt her health, at least till she be
stronger, and better able to bear it. Let her use God's Creatures for
necessity, and not for voluptuousness sake. Suffer her not to be at Musical
concerts, nor to be fond of Fiddles, and Lutes, and Harps, but let her repeat
every day some passages out of the Word of God. Let her not go abroad any where
without her Mother, nor be very familiar, or enter into intreagues with any
Servant. Appoint her a Governess that is sage and wise, and who may teach her to
rise at midnight, to sing Praises to her God. Let her pray and work Day and
Night. Teach her to handle her Needle, to spin and to exercise her self in
turning the Spindle. Suffer her not to employ her self in Imbroideries of Gold
and Silver. Let her Clothes be plain and decent, and let her eat soberly and
temperately, and let her not take plea^^^^ (...)

I know what will be objected here, that this is the advice of a Hermit, and to
teach a Daughter how to be a Nun. But still I appeal to any unprejudiced
person, whether this be not the most likely way to Salvation, and whether these
Precepts be not agreeable to the Gospel of Christ? And though I will grant,
that all are not under the same Circumstances, and all cannot give the same
Education; yet as to the principal part of the advice, which is to teach
Children by Word and Example, how to die to Sin and to the World, it must be
granted it is very practicable. This Age indeed has learnt to shake off these
stricter Rules, but they should show us too, what Warrant they have from the
Word of God to do so.

It was judiciously observed of Fabius, that a soft and effeminate Education,
breaks the strength of Body and Mind, and whilst we breed up Children to all
the Arts of Vanity and Luxury, they continue strangers to God and to themselves.

The Vine grows wild, if it be not cut; so does Youth, if they be not betimes
curbed in things which war against the Soul.

Understand this, ye Parents, and be instructed, ye to whom God has committed
the care of Education; ye are God's Stewards, and your Children are the Goods
you are to manage to your Master's Glory. Their blood God will require at your
hands. Have not ye read the Curse God pronounced against Eli for his
negligence, and are not ye afraid of the same Judgment? Ye are the persons by
whom your Children must be taught to serve God in their Generation; ye are the
persons from whom they are to learn their Duty to God and Man; at your door the
fault will lie, if they miscarry through your carelessness. Are their Souls so
contemptible in your eyes, that you will let them perish for want of
Admonition? Did Christ think them worth purchasing with his own Blood, and will
ye let them lie without fence or wall, or cultivation?

You take care that they may live comfortably in this World: Is it not a
greater Duty to bestir your selves, that they may enjoy God for ever? It is joy
to you to see them do well here, and ought it not to be a greater joy to find,
that they are like to reign with Christ and his Saints in a better World? You
love them, but how does it appear you do, while you let their Souls die? Is
this your Love, to provide for their flesh, and to neglect enriching their
better part with religious Principles? You would have them go to Heaven when
they die; but how is it possible they should, when you are loath to be at the
trouble to show them the way that leads to that Paradise? Was ever any man
saved without Holiness, and do you hope they will be, without this
qualification? If you teach them not by Word and Example to practice that
Holiness, how can you or they hope to ascend into the Mount of God, or dwell on
the everlasting Hills?

Do you believe a future Account, and do not ye enquire, whether you discharge
your Duty to your Children? Or is this no part of the Account ye are to give?
Ye are the persons who are to breathe goodness into them, and to give them life
and happiness. Ye are their Gods, as it were, and from you they receive their
motion; and their spiritual as well as their natural life must begin from you.
Ye are Magistrates in your Families, and it is your Province to be a terror to
evil doers, and Encouragers of those that do well.

If by your indulgence they sin, and by your connivence they grow wicked, will
not the supreme Judge be avenged on such Officers? You blame Governors of a
Commonwealth, if they do not adnimadvert on Offenders, or are regardless of the
reins of Justice; and do not you blame your selves, who are Commanders in your
Families, for suffering the fear of God to decay there, which is the only thing
that can make them happy?

How is it, that you will not understand your interest? Is it not your interest
to educate them into the Practice of Virtue, and Goodness, and Self-denial? If
they love God, they must needs love you, that love will constrain them to
express their Duty to you. The Presence of God will overawe them, and they will
obey you, not with eye-service, but when your eye is off from them. The fear of
God will make them conscientious of obeying your Commands in secret; and if
your good Counsels and Examples prevail with them, they will be not only your
Children, but the Children of God; and you will have this satisfaction, that
you do not only love them, but that God loves them, and dwells in them, and
they in him.

Remember this, ye that are Children, and let this encourage you to a faithful
discharge of your Duty. Your Parents, that under God gave you life, have a just
Right to your Services and Obedience. You are born Servants to them, and to be
at their beck and command is the obligation you bring with you into the World.
As the Authority of Parents was the first Government in the World, so your
subjection to them is the first Service that was ever known in the World. Can
you think any thing too good for them, who are the great Instruments of
conveying to you all the goods you possess, and all the endowments you are
invested with?

If you follow not their good Instructions and Admonitions, ye are the greatest
Rebels in the World, and the sin is as great a Treason in the Family you live
in, as Sedition in a Kingdom is against the State. You have the noblest
Promises made you to reward your Obedience; and though it is a natural Duty
bound up with your very Being, yet God will reward it as if it were a
deliberate self-denial; and because you shall not stay for the recompense, God
will bless you here, and your lives shall be comfortable on this side Heaven.
It is the first Commandment in the Law with Promise; and to let you see how God
delights in your honoring your Parents, and obeying their wholesome Counsels,
he has singled out that Precept, and dressed it with more than ordinary
encouragements.

But then, the Honor you show them, must not spend it self in some outward
Civilities, but must be expressed in Actions, in Speeches, and in Patience,
according to the Advice of the Son of Syrach, Ecclesiastic. 3.12, 13, 14.

In Actions, so as to execute their lawful Commands with great alacrity and
fidelity, to labor, and to take pains for their maintenance and support, if
they are fallen to decay, and to relieve their necessities, according to your
ability.

In Words and Speeches, so as to speak honorably of them, to answer them with
humility, to comfort them when they are in trouble, and to pacify them with
soft language, when they are angry and displeased.

In Patience, so as to bear their anger patiently, and to endure their
frowardness and pettishness without contradiction; to receive their severer
Commands, and such as are contrary to your genius and inclination, with
gentleness, and to do them without murmuring.

These are Duties which draw more than ordinary Blessings upon you, God that
sees you do so, will have thoughts of peace toward you; he will be concerned
for you, and you may be confident, he will not leave you, nor forsake you.

In honoring your Parents, you honor your selves. It Is that which will not
only procure you favor with God, but with men too. It Is upon this account,
that Wise men have recorded the Dutifulness of some excellent Children, and
made them immortal by their Writings; and there are such Examples of this
filial Respect, even among the Heathen, that it would be odious and dreadful,
if the Children of Christians should fall short of their Duty.

God lays so great a stress upon it, that as he promises the kindest things to
it, so he threatens as severe punishments, where it is neglected; and that he
does not only threaten, but execute these Judgments, any man may see, that will
take notice of his Providence. But all this the Reader will be more fully
convinced of, by reading the following Discourse, which, that God may bless
with success and edification, shall be my hearty Prayer.

A. Horneck.

ADVICE TO PARENTS.

BY A Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for S. Lowndes near the Savoy-Gate in the Strand. 1690.

THE CONTENTS Of Advice to Parents.
PART I.
THE Introduction, showing the great Importance of the right Education of
Children. Page 1 How Parents ought to be affected, while Children are yet in
the Womb. 2 How they ought to he affected when their Children are born. 3
The Duties of Parents for their Childrens Souls.
1. Duty, To Consecrate them to God in Baptism. 4 2. Duty, to season their
minds betimes with good Impressions. 7 3 Duty, to teach them to pray. 9 4.
Duty, to observe carefully their Temper and Disposition, and to endeavor to
reform what is amiss therein. 12 5. Duty, to see that they be taught to read.
18 Great care ought to be taken, what Books they read. 20
6. Duty, to bring them to the place of public Worship, so soon as they are
fit for it. 23 7. Duty, to make them understand their Baptismal Covenant. 24
The Benefit of Confirmation, if performed in a right manner. 25 8. Duty, to
encourage them to come to the Lord's Table. 28 9. Duty, to take care that they
accustom themselves to self-Examination. 30 Some plain and easy Directions how
to Examine themselves. 31, 32, etc. 10. Duty, to observe what Providence they
meet with, and to acquaint them therewith in due time. 36
Some Directions to Parents, how to render their Endeavors Effectual.
1. Direction. They must give their Children good Example. 37 2. They must
choose good Company for them. 38 Advice to Parents, who send their Children
abroad to Travel. 31
3 They must, as need requires, reprove and chasten their Children, and how? 42
The Evil of too great Severity. 44.
4. They must carefully improve the time of their Childrens sickness, or of any
other afflictions they meet with, toward the making of them wiser and better.
45 5. They must daily pray to God for them. 47
Some Motives to excite Parents to do these things.
1. Motive, from the Divine Command. 48 2. Motive, from its being a Work worthy
of the utmost care and pains of Parents. 49 3. Motive, from the Rewards which
attend those who faithfully do these things. 51 4. Motive, from the sad effects
which attend the neglect of these Duties. 52.
PART II.
The Duties of Parents, as to their Childrens Bodies.
1. Duty, it belongs to the Mother to give suck to her Children. 56 2. Duty,
about Childrens diet. 58 3. Duty, about Childrens Apparel. 59
The Duty of Parents, as to the outward Estate of their Children.
1. Duty, about choosing a fit trade for their Children. 61 2. Duty, about
disposing of them in Marriage. 62 3. Duty, about providing somewhat that may be
the foundation for their comfortable subsistence in the World. 65 The above
mentioned particulars earnestly recommended to Parents. 68

An Appendix concerning the Duty of Parents when God removes their Children by
Death.
1. They ought to consider that it is the Lord who does it. 75 2. They ought to
consider that their Children were born mortal. 76 3. They should consider from
whence and whither they are gone. 81 4. They should consider that there will be
a Resurrection. 86 5. They should consider, that their giving way to excessive
grief and mourning, can do no good, but will certainly do a great deal of hurt.
88 Some Forms of Prayer, which Parents may teach their Children, according to
their Age. 93

THE CONTENTS OF Advice to Children.
THE Introduction. 103 1. Duty of Children, to honor their Parents. And how
they are to honor them. 104 Against those who dishonor their rents. 107
2. Duty of Children, to obey their Parents. 110 Against Stubborn and
disobedient Children. 112
3. Duty of Children, to be determined by their Parents as to their Calling.
114 Against Children who neglect this Duty. 116
4. Duty of Children, not to suffer themselves to be bestowed in marriage
against their Parents will. 118 Against those Children who neglect this Duty.
120
5. Duty of Children, to submit to their Parents Reproofs and chastenings. 120
Against Rebellious Children. 122
6. Duty of Children, to love their Parents; and how they are to express their
Love? 124 Against unkind and unnatural Children. 127
7. Duty of Children, to pray for their Parents. 128 Against Cursers of
Parents. 129

Motives to excite Children to do these things.
1. Motive, from the Authority of him who commands them to do these things. 131
2. Motive, from the Promise made to those who do their Duty. 133 3. Motive,
from the Example of our Blessed Master. 136 4. Motive, from the Examples of
some Heathens. 139 The Conclusion, showing how Children ought to improve what
has been said. 142
The Contents OF The Discourse about the Right Way of Improving our Time.
THE Introduction. 155 The Text explained. 156
How Time is to be redeemed.
1. Time is to be redeemed from sleep. 158 2. It is to be redeemed from
dressing and adorning the Body. 162 3. It is to be redeemed from eating and
drinking. 165 4. It is to be redeemed from gaming. 168 5. It is to be redeemed
from visuing. 172 6. Time is to be redeemed from worldly business. 179 7. It is
to be redeemed from idleness. 183 8. It is to be redeemed in sacred and
religious Performances, by doing them in the best manner. 186
Some Motives to Excite you to do these things.
1. Motive, from the shortness of your Time. 197 2 Motive, from the uncertainty
of your Time. 201 3. Motive, from the greatness and difficulty of the work you
have to do. 209 4. Motive, from the account you must give how you spend your
Time. 216 The Conclusion. 223
ADVICE TO PARENTS.
PART I.
IT has been always reckoned by the best and wisest men, a thing absolutely
necessary toward a Reformation in the World, to begin with the Instruction and
right Education of Children; those of elder Years being ordinarily so rooted
and hardened in their sinful habits, that, for the most part, there is very
little can be done to reform them, and make them better. So sensible were some
ancient States of this, that they made particular Laws for educating Children;
thinking it too great a Trust, to leave it altogether in the Power of Parents,
to train up their Children according to their Humor and Fancy. Amongst
Christians, there are few restraints upon Parents; in most Countries it being
in their power to Educate their Children as they think good: It is therefore of
no small importance for them to know what their Duty is, that they may approve
themselves to God, in doing whatever he requires toward their Children, for
their Souls, their Bodies, and their outward Estate.

The design of this Treatise is, to furnish those who want such helps with some
plain and easy directions, that they may know how to act the part of Christian
Parents.

While Children are yet in the Womb, How Parents ought to be affected while
Children are yet in the Womb.
it is the Duty of Parents to endeavor to bring their mind to an indifferency,
as to the Sex which shall be born; not to prescribe to God, by their impatient
desires, and their bold asking of him, a Child of this or that Sex; but to
leave it entirely to his Will and Pleasure, to do what he thinks best. The
happiness of Parents does not consist in having Children of this or that Sex:
Sometimes Sons (who are most desired ordinarily) may prove useless in the
World, yea very hurtful in many regards; they may occasion great grief of
Heart, and lasting Anguish and Vexation to their Parents, by their mad and
foolish Courses, and wicked doings: And on the other hand, Daughters may prove
great Blessings in the World, great Comforts to their Parents, and great
Examples of Piety and of Zeal for the honor of God: On which Accounts Parents
ought to resign their will to God, and be ready with all gratitude to accept
whatever he bestows.

Secondly, When a Child is born, How they ought to be affected when their
Children are born.
Parents ought with all thankfulness to return praise and thanks to God, who
has bestowed such a Blessing on them, giving them a living Child, sound and
perfect in all its parts and proportions, without either defect of necessary
parts, or excess and deformity thereof. This should make them admire and adore
the Powerful and Wise Providence of God, which appears in framing and
fashioning their Infant, so curiously and wonderfully in the Womb, preserving
it, and making it grow up, from a very small and imperfect beginning, to such a
bigness, with all those comely shapes and proportions which they behold.

They ought to look upon their Children as given them of God, to be taken care
of both as to their Souls and Bodies; to be bred up in his fear, for his Honor
and Glory; to be made fit to serve him here, and to live with him for ever
hereafter.

The Soul being the chiefest part of the charge committed to Parents, I shall
first show what they ought to do for their Childrens Souls.

The first Duty of Parents for the Souls of their Children, is, to consecrate
them to God in Baptism.
First, They ought to consecrate their Children to God in Baptism, so soon as
conveniently they can: They cannot better express their gratitude to God for
blessing them with Children, than by presenting them to him again in this holy
Ordinance; that he may set his Seal upon them, and admit them into his House
and Family; that he may bestow upon them the privileges of his Children, and
give them a Right and Title to the Blessedness, the Grace and Glory purchased
by Jesus Christ. It is for this End that Baptism is instituted; not only to be
a Ceremony of Admission into the Church, but to seal unto us the pardon of our
Sins, to assure us of the Divine Favor, to make us Members of Christ, Heirs of
God, and Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, if we by wilful impeuitency and
unbelief, do not afterward hinder and frustrate the Virtue thereof. It is not
necessary for Parents to enquire how such things are done by Baptism; it is
enough for them to know, That Baptism is appointed for those Ends, and we are
sure that God appoints nothing in vain: Our Savior is said, Ephesians. 5.26. To
sanctify and cleanse his Church with the washing of water by the Word. And,
Tit. 3.5. he is said to save us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of
the Holy Ghost. And in the 22d. of the Acts and 16. it is said by Ananias unto
Paul, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy Sins: And says St. Peter, 1
Epist. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism does now also save us (not
the putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God,) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And St. Paul tells us, Gal.
3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ:
Which words import not only our owning and acknowledging him as the Savior of
the World, who alone is able to wash and cleanse us with his Blood, but also
our professing our resolution to live holy lives, to walk in newness of life
according to his Example; in token of which in the ancient Church, they who
were baptized, were presently clothed with White Raiment, to testify their
resolution to live in holiness, and to put off the Old Man, that is, all their
former wicked Deeds and Customs, and filthy Practices. Likewise, Romans 6.3, and
4. it is thus written, Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father; even so we also should walk in newness of Life. These
words import not only our belief of a crucified Savior, who dyed and was
buried for sin, to save us from it; but also our Repentance, whereby we
renounce sin, as dead and buried to it for the time to come. The general Design
of this Sacrament, being sufficiently plain and clear from these and other
Scriptures; it is to little purpose, (and oftentimes it proves to very ill
purpose) to enquire any further as to particulars; for by so doing, a great
many persons judging of divine things by their own weak and foolish
apprehensions, have reasoned themselves (if I may so speak) both out of their
Reason and Religion.

2. Duty, to season their Minds betimes with good Impressions.
Secondly, When Children begin to speak and to discover some dawnings of
Reason, it is fit to season their Minds with some good Thoughts, with some
divine Impressions, that Religion betimes may catch hold of their tender and
innocent Minds, before they are corrupted and defiled with bad Principles, and
vain and unreasonable Opinions, which they are apt to learn too soon from evil
Company. Teach them who made them; who dyed for them; for what end they were
made; whither good Children go when they dye, and whither naughty Children go;
what a place Heaven is, and Hell, etc. These and such like plain and easy
things are to be told them, which they can understand, and which may make some
impression on their minds. In teaching Children such matters, it is necessary
to condescend to their weak capacity: It is not fit to ask them such Questions
at all times, nor yet to say too much to them at any one time: Such
Instructions are to be dropped into their minds softly and leisurely, so as not
to oppress them, but to recreate them; not to be a burden to them, but a
pleasure. It cannot be expressed how great Advantages attend such early
Instructions; these are the Seeds of Virtue, which take root insensibly, and
spring up sometimes very unexpectedly; the Impressions which they make continue
a great while, as Earthen Vessels retain the savor of that Liquor which was
first put into them a long time after: So powerful are these first
Instructions, that they are able to conquer even Nature it self. The famous
Lycurgus made this appear, by bringing into the Marketplace two Dogs of one
Litter, and presenting before them a Pot of Pottage and a Hare; one of them
(which was trained up in Hunting) run after the Hare; and the other (which was
brought up in the House) fell to the Pottage. What a wonderful power may we
daily observe in those early impressions which are made on men's minds? Thereby
it comes to pass, that the most absurd and extravagant Opinions, which have
been sucked in, when one was young, can hardly be removed by the clearest and
strongest Reasonings.

3. Duty, to teach them to pray.
Thirdly, Teach them, so soon as may be, to pray to God Morning and Evening; To
say after you, or others whom you appoint for that purpose, two or three short
Petitions, which are easy to be understood; and as their Understanding and
Capacity increases, teach them the Lord's Prayer; and after that some larger
Form of Prayer, which they may say after you, till they can read it themselves,
or get it by heart.

You are to have a special care, that they perform their Devotions in as grave
and serious a manner as their years can admit: You are to keep them from all
sorts of indecent Actions and Postures, when they say their Prayers: For this
end, you are to teach them who it is they speak to when they pray, and what
these things mean, which they pray for.

Choose the fittest times for them, wherein to say their Prayers: as in the
Morning, whenever they arise; while their Spirits are most vigorous, and their
Thoughts most free. At Night let them say their Prayers rather before Supper
than after; because after Supper, they are more apt to be very dull and sleepy,
and thereby less fit for such a performance. God is not to be served with the
refuse of our thoughts, and with sluggish sleepy desires; but with our best and
most lively affections, and with the strength and fervor of our desires.

You are to prevent their omitting their Prayers at any one time; because doing
so once or twice, they are apt to neglect them wholly, or to return to them
with great aversness: Whereas Custom and Constancy in performing their
Devotions, will make them much more easy and pleasant to them.

When they are possessed with more perfect and solid thoughts about Religion,
with stronger and more lively impressions of Divine things, and are able
without great difficulty to express the sense of their Souls; They may do what
they find does serve best the great purposes of Devotion: If praying without
restraining themselves to any particular Form of Words, contribute more to
their fervency and elevation of mind in Prayer, let them pray without using a
Form: But if they find that their Minds are more stayed and fixed, and their
fervency and devotion greater in the use of a Form than without it, let them do
that which they find best.

When they pray for outward and temporal things, teach them to do it with an
entire submission to the Will of God, who has promised perishing things
conditionally, that is, so far as he sees the bestowing of them will be for his
Glory, and the good of his Children: Therefore they must not be vehement and
importunate in their desires and Prayers for such things, but ought to pray for
them with great humility and resignation to the Divine Will. As for spiritual
Blessings, to wit, the pardon of Sin, the direction and assistance of the
Spirit of God, his Grace to help them in time of need, power and strength to
fight against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, etc. These things are to be
prayed for with all the importunity and earnestness that is possible. The more
vehement and fervent their desires and Prayers are for such things, the more
acceptable are they to God, and the more likely to obtain from him the desires
of their Souls; for he has promised to satisfy the longing Soul with good
things.

4. Duty, to observe carefully their temper and disposition, and to endeavor
to reform what is amiss therein.
Fourthly, Observe carefully their Temper and Disposition, what Vices they are
most inclined to; If they are sturdy and proud, peevish and passionate,
cunning, given to lying, flattery, and dissimulation; if they are conceited,
rash, and unadvised, etc. Endeavor all you can to bend their minds another
way: For Example, if they are sturdy and proud, strive to humble them, and
break them, to tame their proud Spirits; accustom them to the doing acts of
humility; do not gratify them in those things that are apt to make them proud;
cause them to yield, and to submit to your Will, or to the Will of others, whom
you think fit they should obey.

If you find them peevish and passionate, teach them to be meek and gentle; to
be of a sweet and mild disposition; to love those who have done or said
somewhat that crossed them; not to seek revenge, but to forgive them, and to be
kind to them; to be ready, when they have occasion, to do them good for evil.

If they be given to Lying, show them the evil of it, that a lying Tongue is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6.17. That the Devil is the Father of Liars, and
that they are in the number of those that are shut out of the new Jerusalem,
and have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev.
21.8. and 22.15. Show them how great hurt it will do them, and what shame it
will bring upon them; That if they be found Liars, people will not believe
them, even when they speak Truth. Encourage them to confess their faults, if
they have done any thing amiss; be apt to pardon them when they confess, and
tell the Truth; and commend them for doing so: But if you find them in a Lie,
be sure to chastise them for it, especially if they have done it oftener than
once. Nothing tends more to the spoiling of Children, than their getting into
such a habit: This is a Vice that grows up apace, if not timely cured by good
Education; Thereby they learn to grow so false and disingenuous, that they are
not fit to be trusted or employed.

If you find them to be of too prodigal a Temper, apt to be too profuse in
their Expenses; ready to throw away their Money upon Trifles, and when there is
no reasonable occasion for it; you ought by all prudent and proper Methods to
endeavor to make them a little more discreet and careful; That they waste
nothing in vain, that may be of use to poor people; That they do not throw away
that which may do good at some time or other. Suggest often to them, that we
are Stewards of whatever God bestows upon us, that he will call us to an
account; and that therefore we ought to employ to good purpose all those good
things he gives us. Show them what our Savior said to his Disciples, after he
had sed five thousand men with five Loaves and two Fishes, Joh. 6.12. When they
were filled, he said unto his Disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain,
that nothing be lost. He would not have any thing lost, or thrown away
unnecessarily, which might be useful afterward to one or other.

If you find them of a covetous Temper, endeavor to enlarge their thoughts by
the Principles of Christian Charity: Show them what an excellent thing it is to
do good; to show mercy and kindness; to make peoples hearts glad: Accustom them
to the doing such kind and charitable offices; for which end, give them now and
then money, and other things to bestow on those who are poor and needy. Show
them the evil of Covetousness; that it is the root of all evil, that it takes
the heart off from God, and rendereth it unfit for the consideration of Divine
things, and for all worthy and useful designs; that it disposes a man for the
basest and vilest actions and undertakings, as it did Judas to betray his Lord;
That it bereaves him of true repose and satisfaction of mind, and pierces him
through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

If you perceive them to be naturally melancholy, and fearful of every little
thing, endeavor to cheer up their Spirits: Suggest to them such
considerations, and possess them with such Maxims and Principles, as tend to
fortify their minds against those things which are apt to make them uneasy,
and are the occasion of their fear. If their distemper proceed from some bodily
indisposition, as oft-times it does, use such helps as are necessary: When such
evil habits of body are once rooted and strongly fixed, and when the blood and
spirits are deeply infected therewith, they are a very grievous clog to the
Soul, and a great hindrance to that cheerfulness and liberty of Spirit,
wherewith people ought always to endeavor to serve God.

If you see them to be of too gay and airy a Temper, so that they cannot fix
and be stayed at any time, you are to use a great deal of prudence and
discretion to compose and settle their Spirits; See that they use their Wit and
Fancy without giving offense, and that they hurt no body by indecent
reflections: Let them by no means take liberty to indulge their humor in
jesting about things that are Sacred, or that have any relation thereto: But
you are to take heed lest your endeavoring to cure one fault, occasion
another; lest your striving to deliver them from one extreme, drive them to the
contrary, that is, lest instead of their being too gay, you make them
melancholy and dull: Their Wit and Spirit is not to be rooted out, but reformed
and rightly managed; for this may be of use for seasoning and sweetning
Conversation.

If you observe them to be rash and forward, ready to speak and act without due
consideration; strive to make them more cautious and circumspect; to reflect
and think a little more, on what they say and do; lest otherwise, they fall
into a habit of speaking and acting impertinently and indiscreetly: when they
say or do a foolish thing, for lack of consideration, then take occasion to
make them sensible what a shame it is for them to do so; what a reproach to
those who are reasonable Creatures, to speak and act like fools without Reason
and Understanding: Show them some of the bad consequences which attend speaking
and acting in this manner.

Thus you are to make it your Business to consider what are their defects and
faults, and to do all that you can to cure them thereof, and to direct them in
the ways of Wisdom and Virtue.

5. Duty, to see that they be taught to Read.
Fifthly, When once they are of an Age fit for it, see that they be taught to
read, that thereby they may be able to make use of the Holy Bible. If your
condition in the World is such, as disables you from doing much for them as to
their outward Estate; yet if you do this, it may prove (unless it be their own
fault) of unspeakable advantage to them, and in some sense better than a great
Portion. It is sad to see how a great many bestow readily enough on their
Children, to learn a gainful Trade, that they may get Wealth: And yet they are
very unwilling to give a little money to one to teach them to read that sacred
Book, which instructs them in the Art of being happy; how to be saved; how to
obtain a Crown of Glory; to purchase a Kingdom which cannot be shaken; to
obtain a Pearl of greatest price, and enduring Substance. The Word of God does
teach us all this; It Is given to make us Wise to Salvation, that we may make
our Calling and our Election sure; and therefore neglect not to do this for
them, to teach them to read: And when they can do it, cause them every day to
read more or less in that Sacred Book: See that they do it with great
Reverence, as being the Word of God: Cause them to consider who it is that
speaks to them therein; and what it is that he commands, promises, or
threatens; direct them at first to read such places, as are most easy to be
understood, and which are apt to make the deepest impressions: After they have
read, see what they remember; cause them to tell you what they can call to
mind: Explain to them so far as you are able, what they do not know; especially
in such things as are most useful to make them wiser and better. Appoint them
now and then a verse or two, to get by heart; cause them to repeat them with
due gravity; let them not do it in a trifling manner, as if they were telling a
silly Story. Do not appoint them too many things to be got by heart; for this
will do more hurt than good: A few things well understood do better than a
great many by rote.

Great care ought to be taken what Books they read.
Be careful lest they read any Books which tend to poison their minds, to fill
them with false Opinions, or to lead them to bad practices: Their tender minds
are apt very quickly to be corrupted by such Treatises. Even they who are of a
more fixed and solid Virtue, are in danger of receiving hurt by reading such
Books; especially when they are writ with great Art, and when their Notions are
represented in fair and Beautiful Colors; They are apt to impress on the fancy
some Images of no good consequence to the Soul: How great need therefore have
Parents to restrain their Children from reading such Books as tend to pollute
their innocent and chaste minds, which are capable of receiving any sort of
impressions either good or bad?

As for Books of Devotion; great care is to be taken, that only such be put
into their hands as are writ in a plain and easy style; which treat of things
fit and needful to be known by them; and which are most likely to make them
Wise and Good. They are to be accustomed to the Writings of those who are Men
of greatest Moderation; who do not impose their own conceits, as necessary
Rules of Devotion; who do not require such things as absolutely needful to be
done, which God has not declared to be so; nor yet who shorten the Rule, by
cutting off such things as God has enjoined us: All Books which lead men to
extremes, are carefully to be avoided; and such Treatises are to be made use
of, as contain the plain and necessary Doctrines of Christianity; which tend to
inspire Men with the Spirit of Purity, of Truth, of Peace and Love; which
promote Sincerity, Justice, Temperance, Charity, Meekness, Humility, Patience,
Resignation to the will of God in all things, Zeal for his Honor and Glory, a
firm belief and trust in him, etc.

When it is requisite to acquaint them with the different Opinions amongst
Protestants, that their minds may not be unfixed and unsettled, when they go
abroad into the World; be sure not to put into their hands such Tracts as are
writ with a fiery uncharitable Spirit, and in a dogmatick and magisterial
manner; but such as are writ with great Temper and Moderation; which tend to
heal the Church of all Contentions and Divisions, and not to kindle and
increase them; which do not load Men's Opinions with unjust, extravagant, and
impious consequences, which never entered into the minds of those who vouched
them: but such as make fair and fovourable constructions, and just allowances.
Such Practices are chiefly to be chosen for them, which dispose Men to be
humble and modest; not to be stiff and pertinacious in their own private
Sentiments; not rashly and severely to condemn others who have different
thoughts; and never on the account of any such particular Opinions to break the
peace of Christian Society; nor to grow more cold in their respect and
affection toward those who have not the same thoughts with themselves in
lesser matters. They are as it were, to feed upon Books of this sort, and
carefully to digest them.

6. Duty, to bring them to the place of public Worship so soon as they are fit
for it.
Sixthly, You are to bring them to the place of public Worship so soon as they
are fit for it, that they may have the benefit of the Prayers of God's People,
and may learn, as they are capable, somewhat that may make them wiser and
better. Take heed how they carry themselves in the House of God, that it be
with all possible silence and reverence; and that they perform their public
Devotions in a decent manner. When they come from Church, see what they
remember; if they have got any thing by heart, encourage them: If they remember
nothing, you may tell them somewhat or other of the Sermon which is fit for
them to learn. Endeavor by their constant attendance on the public Worship,
to beget in them a mighty regard thereto, as being one great means appointed of
God to increase in them, true Knowledge and Piety. Let them not spend the rest
of the Lords day in rambling about; but so far as their age can bear it, let
them be employed usefully.

7. Duty, to make them understand their Baptismal Covenant.
Seventhly, Do all that you can to make them understand their Baptismal
Covenant; and if there be opportunity to own and renew it publicly and
solemnly, fail not to encourage their doing it. It Is of great importance for
them, to make a solemn profession of their Faith, and to declare their
Resolution of performing their Baptismal Promise: It is of great advantage to
them, at such an occasion, to have the Prayers of the Church, and particularly
of those, who are appointed of God, to bless the People. It is true, the great
abuses which have been committed in the performance of this ancient Ceremony,
have made many people to slight and neglect it; but if Confirmation were
performed with that care and seriousness, which ought to be used on such an
occasion, it is a custom which might be of mavelous benefit in the Church;
both to stir up Parents to instruct their Children, and Ministers to Catechize
them, and acquaint them with those things that are needful for them to know, to
believe, and to do. The careful and Religious use of it, would tie Children
more strictly to mind the great concerns of their Souls; it would afford them
occasion to consider what it is to have been baptized, and to be a Christian:
It would work in them a more powerful sense of the Obligations of Christianity;
and make them more careful to live up to that holy Religion, whereof they made
so public a profession: It would make them more afraid to do bad things,
against which they had protested so solemnly. And not only fear, but shame in
this case, would restrain them from doing wickedly. This would be to young
People a great defense against Temptations: Bad men would not so boldly ask
them to sin, if they knew they had openly and solemnly disowned and renounced
them, and all their wicked Courses; and if they were tempted, they would be
more apt to say in their own minds; Shall we do such wicked things, and run the
hazard of being Covenant-breakers, and perjured persons? Shall we commit such
Villainies, and practice such Abominations, and thereby break our solemn Vow and
Engagement? Shall we by our folly and impiety give occasion of offense and
scandal to the Church of Christ, which he has purchased with his Blood? Shall
we renounce the Captain of our Salvation, and prove Deserters, who have so
lately vowed to renounce the Devil and all his Works? What a mighty defense
would this be to your Children, when assaulted by the fiery Darts of the Devil,
the Vanities of the World, and the lusts of their own deceitful hearts; to
consider, that by their own actual Consent, they have renounced all these, and
given up themselves into the hands of God, to be kept by his mighty Power,
through Faith unto Salvation? They have vowed, and they ought to perform it, to
keep his righteous Judgments. These things being impartially considered, should
mightily excite Parents to see that their Children do openly and solemnly
profess their Faith in Christ crucified; their resolution to obey him, to serve
him, and love him, to fight under his Banner, against sin, the Devil, and the
World, and to continue his Faithful Soldiers and Servants unto their lives
end. Is not this your Glory, that your Children are Christians? and do you
think it a shame or dishonor for you or them, if they make a solemn profession
of their Christianity; that they avow their Religion, and will by Gods help
make good the promise which was made in their Name in Baptism? Of so great
importance is this Custom, that the greatest men amongst the Reformers did
highly commend it, and did earnestly with that it might be restored, as a thing
of great use toward the reviving the true Spirit of Christianity.

8. Duty, to encourage them to come to the Lord's Table.
Eighthly, When they are fit for it, you should encourage them to come to the
Table of the Lord, that they may be strengthened in their most holy Faith, and
further assured of the love of God; that they may make a public profession of
their Christianity, of their love to their Lord and Master Jesus, of their
Charity to all Men, and of their sincere affection to those who are Christ's
Members and Followers: They ought to make use of this holy Sacrament, that
their love to their dearest Lord and Savior may be kindled and enflamed, by
remembering his Love, and showing forth his Death; that they may bind themselves
more strictly to serve and obey him, and to fulfill their Baptismal Engagement.
How glad should Parents be to see their Children advanced to this honor, to
eat and drink at their Lord's Table, to partake of so great a Testimony of his
Kindness and Friendship? How earnestly should they encourage them to embrace
this opportunity of renewing their Covenant with the Lord, to live and to dye
his faithful Servants? Do you not desire to have them saved, to have them
delivered from their Lusts and Passions, their Pride and Revenge,
Uncharitableness and Malice, their Hatred and Envy, and from all manner of Sin
and Folly, to be made pure and clean in Heart and Life, to be made meet for
that holy place, where no unclean thing can enter? Do you not desire that their
Sins may be blotted out, that they may be washed with the Blood of their
Savior? And yet do you not advise and entreat them for their Souls Health and
Safety, to come to the Holy Communion, which is designed for these excellent
and great Ends and Purposes? But, alas! how far are too many Parents from doing
this for their Children? How many do either wholly, or for the most part,
neglect and slight this holy Ordinance themselves, as if our Lord had without
any just or necessary ground appointed it? How can such Persons expect the
precious Fruits of the Death of Christ, who will not remember his Death, when
he so lovingly and kindly calls and invites them to do it? Do this in
remembrance of me. What a great Argument is it of a wonderful decay of true
Piety and Religion in the World, when Men do thus despise and set at naught the
kindness of their Lord and Savior? When they refuse to do a thing, so just and
reasonable, and so easy as this is; which tends so much to his Glory and their
own true Happiness and Welfare, both here and hereafter?

9. Duty, to take care that they accustom themselves to Self-Examination.
Ninthly, When they are fit for it, see that they accustom themselves to
Self-Examination, that they spend a few moments every night (if another time of
the day be not more convenient for them to do it in,) in calling themselves to
an account; That they may see what good or what evil they have done; That they
may give praise and thanks unto God for any thing they have done, which was
good and right; and that they may confess their Sins and Follies, begging his
gracious pardon; and renewing their purposes and resolutions to do better for
the time to come.

But besides these daily short Reviews of their Heart and Life, it is fit to
call upon them when they are well advanced in years, to a more strict and
solemn Examination of themselves; to Prayer and Fasting, as their Age and
Strength can bear it. This may be done once a Month, or once in two Months, or
once a Quarter at least. As to their abstinence from Food on such days, there is
no Rule can be given to serve all persons; if they can fast one meal or two, it
is well; if not, then they may eat less at a time, and of such things as are
less apt to be a hinderance to their Devotion: That is to be done that serves
most to render them fit for Prayer and Meditation. It will be convenient in
order to their doing this to good purpose, to be directed to a method, that so
their Thoughts may not wander and be unfixed: For which end, it will be of good
use, to have the direction of their Minister, if he be a discreet and good Man,
or of some other prudent serious Christian Friend: Or you may recommend to them
some plain and easy short Treatise on this Subject, such as you shall find
written discreetly with due moderation of Spirit.

There is not any one method can be prescribed for all persons, nor fit for all
times: But in general, upon such days it is fit for them to begin with Prayer to
God, humbly begging the Divine Assistance and Direction; that he may open their
eyes to see their sin and folly; and to discover his mercy and kindness, his
long suffering and patience toward them, that they may be thereby led to
Repentance.

They may next enquire particularly and strictly into their ways and doings;
which they may do, by considering what have been their thoughts, their words
and deeds; each of which they are to examine according to the Rule of God's
Word: Or, (which comes to the same thing) they may go over the Commandments,
and see wherein they have broken any of them: Wherein they find themselves
guilty, they are with unfeigned sorrow and inward contrition, to confess it, to
mourn for it, and earnestly to beg forgiveness of God; resolving with full
purpose of heart, to do so no more; but to cease from evil, and to learn to do
well. They are to consider what Temptations they are most in danger of; that
they may avoid them: They are also to consider what course they must take, and
what Christian Methods they must use, to overcome their evil Inclinations, and
foolish and bad Customs; and they are to resolve to govern themselves
accordingly; and sincerely to endeavor to go on unto perfection. After this,
they may reflect on the kind Providence they have met with; that their Souls
may be filled with a grateful sense thereof; that they may return all praise
and thanks to God for his mercy and love; and may be excited for the time to
come, to trust more firmly in him, and to depend upon him. They may
particularly consider, wherein God has been pleased to answer their Prayers,
and to grant them the good things they have asked of him for their Souls and
Bodies, for themselves or for others; that their Piety and Love to God may be
thereby the more kindled, and their Devotion excited; that their Faith and Hope
may be made more strong and lively.

They may take notice likewise of the Corrections and Chastisements, wherewith
God has thought fit to exercise them; that thereby they may be awakened from
sin, and made wiser and better for the time to come.

It will be very useful for them to have a Note in writing of those various
particulars; that they may on such days review them, and with the more ease
make such Reflections on them, as tend to their improvement in real Piety.

Besides these Acts of Devotion, which concern themselves immediately; it will
be fit on such days to make earnest and hearty Prayers to God for all Mankind;
for the Conversion of Jews, Turks and Pagans: For the Reformation of those
Christian Countries that are corrupted with Superstition and Idolatry; for
Union amongst those that are divided in their Opinions about lesser matters;
for deliverance to those who are persecuted for Righteousness sake; and for
these Lands, (that God may inspire us with a Spirit of Peace, of Love, and of
true Piety;) For our King and Queen; for all Judges and Magistrates; for all
the Ministers of the Gospel; for all their Fry nds and Relations; for all
their Enemies, and for all who desire their Prayers; of whom it is not unfit to
keep a particular Note in writing, that this Christian Office may be performed
toward them with all faithfulness and kindness.

They are next to consider, what may be done by them for the honor of God and
the good of Men; and are to resolve to do some Act or other of Piety or
Charity, which may be of real advantage to Men's Souls or Bodies.

One thing more I shall mention, which may be very useful on such days; and
that is, That they consider what are the things wherein they desire more
earnestly the divine Assistance and Direction; which they may write down
distinctly, that they may renew their Petitions therein every day. And
thereafter, especially on such days as they appoint for more solemn Reflection
and Humiliation, they may consider what Answers God has been pleased to afford
them.

These are a few General Heads on this Subject, which may be of great
advantage, in order to the promoting of true Devotion: But the designed brevity
of this Treatise does not permit the enlarging upon them.

10. Duty, to observe what Providence they meet with, and to acquaint them
therewith in due time.
Lastly, Consider what Providence they meet with, what signal Mercies and
Favors their merciful Father bestows upon them; what Dangers and Hazards
they have escaped; wherein God's kindness and mighty power has appeared toward
them, in preserving them, and keeping them alive: Keep a Note thereof in
writing; that so when they come to be of age, you may acquaint them therewith,
that they may therein read the loving kindness and tender Mercies of the Lord,
and his wonderful goodness and favor toward them; and may be excited to be
thankful, and to put their trust and confidence in him, whose Mercies are over
all his Works. But, alas! How far are most Parents from doing this? Very few do
any such thing for themselves; the Mercies of God are renewed to them every
morning, they live at his cost and charge, he gives them richly all things to
enjoy; all their good things are from him alone: But how little do they
consider, and take notice of the Hand of God, in those many and great benefits
he loads them with every hour and moment? They do not reflect upon the great
and mavelous things that he does for them; they live as if they were
altogether insensible of God's mercies and loving kindnesses; and no wonder if
they take little thought to possess their Children with any Impressions of that
whereof they have no sense themselves.

Some Directions to Parents, how to render their Endeavors effectual.
Now, to render your Admonitions and all other Endeavors effectual, 1. They
must give their Children good Example.
for the good of your Children; First, you must give them good Example; when
you bid them read or pray, or partake of the Holy Sacrament, or attend the
public Worship, etc. you must do (so far as is needful and fit) the same
things your selves: This will make your Admonitions successful: Children learn
more by the eye than by the ear. If they see you do contrary to what you advise
them, they will be apt to think you do not believe what you say; or that you
are very cruel and unmerciful toward them, to bind heavy burdens upon them,
and not to touch them your selves; and if you should constrain your Children to
do what you do not your selves; what would it signify? It would only make them
Hypocrites and Dissemblers, to do that which they have no heart unto, and which
they are not persuaded to be their Duty. Such Children, when once the restraint
and force which is upon them is removed, will be sure to give themselves the
full swing in all manner of Folly; they will do those things which they have
seen in you, and learned by your Example.

2. They must choose good Company for them.
2dly. Choose good Company for your Children, (so far as you have opportunity and
ability to do it,) otherwise, neither your Admonitions nor Examples will
signify much: Their ordinary Company, if naughty, will pull down faster than
yeu are able to build: Corrupt Nature is easily drawn away by the Example and
Allurements of sinners; This is like going down hill, which is easy,
considering Men's natural bent and inclination: Whereas Self-denial and
mortifying our Lusts and Passions, is more difficult, especially at first, like
going up hill. When therefore you see your Children falling into the
acquaintance of vicious and foolish Persons, delay not to rescue them from the
share; to break off their Familiarity, that they be not corrupted thereby, and
utterly ruined. We see how careful People are to keep their Children from those
who have the Small Pox, or any other infectious Distemper; and yet what a
strange madness is it for them to trust them to the Society of those, whose
Lives and Manners are full of the deadly Poison of Sin, which infects and kills
the Soul.

As this Rule is necessary to be followed at all times, Advice to Parents who
send their Children abroad to Travel.
so especially when Parents send their Children into Foreign Countries, when
they are fit to Travel; how careful should they be not to trust them to every
body? But to the Conduct of those who not only may be useful to advance them in
the Knowledge of the World, to assist them in their Journeyings, to take care
about their Lodging and Diet, to wait on them to visit great Men, to see fine
Places, curious Fabrics, famous Monuments, and ancient Inscriptions, to learn
the Language of the Country, and the different Modes and Fashions, the
Government and Policy, and such like: But who likewise (through the Blessing of
God on their Endeavors,) may preserve them from the Vices of those Countries
where they Travel; from those bad Customs to which they have a great
inclination: Who may make it their business to season their Minds with deeper
and more lively impressions of Virtue; to possess them with a mighty regard for
such excellent Examples as they have occasion now and then to see, to fortify
them against the many wicked and dangerous Opinions and Practices they meet
with; to acquaint them chiefly with the wisest and best Men, by whose
Conversation they may be improved in Wisdom and Virtue; that they may return
into their own Country with their Minds furnished with useful Notions, with
solid Principles, and wise Observations; that they may be able, either in a
more private way, or in a public capacity, to do somewhat, not unworthy of
those who have had such good occasions for improving themselves in those things
which are excellent. To serve this design, Parents are to be careful of two
things; One is, That their Children travel under the conduct of one who is wise
and prudent, and is of a sincere and solid Piety: If he be one that is either
foolish, or profane and Atheistical, his Company must needs be very hurtful
and dangerous; It may utterly ruin the young persons who are entrusted to him.
What an unaccountable thing is it to think, that men who are careful to have a
skilful Groom to look to their Horses, should be so mad, as to venture their
Children (who are their chiefest Possession, and the principal Objects of their
care and kindness) into the hands of those who have little discretion, and less
piety? The second thing that Parents ought to be careful of, in this matter;
is, That their Children do not travel till they are come to somewhat of
stayedness, and solidity of Judgment; till their understanding and discretion
is such, as may give ground to hope that their Traveling shall do them no
hurt, but good. It is none of the wisest parts in some Parents, to send their
Children too soon into Foreign Countries, before their Judgment is prepared,
and made fit to make useful Reflections and Observations on the World; before
their minds are possessed with solid Principles of Virtue, and with a deep
sense of Religion; so as not to be in great danger from the tentations which
they are sure to meet with in most places: Before they know any thing at home,
it is too soon to send them abroad: Before they know themselves a little, it is
not advisable to send them into the wide World, to know a vast multitude of
other things: Hence it too often comes to pass, that a great many return after
their Travels greater Fools than they went; they bring back nothing but a load
of the Vices and Vanities of other Countries.

3. They must, as need requires, reprove and chasten their Children: and how?
Thirdly, Let not overgreat fondness blind your eyes, so as not to see the
faults of your Children; nor cause you to stop your ears against just
complaints. It Is true, there are some wicked people who love to sow discord, to
kindle strife and contention; to divide the nearest Relations: But all are not
so very wicked; you cannot but know some who love you and your Children
sincerely; and when such persons tell you of their faults, you ought to do the
part of those who are wise, as well as kind Parents; that is, you ought to do
all you can to reform their faults, and make them better; and withal you ought
to be heartily thankful to those who do not flatter you and your Children, to
the hurt both of you and them.

In order to their Reformation, try first all gentle Methods to make them
better: Endeavor to conquer them with the Weapons of Kindness and Affection;
Endeavor by Instructions and Admonitions to make them sensible of their
Faults; Use Promises and Encouragements to allure them to do what they ought;
When Threatenings are necessary, make use of them likewise; and if they do not
serve the turn, then try the Rod; but let it be always the last remedy, after
you have in vain attempted their Reformation by milder and gentler Methods: And
when you use Severity, do it with due moderation, and with great care; lest you
kindle your own passion, and exceed the bounds of wisdom and discretion. If
once you give way to this rough, severe, and violent Method of dealing with
your Children, The Evil of too great Severity.
there is a threefold disadvantage attends it; First, you discourage your
Children, you break their Spirits, you make them unfit for any useful thing;
you tempt them to do such things as are hurtful to themselves, and may prove
grievous to you. If oppression makes a wise man mad; it is no wonder if a Child,
or young person, is sadly disordered, and made half mad by cruel and tyrannical
usage: Though it be a fault in Children to be so; yet Parents ought to be careful
not to provoke them overmuch to wrath, by a severe unmerciful carriage toward
them. Secondly, you kindle your own passions, you disorder your minds, and
accustom your selves to a fiery Temper; you become fierce, barbarous, and
savage; thereby you turn one of your great Temporal Comforts into a grievous
Cross and heavy Burden. Thirdly, you hereby likewise teach your Children,
thorough your Example, to be of a passionate and violent Spirit; and so you do
them more hurt, than all your Corrections and Instructions can do them good:
Never think to cure them of their Faults, by your committing as bad your
selves: You must not do evil that good may come of it: The wrath of man works
not the Righteousness of God.

Fourthly, When it pleases God to visit them with sickness, 4. They must
carefully improve the Time of their Childrens Sickness, or of any other
afflictions they meet with, toward the making of them wiser and better.
or any other adversity; be sure to do all that you can, to bear in upon their
minds, a sense of those things you are most desirous to have them touched with,
and which in time of their health they made but very little account of.
Affliction is the time, in which God uses to work upon the hearts of people
most powerfully and effectually; Then he awakeneth them, and convinces them of
their sad and dangerous state; He casts them down, that being made sensible of
their sin and danger, he may again raise them up, and speak comfortably to
them. I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak
comfortably to her, Hos. 2.4. Therefore all they who sincerely desire to
reclaim their Children, or others, from their bad and foolish courses, ought to
take the opportunity of their sickness, their pain and grief, their losses and
disappointments, and of any other sorts of troubles and afflictions wherein
they are, that then they may suggest to them such Counsels and Advices as are
proper for their Instruction, their Conviction, and Amendment. At other times,
there are a great many things which are apt to hinder good Counsel from entering
into the mind, or from making any deep impression thereon; pleasures and
vanities are apt to choke the good seed: But when they are afflicted and
humbled a little by some outward pressure, or bodily distemper; they are
thereby somewhat better disposed to hear friendly Admonitions and Counsels, and
to think a little more seriously of their ways and doings. It is good for a man
that he bear the yoke in his Youth; He sits alone and keeps silence, etc.
Lam. 3.27, 28.

Fifthly, Be earnest in your Prayers to God daily for them; 5. They must daily
pray to God for them.
that he would make them what he requires them to be, his dutiful and obedient
Children and Servants; That he would season their hearts with his Fear and
Love; That he would turn them from Sin and Folly; and incline their hearts to
keep his Precepts always, even unto the end; That he would hold up their goings
in his paths, that their footsteps may not slide; That he would be their God
and guide; their Sun and shield, and their portion for ever; and that he would
give every one of them those things which be best and most needful for them.
You have great encouragement to do this; because you are assured that God
hears Prayer; He has said, Every one that asks receives. So that either
he will grant your Children what you beg for them, or if they render themselves
unworthy of the mercy and kindness of God, by their perverseness and
stubbornness; yet you are sure of one thing, that your Prayers are not lost;
they shall return into your bosom: God will plentifully reward your Piety, your
Charity, and Zeal, with more Grace here, and Glory hereafter.

Some Motives to excite Parents to do these things.
Now to stir you up to perform these things; 1. Motive, from the Divine Command.
Consider, first, It is the Will of God that you bring up your Children in his
Fear, and acquaint them with his holy Laws and Commandments. He who made you,
requires you to do this; he who preserves you and keeps you alive; he who is
your King and Lord, who has a Right to your service, to all that you are able
to do; who is your Father in Heaven; who daily takes care of you, and loads you
with his benefits; who is the God of your Salvation; who has sent his Son into
the World to die for you: It is even he who says, Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers,
provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. If you then be the Subjects, the Servants, and the
Children of the great God; If you love and fear him, as you ought to do, you
will be sure to make it your business to train up your Children in true Virtue
and Piety; to make them what God requires them to be, holy, as he who has
called them is holy, in all manner of Conversation; you will excite them to
strive to enter in at the strait gate; To work out their Salvation with fear
and trembling; To remember their Creator in the days of their youth; To seek
God while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near; To love the
Lord with all their heart, and their Neighbors as themselves.

Secondly, 2. Motive, from its being a work worthy of the utmost care and pains
of Parents.
Is not this a work worthy of all your care and pains, to save the Souls of
those, who are parts of your selves, who derive their Being from you? You are
the Instruments not only of their Being, but the means of conveying unto them
natural defilement and corruption: And therefore you ought with a great deal of
Zeal to endeavor to have their pollutions washed off by true unfeigned
Repentance, and a hearty turning from Sin unto God; by their putting off the
works of darkness, and putting on the Armor of light; by their putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and walking as he walked. Are you ready to do all that you
can to make your Children rich and wealthy, great and honorable in the World?
And yet are you at so little pains to do that for them, which tends to make
them rich in Faith, and Heirs of a glorious Inheritance? You endeavor to
acquaint them with those who may be useful to them in their worldly Affairs and
Concerns; And why do you not strive to acquaint them with God, their greatest
and best Friend? Who is sure to stand by them, to take them up, and to take
care of them, when all forsake them, and turn their backs upon them? Why do you
not with greater earnestness endeavor to procure unto them his Friendship and
Love, who is infinitely Powerful, and infinitely Good and Kind; and therefore
not only can, but will do for them exceeding abundantly above all that either
you or they can think or ask?

Thirdly, The doing of this is attended with great Rewards, 3 Motive, from the
Rewards which attend those who faithfully do these things.
not only in another World, but even in this Life. You cannot but find
unspeakable Joy and Comfort, when you behold your Children walking in the fear
of God, going from strength to strength, and from Grace to Grace, that at last
they may come and appear before the Lord in Sion. It will free you from a great
many anxious thoughts about them for the time to come, when you know that they
have God for their Friend, who will be a Guide and Buckler to them: What a
great satisfaction will it afford you, to think that they, for whom you make so
great provision, and are at so much pains, are good and wise, and in all
probability will make good use of what is given them, or designed for them?
When you see them humble, of a mild and gentle temper, apt to bear uneasy
things meekly and patiently; when you see them sober and temperate, charitable
and compassionate, just and upright, true and faithful, wise and prudent,
devout and religious, zealous for the Honor of God, and studying daily to grow
up in all Virtue and Piety; How will this fill you with a Pleasure that cannot
be expressed? So true is it that is said by the Wise Man, Prove. 15. and 20. A
wise Son makes a glad Father.

Fourthly, If you neglect to do these things for the Souls of your Children, 4.
Motive, from the sad Effects which attend the neglect of these Duties.
and leave them to themselves to do as they list, then you may expect that
their Sins and Follies, their Pride and Passion, their Gluttony and
Drunkenness, their Cursing and Swearing, their Lying and Deceiving, their
Malice and Revenge, their Chambering and Wantonness, their Atheism and
Irreligion, will not only prove Tragical to them, but occasion great
uneasiness, vexation and grief of mind to you. Prove. 10.1. A Foolish Son is a
heaviness to his Mother, and Chapter 17.21. He that begets a Fool, does it to
his sorrow, and the Father of a Fool has no joy.

It Is true, it is not in the Power of Parents to infuse good Qualities into the
Minds of their Children; some are so very perverse, that all that can be said
or done by Parents, is altogether slighted, and neglected by them: However such
Parents, who have the affliction of sad and wretched Children, have some
comfort and satisfaction in having done their Duty for them, and in
endeavoring to approve themselves unto God, who will accept of their honest
and sincere endeavors; and will crown them with glorious Rewards. But it is
otherwise, when Children prove bad through the too great indulgence or the
negligence and bad Example of Parents. What a deep wound must it needs give
them, when they begin to consider that they did not their part to make their
Children good, and were so far from it, that they corrupted and ruined them by
their bad Example, and over great kindness and indulgence? Such Parents do
often eat the Fruits of their cruel fondness, and feel the sad Effects of their
own bad Example, by means of their Profane and Graceless Children. As God does
often visit the iniquity of the Parents upon the Children; so when Children are
suffered to go on in their foolish and wicked courses, through the indiscreet
gentleness and kindness of Parents, who, perhaps, are in other respects good
people; the Lord does sometimes punish such Parents, and bring Temporal
Judgments upon them. Ely was a great instance of this, 1 Samuel 2. and 22. He
heard all that his Sons did unto all Israel; which were things of a very vile
nature, whereby, as it is said Chap. 3. and 13. they made themselves Vile, that
is, hateful to God, and base and contemptible to all the People, by their lewd
and abominable practices. Ely did reprove them, but it was too coldly and
gently. Chap. 2.23, 24. And he said unto them, why do you such things? for I
hear of your evil dealings by all this People: Nay, my Sons; for it is no good
report that I hear; you make the Lord's People to transgress. Besides his
reproof, he ought to have restrained them, Chapter 3. and 13. as being High Priest,
a Judge, and Chief Governor amongst the People: He ought to have put them out
of the Priesthood, as accursed persons, and executed the Laws of God against
them. Which because he did not, therefore God denounced very dreadful judgments
against him by a Prophet, whom he sent unto him, Chap. 2.31, 32, 33, 34, 36.
and Chap. 3.13, 14. And in Chap. 4. we find his two Sons Hophni and Phineas
were slain in Battle by the Philistines, and the Ark of God was taken; upon the
news whereof, the Old Man fell from off his Seat backwards, and his neck brake,
and he dyed.

We see likewise in David, what was the Effect of his too great indulgence to
some of his Children; especially Absalom and Adonijah, who not only wrought
their own destruction, but proved great Crosses to their aged Father.

Advice to Parents.
PART II.
The Duties of Parents as to their Childrens Bodies.
HAving treated of the Duty of Parents toward their Children, as to their
Souls, the better part; I shall next show what their Duties are, as to the
Bodies of their Children.

First, It belongs to the Mother to give suck to her Children; 1. Duty, it
belongs to the Mother to give suck to her Children.
unless some bodily imperfection, great weakness, or sickness, or her
circumstances in the World, make it impossible, or very dangerous and
inconvenient both for her and the Children, or for either. For this end it is
that God has given Breasts unto Women, and caused the Milk to flow into them,
that there may be nourishment suitable to the tender Infants in a readiness for
them. Neither can we suppose any other body capable of showing equal Care and
Love to the Children, with that which it is natural for the Mother to express
to the Fruit of her own Womb. Besides this, it cannot well be imagined, that
the Milk of any other Body can be so fit for the Child as its own Mothers, if
she be but in tolerable Health. Even amongst the Heathens, they were accounted
but half Mothers, who neglected to give Suck to their Children. An ancient
Author amongst the Heathens, speaking on this Subject, says Aulus Gellius,
lib. 12. cap. 1. Quod est enim hoc contra naturam, imperfectam atque dimidiatum
matris genus?
, How unnatural a thing is this, how imperfect, and only to be a Mother by
halves, having brought forth a Child, presently to throw it away? having
nourished in her Womb somewhat that she could not see, not now to nourish it
with her Milk, when she sees it alive, and calling for her assistance?

We see likewise that Nature has impressed on the most Savage and Wild
Creatures a readiness to draw out their Breasts to their young. Peperisse, ac
statim ab sese abjecisse? aluisse in utero, sanguine suo, nescio quid, quod non
videret? non alere nunc suo lacte quod videat, jam viventem? jam hominem? jam
matris officia implorantem?
Lam. 4.3. Even the Sea Monsters draw out the Breast, they give Suck to their
young ones. And shall Women degenerate into such unnatural Barbarity toward
their young, as is not to be met with amongst the most savage Creatures? Shall
they, whose love and tenderness has been so noted and admired, prove unkind and
cruel to the fruit of their own Womb?

2ly. When Children are fit for stronger Food, 2. Duty, about Childrens Diet.
Parents are not to indulge them too much in gratifying the curiosity and
daintiness of their Palate, which not only is apt to make them too soft and
tender; but likewise disposes them to gluttony and sensuality; to make their
Belly their God. It is fit to accustom them to a plain and simple Diet; which
is generally more wholesome than that sort of Food which is very artifically
prepared. The State of all Humane Things is very uncertain; they who have at
present all manner of things in greatest plenty and variety, may meet with
changes and vicissitudes: It Is therefore a part of the Wisdom of Parents, to
accustom their Children (so far as their Health and strength can bear it) to
eat any sort of Food; that so, if God sees fit to change their outward
condition and circumstances, they may be the more fit and able to endure such
an alteration.

Thirdly, As to their Habit and Apparel: 3. Duty, about Childrens Apparel.
Parents ought to cloathe them decently, but not gorgeously: Fineries and
Gayeties in Apparel are apt to make people, especially younger persons, vain
and conceited, to value themselves upon their gay Clothing. It is fit often to
suggest to them, that their Clothes and Apparel are but borrowed Feathers; and
therefore that it is a great folly to be proud of that which is not their own,
but which they owe to the Sheep or Goats, to the Worms or Bowels of the Earth.

It is not fit for Parents, to make too great distinction among their Children,
as to their Apparel; because this is apt to cause discontents and jealousies,
hatred and envy, contentions and quarrellings amongst them. Joseph's Coat of
many Colors, which his old Father Jacob gave him, caused his Brothers to hate
and envy him, and at last to conspire most wickedly against him, Genesis 37.3, 4.
etc. The same is to be said as to their Diet, and other things; wherein it is
no small part of the Wisdom of Parents, not to show too much fondness to one
above all the rest. This does not hinder, but that Parents may, to very good
purpose, give Rewards to their Children for their Acts of Virtue, for their
ready and cheerful Obedience to their Commands; for their diligence and care in
performing what was appointed them, etc. Whereby they who do such things are
encouraged, and they who do not, but are careless and negligent, are punished,
and spurred up to amend their faults. But when such marks of favor are
bestowed, it is fit to let the rest know, that if they do as well, they also
shall have a Reward: By which means they will see that Virtue and Goodness are
the things which their Parents love and esteem most; and for which they are
ready to bestow the marks of their affection.

The Duty of Parents as to the outward Estate of their Children.
A third thing that belongs to the care of Parents, is the outward Estate of
their Children.

First, When they are fit for a Trade, 1. Duty, to choose a fit Tr^ them.
they ought to choose an honest Employment for them: To suffer them to live in
Idleness, is to ruin them: If they have not some useful thing or other to take
up their thoughts, they are in great hazard of finding somewhat to do which is
bad, and hurtful both to themselves and others. The Devil is always at hand to
furnish Occasions to idle people, for employing themselves to their own
destruction.

As to the particular kind of Employment, wherein Children are to spend their
days, it is to be left to the discretion and prudence of Parents: They are so
to instruct and dispose the minds of their Children, that they may be ready to
be determined to any Trade or manner of Life that is honest, which their Parents
think best and meetest for them to follow: But yet a great regard is to be had
to the particular Genius and Inclination of Children, which ordinarily
disposes them more for one sort of Employment than another: It will make them
more diligent in learning their Trade, when they have a delight in it:
Otherwise, if they are put forth to a Trade against their minds, they are more
likely to neglect it, or to break off from it. Seldom do such persons attain
unto great perfection in their Employment, who follow it against the grain.

2. Duty, about disposing of them in Marriage.
Secondly, When they are fit for Marriage, Parents are so to dispose of them,
as that in all likelihood they may be happy in such a state of Life: They are
not to constrain them to marry against their will; for such marriages are
seldom happy; they end too often in somewhat or other very Tragical and
Calamitous, to one or the other party, if not to both.

Great care is to be taken, that there be not too great inequality of outward
state and condition; for that occasions often neglect and contempt of the
person that is inferior to the other in some external advantages: Nor yet too
great inequality of years; for that does likewise, sooner or later, cause an
abatement and decay, and sometimes an utter extinction of that Respect and Love
which is necessary to make those who are married happy.

Parents are not, in disposing of their Children in Marriage, to govern
themselves wholly by their respect to Riches and Honor; but are to have a
regard to Virtue and Goodness, so far, as to prefer one who is discreet and
wise, of a Virtuous and good disposition, to another that is foolish, or
indiscreet, and profane and Atheistical, though attended with greater degrees of
Wealth and Earthly Honor. What a great Reproach is it to our Religion, to
think that so many Parents, in disposing of their Children, only consider how
much Wealth they may have, and what Friends and Alliances they may make by
marrying into such a Family? or what Profits and Preferments may be expected
thereby? As for any other thing, they do not much trouble their Heads about it:
They know no other happiness but in the things of this life, and therefore they
seek nothing else for their Children, but to make them great and wealthy; by
which means it often comes to pass that they bring their Children into a most
miserable and unhappy state of life, in which they must pine away their days in
sorrow and grief, in the Company of foolish and wicked wretches, who are often
in a fury and rage, who spend their time in gaming and drinking, in Cursing and
Swearing, in quarrelling and fighting, in whoring and ranting, and such like
woeful doings; which cannot but prove to those, who have any the least degree of
real goodness, so very uneasy and afflictive, that Wealth and Riches can make
no amends for them. Such unfortunate persons cannot but often envy the
happiness of those who are in a very poor and low estate and condition, but yet
live in peace and quietness, in love and concord, and in the fear of God; and
so enjoy-real satisfaction and contentment, and have a great deal of Comfort to
sweeten their outward Wants and Necessities. Prove. 15.16, 17. Better is little
with the fear of the Lord; than great Treasure, and trouble therewith. Better
is a Dinner of Herbs where Love is, than a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith.

Thirdly, Parents are to provide for them, 3. Duty, about providing somewhat
that may be the foundation of their comfortable subsistence in the World.
if they can, somewhat that may be a foundation for their Comfortable
subsistence in the World; which by the Blessing of God on their Callings, may
be improved toward their living decently and honestly. Parents are not to
propose to themselves, the rendering their Children very Great and Rich: But as
they themselves having Food and Raiment, are to be therewith content; so, if
they can get Necessaries for their Children, they ought to rest satisfied, and
be thankful. Our life (that is the happiness of our life) does not consist in
the abundance of the things we possess, Luke 12.15. Though you are thus to
provide for your Children; yet you are not, out of too great thoughtfulness
about the time to come, to restrain your selves from doing all necessary
Offices of Charity to the poor, who do now stand in need of your help: Never
neglect a present Duty for fear of an uncertain inconvenience: You are forbid
to take thought for the Morrow, Matthew. 6.34. But you are required to do good to
all Men, while you have opportunity, Gal. 6.10. To cast your Bread upon the
Waters; to give a Portion to seven, as also unto eight, because you know not
what evil there may be in the Earth, Eccles. 11.1, 2. This is the way to lay up
Treasures for your Children; to entail upon them great Blessings; to make God
their Guardian; to leave them to his merciful and kind Providence, and to his
Almighty protection. Ps 37.25, 26. I have been young, and now am old; yet have
I not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread. He is ever
merciful and lends, and his Seed is Blessed. So that by your Bounty and
Charity, you put forth your Money into God's hands, who will not fail to repay
it with Usury. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord. You thereby
bring your Wares to a good Market. The liberal Soul shall be made fat, Prove.
11.25. He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28.27. and Deuteronomy. 15.10.
it is written, Thou shall surely give him, (to wit thy poor Brother) and thy
heart shall not be grieved, when thou give unto him; because that for this
thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee, in all thy Works, and in all that
thou put thine hands unto. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 6. v. 10.
it is said, God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love,
which you have showed toward his Name, in that you have ministered to the
Saints, and do minister. From all which it appears, that Charity and Liberality
are the best Husbandry.

As you are to beware, lest your care for your Children, make you neglect
necessary Duties of Charity; so you are to take heed, lest you use any unlawful
method to get Wealth to bestow upon them: This is not a way to make them rich;
for such Riches seldom prosper: There is a Curse which attends all unlawful
Gain, and like a Canker eats it out, and consumes it. All Ages and Places
afford Examples, which confirm this Observation. Better, says Solomon, Prove.
16.8. is a little with Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right.

Thus I have showed you what are the principal Duties you owe to the Souls and
Bodies of your Children, and what you are to do for them as to their outward
Estate.

The above mentioned particulars earnestly recommended to Parents.
From what has been said you may see, what a weighty and difficult charge you
have; the sense whereof should excite you to beg of God earnestly every day,
that he would direct and assist you, to perform the Duties that belong to
Christian Parents. That you may the better act your part; it is fit for you,
when you call your selves to an account about your Lives and Conversations, to
make enquiry particularly how you perform the Duties of Parents toward your
Children, as to their Souls, their Bodies, and Outward Concerns: And if upon
serious enquiry, you find that you sincerely endeavor to do whatever you know
your selves to be bound to do for them; then bless and praise God, who gives
you both to will and to do according to his good pleasure: Beg his pardon for
those imperfections and defects that attend all Humane Actions: Resolve to go
on, and not to grow weary in your Duty toward them; that so they may be as
happy in all respects, as is possible for you, by the help of God, to make them.

But if upon enquiry, you find that you have been very defective in your duty
toward your Children; that you have done very little good for their Souls, and
not what you should, and might have done for their Bodies and outward Estate;
and that perhaps you have done them a great deal of hurt by your Evil Counsel,
and Profane and Wretched Example; that you have led them on in the Broad Way,
which leads to the Chambers of Death; that you have robbed God, who bestowed
them on you, of their Service and Obedience; and have made them the Servants of
Sin; that you have contributed to the making them Heirs of Wrath, Children of
Disobedience, who were made by their Baptism, Children of God, and Inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven; that you have done what tended to destroy eternally
those Souls and Bodies, which God entrusted with you, that you might take care
of them, and do what you could to make them happy. If, I say, upon enquiry into
your hearts and lives, you find your selves guilty of those things, how great
reason have you to be in bitterness and grief of Heart, to weep and lament, to
abhor your selves in Dust and Ashes, to confess and acknowledge your sins with
great humility and contrition, to implore the divine mercy and forgiveness with
all earnestness, for the sake of his dear Son; to resolve and purpose sincerely
to amend your ways and doings; to beg grace from God, that he would assist you,
that he would compass you about with his Salvation; and never leave you nor
forsake you. Consider the particular things wherein you have hurt the Souls of
your Children, and failed in your Duty to them, as to their Bodies and Outward
Concerns: And the more you find you have done amiss, resolve so much the more
to be zealous to do them good; to double your diligence in promoting the
welfare and happiness both of their Souls and Bodies. Tell them so far as is
meet, what you now see and feel; let them know that you have been out of the
way, that you have milled them, and brought both your selves and them in danger
of being undone, and ruined eternally: Tell them what you resolve to do, and
what you and they ought to do, and must do, or else that you will certainly
perish. Delay not to do this one moment: fly like a Bird out of the Snare of
the Fowler. Your Souls lie at the stake, and therefore do what Men use to do to
save their Lives; Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his
Life. Men are ready to part with any thing to save their lives; They Will part
with House and Lands, with Silver and Gold, with their whole Estate and
Substance, to save their Bodies alive, which must dye at last, and, for ought
they know, may dye within a very few days or hours. How much more ought you,
that you may save your own Souls, and the Souls of your Children, to part with
your vile and unruly Lusts and Passions, your vain foolish Habits and Customs,
which are your reproach and dishonor, which are the worst things in the World;
which can do you no good, if you hold them still, but will certainly do you a
great deal of mischief? They will prove the cause of your destruction; they
will deprive you of all that is good and excellent; they will cut you off from
the favor of God, the Love of Christ, and the fellowship of the Blessed
Spirit; they will likewise deprive you of the assistance and Ministry of the
Holy Angels, and the Comfortable Society of the Saints departed; they will
exclude you for ever from the Kingdom of Heaven, the Crown of righteousness,
the peace and joy, the love and glory of the future State: All this your sins
will deprive you of; and instead thereof, they will expose you to the Wrath of
God, to the devouring fire, to everlasting Burnings, to blackness of darkness,
to weeping and gnashing of Teeth, to the wretched and cursed company of Devils
and damned Souls, to the Worm which never dies, which will gnaw you, and
torment you for ever: And will you choose all this rather than part with your
Lusts, that you may be for ever happy, and have fullness of joy and pleasures
for evermore? Will you be so mad, as to prefer Hell and Death, everlasting
Misery and Woe, to Heaven and everlasting life, to Blessedness and Glory? Now
is the time for you to become either happy or miserable; if you repent and
amend, and act the part of Wise and Religious Parents, you may be happy; for
God will have mercy upon you. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous Man his Thoughts: And let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Follow
therefore the Example of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.59, 60. I thought on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. I made haste and delayed not to keep
thy Commandments. But if, instead of this, you continue in your sin and folly,
setting at naught Gods Counsels, and despising his Reproofs, putting the Evil
Day far from you, promising your selves peace and safety, though you walk after
your own Hearts Lusts; making a mock at sin, and laughing at all that is sacred
and serious; and by your wicked Example destroying the Souls and Bodies of your
poor Children; then assure your selves God will not be mocked; he will at last
whet his Sword and bend his Bow, and make ready his Arrows against his
Adversaries; he will render to you according to your Works; he will in no wise
clear the Guilty. Consider the terrible threatening which is mentioned, Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20. against the man, who, when he hears the words of the Curse, does
bless himself in his Heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: [The Lord will not spare
him, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man;
and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the
Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven.]

Concerning the Duty of Parents when God removes their Children by death.
After all that has been said, it will not be unfit to add somewhat
concernning the Duty of Parents, when God sees fit to remove their Children
from them by Death. This falls out so very often to Parents, that it cannot but
be seasonable to a great many to suggest to them some plain and easy
considerations, which they may sometimes reflect upon, and imprint on their
minds; that so they may not be surprised with the death of their Children, nor
swallowed up of excessive and immoderate grief.

Parents ought to consider, 1. They ought to consider that it is the Lord who
does it.
when their Children dye, first, that is the Lord who does it: He who is Lord
of Life, who gave Life to themselves and to their Children, is also Lord of
death, and removes out of the World whom, and when, he sees sit. He is the
great Potter; and Man is the Clay, which he has formed and fashioned into a
curious and beautiful shape; and animated with an immortal Soul: When he sees
fit to break this brittle Vessel in pieces, and to separate the Soul from it,
who dare say unto him, What do thou? May not he do with his own, what he
thinks good? Or must he give an account of his Actions, unto the work of his
own hands? He is infinitely great and powerful; and therefore will do according
to his own good pleasure: He is infinitely wise, and knows what is best and
fittest to be done. He is infinitely good and kind, and therefore will order
all things for good: And he is infinitely just and righteous, and therefore can
do no wrong. It Is fit therefore that Parents, when God removes their Children
from them by Death, submit cheerfully to the will of him, who is infinitely
powerful, wise, good, and just; and that they adore him, and say with Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

2. They ought to consider that their Children were born mortal.
Secondly, They should consider that their Children were born Mortal, frail by
Nature, subject to a necessity of dying, by their very composition and frame;
and also by the Decree of Heaven, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all Men once
to dye. And therefore when God sees fit to remove them by Death, to make the
House of Clay fall down about their Ears, Parents ought not to be surprised:
This is nothing but what falls out daily: Some are going out of the World, and
some are coming into it: Some are a great while upon the Stage, and some but a
very short while; some no sooner enter upon it, but presently they are gone,
and are seen no more; some take a few turns, and then they are withdrawn; some
tarry longer, and act a great part on the Stage, for a considerable time, and
give hopes of yet greater Actions and Performances; but on a sudden they are
gone likewise, as a shadow; and all their own designs and projects, and the
hopes and expectations of others fall to the ground. All this happens every day
in the Course of things here in the World; and therefore Parents have no reason
to think it strange when they see their Children dye. The thing that has been,
it is that which shall be; and that which is done, is that which shall be done;
and there is no new thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1.9.

And as it is with men, so it is with all things else, which live upon the
Earth, or grow out of it: Some live longer and some a shorter while than others
of the same kind: Some prosper and thrive, and others decay and perish. Some
things grow up in the Morning, and are withered e're Night: Some things grow
apace till they are very near the time of ripeness and perfection; and then
somewhat happens, which prevents the perfect growth, and makes the goodly
appearance come to nothing: Now, what are Men? Moses in his Prayer ( Ps. 90.5,
6.) tells us, In the Morning they are like grass, which grows up; In the
Morning it flourishes and grows up: In the Evening it is cut down and
withers. And to the same purpose the Psalmist David speaks, Psalm. 103.15,
16, As for Man his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes, for the Wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place
thereof shall know it no more. Likewise Esa. 40.6, 7. it is thus written, The
Voice said Cry. And he said What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass withers, the
flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it: Surely the
people is grass. By all which it appears what Man is by Nature, to wit, a very
weak and vanishing thing, soon nipt and brought to nothing; like the tender
Grass and the Flower of the Field, which is more exposed to the Winds and other
inconveniences, than the Flowers of the Garden, which the Gardener preserves
and secures.

The Consideration of these things will tend mightily to quiet the minds of
those who calmly and wisely reflect upon them, when God removes their Children,
or other Relations from them by Death. Their case is not singular, it is that
which is common and usual amongst men; it is according to the course of Nature
for a mortal thing to die.

But what if the manner of the death of your Children be somewhat
extraordinary, by some sudden and unusual Accident, or by some strange and odd
Distemper; are you on this account to allow your selves in the excesses of
Sorrow and Mourning? No, in no ways: You are not therefore to be transported
into immoderate grief and mourning. Shall you be vexed and disquieted, because
a Worm did eat up your pleasant Fruit, or because the stormy Wind did blow away
your lovely Flowers? Are you therefore to be enraged and mad with anger against
the Worms, or against the Winds? What would it mend the matter, if you should
give way to your passion and anger never so much in such a case? This would
only multiply your losses, by making you lose not only your Fruit and your
Flowers, but your selves too: Which they all do, who lose their patience, in
which it is that we possess our Souls.

When therefore your Children are removed from you by Death, in some unusual
and extraordinary manner, you ought to look beyond Diseases or Accidents unto
the Lord of Life and Death; who by his Providence orders not only their
death, but the manner of it. If the Sparrows fall not to the ground, that is,
die not, without your Father: You may be sure your Children do not die by
chance, or without the particular disposal of their heavenly Father. As to the
particular grounds and reasons for which God does after such a manner see fit
to put an end to your Childrens days, you are not to be too curious and
inquisitive. The Counsels of God are a great deep: His ways are in the deep
waters; and none by searching can find him out unto perfection, Job 11.7. Upon
such occasions all ought to remember the words of our Lord, when they told him
of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices, Luke
13.2, 3, 4, 5. Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay: But except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower of
Siloe fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that
dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: But except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

Thirdly, Consider from whence, 3. They should consider from whence, and
whither they are gone.
and whither they are gone. They were here in a life of Vexation and Trouble;
subject to innumerable vanities, temptations, snares and dangers: They were
compassed about with great and terrible Enemies, the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh: They were subject to daily necessities and wants. If they had lived
never so long, they would only have seen the same things in a continual
succession and revolution: As for Example, heat and cold, fair weather and
foul, night and day, Summer and Winter, health and sickness, plenty and
poverty, peace and war, prosperity and adversity, succeeding one to another:
All things going round. But now they are delivered from all these; they are at
rest, they are subject to no more necessities and wants; oppressed with no more
troubles and vexations; exposed to no more enemies, temptations or dangers; but
exalted to a state of perfect peace, joy, love, and glory. They are as well and
better than you can desire: You are not able to comprehend the Happiness that
they are admitted to. Will you then be in continual sorrow and grief for your
Children, when they are exalted to a state of Rest and Glory; when they are
where you would rejoice to be; when their gracious Father has freed them from
the vain company of the World, and translated them into the blessed Society of
Angels, and of the Spirits of just men made perfect; when he has put an end to
their toil and labor, to their fighting and wrestling against their Enemies,
and bestowed on them a Crown of Glory, and an everlasting Inheritance; when he
has broken their bonds asunder, wherein they were held and kept in captivity
and slavery, and has put them into a state of perfect and glorious freedom?
The consideration of these things should mitigate and assuage your sorrow and
grief, and fill you with unspeakable comfort and gladness.

But some are apt to say, I should rejoice, if I thought that my Children, who
are dead, were in Heaven: But this I do not know. As to this, you are not to
trouble your thoughts about it: for God does not see fit to acquaint you with
such things. Secret things belong to God; and things revealed to us and to our
Children, Deuteronomy. 29.29. If your Children, while they were alive, minded good
things; and if you did your part to instruct them, and to make them what God
requires them to be, you are not to be any further solicitous about their
everlasting state: You are to hope that they are very happy, and you are to
comfort your selves with these thoughts.

But some are apt to say, I am afraid that my Children are not in a happy
state; they did very bad things, and used bad Company; and therefore I have
cause to fear, and to be troubled about them, now that they are dead. As to
such Parents, who have had wretched Children, they ought not to suffer their
minds to be disordered, and oppressed with grief and sorrow, because their
Children, who died, were wicked. If they did their Duty to make them better; if
they advised and admonished them; if they reproved them, and, as was fitting,
chastened them; if they desired others to deal with them, to see what they
could do toward the reclaiming of them; if they prayed to God for them, and
gave them a good Example: they are not any further to be troubled and
disquieted concerning them, when God takes them into his own hand; He is wise
and good, holy and just, he does all things well, for excellent and glorious
ends; and therefore Parents ought to leave them to his Disposal, who is the
Supreme Governor of the World, and Judge of the whole Earth. Whatever he does,
whether in Mercy or Justice, is always best. The Inhabitants of the other
World, who are translated into a state of heavenly Glory, are not under the
power of such passions and partialities, as govern us here below. The glorified
Parents of damned Children, are not under any uneasiness on that or any other
account: The Will of God and his Glory is their all; they know that whatever he
does is most perfectly just and good, and for his honor; and therefore all
things afford them great pleasure and delight, true and lasting joy and
satisfaction of mind. There Is nothing able to interrupt the happiness and joy
of those in Glory: They are perfectly and eternally delivered from all sort of
evils, both of sin and punishment: They are placed above the reach of whatever
may render them in the least uneasy.

But there is a third sort; of those who are troubled, not only because their
Children were bad and profane, but because they were so through their example
or neglect. As for such, I have already in general showed them what they ought
to do. I shall only add; That since they have been so faulty and defective in
their Duty toward their deceased Children, they ought to be the more careful
of those who are yet alive, and to do all that is possible to make them what
God requires them to be. As to those who have no more Children left them, it
would be very fit for them to take into their care one or more Children, upon
whom they may bestow all that pains and care which they should have bestowed in
the right Education of their own; and endeavor, by God's help, to make them
truly pious and religious, and Patterns of all sorts of Virtue to others. This
is an office which will be very acceptable to God, and one of the best
demonstrations which Parents can make of the sincerity of their Repentance, for
their not having done their Duty to their own Children.

4. They should consider that there will be a Resurrection.
Fourthly, Consider, That there will be a Resurrection of all those that are
dead. The mighty Power of God, which made all things cut of nothing, will also
gather together the scattered dust of those who are deceased, and will reform
and rebuild, as it were, their bodies which are fallen down, and consumed. He
will raise them up again in a more excellent, perfect, and glorious manner.
Then shall you meet with your Children and Friends who died in the Lord, and
behold them after another manner, than you saw them here in this World. Instead
of weak and diseased bodies, you shall see them strong, vigorous, and lively
bodies: Instead of frail and dying bodies, you shall see immortal and
incorruptible bodies: Instead of filthy and vile bodies, you shall see pure and
glorious bodies: And you shall see them so as to be with them for ever, so as
never any more to be separated from them by death, or any other thing; for you
and they shall die no more: 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. So also is the resurrection
of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown
in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: And verse. 15,
53. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

How gladly would poor people part with their dearest Children, if they could
be assured of seeing them again in an honorable state and condition, exalted
to great Dignity and Honor? And will not you, who have the hopes of a glorious
Resurrection, be comforted in the absence of your Children? when their merciful
God and Father takes them away from you unto himself; not to do them hurt, but
good; to make them happy and blessed with himself for ever; to bestow upon them
what eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor which has entered into the heart of
man to conceive? Consider the words of the Apostle to the Thessalonians, 1
Epist. 4.13, 14. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope:
For if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them, which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him.

5. They should consider that their giving way to excessive Grief and Mourning,
can do no good, but will certainly do a great deal of hurt.
Fifthly, Your giving way to excessive Grief and Mourning, can do you no good,
but will certainly do you a great deal of hurt and mischief in many respects.
It cannot bring back your Children that are dead. Though you should break your
Hearts into a thousand pieces, by your weeping and mourning, and waste and
consume your years in constant heaviness and sorrow; though you should never
henceforth allow your selves one moment of relaxation of mind; after all you
must go to them, they shall not return to you. Now what a folly is it for Men
to consume, to disquiet, and to torment themselves, where it is to no purpose
at all to do so?

And not only do you thereby no good at all to your selves, but you do your
selves a great deal of mischief and prejudice. You provoke God to anger against
you, to bring upon you yet heavier and more grievous punishments, and to
deprive you of other Mercies and Comforts, which you still enjoy.

You do thereby no small hurt to your Bodies; you bring upon your selves very
dangerous Distempers, which will make you unfit for the actions of Life, and
the Duties of your Calling. You likewise do unspeakable mischief to your Souls;
you deprive your selves of that vigor and cheerfulness of Spirit, that is
needful to make you fit to serve God acceptably. You thereby weaken your
Memory, and darken and disorder your Reason and Understanding, and so expose
your selves to all the sad consequences of a disordered and distracted Mind.

Your Example does also a great deal of hurt to others: Your impatience and
immoderate sorrow and mourning teaches others to do so upon the like occasion.
Hereby you bring no small reproach upon our holy Religion, as if it were not
sufficient to support and fortify us against our crosses and afflictions, and
to comfort us amidst the uneasy things which God sees sit to exercise us with
in this World.

What an excellent Example is David unto you in this matter? When God struck
his Child, so that it was very sick, he fasted and prayed; but when the Child
died, he arose from the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and changed his
apparel, and came unto the House of the Lord, and worshipped: Then he came to
his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat.
Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou have done? Thou
did fast and weep for the Child, while it was alive; but when the Child was
dead, thou did rise and eat bread. And he said, While the Child was yet
alive, I fasted and wept; for I said, Who can tell, whether God will be
gracious unto me, that the Child may live? But now he is dead, Wherefore should
I fast? Can I bring him again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to
me, 2 Samuel 12.15, 16, etc. Thus ought all Parents to do, who fear God. When the
Lord lays his hand upon your Children, you ought to pray to God for them, and
to use all lawful means for their recovery: But when he sees fit to take them
away by death, you ought patiently to submit to his Will, and to say with Job:
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord,
Job 1.21. This is your wisest course: It is the way to make your selves happy,
and to enjoy comfort and satisfaction of mind under your crosses. This is the
likeliest and readiest way to obtain new Mercies and Favors from the Lord,
instead of those you are deprived of: Thus you see the Lord dealt with Job:
Jam. 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord: That the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. And Job 42.12, 13.
The Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more than his beginning. And verse. 16,
17. After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his
sons sons, even four generations. So Job dyed, being old and full of days.

But if God see it more fit to withhold from you the blessings of the Womb, and
to bestow no more Children upon you; he can and will make up this want, with
much greater and better Blessings. What you want in Temporals, you shall have
in Spirituals. As Elkanah said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. He will be better to you
than ten Sons. He will give you a Name better than of Sons and Daughters, even
an everlasting Name, that shall not be cut off. Isa. 56.5.

SOME FORMS OF PRAYER WHICH Parents may teach their Children according to their
Age.
A Morning Prayer to be taught Children, when they begin to speak.
O Lord, I praise thee for all thy Mercies, and for thy Care of me this Night.
Watch over me this day. Forgive me all my sins, and make me thy Child for Jesus
Christ his sake.

This Prayer may be used likewise at Night, only changing that petition [watch
over me this Day] into [watch over me this Night.]

When Children come to be four or five years old, the following Prayer may be
used.

O Lord my God, what shall I render unto thee for all thy Mercies. I bless thee
for giving me Life, and all things needful to keep me alive. But above all, I
bless thee for sending Christ to dye for me, that he might wash me with his
Blood, and make me fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. For his sake have mercy upon
me, and forgive me all my sinful thoughts, words, and deed. Give me Grace to
serve thee as I ought to do; that I may not do, nor say a naughty thing, lest
thou be angry with me, and cast me into Hell fire. Lord bless and preserve my
Father and Mother If there be Brothers and Sisters let them pray for them
likewise.
and all my Friends and Relations.

I praise thee, O God, for preserving of me this Night, watch over me this day;
save me from every evil thing. Good Lord hear me, and grant me whatsoever thou
know to be best for me, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose holy name and
words, I pray, Our Father, etc.

This Prayer may be likewise used at Night, by changing only two words, and
saying, instead of [preserving me this night] [preserving me this day;] and
instead of [watch over me this day] [watch over me this night.]

A Morning Prayer for Children, when they come to twelve or fourteen years of
Age; sooner or later, according to the ripeness of their understanding.
LORD teach and assist me to worship thee as I ought to do, Lift up my heart
unto thee.

What shall I render unto thee, O most gracious God, and most merciful Father,
for all thy mercies to me, and to all the World? I bless thee for making me a
reasonable Creature, and for affording me all things which be needful to
support my Life; I bless thee for my health, liberty, and safety; for my Food
and Raiment; for the use of my Reason and Understanding, and of my Senses; for
thy corrections and deliverances; and for all the advantages I have had by good
Examples, and good Instructions: But chiefly, I praise and bless thee for the
redemption of Mankind by the Lord Jesus Christ: That I was born within thy
Church, where I was early given to thee in Baptism; that I have had the benefit
of Christian Education; that thou have afforded me the means of Grace, and
called me to the hope of Glory.

But notwithstanding thy goodness and love, I have gone astray from thee; I
have not cared so much as I ought to have done, to know thee, and to do thy
Will, but have done my own will in many things; and followed my own foolish and
sinful inclinations: I have broken many of thy most Holy and Just Laws, in
thought, word, and deed Here they may make a particular Confession of their
Sins.
, whereby I have deserved thy Wrath and Curse.

Father of Mercies have mercy upon me, and forgive me all my sins for Jesus
Christ his sake, who dyed for sinners. Give me a true and hearty Repentance for
all mine Iniquities; that I may not wilfully break thy Laws any more. Lord
never leave me, nor forsake me. Hold up my goings in thy Paths, that my
footsteps may not slide. Grant that henceforth I may love thee with all my
heart, and may be afraid to sin against thee: Work in me a true Faith, and a
lively hope; make me humble, meek, and patient, sober and temperate in all
things, Charitable and compassionate toward all that are in distress, true and
faithful in my words, and sincere and upright in my Actions, well content and
thankful in every condition of Life, and zealous for thy Glory. Grant that I
may daily grow in Grace and spiritual Knowledge. Create in me a clean Heart,
and renew a right Spirit wethin me, and cause me to walk in thy ways.

O Lord send thy Gospel through the World: pour our plentifully the Blessings
of thy holy Spirit on all thy People: Bless and preserve our King and Queen.
Guide our Judges and Magistrates: Sanctify and assist the Ministers of the
Gospel. Be with all my Friends and Relations, particularly bless and preserve
my Father and Mother. Reward them for their care and kindness toward me: Make
me a loving and dutiful Child unto them. If there be any Brothers or Sisters,
he may pray for them, and for Grandfather and Grandmother, if they be alive.
Comfort all that are in trouble, and sanctify their afflictions to them.

I thank, thee, O Lord, for thy care of me this Night: Watch over over me this
day. Bless and direct me in all I do or say. Keep me mindful that I am always
in thy sight, that I may be in thy fear all the day long. Cause me to remember
that I must shortly dye and come to judgment; that I may not mispend my
precious time, but employ it in a constant and cheerful Obedience to thy holy
and righteous Laws; that when this vain and short life is at an end, I may be
made partaker of everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose Holy
Name and words I pray, Our Father, etc.

This Prayer may serve likewise at Night, until you come to the last part,
which begins with these words, [I thank thee, O Lord, for thy care of me this
Night, etc.] instead thereof, you may say as follows, [I thank thee, O Lord,
for thy care of me this day; watch over me this Night, and grant me quiet
repose; save me from every Evil thing, for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, in whose Holy Name and words, I conclude my imperfect Prayers, saying,
Our Father, etc.]

ADVICE TO CHILDREN.

BY A Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for S. Lowndes near the Savoy-Gate in the Strand.

ADVICE TO CHILDREN.
THERE is scarce any thing wherein all Nations, and Men of all Religions, do
more agree, than in the Common Duties of Children to their Parents: Neither is
there any thing that tends more to the comfort and happiness, the beauty and
strength of Society, than for Children to perform all those Duties which they
owe to their Parents. And yet hew sad is it to think, that a great many
Children, who have not only all the advantages which natural Religion affords,
but likewise the assistance of Divine Revelation, do nevertheless carry
themselves in that manner toward their Parents, as if they either understood
nothing of their Duty, or were most prodigiously perverse, and resolved to
rebel against the Light, to trample upon all the Principles both of Natural and
Revealed Religion.

The Design of this short Treatise is to show what the Duties of Children are
toward their Parents, and to suggest some Considerations to excite them to do
their Duty.

1. Duty of Children, to honor their Parents: and how they are to honor them.
First, Children are bound to honor their Parents; which imports, First, That
they should entertain respectful and reverend thoughts of them, as being under
God the Authors of their Life and Being; they must not think slightingly, and
under valuingly of their Parents, whatever be their weaknesses and
imperfections: They ought to hate and abhor their Vices, every thing in them
that is evil, dishonorable to God, and contrary to his Laws and Commandments;
but still they ought to love and honor their persons: And if at any time
disrespectful and irreverend thoughts arise in their minds, they ought to check
them, to accuse and be angry with themselves for them; and to call to mind what
God has commanded them to do, when he says, [Honour thy father and thy
mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee.]

Secondly, This imports that they ought to express their inward Reverence and
Esteem by all the outward marks and demonstrations thereof, in their words and
deeds, their looks and gestures; these things are the Picture of the Mind, they
ordinarily represent the temper and disposition thereof; so that if there be
any thing of real esteem and regard toward any body in the heart, it will
discover it self by some of those outward expressions. We see how Solomon
carried himself toward his Mother, 1 Kings 2.19. Bathsheba went unto King
Solomon to speak unto him for Adonijah: And the King rose up to meet her, and
bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his Throne, and caused a seat to be
set for the King's Mother, and she sat on his right hand. Children are more
apt to carry themselves irreverently and slightingly toward their Mother,
which is the reason, as some think, that she is set down first. Lev. 19.3. Ye
shall fear every man his mother, and his father.

Thirdly, This imports that they ought to cover the infirmities and weaknesses,
the imperfections and indiscretions of their Parents; to do as Shem and Japhet
did, Genesis 9.23. when Noah their Father was drunken, and was uncovered within
his Tent. They took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went
backwards, and covered the nakedness of their father, and their faces were
backward, and they saw not their fathers nakedness. Children are not to publish
the faults and follies of their Parents; but ought to conceal them, all that
they can. However, there are two things very consistent with this Duty: First,
Children may and ought to do all that they can, by their private, modest, and
humble Advice, to reclaim their Parents from their sinful practices. Secondly,
If they find it not so fit for them immediately to advise their Parents; or if
what they say has not the designed effect, then they may recommend this
charitable office to the care of some other body, who is a wise and kind, a
pious and serious Friend, who may have some more influence than themselves
toward the reclaiming their Parents. This is the greatest expression of true
kindness, honor, and respect to them, when their Children sincerely endeavor,
in the discreetest manner, to be the happy instruments of their Conversion and
Reformation; of turning them from Satan unto God: This is to be, in some sort,
the Fathers in Christ, to those who are their Parents by Nature. O how happy
are the Parents of such worthy Children! How may they rejoice and bless God,
who has bestowed on them so great a Blessing?

If Children are thus obliged to honor their Parents; Against those who
dishonor their Parents.
what shall be said of those who dishonor, despise, and slight them, all that
ever they can; who undervalue them in their thoughts; who speak of them with
great contempt and disdain; who speak to them with great insolence; who mock
and scorn them; who laugh at them, and make mouths at them, and point at them
with the finger; who reproach and revile them; who break indecent jests upon
them; who make them the objects of their sport and pastime; who take pleasure
in publishing their weaknesses and indiscretions, that others also may laugh at
them, and despise them? How dreadful and terrible are the Curses and Judgments,
which God has in store against such wretched Children? Prove. 30.17. The eye
that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother; the Ravens of the
valleys shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. That is, he who
is a mocker and scorner of his Parents, who despises and slights them, shall
die a shameful death, and remain unburied, and shall be exposed to the birds
and beasts of prey, to be eaten of them. It does not follow from hence, that
all perverse wretched Children come to such a shameful and untimely end: Only
it shows what ofttimes happens, and is very usual, to wit, that such mockers
and despisers of Parents are punished remarkably by the Justice of God in this
World, and are made Examples to all others, who will open their eyes to
consider the hand of God against such ungodly Children.

As for Instances of the Divine Justice against Mockers of Parents, all Ages
and Countries are full of them. Cham was made an Example of this, Genesis 9.22,
24, 25. And Cham the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father, and told
his two brethren without. And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his
younger son had done unto him. And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of
servants shall he be unto his brethren. In which words, though Canaan the Son of
Cham is only mentioned, yet Cham is not exempted from the Curse; his punishment
is hereby made so much the greater, because he is not only pronounced accursed
in his own person (which is necessarily to be supposed, he having committed the
sin which caused the Curse) but also in his Posterity, which could not but
increase mightily his grief, and make his punishment lie more heavy upon him.

2. Duty, to obey their Parents.
Secondly, Children are to obey their Parents, to do what they bid them. See
this in the Example of Joseph, when Jacob sent him to his Brethren, Genesis 37.13,
14. And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem?
Come, and I will send thee unto them: And he said to him, Here am I. And he
said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and
well with the flocks, and bring me word again: so he sent him out of the vale
of Hebron, and he came to Shechem. The Commands of Parents are either about the
same things which God has commanded, or they are about things indifferent, or
about things unlawful. If they are about the same things which God has
commanded, they are so much the more to be obeyed; as being the will and
pleasure both of their Father in Heaven, and of their earthly Parents. In this
case the obligation to obedience is double. Secondly, If their Parents Commands
are about things indifferent, that is, which are neither commanded, nor
forbidden by God, Children are likewise to obey them: God has made it their
Duty so to do, Col. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things; for this is
well pleasing unto the Lord. This obedience is very acceptable to him; he takes
great pleasure and delight in it, to see those obeyed and submitted to, whom he
has appointed to be, as it were, in his own stead; whom he has clothed with
some beams of Divine Power; whom, with relation to their Children, he has
made, in some sense, sacred persons; whose Will ought to be a Law unto them,
though only in the Lord. For, Thirdly, if the thing commanded be plainly
unlawful, they are to refuse complacence therewith; because they are bound to
obey God rather than man, rather than Father or Mother; rather than all the
World: Their obligations to God are much greater than to their Parents; he is
the Maker both of them, and of their Parents; they live by his Bounty, the
Earth they tread on is his; the Air they breathe in, the Heavens that cover
them, the food they eat, the water they drink, the garments that cloth them,
and all other things which they enjoy for their benefit and comfort in the
World, are the Lord's: He is their great Master, who appoints them their
business in the World, and assures them of a reward; he also will reckon with
them, and either reward, or punish them according to their works; and therefore
his Commands are to be preferred to those of all others.

But even in this case, Children are to express, in their very denial and
refusal of obedience, all that Honor and Respect to their Parents, that is
possible; that they may see it is not stubbornness, but the fear of God, which
makes them disobey. By this means Parents may perhaps be convinced, and made
sensible of their sin, and prevailed with to shun those evil things, which they
see their very Children do so much hate and abhor, and wherein they refuse to
obey.

Against stubborn and disobedient Children.
If Children are thus bound by the Laws of Heaven, to obey their Parents; what
shall be said of those, who make no account of their Parents Commands, but set
at naught all their Admonitions and Counsels; who will not follow their
Directions, and be governed by them for their own good; but do follow their own
humor and fancy, and the examples and customs of others like themselves? What a
sad mark is this of approaching ruin, and of heavy Judgments, which hang over
the heads of such ungodly Children, as you may see in the Sons of Ely, 1 Samuel
2.25. of whom it is said, that they hearkened not unto the voice of their
Father, because the Lord would slay them.

By the Law of Moses, the stubborn Son was to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19,
20, 21. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the
voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that when they have
chastened him, will not hearken unto them: Then shall his father and mother lay
hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City, and unto the gate
of his place: And they shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our son is
stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice: He is a glutton and a
drunkard. And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones, that he die:
so shall thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear.

In ancient times, in most Countries, Parents had an absolute power over their
Children, to punish them as they thought good, for their disobedience and other
faults: And when amongst the Romans they lessened this power, yet they did it
at first only in part; The Father was enjoined to present his disobedient Child
to the Judge, that he might be punished; and the Judge was to pronounce such a
Sentence as the Father thought fit. This came somewhat near the Law of Moses.
By this it appears, what the sense of Mankind was concerning the exceeding
greatness of the crime of stubbornness and disobedience in Children to Parents.

3. Duty of Children, to be determined by their Parents as to their Calling.
Thirdly, They are to be determined by them, as to their Calling and
Employment, if it be an honest and lawful one. Their Parents are to be supposed
ordinarily more wise and prudent to choose for them, than they are to choose a
Trade for themselves: They have more experience, and know the World better than
their Children do; and no doubt, they have kindness enough for them to wish
them well, and to design their advantage, and not to press them to any Trade or
way of Life, which they believe is inconvenient, and like to be hurtful to
them: But if Parents should be mistaken, as to the fitness of the Employment,
to which they design their Children; and supposing the Children to be sensible
of the great inconveniences thereof, which the Parents, through prejudices and
partialities, do not see; in this case Children may, with all due modesty,
meekness, and humility, represent to their Parents what their thoughts are, and
tell them what objections they have against such a Calling; that their Parents
may be prevailed upon, by their Reasons, to alter their resolutions: or if they
be not so fit themselves to discourse their Parents upon such a subject, they
may do it by some wise and discreet Friends. And if after all; Parents be
wilful in their intention and design; Children are not upon the account of
uncertain, or probable inconveniences, to oppose themselves to the Will of
their Parents; they ought to submit themselves to their Judgment, if the Trade,
or manner of Life, to which they design them, be not dishonest and unlawful;
for then there is no farther question to be made; the case is clear: The Will
of God is always to be preferred to the Will of Man. He that loves father or
mother more than me, says Christ, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.37. But if
there be nothing of dishonesty or unlawfulness in such an Employment, they are
to enter upon it with all the cheerfulness that is possible; leaving all events
unto God. It will afford great peace and comfort to their minds, whatever
afterward falls out, when they consider, that they did what was their Duty to
do; they submitted their own opinion to the Judgment of their Parents, whom God
has commanded them to obey. Whatever may be their temporal loss, they are sure
of spiritual gain. God will plentifully reward their humble obedience, and
ready compliance with the Will of their earthly Parents.

Against Children who neglect this Duty.
From what has been said on this Head, we may see how much they are to be
blamed, who are so far from being determined by their Parents, in the way and
manner of their living in the World, that they either wholly give up themselves
to idleness, and waste their time in vain and foolish Company, or they choose
some way of living, that is either dishonest, or very inconvenient for them in
many regards; or if they comply with their Parents, so far as to enter upon
some honest way of living, yet they do not keep at it, but leave it, and become
Prodigals; they spend their substance in riotous living; they waste and consume
what their Parents bestow upon them, in drinking, gaming, and whoring, and such
like extravagancies, whereby they prove Robbers of their Parents; of whom, see
what the Wise Man says, Prove. 28.24. Who so robs his Father, and his
Mother, and says, It is no Transgression, the same is a Companion of a
Destroyer. That is, he is to be looked on as one of those who rob and murder on
the Highway; as a man desperately wicked, who is disposed to act any sort of
Villainy, and Impiety, who will stick at nothing in pursuit of his mad and
wretched designs, that may gratify his Lusts and Passions.

4. Duty, not to suffer themselves to be bestowed in Marriage against their
Parents will.
Fourthly, As to their Marriage, they are not to suffer themselves to be
bestowed, without their Parents consent. Thus Samson, Judge. 14.1, 2. And Samson
went down to Timnath, and saw a Woman in Timnath, and he came up and told his
Father, and his Mother, and said, I have seen a Woman in Timnath of the
Daughters of the Philistines, now therefore get her for me to Wife. How great
reason is there for this? that they who are under God, the causes of their life
and being in the World, whose goods and possession Children are, should he
acknowledged and advised with by them, and depended on in the settling of
themselves in the World, in such a state of Life, which will prove either the
foundation of great happiness or of great misery. To give themselves away,
without their Parents Consent, is a kind of theft; it is to invade the right of
others; to rob them of that which God has given them. We see how great the
Power of Parents was, by the Law of Moses, Numb. 30.3, 4, 5. To disanul the
rash Vows of their Children before Marriage. If a Woman also vow a Vow unto the
Lord, and bind her self by a Bond, being in her Father's House, in her youth,
and her Father hear her Vow and her Bond, wherewith she has bound her Soul,
and her Father shall hold his peace at her: Then all her Vows shall stand, and
every Bond wherewith she has bound her Soul, shall stand: But if her Father
disallow her in the day that he hears; not any of her Vows, or of her Bonds,
wherewith she has bound her Soul, shall stand: And the Lord shall forgive her,
because her Father disallowed her. Now if it be thus in a Father's power to
disanul his Daughters rash Vow which she made to God, how much more may we
reckon it in his Power, to disanul her rash and indiscreet promise made to Man,
of bestowing her self without her Parents allowance? Can there be any thing
more unjust, more unkind, more unthankful, and more unnatural, than for
Children, who have been brought up, nourished, and cherished by their Parents,
for whom all their care and pains have been bestowed, to dispose of themselves
in the most important affair of their lives, without their knowledge, or
against their Will? What a grief and trouble of heart must this needs be to
their poor Parents? As we see it was to Isaac and Rebekah, Genesis 26.34, 35. And
Esau was forty years old, when he took to Wife Judith, the daughter of Beeri
the Hittite, and Bashemath, the Daughter of Elon the Hittite, which were a
grief of mind to Isaac, and to Rebekah. As to such undutiful Children, who do
thus bestow themselves against their Parents will and consent, it is very
remarkable, that they seldom live happily and comfortably; they bring upon
themselves very often a great deal of sorrow and trouble, lasting misery and
woe: They live to eat the fruit of their foolish doings; and wish, when it is
to little purpose, that they had never done so mad and wicked a thing.

5. Duty, to submit to their Parents Reproofs and Chastenings.
Fifthly, They are meekly and patiently to submit to their Reproofs, to their
Chastenings and Corrections. It is a Power that God has given Parents over
their Children, to correct and chasten them for their Faults: This is necessary
for Childrens good; and therefore, when Parents do correct them, they ought not
to be angry with them, or grumble at their severity which they use for
reforming of them; much less are they to resist and rebel against them. Heb.
12.9. We have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence. Yea, though Parents sometimes exceed the bounds of prudence and
discretion in chastising their Children, though they indulge a little to their
own Passion; yet Children are bound patiently to bear and suffer their
Corrections: They are not to fly out into indecent and irreverent words and
actions, but with all the submission and respect that is possible, ought to
endeavor to mitigate the wrath and passion of their angry Parents; and
afterward they are to study all that ever they can, to prevent their anger and
displeasure, by a most humble, reverend, and dutiful carriage.

How much may this serve to reprove those, Against Rebellious Children.
who are so far from taking in good part their Parents correcting and
chastening of them, that they refuse to submit thereto? They resist them, and
rebel against them. Can there be any thing more unnatural and monstrous, than
to see those who owe their being to their Parents; who have been brought up by
them; who have met with so many testimonies of a tender care, and of great
kindness; to rise up against them? to fly into the faces of those who are the
Authors of their being? to lift up their hand against them? This is a sin of so
crying a nature, that he who was guilty thereof, was to be put to death by the
Law of Moses, Exodus 21.15. He that smites his Father or his Mother, shall be
surely put to death. How greatly does it aggravate this sin, when Children have
met with no severe, nor unmerciful dealing from their Parents? But have been
treated by them, with all that gentleness and kindness that was possible. And
yet for such Children to rise up against their Parents, is a Crime of so black
a nature, that it is no wonder if the hand of God appear against them for it,
in a very signal manner; as it did in the case of Absalom, for whom his Father
David had so great a fondness: This unthankful and unnatural Son rose up
against him, and endeavored by force and violence to pull him from the Throne,
and to usurp the Royal Dignity. See how the hand of God appeared against him. 2 Samuel 18.9. And Absalom met the Servants of David; and Absalom rode upon a Mule,
and the Mule went under the thick Boughs of a great Oak, and his Head caught
hold of the Oak, and he was taken up between the Heaven and the Earth, and the
Mule that was under him went away. And, ver. 14. it is said that Joab took
three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he
was yet alive in the midst of the Oak. And ver. 15. Ten young Men that bare
Joab's Armor, compassed about, and smote Absalom, and slew him. And ver. 17.
They took Absalom and cast him into a great Pit in the Wood, and laid a very
great heap of stones upon him. This was done as a lasting Monument of Absalom's
sin and shame, and of God's righteous Judgment upon him.

6. Duty, to love their Parents, and how they are to express their Love.
Sixthly, Children ought to love their Parents; and to express it by all those
Offices, which are in their Power to do for them; by serving them readily; by
doing every thing that may make them well pleased; by sympathizing with them in
all their troubles; by assisting them, and doing all they can, to make their
Lives joyful and comfortable; by shunning every thing that may grieve them, or
make them uneasy: They ought to refuse no labor, nor pains to do them
service, especially when they are sick and weak, oppressed with the Burden of
Old Age, or poor and indigent, under any sort of necessity whatsoever; then
ought Children to be very ready to help them, to comfort and to encourage them,
to do all that they can to make their lives easy to them, and to lighten their
Burdens. This is called, 1 Timothy 1.4. A showing Piety at home. It is an act of
Religion and Worship, which God is well pleased with. We see how Joseph
nourished his Father and his Brethren, and all his Fathers household with
Bread, Genesis 47.12. It was an old Roman Law. Let Children relieve their Parents,
or be put in Prison.

How many Examples have there been amongst the Heathens of Eminent Piety
toward Parents? Such was that Act of her, Valor. Max. l. 5. cap. 4.
who when her Old Father was condemned to be put to death in Prison, visited
him often, and gave him suck, and so preserved him alive, who otherwise must
have dyed of Famine.

The like instance we meet with in the same Author, Valor. Max. ibid.
of a worthy Roman Daughter, who did in the same manner preserve her Mother in
Prison, being condemned to dye. When the Keeper of the Prison, to whom the
charge of putting her to death was committed, found after some time, that her
Daughter kept her alive by giving her suck, he was so affected with the
greatness of the Daughters Compassion and tenderness to her Mother, that he
made it known to those in Power, who were likewise so mightily touched with
such an unusual instance of tender Affection; that they pardoned the Mother, as
the greatest Reward they could bestow on the Daughter for her mavelous
Affection.

What can there be more just and reasonable, than for Children thus to
endeavor to requite their Parents, for their great care and kindness toward
them, when they were not able to help themselves? The time was, when their
Parents were as Eyes and Hands and Feet to them; they did every thing for them,
their Children not being capable to do any thing for themselves: How ready
therefore should they be to serve their Parents, to assist them by all good
Offices, when their condition requires it?

This is a Duty to which Children are so strictly obliged (to wit the assisting
and relieving of their Parents) that no pretense is sufficient to absolve them
from the Obligation thereof. The Pharisees thought they had found out an
Exception from this Rule, which was this; that if Children gave away their
Wealth to pious and Charitable uses, they were freed from the Obligation of
relieving their Parents: They taught them in this case, to tell their Parents,
It is Corban, that is to say, a Gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited
by me. Mar. 7.11. And by saying this, they made people believe that they were
sufficiently freed from all Obligations to take care of, and provide for their
Parents. But our Savior reproves them severely, telling them, that this was no
other than the making void the Commandments of God by their Traditions.

We may see from this, Against unkind and unnatural Children.
what Judgment to make of such unkind, undutiful, and unnatural Children, who
do wholly neglect their Parents, especially in their old age, and in their poor
and low Estate; who show them no more pity, and express no more love nor
tenderness toward them, than if they were not their Parents; who grudge them
the least supply; and take all the wicked courses that they can, to starve them
to death, that they may be rid of them; who wish and long for, and rejoice in
the death of their poor Parents. O what a horrid Barbarity and Inhumanity is
this! Shall not many Pagans rise up in Judgment against such Children, and
Condemn them? How little do they deserve the Name of Christian Children? Their
true Name is Unchristian, and unnatural Children. As Solomon bid the Sluggard
go to the Ant, so may we bid such hard-hearted and unmerciful Children go to
the Stork, of whom it is told, that when the old Dams cannot feed themselves,
their little ones feed and nourish them; when their Feathers fall from them,
they cover them with their Feathers; and when they are not able to fly, they
couple themselves together, to carry them upon their Backs. Let uncompassionate
Children go to this compassionate Creature, and consider her ways and be wise;
Let them learn from her, to be more kind and affectionate, and tenderhearted
toward their Parents, and not any longer to harden their Bowels against them.

7. Duty, to pray for their Parents.
Seventhly, Because all that Children can do is not sufficient to requite the
love and tender care of their Parents; therefore they ought to pray to God,
that he would reward them, and preserve them, and keep them alive; that he
would supply all their wants, and comfort them in all their troubles, and
requite their Love, their tender care, and their great cost and pains they have
been at to bring them up, and to educate them. How happy are the Parents of
such Children, who are supplicants and intercessors, at the Throne of Grace,
for good things unto them? Such Children are the strength of their Parents;
they are a great blessing unto them.

If it be the Duty of Children, thus to pray to God, Against Cursers of Parents.
in behalf of their Parents, what shall we say of those, who neither pray for
them, nor themselves, but live like the Beasts that perish, and mind nothing
that is good? And if their Crime is great, who do not at all pray for their
Parents; how dreadful is their Guilt, who Curse them? What dreadful Judgments
may such Monsters of wickedness expect. Prove. 20.20. Who so Curses his Father
or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness; that is, he shall
be reduced unto a sad afflicted and miserable State; his prosperous condition
(which is compared to Light, or to a Lamp) shall be turned into Adversity and
Misery, and that very great, which is expressed by [obscure darkness] he shall
be made very miserable; his state and condition in the World shall become most
uncomfortable; as it is for a Man who walks in a way that is full of Light,
where he beholds a great many Objects, which afford him pleasure and delight,
suddenly to be deprived of all this, and to find himself all alone in obscure
darkness, without all help and comfort. By the Law of Moses, such ungodly and
unnatural Children were without any pardon to be put to death. Exodus 21.17. He
that Curses his Father or his Mother, shall surely be put to death.

From what has been said, Children may see what their Duty is, which they owe
to their Parents; which that they may perform, there are several things which
serve as powerful Motives and Arguments to excite them.

Motives to excite Children to do these things.
First, 1. Motive, from the divine Commandment.
It will tend mightily to move them to Honor their Father and Mother, if they
consider who requires this at their hands. This Law proceeds not from Men,
but from God; It is a Law made by him who is their Maker; and therefore by
right of Creation may require their Obedience: It is a Law made by their
faithful preserver, and rich provider; and therefore by virtue of his daily
care over them, and kindness to them, may command them what he thinks good:
This is the will of their Father in Heaven, of their Lord and King, of him who
will call them to an account, and render to them according to their Works; of
him who is their greatest and best Friend, if they do his Will and keep his
Commandments; but will be their most dreadful and terrible Enemy, if they do
not obey his Voice: If therefore children have any sense of God on their Souls;
if they consider his infinite greatness, power, wisdom, justice, truth,
faithfulness, mercy, and kindness; they cannot but endeavor to perform what he
requires, when once they know what is his holy will and pleasure. Now, as to
what I speak of, to wit the Duty of Children to Parents, it is plain and clear,
not only from those Laws which are contained in Holy Scripture, which were
revealed from Heaven to Holy Men, whom God made use of to be the publishers
thereof to the World: but likewise from the Laws of Nature, those clear
impressions which God has made on the minds of Men in all places, and in all
Ages; whereby they are taught that Children ought to honor and obey their
Parents, to love them and to relieve them, and provide for them, if they stand
in need of their help. These have always been the calm and sober thoughts of
all Men; and when any were so wicked as to violate this sacred Law, they were
hated and abhorred by all others; and in all well governed States, were
punished according to the demerits of their Crime, and the degree of their
disobedience and perverseness, either immediately by the Parents, or by public
Judges, upon complaint made by Parents. The Sense of all this ought to move
Children to honor their Father and Mother, that they may approve themselves to
God, who requires them to do so, and that upon the severest Penalties, if they
shall dare to dishonor them, and disobey them.

Secondly, To encourage Children to perform their Duty to their Parents, 2.
Motive, from the Divine Promise.
God has been pleased to add a gracious promise. That thy days may be long
upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. He might only have commanded
them to do this, by virtue of his absolute Power and Sovereign Authority, which
he has over all Men, without proposing any Reward; but such is his infinite
Bounty and Goodness, that he has added a Promise to the Command, thereby to
make Childrens Duty the more easy.

As to the Promise it self, it is not to be understood absolutely, as if all
good Children should live long; promises of Temporal Blessings are made
conditionally, that is, so far as God sees such things best and fittest for us:
So that as to this promise of long life, God will bestow it, if it be most for
his own Glory, and the good and Benefit of Children. Oftentimes he does
lengthen out the years of pious and dutiful Children; whereas the years of
wicked and undutiful Children are shortened by their profane and wicked
Courses; so that some of them are cut off immediately by the hand of God; and
others are put to death by the hand of Man.

As for those Children who live not to a great Age, though they are very dutiful
and obedient to their Parents; God does make up what is wanting in the number
of their years here, with an everlasting Life, and Glory in Heaven. In which
case there is no cause to Complain, as if God did not fulfill his promise to
them. For as there is no reason for a Man to complain, who is employed to work
for so much a day, if his Master see it fit to free him from his Work, and pay
him all his Wages before the third part of his time is out: Even so, if God
think fit to set his Children at Liberty, from the toil and labor of this
life, and to bestow upon them glorious and Eternal Rewards, while they are in
the Morning or Noon, as it were, of their Age, there is no ground of
complaining upon his doing so, but rather great matter of praise and
thanksgiving unto him, whose mercy and love is infinitely great.

But besides this Reward in the other World; there are Temporal Blessings which
God will bestow on those who keep this Commandment. How acceptable and pleasing
to him, was the Obedience of the Rechabites unto their Father, though his
Commands seemed very hard and severe, to wit, That they should drink no Wine,
nor build House, nor sow seed, nor plant Vineyard, nor have any, but should
dwell in Tents, Jer. 35. 6, 7. etc. And ver. 18. Jeremiah said unto the House
of the Rechabites, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, because you
have obeyed the Command of Jonadab your Father, and kept all his Precepts, and
done according to all that he has commanded you: Therefore thus says the Lord
of Hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab the Son of Rechab shall not want a Man to
stand before me for ever. Which Words import that he would take a particular
care of them, that he would be mindful of them, and have them in his Eye; that
he would preserve them, and show them his favor and love, and continue unto
them those Offices and Privileges which they enjoyed, which some think were,
of being Scribes and Doctors of the Law, and having some Charge in or about the
Temple.

3. Motive, from the Example of our Blessed Savior.
Thirdly, Besides the Command of God, and the Reward which he has promised to
them who honor their Parents, how strong an Argument ought it to be unto all
Children, to excite them to this, when they consider the Example of their
Blessed Lord and Master, their King and Savior, Jesus Christ? Of whom it is
said, that he was subject unto his Parents, Luke 2.51 And if he, who was so
much greater than his Parents, who was their Lord, their King, their Maker,
their Savior and Redeemer; if he, who was the Son of God, and thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God, I say, if he was subject to his Parents, ought
not all Children to be so to their Parents? and to esteem it their glory to
imitate their Prince and Savior, as in his other Virtues, so in his Obedience
and Subjection to his Parents? Shall any Man think himself too good to do this,
when Christ did it before him? Can it be too mean for a Worm to do that, which
a Man, a great Man, and a mighty Prince has done? Shall vile sinners think
themselves abased and dishonored by doing that which was done before by him,
who knew no sin, and in whose Mouth there was found no guile, who was holy,
harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
Heavens, Heb. 7.26. As our Blessed Lord was a great and noble Pattern to us in
other things, so particularly in his love to his Parents. When he was upon the
Cross, a little before he gave up the Ghost, he expressed how great his love
was to his Mother, and how tender a care he had of her. John 19.25, 26, 27. Now
there stood by the Cross of Jesus, his Mother, and his Mothers Sister, Mary the
Wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his Mother, and
the Disciple standing by, whom he loved, he says unto his Mother, Woman,
behold thy Son. Then says he to the Disciple, behold thy Mother. And from that
hour, that Disciple took her unto his own home. He commends his Mother to John
(Joseph in all probability being dead) that he might take care of her, as of
his own Mother. Though he was at this time in the midst of great pain and
anguish, though his hands and his feet were nailed to the Cross, though his head
was Crowned with Thorns, though he lay under the most insupportable Burden that
ever Man lay under, yet, as if the sight of his Mother had made him forget all
his Sufferings, and Torments, he affectionately recommends her to the Care of
another, who he knew would perform all the Offices of a loving Son unto her. He
knew how great an affliction it would be to her, to be deprived of the Comfort
of his presence in the World; he knew to how many necessities and wants, she
should be exposed by his leaving of her; and therefore he gives it in charge to
the beloved Disciple, to do the Duty of a Son unto her, to be to her in his
stead, to honor her, to love her, to serve her, to take care of her, and
provide whatever might be fit for her. This shows all Children what is their
Duty toward their Parents, to wit, that they ought to take care of them, so
long as they live, and are able to do it; they ought with all respect and
kindness, to perform unto them all those Offices, which the Laws of Nature and
Christianity require.

Fourthly, May not the Examples of some Heathens, 4. Motive, from the Examples
of some Heathens.
which have already been mentioned, excite Christian Children to perform their
Duty to their Parents? There are a great many more instances might be added to
this purpose; I shall only mention two. The first is, of the brave Coriolanus,
that Great Roman Commander, who being very ill used by his Countrymen, fled to
the Volscians, who were at that time at War with the Romans. Within a little
time after his coming amongst them, he was made General of their Forces; in
which Service he had great Success against the Romans, gaining several
Victories over them, whereby he was encouraged to approach to the very Walls of
Rome: His Countrymen were terribly alarmed with this; so that they were forced
to make humble Addresses to him, to deprecate his displeasure, but to no
purpose: They sent their Priests in their sacred Vestments, but to as little
Effect: But no sooner did his Mother, attended with his Wife and Children, come
to him, but he submitted himself to her. Now, says he, you have overcome me
indeed, when the entreaties of my Mother are added to yours; though Rome deserve
my hatred, yet for my Mothers sake I will spare it; and immediately he withdrew
his Army.

A second Example, is that of the worthy Athenian Captain Cimon, who not being
able to redeem the Corpse of his Father, which was arrested for Debt, sold
himself, and became a Slave, that his deceased Father's Body might be freed
from that Arrest that was upon it, and so might have honorable Burial. This
great Man was famous for his Noble and Valiant Exploits, for his great courage
and excellent Conduct in Military Affairs; but there was not any thing for
which he was so much admired and loved, as for this wonderful instance of
Affection and Respect to his Father.

May not such shining Patterns amongst the Pagans, make many Christians
ashamed, who come so far short of them, in their Duty and Obedience to their
Parents? Shall not they rise up in Judgment and condemn Christians, who though
they have a more excellent, complete, and perfect Rule, though they have a great
deal more Light to direct them in their Duty to their Parents; and though they
have much greater assistances to enable them to perform their Duty; do
nevertheless carry themselves so undutifully, and unchristianly, as if they had
never heard of the Gospel of Christ, yea, as if they had been born without any
impressions of Natural Religion on their Minds, whereby all Nations are so far
instructed and enlightened, as to acknowledge, that to honor, obey, love,
serve, and assist our Parents, is a Duty of unquestionable and indispensible
Obligation.

The Conclusion, showing how Children ought to improve what has been said.
From what has been said, Children may see how great reason they have to
perform all those offices of Love, Honor and Subjection to their Parents, that
God requires of them. It remains that they seriously and impartially consider,
what their practice has been, and whether they have done those things which God
requires them to do toward their Father and Mother.

That you may do this to good purpose, it is fit that you employ some time in
looking back on your Lives, in considering how you have honored, loved, and
obeyed your Parents; that you may see, whether you have carried your selves
toward them, in words and deeds, as became good Children, who have a sense of
Religion; or whether you have not dishonored, neglected, and disobeyed them.

If upon Examination of your selves, you find that you have done your Duty;
that you have sincerely endeavored to obey them in all things; that you have
loved them heartily, and paid them that Respect which you knew was due unto
them: Bless God, who has given you to will and to do according to his good
pleasure. But because there are defects and imperfections, which cleave to our
exactest performances, therefore it is needful that you beg of God to forgive
you, wherein soever you have been faulty, or defective in those Duties you owed
them. Consider what these defects and imperfections are, and resolve to amend
them, and go on in doing every part of your Duty to them with greater
exactness, and with all that perfection that is possible.

But if upon inquiry into your hearts and lives, you find that you have been
very faulty and defective in the Duties you owe to your Parents; that you have
neglected to do what you ought to have done; that instead of honoring them,
you have dishonored them, you have slighted and despised them, you have mo^k^d
and scorned them, you have reviled and reproached them; if instead of obeying
them, you find that you have been stubborn and disobedient to them, you have
refused to follow their Counsels and Admonitions, you have done your own Will,
and followed your own vain humor and fancy, in contempt of their Will; if
instead of submitting to their corrections and chastenings, you have refused
submission to them, and perhaps have rebelled against them; if instead of
loving them, you have hated them, and wished, and desired their death; if
instead of relieving them in their wants, and supplying them with what was
necessary for them, you have wasted their substance by your riotous and
extravagant Living, you have put off all bowels of compassion and tenderness
toward them; it, I say, you find that you have thus carried your selves
toward them, in a way so contrary to your Duty, how ought you to lament and
mourn for your wickedness and folly? How ought you to accuse your selves for
your great iniquity, and to aggravate your crimes by all just and fit
considerations? You may in this manner expostulate the case with your selves:
What a sad and unworthy Wretch am I, who have thus dishonored, hated, and
disobeyed my dear Parents, who are under God the Authors of my Being in the
World, to whom I owe that I am? Who have proved so undutiful to them who took
care of me, when I could not take care of my self? who fed and clothed me, who
were at so great pains and charge for me, who have employed so much of their
time and strength to provide for me all necessary things? and yet that I should
prove so wicked as to despise them, to disobey them, and hate them; not to
submit my self unto them, what base and wicked ingratitude is it? That I, who
should have been a Blessing to them, should prove a Curse; That I who should
have been a Comfort to them, should be the cause of their grief and sorrow?
That I who should have been a help unto them, should be so great a hinderance?
That I who should have been the stay and support of their Old age, should prove
their ruin, and the cause of the spending of their days in anguish and
trouble? What a prodigious impiety is this? What a wretched and abominable
Creature am I, who have been guilty of such horrid impiety? Who have had so
little regard to those who are to me in God's stead here in the World? What
punishment do I not deserve? What a wonder is it that God has spared me and
pitied me, and has not cut me off in the midst of my disobedience, neglect,
and contempt of my Parents! That he has not made me an Example to all others,
and a standing Monument of his just displeasure! That he has not bound me hand
and foot, and cast me into utter darkness, and given me my portion with
Hypocrites and Sinners; but has lengthened out my years, and given me time and
place to repent!

Having thus in your own minds expostulated the matter with your selves, you
may in the next place adore and bless the Divine Goodness, the infinite Mercy,
and astonishing Kindness of God toward you, in having spared and pitied you;
in not dealing with you after your sins, nor rewarding you after your
iniquities; but that he has been pleased to wait to be gracious to you. Humbly
confess your faults and offenses unto him; with great shame and confusion of
face, and with true grief and sorrow of heart acknowledge your iniquities; make
particular confession, so far as you remember, of your stubbornness and
disobedience to your Parents, of your contempt and neglect of them, of your
hating them, and wishing Evil to them, of your speaking irreverently and
wickedly to them, or of them, of your not submitting to their Corrections, of
your not heeding their Admonitions and Counsels, nor regarding their just
Reproofs, etc. Beg of God, for Christ's sake, to have mercy on you, and to blot
out your Sins, and to make you what you ought to be.

After this, it is fit to form sincere and hearty Resolutions of doing your
Duty, in all respects, to your Parents for the time to come; of loving,
honoring, obeying, and serving them, as you ought to do. Resolve to amend
whatever has been amiss and defective either in your thoughts words or deeds,
with relation to them. Beg of God to strengthen you in your Resolutions; to
fortify you against all Temptations; to inspire you with his Fear and Love; to
guide you by his good Spirit; and that he would never leave you, nor forsake
you.

If the Example and Society of other wicked Children has been an occasion of
making you so bad, and of hardening you in your Contempt, Stubbornness and
Disobedience; resolve to break off your Familiarities with them; let them and
all others know, and see, that you are sorry for your Disobedience to your
Parents; for your having dishonored, slighted, and neglected them; and that
you are resolved to do so no more; but will, by the help of God, approve your
selves Dutiful, Kind, and Obedient Children.

Not only must you in this manner make your Humble and Penitent Confession to
Almighty God your Heavenly Father, whom you have provoked, as by your other
Sins, so particularly by your disobedience to your Parents, and by your
dishonouring of them; but you must likewise confess unto your Parents the
Crimes whereof you have been guilty against them; you must say as the Prodigal
did, I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son. Luke 15.18, 19. Let your Parents see that you are heartily sorry for your
Offenses against them by Word or Deed; beg of them to forgive you, and desire
them to pray to God that he would forgive you.

You are to be careful after this, to fulfill your Purposes and Resolutions, and
to perform all those Duties of Love, Honor, and Obedience to your Parents,
wherein you were formerly so defective. For this end it is fit, daily and
earnestly to beg of God, that he would direct and assist you to do what is
well-pleasing in his sight. It is necessary for you to be very jealous of your
deceitful and desperately wicked Hearts; to watch over them carefully, lest
they turn aside toward your former crooked Ways; lest you return with the Dog
to the Vomit. Watch against all those Temptations, whereby you are most in
danger of being seduced, and entangled again in your former perverse Practices
and Customs.

As you have been formerly very negligent and defective in Honoring and
Obeying your Parents, endeavor for the future so much the more, to perform all
those Duties which you owe unto them, with great care and exactness.

As you have been great Examples of Disobedience, strive to be so much the
greater Patterns of Obedience. Endeavor to do all that you can; that they who
have been, by your Counsels, or Examples, corrupted and made stubborn, and
disobedient, may be reformed and rescued from their sins and wickedness; that
as you have been Instruments to promote Satan's Kingdom, so you may be zealous
for the glory of God, for promoting Piety and true Virtue in the World; whereof
this is no inconsiderable part; that Children honor their Father and Mother,
and do all those Duties with cheerfulness unto them, which God requires.

This is the way to obtain the divine pardon, to turn away his Wrath, and to
keep off those heavy Judgments which are threatened against stubborn Children,
and such who mock and scorn their Parents: Or if God see it fit to punish you
here, he will make your Corrections and Punishments, and all other things, work
together for your good; and after he has tried you, he will bestow upon you
rewards of everlasting Life and Glory.

As for those who are so perverse as to despise all Counsel and Advice, who
refuse to hearken to any Instructions, who are resolved to go on in their
stubbornness and disobedience to their Parents, in slighting and vilifying
them; let them remember what the Wise Man says, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young
Man, in thy Youth, and let thine heart cheer thee, in the days of thy youth,
and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: But know
thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment.

A DISCOURSE About the RIGHT WAY Of Improving our TIME.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for S. Lowndes over against Exeter Exchange in the Strand,
1690.

Ephesians. V. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.


OF all the outward Blessings, The Introduction.
which God bestows upon us, there is none so valuable and precious as our Time.
God bestows upon us his other Blessings in great variety and plenty; but in
this he seems to be more sparing, for it is given us not in large proportions,
but as it were drop by drop, one minute after another; never two minutes
together: whenever he gives us one, he takes away another. And yet how strange
is it to think, that a great many spend their time in Vanity and Folly? Time is
to many like a dead Commodity; they cannot tell what to do with it. They are
ready to throw it away for nothing, or for that which is little better: instead
of improving and using it in virtuous and profitable actions and designs, they
waste it in trifling and vanity, which is an Argument of the greatest Folly; as
on the other hand, the right husbanding of Time is a great instance of true
Wisdom.

The Apostle having exhorted the Ephesians to walk circumspectly, The Text
explained.
not as fools, but as wise, he immediately subjoins [Redeeming the time.]
Intimating thereby, that there is no better way for us to show our selves wise,
than by employing our time to good purpose, Redeeming and buying it; or, as
some read the words, Buying the opportunity, or a fit occasion and season for
doing good. It is a Metaphor taken from Merchants, who when they have a great
likelihood and probability of making considerable gain and advantage in buying
and selling, part with their pleasures, or lesser cares and concerns, that they
may make a good bargain, and purchase that which they greatly desire. So the
Christian, the man that is good and wise, ought to deny himself in his
pleasures and outward delights, or even in his ordinary affairs and concerns,
when he has any great prospect of doing somewhat considerable for the glory of
God, the good of his Neighbor, and the benefit of his own Soul.

The Reason which the Apostle uses, is [Because the days are evil] that is,
either bad and sinful, full of wickedness and folly; so that it is very hard
and difficult then to be good, when sin, like a violent and impetuous torrent,
carries all down before it. This ought to make you redeem all occasions of
doing good, that you may fortify others in Virtue and Piety, that you may
rescue those that are carried down the stream by bad Example, and may build up
your selves in Holiness, and that you may be made strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his Might. Or [Because the days are evil] may relate to the danger
you are in through the fury and malice of your enemies, who are ready to do you
all the mischief that is in their power; the sense whereof should make you
improve all occasions of doing good, not knowing how soon you may be deprived
of your present happy opportunities and seasons for working.

How Time is to be redeemed.
The Design of this Discourse is to show you; First, How you are to redeem your
Time: And, Secondly, To propose some Considerations to excite you to do so.

1. Time to be redeemed from sleep.
First, You are to redeem your Time from excessive and immoderate sleep. It is
necessary for all men to refresh their bodies with sleep and rest; and the
state of some men's bodies requires a great deal more than others; so that no
exact Rules can be given about the proportion of sleep that is proper for every
one: Only in general, it is fit that all persons redeem as much time from
sleeping, as the health of their bodies can permit; that so they may employ
part of that time to some good and useful purpose, which they were wont to
waste in the shadow of death, as it were; whereof sleep is the picture and
representation.

In the ancient Church we find many were wont to rise up in the night to pray,
that so they might day and night keep alive in their Souls Divine impressions;
that they might preserve a relish and taste of heavenly and spiritual things;
that excellent Objects might not be removed too far out of their sight. This is
a practice, which, perhaps, very few in these cold Countries are able safely to
imitate; especially at some times of the year. The weakness and tenderness of
some bodies makes it to them impracticable; because it would render them unfit
at other times, not only for religious performances, but for the other
necessary actions of life. Some likewise have so little time allowed them for
their repose in the night, that they cannot do this, in their present
circumstances: As for such who are capable, without any sort of inconvenience,
to follow this ancient Practice, let them do it: They want not sufficient
Encouragement thereto, if they consider that thereby they have the opportunity
of flying, as it were, from these regions of darkness and misery, of sin and
folly, unto those glorious regions of light and happiness, of purity and
perfection; there to converse with God their chiefest Joy; to behold his Face,
the light of his countenance; to taste and see how good he is; to walk with
him; to be satisfied with his Salvation; to drink of those Rivers of unmixed
pleasure, which are in his Presence, the streams whereof make glad the City of
God.

As for those, who are not able to deny themselves of their repose in the night
season; all that I shall say to them, is this; When at some times it pleases
God to take away their sleep, and to keep them awake, let them redeem a few
moments from vain thoughts, by lifting up their Souls to God, darting up some
pious thoughts and fervent desires Heaven-wards; reflecting on the Goodness and
Love of God; admiring his glorious Perfections; calling to mind, and
considering his gracious Providence; longing for, and breathing after that
happy state when they shall be placed above all the infirmities and frailties
of the flesh, and outward necessities, above Sin and Satan, and all their
Enemies: And after this, they may again compose themselves to sleep. This is a
way to keep the Soul awake, to entertain it in a way worthy of it, to accustom
it to the contemplation of excellent, and divine Objects, to keep Heaven always
near its view; and not to suffer the things of another life, to be removed too
far out of sight. We see in what temper of mind the Spouse was, Cant. 5.2. I
sleep, but my heart waketh. Even amidst her repose and sleep, her thoughts were
running after her desirable and beloved Object, which possessed her heart, and
filled her thoughts when she was awake. And so it is with pious Souls
sometimes, when their thoughts have been much employed and busied about
spiritual and heavenly things in the day time, they dream of them in the Night
season. Though they sleep, yet their Heart waketh.

This watchful temper is an Excellent means to enrich the Soul; whereas
slothfulness, and giving up ones self to drowsiness and sleep, causes
spiritual beggary. An idle Soul (says Solomon, Prove. 19.15.) shall suffer
hunger. And Prove. 20.13. Love not sleep, lest thou come to Poverty: Open thine
Eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with Bread. Then was it that Samson lost his
Hair, wherein was his strength, when he was asleep. Judge. 16.19.

As it is a fault at any time to waste our precious hours in this sluggish and
lazy manner, so especially when God affords very favorable opportunities of
doing some great good to our selves or others. He that sleeps in Harvest
(says the Wise Man,) is a Son that causes shame; Prove. 10.5. that is, he
makes his Father and Friends ashamed of him, and brings shame and disgrace on
himself. Now is the day of Grace, now is the acceptable time, now is the season
of gathering the Fruits of Righteousness, and of making sure an Harvest of
everlasting Glory. And therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us
watch and be sober. 1 These. 5, 6.

2. Time to be be redeemed from dressing the Body.
Secondly, Redeem time from dressing and adorning the Body: Let not more time
be spent that way than is meet and fit.

Let your first care every day be to dress and adorn the better part, to put on
the true Ornaments, to cloth your selves with Humility, Meekness, Patience,
Charity, and with all other Virtues, which are of great price in the sight of
God. Put off the Works of darkness, and put on the Armor of Light. Raise your
Souls toward Heaven, by some short and fervent Ejaculations. Read the word of
God with great attention and humility, with an earnest desire to know his will,
and with a sincere purpose to do it. Endeavor to feed and nourish your Souls
by serious Meditation. Call on God, by humble and earnest prayer, to pardon
you, to bless you, to direct and prosper you in all your ways, and to save and
preserve you from all Evils Ghostly and Bodily. Form good purposes and strong
resolutions to do what is good and right. Set the Lord always before you. Seek
his Glory in all things, whether you eat or drink, or whatever else you do.

After having done those things which are needful for the Soul, you may next do
what is fit and decent as to your Attire and Clothing, according to your
Circumstances in the World. Beware lest you pride your selves in your Apparel:
Do not therein gratify your Vanity, to go beyond others of your Rank and
Quality, to make your selves be taken notice of more than others. Too great
care about adorning the outward Man, gives just cause to suspect that the chief
business is neglected.

Consider what it is that you deck and adorn with so much care and cost; even a
poor, vile, sinful Body, that is full of rottenness and corruption; consider
that within a little while it will become a very ugly, deformed, and stinking
Carcass, and be food to the Worms.

If they who bestow so much time every day in painting and patching, and such
like things, would but bestow a few Minutes in thinking of the Grave, and what
the Body will become within a very little time, so vile and loathsome, that even
they who do love it most dearly, will then avoid it, and be glad to have it
removed out of their sight; and that their face, which now they themselves
admire so much, and which they are ready to think every body else admires
likewise, shall within a short time be eaten thorough by vile Worms, and wasted
and made ugly with Rottenness and Corruption, and that all its Beauty shall be
marred: I say, if vain persons would sometimes think of these things, and
behold themselves now and then in this Glass, how would it humble them, and
make them less addicted to such vain Employment, and be more busied in things
of greatest consequence! This would turn their thoughts another way, and make
them bestow a little more pains to wash away the Impurities of their Souls.
Consider what is written against all those who are guilty of this vanity and
extravagance in Apparel and Ornaments. Isa. 3.16. and 17 Moreover the Lord
says, because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
Necks and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling
with their feet; Therefore the Lord will smite with a Scab, the Crown of the
Head of the Daughters of Sion, etc. And verse 24. It shall come to pass, that
instead of sweet smell, there shall be stink; and instead of a Girdle, a Rent;
and instead of well set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding
of Sackcloth, and Burning instead of Beauty.

Thirdly, 3. Time to be redeemed from eating and drinking.
Redeem time from eating and drinking, from pampering the Body: Spend no more
of your time that way than what is fit. Make not your Belly your God; eat and
drink that you may live, that you may be able to perform the necessary actions
of life; but do not live so as if you had nothing to do, but to eat and drink,
and to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Live soberly
at all times, and use abstinence and fasting sometimes. Take not too great
delight in gratifying your Palate and Appetite. God allows you the free and
liberal use of his good Creatures for your health and refreshment; but not to
abuse them to gluttony and drunkenness, or any other sort of excess and
extravagance. It is fit to use all those perishing things with great
moderation; because, First, they are apt to be a great Snare, and to lead Men
to a great deal of Sin and Folly. The Apostle reckons up first Gluttony and
Drunkenness, and then Chambering and Wantoness, etc. Romans 13.13. Intemperance
being as the Mother of the rest. It is often the occasion and cause of them.
The sin of Sodom was occasioned by their fullness of Bread, and abundance of
Idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49.

Secondly, This renders the Soul unactive, and unfit (...) those exercises,
which chiefly belong to it to perform. The Spirits are thereby made dull and
sleepy, and incapable to be attentive and serious. Watch and be sober must go
together. If we are not sober and temperate, we are not fit to watch. And
therefore our Savior says, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any
time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that
day come upon you unawares. So long as the Soul lodges in the Body, it depends
much upon the state and temper of it, so that the Body, when it is clogged and
oppressed with meat, or drowned with drink, is a very unfit Tool for the Soul
to manage; yea thereby the Soul is, as it were, chained up, and cannot freely
move and act. So we see that men at such times, when they are guilty of excess
and intemperance, are rash and imprudent in their Counsels and Resolutions,
whereof they are ashamed afterward when they grow sober.

Thirdly, The uncertainty of these delights of Sense should dispose us
sometimes to deny our selves, and not to enslave our selves unto them, and come
under the tyranny of a curious and dainty Palate. A change in our outward
estate will be the less surprising to us, when in time of plenty we now and
then restrain and deny our selves in those pleasures, which we have the
opportunity to pursue in our eating and drinking.

4. Time to be redeemed from Gaming.
Fourthly, Redeem time from Gaming and Recreations. Sometimes they are very
needful to the Body, for your health, and to render you more fit for action and
business. But you must take care that your Divertisements and Recreations be
first innocent and lawful, and not contrary to the Rules and Principles of
Christianity; that they be not hurtful to your selves or others, nor scandalous
and offensive. Let them not be such as those of wicked men, of whom Solomon
speaks, Prove. 10.23. to whom it is a sport to do mischief, and who make a mock
of sin; whose delight and divertisement is, in saying things that are wicked
and profane, to the hurt and grief of one or other. The Philistines called for
Samson, (when he was their Prisoner) to make them sport. Judge. 16.25. The
Babylonians required a Song and mirth of the poor captive Jews, saying, Sing us
one of the Songs of Sion. Psalm. 137.3. They made it a sport to insult and to
triumph over others in their distress; they made themselves merry with the
miseries of others.

Let your Divertisements and Recreations be used with moderation: give not your
selves liberty to go beyond due bounds, neither as to time, nor yet as to the
proportion of money you play for. There is unspeakable hurt and prejudice that
comes from suffering your selves to be too far carried away by the fancy and
humor of gaming and following your Sports and Pastimes. This does insensibly
expose you to the danger of poverty, as Solomon tells us. He that loves
pleasure shall be a poor man, Prove. 21.17. This renders you unfit for all
sacred and serious performances, the mind being thereby filled with the images
and reflections of what you said and heard, of what you and others did at your
Games: Your hopes and your fears, your joys and your uneasiness, your victories
and losses, your surprises and disappointments, your little debates and
contentions, your indignation and resentments, and a great many other things,
too common at gaming, so distract and fill your mind for a great while
afterward, that when you would be serious, and employ your selves to better
purpose, you cannot bring your minds to that fixedness and stayedness that is
necessary; you remain, as it were, drunk with your Pastimes and Divertisements,
your thoughts reel to and fro, and cannot settle: You have a great desire of
returning again to your Recreations, that you may gratify your fancy, and may
gain more profit, or praise and applause. That you may not fall under those
inconveniences, your best way is to keep out of such Company as makes Gaming
their Business. And if at any time it be fit for you to indulge your selves a
little in gaming, it will not be amiss that you set bounds to your selves; both
as to your time, how long to play; and as to the quantity of money you intend
to play for; that you may not either in one or the other respect, exceed those
limits which Christian prudence requires. It is very advisable either not at
all to play for money (which oft-times occasions great strivings and
quarrellings, or great uneasiness of thought) or to play for so very little as
may be next to nothing, which may not afterward occasion any uneasy
reflections and dissatisfaction of mind. And if at any time you be disposed,
and find it expedient to play for a little more than ordinary (still observing
the Rules of discretion and Christian prudence) it would not be unfit to make
it a condition in your Game, that the Winner apply what he gains to some
charitable use, which you may either then expressly determine, or you may
resolve to give the money which shall be gained, to some discreet and
charitable person, who will be sure to bestow it to good purpose. As this would
afford a great pleasure and joy to those who reap some fruit and benefit by
your Recreation and Pastime; so it would afford your selves a greater delight
and satisfaction, than otherwise you could expect by your Divertisements. And
besides, this would prevent covetous desires, and other evil passions and
dispositions, which usually attend those who game only, or chiefly, for profit
and advantage.

As for those who are apt in gaming to be transported into violent passion, and
to break out into indecent heats, it is necessary for such persons to give over
all such Divertisements as use to cause this excessive fermentation of their
Spirits, and which put them upon the fret. Or if at any time they think good to
play at some Game, they ought to do it in the presence of those, who by their
Authority are able to restrain them from every thing that is indecent and
extravagant, that by degrees they may get the victory over themselves, and may
habituate themselves to mildness and gentleness of Spirit, and may be preserved
from all the sad consequences of unruly passions.

5. Time to be redeemed from Visiting.
Fifthly, Redeem time from Visiting. Too many throw away their time in making
vain and unnecessary Visits, employing themselves on these occasions in vain
and impertinent chat, and foolish talking and jesting, which are not
convenient; in making their Observations, and passing their Censures upon the
Words and Actions, the Modes and Customs of others; in slandering and
backbiting; in sowing vain and false Reports; in causing Jealousies and
Contentions, and doing other such like bad Offices.

Visiting is either good or bad, according as it is managed. In some cases it
is very fit and necessary to visit your Friends and Neighbors, to keep up
thereby a friendly and neighbourly Correspondence, to offer your help and
service to them when there is need of it, to sympathize with them when they are
in any sort of trouble or distress, and to assist them to bear their burdens,
whether of body or mind, or outward estate.

Sometimes the Laws of Civility and Discretion require that you visit those who
have witnessed great Civility and Respect toward you. Sometimes the good
Offices and generous Favors of some persons to you, require that you should
express your grateful sense of their kindness and generosity, by all possible
instances of affection and esteem, and particularly by visiting of them now and
then, which is a very easy and a small return for those obligations they have
laid upon you.

You must beware of visiting or frequenting the company of those who are very
lewd and wicked, by whose conversation you are in great danger of being
corrupted, whose example is ready to infect you. When you see a House marked
for the Plague, you are careful not to go into it, you keep your selves at a
good distance from it, that you may not run the hazard of infection. The Love
which you have for life makes you do all you can to preserve it. Ought you not
then to be as careful to keep out of the company of profane persons, whose
throat is an open sepulcher, whose mouths are full of blasphemy and cursing,
whose breath is very infectious, whose words and actions are full of most
deadly poison, whereby your Souls are in danger of being corrupted and
destroyed for ever? Enter not into the path of the wicked, says Solomon, and
go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away, Prove. 4.14, 15. And Chap. 5.8. He advises young men to remove their way
far from the strange woman, and not to come nigh the door of her house.

It is true, sometimes your necessary affairs may oblige you to be in the
company of very wicked persons. This must needs happen, especially if men have
a great deal of business in the World. But in this case, when you are under
this necessity of being in such company, beware lest by word or deed you
approve or countenance any thing that is bad and wicked in them; and if you
cannot do them good, beware lest they do you hurt; get away from them speedily,
like a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler.

Sometimes likewise your Relation wherein you stand to some persons, or your
Calling and Circumstances wherein God has placed you, may make it your Duty to
be often with those who are very bad persons; but then you ought to be, First,
possessed with a great abhorrence of what is evil in them, and in no manner to
approve their sin and folly. Have no Communion with their unfruitful works of
darkness. Secondly, You ought to make use of all favorable opportunities to
endeavor to make them better, and to rescue them from their evil ways and
doings. If you observe these things, you are not partakers with them in their
sins, and therefore God will not lay them to your charge.

If at any time atheistical and profane persons follow after you, and thrust
themselves into your Company, beware of them, and shake off their Society,
unless you converse with them with a design to reform them, and to bring them
off from their evil practices, and have ground to hope that you may do them
good. But when after having tried twice or thrice to make them better, you find
you only cast Pearls before Swine, and that there is more danger of getting
hurt by them, than of doing them good, it is fit that you deal roundly and
plainly with them, and that you let them know, that so long as they are no
better, you desire to be excused, if you do not keep company with them. Though
plainness is very necessary in this case, yet it is fit that it be tempered
with all the discretion and sweetness that is possible, otherwise it may do more
hurt than good. Endeavor to make such persons sensible that you are only an
Enemy to their Vices, and that as for their persons you will be always ready to
do them all good offices.

Secondly, As you ought carefully to avoid the company of those who are
profane and atheistical persons, so it is your interest, as well as Duty, to
visit those who are good and religious. They who feared the Lord (says
Malachi, chapter 3.16.) spoke often one to another. When you have the opportunity
of enjoying the company of such persons, make the best use of it that you can.
Consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works, Heb. 10.24.
Exhort one another daily, Heb. 3.13. Admonish, comfort, and, in a friendly and
loving manner, reprove one another, as there is need. Make use of one another
Counsel and Advice in any thing that is doubtful and difficult. By all discreet
and prudent ways endeavor to learn some good and useful thing from good and
wise persons, with whom you have occasion to converse. Counsel in the heart of
a man, says Solomon, is as deep waters; but a man of understanding draws it
out, Prove. 20.5. Counsel, that is, a skill and dexterity to give good Advice
and Counsel, and to talk of things which tend to make men wiser and better.
This in the heart of a wise man is like deep waters, that is, it makes no great
noise (the wisest men being also the modestest) and is not come at without some
pains, and some prudent Arts and Methods: But a man of understanding draws it
out, that is, by discreet and seasonable questions and other fit ways, he gives
his wise Friend an opportunity to discourse, to communicate his thoughts, and
to discover his wisdom and experience.

Beware lest in good Company your Discourse vanish into air and smoke; lest it
be too trifling, and about things vain and impertinent. Let your words be
seasoned with salt, ministering grace to the hearers, Col. 4.6. Endeavor to
receive benefit from the Society of those who are good and wise, and to do them
good, so far as you can, by your Society.

It is true, it is not only lawful, but sometimes very convenient and
necessary, when virtuous and excellent persons meet together, that they
recreate and divert themselves a little by cheerfulness and innocent mirth,
that thereby their minds may be made more fit for serious and sacred things.
Such is the state and condition of man, while in the body, that his Soul cannot
be always employed about those things which are of a Divine and Spiritual
Nature: This vigor and strength of Soul is not, perhaps, attained to by any on
this side the Grave. However, our care must be, that the bent and inclination
of our hearts be toward those things that are good and useful. This must be our
business, our way and course, to be good, and to do good: And as for our
Recreations and Divertisements, they must only be subservient to the other.

Sixthly, 6. Time to be redeemed from worldly Business.
Redeem time from your ordinary cares and worldly business, that you may do
some great good for the glory of God, and benefit of Mankind. In the ordinary
course of your lives you must mind the business of your Calling, according to
your settled and usual Method: but then you are still to remember, to let the
concerns of your Soul take place and be preferred. First seek the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33. At some times it is fit to deny your
selves in the affairs and concerns of this life, to leave off your ordinary
work and labor for some time, when your great Lord and Master affords you some
extraordinary opportunity for doing good to your Christian Brother, or to your
own Souls: Then you must sell things of lesser value, that you may buy time for
doing that which will make you rich in the true Riches; that you may edify
your Brother, and build up your selves in true Virtue.

The great matter is to know when you are to do so. You must not every time
when a sudden thought arises in your mind, moving you to leave your Plough, or
your Trade and Calling, and to give up your selves to some Acts of Religion and
Devotion; you must not, I say, presently set on this the stamp or seal of a
Divine Inspiration, and a Call from Heaven. This, if not taken heed to, may
lead you into great mistakes and errors, and very dangerous delusions.
Sometimes Melancholy, or other bodily Distempers, may give occasion to a great
many warm fancies and imaginations: Therefore you are not to follow those
private motions and inclinations; if you are not some other way determined
thereto, by some concurring evidence of the hand of God. For Example, if, when
you are moved in your own mind to do some very good and pious work, there
happen about the same time an outward Call to do the same thing, you may
conclude there is somewhat extraordinary in this to determine you. By an
outward Call, I do not mean any extraordinary Voice from Heaven: that is not to
be expected; but a Call by some good, wise, and discreet person, who
unexpectedly desires and invites you to do that, which before his speaking of
it to you, you found your own heart moved and inclined you to. In which case
you have a very mighty encouragement, both from the goodness and usefulness of
the thing it self, and from the Call and invitation which you have had from
another, of whose wisdom and piety you are sufficiently assured. Though there be
no more but this Call from Man, it is of great weight to move you, and to
determine you in this manner to redeem your time from your ordinary labor,
when there is some extraordinary occasion of doing somewhat for the honor of
God, or the good of men. Thus if at any time you are invited to comfort one
that is in any great trouble of body or mind, or in any other great distress
and affliction; if there be any thing in your power to do for the comfort and
encouragement of such a person, you ought to show your readiness to do your
utmost for his help and support. You know not but the Lord may make use of you
(however weak and unfit you may think your selves) to serve the designs of his
Mercy and Love. Likewise, if you are called to reconcile those that are at
variance; to see if you can awaken a person from his sin and folly, especially
when the Lord's hand is upon him; to give your Counsel and Advice in some
extraordinary case, where it is judged needful for you so to do: In these and
the like cases you ought cheerfully to sacrifice your private gain and
advantage, and to let your lesser cares give place to those of a more public
and considerable nature. These things you are only to do, so far as the
necessity of your own occasions will permit. They who are settled in a Calling,
and have a Family, are under a very strict obligation to take care of their
Family, and to mind their Calling and Employment; they must not neglect those
necessary Duties which God has given them to do in their several stations. The
Scripture accounts them worse than Infidels, who provide not for their House,
and those of their own Family. But if the Circumstances of your affairs will
permit you to comply with the Opportunities of performing some eminent acts of
Piety and Zeal, you ought not to neglect them: God will not fail plentifully to
reward your Love to him, and your Zeal for his Glory.

Seventhly, 7. Times to be redeemed from Idleness.
Redeem your time from idleness, and an useless way of living in the World. A
great many do not waste much time in sleep, in dressing and adorning of their
bodies, in eating and in drinking, in gaming or in visiting, and yet they waste
their time: But how? in doing nothing, in entertaining themselves with the vain
imaginations of their foolish minds, feeding on the Wind, pursuing dreams, and
catching at shadows, building Castles in the Air, and sporting themselves with
their own vain conceits and foolish fancies. Their Eyes are, as Solomon tells
us, in the ends of the Earth, Prove. 17.24. They mind those things most which
concern them least. They busy themselves about what others say and do, but do
nothing themselves to any good purpose. Some men are full of vain and useless
contrivances, wherewith they do indeed busy themselves: But to what end? When
all their designs and vain contrivances are accomplished, they are but as so
many Spiders Webs, only fit to catch flies. This is to be busy in Trifles, to
be employed in doing as good as nothing. Thus there be some who pursue a
studious life night and day, with a wonderful diligence; but their studies
being only in impertinent books, and about designs of no use, or perhaps of
very bad use, they gain nothing thereby; yea so far are they from reaping any
benefit by their great pains and labor, that they are unspeakable losers; they
lose their time, and sometimes they lose their Wealth, and their Health, if not
their Reason and Understanding.

Consider, first, how unworthy this sort of life is of men and of Christians?
God has made you to be useful, to glorify him, to do good in the World, to
become daily more and more holy and religious, to grow in grace, and to perfect
holiness in his fear; and not to be like an useless log, or an insignificant
Cipher, not to be barren and unfruitful in his Vineyard. Strive therefore to
live up to the end and design of your being in the World, to improve your
selves in Piety and Virtue, to do somewhat that may be of real advantage to the
Souls and Bodies of others.

Secondly, consider how dangerous a thing it is to live an idle, vain, and
unuseful life. God has promised Men his protection, only when they are in the
way of their Calling, when they employ themselves in that state of life,
wherein by his Providence he has settled them in the World. So the Psalmist
instructs us, Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways; that is, in all honest and lawful undertakings, and in
all actions that belong to your Calling. So that if you are idle, and give up
your selves to a lazy and useless manner of living in the World, doing nothing
that is profitable to your selves or others, you put your selves out of God's
protection, and thereby you give the Devil advantage over you, and you lay your
selves open to all his Temptations.

Thirdly, Consider that the end of this idle and useless life is very sad. Cast
the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, Math. 25.30. Not only shall wicked Servants be cast into
utter darkness, but also unprofitable Servants, who hide their Talents in a
Napkin; that is, who do not employ to any good purpose those Gifts which God
bestows upon them, who stand idle all the day long in the Vineyard.

Eighthly, Redeem time in your sacred and religious Duties, 8. Time to be
redeemed in sacred performances, by doing them in the best manner.
and Performances, by endeavoring to do them in the best and perfectest manner
you can. When you read, and pray, and meditate, and examine your selves, and
hear the word of God preached, and sing his praises, and partake of the holy
Sacrament, and perform other acts of Religion and Piety, in a lifeless, dull,
unconcerned and formal manner, you lose your time; and therefore when by due
reflection upon your ways, you find that you do so, endeavor afterward to
redeem it, by greater watchfulness and seriousness; otherwise you may go on a
great while in a course of Devotion to very little purpose, if you do not stir
up your selves to do the best that is in your power to do by God's help.

Thus when you find that you have read the Word of God in a careless and
negligent manner, without considering whose Word it is, and for what end it is
written, and without those dispositions of mind that are necessary; you must
afterward endeavor to redeem the time, by being more careful to read that
sacred Book with greater reverence and seriousness, and with greater pleasure
and delight. Pray to God more heartily for his direction and assistance.
Meditate more attentively on what you read, and lay it up in your hearts, that
it may be always in a readiness for your use, as the rule of your lives.

If you find that you have lost your time in prayer, by not making your
Addresses to God with a deep humility and reverence, with unfeigned Faith, and
fervent Love, and with great earnestness, sincerity, and importunity; endeavor
afterward to pray with all possible humility and reverence, with greater Faith
and Confidence, and with a mighty earnestness and fervency of Spirit: Study to
have your Souls possessed with a deeper sense of your wants and necessities,
that you may beg supplies of all needful things from him who can help you to
the utmost. Be more sensible of the greatness of your sins, and of the many
heinous aggravations that attend them, that you may make humble confession of
them with true sorrow and contrition. Consider the danger to which your
Hypocrisy, or formality and lukewarmness in religious Duties do expose you,
that you may with great integrity and uprightness of Soul, make your Addresses
to the searcher of Hearts, and tryer of the Reins, who takes pleasure in the
hearty and cheerful services of those who draw near unto him. Be possessed with
more lively impressions of the Divine Power and Greatness, of the Justice,
Holiness, Goodness, Mercy and Faithfulness of God, that the sense thereof may
make you adore him, and call upon him in such a manner as is suitable to so
glorious a Majesty.

If you find that the time you have set apart for self Examination has been
lost, by a negligent performance of this Duty, by your not being in good
earnest, when you pretended to call your selves to an account: Endeavor to
redeem the time, by searching your hearts, and enquiring into your ways with
greater care and exactness. Examine and try your selves, as in the sight of
God, as Men that are in good earnest to save their Souls from everlasting
condemnation. Deal impartially with your selves; do not extenuate your own
Faults, but aggravate them by all just and fit considerations: Endeavor to be
deeply touched with hearty Contrition and real Grief and Sorrow for them; let
your repentance in all regards be more sincere, and unfeigned, and your
purposes and resolutious more strong and steady. If you find that you have
reflected on God's Mercies and Favors to you, without that grateful sense
which you ought to have had thereof, and without making suitable returns, so
far as you were able by his Grace, for his great and undeserved goodness;
endeavor afterward to employ your thoughts on so delightful a subject, as is
the Divine Love and Goodness, with greater pleasure, and with a more lively
sense thereof than you have been wont. Let the consideration of the love and
goodness of God, powerfully move you, and prevail with you to do somewhat which
may testify the reality of your gratitude, somewhat that may be of real
benefit to the Souls or Bodies of others.

If you find that you have been very formal and careless in performing what
relates to the public Worship, endeavor to redeem the time, by being more
sincere and devout. For Example, if you have heard the Word of God read and
preached, in a trifling and unconcerned manner, without those dispositions of
mind which were requisite in a Christian Hearer, and in an humble Disciple of
Jesus Christ; if you have attended on such occasions, more out of compliance
with Custom, and the Example of others, than out of Conscience, and from
Principles of true Religion and Devotion; Consider that this is to lose time,
and, under an appearance of Religion, to remain without any thing of it in
reality. You must therefore afterward endeavor to hear the Word of God in
another manner, to wit, as the Law and Rule of your Lives, as that which is
given you of God to make you wise and good, and to fit you for everlasting
Happiness and Glory; you must, as new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of
the Word, that your Souls may grow thereby. You must hear it with great
reverence and attention, and with humble and tractable minds; you must study to
have it ingrafted in your hearts, that it may abide there as a Scion in a
stock, and may grow and bear fruit unto everlasting life. You must reflect on
what you hear; when you leave the Church, you must not lay aside all further
thinking on what has been read or preached to you; you are to talk a little
with your own hearts about those things, and to call to mind any thing you
heard, which tends to make you wiser and better: Endeavor to have it deeply
imprinted on your Souls, that it may prove unto you the Power of God unto
Salvation, the savor of life unto life.

If you find that you have been too often guilty of singing the Praises of God
with your mouths only, without any melody in your hearts, without any real
sense of the greatness and power, of the kindness and love, of the patience and
long-suffering, of the truth and faithfulness of him whom you praise and
celebrate: Endeavor to be more devout and serious in that part of Worship;
sing unto God, not only with you Voice, but with your Heart, which is the chief
thing that God looks to. Study to raise your Souls to him, as well as to lift
up your Voices when you sing his praises. Stir up all within you to bless his
holy Name, who forgiveth all your Iniquities, and heals all your diseases,
who crowns you with loving kindness and tender mercies, who prevents you
every Morning, and follows you all the day long, with many signal instances of
his Fatherly care and love, giving you richly all things to enjoy for life and
godliness.

If you find that you join in the Public Prayers without any due Sense of God
upon your Souls, and without any real impression of those things to which you
say Amen; if you find that you repeat some words as do others, but in the mean
time your minds are busy in pursuing shadows, in thinking of your Trades and
Sports, or Pastimes, etc. be ashamed that you do thus lose your precious time,
that you are guilty of such trifling in the most serious and sacred action:
Endeavor to be more affected with a right sense about what you do, that you
may offer up unto God the Sacrifices of broken and contrite hearts, that you
may pour out your hearts before him, and may worship him with all your Soul and
Mind. Bid farewell to your Worldly, Cares and to your Pleasures, and Vanities,
when you come into his presence to pay your homage to him. Serve him with your
best affections, with the strength and vigor of your desires, and with all
your power and might. If you do this, you may then expect, with great assurance
and confidence, that God will give ear unto you, and satisfy your longing Souls
with good things, he will make you taste and see how good he is. But if you
pray without being in good earnest, your Sacrifices will be an abomination to
him, he will not regard your Prayers, nor take any notice of you: He will
answer you according to the multitude of your Idols.

If you find that you lose time by your communicating in a careless and formal
manner, without considering the end and design of that holy Institution, and
without endeavoring to prepare your selves as you ought to do, that you may
eat and drink worthily at the Table of the Lord; study to redeem this loss, by
partaking of this Sacrament for the time to come in a more devout and religious
manner: Be careful to approach with greater love and gratitude unto the Table
of your Lord, who not only allows you to come, but kindly and lovingly invites
and encourages you to do so. Come with your Souls burning with love to him who
dyed for you, and who appointed you this Sacrament, that therein you might
remember his wonderful love, and his astonishing compassion and mercy, which he
has testified in laying down his life for sinners, that he might purchase to
them everlasting Life and Glory, even to as many as repent and believe the
Gospel. Come with your hearts deeply wounded and pierced with sorrow for your
sins and follies, which were the cause of so shameful, so painful, and so
cursed a death to your dearest Lord and Savior. Come with your Souls full of
sincere and hearty purposes and resolutions of being new Creatures, not to live
any more unto your selves, or unto the World, but to him who dyed for you. Come
with your Souls likewise enlarged with thoughts of kindness, and unfeigned
Charity to all men, with your minds delivered from all bitterness and wrath,
from all malice and envy, that you may eat and drink at this Feast of Love,
with suitable dispositions of universal Love and Charity. Come with a great
desire to obtain strength from the God of your Salvation, that you may be able
to fight the good fight of Faith, and may at last lay hold on Eternal Life.

In this manner you ought to endeavor to redeem the time, by doubling your
care and diligence in all those Duties of Religion, in the performance whereof
you have been formerly faulty and defective. Thus you are to do likewise in
every other Action which you perform to the glory of God. When you find that
you have been too formal and careless in what you have done and said for God;
for Example, in admonishing others, in instructing them, in reproving them, in
comforting them, etc. endeavor to redeem time, by doing those things with
greater sincerity and zeal, with a more pure regard to the Glory of God, with a
greater desire to approve your selves unto him, who gives you the opportunity
of doing somewhat for his Honor, and with a greater Charity to the Souls of
men.

Depend on God for a Blessing in all your endeavors, beg of him that he may
direct and assist you to do that which is good and well pleasing unto him, and
that he may so dispose the hearts of those whom you admonish, instruct,
reprove, or comfort, that what you speak to them may not be lost, but may have
the desired effect, for the glory of God, and their happiness and welfare.

From what has been said, you may see how you ought to redeem your time: The
next thing which I proposed to speak to, was, to suggest to you some
Considerations to excite you to do so.

Some Motives to excite you to do these things.
First, 1. Motive, from the shortness of your Time.
Consider how short your time is. Your life is compared to a Vapor, which
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Jam. 4.14. It makes a
little show and appearance for a while, and then it is gone. It is compared to
a Post, to the Swift Ships, and to the Eagle that hastes to the Prey, Job
9.25, 26. And to the Wind, and to a Weaver's shuttle, Job. 7.6, 7. All which
Comparisons serve to express how short and swift our time is, how suddenly it
flies away and is gone. Man that is born of a Woman (says Job, chap. 14.1.) is
of few days. And Jacob, (when he was a great deal older than men live to be
now, even 130 years old) told Pharaoh, saying, Few and evil have the days of
the years of my life been. What are 40, or 60, or 80 years, when a man lives so
long, and looks back upon them all? They appear to him but like a shadow, or as
a Dream, or like a Tale that is told Ought not this to move you to be good
husbands of your short time? If it were in your own power to dispose of it,
according to your own humor and fancy, you might then be pardoned to delay
your great Work and Business till you thought good: But now that it is not in
your power to lengthen out your time one Minute, what a madness is it for you
to put off and neglect your greatest and chiefest Concern? Now therefore be so
wise as to make good use of your present opportunities and occasions of doing
good. That you may work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, and may
make your calling and your Election sure, work while the day lasts, for the
night comes wherein you cannot work.

If a man who is guilty of Treason, or Rebellion against his Prince, or of any
other great Crime which deserves death, were allowed a few days to sue out his
Pardon, that he might secure his Life and Estate, would he not improve with
great care and diligence that little time? To be sure he would not lose one
moment of it: And though perhaps at other times, he was wont to give up himself
to his pleasures and pastimes, and to mind little else, but the gratifying his
Lusts and Passions, and his vanity and folly; yet now that his Life and Fortune
lie at the stake, you should see such a man changed in a moment: You should see
him, with great application of mind, with the utmost diligence employing his
time, running from place to place, from one person to another, according as his
great and important business and concern required. How readily would such a
person redeem his time, not only from idleness, from gaming, from impertinent
Visits, and from dressing and adorning of his Body, and the like, but even from
eating and drinking, and from his rest and repose in the night? The desire of
preserving his life would so fill his thoughts, as to make him forges almost
every thing else. What would you (...) or say, if you should see a man in such
circumstances wholly unconcerned and careless, spending his time in g^ming, or
idleness, in making impertinent visits, in rioting and drinking, and the like,
and doing nothing at all to obtain his pardon, and to secure his life and
fortune? Doubtless you would look upon such a man as void of common
understanding, fit only for Bedlam, or not worthy to live, who knew no better
to make use of his short time, to preserve his life, which Nature teaches all
men to do by all honest and lawful means.

It is easy for you to make application of all this to your selves. You are by
your sins Enemies to God, Rebels against your Lord and King, whereby you are in
danger of everlasting death and destruction. But God in his infinite mercy
gives you time to sue out your Pardon, which he offers you upon the most just
and reasonable conditions; only believe and repent, and you shall be saved: He
will have mercy upon you, and blot out your iniquities. Be therefore so wise as
to husband well this short time which God bestows on you for this purpose:
Redeem it as much as you can, from all vain and unnecessary things, that you
may obtain forgiveness of Sins, and the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to
enable you afterward to walk in newness of life.

But if instead of minding this great and important concern of your Souls, you
give up your selves to sin and folly, and indulge your selves in your mad and
wicked practices, and thereby provoke God yet more and more against you, how
just will your judgment and condemnation be? If you will not be saved, if you
will not turn to the Lord that you may live, if you will not believe, repent,
and amend; what remains? you shall certainly dye, and be miserable for ever.
They that will not be happy, shall not be happy. The wrath of God shall abide
upon them.

Secondly, 2. Motive, from the uncertainty of your Time.
Consider that as your time is very short, so it is most uncertain. What do you
know whether your Sun shall decline leasurely, or whether it may not go down
suddenly, when you think it is not yet come to the noontide of the day? You
are not sure to live till you come to a good old Age. How many sicknesses and
distempers, and how many sudden accidents are there in the way, which may
shorten your day, and cause your Sun to set, when you think it shines with its
greatest force and luster? Sometimes a Candle is blown out by the Wind, or
snufft out undesignedly, when it is not yet half burnt. And so the life of Man
is often extinguished by outward accidents, when by the course of Nature, it
might have been prolonged much further.

How many come forth into the World, and give great appearances of making a
very considerable figure in it by their Wisdom and Sagacity, their good
Conduct, and Address, their excellent Parts and useful Learning, their Courage
and Valor, their charming Eloquence, and clear and distinct Reasoning, or by
their shining Piety and burning Zeal? But do not you see how suddenly they are
gone? they are hurried away by death, and you neither see them nor hear of them
any more.

There is nothing certain as to your time, but its shortness and uncertainty.
Nothing can secure you against an unexpected blow by death, when God sees fit
to give charge to the King of terrors to knock you down. Youth and strength
cannot do it; for how many dye when their Breasts are full of milk, and their
bones are moistened with marrow? Too great abundance of Blood and Spirits do
sometimes oppress and stifle the life of Man. Wealth and Riches cannot secure
you: How many great and wealthy men have been suddenly carried away as with a
Flood, when their Coffers were full of Silver and Gold, when they had all that
heart could wish? Even their Wealth proved the bait which allured idle,
covetous, and desperate persons, to break into their Houses and rob them, not
only of their Treasure, but of their lives.

Greatness of Power and earthly Honor and Dignity are not able to do it:
Crowns and Scepters, Castles and Palaces, a wise Council, and great Armies, are
not able to protect Princes from the violent and desperate attempts of Men who
are prodigal of their lives. How many of those who have been most famous in the
World for their Power and Greatness, have been very unexpectedly removed by a
violent and sudden death? When they have been in their greatest height, at the
very top of Earthly Felicity, and full of the deepest Projects and Designs;
when they made account to make the Earth, as it were, to tremble; to humble and
to mortify their Enemies, to enlarge their own Dominions, or to enslave their
Subjects, even then Death gave them a sudden blow, and so there was an end of
them and their designs together.

But may not Wisdom and Understanding, great Learning, and skill in various
Arts and Sciences, do somewhat to secure men from the sudden blow of Death? No,
all this cannot do it: We see even Wise men suddenly and unexpectedly removed
from us by death, as well as others. In the midst of their useful Studies, and
excellent contrivances, and designs, the King of terrors puts a stop to them,
and in the twinkling of an Eye they are gone, and all their thoughts are laid
asleep. So vain a thing is Man, and even the wisest Man; and so uncertain is
his time.

Consider that Death can enter by a thousand doors. Every pore in your Body is
a gate wide enough for Death to enter in at. Do not you see what a small thing
makes way for Death? The prick of a Thorn, or a Splinter of Wood does it
sometimes, by occasioning a Fever, or a Gangrene. How quickly are some removed
by violent and unexpected Distempers, and sometimes on a sudden are struck
dead, you cannot tell how? Have not some dyed through an excess of joy, and
others through immoderate grief; some by excessive laughter, and others by too
much mourning and weeping? Some have dyed with a fright or sudden fear: some by
the violence of their anger and wrath, and others by an excess of love. How
many have been killed with over much care and too great watching? and others
have occasioned their own death by idleness and too much sleep: Some have
killed themselves with eating and drinking, and others have done it by too
great abstinence and fasting. Have not some dyed while they have been at Meals,
by a Crumb or a little Bone, or some such very small matter? When they were
thinking to repair their strength, and to fit themselves for going on with
their business and work; that which they did to save and lengthen out their
lives, did shorten them, and put an end to them. May not this instance alone
show you the great uncertainty of your time, and how necessary it is to redeem
it?

But besides all this, consider that when you go abroad, you are in danger from
innumerable accidents. You may be killed by the noisome steams of the Earth, by
some infectious quality in the Air, by the Beasts of the field, by the teeth of
Dogs, by the horns of mad Oxen, or by the heels of wild Horses. You are
likewise in danger from the winged Creatures, the least of whom have Weapons
sufficient to destroy you, if God by his Power and Justice arm them against you.

How remarkable was the manner of the death of Aeschylus, Valor. Max. lib. 9.
cap. 12.
an ancient Poet in Sicily, who as he sat in a Sunny place without the Walls
of the City, was killed by a Tortoise, which an Eagle let fall on his head.

And no less memorable is the Story which is mentioned in the Book of Martyrs,
of one Burton, Bailiff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, who pretending to be a
Friend to the Reformation in King Edward's time; after the King's death began
to set up the Popish Mass again, and would have beaten the Curate, if he had
not complied with his design. But see how the Lord's hand overtook him; as he
came riding from Fenbank one day, a Crow flying over his head, let fall her
excrements upon his face, the noisome scent whereof so annoyed his stomach, that
he never ceased vomiting till he came home: And after falling deadly sick,
would never receive any meat, but vomited still, and complained of that stink,
cursing the Crow that had poisoned him, and in a few days he died without
giving any sign of his repentance for his former wicked life.

Besides the danger you are in from unreasonable Creatures, are you not also
sometimes in hazard from men, who are mad either through the distemper of their
Brain, or through their violent Malice and Envy? Let a Bear robbed of her
Whelps (says Solomon) meet a man rather than a fool in his folly, Prove. 17.12.
And not only are your Lives in danger from unreasonable Creatures and from Men,
but likewise from the Spirits of Darkness, unless restrained by the mighty
Power of God. These are Enemies of great Power, and of as great Malice: But
your heavenly Father keeps them as it were in chains, and sets bounds to their
rage and fury, that they cannot hurt you so much as in a hair of your head,
without the Divine permission. But further; so uncertain is your time, that
there is not a stone, nor a block in your way, but it may be an occasion of
your stumbling and falling into the snares of Death. And sometimes when there
is no such block in your way, you are not secure from danger: One foot may
prove a stumbling block to the other, and an occasion of your falling into the
hands of Death.

And more than all this; in how great danger are your Lives from Fire and from
Water, from Heat and Cold, from Storms and Tempests, from Thunder and
Lightning, and many other things, the stroke whereof you cannot prevent nor
foresee? God has in store the Sword, the Famine and Pestilence, and
innumerable Judgments and Plagues, whereby he can cut you off, and shorten your
Lives. When you are in your houses, and think your selves in safety, you know
not but that Death is even there, and that your Grave is ready for you: By a
sudden Wind, by an Earthquake, or by a decay in the Foundation, or some other
part of the Building, the house may fall down about your ears, and prove your
burying place.

From all which you may conclude, that your time is the most uncertain thing in
the World. Ought you not therefore to make good use of it while it lasts, not
knowing how soon and suddenly it may be at an end?

Thirdly, Consider how great and difficult a work you have to do; 3. Motive,
from the greatness and difficulty of the work you have to do.
a work that requires a great part of your time, and worthy of all your time.
How hard is it to work out your Salvation, to make your Calling and Election
sure, to strive to enter in at the strait gate, to be born again, to be made
new Creatures, to be renewed in the Spirit of your mind, to put off the works
of darkness, and to put on the armor of light; to add to your faith, virtue;
and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and
to brotherly kindness, charity? To have the image of God renewed in your Souls,
to be made partakers of the Divine Nature, to escape the corruptions which are
in the World through lust; to be comformed to the Example of your Blessed Lord
and Master, in those Virtues wherein you ought to imitate him; to learn of him
who was meek and lowly; to go about as he did, doing good to the Souls and
Bodies of men; to be zealous for God, and holy as he who called you is holy in
all manner of conversation?

How great a work is it to overcome your selves? To become vile and base in
your own eyes, to think meanly of your selves, and to be willing that others
should think so of you too; to be content with every state and condition of
life, wherein God does by his Providence place you; to bear wrongs and injuries
with meekness and patience; not to be overcome with evil, but to overcome evil
with good; to mortify your sinful desires and sensual appetites; to crucify
the flesh with the affections and lusts; to purify your selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit; to cleanse your hearts from all manner of
wickedness, that they may be fit Temples for the Spirit of God to dwell in; to
govern your eyes, that you may not thereby betray your souls into the hands of
your enemies; to govern your lips, to take heed to your ways, that you offend
not with your tongue; to put away from you all lying, flattery, and
dissimulation, all evil speaking, whispering, and backbiting, all foolish
talking and jesting, which are not convenient; to be sober and temperate in all
things; to be just and sincere in all your dealings, doing to others what you
would have them do to you?

How great a work is it to overcome the World? to despise its Pomps and
Vanities, not to be allured and charmed by its smiles, nor yet frighted and
cast down by its frowns; not to suffer your selves to be possessed with the
love of Riches; to entertain just and fit opinions of the things of this World;
to consider them as vain, uncertain, and unsatisfactory enjoyments, which are
not capable to make you happy, which are only so far to be desired, as they are
necessary in order to your accommodation and more easy subsistence in the
World? How hard is it to overcome the temptations of earthly pleasure and
outward delights, and not to suffer your minds to be too far transported by the
love of them; but to use even the most innocent pleasures with great
moderation, lest they lead the Soul captive, and render it unfit for the true
pleasures? How hard is it to live in the World as Pilgrims and Strangers ought
to do, to pass through this Wilderness without much regarding it, but fixing
your eyes on the happy Land, the heavenly Canaan, which you ought to look on as
your only Country? How hard is it to escape the danger of the evil Manners and
Customs which are in the World? the many temptations which you have to vanity
and folly, to pride and passion, to gluttony and drunkenness, to luxury and
sensuality, and to other Vices, by the bad Examples of your Friends,
Neighbors, and other Acquaintances?

How great and difficult a work is it to resist the Devil, to quench his fiery
darts, to reject his suggestions, to discover his wiles and stratagems, to
watch against all his assaults, and vigorously to oppose his temptations, that
you may overcome him and triumph over him? Now this is the work you have to do:
For we wrestle not (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.12.) against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. How hard and dangerous
a Warfare must it needs be, that makes it necessary for you to take the whole
Armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having
done all, to stand?

How hard a work is it to read and hear, and meditate, to examine your selves,
to pray to God, and to praise him, to partake of the holy Sacrament, and to
perform all other Acts of Devotion and Piety, as you ought to do?

How great a work is it to love God above all things, to love him with all your
Soul and heart, and with all your strength and might, and to keep your selves
in the Love of God, that it may be in you a powerful Spring and Principle unto
all good actions, that you may be thereby sweetly constrained to do and to
suffer whatever is his holy Will and Pleasure?

Is it not a great work to perform aright all those Duties which you are bound
to do in your several relations and capacities? To instruct, to admonish, to
reprove, and to comfort others, and to do every thing you can for the good of
men's Souls and bodies? Let no man (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.24.) seek his
own, but every man another wealth. And, Chap. 13.5. Charity seeks not its
own, that is, not only its own; it seeks not its own to the prejudice of
another, but it endeavors to promote the happiness and welfare of others. The
charitable person has an eye to the good and benefit of other men, as well as
his own gain and advantage.

And besides all this, you ought to have so much Zeal for the Glory of God, and
the good of Souls, as to endeavor to do somewhat which may have a lasting
effect and influence not only in the present time, but in the time to come: You
ought to contrive by all means to propagate Religion, to do somewhat which may
bear fruit for the honor of your Maker and Redeemer, when you are laid in the
Grave.

From all which you may see what a great and difficult work you have to do in
the World, and how great need you have to redeem time, and to lose as little of
it as is possible. How necessary is it for you to begin your work betimes, and
to be constant in the pursuit of it, in the morning to sow your seed, and in
the evening not to withhold your hand? What a madness is it to have your work
to begin when your time is almost at an end? When there are but a few sands in
your Glass? You have so long a Race to run, and so much bad Way to pass
through, and who are so weak, and have so little strength to stir one foot, to
do or say, or think any thing that is good, have you not great need to set out
in good time, and to continue unwearied in your course all the day, that you
may at last receive the glorious prize? Ought you not (forgetting those things
that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before) to
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. Arise therefore from your sloth and laziness, and run
and be not weary; and walk, and do not faint. Pray to God to hold up your
goings in his paths, that your footsteps may not slide, to strengthen your weak
hands, and confirm your feeble knees, to draw you that you may run after him,
and follow him fully. Beg of him, that he may be at your right hand to direct
and defend you, that he may perfect his strength in your weakness, and may give
you in all things both to will and to do, according to his good pleasure; that
when you meet with enemies in your way, he may teach your hands to war, and
your fingers to fight; and that his Grace may be sufficient for you.

4. Motive, from the Account you must give how you spend your Time.
Fourthly, Consider that you must give an account of your time, how you spend
and employ it. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in
Righteousness by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is to come from Heaven very
unexpectedly and suddenly in a most dreadful and terrible manner, with Power
and great Glory, in the Clouds of Heaven, in flaming fire, with ten thousands
of his holy Angels, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trump of God. He shall send his Angels, and they shall gather together his
Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. The Throne
shall be set, and all Nations shall be gathered before him. The Books shall be
opened, and the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to light; the
counsels of the heart shall be made manifest; and every work shall be brought
into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or bad. There shall
be no need of Witnesses against the guilty, nor of Racks and Tortures to extort
their Confessions: Every man's own Conscience shall be instead of a thousand
Witnesses. Then shall the Judge pass Sentence on every man according to his
works. The righteous shall be absolved, and shall receive the reward of
everlasting Life and Glory: They shall be made partakers of a Crown of Glory
which fades not away, and of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. But the wicked
shall be cast into utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, where the Worm dies not, and where the fire shall never be quenched:
Where they shall continue for ever deprived of the Favor and Love of God, and
exposed to the insupportable load of his anger and displeasure. You profess to
believe these things, and therefore ought you not so to live, and so to husband
your time, that when the Judge comes, he may not find you idle, nor doing such
things as are to his dishonor?

You may conceive somewhat (though but very little) concerning the different
thoughts of good and bad men, upon such a sudden appearance of the Judge.
Suppose a Prince going into a far Country, should call together his Servants,
appointing them severally their work till his return (which he tells them will
be unxepected) and promising great rewards of Houses and Lands, and honorable
Employments to the faithful and obedient Servants, but threatening severe
punishments, and torments, and a terrible death to the unfaithful and
disobedient. If after his departure some of the Servants mind their business,
observing as well as they can what their Master required them to do: Others,
without any regard to his Commands, take no thought of their business, but are
idle, and eat and drink with the drunken, and smite their fellow servants, and
both by their words and deeds dishonor their Lord. You may easily imagine how
differently these Servants will be affected when he returns suddenly and
unexpectedly. The good Servants will be glad and rejoice at his coming, and
will meet him with great cheerfulness and confidence, as expecting the
accomplishment of his Promises, and being conscious to themselves of having
done their Duty honestly and faithfully, of having carried themselves as they
ought to have done during his absence. But the naughty and wicked Servants must
needs be filled with shame and confusion upon the Coming of their Lord, so as
not to be able to look him in the face: There is no other thing which they can
do, but to endeavor to fly from his presence, that they may not fall under the
weight of his terrible displeasure.

In this manner our Lord and Master Jesus, before he left the World, gave Rules
and Commands to his Servants how to employ themselves, and what to do till his
return. He promised Rewards to all who should believe and obey, and threatened
the unbelievers, and the disobedient with heavy Punishments, and most dreadful
Judgments. When he comes again in the great Day to judge the World, the godly
shall meet him with great hope and assurance, of obtaining the end of their
Faith, even the Salvation of their Souls. But the wicked and unbelievers shall
be full of horror and confusion, and shall cry to the mountains to fall on
them, to hide them from the face of their Judge, who will be a consuming fire
to all the workers of iniquity, and will in no wise clear the guilty.

Now do you desire heartily and sincerely to escape everlasting Condemnation,
and to obtain a glorious Reward in the Day of your Accounts? Then you must
study to redeem the time, and to make use of all opportunities of doing good:
You must not be slothful in your great business, but fervent in Spirit, serving
the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. You see
how the men of the World bestir themselves when there is but a small appearance
and probability of gain and advantage. The Merchants make use of every
favorable opportunity to buy and sell; they go early to Market, that they may
not lose a good occasion; and yet after all they may be, and are frequently
disappointed, and make a very bad bargain. But the Christian, who redeems his
time to buy Wisdom, is sure to find it. They who seek me early, shall find me,
Prove. 8.17.

The Mariners wait for a favorable Gale, a fair and seasonable Wind to go to
Sea: And when it blows according to their wishes, they are sure not to lose one
moment. Their desire of gain, and their hopes of a prosperous Voyage, makes
them venture. And yet after all they may and often do suffer shipwreck, and
lose their goods and their lives too. But the Christian who redeems his time,
is in no such danger; he is sure to arrive safely at the Harbor of everlasting
Rest, after all the storms and tempests which he meets with in the boisterous
Sea of this World.

The Husbandmen wait for a good season to plough and sow, and to do all other
things belonging to their Employment; and when the time is favorable, they are
sure to make use of it. The desire and hopes they have of a Harvest, of a
fruitful Crop, quickens their endeavors, and excites their industry. And yet
after all, they may be disappointed. Their Corn may be drowned by violent
Rains, or scorched and burnt up with violent Heat, or eaten up and consumed by
Insects, Fowls, or Beasts. But the Christian who sows in tears, shall reap in
joy, Psalm. 126.5, 6.

You see that men, who run a Race, strive with great earnestness to gain the
Prize, to obtain that, which ofttimes is of no very great value. And yet some
of those who run come behind, and are disappointed of their hopes. But the
Christian runs not uncertainly; he is sure to obtain not a corruptible Crown,
but an incorruptible, 1. Cor. 9.25.

Again, you see that men who besiege a City or a Castle, wait for all
advantages, and are sure not to neglect a favorable occasion of making an
Assault, and surprising the Enemy. The hopes of getting rich Spoils, of gaining
Honor and Renown, makes them resolute and valiant. And yet it often happens,
that they lose their lives in the Attempt; or are taken captive by those whom
they did hope to overcome and subdue. But he who fights the good fight of
Faith, is sure to lay hold on eternal Life. He who fights under Christ's
Banner, and who has him for his Captain, is sure to obtain the Victory over all
his Enemies.

I shall conclude this Discourse with what is written by St. Peter, The
Conclusion.
2 Epist. Chap. 3. verse. 10, 11, etc. The day of the Lord will come as a thief
in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that
are therein, shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought you to be in all holy conversation and
godliness; Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God,
wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore (beloved)
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot, and blameless.

FINIS.
ADVICE TO PARENTS.
ADVICE TO CHILDREN.

