MYSTICAL BABYLON UNVAILED.

Wherein is Proved, I. That Rome-Papal is mystical-Babylon. II. That the Pope
of Rome is the Beast. III. That the Church of Rome is the great Whore. IV. That
the Roman-Priests are the false Prophet.


ALSO A CALL To all the People of God To come out of BABYLON.

By HANSERD KNOLLYS, a Servant of Jesus Christ.

Isa. 57.14. Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my People.

Rev. 18.6. Reward her even as she Rewarded you.

Printed Anno Domini, 1679.

Isaiah Thomas
NEC ELATUS NEC DEJECTUS

An Epistle to the Reader.
Ingenuous Reader,
IT is an Astonishment beyond the ^^nary Comprehensions of Nature, Reason and
Religion, that the Papists ( esp^^^^^^ the Priests and Jesuits of the Church of
Rome so odious in their bloody Tenants, so prodigious in their Hellish Plots,
such inc^^crable Incendiaries, and furious Ass^^ns for murdering of Princes,
should be suffered to increase, and indulged to multiply in a Protestant
Nation, as of late years they have done in this Kingdom. Assuredly it could
never have been so, but that the Lord in his just Indignation against us for
our God-provoking Sins of Atheism, Idolatry, Profaneness, Adultery, and other
heinous wickedness, intends (and suffers us to ripen, and be prepapared for
some) dreadful Judgment, which God may justly bring upon this Land and Nation
by the hand of the Papists, if we Repent not of those Abominations, and do not
reform them. It is more than Manifest by woeful Experience, that the main End of
the Papists in all their Plots and Conspiracies is the utter Destruction of the
Protestants (whom they call Heretics) and the Protestant-Religion in England
especially, and the Re-establishment of the Popish-Religion of the Church of
Rome in this Kingdom; which End the Popish-Recusants in England (in this Bloody
and Traitorous design, that Damnable and Hellish Plot contrived and carried on
by them for Assassinating and Murdering the King, Subverting the Government,
and for Rooting out and Destroying the Protestant-Religion, as the King and
Parliament have voted and declared) are still endeavoring (...) effect, and
bring to pass. The concurrent (...) our grand and greatest Enemies (...) the
World durst not entertain a Thought of Invasion, did they not Hope, (when Time
serves) to find amongst us a Side and Faction of numerous and Seditious Papists
to join, with them. Were we rid of the Papists, and were Idolatry, Atheism,
Whoredom and Blasphemy put away, as in Policy, Reason, and Religion these ought
to be, The Royal Person of the King would be safe from Assassination, and the
Government secure from Subversion. And the Protestants, and Protestant-Religion
free from utter Destruction, by the blessed Protection of Almighty God.
Conformity unto all Oaths, Tests, and outward formal Satisfactions of State,
concurring with a full

(...) Mystical-Babylon Unvailed.
The Method that I have chosen to Unvail Mystical-Babylon, is, by proving these
four Propositions, viz.

1. That Rome-Papal is Mystical-Babylon. 2. That the Pope of Rome is the Beast.
3. That the Church of Rome is the great Whore. 4. That the Roman-Priests are
the false Prophet.
Proposition I. That Rome-Papal is Mystical-Babylon.
EAstern Babylon of Nebuchadnezzar in Chaldaea, was a famous City, Called the
Lady of Kingdoms Isa. 47.1, 5.
and the glory of Kingdoms Isa. 13.19.
under whose Kings the People of God were Captivated and oppressed violently 2 Chronicles. 36.14,-20. and Jer. 51.34, 35.
. For which violence done to Zion, and other God-provoking Sins, that great
City and Kingdom was destroyed by Cyrus King of Persia, Isa. 45.1-4 and 47.1-9.
whom God raised up to execute his righteous Judgments upon them for their
Iniquities, lo^^ before Saint John's time. Therefore Mystery, Babylon the
great, (so Named, Revel. 17.5.) is some other great City, which does resemble
Old-Babylon for Idolatry, Jerem. 5.47. Persecution, Lam. 5.1.5. Violence,
Jerem. 51.25. Oppression, Jerem. 50.33. Isa. 14.4. and Pride, Isa. 47.1, 5, 7.
And thou said, I shall be a Lady for ever, -- I am, and none else besides me.
And so does Mystical-Babylon say in her Heart, Revel. 18 7. I sit a Queen. Also
Blood-guiltiness, Psalm 79.1, 2, 3. The blood of thy Servants have they shed
like Water round about Jerusalem; and so does Mystical-Babylon, Revel. 26.6.
For they have shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets, Rev. 18.24. As the City
Jerusalem was Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11.8.
where our Lord was crucified. So Rome Pagan and Papal is Mystically called
Babylon, where the Saints have been and shall be killed, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. Rev.
11.7.16, 6. Rev. 18.13, 24.
And in her was found the Blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth. That which Jesus Christ revealed by his Angel unto his
Servant John touching Mystical-Babylon in this Prophecy of the Revelation, can
agree to no other City but Rome only. For first, No other City (in Saint John's
time) was built upon Seven Mountains, or Hills, but Rome only, Revel. 17.5, 8,
9, 18. And the seven Heads are seven Mountains on which the Woman Sits,
called the great City, verse 18. whose Name is Mystery Babylon the great,
verse 5. So Propertius, Propert. Eleg. 10. l. 3. Septem urbs alta Jugis toti
quae praesidet Orbi.
Virgil, Virgil. Georg. 2. o. Pulcherrima Roma, Septem quae una sibi Muro
circumdedit arces. Ovid. 1. de Tristibus l. 3. Elog. 7. Dumque suis victrix
septem de Montibus Orbem Prospiciet domitum, Martia Roma Legar.
Ovid, (i) Cornel. a Lap. Cornel. a Lap. in Apoc. 17.3, 9. In septem Montibus
patet denotari Romam.
Bellarm. Bellar. de R. P. l. 2. c. 2. and l. 3. c. 12.
So do Viegas, Suarez, Ribera, and diverse others affirm, That by Babylon in the
Book of the Revelation Rome is Figured forth. And the Remists in their
Testament acknowledge, That by Babylon is meant Rome: See their Notes on 1 Pet.
5.13. and upon the 17. and 18. Chapters of the Revelation.

Secondly, No other City in the World had seven Kings, that is, Seven several
Kinds of Governors succeeding one another, but Rome only, Revel. 17.10. And
there are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet
come. The five Kings, that were fallen, past and gone before John's time, are
mentioned by Tit. Livius, l. 6. What the Romans did (says Livy,) under their
Kings, and after under their Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, and
Consular-Tribunes, whither as to Wars abroad, or suppressing Troubles at home,
I have set forth in five Books. And this One is Rev. 17.10. (...).
viz. the Emperor, for the Caesar's were the the sixth Head of Rome, who
Reigned in St. John's time; The other is not yet come, viz. the Seventh Head of
Rome, or the Seventh King, or Kind of Roman-Governour, to wit, the Popes of
Rome, Revel. 17.11. And HE (that is, the POPE) is of the Seven, and goes into
Perdition. This Seventh Kind of Government of the Roman-Kingdom by Popes was
not come in Saint John's Time. So then it is manifest, that Rome is the City,
which had seven Kings, Heads, or Kinds of Governors, that succeeded one
another; Now let any One show us another City that has had seven Kings, or
several Kinds of Governors [Et erit mihi magnus Apollo] And let him be Pope.

Thirdly, No other City in Saint John's time did Reign over the Kings of the
Earth, but Rome only, Rev. 17.18. And the Woman which thou saw [(...)] is
that City the Great (verse 5. Mystery, Babylon the Great, viz. Rome) which
Reigns over the Kings of the Earth. Yea, it is very evident by the Testimony
and Confession of many Popish-Writers, who for their Learning, (and Dignity in
the Church of Rome) were Eminent, That Rome is that great City, which by the
Emperors Authority in Saint John's time, and by the Pope's Power since, has
Reigned and still Reigns over the Kings of the Earth. Bellarm. lib. 3. de
Pont. R. c. 13. Per Meretricem intelligi Romam.
Bellarmin says, That Rome is to be understood by the great Whore. Cardinal
Poole Polus Cardinal. de Concilio. p. 91. Petri Cathedram super omnia
Imperatorum Solia, and omnia Regum tribunalia Constituit Christus.
says, Christ has set Peter's Chair above all the Thrones of Emperors, and
above all the Tribunals of Kings, [But Christ did not sit in any such Chair of
Kingly State as the Pope does; nor did Saint Peter, nor any of Christ's
Apostles, no not Saint Paul (the chiefest of all the Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.5. and
12.11.] Isodorus Musconius de Majestate Ecclesiae Milit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 26.
Venetiis, anno 1602. Pontifex Romanus est Judex universalis, Rex Regum, and
Dominus Dominantium. Abra. Bzovius de Pont. Romans Coloniae Agrip. 1619. says,
Papa est Christianorum Monarcha, Mortalium Supremus, Judex Coeli, Arbiter
Orbis, cap. 1.3, 16, 32, 45. Celsus Mancinus, de Juribus Principatuum Romae
1596. lib. 3. cap. 1, 2, etc. says, Papa est totius Orbis Dominus: Potestas
Papae temporalis est omnium aliarum Potestatum eminentissima, Aliaeque
Potestates omnes ab illo dependent.
Isodorus Musconius says, That the Pope of Rome is the Universal Judge; HE is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. However, That Testimony recorded, Luke 2.1,
2, 3. is undeniable. And it came to pass in those Days, that there went out a
DECREE from Caesar Augustus (the Roman Emperor) that all the World should be
Taxed. From what has been Confessed and Testified by the Papists themselves,
it is plain and evident, That Rome-Papal is Mystical-Babylon Viegas in Apoc.
17. Com. 1. S. 3. Inquit, Nomine Babilonis urbem Romam significari in hoc
Apocalypsis opere; ubi toties Babylon nominatur. vid. Orosium lib. 2. c. 3.
Hist. Par. in Apoc. 14.8.
.

Proposition II. That the POPE of Rome is the BEAST.
THe great Monarchs and Monarchies of this World have been Figured forth by
Beasts of Prey. God showed his Prophet Daniel the four great Kingdoms of this
World, viz. the Assyrio-Caldean, the Medi-Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman
Kingdoms by a Vision of four Ravenous and devouring Beasts, Dan. 7.3, 4. -- 8.
Dan. 7.7. (...)
And behold a fourth Beast (the Roman-Kings and Kingdoms with seven Heads, and
ten Horns, and upon the Horns ten Crowns; And upon his seventh Head two Horns,
like a Lamb; Rev. 13.1.11.) dreadful and terrible, etc. ver. 7. Exceedingly,
And diverse from all the other three Beasts. And Jesus Christ showed his Apostle
John the same fourth Beast, Rev. 13.2. And the Beast that I saw, was like unto
a Leopard, and his Feet were as the Feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth
of a Lion, And the Dragon That old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, For the Devil
and the Pope are alike (as Father and Son) in many Things: The Devil
contradicted Gods word, Genesis 3.4. So does the Pope 1 Timothy 4.3. forbidding to
Marry. This confesses Christ, Mark. 3.11. but denies his Laws; So does the
Pope, Rev. 13.11, 15, 16, 17. The Devil would be worshipped as God, Matthew. 4.6.
The Pope would be Exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped,
2 These. 2.4.
gave him his Power, his Throne, and great Authority; And he spoke as the
Dragon, ver. 11. The most full Description of the Roman-Papal Beast is expressly
written in the 17. Chapter of the Revelation. And the Angel said unto me, ver.
7. I will tell thee the Mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast, etc. This BEAST
the Angel described unto St. John in three particulars (which can agree with no
other Persons, Powers, Emperors, Kings, The Devil challenges to be the
disposer of all Kingdoms of the Earth, Luke 4, 5, 6, 7. So does the Pope of
Rome, vid. Bellarm. lib. 5. cap. 8. de Pont. Romans
nor Dominion in the World but the Popes of Rome only.) First, by his Past,
Present, and Future State, ver. 8. The Beast that Was, and Is not, and yet IS.
Secondly, by his twofold Number, ver. 11. HE is the Eight, and (...) of the
Seven. Thirdly, by his Rise and Ruin, verse. 8. and 11. The Beast shall ascend
out of the bottomless Pit, and go into Perdition: That lawless One the Son of
Perdition, and goes into Perdition.

First, The Beast is described by his PAST State, Rev. 17.8. The Beast which
thou Saw, WAS, and is not; that is to say, The Roman State and Kingdom was
formerly, and even in St. John's Time, what it is not, now in our Time, in
diverse Respects, viz. 1. The Roman Kingdom was then a Power ordained of God,
Romans 13.1.7. unto which Roman-Power our blessed Savior Jesus Christ being then
in the Form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7.8. was obedient to Death. So were Christ's
Disciples, and the Primitive Christians, Search those Scriptures Mar. 12.17.
Acts. 25.10.11. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Tit. 3.1. Not only Paul, but Peter, and
Christ himself was Subject to the Roman-Pagan Emperors, Kings, and Governors.
But the Beast of the eighth Head the Pope of Rome will be the Supreme Power
over all Kings and Kingdoms.

In Bella Coenae Dom. Sect. 3, 4, 5. against Queen Elizabeth and all Heretics,
vid. Remonstran. Hibernorum per R. Caron. part. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 4. page 7.


. The Roman Powers though Pagan Persecutors of Christ and Christians WAS Gods
Ordinance of Magistracy, until the Ten Kings gave the Beast (the Pope of Rome)
his Power, his Throne and great Authority. Rev. 13.2. And then the Angel told
St. John; HE is not; viz. The Beast of the seventh and eighth Head is not Gods
Ordinance of Magistracy; nor a Power ordained of God. Here let it be Seriously
considered, That the Dragon, which gave the Beast his Power, Throne, and great
Authority, Was not the Roman-Pagan-Emperours, for they never gave their Power
and great Authority unto the Beast of the seventh and eighth Head, viz. the
Pope of Rome. The Roman-Heathen, yea and Christian Emperors stood in the Popes
Way, and did let and hinder his Rise, and Reigning Power, until they were
Removed out of his Way, as was foretold by the Apostle Paul, 2 These. 2, 3, 4,
7, 8, 9, 10. And thus it came to pass; Constantine the Great leaving Rome, and
making Constantinople the Imperial Seat, thereby (sede vacant) the then Bishop
of Rome got full Possession of that City; And so the Chief Bishop of Rome
continued his Primacy from that Time until (at last) the Western Empire
determined in Augustulus anno 475. or thereabouts; And about the year 607. the
then Bishop of Rome, Boniface the III. obtained from Phocas the Emperor of the
East, That not the Patriarch of Constantinople but the Bishop of Rome be
universal-Bishop. But for all this Rise and Advance, Avent. Annal. Boyor. lib.
5. and page 447. and lib. 9.
The Beast of the eighth Head, ( the Pope of Rome) IS NOT of the Seven, that is
to say, HE is not Supreme as the Roman Emperors were. For although the
Emperors assumed the Title of Pontifex Maximus Dionys. Halicarnas. Ant. Romans
12. And Godwin's Antiq. l. 2. Sect. 2. cap. 15.
and added it to the Imperial Crown; yet the Imperial Crown of the Roman
Government and Kingdom was not added to the Pope of Rome, Petra dedit Petro,
Petrus Diadema Rodulpho. Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. cap. l. 2. c. 17.
until Henry the IV. (Emperor), whom Gregory the VII. Excommunicated and
Deposed, and Made Rodulphus Emperor in his stead: And afterward when Henry
the V. came to Rome to be Crowned by Pope Pascal. II. The Pope would not
consent to his Coronation, until the Emperor did give over all Right of
Election of Popes, and of Investures of Bishops by Staff and Ring. And thus the
Pope gained the Power of Temporal Sovereignty, and so IS of the Seven.

Nor did all this Episcopal, Pontificial, and Imperial Dignity, Power, and
Authority fill and satisfy the Beastly Pope of Rome, until he obtained
Supremacy above all general Councils Bellarmine boasts saying, The last
Lateran Council under Leo 10th. expressly and professedly teaches, That the
Pope is above all Councils, Bellar. de Council. l. 2. c. 17.
, And so the Pope became Pontifex Maximus, the chief high Priest, who
translated Kings and Emperors at his Pleasure. Bellarmine Bellar de trans.
Imp. Romans in tribus libris, per Episcopi Romans authoritatem.
says, The Roman Empire was by the Authority of the Pope, translated from the
Graecians to the French, and from Charles the Great and the French unto the
Family of Otho and the Saxons, which is now the Roman Papal Empire of Germany
with its seven Electors.

Secondly, The Roman Beast also (that WAS) is described by his Present State,
1. Negatively, And is NOT. 2. Affirmatively, And yet IS Rev. 17.8, 9.
. Herein lies another Mystery; And here is the Mind, that has Wisdom: to know
in what Respect the Roman Beast is NOT, and yet IS. I will not be positive, nor
dare I presume to make a determinate Judgment, and to give a Resolution herein;
but I humbly offer my Opinion, and submit it to the Mind, that has Wisdom, and
let him, that has understanding in this Mystery, judge what I say. It is said
HE is NOT, with Respect to those five Kings, or Kinds of Kingly Government,
viz. Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Ancients. Irenaeus, l. 5. adversus
Haeres. c. 28. Tertul. de Resur. car. c. 25. Ander. Caesar. Episc. cap. 36. in
Apoc. 13. v. 1. Beda in Apoc. 13. v. 1.
and Tribunes, which were fallen, that is, past and gone before St. John's
time. For this BEAST, which rose out of the Sea of the Troubles and Confusions
in Rome, and in the Roman Empire, and out of the Earth of the Apostacies 1 Timothy
4.1, 2, 3. and 2 These. 2.3, 4, 5.
which the Apostle foretold should be in the latter Days, and which the Angel
was now Revealing unto John Rev. 13.1. and ver. 11. and Rev. 17.3.7, 8.
viz. Papal Rome, Is NOT yet Come, Rev. 17.10. that is, HE was not in Being,
when St. John write this Book. And yet HE IS, that is to say ONE IS, Modern.
Joan. Viguer. Instit. Theol. c. 21. Sect. 3. v. 4. Nich. Sander. l. 8. de
visib. Eccl. Monarch. c. 1. in Libro octavo. Nich. Zegar in Apoc. 13.
to wit the Emperor, who IS the sixth King, then in Being in St. John's time,
and sometime after, Rev. 17.10. And there are seven Kings, Five are fallen, And
ONE IS, And the Other is not yet come, viz. to be the Seventh head of the Roman
Empire, and the Supreme Governor of the Roman Monarchy. The Roman-Papal BEAST
is NOT, that is to say, HE is not God's Ordinance of Magistracy, nor a lawful
Power ordained of God, but he IS an Usurper of the Roman Kingdom; And an
Instrument of the great Dragon, Papists. Benedict. Pererius, l. 14. in Dan. R.
Bellarminus l. 3. de R. P. c. 2.8. Francis. Rib. in Apoc. 13. Sect. 1. Hiomne
Bestiam Apoc. 13.1. ipsissimum esse Antichristum inter^retantur.
that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12.3.9. viz. The Roman
Pagan Emperor, And also the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, ^ad
Satan, Rev. 20.2. viz. He that beguiled Eve, through his Subtilty, 2 Cor.
2.11.3. gave the BEAST his Power, and his Throne and his Supreme Authority. So
that Beast ( the Pope of Rome) has the Roman-Power, but not Jure Divino, HE IS
NOT, by God's Approbation. And yet HE IS the Supreme Roman-Governour. Yea HE IS
of the Seven, to wit, the seventh King or kind of Kingly Government, as is
before said. And HE even he is the Eighth. Rev. 17.11. Bestia sc. Papa Romans Is
octavus est, Et de septem illis est, Quia nimirum Papa sc. Antichristus (Cornu
illud parvulum Dan. 7.20.) oriturus erat de medio Cornuum quartae bestiae, quae
Imperium adumbrabat Romanum, etc. J.W. lib. de ultimo Romae Exitio. p. 6.
.

Thirdly, The Roman BEAST is described by his Future State: Rev. 17.10. And the
other is not yet Come, that is to say, the other King or Kind of Kingly
Government, viz. Popes had not gotten the Supreme Power, neither Political, nor
Ecclesiastical. But this Beast, that was to Come, that is, to succeed the
Emperors, was the Popes, and they are the Eight and of the Seven. Rev. 17.11.
Which will be made appear in the second Particular of the Angels Description of
the BEAST by his twofold Number.

The Second particular, or Part of the Angels Description of the Roman Beast is
by his twofold Number, Seven and Eight, The Pope of Rome is of the Seven, or
the Seventh King, or Kingly kind of Government with Respect of his Imperial, or
Magisterial Power Bellar. contra. Barcl. c. 5. Non solum in Spiritualibus
quoque Imperatore and Rege major est Papa, sed etiam in temporalibus.
over Emperors and Kings of the Roman-Kingdom; And HE IS the EIGHT with
Respect of his Hierarchical, or Pontifical-Power Oriohou. in Chymer; 10 l. 97
Quanto creatura Deo, tanto Impeperatoria Majestas est Papae inferior.

The Pope is the seventh Head in Nature and Kind: and an Eight also in Degree
and Power. Hen. Bish. of Mead, of Antichrist. page 11.


or Principality, which was also there before, under former Roman-Governments;
For as to matters of Religion, the Romans had of old Instituted by Numa
Pompilius their Pontifices or under-Priests and over them a Chief Priest called
Pontifex Maximus, which lower Priests were exempted from civil Jurisdiction,
and only Ordered and Governed by him, who was their Pontifex Maximus, HE
himself not being accountable to any Dionys. Halicarnass Ant. Romans 12. Godwin's
Antiq. lib. 2. Sect. 2. cap. 15.
. And therefore the Pope is said to be of the SEVEN with Respect of his
Imperial and Pontifical Power, unto which HE has Advanced himself in his
Dominion and Titles above all Principalities and Powers on Earth, (no Kings nor
Emperors being excepted or exempted) Triplex imperium habet Papa, in terra, in
coelo, and (ubi Chirstus nullum habit) in Purgatorio, in cujus signum Tiara
Papalis triplici corona ornata est. Caeremon. l. 1. Sect. 5 c. 9. and Sect. 7.
f. 78. Hab. 3.4. and Zech. 1.18.21.
. And so in his exalted Power of Imperial and Pontificial Horns the Pope of
Rome became the BEAST of the Eighth Head Rev. 17.11. Who did Rise out of the
Earth having two Horus like a Lamb, Rev. 13.11. Horns do signify Power in the
Prophesies of the Holy Scripture of Truth, as in Dan. 8.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
Purgatorium est peculium Papae, says Angelus Parisiensis.

Antoninus part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. Sect. 6. and 7. Bal. in vita Leonis 10.
etc.

Patres council. Lateran. Sess. 10. in Orat. Steph. Patracensis.


. So that the two Horns of that Beast ( the Pope of Rome) signify his two fold
Power Political and Ecclesiastical, or Imperial and Pontifical twisted and
united together in his Seventh and Eighth Headship, For even HE is the Eight,
and is of the Seven, Rev. 17.11. This Number of the BEAST viz. the Seventh and
Eighth can agree with none of the Roman Heads, but Popes only.

The third Particular, or Part of the Angels Description of the
Roman-Papal-BEAST of the Seventh and Eighth Head is by his RISE and RUIN, Rev.
17.8, 11. The BEAST shall ascend out of the Bottomless Pit, and go into
Perdition, ver. 11. And goes into Perdition. I shall here show briefly, first
his Rise, then his Ruin. Whereby it will more plainly appear, That the Pope of
Rome is the BEAST.

First, as to the Rise of the Beast of the Seventh and Eight Head, viz. the
Pope of Rome; we find in the Roman Histories, That Constantine the Great
changed the Seat of the Emperor from Rome to Constantinople, thereby leaving
the City of Rome, as it were vacant. After his Death the Roman-Empire was
divided, and the Roman-Eagle having two great Wings spread her self into the
Eastern and Western Empires; At last about anno 475. the Western Empire quite
expired in Augustulus Ambrose, Cyrill, Theophylact upon 2 These. 2.6, 7.

When the Roman Empire shall be taken out of the Way, then shall Antichrist
Come.


. For the Empire having been invaded by the Goths and Vandals, and other
barbarous Nations, by whom also Rome it self was taken and possessed about
fifty years, The Pope or Bishop of Rome himself being also expelled out the
City of Rome, Chrysostom 2 These. 2.6, 7. (...) (says he) (...),
and put to seek (for a Time) another Place of abode. About the year 607.
Boniface III. Prideaux Introduction of Histories, Interval. 7. Sect. page 89.
then Bishop of Rome obtained from Phocas then Emperor of the East, That not
the Patriarch of Constanstinople, but the Bishop of Rome should be Universal
Bishop. And now was the Title of Pope appropriated to the Bishop of Rome, which
was before communicated to other Patriarchs and Bishops also indifferently.
After this Pope Gregory VII. contended with the Emperor Henry the Fourth, whom
he excommunicated and deposed, and gave the Imperial Crown to Rodulphus Petra
dedit Petro, Petrus, DIADEMA Rodulpho Bellarm. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 17.

2 These. 2.4. (...), etc. (...), Numen.


, with this verse. The Pope of Rome being now Risen above all Bishops
Patriarchs and Emperors, HE advanced himself above all general Councils, which
Rise was fully attained by Pope Leo X. as Bellarmin boasts. The Pope of Rome
having ascended thus high, HE was Ambitious to Rise yet Higher. That so he
might appear to be That Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, who opposes and
exalts himself above every one called God, or divine Power, So that HE as God
might sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. And to that End
the Pope of Rome confirmed those erroneous Doctrines, and Positions of the
Church of Rome, and caused them to be Concluded and Decreed for Doctrines and
Articles of Faith, in the general Councils of Constance, Lateran, and of Trent.
Christophorus Mercellus speaking to Pope Julius II. in the Council of Lateran,
said Tu es alter Deus in Terra. Extra. Joh. 22. de verb. signif. cap. cum
interp. and lib. cerem. 1. Sect. 1. fol. 16. Eberhardus Epist. Salisburgensis
Impress. Lugd. Anno. 1555. Edit. nov. Ant. Papae Greg. 13. Credere Dominum Deum
nostrum Papam non sic potuisse Statuere, prout Statuit, haereticum Censeatur.
Thou art another God upon Earth. And in the Gloss on the Canon Law HE is
called, Our Lord God the Pope by the Popes allowance, as also divine Adoration
Those words, All that is called God, and worshipped, 2 These. 2.4. are not to be
interpreted (...) of Kings, etc. nor (...) of Prelates and Priests, but (...)
of Objects of divine worship, So the Athenian (...), Acts 17.23. were their
Idols and Modes of Devotion, and divine Worship. So Dan. 11.36.37.40.
.

The Pope of Rome, the BEAST of the Seventh and Eighth Head, having ascended
out of the deep Abyss, or Bottomless Pit, and Risen at last unto this Hight of
Impiety; He having overcome the Saints of God, Rev. 13.7. and killed the two
Prophetical Witnesses of Christ Rev. 11.7. must go into Perdition; Rev. 17.8,
11. and goes into Perdition: which implies his gradual Ruin, step by step. As
HE did rise gradually to the hight of his Grandeur, so HE must fall by degrees
into Perdition. 2 These. 2.8. Whom the Lord shall Consume with the Spirit of his
Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of his Coming. So that this BEAST,
( the Pope of Rome) shall be first Consumed, and afterward Destroyed, as is
foretold, Dan. 7.11, 12, 13. Now to be consumed is to decay, to wax weak, and
by some Sickness or Distempers to waste, pine, and wear away, and at last to
dye: even so shall the BEAST, that Man of SIN, the Son of Perdition, the Pope
of Rome. Who has been Consuming many years by the Spirit of Christ's mouth,
viz. The powerful and spiritual Preaching of the Gospel of free Grace: by the
Prophetical witnesses of Christ, his godly and faithful Ministers. Bellarmin's
Confession is a full Confirmation of the Popes Consumption, his words in
English are these -- The Roman See has by little and little decayed, etc.
Bellarm. de Romans Pon^if. lib. 3. cap. 21. Scrip. 1577.
. And it has much more decayed, and been consumed since that Time, by the
Preaching of the Gospel, through the powerful operation of the holy Spirit Mr.
Rich. Bernar's Key of Knowledge, part. 4. page 126, 127, 128, 129. Since 1558.
(says he) the Pope has nothing Increased upon us, But we by Gods power have
prevailed against him. Have not the Papists had ill Success in all their
Attempts against us? And in spite of their Policy, Trecheries, and Treasons, --
we stand and they fall; and so must they now (says he) continually, for by an
Oath of God it is confirmed unto us, Chap. 10. 5, 6. That there should be Time
no longer. Read page 127, 128. and 129.
.

The utter downfall, and Destruction of the Roman Beast (the Pope) is also
Prophesied, Rev. 14.8. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, (which is
Rome as has been fully proved). Also Rev. 18.2, 8, 10, 19, 21. Therefore shall
her Plagues come in one Day -- and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire, for
strong is the Lord God, who judges her. Alas, alas! that great City Babylon
(that is Rome-papal) that mighty City, for in one Hour is thy Judgment come;
and ver. 19. Alas alas! that great City (Rome) for in one hour she is made
desolate. And Rev. 19.19, 20 -- And the BEAST, (that is the Pope of Rome) was
taken, and with him the false Prophet -- These both were cast alive into the
Lake burning with Brimstone. Then shall Rome-Papal be found no more at all,
Rev. 18.21. and Then shall the Beast, (who is the Pope of Rome) be tormented
day and night, for ever and ever, Rev. 20.10.

Proposition III. That the Church of Rome is the great WHORE.
THE Church of God under the Law was Resembled by the Prophet
unto a comely and delicate Woman. And the Church of Christ under the Gospel
was Revealed to the Apostle Rev. 12.1.
by the Similitude of a Woman clothed with the Sun, having a Crown of twelve
Stars on her Head. Such was the Church at Jerusalem, and the Churches in Judea,
in the Days of the Apostles; And such was the Church at Rome, whose Faith was
Famous throughout the whole World Romans 1.7.8.
and such also were the Churches in Asia, those golden Candlesticks (whilst
Jesus Christ walked in the midst of them) and their shining Lights, Like Stars,
the Able Ministers of the New Testament called Angels, whom the Lord Jesus
Christ held in his right hand, Rev. 1.20, and 2.1.
But when the Church of Rome departed from the Faith, as was foretold by the
Apostle 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
and Apostatised both in Doctrine and Manners and fell away, as was also
foretold by the same Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4-12.
then she became a false Church, whom Jesus Christ showed unto his Servant
John, in a Vision and Revelation, like a Woman, that is an Harlot, and the
Mother of Harlots, and calls her the great WHORE Rev. 17.1, 5.
whose Name is Mystery, Babylon the great, etc. which is Papal-Rome, as has
been clearly, and fully Proved. And I shall now prove, and plainly Demonstrate,
this third Proposition,

That the Church of Rome is the great Whore.

That Church which is the Mother of Harlots, (a) by Maintaining, Commanding,
and Practicing spiritual Adulteries, Whoredoms, and Fornications, is the great
Whore: But the Church of Rome is the Mother of Harlots, which maintains,
commands and practices spiritual Adulteries, Whoredoms, and Fornications;
Therefore the Church of Rome is the great Whore.

The spiritual Adultery, whoredom, and fornication of Judah, and Jerusalem,
which God did so much complain of by his Prophets was their Idolatry, and
Image Worship, Ezekiel. 4.11, 37. with their Idols have they committed Adultery.
So God complained of Nineveh, by his Prophet, Nahum 3.4, 5. Because of the
Whoredoms of the well-favoured Harlot, the Mistress of Witchcraft, that Sells
Nations through her Whoredoms, and Families through her Witchcrafts: I will
show the Nations thy Nakedness, and the Kingdoms thy shame. And so did Christ
show the spiritual Adultery, and Idolatry of Papal-Rome under the Similitude of
a Woman whose Name is Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and
of the Abominations of the Earth. God's great Prohibition against this sinful
Abomination of spiritual Whoredom, of making and worshipping Images in the
second Commandment, Exodus 20.4, 5. And the grievous Judgments, which God
denounced against, and inflicted upon the worshippers of Idols, yea against
them false Prophets, and any other persons, that shall entice and persuade any
to go after other Gods, and serve them, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14,
15. shows us the sinfulness of this Sin of Idolatry, And how greatly God is
provoked unto Jealousy by it, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21, 22. and Rev. 3.20, 21, 22. and
Rev. 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8. So that Idolatry and false Worship is spiritual
Whoredom.

Now let us examine the second Proposition, to wit, Whether the Church of Rome
be guilty of this great Sin of spiritual Whoredom, Adultery, and Fornication,
(called Idolatry) and be indeed the Mother of Harlots? The Ancients do with one
Consent assert, that Idolatry is an Attributing of divine Honor unto the
Creature, which is only due unto God. And Thomas Aquinas Aquin. in Epist. ad
Ephesians. c. 5. Lect. 3. Quando bonor soli Deo debitus, exhibetur Creaturae.
Council. Trident. Sess. 9.
out of all the Fathers and Ancient Writers concludes so, That is Idolatry
(says he) when the Honor, that is only due to God, is given to the Creature.
The Church of Rome does attribute that divine Honor to the Creature, which is
only due to God, For she does attribute trust and Confidence in their Prayers
to Saints deceased, yea to their feigned Saints, as plainly appears in the
public Service-Books, Rosaries, Breviaries, Psalters, and Catechisms of the
Church of Rome. Catechis. Roman. Osorius tom. 3. Concion. p. 681. Bellarm. de
Sanctor. beat. lib. 1. cap. 10.
The Papists praying to Saint John, say, Hail, o holy Apostle of our Lord Jesus
Christ, I entreat thee -- that thou would deliver me, thy unworthy Servant,
from all Adversity, and receive my Soul at the Hour of Death, and would bring
me to life everlasting. To Saint George they pray thus -- He save us from our
Sins, that we may rest with the Blessed in Heaven. To Saint Erasmus, o Erasmus!
Grant, that by thy Merits and Prayers we may overcome all the snares of our
Enemies, and be freed from eternal Death. Possevin. bibl. select. page 295.
Boz. de sig. Eccles. Tom. 2. page 200.
To Francis the Friar they pray thus, O Francis -- singular crucified-Saint, be
thou to us the way of Life, make satisfaction for us always, show to Christ the
marks of thy wounds Exut Franciscum tunica laceroque cucullo: Qui Franciscus
erat, jam tibi Christus erit.

Francisci exuviis (si qua licet) indue Christum: Jam Franciscus erit, qui modo
Christus erat.


. This Friar Francis they make equal to Christ, as those Blasphemous Verses of
two shameless Jesuits Turselline and Bencius do plainly declare. And to the
Image Veronica, they pray thus, Hail, holy Face, imprinted on a Clout,
Chemnit. exam. Council, Trident. de Imagine.
Purge us from all Sin within and without, etc. Thus also the Papists by the
Commandments of Men, viz. Popes, Jesuits, Priests, yea and general Councils,
and the Church of Rome do worship Images, Pictures, Crosses, Crucifixes, and
Relics, which (they say) are to be worshipped after the same Manner as Images
are. Vasq. de adoratione, lib. 3. dis. 3. cap. 2. Reliquiae eodem modo atque
Imagines sunt adorandae. Conci. Trident. Decret. de Reliq. Sanct.
It Is written of Dunstan the Abbot of Glastenbury, that he blessed the right
Thumb of Editha the Abbess of Wilton, which being found uncorrupted, after all
her Body was turned to dust and ashes in her Grave, became a Relic. Guliel.
Malmsbur, lib. 2. de Pontif. Vincent. li. 25. cap. 33.
How many things about our Savior are turned into Relics? viz. the Manger,
his linen Cloth, his Cradle, his Shirt, the Table on which Christ eat his last
Supper, the Cup wherein he gave his Blood to be drunk, are Relics to be seen
at this Day (as the Papists and other Pilgrims and Travelers report in several
places and Churches in Rome, Spain, Ravenna, Pisa, at Andegavum, etc. The
Church of Rome is guilty of gross Idolatry and spiritual Adultery in Adoring
and worshipping the Host; for at the Priest's Elevation of the Host (the
Papists breaden God) they all fall down upon their Knees, and worship it with
very great Devotion, and whosoever refuses so to do is counted an Heretic.
Bellarm. de Sacrament. Euchar. l. a. cap. 29. Coster. Enchir. de Euchar.
Rubric. in Missal. Romans
And yet some Priests have poisoned the Host, intending to add Murder, yea
wilful and Sacrilegious Murder thereby to their gross Idolatry, as the Monk
Bernhardine, who poisoned the Host, to the intent that he might poison the
Emperor Henry of Lucenburgh, as he also did at the Instigation of Robert King
of Sicily. Baronius Cuspinian. Nauclerus. Egnat. and Baron. Spondan. An.
Eccles. an. 1055. Volateran. Hoveden. Math. Paris. etc.
tells us of a Priest that either did, or would have poisoned Pope Victor 2d.
at the Sacrament. And William Archbishop of York was poisoned at the Mass by
his own Chaplins, by that which they put into the Chalice. What can be more
Heathenish and palpable Idolatry, than to worship the Bread consecrated by a
Priest, which is maintained, commanded and Practiced by the Church of Rome, by
all her Priests and Papists?

Another branch of the Spiritual Whoredom and Adultery of the great Whore, the
Church of Rome, is the Adoration and worshipping the Cross it Self, on which
Christ suffered, say they, also the Image of the Cross and the Sign of the
Cross. Vasques de Adorat. l. 3. cap. 2. Bellarm. de Imagine. lib. 3. c. 27, 28,
29. Aquin. Sum. part. 3. art. 4.
Vasques the Jesuit affirms, that this is the Doctrine of the Roman-Church,
and so does Bellarmine, and Thomas Aquinas, and many other great Doctors of the
Church of Rome. It is testified Chrysostom. a Visitat. de virb. Domini tom. 4. Lib.
6. c. 7.
that a famous Papist, and a Professor of Divinity, who dedicated his Book to
Pope Clement 8th. says thus, We worship the Cross with the same Worship
wherewith we adore Christ himself, etc.

Again, Whereas we Asserted, That the Church of Rome is the Mother of Harlots;
for a full proof thereof let it be considered, First, That the Church of Rome
owns her self to be the Catholic and Mother Church of all those Churches in
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, etc. whether National or Parochial, that
receive, believe, and practice her damnable Doctrines, and Idolatrous worship,
which are false Churches and Harlots: [with whom the Kings of the Earth have
committed Fornication, and the Inhabiters of the Earth have been made drunk
with the wine of her Fornication] and therefore the Church of Rome
(Mystical-Babylon as before proved) is called the Mother of Harlots, Rev. 17.2,
5. And Abominations of the Earth.

Secondly, That the Church of Rome has begotten, born, and nourished all those
National and Parochial Churches, beforementioned, which are called the Cities
of the Nations, Rev. 16.19. which National Churches are Harlots (as Nineveh was
called, Nahum 3.4.) because of the multitude of their spiritual Whoredoms, and
abominable Idolatries: whereby it appears, that the Church of Rome is the
Mother of Harlots, for She has infused her false Doctrines, worships, and all
her Idolatries into those Churches.

Thirdly, That the Church of Rome, (as the Mother of Harlots) imposes her
false Doctrines, Idolatrous Worships, and damnable Practices upon all those and
other National Churches, whom She calls her Daughters, owning her Authority
over them, as being their Mother.

And, First, It does appear that the Church of Rome is the great WHORE, by her
spiritual Whoredoms and Fornications; Rev. 17.4. And the Woman -- had a
golden-CVP in her hand, full of Abominations, and filthiness of her
Fornication. All kinds of Idolatry, Image Worship, and Superstitions in the
Service of God is spiritual Whoredom, Pride. de Antichristo Lect. 11. Non in
Babilona solum, sed in Sodomam Roma degeneravit, ut non (...) modo Meretricum,
sed (ut habet liber Complutensis and Regius) (...), hoc est, Catamitarum and
Ganimedum Matter habeatur. Sic Heptades de Antichristo, page 99. 129-131. and
Down. Diatr. de Antichristo, l. 1. c. 7. Etiam M. Antonius de Dom. Archiep.
Spalat. de Rep. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 3. n. 26.-29. ac Hieron. adver. Jovin.
lib. 2, etc. Marlor in Apoc. 18.24. and in Apoc. 13. p. 37. 64, 65.
And such are those Images, and Idols; those Crosses and Crucifixes; those
Pictures, and painted forms, or Representations of our Savior Christ, of the
Virgin Mary, and of Saints deceased, whom the Papists set up, fall down before,
and worship. The Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication (that is,
spiritual Whoredom and Adultery) with HER: And the Inhabiters of the Earth have
been made drunk with the Wine of HER Fornication, Rev. 17.1 2. by receiving
those Idolatrous Doctrines, and by Practicing those Imaginary Superstitions,
which the Church of Rome Teaches and practiceth in the Worship of God. Matthew.
15.7, 8, 9. and Rev. 13.4, 8. Idem, in Apoc. 18. Meretricem Babylonicam,
Ecclesiam nempe Romanam, Scortationibus, ad immundia Antichristi Romani,
Sanguinolentorum scil. atque Belluinorum Pontificum, quorum plerique Magi,
Venefici, Athei, Adulteri, -- non Apostolici, sed Apotactici, and Apostatici,
quales ipse Genebrardus lib. 4. Chronol. fatetur -- Superstitionum, and Cultuum
novorum inventores.
In vain do they worship God (says Christ) teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, to wit, those Notoriously known Doctrines and Practices
of the Church of Rome, the Mother of Harlots, namely, Down. de Antichristo lib.
1. cap. 7. Dementatos and mente captos esse not at Apostolus, Apoc. 18.23. and
19.2. and 17.2, 4. qui cum ista Meretrice scortantur, ejusque scortationibus
and Idololatriis imbuuntur and fascinantur.
Their worshipping of Images, viz. of Christ, and of the Virgin Mary; their
Invocation, Adoration, and Prayers to dead Saints; And their irrational and
senseless Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Sacrifice, and Adoration of the Host,
that is, their Breaden God; which (say they) is by Consecration changed into
the very Body and Blood of Christ, which the Papists adore, kneel unto, and
worship, as their God and Savior.

But besides the Idolatry, and Superstition of this part of their Will Worship,
let it be considered by the judicious and rational Papists and Protestants,
First, how irrational that Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome is, to
wit, of Transubstantiation. Admit the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be
Administered in the Roman-Catholick-Church in a 100. 500 Places, (as indeed it
is) at the same Time, And the Bread be by virtue of each Priest's Consecration
changed into the Real Body of Christ, then Christ has 100. 500 Real Bodies at
one Time, which is absurd and irrational. Secondly, how senseless their Doctrine
of Transubstantiation is; The Church of Rome teaches, and the Papists
senselesly are to believe, That the Bread after Consecration is the very Body
of Christ. And yet they that Eat that Bread, see it is Bread, after the
Consecration, yea they taste and know it is Bread still, whilst they are
eating of it: And thus they delude their Senses by a fond and false Belief.
Thirdly, how damnable their Doctrine and Practice of this part of their false
worship of God is, (viz. Transubstantiation). The Doctrine is Damnable; For the
Church of Rome teaches her Children, the Papists, to believe in, to fall down
unto, and to worship a breaden-God, which their Priests have made an Idol, with
Solemn and Sacred Adoration. And the Practice is also damnable; For the Papists
eating that Bread with a firm Belief, that it is not Bread, but the Body of
Christ, do eat that Bread and drink that Cup unworthily, and so eat and drink
their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Secondly, It appears, that the Church of Rome is the great Whore; Because She
is become the Mother of Harlots Pride. de mill annis Apoc. Lect. 13. Roma est
Sodoma spiritualiter, quia similis Sodomae: qua re similis? foeditate
Sodomiticarum libidinum in urbe magna horribiliter grassantium, unde and Matter
Scortationum, Apoc. 17.5. vocata, etc. Vide jam magnam urbem Papatus; Quid est
nisi scortationum spiritualium and corporalium foedissima Officina? Petrarcha
queritur Ep. 20. Romae stupra, raptus, incestus, adulteria, jam Pontificialis
lasciviae ludi sunt, quod cecinit Mantuanus. Ipudor in villas, si non patiantur
easdem, Et villae vomicas, Roma est jam tota Lupanar. Roma, vale, vidi, satis
est vidisse; revertar, Cum Leno, Meretrix, Scurra, Cinaedus, ero. Sic, Marulus
in Epitaph. Ita Janus Pannonius, Etiam Johannes Sapidus.
the Lupan * of Stews, and of all Abominations, Rev. 17.1, 5. The Church of
Rome calls her self the Catholic Church, and She teaches her Children (the
Papists) to believe, that She is the Mother of all National-Churches, and
whosoever do not acknowledge Her to be the holy Catholick-Church, and submit not
to Her Canons, Constitutions, Doctrines, Discipline and Worship, are Heretics:
All the National-Churches, of Germany, France, Spain and Italy, etc. are her
Harlots; false Churches, and Idolatrous Worshippers of Images, Crosses,
Crucifixes, etc. as before-said.

The Church at Rome was a true Church in the Apostles Time, whose Faith was
famous throughout the whole World, Romans 1.7, 8. But afterward that Church
departed from the Faith, Apostatized both in Doctrine, and in Discipline, yea
and also in Manners. J. W. de ult. Romae exitio. page 62. ait, Joannes 13. omni
Flagitiorum generi, scil. Stupris, Adulteriis, Incestis, aliisque sceleribus ab
ipsa Adolescentia incumbens, Stephenam Concubinam Patris sui, and duas sorores
vitiavit. Nicholaus quidam de Bibrach. Erphordiensis non obscure innuit se a
Martino 2. velut Ganymedem -- ad turpiora quaedam expetitum.
And so became a false Church, and a Synagogue of Satan, and She is now become
the great Whore, and Mother of Harlots: She has left her first Husband Christ
Jesus the Lord, and has taken another Head and Husband, the POPE of Rome. She
has departed from her first Faith, which was grounded upon the Doctrines of
Jesus Christ, and his Apostles; and now she does believe the Doctrines of her
holy Father the Pope. And She is fallen from her first Purity in Discipline and
Manners, into all manner of Licenciousness and abominable Wickedness, and so is
become the Mother of Harlots, and of all the Abominations which are in all
false Churches, that are her Daughters, whereby the Church of Rome is plainly
manifested to be the great WHORE.

Thirdly, It appears, That the Church of Rome is the great Whore, by her
barbarous and bloody Persecutions, and Murders added to her Whoredoms, Revel.
18.24. For in HER was found the Blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and all that
were slain upon the Earth. And I saw the Woman (the great Whore, and Mother of
Harlots) drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.1, 5, 6. Particularly of the Waldenses, Albigenses,
and other. Abrege Chronol. etc. par le Sieur de Mezeray, Paris. 1567. Tom. 3.
p. 1082. 1086. ad Annum 1572.
Vergerius, who was well acquainted with the Romish bloody Inquisition, tells
us, that 150000. Protestants suffered Death in less then 30. years. The King of
France in his Letters to the Pope boasts, that in the year 1572. ( in the
Massacre of Paris and elsewhere) Thuanus Hist. l. 53. ad annum 1572. p. 837.
Edit. 1620. Fam. Strada de bello Belgico. l. 7. p. 373. Edit. Romae 1648.
70000 Heretics were slain in few days, that is 70000 Protestants were then
and there murdered by the Papists. And can we forget, or omit, to mention the
late bloody Butcheries of Protestants by the Barbarous cruel Irish-Papists,
Anno 1641. when 100000. were murdered? And if the bloody Invasion, Anno 1588.
and the Horrid Gunpowder Treason, Novvember 5th. 1605. And the bloody
traitorous design of Popish Recusants, as the King calls it In his Majesty's
Declaration for banishing all Papists Ten miles from London, October. 30. 1678.
Even that damnable, and Hellish-Plot (as the Parliament voted it) contrived,
and carried on by Popish Recusants, for Assassinating and Murdering the King,
and for Subverting the Government, and rooting out, and destroying the
Protestant Religion The Votes of the Commons read to the Lords, and by them
also approved at a Conference, 1st. Nov. 1678.
had taken Effect, many more Protestants in England had been (ere this Day)
murdered and massacred by the blood-thirsty-Papists. And these barbarous,
bloody, and damnable Persecutions and Practices of the Papists, are grounded on
the very Doctrine, Religion, and Faith of the Church of Rome; which is not to
be found in any other party of the whole Christian world (so called) besides.
Whereby it is evident, to those that have understanding, That the Church of
Rome is the great bloody Whore, viz. that purple and scarlet Colored Whore,
the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth, Revel. 17.1, 4, 5.

Proposition IV. That the Roman-Priests are the false Prophet.
BY the Roman-Priests, I mean and intend the Pope, the Cardinals, the Jesuits,
and all those Priests that do receive Orders of Priesthood from the Church of
Rome, and ackowledge HER to be the Catholic Church, believe Her Doctrines,
obey her Canons, and Teach Her damnable Heresies. That the Roman-Priests are
the false Prophet does plainly appear by the false Doctrines of the Church of
Rome, which they believe, and teach. I call them the Doctrines of the Church of
Rome, which are approved by the public Authority of that Church by their
established Laws, their Popes Bulls, Decretals, and Constitutions, or the
Canons of their Provincial, National, or general Councils, All which are
approved and confirmed in their Trent Council Con. Trident. Sess. 25. de
Reformatione, cap. 20. Praecepit. Sancta Synodus, Sacros Canones, and Concilia
generalia omnia, nec non alias Apostolicas Sanctiones in favorem Ecclesiast
icarum Personarum and Libertatis Ecclesiasticae; and contra ejus Violatores
editos, quae Omnia presenti Decreto innovat, exact ab omnibus observari debere.
. And all their Secular Clergy, and all who have Cure of Souls, etc. are sworn
to approve, to profess, and teach the same -- And to Anathematize, Reject, and
Curse all contrary opinions and Doctrines. Vide Bullam Pii 4. Super forma
Juramenti Professionis fidei, in calce Sess. 25. Concilii Trident. datam Romae.
Id. Nov. 1564. de Reformatione, cap. 12.
I shall at present instance in three known Doctrines of the Church of Rome, 1.
The Doctrine of the Popes Supremacy over all Princes, Kings, and Emperors of
the Earth. This pernicious Doctrine of the Church of Rome is taught by the
Roman-Priests Blasius Bagnus de S. Romanae Ecclesiae dignitatibus, Tract. 7.
page 83, 84.85.
Blasius Bagnus a Prior general tells us, That the Popes Empire is over all the
World: and that HE is the only Vicar of God, who has Supreme Power and Rule
over all Kings and Princes of the Earth; Sic. Simanca Enchir. Judicum Tit. 67..
12. p. 349. Antwerp. Anno, 1573. and
Jacobus Simanca a Roman-Bishop, whose Book is Printed cum publico Privilegio,
and Commended by the Censor librorum the learned Ben. Arias Montanus, who
says, That he had read it -- And that it contained nothing offensive to the
Catholic Faith. Heretics (says Simanca) are actually deprived of all
Dominion and Jurisdiction, and their Subjects freed from their Obedience, and
this comprehends Kings and other Lords. And Emanuel Sa a famous Jesuit
affirms Eman. Sa Aphor. Confess. Verbo Clericus, page 41. Col. 1599.
That if a Clergyman Rebel against his King, it is no Treason, because (says
he) Clergymen are not the Kings Subjects. These false Prophets have taught,
and maintained this false Doctrine.

2. The Doctrine of Justification by works which are (say they) meritorious and
satisfactory. I need not spend Time, and wast Paper in proving that the Church
of Rome, and all her Clergy own and teach this Doctrine Conc. Coloniens. page
140. 141. Becan. Ibid. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 6. Bellarm. lib. 1. de
just. cap. 13. and de Purgot. lib. 1. cap. 14. Rhem. Annot. 2 Timothy 4.8. and
Heb. 6.10. Greg. de Valen. tom. 3. disp. 7. q. 2. de Indulgent. Bellarm. lib.
4. cap. 16. de Justif. and lib. 5. cap. 16, 17. Andradius orthod. Explic.
Council. Trident. lib. 6.
therefore I will briefly prove that it is false Doctrine, whereby it will
appear, that the Roman-Priests are false Teachers, Deceivers, and the false
Prophet. The Apostle Paul gives it in holy writ as the Conclusion of all
Christ's Apostles, Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude (says he) that a man is
justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law. And Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a
Man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ
-- For by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

It may be objected, that the Apostle James says expressly, That by works a man
is Justified, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.24. and Instanceth in Abraham, ver.
21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works?

I Answer, That a man's Person is justified by Faith before God, and works
justify his Faith before Men: And this seems to be the Mind of both those
Apostles; For St. Paul says expressly Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by
works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God. And St. James speaks of
showing our Faith by our works, before Men, verse. 18. I will show thee my Faith
by my Works, And so Peter Martyr and other of the Ancients used to Distinguish;
Faith (says he) justifies our Persons, and good Works justify our Faith.

3. The Doctrine of the false worship of God, which consists of many particular
Parts, (that the Church of Rome Practices, and the Roman Priests teach) all
which are asserted, confirmed, and established by the Laws, Canons, and general
Councils of the Church of Rome. And the Romish Clergy (by teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men touching the Worship of God Joan. Bal. in
vita Innocent. 3d. says that Innocent 3d. Commanded, that the Words of the
Canon of the Mass should be held equal to the words of the Gospel.

Card. Cusanus entitleth his Book, De Authoritate Ecclesiae and Concilii supra
and contra Scripturam.

Henricus Doctor, magister suori palatii Roma ad Legatos Bohemicos sub Felice
Papa, page 1447. says, The Pope may Change the holy Gospel, and may give to the
Gospel, according to the place and time, another Sense. Michael, Medina,
Gratian, Abb. Panorm. Felinus, and all the Roman Priests assert and Teach, The
Pope may dispense against jus divinum, and against the New Testament.


and thereby deceiving and seducing them) are become the false Prophet: like
Thyatira's Jezabel, Rev. 2.20. which called her self a Prophetess, viz. The
false Prophets in that Church, who taught and seduced the people of God to
commit Fornication: so the Roman Priests do teach them, that worship the Beast
and his Image, to worship Saints deceased, yea to worship Idols, Crosses,
Crucifixes, and Images which the Church of Rome has set up, and Commanded to
be Adored and Worshipped; especially their breaden God, and Sacrilegious Host,
teaching the People and Seducing them to Believe, That the self same Body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who was once in the fullness of Time (and but once) made
of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. by the Power of God, is every Sacrament Day made of a
Wafer by the power of a Romish Priest. By all which, and by several other false
Doctrines, it is plain and evident to those, that have understanding in the
holy Scriptures of Truth, That the Roman-Priests are the false Prophet, meant
and intended by Christ, Rev. 13, 14. and 16.13. and 19, 20. As for their
Doctrines of Purgatory, Pennances, Pardons, and many other false Doctrines
taught by the Roman-Priests, I pass by, as not worth mentioning.

Having thus far unvailed Mystical-Babylon, that is Rome-papal, I shall now
proceed to Call the People of God to come out of Babylon, fand to forsake
Papal- Rome, to Renounce the Church o Rome, as the great Whore and Mother of
Harlots, to Deny the Popes Imperial and Pontifical Supremacy, as the Beast with
his two horns like a Lamb and not to hear nor hearken unto the Roman-Priest,
(that false Prophet) which teach the false Doctriness of the Church of Rome,
and Seduce the Servants of God. And this Call I give the People of God (
especially in England) in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

A Call to all the People of God to come out of Babylon.
REvel. 18.4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of HER my
People, That ye be not Partakers of her Sins, And that ye receive not of her
Plagues. This Call is the Call of God our Savior unto all his People in
Mystical- Babylon (Papal-Rome) to come out of HER. Come out of her my People:
which Call of Christ was given by an audible voice, And I heard another voice
from Heaven saying, etc. And this Call from Heaven is urged and enforced upon
the People of God by two Cogent Arguments or Reasons, 1. That ye be not
partakers of HER Sins: 2. That ye receive not of her Plagues.

Two things in this Call need Explanation, 1. What this voice was? 2. What it
is to come out of HER? To both these I shall speak briefly, and then proceed to
speak more largely of this Call.

First, This voice has Heaven's Authority, It was from Heaven, to wit, the
voice of Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel ordinarily, and by the powerful
Efficacy of the holy Spirit also, 1 These. 1.5. For our Gospel came not unto you
in Word only, but also in Power, and in the holy Spirit, and in much assurance.
So had the voice of the Angels of God by whom Christ then Spoke unto his
Servant John, Rev. 14.6. -- 13. with a loud voice, ver. 7. which St. John heard
from Heaven, ver. 13. And so have the voice of the faithful Ministers of God,
by whom Christ also now speaks unto his People, Luke 10.16. He that hears
you, hears me, etc. to wit, Heavens Authority.

Secondly, To come out of HER, is to Separate themselves from the Church of
Rome, which is now become a false Church, called the great Whore, and Mother of
Harlots. 2 Cor. 6.14. -- 18. ver. 17. Wherefore Come out from among them, and
be ye Separate, says the Lord. The Lord Jesus Christ would have his People to
be Separated under the Gospel from the unbelieving Jews, and their false
worship (which Christ calls vain worship, Matthew. 15.8.9.) And St. Paul did
Separate the Disciples from the Jewish Synagogue of unbelievers, Acts 19.8, 9.
And also from Idolatrous Gentiles, that worship Images, (as the Church of Rome
does) and from their Idol-Temples, Churches, and Chapels, For the Gentile
Papists, and Church of Rome, their Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, and all the
Roman-Priests do tread under foot the holy City, Rev. 11.2. Jerusalem, viz. the
Church and People of God, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. What agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said,
Levit. 20.24.26. and 26.12. I will dwell among them, and walk among them, And I
will be their God, and they shall be my People: wherefore Come out from among
them, and be ye separated says the Lord, and touch not the unclean Thing, etc.
The Papists Images, Crosses, Crucifixes; their Consecrated Wafers, holy Waters,
and Saints Pictures, the Image of the Virgin-Mary, and of our Savior upon the
Cross, unto which Images the Papish Priests and people fall down and worship;
yea their Ave Maria, and prayers to Saints deceased, all their holy Bells,
Beads, Prayer-Books, and Candles, etc. are all as an unclean thing, and ought
to be separated from, and not touched by the People of God, whom Christ calls
upon with a loud voice to come out from among them.

These two particulars explained the Argument which Christ urges to enforce
this his Call unto his People follows, That ye be not Partakers of HER Sins,
and that ye receive not of HER Plagues. As if Christ had said, I do by the
voice of my faithful Ministers Call and Command you my People to Come out of
Mystical- Babylon (Papal-Rome) and to Separate your selves from the Church of
Rome, which is fallen, is fallen from her Apostolical Purity in Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline or Ecclesiastical Government, and is become an Harlot,
a false Church, the great Whore, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the
Earth, The Synagogue of Satan, the Habitation of Devils, the Hold of every foul
Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. But if you my People (as
if Christ had said) will not obey my voice, nor hear my Call, If you will not
come out from the Church of Rome, and separate your selves from the Papists,
and leave going to and worshipping in their Popish Temples, Churches, Chapels,
and private Cloisters, Nunneries, Priories, Religious Houses, Meeting-places,
and holy Roods of Auricular Confession, etc. then in the first Place you will
be Partakers of their Sins, that is, you will become guilty of their
Will Worship, and spiritual Fornication, Rev. 17.2. of their Idolatries,
Adulteries, Thefts, Murders, etc. Rev. 9.20, 21. And of their Impenitency added
unto their Iniquities. And in the next Place you shall receive of her Plagues,
Death and Mourning and Famine, etc. Rev. 18.8. And these shall drink of the
Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without Mixture into the Cup of
his Indignation, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11, 12.

The Motives and Encouragements I shall propound to the People of God to Come
out of Mystical- Babylon, and to Separate from the Church of Rome are these, 1.
You cannot come to Sion, until you come out of Babylon, Isa. 35.10. And the
Ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting
joy upon their heads. 2. You cannot worship God in Spirit and Truth, unless you
first separate your selves from false Worship and Worshipers, John 4.22, 23,
24. Ye worship ye know not what, -- The true worshipers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and Truth. 3. You cannot enjoy Communion with God, whilst you
hold a Communion with Idols, and Image-worshipers 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. What
Communion has Light with Darkness? And what agreement has the Temple of God
with Idols? Wherefore Come out from among them, and be ye Separate, says the
Lord.

Consider whilst you continue in Babylon, (the Church of Rome) you are under
the Guidance of the Pope and Roman-Priests, who are so far from being
infallible Guides, (as they pretend) that they are erroneous, false, and blind
Leaders of the blind into Perdition; The Roman-Priests are those false
Teachers, Seducers, Deceivers; which were foretold by the Apostles of Christ, 2
Pet. 2.1, 2. and 2 John 7. and 2 Timothy 3.13. and 1 Timothy 4.1. and 1 John 2.26.
These things have I written unto you concerning them that Seduce you. Therefore
look to your selves, says the Apostle, 2 John 8. verse. Beloved (says he) 1
Epist. of Joh. 4.1, 2. etc.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be of God, for
many false Prophets are gone out into the World. You may do well to Consider
also, what Diversities, and Divisions in Principles, Opinions, and Practices in
Religion there are at this Time, in the World, especially among Teachers, false
Teachers, who privately bring in Damnable Heresies: And many follow their
pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2.1.23. By Reason of whom the WAY of TRVTH is evil
spoken of. Now God has in great Mercy unto the Souls of his People out of the
exceeding Riches of his free Grace, and marvelous loving Kindness toward them,
(That they might not be led away with the Errors of the Wicked), appointed them
a threefold Guide, which God has plainly declared in the holy Scripture of
Truth to direct, lead and guide his People in the WAY of TRUTH until they come
to Heaven: namely, 1. His holy Spirit, 2. His written Word, and 3. his faithful
Ministers.

First, God has given his holy Spirit unto his People, Gal. 4.6. To lead them,
Romans 8.14. and guide them into all the Truth, John 16.13. and to Teach them all
things, John 14.26. and 1 John 2.20, 27. And least his People should be
deceived, deluded, or seduced by Satan's transforming himself into an Angel of
Light, or by false Apostles, deceitful workers, (who are his Ministers)
transforming themselves into the Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. God
has Secondly given his People a Sure Word, ( his written Word to Guide them,
Psalm 43.3) 2 Pet. 1.14. Unto which, they do well, if they take heed, as unto a
Light, that shines in a dark place, etc. And thus God Councelled and Cautioned
his People of old by his Prophet, Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony;
If they speak not according to that Word, it is, because there is no Light in
them. And the Apostle testifies, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. That all Scripture is
given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, and for
Instruction in Righteousness, etc. And thirdly, God has also given his people
able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter only, but of the Spirit,
2 Cor. 3.5, 6. and Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the work of
the Ministry, etc. Heb. 13, 7, 17. (...) etc.
And God Set them in his Church, 1 Cor. 12.4, 28. to be Guides unto his people,
(b) Heb. 13.7, 17. Remember your Guides, ver. 7. Obey your Guides, ver. 17. And
submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give
account. Will any godly wise Man or Woman judge in themselves, that it is safe
for them to forsake and refuse this threefold Sure Guide of the Spirit, Word,
and Ministry of Christ, Math. 24.4, 5, 11.23, 24, 25.21. Act. 20.29, 30. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.1.2, 3. 1 John 4.1, 2, 3.
which God has ordained, and to give up the conduct of their Souls unto the
Church of Rome, to be guided by her Laws, Canons, Councels, Popes, Cardinals,
Jesuits, and the rest of the Roman-Clergy, who are blind Guides, and
Antichristian Ministers: and so to hazard their own eternal Salvation? which
false Teachers, and their false and damnable Errors, Doctrines, and Practices
our blessed Savior and his holy Apostles have forewarned us of in the
Scripture of Truth.

2. A Call to the Kings of the Earth to hate the Whore, to make her Desolate,
and to burn her with Fire.
MY Warrant to give this Call to the Kings of the Earth is that Prophecy, Rev.
17.16. And the ten Horns, which thou saw upon the BEAST, these shall hate
the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
shall burn her with Fire. The ten Horns are those ten Kings, which had formerly
agreed, and given their Kingdom, Power, and Strength unto the Beast, Rev.
17.12, 13, 17. until the Words of God shall be fulfilled. These ten horns are
the Europaean Kings of Italy, Spain, Germany, France, England, etc. who have
formerly submitted themselves and their Kingdoms unto the BEAST (the Popes of
Rome) and to the Church of Rome (that great Whore and Mother of Harlots) As was
here fore- Prophesyed, and as all Historians have testified. But it is the
Revealed Will of God recorded in the Scripture of Truth, That the ten Horns
shall hate the Whore, etc. And upon this Scripture Ground I take this humble
boldness to give this CALL unto the Kings of the Europaean World to hate the
Whore, etc. And the Reasons, which I shall humbly Propose to them are these,
viz. 1. Because it is the Revealed Will of God that they should so do (in this
very Scripture, Rev. 17.16,) and They shall do so. 2. Because, the great Whore
(the Church of Rome) has given her golden Cup, full of Abomination and
filthiness of her Fornication, into the Hands of the Kings of the Earth, and
caused them to drink, and they and the Inhabitants of the Earth have been made
drunk with the Wine of HER Fornication, Rev. 17.1.2, 4. 3. Because SHE (the
Church of Rome) has Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18. Deposing
Emperors, and Kings; putting down one, and setting up another, at the Pope's
Pleasure (who is HER Head, Lord, and Lawgiver) as has been proved, page 3.10,
11. of this Treatise: and appears Century 8. Pope Zachary deposed Childerick
King of France.

Gregory the 7th, deposed Henry the fourth, Cent. 11. Pope Sylvester the third
Excommunicated Henry the fifth, Cent. 12. Pope Innocent the 4th, deposed the
Emperor Frederick 2d. Century, 13. Pope Gregory the 2d, deposed the Emperor
Leo Isaurus, because he was against Images.

Baron Annal, ad annum 730. Number. 5. and ad annum 593 Number. 86. and Tom. 8. ad
An. Christi, 593. Number. 86. Non modo deponi, sed etiam excommunicari, and in
aeterno examine damnari Decrevit. Damnatio and Excommunicatio Hen. 8. by Pope
Paul the 3d. and Elizabethae. by Pope Pius the 5th. The Title fixed to the
Pope's Bulls.


4. Because SHE has shed the blood of the Prophets, Saints, and Martyrs of
Jesus, Rev. 16, 6, 7. and 17.6. and 18.24. Therefore Reward her even as she
Rewarded you; and double to her double, according to her Work, Rev. 18.1, 2, 3,
5 6, 7, 8, 20, 21-24. And of all the Nations in Europe, no Kings, or Kingdoms
have more just Cause to hate, and to be Avenged on Mystery, Babylon the great,
the Mother of Harlots, that great WHORE, the Church of Rome, and her Head the
Pope, that BEAST, and the Roman-Priests, the false Prophet, than this our
Nation, King, and Kingdom; If his Royal Majesty, and his great Council
Assembled in Parliament seriously consider all the Papists former Plots and
Conspiracies against the Kings and Kingnom of England; but most especially this
late bloody traitorous design of Popish Recusants, even this damnable and
Hellish Plot The Votes of the House of Commons approved by the Lords in a
Conference, November. 1. 1678.
contrived and still carrying on by them to Assassinate the King, to subvert
the Government, and to Root out the Protestant Religion, and all the
Protestants in England.

All which I most humbly submit to the Wisdom of the King's Majesty and his
great Council when Assembled in Parliament, for whom I daily pray.

FINIS.

