THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

THE HISTORY Of the REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND; Containing five
Books: Together with some TREATISES conducing to the History.

Published by Authority.

JEREM. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now,
and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there
be any executes Judgment, that seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it.

2 COR. 13.8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

LONDON, Printed by John Raworth, for George Thomason and Octavian Pullen, and
are to be sold at the sign of the Rose in Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLIV.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HEre I present unto thee a Piece, I dare promise, worthy of thy reading;
wherein thou have a true and plain Relation (without disguising) of many
memorable Passages happened in the Church of God, and likewise some notable
ones in the State of the Kingdom of Scotland, from the very first settling of
State and Church in that Country. But namely, and chiefly, thou have here
related what principally passed in Church and State in this our Country,
during the great Work of purging the Church from the Superstitions and
Idolatry, and freeing both Church and State from the Tyranny and Slavery of
Popery, until the coming of King James, our late Sovereign, to the Crown of
Scotland. Further, beside the true and faithful Relation of many Occurrences
that fell out in these days in Scotland, thou have unfolded unto thee, and
made plain, the strong Reasons, and necessery Causes that moved these men who
are here named, although infirm and weak in themselves, to undergo the great
Work of Reformation: With the solid Grounds upon which they went on with this
weighty Business willingly and cheerfully, notwithstanding the great rubs and
difficulties they met withal, through the help and assistance of God, who by
them, mean Instruments, brought things to pass, in despite of the malice and
stratagems of Satan, with his agents, for the good of his People, and the
settling of his Church in Purity and Liberty.

All these things are set down plainly and simply, in familiar and homely
Language; Yet so, that they may be with ease apprehended and understood by any
one. From what thou have here, written in this Volume, although there were no
other Writings in this kind extant, thou may see easily, by what means the
great Mystery of Iniquity, from the very first Rise, has been set afoot, and
constantly, ever since, has been carried on; to wit, By cunning Devices,
impudent Lies, continued and crafty Plots, under specious Pretexts, and open
Oppression, Tyranny, and Cruelties, within Scotland, till the year of Christ
1567. After which time, the enemies of God, and of his People, have not been
sleeping, till this present, more then formerly. Wherefore, for thy good,
Christian Reader, I have thought fit in this place to point at some main
Occurrences from that time till now.

First then, the adversaries of Truth and Goodness, under the specious Pretext
of restoring Queen Mary to her Liberty, and of re-establishing her in full
Authority, and sole Power, did disquiet and trouble both Church and State in
Scotland, both with open Force, and subtle Plots, for some years, that is, to
the 1573 year. But finding that all their Undertakings, under this pretext,
proved to be in vain, and without success, and standing to their main Design
of undoing Religion and Liberty, they bethought themselves of another way, in
appearance more plausible, for compassing their wicked Intents; it was, To
deal, by way of entreaty and request, with the chief Ministers of State and
Church then, To have the Mother set at liberty, and to be joint in Authority
and Power with her Son. And, for the obtaining of this, was employed the credit
of the French Court for the time, with all its skill and cunning; but to small
purpose: For these rude fellows, who managed the public Affairs then of State
and Church, could not be corrupted with the French Complements. In this way the
enemies continued, till the year 1577, and did not then give over,
notwithstanding their bad success; but, according to their wonted and resolved
custom, they went on with their Design, betaking themselves to a new course;
wherein, they had indeed more success then in either of the former two: It was
this; They did set awork certain men, who with fair words, and flattering
tales, so craftily dealt with the young King, hardly yet twelve years of age,
that they made him cast off, as a yoke, the counsel and service of those, who,
ever since his Birthday, had carefully labored for the good of State and
Church, with the pereservation of his Authority, and safety of his Person: And
so the inconsiderate young King, although of most nimble wit and knowing, above
his years, under the show of freedom, put himself in the power of those who
wished no good to his Person and Authority, and as little to the Church and
State, making no scruple to trouble both for their own ends, according to the
Instructions of the Masters who set them awork. So, in very short time, they
gave unto the young King such impressions (which did stick too much to him)
that not only he became averse from those who had been so useful to the
public, and so serviceable to him, but also he suffered them to be persecuted,
yea, some by death, and others by banishment.

While the enemies were thus working business with us in Scotland, they were
not idle with our neighbors in England; for they were contriving and plotting,
under color of setting the imprisoned Queen at liberty: And were gone so far
on in this way in both Kingdoms, that to stop the course and progress of the
enemies, both Countries thought it necessary to enter into a mutual League and
Covenant one with another, for the defense of the Reformed Religion, and
Liberties of both Kingdoms, with the preservation of the Persons and
Authorities of both Princes, King James and Queen Elizabeth, against the common
enemy. This was done by the consent of both Princes, in the year 1686.

After this, the enemy seeing the wariness of both Kingdoms to be such, that
in a short time he was not likely to advance the main Design according to his
mind, by craft and cunning leaves off for a time to act the part of the Fox,
and openly declares himself to be a ravishing Wolf: So the year 1588 the Armado
comes against both Kingdoms, which God, in his mercy unto our fathers and us,
brought to naught. About this time, and some years before, the agents of the
enemy were very busy with King James to break with England, and to revenge the
hard usage, and ill treatment of his Mother: But God did direct him so, for his
own good, that he did give no consent to their evil counsel. Upon this
refusal of the Kings, the agents of the common enemy do bestir themselves to
trouble both King and Kingdom; which they did in a high measure, in the year
1595. This gave occasion then both to Prince and people to enter into Covenant
for the defense of the Truth, and pure Doctrine of the Church, with the
Reformed Discipline, and of the safety of the King and Kingdom; by which means,
the proceedings of the enemies was stopped for a while.

Now the time drawing near of the Kings coming to the Crown of England, the
watching enemy returns to work again, in another manner then he had done
hitherto; which was this: By the mouths of some timorous and worldly men, he
causes to present unto the King the consideration of great difficulties that
he was likely to find, in his succeeding to the Crown of England, by two
parties there, who were given out to be the Strength of the Kingdom; to wit,
the professed Papists, and the Prelaticall men; therefore, to facilitate the
business, they must be in some sort contented. For the satisfaction of the
Prelates, the King, by degrees, must endeavor to bring again into Scotland
Prelacy, with all its dependences; for no neglecter or contemner of the holy
Order could be kindly received to reign in England: and so this part of the
advice was followed with all possible care and diligence. To content the
Papists, they not only must have given unto them underhand hopes of
connivence, and over seeing their practice; but also there must be a Letter
written to the Pope, to assure his Holiness of the Kings affection to the
Catholic Cause. Thus both these parties were calmed so far, that the King came
to the Crown of England, Anno 1602, without manifest opposition, albeit not
without the grumbling and grudging of some. As for the stricter sort of
Professors of the Reformed Religion, going under the nickname of Puritans, no
opposition or trouble to the Succession was feared from them, because the
Principles upon which they go on, rising from the Word of God, are far other
then those of worldlings, which flow from interest, and consequently, they
needed not Atonement, or Propitiatory Sacrifice, to befriend the King. But the
holy Father not finding real performance by the King of what he looked for,
remembers the King in good earnest of his promise not kept, by the Gunpowder
Plot, Anno 1605. After which (by Gods mercy failing) men would have thought,
that the Popish party should leave off all undertakings hereafter. But they
follow their business more constantly then so; for no sooner one Plot fails,
but incontinent they put another afoot; yea, they have several Plots at one
and the same time in hand, whereof it is likely that either one or other will
take. Now this great Plot of the Gunpowder being come to nothing, they, as it
were, go back for a time, to come forward in due season with another; and
leaving for a while the open and devouring ravishing of the Wolf, they have
recourse again to the cunning of the Fox.

The next care then, after the calming in some measure the spirits of men,
after so horrid a Treason, is to look about, and to study by whom: he affairs
of these Dominions were managed: And finding, by serious inspection, That all
affairs received great influence from the Court, after mature deliberation,
they resolved to make friends there; which they did, by subtle insinuations,
fair words, high promises, and some real performances of good Offices; yea,
when money was absolutely necessary, it was not spared. Thus, by degrees,
having gotten friends at Court, in it they make a party next, for whose
subsistence and increase, they employ all that they can. Now having power and
credit at Court, more and clearly perceiving it to be the fountain from whence
all preferment to Honor and benefit in Church and State did flow, they judged
it fit for their purpose to make sure of some prime men both in Church and
State, according to their mind* which was done as they desired. Thus having
gained men chief in State and Church for their use, then they went to the
corrupting of the Universities, being the Seminaries of all Liberal Education.
This likewise they did effectuate; first, by the Overseers connivence to
looseness of life in young people; next, by the bad example of the Seniors the
Iuniors were invited to do mischief. Then the Teachers, by their bad
instruction, did corrupt, namely, in Theology, all sound Doctrine. And for
this purpose, the earnest study of the Old Testrment in the Original Hebrew
was cried down, as beseeming rather men of the Synagogue, then those of the
Christian Schools. Likewise the Greek of the New Testament must not be read
with diligence, for fear of spoiling the elegancy of the Greek Language, which
is to be found in profane Authors. So they withdrew the Students from the
study of Scriptures in the Original, and recommended to them the reading of
humane Writings, particularly in Theology, the Books of the Ancients, which
are commonly called Fathers. Likewise was recommended unto young men the study
of the Sophistry of the Monks, as of Thomas and Scotus namely, with their
Expositors. True it is, That if young men were well instructed in Theology
from the Scriptures, and taught the true Principles of Philosophy, in a settled
course, by some judicious and diligent Professor, they might read all these
Books, and others in their kind, with pleasure and benefit. But alas, young
men not knowing the rudiments of Theology, nor the first Elements of
Philosophy, are let loose unto themselves, and so by reading these Books,
having no sure ground to stick to, learn only to doubt, and put Queries, yea,
of the very Principles of all sound knowledge, both Divine and Humane. Thus
being brought to waver and doubt, they are easily led, what by interest, what
by weakness, to embrace a bad Opinion; or at least, to hold all uncertain, as
the ancient Scepticks, not being able to resolve: Yea, doubting is come to that
height, that, in the opinion of many, he is the bravest fellow, and wittiest,
that can raise most Queries, answer them who will or can: And so Wit is hugely
cried up, which is but mere froth; and poor solid Wisdom is not so much as
named, or thought on.

Then those of the richer sort, having spent some time idly and loosely at the
Universities, go beyond Sea, particularly to Italy, forsooth, either upon their
own trust, or, which is little better, if not worse, many of those who go along
with young men, to advise and direct them, have as much need of one for their
guide, as the young men themselves; having neither staidness, discretion, nor
probity. So that if there were a just account cast up of all those who either
have been bred in the Universities, or gone beyond Sea these many years, I will
speak within compass, That of twenty you shall hardly find one who is
improved in virtue by this Breeding, for the good of the Church and State,
whereof they are members, and perhaps considerable too, if they were wise and
good. At this present both Church and State finds this to be true, by woeful
experience, namely, in the Clergy, Gentry, and Nobility.

Now these evils have not been in England alone, for Scotland, according to its
proportion, in compass of Bounds, numbers of people, provision of means, and
in its distance from Court, has its full share of all the evil: For first, the
Schools of breeding young people at home were become very corrupt; and many in
their traveling abroad, have either miscarried, or little benefited
themselves: The fruit we have found, namely, in our corrupt Clergy, yea, and
in some of our infatuated Gentry and Nobility: but blessed be God, things are
now in a better posture and constitution there, then they have been formerly;
God grant we may have occasion to say the like of England. For Religion, sound
knowledge, and true wisdom, with probity have been so neglected and contemned
there, to the ignominy and reproach of Christianity, that in these times, there
we have seen the doleful effects of want of Religion, and of these other
virtues. But to return to the Court.

The Popish party, although they had both power and credit at Court, yet they
were not assured to go on so smoothly and speedily with the great Design, so
long as there were any of eminency there, of whom they could not be certain: So
Prince Henry was first wished to be out of the way, next, by untimely death was
taken away, to the grief of many honest men. This conceived Remora being laid
aside, they resolve to go on more freely in their Design. But although they
had gained much upon the affection of the King, yet they can suffer him to
express the Notions of Religion and wisdom, both by word and writing: Yea,
they will yield him to follow so far his former Principles, as to match his
daughter to one of his Profession: so he marries the Lady Elizabeth to the
Prince Elector Palatine, although it was not altogether so pleasing to some
chief ones at Court then. These things passed, in the year 1613. who, although
they would not stop the Marriage to go on, yet they managed the business so,
that they hindered the Prince Elector Palatine to receive the advantages which
in reason he should have had by virtue of it, as help and aid at his need, etc.

Here we must make a little step beyond Sea, and presently return back. Now
then, we must know, That as the Popish party have been very busy in these our
Dominions, in carrying on the Work of the great Design of subjecting all to
the Pope, directly, or indirectly; so in other places, where Idolatry and
Tyranny had been cast off, they have not been sleeping nor idle, namely, in our
neighbor Countries; where, when they had made things up for a combustion of
War, by their crafty forecasting divisions and corruptions in life and Doctrine
of men of place, they kindled the fire; witness the business of Barnevel in
the Low Countries, in the year 1619. And not long thereafter, the troubles
raised in France against the Professors of the Truth; then in Germany likewise,
having all things ready for a War, as they were thinking that the two Houses of
Saxe, to wit, the Weymerian, and the now Electorall, was most fit and easy to
be embroyled, by reason of the emulation of the Weymerian against the other,
for the Electorall Dignity; taken from it, and given to the other: But
conveniently for their purpose, the Elector Palatine being made King of
Bohemia, the great agent of the Pope, the House of Austria, takes occasion to
make War against him, leaving the House of Saxe, etc. Now to come home again.

King James by this time is turned about, and his affection so much cooled and
turned from the Protestant party distressed, that for all help or supply to the
Protestants of France, he sends complements by Ambassadors, with fair
promises. And for his son-in-Law, with other Protestants his adherents in
Germany, he did little more; so senseless is he of the sufferings of Jacob,
and unmindefull of his own interest, by suffering those in France and Germany
to perish, who not only did so much honor him, but they being preserved, made
him the most redoubted and considerable Prince in Christendom. To speak nothing
of his tie by nature unto his own children. Then, contradicting his own
published Dictates, he must seek after a Popish wife for his son; and, to
hasten the business, the young Prince must be sent into Spain, where he had
two men by whom he was then advised; who, although they did not love one
another, yet they did agree among themselves, To betray their old Master, with
their Country, and their young Master in their company; whom they theu
counseled to embrace Popery, and by writing engage himself unto the Pope. This
is upon Record. At last, the Prince comes home without the wife, which was
never really intended for him, howsoever things were given out, notwithstanding
all the pains of the young Prince, and the earnest solicitude of the Father,
with the compliance of both. If it had not been for the hatred to the Palatine
House, and fear of its advancement to the succession of those Dominions, the
Prince never had seen this Island again, but in a Map. Howsoever, King James is
glad to have his son safe returned: And at length, seeing clearly how he had
been misled and gulled, bethinks himself how to amend his former mistakes and
errors; but alas, it was too late: for as he was thus consulting with himself,
death takes him away, An. 1625. not without suspicion of wrong done unto him.
The new King must have a Popish wife (according to the former intention) she
comes from France, and brings along with her, her strange gods. The Prelates
had a main hand in this Popish Match, by actual furtherance thereof, and by
opening the way how the free exercise of Popery might be had, in favor of the
Queen and her adherents, without breach of the Law of the Land.

The same year of the death of the late King, and of the Marriage of our now
Sovereign, there was an Expedition made against the Spaniard, without any real
intention to do harm, as appears by the slack performance of the War, and by
the shameful Peace made thereafter. The main drift of this undertaking was,
first, To try how ready the people would be to endure Soldiers in the
Country, which they had not seen for a long time, and how willing they would
be to undergo a War, at the command of the corrupt Court, and uphold it with
Supplies of men and moneys. Next, There must be an Expedition against France,
under pretext to help the then distressed Protestants there; which really was
intended for the hastening of their ruin, and increase of their desolation:
and so it proved indeed, although the main and chief undertaker was prevented,
by death, to see the effect of his intents. The other end of this undertaking
was, To have Forces at command, both Horse and Foot, by Land, and a
well-provided Navy at Sea, for the enslaving of the people to spiritual and
temporal Bondage; which in all humane probability had not been difficile to
effectuate then, such was the sheeppish silliness, and knavish baseness of
many men in these Dominions, of all ranks, conditions, and professions; as also
the unpreparednesse of the wiser and better Patriots and Members of the Church,
to withstand this mischief, if God in his mercy, by the unexpected death of the
Court-ruler, and chief agent in the business, had not put in a Remora and
let: At which time, if men had returned unto God, amending their lives in
private, and had expressed their true zeal then to the good of the Church and
Country whereof they are members, according to their several ranks and
conditions, the design of the common enemy had been fully dashed. But God in
his wisdom has been pleased to keep us yet a while longer under the rod of
trial, to see if we will return unto him at last. The Romish party, although
astonished and surprised at the death of their Engine and main Instrument here
among us, gives not over, but continues the great Design, without
intermission, albeit not with such speed as formerly; for those to whose care
principally the business was committed, and in whose hands the managing of
matters had fallen, by the death of the late Fac totum, were not so powerful
to obtain, without refusal, what they pleased, at the Kings hands; neither
were they in such opinion and reputation with inferiors, to make them go on in
the work so earnestly; wherefore the Queen must be brought now of necessity, to
take upon her the main care, and to obtain from the King whatsoever may conduce
and further the business, and take away all letts and stops which may hinder
the proceedings: Then, to employ all her credit abroad, for countenancing and
advancing affairs: And next, by her authority to draw on inferiors to act
their part with affection and ardour. Now all things being thus cunningly and
carefully, by degrees, in few years, prepared and disposed, for enslaving
Church and State, Prince and People, to Rome again, it was thought fit, by the
hottest of the party, to wit, the Jesuits, to hasten the work openly, and
delay no more time (the compassing of the Design being conceived to be
infallible) By this means they thought to shorten the business, and to make
themselves so considerable, as to share deeply in the Booty; of which they
looked for but little, if things were still lingered, and carried on slowly. But
how, and where to begin this new undertaking, was consulted upon; and, after
deliberation, the Scots must be begun at, the way is resolved on, there must be
a new Prayer Book put upon these rude fellows, that they may say their Prayers
in modo and figura a la Roman, and not so rudely and irregularly as they were
wont to do, in the Northern way. Then they must have High Commission Courts,
Canons, and Etcetera's: Which things, if the Scots be so wise to accept, as
doubtless they will (reasoned these men: but he that reckons without this
host, reckons twice) for their chief men of State are either actually at Court,
or provided to places in the Country from Court, at least, they can do no
business of moment, without the favor of the Court. At this time the devout
and religious Prelates, with the rest of their good Clergy, are not only in
all earnestness bent for the work, according to their several places in the
Church, but also they over-sway all business in State, Wherefore, without
difficulty, we will compass our main Design through all these Dominions (said
they.) And truly so they had, in all likelihood, as we may see by the woeful
carriage of business, and so ill managing so good a Cause in England since;
But God had, in his mercy toward us all, ordained otherwise. And if the Scots
(say they) should be so mad as to refuse the commands from the Court, and think
upon resistance, they shall be made obey the holy Mandate with a Vengeance and
say their prayers with a rod; for we shall overrun their Country speedily,
and subdue them, as poor, silly, ignorant fools, destitute of all means for
War, to wit, wisdom, with resolution, not having breeding, and pressed down
with poverty, to undertake and undergo such a business as War; and money and
Arms to go on in it; for the S^yl being barren, and the Havens bad, they cannot
have the advantages of a fertile Country, furnished with good Harbors, and
Commanders or Leaders, to manage a War, their Military men being abroad, who
will not easily quit the honorable and beneficial Employments they have in
foreign Countries, and come home to suffer want, with loss of credit. But
God, who laughs from above at the foolish Counsels of vain men, in this
particular has made us see, That he has an ^ver-ruling power over the affairs
of men, making little and contemptible ones do great things, and bring to
nothing the undertakings of the mighty and wise of this world.

By this time the new Prayer Book, designed at Rome, and perfected at London,
is sent down into Scotland. After some little reluctance, it is received by the
Council there, the major part whereof then were either Churchmen, or their
addicted friends. Then it is sent to the Churches, to be put in use and
practice: But unexpected and unlooked for, it is opposed by inferior people;
from whence the opposition rises to those of higher ranks: whereupon Petitions
are drawn up, and sent to the King, to supplicate His Majesty, in all due
respect, to free the Church of Scotland from this new Prayer Book, with the
High Commission Courts, Canons, Etcetera's. To these Demands of the Scots no
answer is given, but hot threatenings; after which, preparatives of War were
made against the Scots: and because the King did not show himself propense
enough to the undertaking of War, nor the Queen forward enough to engage the
King in this holy War, the Queen Mother, who, for her known faithfulness to
her husband, and for her care of her son, both late Kings of France, must come
to her Son-in-law (against his will) to help him with her best advice and
counsel, and to better instruct her daughter how to carry her self with
earnestness and address in the business.

Things being thus disposed, there is an Expedition undertaken against the
Scots, and followed to the Borders by the King present in person; but to small
purpose; for the Scots came to the Borders duly prepared, notwithstanding their
pre-conceived wants and indisposition, to sell their Religion and Liberty at a
dear rate: which being perceived by the Court, the Scots Demands, formerly
rejected, are granted, and a Peace concluded. Then some of the chief men of the
Scots were invited to go to Court, for the time at Barwick; who, upon certain
advice of a Plot against them, were stopped by their friends, to trust
themselves to the faith of the Court.

After things in a kind calmed there, the King, not suffered by his Counsel
to go into Edinburgh to settle things fully, he sends Deputies thither, and
returns to London. At his return, the Scots Commissioners are imprisoned at
London, against their Safe Conduct; and the Agreement with the Scots is burnt
publicly, by the hand of the Hangman, and a new Expedition, with more cunning
and strength then the former, is undertaken against the Scots: Whereof the
Scots duly advertised, judging it not to be safe to play always after-games,
settle their Country, make sure the strong Holds, which they had delivered, in
simplicity of heart, unto the King, at the late Agreement, and come into
England with such an Army, that they made their enemies retire. Upon this point
of necessity, the King assembled diverse of the Nobles, by whom he is advised to
call a Parliament; which is granted, although with difficulty. At the overture
of the Parliament, having gained all the party possible, the King is made to
demand assistance to repel the Scots from England, and chastise them; but to
no purpose, wherefore the Parliament must pay for it; and to this purpose, the
English Army afoot must be brought to London, under some pretext. This Plot
failing, and discovered, the Scots must be tempted, under great offers, no
less then the plunder of London, and the propriety of the adjacent Counties to
their Country. The Scots not only refused these great offers, but also give
advice of them to the Parliament. Then the Scots must be hastened home, and the
King must go into Scotland, under pretext to settle things there, but really,
to make a party, viewing by the way the Scots Army; and to make sure of some
men disaffected to the Design of the Court. These things not succeeding, to
smooth a little the shameful business, Titles of Honor, and Pensions are
given to many.

While the King is in Scotland, the Rebellion rises in Ireland, having its
influence from the Court, whether by sealed Patents, or otherwise, I will not
enquire now (more then of the Spanish Navy) but certain it is, it had its rise
from Court. Some days after the Rebellion begun in Ireland, the King must
return in all speed to London, under pretext to consult with the Parliament how
to repress this odious Rebellion; but really, to be revenged of the
Parliament, for not assisting against the Scots, and for punishing the main
agents of the Scottish party, witness the faction the Queen had made in the
City, during the Kings abode in Scotland, to divide the City and Parliament,
and the demanding of the Members of the Houses, against all Law, upon
accusation of Treason; whereof the chief and main point was, To have favourized
the Scots Affairs in England, against express Acts of Oblivion of both
Parliaments of Scotland and England. As for the repressing of the Rebellion in
Ireland, it is so little taken to heart, that the King seldom goes to the
House; and being there, speaks but little of the business. After a while, with
much ado, the Popish Irish in Arms are declared Rebels, when they had ruined
many families, and killed many of the innocent Protestants: But of the Kings
Declaration there were but few Copies Printed, and of the few hardly any
dispersed; when the Scots, before they had gathered any Head, were Prelatically
excommunicated, and cursed through all the Parishes of England, and declared
Rebels every where by printed Papers: Who, as they intended no ill, so,
blessed be God, never men of War in a Country did less harm then the Scots
did. Yea, which is more, all the good intentions of both Parliament and City,
with the ready offers of the Scots for the speedy help of the poor Protestants
against the bloody Butchers in Ireland, was delayed, deluded, yea, almost put
off, by the Court, and the corrupt Members of both Houses, who since have
showed themselves openly what they are, in public Affairs. But these Designs
failing of apprehending the Members, and of dividing the City and Parliament,
as was seen by the accompanying the Members to the Houses again, the King must
leave London.

Here before we proceed any further, we shall go a little back.

When the first undertaking was against the Scots, all things within these
Dominions being disposed for the best furthering of the work, the holy Conclave
of Rome forecasting all chances: and fearing that England would not altogether
be so forward to contribute much unto the destruction of Scotland, wherefore
the King must be assured of some good friend abroad, and not far off, who may
help in case of need: None is thought so fit as the Prince of Orange, being
able to help with Moneys, Arms and Men for command: He must be gained, by
offering him for his Son one of the Kings Daughters; who, notwithstanding his
high mind, would have been glad of a lower Match. Now at the first, the Prince
of Orange did only look to have the second Daughter in due time: But, to
engage him further, he shall have the elder (not staying for her till she be
nubile) and that presently, although she did little more then, then well
discern her right hand from her left. But this is not all; for the Mother must
carry the Daughter to the Prince of Orange, to gain him more speedily, and make
him more affectionate and sure to the Designs of our corrupted Court: So the
Kings Daughter is sold, and made a Sacrifice for furtherance of the Catholic
Cause, as his Grandmother was sold to France to the same Design, by the
corrupt Court of Scotland for the time. What mischief this Marriage, and the
Queens Voyage into Holland has brought into this Country, and what stain she
has brought upon her self by it, we see all. And so many evils fell upon
Scotland, after the sending the then young Queen into France.

Here you shall observe the juggling knavery of our corrupt Court, who cry out
against the Scots for taking Arms for the just defense of their Liberty and
Religion, without any by-respect, as their whole proceedings to this instant do
testify, as guilty of the most horrid crime of Rebellion against Higher
Powers, as they call it; yet the same corrupt Court makes the King give his
Daughter unto him, who is not only a chief man, but a main Instrument to make
War for the Liberty and Religion of the Country where he lives, against the
unjust oppression of their Sovereign; as his renowned Brother, and most
virtuous Father did before him; and as he intends to make his Son after him,
witness the reversion of his Place he has obtained, unto him, from the
States. If the King of Spain by necessity has been constrained to acknowledge
the United Provinces free, it is nothing for the justice of their taking Arms
to defend their Religion and Liberty: And if he had power, they would not be
long free, witness the secret Plots to divide them, and overreach them.
Farther, he is very shie in his Writs, to call them Free, as every man knows.

The Queen of Bohemia must not only be neglected, and seen lose all that she
and hers can claim for their own, but she and hers must be serviceable to those
who have undone them: To this end she must have People about her, namely,
Court-Chaplains, to disguise business unto her, and so make her have a bad
conception of those who are her best friends, to wit, the true Professors of
the Truth, and good Patriots in these Dominions. Next, her eldest son, after a
long and great neglect of yielding him any help for the recovery of his own, is
betrayed at our corrupt Court, when he is put in away to do somewhat for his
own restoring, etc. And after this, by the same Court, he is solicited to take
Arms here against the only men, who really and constantly have expressed unto
him and his, true affection; but they being stopped by the Court, could not
effectuate much by their good will. He in wisdom refuses to fight against his
friends. Since he will not, his two next Brothers must be employed; the eldest
whereof is released from prison to that effect: And so they hazard their lives,
and spend their blood, to serve the party who has undone their Fortunes, and
now strives to undo their persons.

The King having left London, after he had been in several places, retires to
York, where he begins to raise men against the Parliament. The Scots seeing
this, send to him thither, to entreat him to lay aside all such intentions, and
offer their service by way of Mediation betwixt him and the Parliament, to take
away all known mistakes. The Scots Commissioners were not suffered to proceed
any further then, in the business, and were sent back, beyond the expectation
of men. After a long Pen-skirmishing on both sides, Armies are leavied, many
men killed and taken at diverse times on each side; yea, a set Battle fought,
where numbers of men are slain.

The Scots not being able any longer to see their Brethren in England
destroyed, and the Executioners of Ireland butchering man, woman and child
(the help that the innocents should have had from England being almost
altogether diverted, by the Intestine War) and neither say nor do in the
business, under Safe Conduct send to the King and Parliament Commissioners, to
intercede for an Agreement: But they being arrived at Court, were neglected
with their Commission, and not suffered to repair unto the Parliament: At last,
they are dismissed, not without difficulty, and, having done nothing, return.
Upon this, the Scots convene the States, to consult concerning their own
safety, and the help of their friends: At this nick of time, when they received
many fair promises from the Court, with a request to be quiet, a Plot of the
Papists, set afoot by the Court, for embroyling the Country, is discovered; by
the means whereof, they were incited to look more narrowly to themselves and
their friends. Then the Parliament of England sends to the Scots for help. Upon
this, a Covenant is made betwixt the two Nations, for the defense of the true
Religion, and Liberty of the Countries, with the Kings just Rights: and, after
due preparation, the Scots having settled their own Country, enter into England
with a strong Army, to fight the Battles of the Lord; having for scope of
their Expedition, The glory of God, and the good of his People, with the Honor
of the King.

Here we shall observe, in these our Countries, in these last years, such
Riddles of State and Church, as have hardly been heard of: A Protestant Prince
makes one Protestant Nation fight against another, for the Protestant Religion,
which have been thought to be of one and the same Doctrine, for the main: One
Church thunders Curses against another: Then, a Prince misled, with the aid of
Papists and Atheists, spoiling and destroying the professors of the Truth,
because they profess it, for the good and advancement of the Protestant
Religion: Next, in a very short time, a Prince to have all his subjects
declared Rebels: First, he is made declare the Scots; Then, he is constrained
to declare the Irish: An Army gotten together in the Kings name, declares all
those that did oppose them, Rebels: The Parliament declares all those who in
the Kings name oppose them, Rebels and Traitors: Farther, under the Kings
Authority, the named Rebels in England by the King, maintain a War against the
declared Rebels in Ireland. But the late carriage of things at Court, and by
the Court-Instruments at home and abroad, has solved the Riddle, namely, The
Patent for the Rebellion in Ireland, The detaining of help ordained for the
repressing of it, The Kings offer to go into Ireland, The Cessation, and
bringing over of the Irish, and, The last-discovered Plot in Scotland, all
other things laid aside, tell us clearly, howsoever the Proclamations and
Protestations going in the Kings name be soft and smooth as the voice of Jacob,
yet the hands are rough as of Esau, destroying, and seeking to destroy the true
Religion, grounded in Gods Word, with the professors thereof, as also the
lawful Liberty of the Country, and bring all unto slavery. Let Ireland and
England say, if this be not true; and Scotland likewise, according to its
genius, speak truth.

I shall close up all with two or three Instances of eminent men amongst the
Papists Clergy, to show clearly how they stand affected to the Protestants.

Cardinal Pool, in an Oration to Charles the fifth, Emperor, says, You must
leave off the War against the Turks, and hereafter make War against the
Heretics; so names he the professors of the Truth: He adds the reason, Because
the Turks are less to be feared then the Heretics. Paul Rodmek in a Book
express, tells us, That the Heretics must be put to death, slain, cut off,
burnt, quartered, etc. Stapleton the Jesuit tells us, That the Heretics are
worse then the Turks, in an Oration he made at Doway. Campian the Jesuit, in a
Book of his, Printed in the year 1583, in Trevers, declares thus, in the name
of his holy Order, Our will is, That it come to the knowledge of every one, so
far as it concerns our Society, That we all, dispersed in great numbers through
the world, have made a League, and holy solemn Oath, That as long as there are
any of us alive, that all our care and industry, all our deliberations and
counsels, shall never cease to trouble your calm and safety. That is to say,
We shall procure and pursue for ever your ruin, the whole destruction of your
Religion, and of your Kingdom. He speaks to the English. Now it is long since
we have taken this resolution, with the hazard of our lives: so that the
business being already well begun and advanced, it is impossible that the
English can do any thing to stop our Design, or surmount it.

Let these few Passages satisfy for this time. I wish that thou may reap
some benefit of what is written here for thy good.

So, praying for your happiness, I rest, Yours, in the Lord, D. B.

The LIFE OF JOHN KNOX.
JOHN KNOX was borne in Gifford, near Hadington, in Lothian, the year of
Christ, 1505. of honest Parentage: His father was a brothers son of the House
of Ranferlie, which is an ancient Family of Gentlemen in the West. When he left
the Grammar School in the Country, he was sent to the University of Saint
Andrews, to study under M. John Mair, who in those days was very famous for
his Learning, which particularly did consist in the ergotie or disputative part
of Philosophy, and in School Divinity, wherein formerly, for many years
together, almost all Learning was placed. In a very short time, John Knox
became such a Proficient, that in this kind of knowledge wherein his Master
most excelled, he surpassed him; and being yet very young, was thought worthy
of Degrees in the School: Moreover, before the time ordinarily allowed by the
Canons, he entered in Church Orders. Thereafter, laying aside the idle Disputes
and Sophistry of the School, he betook himself to the reading of the Ancients;
namely, of Augustine, with whose Writings he was much taken, by reason of their
plainness and solidity. Last of all, he betook himself to the earnest study of
the holy Scriptures; wherein having found the Truth of God concerning the
salvation of Mankind fully revealed, he in good earnest did embrace it, and
freely professed it; yea, made it his main work to make it known to all men,
and believed by them; in which work he was very active and vigilant, at home
and abroad, namely, at home. For the Cause of the Truth he suffered very much
by Sea and by Land, in mind and in body; among forraigners, and amongst his
own Countrymen, as ye may see in this History of the Church, which now here we
present unto you: Which History, namely, so much of it, I mean, as formerly was
published, has gone commonly under his name, because he is the man of whom
most is spoken thorowout the whole History, as being a most earnest and
diligent agent in the business of Reformation in the Church: Next, because he
has penned with his own hand, or spoken by word of mouth, the most part of the
most remarkable and most useful things for Posterity in the History. Thirdly,
the whole History is gathered out of his Papers and Manuscripts: And so ye see
why it is generally received to be of John Knox. But to return to his Life.

He being constrained for a time to leave his Country, by reason of the
Persecution raised in Scotland, by the then Bishops, against the professors of
the Truth, he came into England, where for some years he was busied, in
preaching the Evangell of Christ, with a great deal of content and benefit to
those that had the happiness to hear him. His chief abode was in Berwick,
Newcastle, and London: This was in the days of King Edward the sixth, with
whom he was in great favor and esteem; By whom being offered a Bishopric, he
not only refused and rejected it, but with a grave and severe speech declared,
That the proud Title of Lordship, and that great State, was not to be suffered
to be in the Church of God, as having quid commune cum Antichristo; that is,
somewhat common with Antichrist. King Edward being dead, the persecution of
Mary made him leave England, with many other godly Ministers, who went beyond
Seas. First, John Knox went to Frankford, where for a time he preached the
Gospel to the English Congregation there; From whence he wrote the Admonition
to England: But being molested there, partly by open Papists, and partly by
false Brethren, was constrained to retire: And from thence he went to Geneva,
from whence he wrote his Letter to Mary Regent of Scotland, his Appeal to the
Nobility of Scotland, and Admonition to the Commons of Scotland. From Geneva,
after some years abode there, he was called home to his own Country, the year
of Christ 1559. which was the 54 of his age, by the Noblemen, and others who
had taken upon them the general Reformation of the Church of Scotland; where,
how soon that the reformed Church had any liberty, he was settled Minister at
Edinburgh, where he continued exercising his Ministry to his dying day; but
not without interruption, by reason of the Civil disorders that fell out in
those days.

During this his being at Edinburgh, he Preached many excellent Sermons;
whereof there be but few that were printed and conserved to Posterity, he not
being willing to busy himself with the Press: Yet some of them we have, as
this, namely, which he Preached Aug. 19, An. 1564. and for which he was
forbidden to Preach for a time: He, to make known to the world what ground
there was to deal so with him, took the care to have this Sermon printed, as
you will find it at the end of this History.

Here I cannot let slip a remarkable passage; which was this; Anno 1566. the
Earl of Murray was slain upon the Saturday: The morrow after, John Knox
preached in Edinburgh; where, as he was reading the Papers wherein was written
the names of those that desired the Prayers of the Church, he finds a paper
with these words, Take up the man whom ye accounted another god: which he
passed, without expressing any commotion, and went on with his Prayer and
Sermon. At the end of the Sermon, he made moan for the loss that the Church
and State of Scotland had, by the death of that virtuous man; and said, That as
God in his mercy gives good and wise Rulers, so takes he them away from a
people in his wrath. Then he added, There is one in this company that makes
the subject of his mirth this horrible murder, whereat all good men have
occasion to be sorry: I tell him, That he shall die where there shall be none
to lament him. He who had written the aforesaid words in the paper, was Thomas
Metellan, a young Gentlemen of most rare parts, but youthful, and bearing
small affection to the Earl of Murray; who, when he heard this Commination of
John Knox, went home to his lodging, and said to his sister, That John Knox was
raving to speak of he knew not whom. His sister replied, with tears in her
eyes, If you had followed my advice, ye had not written these words; and
withal told him, That none of John Knox his threatenings fell to the ground
without effect. And so it fell out in this particular; For shortly thereafter
the young Gentleman went beyond Seas to travel, and died in Italy, having no
known man to assist him, much less to lament him. Toward the latter days of
his age, his body became very infirm, and his voice so weak, that the people
could not hear him, Preaching in the ordiplace, wherefore he made choice of
another more commodious within the Town, reading to his auditors the history of
the Passion, in which, he said, it was his desire to finish and close his
Ministry. Thus he continued Preaching, though with much weakness, two months
and more, after this retiring: And foreseeing that he was not to remain long
with them, he was instant with the Counsel of the City to provide themselves
of a worthy man to succeed in his Place. Master James Lauson, who at that time
professed Philosophy in the University of Aberdene, being commended for a good
Preacher, Commissioners were directed from the Body of the Church of Edinburgh,
and from Master John Knox in particular, to desire him to accept of the Charge.
To the Letter that the Commissioners carried, after that he had set his hand,
he added this Postscript, Accelera mi frater, alioqui sero venies: Make haste,
Brother, otherwise ye shall come too late: Meaning, That if he made any stay,
he should find him dead and gone. These last words moved M. Lauson to take
journey the morrow thereafter. When he was come to the Town, and had preached
two several times, to the good liking of the people, order was taken by the
Rulers of the Church for his admission, and the day appointed; at which day
John Knox himself would not only be present, but also preach, though he could
scarce walk on foot to the Chair; which he did with such fervency of spirit,
that at no time before was he heard to speak with such great power, and more
content to the hearers: And in the end of the Sermon, calling God to witness,
That he had walked in a good conscience amongst them, not seeking to please
men, nor serving either his own, or other men's affections, but in all sincerity
and truth preached the Gospel of Christ: With most grave and pithie words, he
exhorted them to stand fast in the Faith they had received: And having
conceived a zealous Prayer for the continuance of Gods blessing among them, and
the multiplying of his Spirit upon the Preacher who was then to be admitted, he
gave them his last farewell. The people did convey him to his lodging, and
could not be drawn from it, so loath were they to depart from him; and he the
same day in the afternoon, was forced to take bed. During the time he lay
(which was not long) he was much visited by all sorts of persons, to whom he
spoke most comfortably: Amongst others, to the Earl of Morton, who came to see
him, he was heard say, My Lord, God has given you many blessings; he has
given you Wisdom, Honor, high Birth, Riches, many good and great friends, and
is now to prefer you to the Government of the Realm (the Earl of Mar, late
Regent, being newly dead) In his Name I charge you, That ye will use these
blessings better in times to come, then you have done in times past: In all
your actions seek first the glory of God, The furtherance of his Gospel, The
maintenance of his Church and Ministry; and next, Be careful of the King, to
procure his good, and the welfare of the Realm. If you shall do this, God will
be with you, and honor you: If otherwise ye do it not, he will deprive you of
all these benefits, and your end shall be shame and ignominy. These speeches,
the Earl, about nine years after, at the time of his Execution, called to
mind, saying, That he had found them to be true, and him, therein, a Prophet.

A day or two before his death, he sent for Master David Lindsay, Master James
Lauson, and the Elders and Deacons of the Church, to whom he said, The time is
approaching, for which I have long thirsted, wherein I shall be relieved of all
cares, and be with my Savior Christ for ever: And now, God is my witness,
whom I have served with my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, That I have taught
nothing but the true and solid Doctrine of the Gospel; and that the end I
proposed in all my Doctrine, was, To instruct the ignorant, To confirm the
weak, To comfort the consciences of those that were humbled under the sense of
their sins, and born down with the threatenings of Gods Judgments: Such as were
proud and rebellious, I am not ignorant that many have blamed, and yet do blame
my too great rigor and severity; But God knows, That in my heart I never
hated the persons of those against whom I thundered Gods Judgments; I did only
hate their sins, and labored, according to my power, to gain them to Christ:
That I did forbear none, of whatsoever condition; I did it, out of the fear of
my God, who has placed me in the Function of his Ministry, and I know will
bring me to an account. Now, brethren, for your selves; I have no more to say,
but to warn you, That you take heed to the Flock over which God has placed you
Overseers, which he has redeemed by the Blood of his only begotten Son. And
you, Master Lauson, fight a good fight, do the Work of the Lord with courage,
and with a willing mind: And God from above bless you, and the Church whereof
you have charge: Against it (so long as it continues in the Doctrine of the
Truth) the gates of hell shall not prevail.

This spoken, and the Elders and the Deacons dimitted, he called the two
Preachers unto him, and said, There is one thing that grieveth me exceedingly;
You have sometimes seen the courage and constancy of the Lord of Grange in the
cause of God; and that most unhappy man has cast himself away: I will pray you
two to take the pains to go unto him, and say, from me, That unless he forsake
that wicked course wherein he is entered, neither shall the Rock in which he
confideth defend him, nor the carnal wisdom of that man whom he counts half
a god (this was young Lethington) yield him help; but shamefully he shall be
pulled out of that nest, and his carkase hung before the Sun (meaning the
Castle he did keep against the Kings Authority: And so it fell out the year
next following; for the Castle was taken, and he was publicly hanged, and his
body hung before the Sun) The soul of that man is dear unto me; and, if it be
possible, I could fain have him to be saved. They went, as he had desired, and
conferred a long space with Grange; but with no persuasion could he be diverted
from his course: Which being reported, he took most heavily. Yet Grange, at his
death, did express serious repentance for his sins.

The next day, he gave order for making his Coffin wherein his body should be
laid; and was that day, as through all the time of his sickness, much in
prayer, crying, Come, Lord Jesu; Sweet Jesu, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit. Being asked by those that attended him, if his pains were great, he
answered, That he did not esteem that a pain, which would be to him the end of
all troubles, and beginning of eternal Joys. Oftentimes, after some deep
meditations, he burst forth in these words; O serve the Lord in fear, and death
shall not be troublesome unto you: Blessed is the death of those that have part
in the death of Jesus. In the evening, which was the last of this wretched
life, having slept some hours together, but with great unquietness, for he was
heard to send forth many sighs and groans; one Campbell, and one John Johnston,
which two waited very diligently upon him, asked, after he awaked, How he did
find himself, and what it was that made him to mourn so heavily in his sleep?
To whom he answered, In my life time I have often been assaulted with Satan, and
many times he has cast in my teeth my sins, to bring me to despair; yet God
gave me strength to overcome all his tentations: And now that subtle Serpent,
who never ceases to tempt, has taken another course, and seeks to persuade me,
That all my labors in the Ministry, and the fidelity that I have shown in
that Service, has merited heaven and immortality: But blessed be God, that
brought to my mind these Scriptures, What have thou that thou have not
received? And, Not I, but the grace of God in me: With which, he is gone away
ashamed, and shall no more return: And now I am sure my Battle is at an end;
and that without pain of body, or trouble of spirit, I shall shortly change
this mortal and miserable life, with that happy and immortal which shall
never have an end. After which discourse, a Prayer was said near his bed where
he lay: which being ended, it was asked, If he heard the Prayer? He answered,
Would to God that ye had heard it with such an ear and heart as I have done;
Adding, Lord Jesu receive my Spirit. With which words, without any motion of
hands or feet, as one falling a sleep, rather then dying, he ended his life. He
was a man endued with many excellent gifts, and with a very great measure of
the Spirit: God raised him up to be a chief Instrument of the glorious Work of
Reformation. The Court claw-backs and parasites, have been, and are displeased
with his Doctrine touching the Authority of Princes and Civil Magistrates,
although there was never man born, who did more heartily reverence Civil
Authority, nor obey more willingly the lawful commands thereof, then he: All
his Doctrine concerning the Civil Authority, was, To correct the corruption
brought in by the slavish flatterers, who, abusing the simplicity and
debonaritie of those whom God has placed in Authority, makes them
inconsiderately to rebel wilfully and openly against God and his Son, and turn
all things up-side down, and undo the poor people of God, for whose good and
safety they are placed so high. Likewise were and are to this day the proud
Prelates and idle belly-gods highly offended with his Doctrine concerning
Church Government, although he intended no other thing, but the pulling down of
Antichristianisme fully, and casting all tyranny and Idleness out of the House
of God. Never was a man more observant of the true and just Authority of the
Church-Rulers, according to the Word of God, and practice of the purest
Primitive times. He always urged pressingly due Obedience by the people, to
the faithful Pastors and Elders of the Church. Although he was both learned
and eloquent, yet did he not much apply his mind to compose Books for
Posterity; for he was wont to say, That God had called him rather to instruct
the ignorant, comfort the sorrowful, rebuke the sinners, and confirm the weak
living in his time, then to make Books for ages to come. Nevertheless, he
wrote several good Pieces; for besides what we have spoken of already, namely,
he left these, A learned Treatise against the blasphemous Anabaptists, Two
Treatises against the Mass, One, of the Eucharist, Some Sermons upon Genesis,
Some also upon the Psalms, An Exhortation to all afflicted Churches, An Advice
in time of trouble, The first blast of the Trumpet, etc.

He died, Anno Dom. 1572, and of his age, 62. His body was interred at S.
Giles, without the Church. To his Burial assisted many men of all Ranks; among
others, the Earl of Morton, who being near to the grave, as the Corpse was put
in, said, by way of Epitaph, Here lies the body of him, who, in his life time,
never feared the face of man.

THE PREFACE.
THe SCOTS, by the most judicious Writers, and by those who have most
diligently studied their Antiquities, are acknowledged to be among the first
who embraced the Faith of Christ: yea, they are said to be, by some, of the
very first fruits of the Gentiles: For in few years after the Ascension of our
Savior Jesus Christ, the Apostles and Disciples being constrained to leave
Jerusalem and Judea, by reason of the Persecutions raised against them by the
Jews, according to the dispensation of the All-wise God, went up and down the
world; and speaking to every People in their own Language, declared unto them
the glad Tidings of Salvation in Christ Jesus. Scoti ex discipulis Joannis
Apostoli Christianismum edocti sunt. Buch. Lib. 5. Multi ex Britonibus
Christiani saevitiam. Domitiani metuentes in Scotiam commigrarunt, e quib is
complures doctrina and vitae integritate clari in ea. subsisterunt. Buch. Lib.
4.
Those who came into our Northern Parts, to wit, into Scotland, and first made
known unto our Fathers the Mysteries of Heaven, were of the disciples of John
the Apostle.

Some years thereafter, to wit, in the second Persecution raised against the
Christians, many Britons Provincials of the Empire, professing the Name of
Christ, left their own country, and went into Scotland, for shelter from the
general Massacre then executed thorowout the whole Empire, by that bloody
Butcher Domitian; and to enjoy the freedom of the Gospel, which they knew to be
received then in Scotland. Among these fugitive Britons there were sundry
learned and pious men, who stayed in Scotland (the Persecution ended)
propagating the Faith of Christ there by their Preaching. This we have related
unto us by the Historians of best trust. We have not then from the Sea of Rome
our first Institution in the Christian Faith; yea, we are so far from it, that,
for many years together, we hardly had any communication with Rome at all.
Palladius was the first, some years after the beginning of the fifth Age, who
made our acquaintance with Rome; although the general current of the Romish
Writers give out, That the Gospel was first planted amongst us in Scotland by
the means of Victor Bishop of Rome: Yet Baronius, that renowned Chronologer,
albeit he would fain have the Scots owe this Obligation unto Rome, disclaimeth
this opinion of his Party, as untrue, and disagreeing with the best Antiquity.

Tertullian, who lived in the second Age, and wrote Books diverse years before
the end thereof, and so was so near the planting of the Christian Faith amongst
the Nations, E^angelium fuit diffusam in omnes orbis parts, etiam in
Britanniam usque, eamque insulae partem, ad quam Romanae vires nunquam
penetr^rum.

Tert. lib. contra Judaeos. Antoninus Pius Britannos vicit, alio muro c^spicio
submotis Barbaris ducto. Jul. Cap. Britanniam, muro per transversam insulam
ducto, utrumque ad finem Oceani munivit.

Adrianus murum primus ducit, qui Barbaros Romanosque dividit, Aelius
Spartianus. Venit and extremis legio praetenta Britannis, Quae Scoto dat froena
truci, id est, opposita Scotis, quae eorum furorem a Britannis propelleret in
extrem^ limite Britanniae and Scotiae, ut explicat Buchan. Lib. 1.


that in a manner he may be said to have been an eyewitness unto it, in his
Book against the Jews, speaking how the Light of the Gospel was spread through
the whole world, says thus, The Euangel was diffused into all the parts of the
world, yea, into Britanie, and into that part of the Island whereunto the Roman
Forces did never pierce. By these last words of Tertullian, are meant the
inhabitants of that part of the Island which lies benorth the walls, first
built by Adrian, then by Antoninus Pius, thirdly by Severus; and these were the
Scots by name: For the Romans put walls betwixt them and the Scots Bowe-men, as
our Poet expresses it: Roma sagitti feris praetendit maenia Scotis.


And Claudian, many hundred years before this our Poet, speaking of the Legion
which then was called from its Garrison on the aforesaid walls, says thus, The
Legion came, which was placed before the utmost Britans, and which bridled the
fierce Scot.

Lucius Florus, many years before Claudian, who wrote toward the later end of
the fourth Age, to wit, in the beginning of the second Age; and Spartianus, who
alleges Florus, writ toward the later end of the third Age. Lucius Florus
the Poet (is the same with the Historian, who writ the short History of the
Romans, as judges Salmasius) is brought in by Aelius Spartianus, in the
History of the Life of Adrian the Emperor, Ego nolo ^aesar esse, ^mbulare per
Britannos, and Sc^^ic^^ pati pricinas,
saying these words, I would not be Caesar, to walk among the Britans, and
suffer the Scots morning hoar Frosts. The word pruina, which the Author uses,
does signify so much; for it is quasi (...) a (...), morning. What Florus, in
these words here alleged, calls in his Language Scoticas pruinas: Claudian
calls Caledonias pruinas, Inque Ca^edonis posuit qui castra pruinis,
speaking of another Roman, in these words, And he placed his Camp in the
middle of the Caledonian morning ^oar Frosts. I know that commonly in Spartian,
of whom we have these Verses of Florus, it is read, Scythicas, for Scoticas,
but wrong, notwithstanding that the great Critics have not corrected it: For
how, I pray you, can Adrian be said to suffer Scythicas pruinas, who never was
in the Country which then went under the name of Scythia? yea, the Romans had
never any War with the Scythes; for albeit the Scythes heard of the Romans
Arms, Scythae dudiverunt, sed nunquam senserun^ arma Romannorum.
yet they never felt them: Besides, what sense had it been in Florus to say
unto Adrian, That he would not be Caesar, to walk in Britany, and endure the
morning hoary Frosts of Scythia? For although the Romans heard say, That
Scythia was a cold Country; yet they more perfectly knew Scotland to be cold,
having been upon the place. Now it was very easy to those who copied Books of
old, and hardly understood what they writ, to change one letter for another,
namely, when two letters are so like one to another, as these two Vowels O, O;
for O not being Initiall or Capital, was written formerly without the draught
under it, which has been written for distinction sake, as we see it commonly
now, thus (...), This change of these two Vowels, has been found elsewhere
then in this place of Florus, by the Critics, in the same words; who seeing
the name of the Sea upon the Coast of Scotland written Scythicum, presently
mended it, and made it Scoticum. Then Erasmus smelled out the same fault in
Jerome his Epistle to Ctesiphon, Britannia and Scoticae gentes Mosem and
Prophetas nondum cognoverant.
against Palladius, and his disciple Caelestius, in these words, Britannie and
the Scots Nations had not then known Moses and the Prophets. Erasmus finding
Scythicae, he changed it into Scoticae.

Lucius Seneca, about an hundred years before Florus, that is, about forty
years after Christ, now 1600 years since, in his Satyr upon the death of
Claudius, makes mention of the Scots in the composed word Scoto-Brigantes, as
thus follows; Ille Britannos ultra noti littora ponti, and Caeruleos
Scoto-Brigantes dare Romuleis colla catenis jussit.
He ( i. e. Claudius) commanded the Britans beyond the known Seas, and the blue
Scoto-Brigantes, to submit their necks to the Roman Chains. This word above
named has puzzled many of the Critics how to read it, so that a right
meaning or sense might be had of these lines, with the true measure of the
Verse, some reading it one way, some another way; till at last, the learned
Joseph Scaliger corrected it as you have it here, giving to the words a plain
and easy sense, and keeping the law of the Verses, against which all others
did fail: And to this Correction of Scaliger has submitted many learned men:
In quibus Buchan. lib. 2. Et Salmasius in Plinium. Ex coloribus maxim purpureo
and Cerulaeo delectautur prisci Scoti.
yet some, partly for envy against the Nation of whom is here spoken, partly
for vanity, will stand out against the truth, because of the authority of this
Correction, at whose great and most rare Learning they are offended, as the
former are at any advantage that the Nation whom these words does concern may
have. The Scots are called Cerulaei, or blue, because they used much blue in
their Garments; and so does the old Scots to this day, witness their Plaids,
whereof the best sort ordinarily has the ground blue; as also their blue Caps.
Mamertinus in Panygyrico ait, Britones habuisse bellae contra Scotos and
Pictos, ante Jul. Caes. Buchan. lib. 2. Ejus parts habitatores saepius a
Britannis scriptoribus Britones quam Brit^nni nominatur. Buc. l 2.


Mamertin, in his Panegyric to Maximinian, tells us, That the Britans had War
with the Scots and Picts, before Julius Caesar entered into the Island. So, by
these Testimonies, ye see how injurious they are unto the Scots, that will not
have their name known, till many years, yea, some hundred years after the entry
of the Romans into the Island.

The Romans having settled themselves in the Island, they divided the whole into
two parts: Their part, or the South part, they called Britannia major and
superior; and their Provincialls went most commonly under the name of
Britones, although sometimes under the name of Britanni, but not so often: Nomen
Scotus erat commune omnibus gentibus quae excursionibus loca populi Romanae
infestabant. Scal. in Euse. Sic vocat eos Beda modo transmarinos modo
peregrinos Quod etiam notat Buch.

Scoti dicuntur non solum Brigantes qui ex Hiberu. in Britanniam transmiserunt,
sed etiam indigena Britanni very Picti, Sermon prorsus a Brigantibus discreti.
Scal.


and they were sub-divided into several Peoples. The other part of the Island
without the Roman Province, that is, the northern part, was called Britannia
minor, and inferior: Now all the inhabitants of this northern part, who were
in continual Bickerings and War with the Romans and their Provincialls, were
called Scoti, sometime Transmarins, sometime Foreigners; and they did consist
of two chief Peoples, to wit, Brigantes, and Picti; which both were sub-divided
into several lesser Peoples, of which we forbear to speak at this time. So the
name of Scoti was at first appellative, and given to more then to one People;
but in success of time, appropriated to one. And this is not singular in this
name, for the proper names of diverse Peoples at first has been appellative,
and thereafter appropriate to one alone: I will instance only in one, for
brevity sake, which is this; The name Franck or French, at first was common to
all those that stood out together for Franchise and Liberty against the Romans
about the Rhyne, and other parts of Germany; But at length it became peculiar
unto one people, as we see it is at this day. Moreover, that the name of Scoti
was appellative, and given to more then one people, you may clearly see by the
ordinary expression of ancient Writers in the plural number, thus, Scotorum
gentes, Scoticae gentes; when otherwise all men ordinarily, both by word and
writing, have ever used, and to this day use the singular number, speaking of
one people; as gens, not gentes; populus, not populi; nation, not nations.

As all the northern people of the main Land, or Continent, both in Europe and
Asia, (...). Strab. lib. 11. (...).
went anciently under the name of Scythae, witness Strabo, in these words, The
ancients commonly called the northern people Scythes. And in another place he
says, The ancients did call by one name of Scythes all the known places
toward the North. He means, in the Continent, or main Land. So the northern
people of Britannie, which is another little world, were of old, and to this
day are called Scoti. The two names Scytha and Scotus do signify one and the
same thing, to wit, an Archer, or Bow-man; in Latin, Arcuarius; in Greek,
(...). The ancient Writers tell us, That the Scythes were much given to
Archery, and to Hunting; so were anciently, and to this day are the old Scots
Bow-men; In Hebrew, (...) Keshut, from (...) Keshet, Bow. And so you have the
signification of Scytha and Scotus; which are truly one and the same, with
little change, more in Latin then in Greek; for the one is written (...), so at
first the other was written (...), which afterward they turned into (...). This
is the true origin of the name Scotus: It comes neither then from the fabulous
Scota, neither from the foolishly-invented (...), darkness; For if the days be
as long in summer, as the nights are in winter, Why should the Country be
called Scotia, from (...), rather then Photia, from (...), light? Also the
Britan Writers use one and and the same word, when they speak of Scyth and
Scot, to wit, y Scot; as likewise the Low German calls them both Schutten:
From the Hebrew (...) Keshet, we have the vulgar schut and schot. Now this
Etymology of Scot, as it is true, so it is easy, by the transposition of a
letter; to wit, by putting (...) behind (...); which is ordinary, not only in
the derivation of words from one Language into another, but also obvious in one
and the same Language, in common discourse. Let this one Example satisfy for
all, to be short, Is not one and the same word both written and pronounced,
according to the writing thirty and thrity, in our vulgar Tongue? As the names
of Scyth and Scot do signify one thing; so the people, in many things, may be
said to be like one another; as for Example; The Scythes, in the Continent,
generally were of two kinds; to wit, European, and Asiatick: So the Scots in
Britanie were of two sorts in general; to wit, the Brigantes, and Picti. Next,
the Scyths did not till the ground, (...).
but feeding cattle and sheep, had a Custom to remove from one place or
solitude to another: Of old, so did all the Scots; and to this day, the ancient
or prisei Scots do. Strab. lib. 11. Hence they are (...).
The Scythes did live much upon milk, and so do our old Scots. The Scythes, not
knowing the use of riches, Scythae ab alieno imperio aut intacts, aut invicti.

(...).

Sola manet invicta Britannia Scotis. Gens laboribus and bellis aspera.


did not desire them: and so it is with many of our old Scots. The Scythes were
never vanquished by Foreigners: so the Scots were never utterly overthrown,
although they have suffered very much by their enemies at several times. The
Scythes were hard for toyling and War; so are our Scots, as is known to all,
etc.

We have said, That the In-dwellers of the north part of the Island were named
Scoti; and that by a general Division they were of two kinds, Brigantes, and
Picti: Now we must enquire who are Brigantes, and who Picti; where they both
lived, and from whence they came. And, to begin at Picti, They inhabited the
East side of Britannia minor, which is the best: and, for the most part, they
were of the ancient native Britons; of whom, sundry of old, before the entry of
the Romans into the Island, had drawn themselves Northward, to have more
elbow-room for their course of life, which was, To feed Cattle, and to hunt,
removing from one place to another, whereunto largeness of Bounds is required.
Then others of the old Britons flying from the Tyranny of the Romans, upon
grievance, went from time to time Northward, beyond the Limits of the Empire,
to their ancient com-Patriots.

Next came in to these North Britans, at diverse times, several Colonies of
Northern people from beyond Sea. Hence it is, that some late Authors have
written, That the inhabitants of the East side of Britannia minor came from
Scandie. The North Britans having received these men come from beyond Sea, into
their Society, and being joined with them, made up a People, called the Romans
and South Britons Picti, because they continued the Custom of painting their
bodies, of old in use among many Nations: which custom the South Britons left
off, with other Rites, now become Provincialls of the Empire. The whole Island
was first called Albion; of which we shall speak anon, God willing.

Then (...), Britannia, which signifies a woody Country; for of old it was
(...), Sylvis obsita, covered with Woods, as Strabo terms it. And to this day,
we see that part of the country opposite to the Continent, full of Woods and
Enclosures. We find in ancient Authors, the Peninsule of Italy, (...).

Vide Sal. page 321. in Plin.


next Sicilie, whereof Rhegium was the Metropolis, called (...) and (...) for
the same reason, because it was (...). So Strabo names it also. The Origin of
the word is (...) barat, which signifies several kinds of trees, Fir, Ash,
Cedar, etc.

The Picti had diverse people under them, whereof the chief were Caledonii; by
whose name, sometimes all the Picts were named, although Caledonii properly
were those of the Picts who dwelt among the lesser hills; of which hills, some
are called Ocelli montes, in vulgar language Ochell hills. The country of the
Caledonii did begin at Forth, and went Northward beyond Tay, where their chief
City was Caledon, now Dunkell, by a transposition. In this country were the
Woods called saltus Caledonius, or sylva Caledonia. The rockie and hilly part
of Aetolia in Greece, was called by the same name: and there was there a Town
of this name, yea, and a Forest, so much spoken of by the old Poets. True it
is, That the second vowell is now and then changed, which makes no difference;
for in words the consonants are mainly regarded. Strabo, Lib. 10. calls the
one and the other country (...), hilly and stony or rockie: the name comes
from (...) Galeaetan, which is as much as (...), tumulus asper, a rough little
hill.

Benorth the Limits of the Empire in this Island, all people, beside the Picts,
were called Brigantes, which imports as much as In-dwellers of Mountains, or
high hills: So you have the Brigantes near the Lake of Constance, in-dwelling
Mountains. On the Alps in Daulphine you have Brigantium Brianson, the highest
Town in Europe. The Brigantes of Spain, as those of Ireland, of old did
inhabit Mountains; and so did our Brigantes in this Island mainly keep upon
the Mountains. The name comes from Briga, Brica, or Bria, as it is diversely
written: It signifies an high place, or Mountain: Our vulgar has interpreted
it Bray; hence we happily call our Brigantes Bray-men, whom we call otherwise
High-landers, or High-land-men. Strabo tells us, That bria, amongst the
Thracians, does signify a Town, or City. And so the word Bria must needs
come from the Hebrew (...) bira, Town or Palace, by the transposition of a
letter; which is ordinary in the derivation of words, as we have said a
little before. Here, for further proof of the transposition of a letter in a
derivative word, take this example only, Dumbarton, for Dumbriton.

Cansabon, Hesychius explicat, (...), ubi lego (...), non (...) ut vulgo
legitur.
in his Notes upon Strabo, tells us, from Hesychius, That bria signifies a
Village or Town upon a hill: So bria signifies not simply a Town or Village,
but such a one as is builded upon a hill. And truly, in the most ancient
times, Towns or Villages were, for the most part, builded upon high places;
as any man that has taken the pains to remark, either by Histories, or by
considering the places he may have seen, knovveth. So then Brigantes are men
inhabiting the hills, or having their Towns, Cities, Villages upon the hills.
Yea, in old times, when they had not yet fixed their abode certain, they were
wont to remove from hill to hill, as we have said formerly; and to this day
some of our Highlanders do, within their own extent and limits.

The Brigantes in the Continent namely, were so given anciently to take away
goods from their enemies with a strong hand, that by success of time, all
those that openly did rob and plunder, were called Brigantes: And the French
has from hence derived the verb, Brigander, to rob or plunder. Next, there is a
kind of Armor called Brigantine, the use and manner whereof is borrowed from
the Brigantes; it is like a Male-Coat. Lastly, there is a kind of Ship used at
the Sea, called Brigantine, of the middle size, as being most proper for War at
Sea. Thus much for the name of Brigantes.

The Brigantes of this Island came hither from Ireland, at diverse times, and
upon diverse occasions. The Brigantes in Ireland, by Ptolomie, Vide sis
Ptolomaei Tabulam primam Europae; Et Ortelii tertiam: quas conferas veii^*
are placed well Southward: But those that are come after Ptolomee, I mean
those of nearer Antiquity, have placed them more Northerly by many miles; as ye
may see easily by looking upon Ptolomee his Maps; and Ortelius his Maps of
Geographie of the Ancients. So ye see that the Brigantes, at their first coming
to Ireland from Spain; for thence they came, with many other inhabitants of
that Island, dwelt in the South parts, but by degrees drew Northward, for
convenience to their wandering course of life, in keeping cattle, and hunting,
and for freedom from the trouble of too near neighbors: They went, by success
of time, so far North, till at length, having come to the part next unto
Britannie, they came hither, and possessed themselves of the little Islands and
hills next unto Ireland; and finding themselves firted in this newfound Land
for their purpose, according to their mind, they made their abode there, and
drew daily more and more company unto them, Scoto-Brigantes primo ex Hibernia
in Aebudas insulas and Montana continentis his proxima venerunt sine certo
Imperio: deinde accersiverunt Fergusium cum novis Colonis cum res eorum
crevissent, quem in Regem sibi sumpserunt.
till at length they made up a great Body of people in Britannie, and by little
and little came all along the West side of Britannie, keeping the hills, till
they came to the River Belisana, that is, Rhibet, in Lancashire, and from
thence went straight Eastward, till they came to the mouth of Abus, now Humber.

The North Britans were glad to give them way, contenting themselves with the
East side of Britannia minor (which indeed was, and is the best) and were glad
also to have them for a Rampart against their enemies in the South, or in
majore Britannia. Ab Hibernia Scotici generis fuere Brigantes qui circa
Eboracum habitabant, magna and valido natio, ac totius insulae latitudinem
obtinebant. Buch.
The Brigantes were great enemies to the Romans, with whom they had diverse
Bickerings; but at last they were compelled to go Northward, and were hemmed in
by the wall built by the Romans, betwixt the fluve Tina, now Tyne on the East
side, and Itrina, now Eden in Cumberland, on the West side. Although they left
the Country besouth this wall, yet the Romans continued there the names of
Brigantes; yea, some of the Brigantes, allured by the bounty of the Soil, did
choose rather to submit to the Roman yoke, then change their abode, although it
was with thraldom. Then, after many various encounters with the Romans, they
were yet constrained to yield more ground unto the Romans, who hedged in both
them and the Picts northward with a Wall, betwixt Bodotria, or Forth, and
Glotta, or Clyde. At last, the Romans, by cunning, raised jealousies betwixt
the Brigantes and Picts, and so not only withdraws the Picts from the
friendship of the Brigantes, but makes them join with them, to overthrow the
Brigantes; and taking occasion of the Brigantes domestic troubles, fights with
them; yea, at length, after a bloody well-fought Battle, defeats them, gives
the best of the Lands they possessed to the Picts, for their reward. After this
the Brigantes were constrained, for the most part, (I mean of the better sort)
to retire thence, whereof some went to the next Isles; some returned to
Ireland, to their ancient Patrie; and some went to the North Countries beyond
Seas, and so they were for a time distressed, and in exile, till after diverse
attempts, they were restored again under the conduct of Fergus the second. Here
let us remember, That the whole Island Britannie was first named Albion, from
Albe, or Alpe, which signifies hill, or high place. This word Albe, or Alpe,
comes from Albus, white; and this from the Hebrew (...) Laban, per metathesin,
Alban, Albus; and (...) in Greek; because the high hills and mountains,
Britannia modo nomen totius insulae, modo partis ejus quae Romany fascibus
parebat ea^que pars nunc Humbro, nunc vallo ad ^inam, nunc vallo ad Fortham
finiebatur.

Johannes Forderus, in his 2 Book, 7 chapter of his Scoti-Chronicon, tells us, That
Albania, that is, Albion, began for a time at Humber, then at Tyne, then at
Forth.


yea, in the hot Countries, are frequently covered with Snow, and so appear
white; witness the high hills betwixt France and Italy, which, by reason of
their highness above other mountains, are named particularly Alps. The Island,
when it had given unto it the name of Britannia, by little and little left off
the old name of Albon, which continued in the North part of the Island, benorth
the limits of the Empire; and so the whole Country beneath the Humber was
called; and Albion in this second sense, in following times was called
Britannia minor, as we have heard; but as the Romans did gain ground upon the
in-dwellers of Albion, or Britannia minor, beating them Northward, they
lessened Albion, or Britannia minor, so far, till they brought them to keep
North Bodotria, or Forth, and Glotta, or Clyde.

Last of all, the Romans having by their cunning divided the Brigantes and
Picts; and having drawn the Picts on their side against the Brigantes, Albion
was taken for that part of Britannia minor, beyond Clyde and Forth, which did
not belong to the Picts; that is, the Northwest side of that hilly Continent,
with the hilly Islands adjacent, where to this day dwells our Highlandmen,
or Highlanders, who are the remnant of the ancient Brigantes. That the ancient
name of a whole great Country, as this Island is, should be conserved in one
corner, or a little portion thereof, may not seem strange, I have thought fit
to tell you, That you have the like in our neighbor Country, of old called
Gaul, now France; where the ancient name of Gaul, among the vulgar, is only
conserved in a little Country lying about Sens, of old, Senones: this little
Country is called Pays Gaulois, and is divided in Haute, and basse Gaul. So
it was judiciously said by the Historiographer, The name of the Isle Albion is
derived from Albe, and remains in Scotland, as it were in its Native Soil.
Nomen insulae ab Albo ductum Albion, in Scotia velut in natali solo haeret.
Buch.


Of Alpe, or Albe, signifying hill, or high place, you have the in-dwellers
thereof sometimes named Albani, as in Asia, Dalmatia, Italy, and North
Britannia; and their Country Albania, sometimes Albici, Albigois in
Languedock, and their Country Albium, or Albi, in vulgar language, sometimes
Albini, or Alpini, and Albienses, as the in-dwellers of our Albion, who to this
day call themselves as they have done of old, etc. which name is one and the
same with Brigantes. Here let us remark, That as the Provincialls or
In-dwellers of Britannia superior, subject to the Romans, are ordinarily
called by the Writers Britones; so the others, benorth the Empire, have been
called by the Writers Britanni, peregrini, and transmarini, strangers, and
beyond-Sea-men, as if they had been of another Island. And truly, if it were
not for the Strait betwixt the Rivers aforementioned, which did serve for Border
unto them, they were in another Island. Hence England is said to be inter
quatuor maria.

In Albio sunt Brigantes Ptolomae. Tacitus, and Seneca.
Ptolomeis, Tacitus, and Seneca tell us, That the Brigantes inhabited Albion,
which when they writ, was that part of the Island beyond the Roman Empire.
Therefore the Brigantes were then Albini, or Albani.

Brigantes circa Eboracum fuerunt Scotici generis, magna and valida natio. Buch.
Moreover, the Brigantes about Eboracum, now York, were of the Scots, who came
from Ireland, a great and mighty People.

John Fordon, in his Scoti Chronicon, writes, That the Scots came so far South
as Humber, and possessed Lands there. Also the Isle of Man was for a long time
under the Crown of Scotland; which Isle is as far South, as the Country about
York, although it be Westward, and in the Sea. And these were the Brigantes we
now have spoken of. Florente tum Imperio Romano Brigantes in Albium trajecerunt.
The Brigantes, at their first coming into Albion, came, as we have said,
without any certain or settled way of Government: but being grown to a
considerable number or Body, they sent into Ireland for Fergus the first, to be
their King; whose (with a new Colonie) coming into Albion, is reckoned to be
about Alexander the Great his time; that is, about three hundred years before
the Birth of Christ.

The Brigantes, alias, Albini, for a certain time, by some have been called
Dalreudini (although this name did not last long) from the King Reuda, Deind
post aliquot aetates domo pulfi in Hiberniam redierunt, unde majore cum numero
duce Reuda in Albium reversi sunt.

Quinte Caledonios iterum visure Britannos.


who brought into Albion the second remarkable Colony from Ireland, after
Fergus, about 180 years before Christ; that is, about 220 years after Fergus,
And Dale, which signifies Country and Province, as is known to this day:
There is a certain place in the West of Scotland, called to this very day
Ridsdale.

We have heard, That the people benorth the Roman Province, upon the East side,
were originally Britains, whence they were called Britanni Picti; and sometimes
Britanni Caledonii, from one of the chief people; sometimes simply Picti, or
Caledonii. Also we have heard, That the people benorth the Province, on the
West side, were come from Ireland, and called Brigantes, or Album; yea, for a
time Dalreudini. Likewise we have heard, That all the people benorth the
Empire, by a general Appellation, were called Scoti, where they were all
spoken of together: but when they were spoken of apart, those of the East were
called Scoto-britanni: Those of the West were called Scoto-brigantes, as we
have heard out of Seneca.

Moreover, by progress of time, the Irish came to go under the name of Scots,
with those of Britannia minor, or Albion, who from them had help, Hiberniam
nominatam Scotiam a mediae aetatis scriptoribus observaevit Ortelius in
Geographia.
supply, and recruites, in their War against the Romans and Britans
Provincialls. Thus naming the Irish by the name of Scots, began some hundred
years after Christ; that is, toward the middle Ages. And about that time
Ireland was called by the name of Scotia, as Abrahamus Ortelius has remarked,
in these words; I have observed Ireland to be named Scotia, by the Writers of
the middle Age. And so it has been observed by the learned, That ancient
Authors did never name Ireland Scotia; as you may see by those who have exactly
reckoned up the old names of Ireland, Videsis Hermolaum Barbarum in Plinium,
and Vadianum, in Solinum.
out of the ancient and Classick Authors. So it was not said much amiss by
one, That this naming of Ireland by the name of Scotland, was first about Beda
his time, who lived in the beginning of the eighth Age. Scaliger tells us, That
the word Scot is no Irish word, but British; that is not used in Ireland,
Scotus non est nomen Hibernicum, sed Britannicum.
but in Britannia: what is the origin and signification of the word, we have
heard before.

As the Irish began to be called Scots, so the Picts left off to be so named;
now withdrawing themselves from the Brigantes, or Albini, and striking in with
their enemies the Irish, by the Writers were called Scoti Hibernienses, and the
Albins were called Scoti Albienses: And Ireland was called Scotia major,
because Albania or Albion in those days, which they called Scotia minor, was
of less extent. But this name of Scots was not for any long time given to the
Irish; So that at length the name of Scots became peculiar to the Albins or
Brigantes alone.

Lastly, the Albins having subdued the Picts, and made them no more a People,
communicated into the Country, newly conquered by them, the name of Scotia, as
one Country with Albinia; and so all the in-dwellers there, were called Scots,
with the Albins, as one people with them, and so they are to this day.

Now the Albins or Brigantes being the only Masters of Britannia minor, came
to be called Scoto-Britanni; as the Picts had been of old, and are upon
occasion called so to this day, to distinguish them from the South Britons, of
whom, some are called Cambro-britanni, the rest, Anglo-britanni.

Although the ancient Brigantes were called by foreigners Scoti, namely, by
the Britons Provincialls, and the Romans, yet they did never name themselves
so, by this name Scoti; neither do the High-landers to this day, in their own
language call themselves Scots, but Albins. So Scaliger had just reason to say,
That Scoti was not an Irish name. As the Hellenes did never name themselves
Greeks, although they were so commonly called by the foreigners: And the
Misraims did not call themselves Egyptians, although foreigners named them so.

The Scots now adays are divided in Highland-men, and Lowland-men: The
Highlanders are the true Progeny of the ancient Brigantes, or Albins, for the
most part, I say, because some are come in later times from other Countries.
And to this day our Highlanders, as the Brigantes of old, makes main use of
their Bows and Arrows, in their war, namely, when they are among the hills; so
when they praise one for a Military man, they say, He is a good Bowe-man, and
Bray-man; which two Epithites were expressed by the ancients in one composed
word, Scoto-Brigantes.

The Lowland-men are made up of diverse Nations; for a few of them are a little
remnant of the ancient Picts; other few are descended from the ancient Albins:
who leaving the hills, after the defeat of the Picts, did betake themselves to
the Low Country. Diverse from the South parts of Britannie, had fled thither
from the Tyranny of the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, as they did of old from the
Tyranny of the Romans. Then the English, being so often in Scotland with their
Armies, have left diverse in the Country. Also Marriages, and other private
occasions, have drawn sundry men from England into Scotland. Lastly, sundry of
the Low-Countrie people are come from beyond Seas, as from France, Germany,
Hungary, Flanders, Ireland, etc. of late days: So all being reckoned, they are
but few in the Low Country come of the old Albins, Brigantes, or old Picts.

The Low Country men calls the High-landers Irish, not so much for their
ancient descent, as for their language, only differing from the Irish by
dialect; and for their ways of living not much unlike: yet one main difference
is to be seen in the activity of the Scots, and the laziness of the Irish. On
the other side, the Highlanders calls the Low Country men Saxons, not so much
for their descent (although many of them are come from the Southern people, as
we have said, who are a Progeny of the Saxons) as for the language, which
differs only by dialect from the language of the South, which acknowledges
the Saxon language for its mother Tongue, and for the way of living not so
different, save that the Scots are harder bred, and consequently, more fitted
for toyling at War namely, then the English are; for we see the English to have
pain to toil, and endure Wars, at the first going to the Field, by reason of
their tender and soft breeding. The language of the South- Britons of old, was
not much different from that of the Gauls, from whence they came into Albion;
witness Tacitus, in Agricola his Life: The Gauls then did speak a corrupt
Greek, In no Language are the Greek Authors so well turned, as in French.
for they are come of the Greeks. Besides, many words of the old Gaulois, the
phrase and construction, are to this day in the French language kept; which
does signify, that of old the Greek was spoken in Gaul, although corrupt
grossly by ignorant men without learning, who neither could read nor write. Yet
in the South parts of Gaul, near the Mediterranean Sea, wherein the Greek
Islands are, the Greek was spoken and taught, at Marseilles namely. The
ancient language of the Britons suffered a great change by the Romans, and other
foreigners, who brought in amongst them their terms of Law, of divine Service,
of War, and of Policy, with the names of diverse Commodities, and the names of
diverse Trades.

When the Saxons and Danes came into the Land, they confined the remnant of the
ancient Britons unto the West Country, with their language, such as it was
left unto them by the Romans, and other foreigners of old, and with themselves
planted the language which is spoken in all England now adays, with some
alteration and change. The first notable change happened by the Normans, in
whose language the Law has been administered, etc. The next change is from the
Latin, in which language divine Service has been for many years Officiated.
Then the English language has borrowed from all neighbor Nations many words,
without any great change; so that the English language is said to be the
quintessence of all neighbor Languages: From it the Scottish Tongue differs but
in dialect, as we have said. The Highlanders Language, as has been said
likewise, is Irish, which of old was a corrupt Greek also; for the Irish came
into Ireland from the North parts of Spain, who spoke a corrupt Greek, as those
of Gaul did; for the ancient in-dwellers of the North parts of Spain came also
from the Greek Islands. So that of old, the Language of the ancient Britons was
not altogether strange unto the Brigantes, or Alpins; yea, in this time wherein
we live, notwithstanding the great changes that both the Languages have
sustained by time, and Commerce of foreign Nations, they have many words which
are one and the same, signifying the same thing.

Thus much I have written of the beginning, names, way of living, and Languages
of Scotland, to make known to all, how unjust and injurious unto us are some
modern Antiquaries of our neighbor Countries; who first think they cannot
prove their own people to be sufficiently ancient, except they take from their
neighbor their just right of good Antiquity. Next, they conceive they cannot
set forth fully enough the greatness of their own Country, except they make
their neighbors no people at all, or at least, hardly considerable. Thirdly,
they imagine, That they cannot extol and magnify the glory of their Country
highly enough, unless they not only depresse and extenuate their neighbors
name, but also attribute unto themselves the advantages of their neighbors.
But if these Antiquaries had considered with the eyes of men, That there is
enough to be said for the credit of their own Country, without wronging
others, they had not so stuffed their Books with mistaken and mis-applied
Allegations of good ancient Authors, nor with Collection of fabulous and lying
Monks tales, wherein some of them do fancy Learning mainly to consist. But of
this enough.

For this place, I will only add this: As the Scots, although they be not of
the greatest people, yet they are truly one of the most ancient People in
Europe; So I dare be bold to say, That God (to whose praise be it spoken) in
his goodness toward them has raised up of them, and amongst them, so many
excellent and virtuous men, in Church and State, in Piety and Learning, in
Policy and War, at home and abroad, of old and of late, that few Nations,
ancient or modern, although of greater bounds, can compare with them; fewer
equal them, and hardly any at all go beyond them in this; for which we praise
God, who of the best things has given us the best measure; and say with the
Historian, Terra virorum f^rtium quam frugum feracior
That the Land is more fertile of good men, then of good fruits.

But now, since all former walls of separation and division, both ancient and
modern, Civil and Ecclesiastical, are in a great measure taken away by Gods
blessing: and since in so many respects the Scots and English are so near one
unto another, as we have said: But above all, since they both are members of
the true Church and pure Spouse of Christ Jesus, to the upholding of whose
Truth, and purging of it from uncleanness they have newly bound themselves
together as one People, yea, as one man, Let them then, in Gods Name, laying
aside all excuses, envies, jealousies, and by-ends, as feeling members of one
and the same Body, concur unanimously, with their mutual and best endeavors,
to settle the true Worship of God in all true purity, and quiet all things
speedily with wisdom, to the good of the people, with due obedience to our
lawful Sovereign under God, as we are taught by the Law of God, the Law of
Nature, the Law of Nations, and the Municipall Laws of our several Countries.
But to return to the Church.

The Scots, although they received amongst them the light of the Gospel with
the very first of the Gentiles, as we have said, yet had they not the Evangel
so universally professed through the whole Country, till toward the first
years of the third Age; that is, till Donald the first; who not only professed
the Faith of Christ himself, with his Family, but did his best to cast out
Idolatry wholly from his Dominions, and to settle the Ministry of the Gospel
in every corner thereof: But this religious King could not bring to pass this
his good Design fully, being diverted by continual Wars against the Romans
the whole course of his life.

After the death of Donald, till toward the later end of the third age; that
is, to the Reign of Crathilinth, this work of totally putting down Idolatry,
and settling the Gospel every where in the Country, by the negligence of the
following Princes, was at a stay. In this King Crathilinth his days fell out
the ninth persecution under Aurelius, and the tenth under Dioclesian, which
gave occasion to many Christians from diverse parts of the Empire, but namely
from the South parts of Britanie, now another time to fly into Scotland for
refuge, as they had done before under Domitian. Among those fugitives who did
then repair into Scotland for shelter from the general massacre, were many
excellent men in Piety and Learning, whom the King Crathilinth not only
kindly received, but also employed to aid and help him and his Council in the
further settling of Christ's Truth in his Kingdom, and in the total extirpation
of Idolatry out of it; which was so much the harder work, because of the
Druides, the principal false Prophets, and Idolatrous Priests in those days;
who not only by their subtle hypocrisy, and sense-pleasing Divine Service,
but also by a cunning forecast, having drawn into their hands the hearing and
determining of Civil affairs, had so gained upon the spirits of the poor and
simple people, that they could not imagine how to be without them, and live.
The resolute care and diligence of King Crathilinth and his Council, with the
help of those pious and learned men, surpasses all difficulties; and having
put quite down the Groves and Altars under the Oaks, and, in a word, all Idol
Service, established the pure Worship of the true God in every place of his
Dominions, and filled up the rooms of those false Prophets, with godly and
learned Teachers of the people; which was done every where through the Kingdom,
but particularly in the Islands, which those pious men chose for their
principal abode, as being most fit for a retired life; and namely, in the Isle
of Man the King Crathilinth caused to build a Church to the honor of our
Savior, which in following times, by corruptions, was called Fanum Sodorense,
for Soterense, the word original is, (...). Hence the Town near the Church was
called Sodora, as Minster in our vulgar language, and Moustier in French,
signifying a Town, in a secondary signification, near a Church. Those godly men
being settled as aforesaid, and having withdrawn themselves from the solicitude
of worldly affairs, did wholly give themselves to divine Service, that is, To
instruct the ignorant, comfort the weak, administer the Sacraments to the
people, and to train up Novices and Disciples, to do the same service in their
due time. These men, for their single and retired life, were called (...), or
Monks, by abbreviation; and for their traveling altogether in Gods Worship and
Service, were called Colidei, or Culdees.

Culdei vitam solitariam tanta sanctitatis opinione apud omnes vixerunt, ut
vita functorum Cellae in Templa quum mutarentur; and inde consuetudo apud
posteros mansit, ut prisci Scoti Templa Cellas vocent. Buch.
These Culdees were so given to the exercise of devotion, by the meditating the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and by Prayers, that the very Cells
whereinto they had enclosed and separated themselves from the world, after
their death were reputed so many Temples or Chapels set aside for Divine
Service; hence to this day Cella is taken for a Church among the ancient Scots,
as you may see in these composed names, Kelmarnoc, Marnoc his Church,
Celpatric, Patrick his Church.

Veteres Scotorum Episcopie monasteriis electi, cum adhuc non honoris and
^ncri, sed sanctitatis and doctrinae inter cos certamen esset, sine invilia and
aemulatione partium ubicunque obvenerat occasio suum munus obibant, nullis
adhuc regionibus desinit^^, cum nondum finctio muneris ecclesiastici esset
questuaria. Buch.
The Culdees thus settled, as we have seen, did chose out of themselves some
eminent men, in piety, knowledge, and wisdom, to oversee the rest, and to keep
them to the discharge of their duty toward the People, and toward the
Disciples, with an orderly and discreet carriage of each one toward another,
in their several societies, and in their private. These Overseers or
Superintendents chosen of themselves, and by themselves, did discharge the
Duties of their Function, indifferently every where, thorowout the whole
Kingdom, without restraining themselves to any certain place, or Lording over
their Brethren, or any part of the Flock of Jesus Christ, not attributing unto
themselves any particular distinct holy order from the rest, belonging only to
them, and to be only conferred by them. This way of instructing the People,
and governing the Church by Culdees, did continue for many years, under Gods
mercy; the Ministry of Gods Church, as yet, not being become a business of
gain, and of worldly pomp and pride; So these Culdees and Overseers of others,
had no other emulation, but of weldoing, nor striving, but to advance true
Piety and godly Learning. The Overseers of Superintendents of the Culdees,
were commonly called by the Writers who writ of those days, Scotorum Episcopi,
without any definition of place, or preeminence of one above another. But to
return to Crathilinth, who till his dying day, which was about the 312. year,
did constantly continue to advance the Kingdom of Christ, as likewise his
successor Fincormac; under whose days the Gospel did flourish in Purity and
in Peace; he died about the year 358. After the death of Fincormac, both the
Church and State of Scotland fell in great disorder and troubles, by domestic
dissensions and factions for some years. The Roman Lieutenant Maximus, seeing
the intestine troubles of Scotland, began to lay hold upon the occasion. First,
he foments their divisions within them* next, not only he withdraws under fair
promises from the Scots their ancient Allies, the Picts, but also obtains help
of the Picts to make War against the Scots, and so to defeat them, which he
did effectuate indeed in a battle fought with much bloodshed on both sides, at
the Water of Dun, in Carrick, wherein the King Ewen was killed (this defeat
fell out about 380. in the year of Christ) the most part of the Nobility, and
numbers of People of those that escaped, some fled into the West Isles, some
into Ireland, and others to the Northern parts of Germany or Scandia; some
submitted themselves to the will and discretion of the Conqueror, with the
poor people that had not taken arms. Among those that fled away, was Ethod the
Kings Brother, who went with sundry of the Nobility unto Scandia, where he and
they stayed diverse years, and from whence now and then they made secret
attempts upon Scotland, with the help of their Brethren, retired into the
Islands and Ireland, but to small effect.

Now as the face of the politic State of the Country was quite altered and
undone, so the condition of the Church also was much disordered, and the
Culdees were constrained to withdraw, and seek shelter up and down, where they
could find any; namely, they returned into the Isles, and into Ireland: At
last the Picts perceiving by several attempts made by the exiled Scots, to
return home, and re-establish their State (although with little success, as we
have said) that the Scots were fully resolved to bestirre themselves
continually, till they were restored, and reestablished in their ancient
Inheritances; the Picts themselves being moved with the groaning miseries of
their neighbor poor people of Scotland, now under the Roman yoke, chiefly by
their means; and taking to their consideration, how foolishly they had suffered
themselves be so far circumvented and deluded by the Romans, as to contribute
to the ruin of their old friends; by whom, mainly in former times, they had
withstood the common enemy, did not only comfort the poor oppressed remainers
of the Scots at home, but also did invite these that were in exile to return,
promising unto them the Lands which they had of theirs, and to help them with
all their strength and counsel, in the recovery of their whole State from the
Roman Tyrants. The exiled Scots under the conduct of Fergus the second, son to
Ethod, beyond Sea, gathered all they could, both of their own people, and of
their friends, from the places of their exile, namely, from Scandie, and from
Ireland likewise, and came into Scotland, from whence they chased away the
Romans, by strong hand, with the help of the Picts, who made good their promise
unto them, both in assisting them in the action of War, and in restoring unto
them the Land that they had been possessed with by the Romans. The Auxiliaries
from Ireland stayed still in Scotland, and had allowed unto them the Country
of Galloway for their reward; and because they were of the ancient Brigants of
Ireland, some of the late Writers have said, That the Brigantes of Albion had
their abode in Galloway. No sooner is Fergus Crowned in the fatal Chair, and
settled in his Kingdom, but he takes to his first care to restore the purity of
Divine Service, which had been eclipsed in these bounds for several years; and
to this effect, he calls some of the dispersed Culdees of his Country, whom he
settles in their ancient abodes; namely, in the Isle of Iona, where he
furnished them with a Library of Books which he had gathered beyond Sea, as the
Story tells us.

This return of Fergus into Scotland, son of Ethod, Brother to late Ewen, fell
out about the year 420. The regaining by the Scots of their native Country,
under the command of Fergus the second, will not seem strange unto them who
have read what they did under the commands of William Wallace, and how under
the conduct of Robert Bruce, they recovered their liberty from the thraldom
wherewith they were then oppressed.

Ewen, son to Fergus the second, by the counsel and aid of his Grandfather by
his Mother Grame; did not only keep his Fathers ancient Kingdom, but also did
enlarge the Limits thereof, having passed the next Wall of the Romans, which by
Grame was pulled down in many places, hence it is called Grames Dyke; and he
possessed himself, and the Picts with all the Lands lying an hundred miles
Southward, that is, unto Tyne, and kept them till the entry of the Saxons into
the Island. Next, he took unto his care not only to seek out the Culdees
fugitives, which had not yet returned, under his Father, but also he sent for
others into the neighbor Country of Britain, and assigned unto them
convenient places for their abode, with a moderate competency of means for
their maintenance, that they should be in no ways burdensome to the people,
now looking to have some respite from their pressures and grievances. And such
was the happiness of these days, that a very small proportion did content the
Churchmen, setting wholly their minds to the conscionable discharge of their
calling, which they did, Preaching Gods Word carefully, truly, and simply,
instructing the people in the fear of God, and so gaining their souls to their
Maker and Redeemer. Scotiae tunc temporis sanctissimorum fertilis virorum.
By this their carriage, they gained very much respect among the people, who
honored them, as Fathers, Instructers, and Guiders to Heaven, under God; the
virtuous civil Magistrate was the secondary cause of this good behavior of
Churchmen, who by his authority kept them in order, and by his own example
taught them to discharge their duty faithfully, and live discretly; But so soon
as the civil Magistrate left them to themselves, then they neglecting their
calling, set their mind upon ambition and avarice, and consequently upon all
evil, thinking of nothing less, then of that they were called to.

Here we are to observe, That as the Scots did constantly withstand the ancient
Romans, and kept themselves so free of their yoke, that they neither
acknowledged their Authority, nor received any Law from them, although it was
not without great struggling and hazard, yea, almost to their utter ruin, as
it fell out under Ewen the first; but after some few years, the Scots under the
conduct of Fergus the second, and Ewen the second, not only regained what they
had lost by the Romans and Picts, but also conquered a great deal of ground
beyond their last Limits, as we have newly said. So the Scots in Church
affairs, for many years together, had nothing to do with the Bishop of Rome,
neither made they acknowledgement unto him in any way, neither did they receive
any Laws from him; for as they had the Gospel planted among them, without his
help, to wit, by the Disciples of Saint John the Apostle, so they kept
themselves unto the Constitutions and Canons, settled by the same first Planters
of the Gospel amongst them; but by success of time, they became to be infected
by their neighbor Nations, with the poison of the Pelagian Heresy. Celestine
then Bishop of Rome, taken occasion to send unto the Britons, a learned man
called Palladius, to help the Orthodox Britons to convince the Heresy of
Pelagius, then spreading it self amongst them, which was done accordingly.

Ewen the second, King of Scots, hearing how the Britons, by the help of
Palladius, had repressed the Pelagianisme, being most desirous to purge the
Church of his Kingdom also, where this Pelagian error had crept in; sends for
Palladius; who with small difficulty assisted the Orthodox, to disabuse those
who had been carried away by Pelagianisme, and thereafter in a very short time,
by subtle in^inuations, gained so far upon the well-meaning Scots, that they
consented to take new Governors of their Church, who were to have a Degree and
Pre-eminence above their brethren, to wit, the Prelat-Bishops. Hitherto the
Church of Scotland had been governed by Monks and Priests, without any such
dignity or pomp. I call their new Governors, Prelat-Bishops, to distinguish
them from their former Overseers and Superintendents of the Culdees, who are
sometime by Writers called Bishops, as they were indeed; but they had no
Pre-eminence or rank of Dignity above the rest; neither were they of any
distinct Order from the rest of their Brethren. That at this time by Palladius
was brought into Scotland these new kind of Bishops, it appears by the
relations of the Authors following, thus.

Palladius is thought to be the first who made Bishops (that is, Buc. l. 3. In
Eugen. r Ceditur Palladius primos Episcopos in Scotia creasse, nam ad id usque
tempus Ecclesiae absque Episcopis per Monachos regebantur; minore quidem cum
fastu and externa pompa, sed majore simplicitate and sanctimonia.
of this new order) in Scotland; for till then the Churches were without
Bishops, governed by Monks; with less vanity truly and outward pomp, but with
greater simplicity and holiness.

Before him, Lib. 7. Cap. 128. Erat Palladius primus omnium qui sacrum inter
Scotos egere Magistratum, a summo Pontifice Episcopus creatus, quum antea
populi suffragiis ex Monachis elegerentur.
says Hector Boece, Palladius was the first of all that did bear the holy
Magistrature among the Scots, being made Bishop by the great Pontif or Bishop;
for till then, by the suffrage of the people, the Bishops were made of the
Monks and Culdees.

John Mair speaks thus, Lib. 2. cap. 2. Ante Palladium per Sacerdotes and
Monachos, sine Episcopis* Scoti in fid^ crudiebantur.
Before Palladius, by Priests and Monks, without Bishops, the Scots were
instructed in the faith.

Lib. 4. in Eugenio 2. Apud nos non nisi Monachorum suffragiis Episcopi
designabantur.
John Lesley says this, Among us (Scots) the Bishops were only designed by
the suffrage of Monks.

Lib. 3. Cap. 8. Ante Palladii adventum habebant Scoti fidei doctores, as
Sacramentorum administratores presbyteros solummodo, vel Monachos, ritus
sequentes Ecclesiae primitivae.
John of Fordon, in his Scots Chronicle, says, Before the in-coming of
Palladius, the Scots had for Teachers of the Faith, and Ministers of the
Sacraments, Presbyters only, or Monks, following the Rites or Customs of the
Primitive Church. Mark the later words; for according to this saying goes the
judgment of the best Divines, who write the truth without any respect. In
glossa De^^eti, Distinct. 93. Cap. Legimas. In prima primitiva Ecclesia commune
erat Episcoporum and Sacerdotum officium, and nomina erant communia, and
officia communia: sed in secunda primitiva Ecclesia caeperunt distingui and
nomina and officia.
Whose mind John Semeca declares thus, In the first Primitive Church the
Office of Bishops and Priests was common to the one and the other; and both the
names were common, and the Office common, to one and the other: But in the
second Primitive Church, the names and the Offices began to be distinguished.

Centur. 14. Cap. 6. Ante Palladium Scoti habebant fuos piscoposac Ministros ex
Verbi divini Ministerio plebiu^ suffragio electos, juxta morem Asianorum: sed
haec Romany Asianorum osoribus non placebant.
Baleus of the Briton writers, Before Palladius the Scots had their Bishops and
Ministers, according to the Ministry of the sacred Word, chosen by the
suffrage of the people, after the custom of those of Asia: But those things did
not please the Romans, who hated the Asiaticks.

Ad annum 424. Scoti primum Episcopum a Celestino acceperunt.
Baronius in his Annalls says this, The Scots gat their first Bishop from
Celestine Pontif Roman.

Ad annum 436. Ad Scotos Pontifex Celestinus Palladium mi^it Episcopum.
Prosper in his Chronic. The Pontif Celestine sends unto the Scots Palladius
to be their Bishop.

Ad Scotos in Christum credentes ordinatur a Papa Celestino Palladius, and
primus Episcopus mittitur.
Item, Unto the Scots then believing in Christ Palladius is ordained by Pope
Celestine, and sent thither the first Bishop.

Lib. 1. Palladius ad Scotos in Christum credentes a Pontifice Romanae
Ecclesiae Celestino primus mittitur Episcopus.
Beda, in the History of England, Palladius was sent first Bishop unto the
Scots, by Celestine, Pontif of the Roman Church.

By these Authorities we see, That the Scots, before Palladius, had no Bishops
at all; or at least, their Bishops were not of any distinct Order from other
Priests and Culdees, by whom they were ordained, and of whom they were chosen,
as we have touched before: and so they were not as those Bishops have been with
us, in these later times.

Next, let us observe, That the Scots Bishops, since Palladius, must
acknowledge themselves clients of the Roman Antichrist, seeing of him they have
their beginning and dependence: although in words, yea, in some part of
Doctrine, they seem to disclaim him, yet in many parts they show themselves to
be of his Family, namely, in Government; for they, with him, Lord over the
Inheritance of Christ, and, forsooth, take unto themselves the name of Lords
Spiritual, as if they were Lords of the Spirits of men, contrary to Gods Word,
wherein we are taught, That the Father and Maker of Spirits, is the only Lord
over them: or at least, Lords of Spiritual things, against the express words
of the Apostles, who acknowledge themselves to be only Ministers of the
Spirit, and spiritual things, reputing it the greatest honor in the world to
be so. And Peter, who after he had styled himself no more then co-Presbyter
with the rest of the Presbyters, he forbids them to Lord over the sort of
Christ. Then, since in the first Primitive Church the Functions of Bishop, and
Pastor, and Presbyter were undistinguished, and any one of the names
indifferently denoted the Office, it must be confessed, That the change of
Government which has entered into the Church is not immediately from Christ and
his Apostles, neither by Precept nor Example, but contrary to Christ's Will and
Intention, declared in his Word; and according to the inventions of men,
serving to the exorbitant affections of avarice, ambition, and lust; to the
satisfaction of which, they have domineered over the Flock of Christ, like
tyrants, devoured the substance thereof, like ravening Wolves: yea, what is
worse, they have not only been negligent and careless to distribute unto the
people the Word of God, but also with their might and power have hindered and
stopped others to make known unto Gods people the pure light of his Gospel, the
ordinary means of salvation; and consequently, so far as in them lies, by
thus starving the people of this heavenly Food, send them to hell. Such were
these Spiritual Lords; who, See the Breviate of the Prelates by Huntley. 1637.
as they have encroached upon the Spiritual Lordship of Christ Jesus over his
Flock, and usurped his Authority; yea, and opposed it flatly, under the name of
Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction; so have they boldly and cunningly
invaded the Prerogative of civil Magistrates, by their Courts and Regalities
within the Dominions of Princes where they live: Yea, in sundry places they
usurp the full Authority of Princes, and in others they flatly oppose it. And
all this has been done, not only of old, by those who were called Romish
Bishops, but also in our days by Bishops; who in some things make a show that
they disclaim their Father the Pontif Roman, whom in their heart they love and
respect, as their actions do witness.

Although by Palladius Prelacy was brought in the Church of Scotland, and by
that means the Government was changed; and thereafter immediately by degrees
other alterations crept into the Church, yet those times after Palladius, till
the sixth Age, I mean, till Augustine the Monk, may be said to be golden times,
and pure, in regard of the following days, wherein Churchmen, without any
restraint, abandoned themselves to ambition, avarice, and lust, neglecting
altogether their Function; for in these fourth and fifth Ages they were many
godly and learned men, who were diligent in discharging the true Duty of a
Pastor, as Colombe, Libthac, Ethernan, etc. Then Knitogerne, who by nickname
was called Mongo; because his Master Servian speaking unto him, used ordinarily
this expression, Mon ga, which in corrupt French is as much to say, as My boy.

Palladius having brought into the Church of Scotland Hierarchy, as we have
said, takes to his next care to provide for the maintenance of this new Degree
and Order; which was obtained without great difficulty, both of Prince and
people, under pretext of Piety; but with bad success, as by the woeful
experience of following times we have found.

These new Bishop-Prelats, having pretty well settled their own condition for
maintenance, which although it did exceed much the allowance of former Ages to
Churchmen, yet it was very moderate in regard of the following times: Next,
they obtained great Lands and Revenues from Prince and People, for other
Presbyters and Ministers, who formerly had been very little burdensome to the
people; for by their own industry and work of their hands, did provide for
themselves, necessaries for the most part; by this means, the Prelates tie the
other Presbyters and Ministers to them, and secondarily bring in, by little and
little, idleness, and slacknesse in discharging their calling, from whence are
risen all the evils we have seen since in the Church.

After the beginning of the fifth Age, to wit, 521. years, in this Island began
(the old Saturnalia of Rome, which was first kept in honor of Saturn; but by
the Successors of Julius Caesar, it was ordained to be kept, to the memory of
him, and was called Iulia) to be celebrated unto the honor of Christ's Birth,
in the later end of December. The occasion was this, Arthur that renowned
Prince wintering at York (whereof, he newly had made himself Master) with his
Nobles, bethought himself with them, to pass some days in the dead of winter
in good cheer and mirth, which was done forth with, as it is given out for
devotion to Christ, although, that then true Devotion was very little regarded;
for as these men did exceed the Romans during this Feast in Riot and
Licentiousness; So they continued the Feast double the time that the Ethnic
Romans were wont to kept it; for the Romans kept it only five days, but these
kept it ten days with their new devotion; yea, those of the richer sort in
time following have kept it fifteen days. Thus was the beginning of the
profane idleness and riot of Christmas, now kept twelve days with foolish
excess and riot. As these Christmas keepers did mistake the way of honoring
Christ's Birth, by this kind of solemnity; so did they mistake the time of his
Birth; for the most exact Chronologers tells us, that Christ was born in
October, and not in December.

The Scots retain still the old name Iulia, of this preposterous-holy-Feast,
for they call it corruptly Iul: Although they never kept it of old, not being
subject to the Romans.

The French and Italians, in this, are nothing behind with us; Nunc in
opprobrium Christianorum haec festa celebrantur.
for beside, That they share with us in these Saturnalia, Iulia, or Christmas;
They go beyond us in riot and fooleries in their Bacchanalia, which they call
Carnaval or Mardigras before Lent; which in old time was kept to the honor of
Bacchus.

But the corruptions that were brought in our Church from Rome in the fourth
and fifth Age, were nothing to what was brought in in the sixth and seventh
Age, for then was Religion turned upside down, and so changed into
Superstitious Ceremonies, and Idolatry, authorized by false miracles, that
there was hardly left any trace of true Religion among men in these days.
Palladius was the first that acquainted us with Rome, as we have said, and that
brought in Prelacy amongst us, a little after the beginning of the fourth Age,
which he and his Successors by degrees brought unto a great height, both in
worldly pomp and means (for the times) by the inconsiderate, debonnarty of the
Prince, and simplicity of the people, but not without struggling and
resistance, by pious and wise men, for many years; it was the work of
Churchmen, set a foot by Palladius so till the sixth Age, that is, upon the
matter, two hundred years, to raise themselves to Power, and Authority, and
Means, whereunto they came insensibly, so much the rather, because they were
sparing for these days, to invert the main Doctrine of the true Religion. The
People and Magistrate seeing their Religion remaining in its maine, were,
without great difficulty, drawn over to give way unto the greatness of the
Churchmen; But when these gallant fellows had wrought their own ends, they did
show plainly what was within their hearts; for then they declared themselves to
be enemies both to God and to Man, by their vicious lives, contrary to the Laws
of God and man; Their false Doctrine, contrary to Gods Word; their Tyrannical
domineering over the people; and withdrawing themselves from due obedience,
unto the lawful Magistrate. In a word, by directly opposing God, abusing men
to their utter ruin of soul and body, and setting up their own inventions for
the Laws of God, and men, they were a bringing this height of iniquity to
pass, about the matter of two hundred years likewise, to wit, the sixth and
seventh Age, although the workers of iniquity did at last bring their
mischievous design to an end, by the permission of God, irritated against men
for their sins, who not adhearing unto him, were abandoned so, that they became
a prey unto Satan and his instruments, to follow all iniquity; yet, such was
the mercy of God toward men in these most corrupt times, that the devil and
his instruments went not so clearly on with their wicked business, but they
had now and then, from time to time, remoraes and lets in it, by those whom God
raised up to bear witness to his Truth; and in these days, sundry of the
Scots Divines were very stout in the keeping of the ancient Tenets and Rites
(which they had received from their first Apostles, Disciples to Saint John,
according to the Church of the East; Witness the great struggling they had
about the keeping of Pasche, or Easter Day; for till then, the Scots had kept
the day of Pasche, upon the fourteen day of the Moon, whatsoever day of the
week it fell out on; the Romanists called those that kept so this day,
quartadecimani, and condemned them as Heretics, and they kept the day
constantly upon the next Sunday following, and not upon a working day; at last
the Scots were constrained to yield in this, Colmannus and complures alii, qui
maluerunt optione data loco ceders, quam ritus Romanae ecclesiae recipere.
as in other Rites, unto Rome. Culman, and diverse others Scottish men, did so
stoutely oppose the Romanists in the point of Easter Day, and in other Tenets,
that they chose, it being given to their choice, either to submit unto Rome, or
to quit the setlings they had in the North of England, rather to lose their
Benefices, then to yield. So standing fast to the Customs of the Scots Church,
wherein they had been born and bred, they returned home to Scotland.

About the end of the seventh Age; men from Scotland, given to ambition and
avarice, went frequently to Rome for preferment in the Church; and seeing it
lay much that way then, they did their best to advance the design of the
Romish Party, wherein all the skill of worldly men was employed, both in Rome,
and among the Scots of that Party; many men went to and fro, between Rome and
Scotland, to bring the Scots to a full obedience unto Rome, and conformity; by
name there was one Boniface sent from Rome to Scotland, a main Agent for Rome
in these affairs; but he was opposed openly, by several of the Scots Culdees,
or Divines; namely, by Clemens, and Samson, who told him freely, That he, and
those of his Party, studied to bring men to the subjection of the Pope, and
slavery of Rome, withdrawing them from obedience to Christ; and so in plain
terms, they reproached to him, and to his assistants; That they were
corrupters of Christ's Doctrine, establishing a Sovereignty in the Bishop of
Rome, as the only successor of the Apostles, excluding other Bishops; That
they used and commanded Clericall tonsure; That they forbad Priests Marriage,
extolling Celibat; That they caused Prayers to be made for the dead, and
erected Images in the Churches; to be short, That they had introduced in the
Church many Tenets, Rites and Ceremonies, unknown to the ancient and pure
times, yea, contrary to them. For the which, and the like, the said Clemens,
and those that were constant to the Truth, with him were excommunicated at Rome
as Heretics, as you have in the third Volume of the Concels: although the true
reasons of their excommunication be not there set down.

In the eighth Age, the poor people were so blindly inslaved and intoxicat with
the Cup of Rome, that they thought it a truly holy Martyrdom to suffer for
the interest of Rome; yet, although most men had left God, to worship the
Beast, in these days God raised up sundry great Lights in our Church, as
Alcuin, Rabanus Maurus his Disciple, John Scot, and Claudius Clemens. In this
we shall remarke the constant goodness of God toward his people, who made his
Light shine in some measure through the greatest and thickest darkness, by
raising up these men, who did bear witness to the Truth, both by word and
writing; so that God did not altogether leave off his people. The Bishop of
Rome caused to declare Alcuin (for his Book of the Eucharist) many years after
his death an Heretic. So Rome persecutes the Saints of God, even after their
death.

In the ninth Age, both Prince and People, by doleful experience, did find
the idleness, pride, ambition, avarice and riot of Churchmen, occasioned by
the indulgence of Prince and People; wherefore, at Scone under King Constantine
the second, there was had a convention of States for reforming the disorders in
the Church. In this Assembly it was ordained, That Churchmen should reside
upon their charge; have no meddling with secular affairs; that they should
instruct the people diligently, and be good examples in their conversations;
that they should not keep Hawks, Hounds, and Horses, for their pleasure; that
they should carry no Weapons, nor be pleaders of civil Causes, but live
contented with their own provisions: in case of failing in the observance of
these points; For the 1, time, they were to pay a pecuniary mulct or fine; for
the 2, they were to be deprived from Officio and Beneficio. Thus you see, in
these most blind and confused times, That resolute Princes and People did
oppose manifestly the Popes omnipotency, and highest Sovereignty. In the later
part of the same Age, King Gregory was most indulgent to Churchmen; he was so
far from curbing and keeping them under, that he granted them many things
they had not had before. Then in a convention of States holden at Forsane, it
was ordained, That all Churchmen should be free of paying Taxes and Impost;
from keeping watch, and going to warfare. Item, They should be exempt from all
Temporal judicature. Item, All Matrimonial Causes were given over to be
judgment of Churchmen; as also Testaments, Legative Actions, and all things
depending upon simple faith and promise. Likewise, the right of Tithes, with
liberty to make Laws, Canons, and Constitutions; to try without the assistance
of the temporal Judge, Heretics, Blasphemers, Perjured Persons, Magicians,
etc. Lastly, it was ordained, That all Kings following, at their Coronation,
should swear, to maintain Churchmen in these their Liberties and Privileges.

In these days lived a Learned man, called John Scot, surnamed Aerigiena,
because he was born in the Town of Air; he published a Treatise, De corpore
and sanguine Domini in Sacramento, wherein he maintained the opinion and
doctrine of Bertram; whereby he offended highly the Sea of Rome.

In the tenth Age things grew worse and worse, The Churchmen did so blind the
King Constantine the third, That they persuaded him to quit the Royal Crown,
and take the Clericall Tonsure of a Monk, which he did at Saint Andrews; There
were some Priests in these days, who did strive to have liberty to take
lawful Wives, but in vain. A little thereafter, there were new disputes for
Priests marriage; one Bernet a Scots Bishop, stood much for that cause in a
national Council. In this Age, although that avarice and ambition, had
corrupted, and perverted Religion generally, yet there were constantly some
godly men, who albeit they could not openly stop and oppose the torrent of
these times, given to Idolatry and Superstition, did instruct and teach the
people, That Christ was the only propitiation for sin, and that Christ's blood
only did wash us from the guilt of sin.

In the eleventh Age, Malcome gave away a part of the Crown Lands among his
Nobles, for their good service against the Danes; the Nobles in recompense
thereof, did grant unto the Crown the ward of these Lands, with the benefit
that was to arise by the marriage of the Heir. Until the later part of this
Age, the Bishops of Scotland, although they had raised their Order unto a great
power and riches, yet they were not distinguished in Diocesses, so till then
indifferently, wheresoever they came, they did Ministrate their Function,
without lording over one particular place, or calling themselves Lords of any
place. The Diocesses wherein Scotland was divided at first, were these, Saint
Andrews, Glasgo, Murray, Catnes, Murthlac, or Aberdene. The Bishops of Rome
taking upon them in these days to be above Kings, and to confer in matters
of Honor, upon Kings, how, and where they pleased; and so by this means, to
put a farther tie of Vassalage and subjection upon Princes. To this effect, in
the year 1098. ordained King Edgar to be anointed with external Oil by the
Bishop of Saint Andrews, a rite, which till that day, had not been in use among
our Kings: yet they were as much the anointed of the Lord before, as they have
been since, and as any other Princes, who before them had this external
anointing from the Sea of Rome; although the Romish Writers do make a greater
esteem of these Kings anointed by them, then of others, because they conceive
them to be more their own. Here note by the way, That all Princes whatsoever in
Scripture Language, are said to be the Anointed of the Lord; and so Cyrus was
named, although he was never anointed with external Oil. Next, although the
first Kings of Israel were anointed, as Saul, David, and Solomon, with some of
the following Kings; namely, where there was any opposition feared of settling
them in the Royal Throne; for further Confirmation were anointed. Read
diligently the History of the Kings, and you shall not find that each one, or
every one of them was anointed externally, although they were all the Anointed
of the Lord. Next, you shall note, That the Oil wherewith Samuel anointed Saul
and David (and so the Oil wherewith other Kings were anointed) was not an Oil
consecrated, as that wherewith the High Priest, etc. was anointed, but common
Oil.

The reason of the Scripture Phrase whereby all Princes are said to be
anointed, is this: Anointing, in first and most ancient times, was a sign of
setting apart of a man for the Office of a King. Hence, by progress of time,
any man that was set aside by Gods providence to execute the Office of a King,
whether he came thereunto by Succession, or by choice, or by Conquest, was
called the Anointed of the Lord, because they had the thing signified by Gods
appointment, notwithstanding they wanted the sign, to wit, the Ointment.

Further we shall observe here, That not only those whom God has set aside to
be Kings, be called the Anointed of the Lord; but also the people whom he has
set aside or apart for a peculiar end: So the Prophet, speaking of the People
of Israel in Gods Name, uses this expression, Touch not mine Anointed: For
their sake I have reproved Kings.

Moreover note, That as the people set aside by God are said to be his
Anointed, so they are also called, A Royal Priesthood, Kings and Priests. Not
that every one of the people is a King or a Priest, these being particular
Callings, no more then they were anointed; but because they are set aside by
God as Priests, to offer daily unto him the Sacrifice of Righteousness, etc.
And as Kings were anointed with Oil, to signify their setting aside for their
peculiar Office; so every one of us, being anointed in Baptism by the holy
Spirit, is set aside to do justice, etc. as a King, in our several station.

Thus much have I, in few words, spoken of Kings anointing, and how the people
are said to be anointed, or to be Priests and Kings, because in the beginning
of the fifteenth Age, sundry were condemned as heretics, for saying, That
every man is a Priest in some kind; and that the anointing of Kings is now
needless, being an invention of Rome, to subject Princes unto it.

Some years after the beginning of the twelfth Age, King David, beside the
Bishoprics formerly erected, did erect the Bishopric of Rosse, Breachen,
Dunkel, and Dumblane. This debonaire Prince was so profuse toward Churchmen,
that he gave them a good part of the ancient Patrimony of the Crown: So he and
his Successors were necessitated to lay Taxes and Impost upon the people, more
then formerly, to the harm of the Commonwealth. In this also he wronged the
Church: for the Clergy being rich and powerful, left their Function, and gave
themselves over to all riot and idleness. Till riches made Churchmen lazy,
this distinction in discharging the Duty of a Pastor, or of the souls per se,
aut per alium, was unknown. While riches did not so abound in the Church,
Churchmen kept more conscience in the discharging of their places.

In this twelfth Age, the Scots, although they had Bishops ever since
Palladius, who for a long time did discharge the Function indifferently in
every place where they came to: And although they had of later times
distinguished the limits of the bounds wherein they were to execute their
Calling, by Diocesses; yet in that Age, I say, they were not come to that
height, to have Primates, Metropolitans, and Archbishops. Wherefore their
neighbor, the Archbishop of York, having gained the consent of the Pope,
bestirred himself very earnestly, by the assistance of his King, to have the
Scottish Bishops acknowledge him for the Metropolitan; whereunto the stoutest
of the Scottish Clergy would not consent; but they would depend immediately
upon the Pope: and to this effect, Legates were sent from Rome to Scotland; who
being come hither, and seeing the resolution of the Scottish Bishops not to
submit to the Archbishop of York; and finding their own benefit thereby, they
did exempt and free the Scots Clergy, from the trouble of the Archbishop of
York. There was one Gilbert Bishop of Catnes a great strugler for this
business.

About the later end of this Age, sundry Priests were put from their Office,
because they had taken Orders upon Sunday. In that time there was a Synod in
Perth of Divines, such as they were, who decreed, That Sunday should be kept
holy from all work, from Saturday at midday, or twelve of the clock, till
Monday morning.

In the thirteenth Age, few years after the beginning thereof, diverse kinds of
Monks came into Scotland, formerly unknown to the Land; as Dominicans,
Franciscans, Iacobins, and sundry other of that sort of Locusts. In this Age
these Vermin of Monks did so multiply every where, that at a Council at Lions
it was decreed, That no more new Orders of Monks should be admitted or
tolerated. But how the Decree has been kept, we see in our days.

Next, the Monks of several kinds gave themselves so to Begging, that the
people were much eaten up by them, and the poor his portion was withdrawn;
which occasioned a great murmr among the Commons. Upon this, there was a
Decree made then, That only the Minorites, Praedicants, Carmelites, and
Hermits of S. Augustine, should have liberty to beg: Whence they are called,
The four Mendicants; Les quatre Mendiants.

Toward the end of this thirteenth Age fell out that great desolation of the
State of Scotland, occasioned by the Controversy for the Succession of the
Crown, betwixt Baliol and Bruce; Baliol being constrained by the States of
Scotland to break the promise he had made to Edward of England, To subject the
Crown of Scotland unto him, for judging the cause on his side. After much
trouble and misery of War, the State of Scotland receives Robert Bruce, come of
the second Branch, for King, recalling all the subjection and Allegiance that
they had given to Baliol, because of his unworthiness to Reign: who, beside
unfitness to bear rule over a Military People, had basely condescended to
enslave that Nation, to whom their Liberty has been so dear to this day, that
for it, and the purity of true Religion, which both, by Gods mercy, they now
enjoy, they have willingly and cheerfully undergone all hazard of life and
means; judging, That if they suffered these two twins, Liberty and Religion,
either to be infringed, or taken from them, they had nothing left them, whereby
they might be called men.

The remarkable History of King James the first of Scotland, fitteth this
purpose very well. The Passage is this: King James the first going into France,
was taken by the English, and kept prisoner by them for many years. In that
time the King of England goes to France, to make War; and at his arrival
there, he finds an Army of Scots ready to fight for the Alliay of Scotland,
the French King, against the English. Upon this, the King of England moves King
James, whom he had taken along with him, to write unto the Scots, and to charge
them, upon their Allegiance, not to draw their Sword against the party where he
their King was in person. The Scots answered, That they were sent into France
to assist their Alliays against the common enemy. As for him who writ unto
them, since he was a prisoner, and not a free man, they neither owed him
Allegiance, nor would they give him any, so long as he was in prison; but if he
were set at liberty, and were living among them, they would obey him according
to the Laws of the Country; since the Crown was settled upon him by the consent
of the States, and so they did; for these Kingdoms were governed in his name,
without any communication with him, during the time of his imprisonment, which
was very long; but when he went home, he was received and obeyed as King. From
this Princes may learn, that although people do submit themselves to their
Government; the resignation is not so full as to divest themselves of all power
in such a way, That the Prince may dispose of them as he thinks right or wrong,
he ordinarily being misled and kept captive, by those that are about him; who
for the most part, have no regard to the public good, nor to the credit and
esteem of him, to whom in show they profess themselves so addicted; the people
have constantly reserved even unto themselves by the consent of all men, yea,
of the greatest Court-parasites and Sycophants of Princes, that the Prince
cannot, nor ought not to enslave or subject the people to any Foreign Power;
and where Princes by Pusillanimitie and ill counsel, have essayed or attempted
such a thing, they have smarted for it, witness Baliol, who not only was
excluded himself from the Crown, but also his Posterity; and it was settled upon
the next Branch, to wit, Robert Bruce, with his descendents, where it continues
to this day by Gods providence. Then since the people have reserved this power
in themselves, to stop the Prince, to put them under any Foreign yoke or
slavery; is it possible, That they have not reserved a power to right
themselves from domestic, and intestine slavery, and misery, slavery being
ever one and the same? For what is it to me by whom I suffer evil of one and
the same kind and degree, whether it be by a neighbor, or a stranger, a
forreigner, or a con-citizen? yea, when I suffer by him who should be my
friend, and stand for the same Freedom with me, my suffering is the greater.

To this purpose you have a memorable Passage of William the Norman; who,
although he had invaded England with the Sword, and by it had defeated him who
did oppose him for the Crown, with all his adherents and party, and in
consequencie of this Victory, had committed many outrages with a strong hand;
yet the same William could never assure himself nor his Posterity of the
Allegiance of the People, till he had sworn solemnly (according to the Rite of
the times) for himself and his, To govern according to the good and approved
Laws of the Land, as the best Kings before him had done.

Then the County of Kent, in its own name, and in the name of the whole
Kingdom, declared, That neither Kent, nor any other of the Kingdom, was
conquered, but in a peaceable way did submit to William the Norman, upon
Condition, and with Proviso, That all their Liberties, and free Customs in use
and practice, should be kept. If this was not accomplished afterward, it was
silliness of the People that suffered themselves to be abused, and the fault
of misled Princes, that did not keep their promise whereunto they were tied:
And sundry, for the breach of this promise, have had occasion to repent, when
it has been too late.

We shall add one example more, which is, of Henry the eighth; who, anno 1525,
the seventeenth year of his Reign, by the advice of his Council, put a Tax
upon the people; which the people did not only refuse to pay, but declared,
That the thing was unjust and unlawful. Withal, wherever they met those whom
the King had employed for the gathering the money, they used them so kindly,
that they did never come twice to one place for the payment of the Tax. The
King seeing this, he disclaims the Imposition of the Tax, and so do the Nobles
that convened at London, by his Command, for that purpose, and lays all the
fault upon ill counsel, namely, upon Wolsey. This was Henry constrained to do,
notwithstanding his resolutenesse against all foreign enemy, chiefly the Pope,
with his shavelings. By this instance, Henry acknowledged his power to be
limited, and no ways arbitrary: Against the doctrine of our now Cout-parasites.

Now if the People have this much power in them, as to stand for their
Temporal Liberty, both against foreign and domestic slavery; far more may
they, and ought they, to defend the Spiritual Freedom, which Christ, having
purchased with his Blood, has left them, as Members of his Church. But all
this defense of Liberty and Religion ought to be made so, that it be without
by-ends, sinistrous respects, of hatred, malice, ambition, etc. The only scope
and main drift being, To have Gods glory, in the Light of his Gospel, settled
and maintained, The People at quiet, The Prince obeyed, in God, and for God (i.
e.) according to the Law of God, Nature, Nations, and the Country or Kingdom,
so far as possibly can be. This being looked to carefully, there is no gap
opened to Rebellion; which is a fighting against Gods Ordinance, and not the
just and necessary opposing of the abuse and corrupting of the good Ordinance
of God.

But here a Court-slave will say, If things be so, there is no absoluteness in
Monarchs and Princes?

To answer this, we must know what is to be meant by absolute, or absolutenes;
whereof I find two main significations. First, absolute signifies perfect,
and absoluteness, perfection: Hence we have in Latin this expression,
Perfectum est omnibus, numeris absolutum. And in our vulgar Language we say, A
thing is absolutely good, when it is perfectly good. Next, absolute signifies
free from tie or bond; which in Greek is (...). Now, say I, if you take
absolute for perfect, that Prince or Magistrate is most absolute, that is most
perfect, who governs most absolutely, or most perfectly. The absoluteness or
perfection of Government consists in its conformity to the perfect Rule which
is written in the Law of God, printed in the heart of man, received generally
of all wise People, and in practice by all particular well-polished
Commonwealths. Next, I say, if you take absolute for free from tie or bond,
That no Prince nor Magistrate is free; for every Magistrate or Prince, as well
as the private man, is bound to keep the Law of God, of Nature, etc. not only
in particular things, for his own singular carriage, but also in public
businesses, for the good and society of men, or of the people: for God has
given his Law, and Nature her Dictates to all, to the observance of which all
men are tied. Yea, farther, they are not only bound in their several
Conditions, and tied to the performance thereof in their own persons; but also
are bound to further it with all their might, and take away all things that may
let and stop this performance, or deter and withdraw men from it. Read
Levit. 19.17. where every man is commanded to rebuke his neighbor, and stop
him from sinning. Read Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. where the King is commanded to have
continually the Copy of the Law before him for his Rule and Guide. What is in
1 Samuel 8.10. is what a King is likely to do, and not what he ought or should
do. This is clear; for in the place now named, in Deuteronomy, the King is told
what he ought to do; but that he is said to do in Samuel, is contrary to the
Ordinance of God. Confer the places, and you will easily see this truth. Next,
a Prince is said to be absolute, that is, not in any kind subaltern to
another, and whose subjects acknowledge (under God) no other but him. Hence you
may see, That the Popish Kings and Princes are not absolute; for, beside the
great number of people within their Dominions who are immediate sworn vassalls
to the Pope, I mean, the Shavelings; The Prince himself takes Oath, at his
Reception, To uphold the overruling Government of the Pope, under the masked
name of Spirituality; and the simple abused Prince shall have for a reward, to
make up all, a little holy Oil to anoint him, and bear the Title of most
Christian or Catholic Princes. Farther, I say, That the Prince, who although
in some things has cast off the yoke of this god upon earth (for so is the
Pope now and then called) but keeps up a part of his tyranny in the Church of
God over his people, wants and loses so much of his absoluteness, for this tie
upon him from a foreign Prince, the Pope. But here the Pope shows the height
of his cunning; for he seeing that Princes are told frequently, That they are
either absolute, or ought to be such, bethinks himself to keep up his
super-eminency above Princes, as his vassalls, and yet make the Princes find
an absoluteness; which he acts by his Emissaries, and their inferior
instruments, for their own private ends, whom he makes inculcate in the ears of
Princes, That their absoluteness consists in doing with the Life, Liberty
and Fortunes of the People, as seems good in their eyes, without any regard to
the good of humane Society, which is the true End of all Government: But with
this Proviso, That those who have relation to him immediately, be exempted: and
these are not only his shavelings, who are openly obedient to his commands and
orders, etc. but also those, yea, in Kingdoms where his name is in a kind
rejected, who keep up his tyrannical Laws and Ordinances, as we have felt of
late, namely, in these Dominions wherein we live, to our woeful experience; for
they, to uphold and increase their power, have cast both Prince and People into
great troubles, making the Prince believe, That without them he has no being.

But to show thee that Princes may use the people committed to their Charge
like beasts, and yet nevertheless are not absolute, cast thy eyes in the
neighbor Countries only upon the Duke of Savoy, and the Duke of Florence;
who, although they be Sovereigns in a kind over the people, and deal most
hardly with them, taking their Lives and Fortunes away at their pleasure, yet
they are not acknowledged to be absolute Princes; for they are vassalls of the
Empire, and their chief titles are to be Officers thereof: So the Duke of Savoy
is qualified Vicar of the Empire, etc.

If you consider the Prince, and people committed to his Charge, as having
relation one to another, I say, they are both bound one to another by Duty; the
Prince first bound to rule and govern according to the Law of God, of Nature,
of Nations, and Municipall Laws of the Country and the People is bound to obey
him accordingly: but if the Prince command any thing against these, his
commands are not to be obeyed, God being only he, to whose commands Obedience
is simply due, and to be given; but to men, only obedience with limitation,
and in external things, according to the Laws so often above named, at the least
not against them, or opposite to them. The Chimaera, or rather Solaecisme in
reason of passive Obedience, is not to be thought on among rational men, it
being the invention of Court-parasites, a mere nothing, or non ens, for
Obedience consists in action, as all other virtues do, and not is suffering.
Farther, whosoever, for not obeying a wicked command of a Superior, suffers,
if he can stop it, or shun it, is an enemy to his own being, wherein he offends
against nature; for you see every natural thing striveth to conserve it self
against what annoyeth it; then he sins against the Order of God, who in vain
has ordained us so many lawful Means for the preservation of our Being, if we
suffer it to be destroyed, having power to help it. But then it will be
demanded; What, is there no absoluteness in humane Authority? I answer, simple
absoluteness there is none under God; For all humane Authority is limited by
the Laws aforesaid, and extends to farther then external things; yet
comparatively humane Authority is said to be absolute, Read a Treatise, written
in Laetine, 1546. and dedicated to the King by John Dickinson, De Supremo and
absoluto Principis Imperio.

Read William Wraghton his Treatise, called the Romish Fox, written in English,
and dedicated to King Henry, 1543.


when it is free from any Foreign Superior Power. So when Henry the eighth,
having cast off the Romish yoke, and putting down the vassallage of these his
Dominions unto the Pope, caused diverse Books to be written of the absolute
Empire or Authority of the Prince; although, after the freeing himself from the
Pope, he had not, nor did not pretend to have any more absolute power over the
people, then he had before; but albeit this Prince did much for the regaining
the absolute Authority to the Crown again, in chasing away the Romish Pontiff,
yet, he did it not fully, in so far as he kept still the Romish Rites, and
the Hierarchy, or Prelacy, wherein the Romish Fox lurking, has kept himself in
these Countries unto this day; and now having acted the Fox long enough, he is
acting the Woolf by dedestroying the people of God; if the Successors of King
Henry had not kept in the Romish Superstitious Rites and Hierarchy, they, and
we all had had better times, then we have all tasted of. Although King Henry
for his Vices, be blame worthy to all posterity, yet I must say, in all humane
appearance, That if the Prelat-Bishops, to whom he trusted the reforming of the
abuses of the Church, had been as forward, as he was willing, there had been a
better Reformation then was in his time, witness this instance, The People
desired freedom to read the Scripture, the then Bishops refused this unto the
People. Whereupon the King was petitioned in the name of the People, the King
grants their Petition; the Bishops hearing of the Kings grant, thus limit it,
not daring to deny it flatly, That all Gentlemen should have liberty to read
the Scripture, since it was the Kings pleasure; but for others, the permission
was stopped: As if Yeomen and Tradesmen, had not as much interest in Gods Word,
as Gentlemen. Then remarke all those that were put to death for the testimony
of the Truth in Henry the eighth his days, were persecuted by the Bishops of
the time, although the blame lies upon the Prince; for albeit they had in
compliance to the King renounced the Pope by word of mouth, yet in effect they
kept up his tyranny, by his doctrine (with small alteration changed) his Rites
and Ceremonies, Canons and Laws, Prelacie or Hierarchy maintained: And seeing
the King so opposite to the Pope, they condescended that the King should bear
the blasphemous Title of the Pope, Head of the Church, although with
reluctance: and so it proved; for notwithstanding all the Statutes that were
made in favor of this Title taken from the Pope, and attributed to the King,
the Bishops with cunning and subtle proceedings, kept a foot the power of the
Pope; and so soon as they saw the occasion of Queen Marie her Reign, they
freely and easily brought all back again to Rome, without Mask or Limitation:
and ever since, their successors, although by the course of affairs (they) have
been obliged to disclaim the Pope his authority, yea, and his doctrine in some
measure; yet they, ever since, to this day, have expressed their inclinations,
and done their endeavors to return thither again, as we all know by doleful
experience. But here it may be demanded, What drift or policy can it be in the
Bishops, to desire to be subject to Rome, rather then to their Prince, and Laws
of the Country? The answer is, The propensitie of us all, to follow evil
rather then good, is known, namely, When the evil has the mask of worldly
dignity, pomp, power, and pleasure, which hinders it to be seen in its own
colors. Now the Bishops and all the rabble of that corrupt Clergy, are given
to Temporal, howsoever unlawful advantages, as their ambition, avarice, and
lust, from the very beginning has shown; which exorbitant passions lead men
headlong, without measure, when once way is given unto them, unless they meet
with some let or stop, which is both lesser and slower, when it is a far
off, namely, when it comes from one who is possessed with the same distempers,
and himself of the same order of men with the Delinquent; and so the Bishops of
this Island, had rather have to do with the Pope, then with the Prince.

First, Because of mutual infirmity the Pope proves more indulgent then any
Prince.

Next, The Prince is too near them, and so it is best for them to be so free of
the Prince his Jurisdiction, that they may be able not only to neglect him,
but also to oppose him. Read Matthew Paris in Henry the third.
For all, let that example of the Canterbury-prelat serve; who made the King
for the time to hold the Stirrup when he gat up upon his horse. The Story is
known.

I called a little before the Title of Head of the Church, used by the Pope,
and then given to Henry, blasphemous. To lay aside all other things that may be
alleged against this Title, I shall only say this; The Church is the Spouse
of Christ: No Spouse can be said to have any other Head, but him whose Spouse
she is. Now if the Church should acknowledge her self to be the Spouse of any
other but of Christ, she were a professed Whore and Adulteress. By no means
then a Prince is to be called, The Head of the Church: For although the civil
Magistrate is obliged, according to his rank and place, to see the Ministers of
the Church do the work of the Lord, truly, diligently, and carefully, and to
make them do it according to the Will of God declared in his Word; yet for all
this, he is nothing but a servant, overseer, or grass, and not the Head, which
is a Title belonging only to Christ; wherefore, Princes or Magistrates, that
by slavish flatterers had this Title given unto them at the first, had done
well to reject it, as their Successors, who have followed, had done well
likewise, (according to God his Will) if they had not suffered this Title to
have been continued unto them, namely, in the public prayers, where the
time-serving inconsiderate Minister prays, in the name of the Church, for her
Head; if the Head of the Church needs to be prayed for, then the influences of
the Head, upon the Church, will be but poor and weak, etc. But of this enough
for this place.

Moreover, The flattering Preachers, unrequired in the public prayers in the
name of the Church, call the Prince forsooth, The Breath of our Nostrils,
taking for his ground, the words of Jeremy, in his Lamentations, Chap. 4. verse.
20. Which words, by the Current of the Ancients, and Septuagint, are to be
understood of Christ Jesus; True it is, The Rabbis have interpreted the words
of one of the Kings of Judah, to wit, Josias, or Zedekias; and hence some of
the later Expositors have explained these words, That first and literally they
may be applied to one of the Kings of Judah, who were all figures of Christ to
come, but principally, and mainly the words are to be understood of Christ
Jesus, by the consent of all; So to attribute these words to any Prince
earthly, cannot be without offense to Christ; For who can be said properly, and
well, To be the Breath of our Nostrils, but he, who inspireth into us life,
that is God. In like manner, the inconsiderate Ministers of the Gospel, abusing
the Text of the eightieth Psalm, which, by the consent of all, is understood of
Christ truly, and of David, as a figure of Christ to come, call the King, The
man of thy right hand, this in no ways, without Blasphemy, can be attributed
unto any earthly Prince; for none is to be said a figure of Christ, as David,
and his Successors were by a particular dispensation. But if misapplying, and
mistaking of Texts of Scripture will do business, Domino Deo qui nostri.
since Magistrates are said to be gods, you may as well call the Prince god, as
the Roman Emperor was of old by some so called, and now the Pope, by his
Court-parasites: which Titile of god, no Prince will suffer to be given unto
him; Surely, as it is a very great crime, not to give due respect, reverence,
and obedience unto him, whom God has set over us for our good, according to
his wise Ordinance; so on the other side, it is a huge sin to Idolize the
Prince, making him a god, when he is but a weak, and infirm man, servant of
God. This second fault is committed chiefly by the Sycophants and Parasites,
who have no other Church, nor Chapel, but the Court, and make Petition to
none, but to the King, whom to please, they wholly study, that they may catch
somewhat to satisfy their inordinate desires. And the first is committed,
namely, by their prelaticall Clergy, who withdraw from the Prince a great part
of his due, when they study to exempt themselves from his Obedience, and take
from him any inspection upon them, namely, concerning the discharge of their
calling, although by Gods Ordinance it be a main part of his Office, to see God
served, and worshipped, according to his Will revealed in his sacred Word.

We have a little above seen, how that by the flattery of some Court-preachers,
the custom is brought into the Church, to give unto the Prince, not only
swelling, but blasphemous Titles in the public Prayer, that is made by the
Minister in the name of the Chruch; but although, this be too great an evil,
and requires Reformation, yet the flattery of some Preachers has not stayed
here; for they, according to their custom, having addicted themselves to any
one, whom they conceive may help them to preferment, stick not in the pulpit,
where all relation should be laid aside, save that of a Minister of Gods Word,
to publish themselves, yea, in their Prayers, to be varlets to this man, or
that man; and, what is worse yet, in the Prayer they call their Masters and
Lords Virtuous, Pious, and Religious, when it is known to all, That for the
most part they have little Virtue, less Piety, and no Religion at all. To have
pointed at these things, shall suffice for this place. If any man will be
contentious for these practices, I answer him, That the wel-Reformed Churches
have no such Customs; for among the other abuses whereof they have been purged,
by the care and diligence of the faithful Vine-dressers, under Gods blessing,
they have been pruned of this rotten Bud of slavish flattery, as a corruption
much opposite and contrary to the dignity and power of the Gospel. But let us
return, after this long Digression.

In these days (that is, in the thirteenth Age) lived Michael Scot, renowned
for his Learning in Physic, Astronomy, etc. He is remembered by Picus
Mirandula, and Cornelius Agrippa, very honorably. Also then lived Thomas
Lermouth, commonly called, The Rythmer; whose Predictions are extant to this
day: But no wise man can make any thing of them, more then of Merlin his
Prophesies, who lived long before him; although sundry have pleased their
fancies with idle Expositions of these two men's dreams.

Toward the end of this thirteenth Age, the good Roman Pontif Boniface the
eight, making use of the havie moans and complaints that some of Scotland,
namely, of the Bishops and other Clergymen, You may see Pope Boniface his
Letter to King Edward, and to the Bishop of Canterbury for the time, in John
Fordon his Scoti-Chronicon.
with their clients, made against King Edward of England, who then did cruelly
afflict the Country, claims a right unto the Crown of Scotland, as re^igned
unto him by the States: And upon this he writes an insulting Letter, and full
of threatenings, unto Edward, that he was so malapert as to do any wrong to his
vassalls and subjects, where he had none, truly, save the Bishops, and
Shavelings, with their clients. Whether the Clergy did make this offer of
subjection unto the Pope, or whether he did falsely invent this lie, we cannot
tell, but it is betwixt the Pope and his shaved creatures; such master, such
men. Let this teach us, how the Popes are, and have been, and will be ever
constantly ready watching at all occasions, to draw all things to their Cross.
But this owning of the Scots by the Pope for his peculiar people did not last
long; for in a very short time thereafter, notwithstanding the great ignorance
of these days, the Scots showed themselves refractaries to his holy Orders;
and he, in revenge, did thunder the fire-bolts of his Excommunication against
these rude fellows, putting them to the Interdict, all to small purpose; for by
these Bolts they were but very little dashed.

We have heard how that in former times the Church of Scotland was served by
Culdees, and they ruled by their Presbyteries or Elders, having a Moderator, or
Prefect of themselves, and of their own choosing: This was for many years. When
Palladius brought in Prelacie, a new holy Order, into the Church of Scotland,
unknown to the preceding Ages, it was with this Restraint, That Bishops should
be chosen by the Culdees, and of them: But when Bishops had once gotten certain
Diocesses and Limits allotted unto them, they set up a new Presbytery of their
own, or Council of Canons or Regulars, which they called Chapters; by whom
they intended to be chosen in following times. The Culdees seeing this, did
oppose it with their main strength, namely, under King David, who did take up
the business thus (being carried away by the Prelates) That so many of the
Culdees as would be Canons, should have hand in the choosing of the Bishops. But
the Bishops, to elude this Ordinance of the Prince, obtained a Mandate from the
Pope, That no Culdee should be received in the Convent of Canons, but by the
consent of the Prior, and most part of the Canons. By these means the Culdees
were kept out, and deprived of their voice in choosing of the Bishop. In the
time of the troubles of Baliol and Bruce, one William Cumin, Prefect of the
Culdees, thinks it fit for to bestir himself, to try what he could regain upon
the Canons; and so he opposes the Election by the Canons of one William
Lamberton to the Sea of S. Andrews: The business being come to a great height,
by Appeal was drawn to Rome, where, after much debate pro forma, time and
moneys employed, the holy Father Boniface the eight pronounces sentence, in
favor of his dear Clients the Canons; and so Lamberton is made Bishop, and
consecrated by the Pope Boniface. This fact turned so to the disgrace of the
Culdees, that after that time we read no more of them; so the Name and Order
by little and little came to be quite extinguished, about the beginning of the
thirteenth age.

In the beginning of the fourteenth age, the Order of the Templers was put
down, whether for their just demerits, or for private ends and hatred, we leave
it to the Histories of these times, Pope Clement the fifth by his Bull did
cashier them, the Bull beginning thus, Quanquam de jure non possumus, tamen pro
plenitudine potestatis dictum Ordinem reprobamus, etc. After which all
Christian Princes did cause them to be apprehended in their several Dominions,
and put them from their estates, which was then given to Hospitallers and
Knights of Saint John, after they had stood about two hundred years, instituted
by Baldonin King of Jerusalem, for defense of that City and Temple, and the
safe conveying of all such as did travel thither: They are also called Red
friars, because their Gowns were Red. In this fourteenth age did flourish the
great Scholastic Johannes, called Scotus from his Nation, and Duns from the
place of his Birth, for he was born in the Town of Duns in the Mers; he was a
great Opposer of Thomas of Aquin his Doctrine; his Sectaries were called
Scotists, his Epitaph was thus: Scotia me genuit, Anglia suscepit,
Gallia edocuit, Germania tenet.


In the beginning of the fifteenth age there was a great Schism in the Romish
Church, Pope against Pope; yea, sometimes there were three Popes at one time
fighting one against another, and excommunicating one another; this Schism
lasted about thirty years, and by the Council of Constance Martin the fifth was
made Pope, and the rest defeated: There was one John Fogo, a Monk of Milros,
who in Scotland defended the Election of Martin by the Council, against
Benedict, alias, Peter de Lune.

During this forenamed Schism, many (taking occasion of the opennesse of the
times) began boldly and freely to speak against the bad Doctrine, Government
and Lives of the Churchmen, and that not only in private discourse, but they
also preached it publicly, as John Wickliffe in England, John Hus and Jerome
of Prague in Bohemia, who spoke before the people freely of the Tyranny of the
Government of the Clergy, the corruption of their Doctrine, and wickedness of
their lives. In those days also there were some in Scotland, who feared not to
make known to the people the Truth of God, as namely James Resby and Paul Craw
(among others) who suffered Martyrdom for the Truth. About this time the
Carthusians were brought from England into Scotland, and had built unto them a
Monastery at Perth. In this Age the Universitie of Saint Andrews was set up,
chiefly by the means of Henry Wardlaw Bishop of the place, that in some kind
the Schools of Learning might not be altogether wanting, which formerly had
flourished for so long a time among the Culdees, and of later years had quite
decayed; this good did Wardlaw: As his Predecessor William Trail had built the
Castle of the same City; So his Successor James Kenedy built the old College
likewise, called Saint Salvator his College; Patrick Grahame, that came after
him, was the man that brought into Scotland the Title of Primate,
Metropolitan, and Archbishop, by Bull of Sextus quartus. From the first
Preaching of the Gospel, till Palladius, the Church of Scotland was happy
without Bishops. From Palladius to King Malcolme his days the Bishops had no
distinct Diocesses or Parishes from King Malcolme: till Patricke Grahame they
were without Archbishops; this Title and higher rank of Authority did not
succeed well with Grahame, for the other Bishops could suffer no Superior
under the Pope, namely so near them, hitherto having rejected all the
pretentions of the Archbishop of York; The inferior Clergy also were afraid of
the increase of the Authority of the Man whom they conceived austere and rigid,
and so by the Faction of the corrupt Court and disordered Clergy, poor Grahame
lost the Title he had procured, with the Benefice, and one Shevez got his
spoil; and what a sweet Bird Shevez was, the Stories of that time do
sufficiently manifest.

Robert Blacater seeing the Bishop of Saint Andrews now a Metropolitan and
Archbishop, obtains from Alexander the sixth a Bull, whereby he is made
Archbishop also, and he had under him the Bishops of Galloway, Argyle and
Isles; which new dignity angered the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, above the
loss of his Vassals; for to have a Companion in equal dignity set up beside
him was hard; but he must digest the Pill, since the Pope will have it so.

Lastly, David Beaton brought in the Title of Cardinal into Scotland, who has
been the only man that has born that Title in this Country, and how it did
speed with him, the following History will tell you.

As in the beginning of the fifteenth age the Schism for the Papacy opened
through Christendom many men's mouths, and busied their Pens to set forth the
corruption of the Church, and the Vices of the Clergy; even so in the
beginning of the sixteenth age, those that fought for the Bishopric of Saint
Andrews, by their dissension gave occasion to many in Scotland to speak in
public and private of the corruption of Church-mens Lives, Government and
Doctrine in Scotland; which coming to the Popes ears, presently he sent unto
the King, James the fourth, a Sword, with the Title of Protector of the Faith;
as if all Christian Princes were not in duty bound to protect the Faith in
Christ; but the Faith which the Pope would have the King to protect, was his
erroneous Doctrine, and Tyrannical Authority.

Some few years after this, Henry the eighth was declared by the Pope, Defender
of the Faith, and had the Sword likewise. James the 4 of Scotland being dead,
now by the corrupt Courtiers the young inconsiderate King James was made
believe, That the conferring of this new Title by the Pope, did bring unto him
a great pre-eminence; yea, the Court Sycophants did not stick to call it, A new
Royalty, when in effect it was nothing else but a new note of his Vas^allage
to Rome; and by the accepting of the Sword he did engage himself to make war
for Rome; and so he did indeed, for sundry men after this, during his short
Reign, were persecuted, and suffered death for the Truth of Christ. This is the
second remarkable Badge of slavery put upon our Princes by the Pope; the former
was their Anointing by him, as we have seen before.

Here be pleased with me to remark, That of all the Bishops of Scotland before
the Reformation, namely, since they were made Lords of certain places, and had
particular Diocesses, you cannot find one who had any care of the true Charge
of Pastor; for their whole study was, to raise their power, and to increase
their means for the upholding of their power: and, to effectuate this more
easily and fully, they kept both Prince and people in dark ignorance of Gods
Will and Word. But because they must seem to do somewhat for the name sake of
Bishops, they caused to build walls of Temples and Chapels, set up images and
pictures richly dressed, to content the eyes, and brought into the Church
Instruments of Music, and artificial Singing with great skill, to content the
ear; Also they brought in sweet perfume and incense for the smell; so the most
subtle senses were thus satisfied. And, to make a show to keep under the
senses which are more gross, there must be some kind of Fasting enjoined to
the people, and chastenesse to the Churchmen. But how, and to what purpose
these two last have been kept, all men know. But kept or not, all is one, all
these Ordinances which the Bishops set up for Religion, have been discovered by
Gods mercy, to be not only without Warant in Gods Word, but plainly contrary
to the same. Of all the Bishops of Scotland in time of Reformation, there was
only one or two who embraced the Truth, all the rest were either professed
persecutors of Gods Children, and open enemies of the Truth, or else they were
given altogether so to satisfy their bellies and lusts, that they had no care
of Religion; witness George Creichton (in the name of all the rest) Bishop of
Dunkell, who confessed truly, That he had lived a long time Bishop, and never
knew any thing of the Old or New Testament.

Impiety, Ignorance and Wickedness came to such height among the Churchmen
of all ranks, degrees and professions, that God being, after so long patience,
in a manner vexed with them, did stir up the people to chase them from the
service of his House, and to put others in their places, as you will see in
this following History, whereunto I refer you. And I shall close up this
discourse with one or two passages, worthy to be known; whereby you may see the
learning of the Church-Doctors in those days, and how they did employ the
knowledge they had to abuse the poor people. The first Passage is this: One
Richard Marshall Prior of the Blackefriers at Newcastle in England, preached in
Saint Andrews, That the Paternoster should be said to God only, and not to
the Saints: The Doctors of Saint Andrews offended at it, made a Gray friar,
called Tottis, preach against Marshall his Tenet; which he did thus, (taking
his Text out of the fifth of Saint Matthew, Blessed are the poor in spirit)
Seeing we say, Good day, Father, to any old man in the Street, we may call a
Saint, Pater, who is older then any alive; And seeing they are in Heaven, we
may say to any of them, Our Father which art in heaven: And seeing they are
holy, we may say to any of them, Hallowed be thy name: And since they are in
the Kingdom of Heaven, we may say, Thy kingdom come: And seeing their will is
Gods Will, we may say to any of them, Thy will be done. But when the Gray Friar
preaching came to the fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily bread, he was
hissed at, and so was constrained not only to leave off Preaching, but also to
leave the City for shame. Yet among the Doctors then assembled, the Dispute
continued about the Pater; for some would have it said to God formaliter, and
to the Saints materialiter; others, to God principaliter, to the Saints minus
principaliter; others, primario to God, secundario to the Saints; others would
have it said to God taking it stricte, and to the Saints taking it late:
Notwithstanding all these Distinctions, the Doctors could not agree upon the
business. A fellow, called Tom, servant to the Sub-Prior of Saint Andrews, one
day perceiving his Master much troubled with some business, and as he
conceived weighty, said to him, Sir, what is the matter of this your trouble?
The Master answered, We cannot agree about the saying of the Pater. The fellow
replied, To whom should it be said, but to God alone? The Master answers again,
What shall we do then with the Saints? The fellow duplies, Give them Ave's and
Credo's enough, that may suffice them, and too well too. If this was good
Divinity, God knows. The second passage likewise is very well worth the
knowing, and to this purpose very fit, which fell out about the same time with
the former, that is, about the first beginning of the Reformation. A little
before the death of George Wischard, there came home from Rome a fellow charged
with very many holy Relics, and new things of great virtue, as he gave out;
but the things were not to be had, nor any benefit by the sight or touching of
them, without moneys. Now upon a holy day, in a village near Hadington, this
Romish Peddler did open his pack, to try if he could vent any of his Wares among
the Country people. Among other commodities, the good Merchant did show unto
the people there was a Bell of much value, by reason of its great virtue; which
he gave out to be this, That if any two parties had any difference, which could
not be otherwise decided but by Oath, the truth of the Oath was to be made
known by this Bell: for (said he) when any one swears, laying his hand on
this Bell, if he swear true, he shall after the Oath sworn remove his hand
easily from from the Bell, without any change to the Bell: But if he that
swears having his hand upon the Bell swears falsely, his hand will stick to
the Bell, and the Bell will rive asunder. Now we must tell you, That already
there was a rift in the Bell, which this Romipete did affirm had happened by a
false Oath of one that had sworn having his hand upon the Bell. At this tale
the poor simple people were astonished, and fell in admiration. But among them
was one Fermer, who had some light of the Truth of God; he drawing near the
Romish Merchant, desired to have the Bell in his hand, to see it nearly. This
desire was granted unto him. Then he takes the Bell, and looks on it,
expressing great admiration at first; but immediately thereafter, he asked at
the Romipete, if he would suffer him to swear in presence of the company,
having his hand upon the Bell, for he had mind to take an Oath upon a weighty
business. The man could not refuse him. Then said the Farmer to the company,
Friends, before I swear, you see the rift that is already in the Bell, and how
big it is, and that I have nothing upon my fingers to make them stick to the
Bell. With this he shows them his hand open: then laying his hand upon the
Bell, he did swear this; I swear, in the presence of the living God, and before
these good people, That the Pope of Rome is Antichrist, and that all the rabble
of his Clergy, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Monks, with the rest
of the crew, are Locusts, come from hell, to delude the people, and to withdraw
them from God: Moreover, I promise, They will return to hell. Incontinent he
lifted up his hand from the Bell before them all, and said, See, friends, that
I have lifted up my hand freely from the Bell, and look unto the rift in the
Bell, it is one and the same, without change; this shows, according to the
saying of this Merchant, That I have sworn truth. Then this poor fellow went
away, and never was more seen in Scotland, nor any other of his kind, who
brought Relics, or other like toys from Rome.

Many more of this kind might be alleged, but let these suffice, to
demonstrate the miserable ignorance from which God in his mercy has delivered
us; To whom be praise and glory, for this and all other benefits.

With this I end the Preface, that you may come to the History it self.

1553.
PAtrick Hamilton was three and twenty years of Age when he suffered. After his
death, his brother German James Hamilton of Levinston was accused likewise; but
the King did cause to convey him secretly out of the way. Also Katherine
Hamilton, his sister, was accused, and being questioned upon Works; she
answered, That none was saved by his works. Then John Spencer spoke to her of
the works of congruo and condigno; to which she answered, Work here, work
there; what kind of working is all this? no works can save me, but Christ's.
At this, the King, being present, laughed, and after conveyed her away
secretly. One Henry Forest, a Monk of the Order of Benet and Collet, as they
spoke then, was also accused of heresy; but without sufficient proof. Then he
was sent to Walter Ange, (whom Buchanan, in his Satyr against the Gray Friars,
called Langius) to be confessed: Langius having asked him, by way of
confession, What he thought of Patrick Hamilton? He answered, That he was a
good man, and that his Articles were to be maintained. Lange discovers this
simple man's confession; and this confession being taken for a sufficient proof,
the poor man was condemned to be burnt, and so he was, immediately after they
had degraded him, according to their Custom. As they were leading him to the
Execution-place, he complained of the Friar who had betrayed him, and said, Let
no man trust the false Friars, after me; they are despisers of God, and
deceivers of men. They burnt him at the North Style of the Abbey Church in
Saint Andrews, that the Heretics of Angus might see the fire.

1558.
One Andrew Oliphant accused with heat Walter Mill, an ancient man, and
formerly a Priest, and said to him, being at his devotion, Rise up, Sir Walter.
He answered, when he had ended his prayer, My name is Walter: I have been too
long one of the Popes Knights (for all Priests are Sirs.) Andrew Oliphant said
to him, Thou keep my Lords too long here, therefore haste. He answered, I
must obey God before men. Being questioned by Oliphant concerning Priests
Marriage, he answered, It was Gods Ordinance, That every man that had not the
gift of chastity, should marry: but you abhor it, vowing chastity, which you
cannot keep, but take other men's wives and daughters. Then, being asked if
there were not seven Sacraments, he answered, Let me have two, take you the
rest to your selves. Being asked about the Mass, he answered, A Lord sends,
and calls many to his dinner; and when all is ready, he causes ring the
Bell, the guests come into the hall; but he turning his back upon them, eats
all himself: And so do you. Then he added, The Scripture is not to be
understood carnally; Christ has put an end to all carnal Sacrifices, by
offering once for all his body upon the Cross. Many other Queries were put to
him, to which he answered stoutly. Being desired to recant, he told them, That
he was corn, and not chaff. I will, said he, neither be blown by the wind, nor
bruised with the Flail, but I will abide both: I will not recant the Truth.
Being commanded to go to the stake by Oliphant, he answered, By the Law of God
I am forbidden to put hand on my self, therefore put thou me to it with thy
hands, and then thou shall see my resolution. After he had said his Prayer, he
gat leave, with difficulty, to speak to the people standing by: In his Speech
he told them, That although he was a great sinner, yet it was for Gods Truth,
contained in his Word of the Old and New Testament, that he suffered, and that
God, in the abundance of his mercy toward him, did honor him so far, as to
make him seal his Truth with his life, among other of his Servants. He added,
Dear friends, as you would escape eternal death, be no more seduced with lies
of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Priests, Monks, Friars, and the rest
of the Antichristian rabble, but only trust in God. This was the last man that
died for Religion in Scotland: And by his death was given the very dead blow to
Popery; for by his death the people of all ranks and conditions were so moved,
that they made open profession of the Truth, without any more dallying; and
presently was, upon this occasion, made a Covenant or Bond of mutual defense,
To defend one another by Arms, against the Tyranny of the Bishops, and their
Parties.

Errata.
THe Life. Page 2. line 7. dele he. P. 5. l. 38. r. ordinarily. P. 6. l. 24. r.
would.

Preface. P. 4. l. 23. r. Author, P. 37. l. 5. d. in, P. 39. l. 12, 13. r. the
Kingdom was, l. 25. r. ever, P. 40. l. 20. r. any part, P. 45. l. 8. r. grief.

The first Book. P. 4. l. 43. r. he did, p. 36. l. 3^. r. drowned, p. 37. l. 7.
r. used not, p. 39. l. 6. r. inviolably, l. 7. r. worthy, p. 76. l. 47 d. from,
p 58. l. 33. d. not, p. 73. l. 14. r. Kitching. l. 45. r. design, p. 17. l.
48. add, they call it, wrote to, p. 104. l. 44. r. seen so, p. 105. l. 36. r.
did, l. 37. r. him for, p. 109. l. 9. r. never so, p. 15. l. 36. r. only.

The second Book. P. 124. l. 20. r. these, p. 134. l. 19. r. with, l. 39. r.
were, l. 46. r. their, p. 144. l. 21. r. we, p. 147. l. 27. r. bondmaide, p.
152. l. 16. r. assisters, p. 155. l. 47. r. concur, p. 157. l. 33. r. also, l.
37. r. is true, p. 158 l. 32. r. such time, p. 163. l. 17. r. first the, p.
165. l. 44. r. without, p. 166. l. 26. r. his, p. 168. l. 2. r. nor, p. 172. l.
43. r. thereof is, l. 44. r. moved, p. 174. l. 38. r. is not, p. 175. l. 3. r.
as well, p. 179. l. 1. r. just, l. 29. r. persons, p. 190. l. 4. r. to say, p.
198. l. 19. r. to us by her, l 21. r. as we that be, In the Margin, p. 201. r.
heart. P. 203. l. 32. r. many, p. 209. l. 32. r. offended not, p. 210. l. 28.
r. uncertain, l. 30. r. uncertain, l. 39. in their.

The third Book, P. 214* l. 19. r. at, p. 415. l. 13. r. did God, p. 227. l.
17. r. declare, p. 228. l. 34. r. persuade me of, p. 229. l. 2. r. in you, p.
230. l. 14. r. at the, p. 243. l. 23. d. which, p. 244. l. 32. r. wife, p. 248.
l. 18. r. shall not, p. 249. l. 12. r. their parts, p. 255. l. 20. defrauded,
p. 261. l. 25. r. restrained, p. 264. l. 14. r. as it, p. 266. l. 47. r. as, p.
271. l. 6. r. we, l. 28. r. not to, l. 48. r. which they, p. 274. l. 23. r.
foulelesse, p. 282. l. 21. r. upon, p. 284. l. 24. r. if any man, l. 23. r.
would put, p. 288. l. 1. r. drops, p. 297. l. 3. r. has, p. 300. l. 4. r.
peace kept.

The fourth Book, P. 304. l. 24. d. the, p. 305. l. 19. d. must, p. 306. l. 1.
r. surfeit wet, p. 307. l. 19. r. as, p. 311. l 40. r. as well, p. 312. l. 2.
r. authority, p. 313. l. 12. r. he, l. 39. r. shall only, l. 47. r. is, p.
316.35. r. might not, p. 317. l 9. r. whither, p. 319 l. 15. r. concur, l. 20
r. she, p. 321. l 34. r. charge, p. 324. l. 28. r. meats, p. 326. l. 7. r.
modified, p. 327. l. 39. r. women, p. 352. l 3. r. dearth. l. 5. r. many, p.
359. l. 1. r. her, p. 366. l. 12. r. within, l. 19. r. days, p 369* l. 24. r.
unlawful, p. 373. l. 36. r. if the, p. 375. l. 32. r. all through, l. 34. r.
sins, p. 386. l. 35. r. death, p. 387. l. 1. r. which, l. 45. r. what, p. 392.
l. 25. r. will say, p. 393. l. 4. r. misknow, p. 397. l. 5. r. this, l. 10. r.
the.

The fifth Book, P. 413. l. 39. r. best, p. 414. l. 17. r. to, p. 416. l. 5. ^.
celerity, p. 421.36. r. as you, p. 436. l. 26. r. foolish cagots, p. 437. l. 7.
r. to such, p. 447. l. 5. dele was, l. 23. r. saying.

Appendix, P. 7. l. 43. r. ye* p. 29. l. 6. r. result, l. 10. world, p. 60. l.
44. r. Mistress, p. 78. l. 15. r. time, p. 79. l. 7. r. Iehu, page 99. l. 1.
r. whole, l. 11. r. final, p. 102. l. 4^. r. punished, p. 106. l. 1. r. all,
p. 111. l. 17. r. him, p. 112. l. 24. r. perceived.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION Within the Realm of SCOTLAND, from the year
1422. Till the 20. day of August. 1567. THE FIRST BOOK.
IN the Records of Glasgow is found mention of one whose name was James Resby,
Robert the third.
an Englishman by Birth, 1422.
Scholar to Wickliff; He was accused as an Heretic, by one Lawrence Lindors
in Scotland, and burnt for having said, That the Pope was not the Vicar of
Christ, and that a man of wicked life was not to be acknowledged for Pope. This
fell out, Anno 1422. Farther our Chronicles make mention, James the first.
That in the days of King James the first, about the year of God 1431. was
deprehended in the University of Saint Andrews, 1431.
one named Paul Craw, a Boheme, who was accused of Heresy, Paul Craw burnt
with a ball of Brass in his mouth.
before such as then were called Doctors of Theology. His accusation consisted
principally, That he followed John H^s and Wickliff, in the opinion of the
Sacrament; Who denied that the substance of Bread and Wine were changed by
virtue of any words; Or that Confession should be made to Priests; or yet
Prayers to Saints departed: While that God gave him grace to resist them, and
not to consent to their impiety; He was committed to the secular Judge (for our
Bishops following Pilate, who both did condemn, and also wash his hands) who
condemned him to the fire, in the which he was consumed in the said City of
Saint Andrews, about the time before written. And to declare themselves to be
the generation of Satan, who from the beginning has been enemy to the Truth,
and he that desires the same to be hid from the knowledge of men, They put a
ball of Brass in his mouth, to the end he should not give Confession of his
Faith to the people; neither yet that they should understand the defense which
he had against their unjust accusation and condemnation. Both these godly men
Resby and Craw, suffered Martyrdom for Christ his Truth, by Henry Ward-Law,
Bishop of Saint Andrews, whom the Prelates place amongst their Worthies*

But that their wicked practice did not greatly advance their Kingdom of
darkness, neither yet was it able utterly to extinguish the Truth; for
albeit, that in the days of King James the second and third, we find small
question of Religion moved within this Realm; yet in the time of King James the
fourth, James 4.
in the sixth year of his Reign, and in the twenty two year of his age, 1494.
which was in the year of God 1494. were summoned before the King and his great
Counsel, by Robert Blacater, called, Archbishop of Glasgow: The number of
thirty persons remaining, 30 Persons accused.
some in Kyle St^wart, The Professors of the Tru^th at the first b^ginning of
the Reform^tion were called in our Island Lo^lards from on a g^dly man in this
Island named ^o^ard, w^o was ^n^ of the first Teachers of the True^h: what other
names they had ^lsewh^re, s^e the History of the Albigo^s, Lib. 1. cap. 3.
Where you may see what accusations, and calumnies was made against these poor
people.
some in Kingstyle, and some in Cunninghame: Among whom were George Campbell of
Cesnok, Adam Read of Barskyning, John Campbell of Newmyls, Andrew Schaw of
Polkemac, Helene Chalmer, Lady Pokellie, Isabelle Chambers, Lady Stairs.

These were called the Lollards of Kyle, they were accused of the Articles
following, as we have received them out of the Register of Glasgow.

1. First, that Images are not to be had in the Kyrk, nor to be worshipped. 2.
That the Relics of Saints are not to be worshipped. 3. That Laws and
Ordinances of men, vary from time to time, and that by the Pope. 4. That it is
not lawful to fight for the Faith, nor to defend the Faith by the Sword, if we
be not driven to it by necessity, which is above all Law. 5. That Christ gave
power to Peter, as also to the other Apostles, and not to the Pope his
pretended Successor, to bind and loose within the Kyrk. 6. That Christ
ordained no Priests to consecrate as they do in the Romish Church, these many
years. 7. That after the Consecration in the Mass, there remains Bread, and
that there is not the natural Body of Christ. 8. That Tithes ought not to be
given to Ecclesiastical men, as they were then called, to wit, wholly, but a
part to the poor, widow, or orphans, and other pious uses. 9. That Christ at
his coming has taken away power from Kings to judge. This Article we doubt not
to be the venomous accusation of the enemies, whose practice has ever been to
make the doctrine of Jesus Christ suspect to Kings and Rulers: Confer this 4.
Article with the 16. Article.
As if God thereby would deprive them of their Royal Seats; While on the
contrary nothing confirms the power of Magistrates more then does Gods Truth.
But to the Articles. 10. That every faithful man and women is a Priest, in
that sense that they are called by the Apostle Saint John, Apoc. 1.6.5.10.20.6.
The Pope did bethink himself at last ^o subject Princes unto him, by this tie
of invented unction.
11. That the Unction of Kings, ceased at the coming of Christ; and truly it
was but late since Kings were anointed, namely in Scotland, for Edgar was the
first anointed King in Scotland, about the year 1100. 12. That the Pope is not
the successor of Peter, but where he said, Go behind me Satan. 13. That the
Pope deceives the people by his Bulls, and his Indulgences. 14. That the Mass
profits not the souls, who in those days were said to be in Purgatory. 15.
That the Pope and the Bishops deceive the people by their Pardons. 16. That
Indulgences ought not to be granted to fight against the Saracens. 17. That the
Pope exalts himself against God, and above God. 18. That the Pope cannot remit
the pains of Purgatory. 19. That the blessings of the Bishops (of dumb Dogs
they should have been styled) are of no value. 20. That the Excommunication of
the Kyrk is not to be feared, if there be no true cause for it. 21. That in no
case it is lawful to swear, to wit, idly, rashly, and in vain. 22. That
Priests may have wives, according to the constitution of the Law, and of the
Primitive Christian Church. 23. That true Christians receive the body of Jesus
Christ every day by Faith. 24. That after Matrimony be contracted, and
consummate; the Kyrk may make no Divorcement. 25. That Excommunication binds
not, if unjust. 26. That the Pope forgives not sins, but only God. 27. That
Faith should not be given to Miracles, to such namely as the Romish were then,
and are to this day. 28. That we should not pray to the glorious Virgin Mary,
but to God only, since he only hears us, and can help us. 29. That we are no
more bound to pray in the Kyrk then in other places Although the Temple be set
a part for divine service, yet we are not so tied to the place as the Jews
were, yea, not so much as the Rominists would have us to be, according to that
of S. Ioh 21.22 23 for wheresoever 2 or 3 are gathered together in my N^^^r, I
am in the midst of you.
. 30. That we are not bound to believe all that Doctors of the Kirk have
written. 31. That such as worship the Sacrament in the Kyrk (we suppose the
Sacrament of the Altar) commits Idolatry. 32. That the Pope is the head of the
Kirk of Antichrist. 33. That the Pope and his Ministers are murderers of
souls. 34. That they which are called Princes and Prelates in the Church, are
Thieves, and Robbers.
By these Articles which God of his merciful providence caused the enemies of
his truth to keep in their registers, may appear how mercifully God has looked
upon this Realm, retaining within it some spark of his light, even in the time
of greatest darkness. Neither ought any man to wonder, albeit that some things
be obscurely, and some things doubtfully spoken. But rather ought all faithful
to magnify Gods mercy, who without public Doctrine gave so great light. And
further, we ought to consider that seeing that the enemies of Jesus Christ
gathered the foresaid Articles, thereupon to accuse the persons aforesaid, that
they would deprave the meaning of Gods servants so far as they could; as we
doubt not but they have done, in the heads of Excommunication Witness the
Princes and people, that the Pope put to the Interdict without cause, to say
nothing of private persons.
, Swearing So that many do think it a liberty of Religion to swear and curse.
, and of Matrimony Witness the divorce of Mary Stuart, daughter to James 2.
from her lawful husband Tho. Boyde, and ma^ried to James Hamilton^ Also of
Mary, mother to James 5. who married after K. Iam. the fourths death, Ar^hibald
Douglas Earl of Angus, and was divorced from him, and married to Henry Stuart,
Lord Meffen.
: In the which it is no doubt but the servants of God did damn the abuse only,
and not the right Ordinance of God: for who knows not that the Excommunication
in these days was altogether abused? That Swearing abounds without
punishment or remorse of conscience: And that Divorcements was made, for such
causes as worldly men had invented. But to our History. Albeit that the
accusation of the Bishop and of his Accomplices was very grievous, yet God so
assisted his servants, partly by inclining the Kings heart to gentleness (for
diverse of them were his great familiars) and partly by giving bold and godly
answers to their Accusators; that the enemies in the end we^e frustrate of
their purpose. For while the Bishop in mockage said to Ad^m Read of
Barskeiming; Read, believe ye that God is in heaven? He answered; Not as I do
the Sacraments seven: Whereat the Bishop thinking to have triumphed, said; Sir,
lo, he denies that God is in heaven? Whereat the King wondering, said; Adam
Read! What say ye? The other answered; Pleases your Majesty to hear the end
betwixt the churl and me: and therewith he turned to the Bishop and said; I
neither think nor believe, as thou think that God is in heaven; but I am
most assured, that he is not only in heaven, but also in the earth: But thou
and thy faction declare by your works, that either ye think there is no God at
all, or else that he is so set up in heaven, that he regards not what is done
upon the earth: for if thou firmly beleevedst that God were in the heaven, thou
should not make thy self check-mate to the King, Adam Read, his bold and
godly answer.
and altogether forget the charge that Jesus Christ the Son of God gave to his
Apostles, which was, To Preach his Gospel, and not to play the proud Prelates,
as all the rabble of you do this day: And now, Sir, said he to the King, judge
ye, whether the Bishop or I believe best that God is in heaven. While the
Bishop and his band could not well revenge themselves, and while many taunts
were given them in their teeth. Note.
The King willing to put an end to further reasoning, said to the said Adam
Read; Will thou burn thy bill? He answered; Sir, the Bishop and ye will. With
these and the like scoffs, the Bishop and his band were so dashed out of
countenance, that the greatest part of accusation was turned to laughter. After
that Diet, we find almost no question for matters of Religion, the space near
of thirty years; for not long after, to wit, in the year of God 1500. the said
Bishop Blaktar departed this life, 1500.
going in his superstitious devotion to Jerusalem: Unto whom succeeded Master
James Betone, son to the Lord of Balfor in Fife, who was more careful of the
world, then he was to Preach Christ, or yet to advance any Religion, but for
the fashion only, and as he sought the world it fled him not: For it was well
known that at once he was Archbishop of Saint Andrews, Abbot of Dunfermeling,
Aberbrothe, Kylwinning, and Chancellor of Scotland: For after the unhappy
field of Flowdonne, 1513.
in the which perished King James the fourth, with the greatest part of the
Nobility of the Realm, the said Betonne with the rest of the Prelates, had the
whole Regiment of the Realm. And by reason thereof held and traveled to hold
the truth of God in thraldom and bondage, till that it pleased God of his
great mercy in the year of God 1527. to raise up his servant Master Patrick
Hammilton, 1527.
at whom our History does begin: Brothers son to James Hamilton Earl of Arran
and sisters son to John Stuart Duke of Althai.
Of whose progeny, life, and erudition, because men of fame and renown have in
diverse works written; we omit all curious repetition, sending such as would
know further of him then we write to Francis Lambert, John Frith, and to that
notable work lately set forth by John Fox, English man, of the lives and deaths
of Martyrs within this Isle in this our age.

This servant of God Master Patrick Hamilton, being in his youth provided to
reasonable honors and living (he was entitled Abbot of Fern) as one hating
the world and the vanity thereof, left Scotland, and passed to the Schools in
Germany; for then the fame of the Universitie of Wittenberg was greatly
divulgate in all Countries: where by Gods providence he became familar with
those lights and notable servants of Christ Jesus of that time, Martin Luther,
Philip Melancthon, and the said Francis Lambert, did so grow and advance in
godly knowledge, joined with fervencie and integrity of life, that he was in
admiration with many. The zeal of Gods glory did so eat him up, that he could
not long continue to remain there, but returned to his country where the
bright beams of the true light, which by Gods grace was planted in his heart,
began most abundantly to burst forth, as well in public as in secret; for he
was (besides his godly knowledge) well learned in Phylosophie, he abhorred
Sophistry, and would that the Text of Aristotle should have been better
understood, and more used in the Schools than then it was; for Sophistry had
corrupted all, as well in Divinity, as in humanity. In short process of
time, the fame of his reasons and Doctrine troubled the Clergy, and came to
the ears of Bishop James Betonne, of whom before we have made mention, who
being a conjured enemy to Christ Jesus, and one that long has had the whole
regiment of this Realm, bare impatiently that any trouble should be made to the
Kingdom of darkness, whereof within this Realm he was the head. And therefore
he so traveled with the said Master Patrike that he gat him to Saint Andrews,
where after the conference of diverse days he had his freedom and liberty. The
said Bishop and his bloody Butchers, called Doctors, seemed to approve his
Doctrine, and to grant that many things craved Reformation in the
Ecclesiastical regiment. And amongst the rest, there was one that secretly
consented with him almost in all things, named, Friar Alexander Campbell, A
Dominican Friar.
a man of good wit and learning, but yet corrupt by the world, as after we will
hear: when the Bishops and Clergy had fully understood the mind and judgment
of the said Master Patrick, and fearing that by him their kingdom should be
endamaged, they travailed with the King, who then was young, Note how
Churchmen rules the good nature of the Prince.
and altogether addict to their commandment, that he should pass in Pilgrimage
to Saint Dothesse in Rosse, to the end that no intercession should be made for
the life of the innocent servant of God, who suspecting no such cruelty as in
their hearts was conceived, remained still, (a lamb amongst the wolves) till
that upon a night he was intercepted in his chamber, and by the Bishops Band
was carried to the Castle, where that night he was kept, and upon the morrow
after brought forth to Judgment, he was condemned to die by fire for the
testimony of Gods Truth. The Articles for the which he suffered, were but of
Pilgrimage, Purgatory, prayer to Saints, and for the dead, and such trifles.
Albeit that matters of greater importance had been in question, as his Treatise
which in the end we have added, may witness. Now that the condemnation of the
said M. Patrike should have greater Authority, they caused the same to be
subscribed by all those of any estimation that with them were present; and to
make their number great, they took the subscription of children, if they were
of the Nobility; for the Earl of Cassilles, which last deceased in France,
then being but twelve or thirteen years of age, was compelled to subscribe his
death, as himself did confess. Immediately after dinner the fire was prepared
before the old College, and he led to the place of Execution, and yet men
supposed that all was done but to give nnto him terror, and to have caused him
to have recanted, and have become recreant to those bloody beasts; but God for
his own glory; for the comfort of his servant, and for manifestation of their
beastly tyranny, had otherwise decreed; for he ^o strengthened his faithful
Witness, that neither the love of life, nor yet the fear of that cruel death,
could move him a jote to swerve from the truth once professed. At the place of
execution, he gave to his servant who had been chamberlain to him of a long
time, his Gown, his Coat, Bonnet, and such like garments, saying, These will
not profit in the fire, they will profit thee; after this, of me thou can
receive no commodity, except the example of my death, which I pray thee bear
in mind, for albeit it be bitter to the flesh* and fearful before men, yet is
it the entrance unto eternal life, which none shall possess that denies
Christ Jesus before this wicked generation. The innocent servant of God being
bound to the stake, in the midst of some coals, some timber, and other matter
appointed for the fire, a train of powder was made, and set on fire, which
gave to the blessed Martyr of God, a blaise, and scorched his left hand and
that side of his face, but neither kindled the wood nor yet the coals, and so
remained the appointed to death in torment, till that men ran to the Castle
again for more Powder, and fire wood more able to take fire, which at last
being kindled, with loud voice, cried; Lord Jesus receive my spirit; How long
shall darkness overwhelm this Realm? And how long will thou suffer this
tyranny of men? The fire was slow, and therefore was his torment the more: But
most of all was he grieved by certain wicked men, amongst whom Campbel the
black Friar (of whom we spoke before) was principal, who continually cried,
Convert Heretic, Call upon our Lady, say, Salve Regina, etc. To whom he
answered, Depart, and trouble me not, Friar Campbell apostate.
thou messenger of Satan. But while that the aforesaid Friar still roared, one
thing in great vehemence he said unto him; Wicked man, thou know the
contrary, and the contrary to me thou have confessed; I appeal thee before the
tribunal seat of Christ Jesus. After which, and other words, which well could
not be understood nor marked because of the tumult, and vehemency of the fire.
The witness of Jesus Christ gate victory, after long sufferance, the last of
February, in the year of God 1527. The said Friar departed this life within
few days after, in what estate, we refer to the manifestation of the
general Day. But it was plainly known, that he died in Glasgow in a phrenzie,
and as one despaired.

Now that all men may understand what was the singular erudition, and godly
knowledge of the said M. Patrike Hamilton, we have inserted this his little
pithie Work, containing his Assertions and Determinations, concerning the Law,
the Office of the same; concerning Faith, and the true Fruits thereof; first by
the said Master Patrike collected in Latin, and after translated into vulgar
Language.

Of the Law.
THe Law is a Doctrine that bids good, and forbids evil, as the
Commandments here contained do specify.

The ten Commandments.
THou shall worship but one God. 2. Thou shall make thee no Image to worship
it. 3. Thou shall not swear by his Name in vain. 4. Hold the Sabbath day holy.
5. Honor thy father and thy mother. 6. Thou shall not kill. 7. Thou shall not
commit adultery. 8. Thou shall not steal. 9. Thou shall bear no false witness.
10. Thou shall not desire ought that belongs to thy neighbor.

M^ior.
He that loves God and his neighbor, keeps all the Commandments of God.
Deu^. 6. Matthew. 12.
Love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind: this is the first and great Commandment. The second is like unto
this, Love thy neighbor as thy self; in these two Commandments hang all the
Law and Prophets. Minor.
He that loves God, loves his neighbor: If any man say, I love God, 1. Joh.
4.
and yet hates his neighbor, he is a liar: He that loves not his brother
whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? He that loves
his neighbor as himself, keeps the whole Commandments of God. Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, Conclusio.
even so do unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matthew 7. Romans 13.
He that loves his neighbor, fulfilleth the Law; Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor, Thou shall not desire, and so forth? If there
be any other Commandment, all are comprehended under this saying, Love thy
neighbor as thy self. Galat. 5.
He that loves his neighbor, keeps all the Commandments of God, Romans 13.
Gal. 5. He that loves God, loves his neighbor, Mayor.
Romans 13.
1 John 4. Ergo, He that loves God, keeps all his Commandments. He that has
the faith, Minor.
loves God; My Father loves you, because ye love me, and believe that I came
of God. He that has the faith, keeps all the Commandments of God; Joh. 19.
he that has the faith, loves God, and he that loves God, keeps all the
Commandments of God. Ergo, He that has faith, Conclusio.
keeps all the Commandments of God. He that keeps one Commandment, keeps
them all. For without faith it is impossible to keep any of the Commandments of
God; Christ is the end and fulfilling of the Law to every one that believes
Romans 10.14.
and he that has faith, keeps all the Commandments of God. Ergo, He that
keeps one Commandment of God, keeps them all.

He that keeps not all the Commandments of God, he keeps none of them; he
that keeps one of the Commandments of God, he keeps all: Ergo, He that
keeps not all the Commandments, he keeps none of them. It is not in our
power without grace to keep any of Gods Commandments. Without grace it is
impossible to keep one of Gods Commandments, and grace is not in our power.
Ergo, It is not in our power to keep any of the Commandments of God. Even so
may you reason concerning the holy Ghost and faith. The Law was given us to
show us our sin. By the Law comes the knowledge of sin; Romans 3. Romans 7.
I knew not what sin meant, but through the Law. I knew not what lust had
meant, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust. Without the Law sin was
dead, that is, It moved me not, neither wist I that it was sin, which
notwithstanding was sin, and forbidden by the Law. The Law bids us do that
which is impossible for us; for it bids us keep all the Commandments of God,
and yet it is not in our power to keep any of them. Ergo, It bids us do that
which is impossible for us. Thou will say, Wherefore does God command us that
which is impossible for us? I answer, To make thee know, That thou art but
evil, and that there is no remedy to save thee in thine own hand; and that
thou may seek remedy at at some other: Gospel, quasi Godspel, that is Gods
word, but ordinarily it is taken from that part which we call Evangel, that is,
Good tidings, otherwise, Gospel, quasi Goodspel, that is, Good words, and so,
Good tidings.
For the Law does nothing but command thee.

Of the Gospel.
THe Gospel is as much to say in our Tongue, as good Tidings, like as every one
of these Sentences be.

Christ is the Savior of the world. Christ is our Savior. Christ died for us.
Christ died for our sins. Christ offered himself for us. Christ bare our sins
upon his back. Christ bought us with his Blood. Christ washed us with his Blood.
Christ came into the world to save sinners. Christ came into this world to take
away our sins. Christ was the Price that was given for us and our sins. Christ
was made Debtor for our sins. Christ has paid our Debt, for he died for us.
Christ has made satisfaction for us, and for our sins. Christ is our
Righteousness. Christ is our Wisdom. Christ is our Sanctification. Christ is
our Redemption. Christ is our Satisfaction. Christ is our Goodness. Christ
has pacified the Father of Heaven. Christ is Ours, and all His. Christ has
delivered us from the Law, from the devil, and hell. The Father of heaven has
forgiven us for Christ's sake.
Or any such other as declare unto us the mercies of God.

The nature of the Law, and of the Gospel.
The Law Shows us our sin. Shows us our condemnation. Is the word of ire.
Is the word of despair. Is the word of displeasure.


The Gospel Shows us a remedy for it. Shows us our Redemption. Is the Word
of Grace. Is the Word of Comfort. Is the Word of Peace.


A Disputation betwixt the Law and the Gospel.
The Law says, Pay thy Debt. Thou art a desperate sinner. Thou shall die.


The Gospel says, Christ has paid it. Thy sins are forgiven thee. Be of good
comfort, thou art saved.


The Law says, Make amends for thy sin. The Father of heaven is wrath with
thee. Where is thy righteousness, goodness and satisfaction? Thou art bound
and obliged unto me, the devil and hell.


The Gospel says, Christ has made it for thee. Christ has pacified him with
his Blood. Christ is thy righteousness, goodness, and satisfaction. Christ
has delivered thee from them all.


Of Faith.
FAith is to believe God, like as Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness. He that believed God, believed his Word. To believe in
him, Genesis 15. Joh. 5.
is to believe his Word, and account it true that he speaks: he that
believes not Gods Word, he compteth him false, and a liar, and believes not
that he may and will fulfill his Word, and so he denies both the might of God,
and himself. Faith is the gift of God: Every good thing is the gift of God.
Jam. 1.
Faith is good; Ergo, Faith is the gift of God; The gift of God is not in our
power: Faith is the gift of God, Ergo, Faith is not in our power. Without faith
it is impossible to please God; all that comes not of faith, Rom 14. Heb 11.
is sin; for without faith, can no man please God. Besides that, he that
lacks faith, he trusts not God; he that trusts not God, trusts not in
his Word; he that trusts not in his Word, holds him false, and a liar; he
that holds him false and a liar, he believes not that he may do that he
promises, and so denies he that he is God: O how can a man, being of this
fashion, please God! No manner of ways, yea suppose he did all the works of
man and Angel.

All that is done in faith, pleases God. Right is the Word of God, and all his
works in faith: Lord thine eyes look to faith; that is as much to say, as, Lord
thou delightest in faith: God loves him that believes in him, how can they
then displease him? He who has faith, is just and good, and a good tree
brings forth good fruit. Ergo, all that is done in faith, pleases God.
Moreover, he that has faith, believes God; he that believes God, believes
his Word; he that believes his Word, wotteth well that he is true and
faithful, and cannot lie; but knows well that he both may and will fulfill
his Word. How can he then displease him? For thou can do no greater honor
unto God, than to count him true. Thou will then say, That theft, murder,
adultery, and all vices please God: No verily, for they cannot be done in
faith; for a good tree bears good fruit. He that has faith, wotteth well
that he pleases God; for all that is done in faith, Heb. 11. Rom 8.
pleases God; faith is a surenesse: Faith is a sure confidence of things which
are hoped for, and a certainty of things which are not seen: The same spirit
certifieth our spirit, Romans 4.
that we are the children of God. Moreover, he that has the faith, wotteth
well that God will fulfill his Word: Ergo, faith is a surenesse.

A man justified by faith.
ABraham believed God, Romans 4.
and it was imputed to him for righteousness; we suppose therefore that a man
is justified (says the Apostle) without the works of the Law. He that works
not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted
unto him for righteousness. The just man lives by faith, Abac. 2. Romans 1.
Abac. 2. Romans 1.
We know that a man that is justified, is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, and not by the deeds of the Law.

Of the faith of Christ.
THe faith of Christ is, To believe in him, that is, To believe in his Word,
and to believe that he will help thee in all thy need, and deliver thee from
all evil. Thou will ask me, What Word? I answer, The Gospel: he that believes
in Christ, Joh. 6.
shall be saved. He that believes the son, has everlasting life; 1 John 5.
Verily verily I say unto you, He that believes in me, has everlasting life.
This I write unto you, that believing in the Name of the Son of God, ye may
know that ye have eternal life. Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou
believe, but happy are they that have not seen, and yet believe in me. All
the Prophets to him bear witness, That whosoever believes in him, shall have
remission of their sins. What must I do that I may be saved? the Apostle
answers, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 10. Romans 10.
and thou shall be saved. If thou acknowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the
Lord, and believe in thine heart, Joh. 3.
That God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be safe. He that believes
not in Christ, shall be condemned. He that believes not the son, shall never
see life, but the ire of God abides upon him. The holy Ghost shall reprove the
world of sin, because (says Christ) they believe not in me. They that believe
in Jesus Christ, are sons of God. Ye are all the sons of God, because ye
believe in Jesus Christ. He that believes in Christ the son of God, Gal. 3.
Matthew. 19.
is safe. Peter said, Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Jesus answered
and said unto him, Happy art thou, Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood
has not opened unto thee that, but my father which is in heaven. We have
believed and known that thou art Christ, the son of the living God. I believe
that thou art Christ the son of the living God, which should come into the
world. Joh 9. Joh. 20.
These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus Christ is the son of
God, and that in believing ye might have life. I believe that Jesus is the son
of the living God. He that believes God, believes the Gospel. He that
believes God, believes his Word, and the Gospel is his Word. Therefore he
that believes God, believes his Gospel. As Christ is the Savior of the
world, Christ is our Savior; Christ bought us with his Blood, Christ washed us
with his Blood, Christ offered himself for us, Christ bare our sins upon his
back. He that believes not the Gospel, believes not God; he that believes
not Gods Word, believes not himself; and the Gospel is Gods Word. Ergo, He
that believes not the Gospel, believes not God himself. And consequently,
they that believe not, as is above written, and such other, believe not God. He
that believes the Gospel shall be saved; Go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel unto every creature, Mark 16. Matthew. 28.
he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be condemned.

A Comparison betwixt Faith and Incredulity.
Faith Is the root of all good, Makes God and man friends, Brings God and
man together.


Incredulity Is the root of all evil, Makes them deadly foes, Brings them
asunder.


All that proceeds from Faith, pleases God.
All that proceeds from Incredulity, displeases God.
Faith only makes a man good and righteous,
Incredulity makes him unjust and evil.
Faith only makes a man The Member of Christ, The Inheritor of heaven. The
Servant of God.


Faith shows God to be a sweet Father. holds stiff by the word of God.
counts God to be true. knows God. loves God and his neighbor. only
saves. extolleth God and his works.


Incredulity makes man a member of the devil. makes him inheritour of hell.
makes him the servant of the devil. makes God a terrible Judge. causes man
wander here and there. makes him false and a liar. knows him not. loves
neither God nor neighbor. only condemns. extolleth flesh and her own deeds.


Of Hope.
HOpe is a trusty looking for of things that are promised to come unto us, as
we hope the everlasting joy which Christ has promised unto all that believe in
him; we should put our hope and trust in God only, and in no other thing.
Psalm. 117.
It is good to trust in God, and not in man. He that trusts in his own heart,
he is a fool; It is good to trust in God, and not in Princes: They shall be
like unto Images that make them, and all that trust in them: He that trusts
in his own thoughts does ungodly: Cursed be he that trusts in man: Bid the
rich men of this world that they trust not in their unstable riches, but that
they trust in the liv^ng God: It is hard for them that trust in money to enter
into the kingdom of God. Moreover, we should trust in him surely, that can help
us, 1. Tim. 6.
yea we should trust in him only. Well is him that trusts in God, and woe to
them that trust him not. Well is the man that trusts in God, for God shall be
his trust: He that trusts in him shall understand the truth. They shall all
rejoice that trust in thee, they shall all ever be glad, and thou will defend
them.

Of Charity.
Charity is the love of thy neighbor: This (...)derstood of circumstance of
worldly m^n, and not of them of God for the nearer that me^ draw to God, we are
bound (...) more to love them.
The rule of Charity is, To do as thou would were done unto thee; for
Charity esteems all alike, the rich and the poor, the friend and the foe,
the thankful and unthankful, the kinsman and stranger.

A comparison betwixt Faith, Hope, and Charity.
FAith comes of the word of God: Hope, comes of Faith; And Charity springs
of them both: Faith believes the word; Hope trusts after that which is
promised by the word; and Charity does good unto her neighbor, through the
love that she has to God, and gladness that is within her self. Faith looks
to God and his word: Hope looks unto his gi^t and reward Charity looks unto
her neighbors profit; Faith receives God. Hope receives his reward: Charity
looks unto her neighbor with a glad heart, and that without any respect of
reward. Faith pertains to God only; Hope to his reward; and Charity to her
neighbor.

Of good Works.
Galat. 3.
NO manner of works make us righteous: We believe that a man shall be justified
without works. No man is justified by the deeds of the Law, but by the Faith of
Jesus Christ; and we believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be justified by the
Faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the Law. If righteousness come by the
Law, then Christ died in vain: That no man is justified by the Law, it is
manifest, for a righteous man lives by his Faith; but the Law is not of Faith.
Moreover, since Christ the maker of heaven and earth; and all that therein is,
behoved to die for us: We are compelled to grant, that we were so far drowned
in sins, that neither the deeds, nor all the creatnres that ever God made or
might make, might help us out of them: Ergo, No deeds nor works can make us
righteous: No works make us unrighteous; for if any work made us unrighteous,
then the contrary works would make us righteous. But it is proved that no works
can make us righteous; Ergo, No works make us unrighteous.

Works make us neither good nor evil.
IT is proved that works neither make us righteous nor unrighteous. Ergo, No
works neither make us good nor evil; for righteous and good are one thing, and
unrighteous and evil, another. Good works make not a good man, nor evil works
an evil man. But a good man makes good works, and an evil man evil works; good
fruit makes not the tree good, nor evil fruit the tree evil. But a good tree
bears good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit. A good man cannot do evil
works, nor an evil man good works, for an evil tree cannot bear good fruit, nor
a good tree evil fruit. A good man is good before he do good works, and an evil
man is evil before he do evil works; for the tree is good before it bear good
fruit, and evil before it bear evil fruit. Every man is either good or evil;
either make the tree good, and the fruit good also; or else make the tree evil,
and the fruit likewise evil. Every man's work is either good or evil; for all
fruit is either good or evil. Either make the tree good and the fruit also, or
else make the tree evil, Matthew 13. Matthew. 7.
and the fruit of it likewise evil. A good man is known by his works, for a
good man does good works, and an evil, evil works: Ye shall know them by their
fruits: for a good tree brings forth good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit.
A man is likened to the tree, and his works to the fruit of, the tree. Beware
of false Prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they
are ravening wolves: ye shall know them by their fruit.

None of our works either save us nor condemn us.
IT is proved that no works make us either righteous or unrighteous, good or
evil: but first we are good, before that we do good works and evil before we do
evil works: Ergo, No work either saves us nor condemns us. Thou will say*
Then makes it no matter what we do? I answer thee; Note.
Yes. For if thou do evil, it is a sure argument that thou art evil, and
want Faith: If thou do good, it is an argument that thou art good, and have
Faith; for a good tree bears good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit. Yet
good fruit makes not the tree good, nor evil fruit the tree evil: So that man
is good before he do good works, and evil before he do evil works. The man is
the tree; the works are the fruit. Faith makes the good tree; Incredulity the
evil tree: Such a tree such a fruit, such man works. For all that is done in
Faith pleases God, and are good works: And all that is done without Faith
displeases God, and are evil works. Whosoever thinks to be saved by his
works, Note.
denies that Christ is our Savior, and that Christ died for him; and finally
all things that belongs to Christ. For how is he thy Savior, if thou might
save thy self with thy works? Or to what end should he have died for thee, if
any works of thine might have saved thee? What, is this to say Christ died for
thee? Is it not that thou should have died perpetually, and that Christ to
deliver thee from death died for thee, and changed thy perpetual death into
his own death? for thou made the fault, and he suffered the pain, and that
for the love he had to thee, before ever thou wast born, when thou had done
neither good nor evil. Now since he has paid thy debt, thou die not, no thou
can not, but should have been damned, if his death were not. But since he
was punished for thee thou shall not be punished. Note.
Finally, he has delivered thee from condemnation, and desires nothing of
thee, but that thou should acknowledge what he has done for thee, and bear
it in mind; and that thou would help others for his sake both in word and
deed, even as he has helped thee, for naught, and without reward. O how ready
would we be to help others, if we knew his goodness and gentleness toward
us? he is a good and a gentle Lord, and he does all things for naught. Let us,
I beseech you, follow his footsteps, whom all the world ought to praise and
worship. Amen.

He that thinks to be saved by his works, calls himself Christ.
FOr he calls himself a Savior, which appertains to Christ only. What is
a Savior? But he that saves. And thou say, I save my self, which is as
much to say, as, I am Christ; for Christ is only the Savior of the world. We
should do no good works to the intent to get the inheritance of heaven or
remission of sins through them. For whosoever believes to get the inheritance
of heaven, or remission of sins through works, he believes not to get that for
Christ's sake. And they who believe that their sins are not forgiven them, and
that they shall not be saved for Christ's sake, they believe not the Gospel; for
the Gospel says. Thou shall be saved for Christ's sake; Sins are forgiven you
for Christ's sake. He that believes not the Gospel, believes not God: And
consequently, they that believe to be saved by their works, or to get remission
of sins by their own deeds, believe not God, but account him a liar, and so
utterly deny him to be God. Thou will say, Quaere.
Shall we then do no good works? I say not so: But I say, we should do no good
works, Answer.
to the intent to get the kingdom of heaven, or remission of sins; for if we
believe to get the inheritance of heaven through good works, then we believe
not to get it through the promise of God. Or if we think to get remission of
our sins, by good works, we believe not that they are forgiven us by Christ,
and so we count God a liar; for God says, Thou shall have the inheritance of
heaven for my Sons sake. You say, Note.
It is not so, but I will gain it through mine own works. So I condemn not good
works, but I condemn the false trust in any works, for all then works that a
man puts confidence in, are therewith intoxicate or impoysoned, and become
evil. Wherefore do good works, but beware thou do them not to get any good
through them, for if thou do, thou receivest the good, not as the gift of God,
but as a debt unto thee, and make thy self fellow with God, because thou will
take nothing from him for naught. What? needs he any thing of thine, who
gives all things, and is not the poorer? Therefore do nothing to him, but take
of him, for he is a gentle Lord, and with a gladder heart will give us all
things that we need, then we take it of him. So that if we want any thing, let
us blame our selves. Press not then to the inheritance of heaven, through
presumption of thy good works; for if thou do, Note.
thou countest thy self holy and equal unto him, because thou will take
nothing of him for naught; And so shall thou fall as Lucifer fell from heaven
for his pride.

Thus ends M. Patricks Articles. And so we return to our History. When those
cruel wolves had (as they supposed) clean devoured the prey, they found
themselves in worse case then they were before; for then within S. Andrews,
yea, almost within the whole Realm (who heard of that fact) there was none
found who began not to inquire, Here you see verified, Cinis Martyrum, semen
Ecclesiae.
wherefore M. Patrike Hamilton was burnt, and when his Articles were rehearsed,
Question was holden, if such Articles were necessary to be believed, under the
pain of damnation. And so within short space, many began to call in doubt, that
which before they held for a certain verity, insomuch that the University of S.
Andrews and S. Leonards College, principally by the labors of Master Gawin
Logy, M. Gawyn Logy.
the Novises of the Abbey, and by the sub-Prior, began to smell somewhat of the
verity, and to epsy the vanity of the received Superstition; yea, within few
years after began both black and gray Friars publicly to Preach against the
pride and idle life of Bishops, Munks Preach Bishops devices
and against the abuses of the whole Ecclesi^sticall estate; amongst whom was
one called Will. Arith^; who in a Sermon preached in Dundie, spoke somewhat
more liberally against the licentious life of the Bishops, then they could well
bear. He spoke further against the abuse of cursing and of Miracles. The Bishop
of Brechain, having his Parasites and Jack-men in the Town, buffeted the
Friar, and called him Heretic. The Friar impatient of the injury received,
past to S. Andrews, M. John Mair, whose History of Scotland we have, etc. He
wrote upon the 4 Evangelists, etc.
and did communicate the heads of his Sermon with Master John Mair, whose word
then was holden as an Oracle, in matters of Religion; and being assured of him,
than such Doctrine might well be defended, and that he would defend it, for it
contained no Heresy. There was one day appointed to the said Friar, to make
repetition of the same Sermon: and advertisement was given to all such as was
offended at the former, to be present. And so in the Parish Church of S.
Andrews upon the day appointed* appeared the said Friar, and had amongst his
Auditors, M. John Mair, M. George Lockart, the Abbot of Gambuskeneth, M.
Patricke Hepburn Prior of Saint Andrews, with all the Doctors, and Masters of
the Universities.

The theme of his Sermon was; Verity is the strongest of all things. His
discourse of cursing was* That if it were warily used, it were the most
fearful thing upon the face of the earth; Arithe his Sermon.
for it were the very separation of man from God; but that it should not be
used rashly, and for every light cause, but only against open and incorrigible
sinners: but now; said he, the avarice of Priests, and the ignorance of their
Office, has caused it altogether to be vile-pended. For the Priest (says he)
whose Duty and Office is to pray for the people, stands up on Sunday, and
cries, Anne has lost her Spindle; There is a Flail stolen behind the barn;
The goodwife on the other side of the gate has lost a horn spoon; Gods curse
and mine I give to them that knows of thy goods, and restores them not. How
the people mocked their cursing, he further told a merry tale, How after a
Sermon that he made at Dumfermeling, he came to a house where gossips were
drinking their Sundays penny; and he being dry, asked drink; Yes Father (said
one of the gossips) ye shall have drink, but ye must first resolve one doubt
which is risen among us, to wit, What servant will serve a man best at least
expenses? The good Angel, said I, who is man's keeper, who makes good service
without expenses. Tush, said the gossip, we mean no such high matters; we mean,
What honest man will do greatest service for least expenses. And while I was
musing (said the Friar) what that should mean, she said, I see, father, that
the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men. Know ye not how the Bishops and
their Officials serve us husbandmen, Will they not give to us a letter of
cursing for a plack, to last for a year, to curse all that look over our
ditch, and that keep our Corn better nor the sleeping boy that will have three
shillings of Fee, a shirt, and a pair of shoes in the year. And therefore if
their cursing do any thing, we hold the Bishops the cheapest servants in that
behalf, that are within the Realm. As concerning Miracles, False Miracles.
he declared what deligence the ancients took to try true miracles from false.
But now, said he, the greediness of Priests not only receive false miracles,
but also they cherish and hire knaves for that purpose, that their Chapels may
be the better renowned, and Offerings may be augmented. And thereupon are many
Chapels founded, as that if our Lady were mightier, and that she took more
pleasure in one place than in another; As of late days our Lady of Karsgreng
has hopped from one green hillock to another: But honest men of Saint Andrews
(said he) if ye love your wives and daughters, hold them at home, or else send
them in good honest company; for if ye knew what miracles were wrought there,
ye would neither thank God nor our Lady. And thus he merely tanted their
Priests of whoredom and adultery used at such devotion.

Another Article was judged more hard; for he alleged the common Law, That
the Civil Magistrate might correct the Churchmen, and deprive them of their
Benefices for open vices. Another day the same Friar made another Sermon of the
Abbot of Unreason, unto whom, and whose Laws; he compares Prelates of that age;
for they were subject to no Laws, no more than was the Abbot of Unreason. And
among other things, he told such a merry jest: There was, said he, a Prelate,
or at least a Prelates Peer, a true servant to the King of Love, who upon a
night after Supper, asked of his Gentlemen, by the faith that they ought to the
king of Love, that they truly declare how many sundry women every one of them
had, and how many of them were men's wives. One answered, He had lien with five,
and two of them were married. The other answered, I have had seven, and three
of them are married. It came last to my Lord Abbot himself, who making it very
nice for a little space, gave in the end a plain confession, and said, I am the
youngest man, and yet have I had the round dozen, and seven of them are men's
wives. Now said the Friar, This god and king of Love, to whom our Prelates do
homage, is the master devil of hell, from whom such fruits and works do
proceed. This Friar was known by his proper tokens to have been Prior Patrike
Hepburne, now Bishop of Murray, who to this day has continued in the
profession that he has made to his god and king of love.

It was supposed, notwithstanding this kind of preaching, that this Friar
remained Papist in his heart: For the other Friars fearing to lose the
Benediction of the Bishops, to wit, Their Malt and their Meal, and their other
appointed Pensions, caused the said Friar to fly to England, where for defense
of the people and Papistry, he was cast into prison at King Henry's
commandment. But so it pleased God to open the mouth of Balaams own Ass to cry
out against the vicious lives of the Clergy of that age.

Shortly after this, new consultation was taken there that some should be
burnt; for men began liberally to speak. A merry Gentleman named John Lindsey,
familiar to Bishop James Betonne, standing by when consultation was had, said,
My Lord, If ye burn any more, except ye follow my counsel, ye will utterly
destroy your selves; if ye will burn them, let them be burnt in hollow
Cellars; for the smoke of Master Patrike Hammilton has infected as many as it
blew upon. Thus it pleased God that they should be tanted in their own face.
But here follows the most merry of all: One Alexander Furrour, who had been
imprisoned seven years in the Tower of London, Sir John Dungwaill (according to
the charity of Churchmen) entertained his wife, and wasted the poor man's
substance; for the which cause at his returning, he spoke more liberally of
Priests, then they could bear: And so was he declared to be accused for
heresy, and called to his answer to Saint Andrews, he leapt up merrily upon
the Scaffold, and casting a gambade, said, Alexander Furrour his Examination
before the Bishops.
Where are the rest of the Players? Master Andrew Olyphant offended therewith,
said, It shall be no Play to you, Sir, before ye depart, and so began to read
his Accusation; the first Article whereof was, That he despised the Mass. His
answer was, I hear more Maffes in eight days, than three Bishops there
sitting say in a year. Accused secondly of the contempt of the Sacraments. The
Priests, said he, were the most common contemners of Sacraments, and specially
of Matrimony. And that he witnessed by many of the Priests there present, and
named the man's wife with whom they had meddled, and especially Sir John
Dungwaill, who had seven years together abused his own wife, and consumed his
substance; and said, because I complain of such injuries, I am here summoned
and accused as one that is worthy to be burnt: For Gods sake, said he, will ye
take wives of your own, that I and others whom ye have abused, may be revenged
upon you. Then Bishop Gawin Dumbar, named the old Bishop of Aberdein, thinking
to justify himself before the people, said, Carle, thou shall not know my
wife. The said Alexander answered, My Lord, ye are too old, but with the grace
of God I shall drink with your daughter or I depart, and thereat was smiling of
the best, and loud laughter of some, for the Bishop had a daughter married with
Andrew Balfour in that Town. Then the Bishop bade away with the carle. But he
answered, Nay, I will not depart this hour, for I have more to speak against
the vices of Priests, than I can express this whole day. And so after diverse
purposes, they commanded him to burn his Bill. And he demanding the cause, they
said, Because ye have spoken these Articles whereof ye are accused. His answer
was, The great devil bear them away that first and last said them; and so he
took the Bill, and chawing it, he spat it in Master Andrew Olyphants face,
saying, Now burn it or drown it, whether ye will, ye hear no more of me. But I
must have somewhat of every one of you, to begin my pack again, which a Priest
and my wife, a Priests whore, have spent. And so every Prelat and rich Priest,
glad to be quit of his evil, gave him somewhat, and so departed he, for he
understood nothing of Religion. But so fearful it was then to speak any thing
against Priests, that the least word spoken against them, yea, albeit it was
spoken in a man's sleep, was judged Heresy, and that was practiced upon Richard
Carmichell, yet living in Fyfe, who being young, and Singer in the Chapel
Royal of Sterelin, happened in his sleep to say, The devil take away the
Priests, for they are a greedy pack. He therefore accused by Sir George
Clapperton, Dean of the said Chapel, was compelled forthwith to burn his
Bill. But God shortly after raised up against them stronger Champions: For
Alexander Seton, Alexander Seton, a black Friar.
a black Friar, of good learning and estimation, began to blame the corrupt
doctrine of Papistry. For the space of a whole Lent, he taught the Commandment
only, ever beating in the ears of his auditors, That the Law of God had of
many years not been truly taught: for men's Tradition had obscured the purity
of it. These were his accustomed Propositions; 1. Christ Jesus is the end and
perfection of the Law. 2. There is no sin, where Gods Law is not violated. 3.
To satisfy for sins, lies not in man's power; but the remission thereof comes
by unfeigned Repentance, and by faith apprehending God the Father merciful in
Jesus Christ his Son. While oftentimes he puts his auditors in mind of this
and the like Heads; he makes no mention of Purgatory, Pardons, Pilgrimage,
prayer to Saints, nor of such trifles. The dumb Doctors, and the rest of that
forsworn rabble began to suspect him, and yet said they nothing publicly,
till Lent was ended. And he passed to Dundie: And then one in his absence,
hired to that purpose, openly condemned the whole Doctrine that before he had
taught. Which coming to the ears of the said Friar Alexander, then being in
Dundie, without delay he returned to Saint Andrews, Note.
caused immediately to toll the Bell, and to give signification that he would
preach, as that he did indeed, in the which Sermon he affirms (and that more
plainly than at any other time) whatsoever in all his whole Sermons he had
taught before, the whole Lent past; adding, That within Scotland there were no
true Bishops, if that Bishops should be known by such notes and virtues as S.
Paul requires in Bishops. This delation flew with wings to the Bishops ears,
who without further delay sent for the said Friar Alexander, who began sharply
to accuse that he had so ^landerously spoken of the dignity of Bishops, as to
say, That it behoved a Bishop to be a Preacher or else he were but a dumb dog,
and fed not the flock, but fed his own belly. The man being witty, and minding
that which was his most assured defense, said, My Lord* The reporters of such
things are manifest liars. Whereat the Bishop rejoiced, and said, Your answer
pleases me well; I never could think of you that ye would be so foolish as to
affirm such things: Where are the knaves that have brought me this tale? Who
comparing and affirming the same that they did before, he still replied, That
they were liers. But while the witnesses were multiplied, and men were brought
to attention, he turned him to the Bishop, and said, My Lord, ye may hear and
consider, what ears these Asses have, Note.
who cannot discern betwixt Paul, Esaias, Zachary, and Malachy, and Friar
Alexander Seton. In very deed, My Lord, I said, That Paul says, It behooves a
Bishop to be a Teacher; Esaias said, That they that fed not the flock are dumb
dogs; and Zachary says, They are idle Pastors: I of mine own head affirmed
nothing, but declared what the Spirit of God before pronounced: At whom, my
Lord, if ye be not offended, justly ye cannot be offended at me. And so yet
again, my Lord, I say, That they are manifest liars that reported unto you that
I said, That ye and others that preach not, are no Bishops, but belly-gods.
Albeit after that the Bishop was highly offended, as well at the scoff and
bitter mock, as at the bold liberty of that learned man, yet durst he not
hazard for that present, to execute his malice conceived. For naught only
fears he the learning, and bold spirit of the man, but also the favor that
he had, as well of the people, as of the Prince, King James the fifth, James
the fifth.
with whom he had good credit, for he was at that time his Confessor, and had
exhorted him to the fear of God, to the meditation of Gods Law, and unto purity
of life. Note.
But the said Bishop, with his accomplices, foreseeing what danger might come to
their estate, if such familiarity should continue betwixt the Prince and a man
so learned, and so repugning to their affections, labors by all means to
make the said Friar Alexander odious unto the King, and easily found the means
by the gray Friars (who by their hypocrisy deceived many) to traduce the
innocent as an Heretic. This accusation was easily believed of the young
Prince; who being much given to the lusts of the flesh, abhorred all counsel
that repugned thereto. And because he did remember what a terror the
admonitions of the said Alexander was unto his blinded conscience, without
resistance he subscribed to their accusation, affirming that he knew more then
they did in that matter. For he understood well enough that he smelled of the
new Doctrine, by such things as he had showed to him under Confession. And
therefore he promised that he should follow the counsel of the Bishops in
punishing of him, and of all others of that Sect. These things understood by
the said Alexander, as well by the information of his friends and familiars, as
by the strange countenance of the King unto him; provideth the next way to
avoid the fury of a misled Prince, and so in his habit he departs the Realm;
and coming to Berwicke, wrote back again to the King his Complaint and
Admonition; The very Tenor and Copy whereof follows, and is this.

MOst gracious Sovereign Lord, Ale^ander Seton his Letter.
under the Lord and King of all, of whom only thy Highness and Majesty have
power and authority, to exercise Justice within this thy Realm under God, who
is King and Lord of all Realms, and thy Majesty, and all mortal kings are but
only servants unto that only immortal Prince, Christ Jesus, etc.
It is not, I wot, unknown to thy gracious Highness, how that thy Majesty's
sometime servant and Orator (and ever shall be to my lives end) is departed out
of thy Realm, unto the next adjacent of England; nevertheless, I believe the
cause of my departing is unknown to thy gracious Majesty: Which only is,
Because the Bishops and Churchmen of thy Realm have had heretofore such
authority upon thy subjects, that apparently they were rather King, and thou
the subject; which unjust Regiment is of it self false, and contrary to holy
Scripture, and Gods Law. Then thou art the King and Master, and they thy
subjects, which is very true, and testified expressly by the Word of God. And
also because they will give no man of any degree or state (whom they often call
Heretics) audience, time, nor place to speak and have defense, which is
against all Law, both the old Law (called the Law of Moses) and the new Law of
the Gospel. So that if I might have had audience and place to speak, and have
showed my just defense, conformable to the Law of God, I should never have fled
to any other Realm, suppose it should have cost me my life. But because I
believed that I should have no audience, nor place to answer (they are so great
with thy Majesty) I departed not doubting, but moved of God, unto a better
time* that God illuminate thy Majesty, even to give every man audience (is
thou should and may, and is bound by the Law of God) who are accused to the
death. And to certify thy Highness that these are no vain words, but of deed
and effect, here I offer me to thy Majesty to come in thy Realm again, so
that thy Majesty will give me audience, and hear what I have for me of the Law
of God: and cause any Bishop or Abbot, Friar or Secular, which is most cunning
(some of them cannot read their Mattins, who are made Judges of Heresy) to
impugn me by the Law of God; and if my part be found wrong, thy Majesty being
present and Judge, I refuse no pain worthy or condign for my fault. And if
that I convince them by the Law of God, and that they have nothing to lay to my
charge, but the law of man, and their own inventions to uphold their own glory
and pridefull life, and daily scourging of thy poor subjects* I refer my self
to thy Majesty as Judge, Whether he has the victory that holds him at the Law
of God, which cannot fail, or be false, or they that holds them at the Law of
man, which is very often plain contrary, and against the Law of God; and
therefore of necessity false, and full of lies. For all things that is contrary
to the verity (which is Christ and his Law) is of necessity a lie. And to
witness that this comes of all my heart, I shall remain at Berwike while I get
thy Majesty's answer, and shall without fail return, having thy hand write,
that I may have audience, and place to speak. No more I desire of thee, whereof
if I had been sure, I should never have departed; and that thou may know the
truth thereof, if fear of the justness of my Cause, or dread of persecution
for the same, had moved me to depart, I could not so pleasantly revert, only
distrust was the cause of my departing. Pardon me to say that which lies to
thy Majesty's charge. Thou art bound by the Law of God (suppose they falsely
lie, saying it pertains not to thy Majesty to intermeddle with such matters)
to cause every man in any case accused of his life, to have their just defense
and their accusers produced conform to their own law. They blind thy Matie
eyes, that knows nothing of thy law: but if I prove not this out of their own
law, I offer me to the death. Thy Matie therefore by experience, may daily
learn (seeing they neither fear the King of Heaven, as their lives testify,
neither thee their Natural Prince, as their usurped power in their actions
shows) why thy Highness should be no longer blinded. Thou may consider that
they pretend nothing else, but only the maintenance and upholding of their
barded mules, augmenting of their insatiable avarice, and continual
overthrowing and swallowing up thy poor subjects; neither preaching nor
teaching out of the Law of God (as they should) the rude ignorant people, but
contend who may be most high, most rich, and nearest thy Majesty; to put thy
Temporal Lords and Lieges out of thy counsel and favor, who should be, and
are most tender servants to thy Majesty in all time of need, to the defense of
thee and thy Crown: And where they desire thy Majesty to to put out thy
Temporal Lords and Lieges, because they despise their vicious life, What else
intend they, but only thy death and destruction, as thou may easily
perceive: suppose they color their false intent and mind with the pursuit of
heresy; for when thy Barons are put down, What art thou but the king of Land,
and not of men, and then of necessity must be guided by them: and there (no
doubt) where a blind man is guide, must be a fall in the mire. Therefore let
thy Majesty take boldness and authority, which thou have of God, and suffer not
their cruel persecution to proceed, without audience given to him that is
accused, and just place of defense: and then, no doubt, thou shall have thy
subjects hearts, and all that they can or may do in time of need, tranquillity,
justice, and policy, and finally, the Kingdom of the heavens. May it please you
to give one Copy of this to the Clergy, and keep the Original, and thy
Majesty shall have experience, if I go against one word that I have spoken. I
shall daily make my hearty devotion for thy Majesty, and for the prosperity
and welfare of thy body and soul. I doubt not but thy gracious Highness will
give answer to this Letter, unto the Presenter of it unto thy Highness.

At Berwike, by thy Highness servant and Orator. Sic subscribitur, Alexander
Seton.


This Letter was delivered to the Kings own hands, and of many read; but what
could greatly avail, where the pride and corruption of Prelates commanded what
they pleased; and the flattery of Courtiers fostered the unadvised Prince in
all dissoluteness, by which means they made him obsequious unto them. There
was another Friar Forest hanged in Smithfield, 1538.
From the death of that constant Witness of Jesus Christ, M. Patrike
Hammilton, God disclosing the wickedness of the wicked, as before we have
heard. There was one Forest of Linlytquow taken, who after long imprisonment
in the said Tower of S. Andrews was adjudged to the fire, by the said Bishop
James Betonne and his Doctors, for no other crime, Note.
but because he had a new Testament in English. Further of that History we have
not, except that he died constantly, and with great patience at S. Andrews.
After whose death the flame of Persecution ceased, till the death of M. Norman
Gurlaw, the space of ten years, For 10 years the persecution cease.
or thereabout, not that the bloody beasts ceased by all means to suppress the
light of God, and to trouble such as in any sort were suspected to abhor
their corruption; but because the Realm in these times was troubled with
intestine and cruel wars, in the which much blood was shed; first at
Melrosse, betwixt the Douglas and Balclench, in the year of God 1526. the 24.
day of July: Next at Lynlythcow, betwixt the Hamiltons and the Earl of Lenox,
who was sisters son to the Earl of Arran* where the said Earl with many
others lost his life, the thirteenth day of September, in the same year: And
last, betwixt the King himself and the foresaid Douglas, whom he banished the
Realm, and held him in exile during his whole days. By reason of these, we
say, and of other troubles, the Bishops and their bloody bands could not find
the time so favorable unto them as they required, to execute their Tyranny.

In this middle time, 1534.
so did the wisdom of God provide, that Henry the eight, 1538.
King of England, did abolish from his Realm the name and authority of the
Pope of Rome, The civil troubles give some rest to Gods flock f^r a time.
commanded the Bible to be read in English, suppressed the Abbeys and other
places of Idolatry, with their Idols, which gave great hope to diverse Realms,
that some godly Reformation should thereof have ensued: And therefore from this
our Country did diverse learned men, and others that lived in fear of
Persecution, repair to that Realm, where albeit they found not such purity as
they wished (and therefore diverse of them sought other countries) yet they
escaped the tyranny of merciless men, and were reserved to better times, that
they might fructify within his Church in diverse places and parts, and in
diverse vocations. Alexander Setonne remained in England, and publicly (with
great praise and comfort of many) taught the Gospel in all sincerity certain
years. And albeit the craftiness of Gardner Bishop of Winchester and of
others, circumvented the said Alexander, so that they caused him at Paul's
Cross, to affirm certain things that repugned to his former Doctrine: yet it
is no doubt but that God potently had assisted him in all his life, Note.
and that also in his death (which shortly after followed) he found the mercy
of his God, whereupon he ever exhorted all men to depend. Alexander Alaesius,
Master John Fyfe, and that famous man Doctor Machabeus departed unto Dutchland,
where by Gods providence they were distributed to several places. Makdowell
for his singular prudence, Macdowel.
besides his Learning and Godliness, was elected borrow-Master in one of their
steads. Alaesius was appointed to the Universitie of Lipsia, Alaesius.
and so was Master John Fyfe, John Fyfe.
where for their honest behavior and great erudition they were holden in
admiration with all the godly. And in what honor, credit, and estimation
Doctor Machabeus was, Machabeus.
with Christian, king of Denmark, Cawpmanhowen and famous men of diverse nations
can testify. This did God provide for his servants, Note.
and did frustrate the expectation of these bloody beasts, who by the death of
one (he means M. Patrick Hamilton) in whom the light of God did clearly shine,
intended to have suppressed Christ's Truth for ever within this Realm, but the
contrary had God decreed: for his death was the cause (as is said) that many
did awake from the deadly sleep of ignorance; and so did Jesus Christ the only
true Light shine unto many, for the way taken of one. And albeit that these
notable men did never after (M. John Fyfe only excepted) comfort their
country with their bodily presence, yet made he them fructify in his Church,
and raised them up Lyghts out of darkness, to the praise of his own mercy, and
to the just condemnation of them that then ruled; To wit, of the King,
Counsel, and Nobility, yea, of the whole people, who suffered such notable
personages without crimes, counted to be unjustly persecuted, and so exiled;
others were after even so dealt withal, but of them we shall speak in their
own place.

No sooner gate the Bishops opportunity (which always they sought) but so soon
renewed they the battle against Jesus Christ. For the aforesaid leprous Bishop
in the year of God 1534. 1534.
caused to be summoned Sir William Kyrk, This year was Laws made against the
Reformation, the Pope having sent to Scotland a Legate the year before. 6
Accused for Heresy.
Adam Dayis, Henry Kernes, John Stewart of Leyth, with diverse others, such as
Master William Iohnston Advocate, Master Henry Henderson, Schoolmasters of
Edinburgh, of whom some compeered in the Abbey Kyrk of Halyrud-house, and so
abjured, and publicly burnt their Bills: others compeered not, and therefore
was exiled. But in judgment were produced two, to wit, David Straton, a
Gentleman, and Master Norman Gowrlay, a man of reasonable erudition, of whom we
may shortly speak. In Master Norman appeared knowledge, albeit joined with
weakness; But in David Straton could only be espied for the first; a hatred
against the pride and avaritiousnesse of Priests, for the cause of his delation
was, he had made to himself one Fish-boat to go to the sea; The Bishop of
Murray, then being Prior of Saint Andrews, and his agents, urged him for the
tithe thereof; His answer was, If they would have tithe of that which his
servants wan in the sea, Note.
it were but reason that they should come and receive it where they got the
stock, and so as it was constantly affirmed, he caused his servants to cast
the tenth fish in the sea again: Process of cursing was laid against him for
not paying such tithes, which when he contemned, he was summoned to answer for
Heresy. It troubled him vehemently, and therefore he began to frequent the
company of such as were godly; for before he had been a man very stubborn, and
one that despised all reading (chiefly of those things that were godly) but
miraculously, as it were, he appears to be changed, for he delights in
nothing but in hearing of reading (for himself could not read) and was a
vehement exhorter of all men to concord and quietness, and the contempt of the
world. He frequented much the company of the Lord of Dun Areskin, whom God in
those days had marvellously illuminated: upon a day as the Lord of Lawriston
that yet lives, then being a young man, was reading unto him in the New
Testament, in a certain quiet place in the fields, as God had appointed, he
chanced to read these Sentences of our Master Jesus Christ; He that denies me
before men, or is ashamed of me in the midst of this wicked generation, I will
deny him in the presence of my Father, and before his Angels. At which words,
he suddenly being as one revived, cast himself upon his knees, and extending
both hand and visage constantly to the heaven a reasonable time, at length he
burst forth in these words; O Lord, I have been wicked, and justly may thou
withdraw thy grace from me: but Lord, for thy mercies sake, let me never deny
thee, nor thy Truth, for fear of death or corporal pain. The issue declared
that his prayer was not vain; for when he with the aforesaid Master Norman, was
produced in judgment in the Abbey of Halyrud-House, the King himself (all
clad in red) being present, 2 Gentlemen Straton and Gow^ley burnt.
great labor was made, that the said David Straton should have recanted, and
burnt his Bill: But he ever standing at his defense, alleging that he had not
offended, in the end was adjudged to the fire, and then when he perceived the
danger, asked grace at the King (which he would willingly have granted unto
him) the Bishops proudly answered, See how the Bishops did entrench upon the
good disposition of the King, and his Sovereign.
That the Kings hands were bound in that case, and that he had no grace to
give, to such as by their Law were condemned. And so was he with the said
Master Norman, after dinner, upon the seven and twentieth day of August, in the
year of our Lord 1534. aforesaid, led to a place besides the roode of green
side: 1534.
and there they two were both hanged and burnt, according to the mercy of the
Papisticall Church. To that same diet were summoned as before we have said,
others of whom some escaped into England, and so for that present escaped the
death. This their tyranny, notwithstanding, the knowledge of God did
wonderfully increase within this Realm, partly by reading, partly by brotherly
conference which in those dangerous days was used to the comfort of many; but
chiefly by Merchants and Mariners, who frequenting other countries, heard the
true Doctrine affirmed, and the vanity of the Papisticall Religion openly
rebuked: Amongst whom were those of Dondie and Lies principals, against whom
was made a very strait inquisition, by David Beton, cruel Cardinal. And
diverse were compelled to abjure and burn their Bills, Burning of the Bill was
a sign of recantation.
some in Saint Andrews, and some at Edinburgh. About the same time, Captain
John Berthwick Provost of Lithcow, was burnt in figure, but by Gods providence
escaped their fury. 1537.
L^sly writes this done* 1540. John Berthwick fled into England, from whence
Henry sent him into Germany to the Protestant Princes.
And this was done for a spectacle, and triumph to Mary of Lorraine, lately
arrived from France, as wife to James the fifth King of Scots: what plagues she
brought with her, and how they yet continue, such as are not blind may
manifestly see. The rage of these bloody beasts proceeded so far, that the
Kings Court it self escaped not that danger; for in it diverse were suspected,
and some accused. And yet ever did some light burst out in the midst of
darkness; for the truth of Christ Jesus entered even into the Cloisters as
well of Friars and Monks as of Channons. John Lyn, a gray Friar, left his
hypocritical habit, and the den of those murderers, the gray Friars. A black
Friar, called Friar Killor, set forth the History of Christ's passion in form
of a Play, which he both Preached and practiced openly in Sterlin, the King
himself being present upon a Good Friday in the Morning, in the which all
things were so lively expressed, that the very simple people understood and
confessed, That as the Priests and obstinate Pharisees persuaded the people to
refuse Christ Jesus, and caused Pilate to condemn him; So did the Bishops, and
men called Religious, blind the people, and persuade Princes and Judges to
persecute such as profess Christ Jesus his blessed Gospel. This plain speaking
so inflamed the hearts of all that bare the Beasts mark, that they ceased not,
till the said Friar Kill^r, and with him Friar Beaverege, Sir Duncane Symson,
Robert Forester Gentleman, and Deane Thomas Forrat, Channon regular, and Vicar
of Dolor, a man of upright life, Four burnt.
who altogether were cruelly murdered in one fire upon the Castle hill the
last of February, in the year of our Lord 1538. 1538.
This cruelty was used by the aforesaid Cardinal, the Chancellor, the Bishop
of Glasgow, and the incestuous Bishop of Dumblane. After that this cruelty was
used in Edinburgh upon the Castle hill, to the effect that the rest of the
Bishops might show themselves no less fervent to suppress the light of God,
1539.
then he of S. Andrews was, were apprehended two of the Diocese of Glasgow;
The one named Ieronimus Russell, Jeremy Russell.
a gray Friar, a young man, of a meek nature, Alex. Kennedie.
quick spirit, and good Learning; And one Alexander Kennedie, who passed not
eighteen years of age, one of excellent wit in vulgar Poesy. To assist the
Bishop of Glasgow in that cruel judgment, or at least to dip his hands in the
blood of the Saints of God, were sent Master John Lawd^r, Master Andrew
Olyphant, and Friar Meitman, servants of Satan, apt for that purpose; The day
appointed to the cruelty approached; The two poor Saints of God were presented
before those bloody butchers, grievous were the crimes that were laid to their
charge: Kennedie at the first was faint, and gladly would have recanted: but
while the place of repentance was denied unto him* the spirit of God, which is
the spirit of all comfort, began to work in him; yea, the inward comfort began
to burst forth, as well in visage, as in tongue and word, for his countenance
began to be cheerful, and with a joyful voice upon his knees he said,
Kennedie his thanks to God.
O eternal God, how wonderful is that love and mercy that thou bear unto
mankind, and unto me the most caitife and miserable wretch above all others;
For, even now, when I would have denied thee, and thy Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ my only Savior, and so have cast my self into everlasting damnation;
Thou by thine own hand have pulled me from the very bottom of hell, and made
me to feel that heavenly comfort, which takes from me that ungodly fear
wherewith before I was oppressed. Now I defy death, do what ye please; I
praise my God, I am ready. The godly and learned Ieronimus, railed upon by
these godless Tyrants, His speech to the Judges.
answered; This is your hour, and power of darkness; Now sit ye as Judges,
and we stand wrongfully accused, and more wrongfully to be condemned; but the
day shall come, when our innocence shall appear, and that ye shall see your
own blindness, to your everlasting confusion. Go forward, and fulfill the
measure of your iniquity. While that these servants of God thus behaved
themselves, a variance arises betwixt the Bishop and the beasts that came from
the Cardinal; For the Bishop said, I think it better to spare these men, Note.
then to put them to death: Whereat the idiot Doctors offended, said, What will
ye do my Lord? will ye condemn all that my Lord Cardinal and the other
Bishops and we have done? If so ye do, ye show your self enemy to the Church
and us, and so we will repute you, be ye assured. At which words, the
faithless man afraid, adjudged the innocents to die, according to the desire
of the wicked. The meek and gentle Ieronimus Russell comforted the other with
many comfortable sentences, often saying unto him, Brother, fear not, more mighty
is he that is in us, than he that is in the world: the pain that we shall
suffer is short, and shall be light; but our joy and consolation shall nevea
have end: and therefore let us contend to enter in, unto our Master and
Savior, by the same strait way which he has taken before us: Death cannot
destroy us, for it is destroyed already by him for whose sake we suffer. With
these and the like comfortable sentences they passed to the place of execution,
and constantly triumphed over death and Satan, even in the midst of the
flaming fire. And thus did those cruel beasts intend nothing but murder in
all the quarters of this Realm: for so far had they blinded and corrupted the
inconsiderate Prince, that he gave himself to obey the tyranny of those
bloody beasts: and he made a solemn Vow, That none should be spared that was
suspect of Heresy, yea, although it were his own son. To press and push him
forward in this his fury, he lacked not flatters enough; for many of his Minions
were pensioners to Priests: Amongst whom, Oliver Synclare, yet remaining enemy
to God, was principal. And yet did not God cease to give that blinded Prince
documents that some sudden punishment was to fall upon him, if he did not
repent, and amend his life; and that his own mouth did confess: For after that
Sir James Hamilton was beheaded (justly or unjustly we dispute not) this Vision
came unto him, Sir James Hamilton said, That God had justly brought him to
that, because he had offended often, to gain the King favor, by unjust ways.
as to his familiars himself did declare) the said Sir James appeared unto him,
having in his hands a drawn sword, with the which he stroke from the King both
the arms, saying to him these words, Take that, till thou receive a final
payment for all thy impiety. This Vision with sorrowful countenance, he showed
on the morrow, and shortly thereafter died his two sons, both within the space
of 24 hours, yea, some say within the space of six hours. In his own presence
George Steill, his greatest flatterer, Note.
and greatest enemy to God that was in his Court, dropped off his horse, and
died not saying one word that same day, that in audience of many, the said
George had refused his portion of Christ's Kingdom, if the prayers of the Virgin
Mary should not bring him thereto. How terrible a Vision the said Prince saw
lying in Lintlightow that night that Thomas Scot, Justice Clerk, died in
Edinburgh, men of good credit can yet report: For afraid at midnight, or
after, he called aloud for Torches, and raised all that lay beside him in the
Palace, and told that Thomas Scot was dead; for he had been at him with a
company of devils, and had said unto him these words; O we to the day that
ever I knew thee or thy service; for serving of thee, against God, against his
servants, and against Justice, I am adjudged to endless torment. How terrible
voices the said Thomas Scot pronounced before his death, men of all estates
heard; and some that yet live can witness his voice ever was, Iusto Dei
judicio condemnatus sum; that is, I am condemned by Gods just Judgment. He was
most oppressed for the delation and false accusation of such as professed
Christ's Evangel, as M. Thomas Mairioribanckes, and M. Heus Rig, then advocates,
did confess to M. Henry Balnaves, who from the said Thomas Scot came to him,
as he and M. Thomas Ballenden were sitting in Saint Giles Church, and asked him
forgiveness of the said Thomas. None of these terrible forewarnings could
either change or alter the heart of the unfortunate and misled Prince, but
still he did proceed in his accustomed ways. For in the midst of these evils,
he caused, to put hands on that notable man M. George Buchanan, to whom for his
singular erudition and honest behavior, was committed the charge to instruct
some of his natural children: But by the merciful providence of God he
escaped (albeit with great difficulty) the rage of those that sought his life;
and remains alive to this day in the year of God 1566. to the glory of God,
to the great honor of this nation, and to the comfort of those that delight in
letters and virtue. That singular Work of David's Psalms, in Latin Meeter and
Poesy, besides many others, can witness the rare graces of God given to that
man, which that Prince by instigation of the gray-Friers and of his other
flatterers, George Buchanan by the Kings c^mmand, then angry with the Friars,
did write this Satyr against them. who thereafter having made their peace with
the King, would not be appeased with G^orge Buchanan whom the king gave over to
their importunity and so he was put in prison.
would altogether have devoured, if God had not provided remedy to his servant
by escaping (the keepers being asleep he went out at the window) This cruelty
and persecution, notwithstanding the monsters and hypocrites, the gray-Friers,
day by day came farther in contempt, for not only did the learned epsy and
detest their abominable hypocrisy, but also men in whom no such graces or
gifts were thought to have been, began plainly to paint the same forth to the
people. As this Ryme which here we have inserted for the same purpose, made by
Alexander Earl of Glevearne to this day 1566 alive can witness, entitled, An
Epistle directed from the holy Hermit of Larites, to his Brethren the
gray-Friers.

I Thomas Hermit in Larite
Saint Francis brother heartily greet,
Beseeching you with firm intent
The Earl of Gleaverne his verse upon the Gray Friars.
To be watchful and diligent
For their Lutherans rissen of new
Our ordour daily does pursew
These smacks do set their whole intent
To read this Engls' new Testament
And says we have them clean desceivd
Therefore in haste they must be stopped
Our stately hypocrisy they pryse
And do blaspheme us on this wise
Saying that we are heretics
And false loud lying Matin tykes
Cummerers and quellers of Christ's Kyrk
Such lasie scemlers that will not wirk
But idly our living winnes
Devouring Wolfs into Sheepe-skinnes
Hurkland with huids into our neck
With Judas mind to Jowcke and Bek
Seeking Gods people to devore
The overthrowers of Gods glore
Professors of hypocrisy.
Doctors in Idolatry
Fishears with the feynds net
The upclosers of heaven gate
Cancard corrupters of the Creed
Hemlock sowers among good seed
To throw in brambles that do men twist
The hye way kennand them from Christ
Monsters with the Beasts mark
Dogs that never stintes to bark
Church men that are to Christ unkend
A sect that Satan's self has send
Lurking in holes like trator todes
Maintainers of Idolles and false gods
Fantastike fools and frenzy flatterers
To turn from the truth the very teachers
For to declare their whole sentence
Would much cumber your conscience
To say your faith it is so stark
Your cord and loosie cote and sark
Ye lippin may you bring to salvation
And quyte excludes Christ his passion
I dread this doctrine and it last
Shall either gar us work or fast
Therefore with speed we must provide
And not our profit overslide
I schaip my self within short while
To curse our Lady in Argyle
And there some crafty wise to work
Till that we builded have one Kyrk
Since miracles made by your advice
The kitterells thought they had but lyce.
The two parts to us they will bring
But orderly to dress this thing
Aghaist I purpose for to cause gang
By counsayll of Frear Walter Lang
Which shall make certain demonstrations
To help us in our procurations
Your holy ordor to decore
That practice he proud once before
Betw^xt Kyrkcadie and Kinggorne
But Lymmers made thereat such skorne
And to his fame made such digression
Since syn he heard not the Kings confession
Though at that time he came with speed
I pray you take good will as deed
And some among your selves receave
As one worth many of the leave
What I obtain you through his art
Reason would ye had your part
Your order handles no money
But for other casualtie
As beef, meal butter and cheese
Or what else you have that you please
Send your brethren and habete
As now not else but valete
Be Thomas your brother at command
A Culrune kethed through many a land.
After God had given unto that misinformed Prince sufficient documents, that
his warring against his blessed Gospel should not prosperously succeed. He
raised up against him Wars as he did of old against diverse Princes that would
not hear his voice, in the which he lost himself, as we shall hereafter hear.

The occasion of the War was this, HENRY the eighth, King of England, had a
great desire to have spoken with our King, and in that point traveled so long,
till that he gat a full promise made to his Ambassador, Lord William Howard:
The place of meeting was appointed York, which the King of England kept with
such solemnity and preparations, as never for such a purpose was seen in
England before. Great brute of that journey, and some preparation for the same
was made in Scotland: But in the end, by persuasion of the Cardinal David
Beton, and by others of his faction, that journey was stayed, and the Kings
promise falsified. Whereupon were sharp Letters of reproach sent unto the King,
and also unto his counsel. King Henry frustrate returns to London, and after
his indignation declared, began to fortify with men his frontiers toward
Scotland. There was sent to the borders, Sir Robert Bows, the Earl of Angus,
and his brother, Sir George Douglas. Upon what other trifling questions (as for
the debetable land and such) the War brake up, we omit to write. The
principal occasion was the falsifying of the promises before made. Our King
perceiving that War would rise, asked the Prelates and Churchmen, what support
they would make to the sustaining of the same: for rather would he yet satisfy
the desire of his Uncle* then he would hazard war where he saw not his force
able to resist. They promised mountains of gold (as Satan their father did to
Christ Jesus if he would worship him) for rather would they have gone to hell,
then he should have met with King Henry, for then thought they, Farewell our
Kingdom of Abbots, Monks, etc. And farewell, thought the Cardinal, The
Churchmen engage the King to war against his Uncle.
his credit and glory in France. In the end, they promised fifty thousand
crowns by year, to be well paid so long as the War lasted: and further, That
their servants and other that appertained to them, and were exempted from
common service, should nevertheless serve in time of necessity. These vain
promises lifted up in pride the heart of the unhappy king, and so begins the
War. The Realm was Quartered, and men were laid in Iedburgh and Kelso: All
men (fools we mean) bragged of victory, and in very deed the beginning gave us
a fair shaw: For at the first Warden Read which was made on Saint
Bartholomewes day, in the year of our Lord, 1542. was the Warden Sir Robert
Bows, his brother Richard Bows Captain of Norhame, Sir William Mamebery
Knight, a Bastard Son of the Earl of Angus, and James Douglas of Parkhead,
then Rebels, with a great number of Borderers Soldiers and Gentlemen taken:
The Read was termed Halderig. The Earl of Angus and Sir George his brother,
did narrowly escape. Our Papists and Prelates, proud of this victory, Halderig
Read.
encouraged the King, so that there was nothing heard, but All is ours: They be
but Heretics, if we be a thousand and they ten thousand, they dare not fight;
England called Heretic, because it renounced the Pope.
France shall enter into one part, and we the other, and so shall England be
conquest within a year. If any man was seen to smile at such vanity, he was
no more but a Traitor and an Heretic. And yet by these means men had
greater liberty then they had before, Note.
as concerning their conscience, for then ceased the persecution. The War
continued till midde September: And then was sent down the old Duke of
Norfolk, with such an Army as a hundred years before had not come into
Scotland. They were in gathering their Forces, and setting forward of their
Preparations and Munitions, which were exceeding great, till midde October and
after. And then they Marched from Barwick and tended to the wast, ever holding
Tweid upon their own side, and never camped from that River the space of a
mile, during the whole time they continued in Scotland, which was ten or twelve
days. Forces were sent up and down to Smallame, Stichell, and such places
near about, but many snappers they gat, some Corn they burnt, besides that
which the great host consumed, but small booty they carried away. The King
assembled his Forces at Fallowe (for he was advertised that they had promised
to come to Edinburgh) and took the Musters all at an hour, two days before
Hallowe even. All hallow tide
There were found with him eighteen thousand able men: Upon the Borders that
awaited upon the English Army, were ten thousand good men with the Earl of
Huntlie, Lords Erskin, Seton, and Hume. These were judged men aneuh to hazard
Battle, albeit the other were esteemed forty thousand. Fallow Read.
While the King lay at Fallowe, abiding upon the Gunes, and upon advertisement
from the Army. The Lords began to remember how the King had been long abused by
his flatterers, and principally by the Pensioners of the Prelates. It was then
concluded that they would make some new remembrance of Lawder brig, to see if
that would for a season somewhat help the state of their Country. But because
the Lords could not agree among themselves upon the persons that deserved
punishment (for every man favored his friend) the whole escaped, Note.
and the purpose was opened to the King, and by him to the courtiers, who till
they came to Edinburgh stood in no little fear: but that was suddenly forgot,
as we shall after hear. While time is thus protracted, the English army, for
want of victuals (as was bruted) retired over Tweid in the night, and so begin
to skale and sunder; whereof the King advertised, desired the Lords and Barons
to assist him to follow them into England; whose answer was with one consent,
The Lords answer to the Kings desire.
That to defend his person and Realm, they would hazard life, and whatsoever
they had: But to invade England, neither had they so just Title as they
desired, neither yet could they be able to do any thing to the hurt of England,
considering that they had long before been absent from their houses, their
provision was spent, their horses wearied, and that which was greatest of all,
the time of the year did utterly reclaim. This their answer seemed to
satisfy the King: for he in words praised their prudent foresight and wise
counsel. But the essay made to his Courtiers, and that bold repulse of his
desires given to him in his own face, so wounded his high stomach (for long
had he run as himself listed) that he decrees a notable revenge, which no
doubt he had not failed to have executed, if God by his own hand had not cut
the days of his life. He returns to Edinburgh, the Nobility, Barons,
Gentlemen, and Commons, to their habitations. And this was the second and third
days of November.

Without longer delay at the palace of Halyrud-house was a new council
assembled, a council we mean of his abusers, wherein were accusations laid
against the most part of the Nobility; Note.
Some were Heretics; Some favorers of England; Some friends to the Douglas:
and so could there be none faithful to the King in their opinion. The
Cardinal and Prelates cast fagotts in the fire with all their force, and
finding the King wholly addicted to their devotion, delivered unto him a
schroll, containing the names of such as they in their inquisition had convict
for Heretics. For this was the order of Justice which these holy Fathers kept
in condemning of innocent men; Note.
Whosoever would accuse any of Heresy, he was heard, no respect nor
consideration had, what mind the accuser bare to the person accused; Whosoever
was produced for witness, were admitted, how suspicious and infamous so ever
they were; if two or three had proved any point that by their Law was holden
Heresy, that was an Heretic: There rested no more but a day to be affixed to
his condemnation, and to the execution of their corrupt sentence: What man
could be innocent where such ^udges were party, the world may this day
consider. True it is, by false Judgment and false Witnesses have innocents
been oppressed from the beginning. But this freedom to shed innocent blood got
never the Devil but in the Kingdom of Antichrist; Note.
That the innocent should die, and neither know accuser, nor yet the witness
that testifies against him. But how shall the Antichrist be known, if he
shall not be contrarious to God the Father, and his Son Christ Jesus, in Law,
Life, and Doctrine. But this we omit. The same schroll had the Cardinal and
Prelates once presented to the king before, at that time when he returned from
the Navigation about the Isles, in the year 1534. But then it was refused by
the prudent and stout council of the Lord of Grainge, who opened clearly to
the King the practices of the Prelates, and the danger that thereof might ensue:
Which considered by the King (for being out of his passion he was tractable)
gave this answer in the palace of Halyrud-house to the Cardinal and Prelates,
after that they had uttered their malice, and showed what profit might arise to
the Crown, An answer worthy of a Prince. By this answer you may see how good
this Prince had bin if (...) Church m^n and flatter^^s ^ad not abused him.
if he would follow their council: Pack you Iuglers, get you to your charges,
and reform your own lives, and be not instruments of discord betwixt my
Nobility and me; Or else, I vow to God, I shall reform you, not as the King
of Denmark by imprisonment does, neither yet as the King of England does by
hanging and heading: but I shall reproove you by sharp punishments, if ever I
hear such motion of you again. The Prelates dashed and astonished with this
answer, ceased for a season to attempt any further by rigor against the
Nobility. But now being informed of all proceedings by their Pensioners, Oliver
Sincler, Rosse Lord of Cragie and others, who were to them faithful in all
things: they conclude to hazard once again their former suit: which was no
sooner proponed, but as soon it was accepted, with no small regreate, by the
Kings own mouth, that he had so long despised their counsel: Abused Prince by
Prelates.
For (said he) now I plainly see your words to be true; The Nobility neither
desire my honor nor countenance, for they would not ride a mile for my
pleasure to follow mine enemies: Will ye therefore find me the means how that
I may have a road made into England without their knowledge and consent, So
the evil advised Prince gave himself over to the false Prop^ets, I mean, the
Prelates.
that it may be known to be mine own read, and I shall bind me to your
counsel for ever. There were gratulations and clapping of hands; there were
promises of diligence, closeness, and fidelity among them. Finally, conclusion
was taken that the West borders of England, which was most empty of men and
Garrison, should be invaded. The Kings own Banner should be theirs, Oliver the
great Minion should be Generall-Lieutenant, but no man should be privy (except
the counsel that was then present) of the enterprise, till the very day and
execution thereof. The Bishops gladly took the charge of that device. Letters
were sent to such as they would charge, The Read of Holway mass by Oliver
Sinclar.
To meet the King at the day and place appointed: The Cardinal with the Earl
of Arran was directed to go to Hadington, to make a show against the East
Border, when the others were in readiness to invade the West: And thus neither
lacked counsel, practice, closeness, nor diligence, to set forward that
Enterprise; and so among these consulters there was no doubt of any good
success. And so was the scroell thankfully received by the king himself, and
put into his own pocket, where it remained to the day of his death, and then
was found. In it were contained more then an hundred landed men, besides other
of meaner degree: Among whom was the Earl of Arran, notwithstanding his siding
with the current of the Court, and his neernesse in blood to the King. It was
bruted that this road was devised by the Lord Maxwell, but the certainty
thereof we have not. The night before the day appointed to the Enterprise, the
King was found at Lochmabane. To him comes companies from all quarters, as they
were appointed, no man knowing of another (for no general Proclamations past,
but privy Letters) neither yet did the multitude know any thing of the purpose
till after midnight when that the trumpet blew. And commanded all men to march
forward, and to follow the King (who was constantly supposed to have been in
the host) guides were appointed to conduct them toward England, as both
faithfully and closely they did; upon the point of day they approached to the
enemies ground, and so passed the water without any great resistance made unto
them. The forward goes forth, fear rises, hership might have been seen on
every side. The unprovided people were altogether amazed, for bright day
appearing, they saw an army of ten thousand men: Their Beacons on every side,
send flames of fire unto the heaven: To them it was more then a wonder that
such a multitude could have been assembled and conveyed, no knowledge thereof
coming to any of their Wardens. For support they looked not, and so at the
first they utterly despaired, and yet began they to assemble together, ten in
one company, twenty in another, and so as the Fray proceeded their Troops
increased, but to no number (for Carlisle fearing ^o have been assaulted,
suffered no man to issue out of their gates) and so the greatest number that
ever appeared or approached before the discomfiture past not three or four
hundredth men, and yet they made hot skirmishing, as in their own ground, in
such feats as they are most expert, about ten hours: When fires were kindled,
and almost slackned on every side, Oliver thought time to show his glory, and
so incontinent was displayed the Kings Banner, and he upholden by two Spears,
lift up upon men's shoulders there with sound of Trumpet was proclaimed General
Lieutenant, and all men commanded to obey him, as the Kings own Person, under
all highest pains. There was preseut the Lord Maxwell, Warden, to whom the
regiment of things in absence of the King properly appertains. He heard and
saw all, but thought more than he spoke: There were also present the Earls of
Glencarne and Cassels, with the Lord Flemyng, and many other Lords, Barons, and
Gentlemen of Lothaine, Fife, Angus, and Mearnes. In this Mountain did the
skirmishing grow hotter than it was before, Wha^ton was then Warden in these
parts.
shouters were heard on every side; some Scottish-men were stricken down, some
not knowing the ground, were mired, Stratageme.
and lost their horses: Some English Horse of purpose were let loose, to
provoke greedy and imprudent men to press at them, as many did, but found no
advantage. While such disorder rises more and more in the Army, every man cried
aloud* My Lord Lieutenant, What will ye do? Charge was given that all men
should light, and go to array in order, for they would fight: Others cried,
Against whom will ye fight? yonder men will fight none other ways than ye see
them do, if ye will stand here while the morrow. New purpose was taken, That
the Footmen (they had there with them certain Bands of Soldiers) should safely
retire toward Scotland, and the Horsemen should take their Horse again, and
so follow in order. Great was the noise and confusion that was heard, while
that every man calls his own sluggards; the day was near spent, and that was
the cause of the greatest fear. The Lord Maxwell perceiving what would be the
end of such beginnings, stood upon his feet with his friends, who being
admonished to take his horse, and provide for himself, answered, Nay, I will
rather abide here the chance that it shall please God to send me, than to go
home, and there be hanged; and so he remained upon his foot, and was taken
while the multitude fled, and took the greater shame. The enemies perceiving
the disorder, increased in courage. Before they shouted, but then they stroke;
they shot Spears, and dagged Arrows where the Companies were thickest; some
encounters were made, but nothing avails, the Soldiers cast from them their
Pikes and Culverings, and other Weapons fencible; the Horsemen left their
Spears, and so without judgment all men fled. The Sea was filling, and so the
water made great stop; but the fear was such, as happy was he that might get a
taker: Such as passed the water, and escaped that danger, not well acquainted
with the ground, fell into the slimy moss; the entry thereof was pleasing
enough, but as they proceeded, all that took that way, either lost their horse,
or else themselves and horse both. To be short, Note.
a greater fear and discomfiture without cause, has seldom been seen; for it
is said, That where the men were not sufficient to take the Bands of prisoners;
Some ran to houses, and rendered themselves to women. Stout Oliver was without
stroke taken fleeing full manfully. And so was his glory (stinking and foolish
proudnesse we should call it) suddenly turned to confusion and shame. In that
discomfiture were taken the two Earls aforesaid, the Lords Fleming, Somerwell,
and Olyphant, and many other Barons and Gentlemen, besides the great multitude
of servants. Worldly men say, That all this come but by misorder and fortune,
as they term it: But whosoever has the least spark of the knowledge of God,
may as evidently see the work of his hand in this discomfiture, as ever was
seen in any of the Battles left to us in Register by the holy Ghost: Note.
For what more evident Declaration have we that God fought against Benhadad,
Oliver compared to Benhadad against Samaria.
King of Aram, when he was discomfited at Samaria, than now we have, that God
fought with his own Arm against Scotland in this former discomfiture? There did
two hundred and thirty persons in the Skirmish, 2 King. 20.
with seven thousand following them in the great Battle, put to flight the
said Benhadad, with thirty Kings in his Company. But here there is in this
shameful discomfiture of Scotland, very few more than three hundredth men,
without knowledge of any Back or Battle to follow, put to flight ten thousand
men, 300 men put to flight 10000
without resistance made. There did every man recounter his marrow, till that
the two hundred and thirty slew such as matched them: But here, without
slaughter, the multitude fled. There had those of Samaria the Prophet of God to
comfort, to instruct, and to promise Victory unto them: But England in that
pursuit had nothing, but as God secretly wrought by his providence in the men
that knew nothing of his working, neither yet of the cause thereof, more then
the wall that fell upon the rest of Benhadads Army knew what it did. And
therefore yet again we say, That such as in that sudden dejection beholds not
the hand of God fighting against pride, for freedom of his own little Flock
injustly persecuted, does willingly and maliciously obscure the glory of God;
but the end thereof is yet more notable. The certain knowledge of the
discomfiture coming to the Kings ears (who waited upon news at Lochmaban) he
was stricken with a sudden fear and astonishment, Others say, at Carlave^ok,
near by the place where the defeat was given, called Sob^^y Moss:
so that scarcely could he speak, or had purpose with any man: The night
constrained him to remain where he was; and so went to bed, but rose without
rest, or quiet sleep: His continual complaint was, O fled Oliver, is Oliver
taken? O fled Oliver: And these words in his melancholy, and as it were
carried in a Trance, repeated he from time to time to the very hour of death.
Upon the morn, which was Saint Katherines day, returned he to Edinburgh, and so
did the Cardinal from Hadington. But the one being ashamed of the other, the
brute of their communication came not to public audience. The King made
Inventory of his Treasure, of all his Jewels, and other substance. And
thereafter ashamed to look any man in the face, secretly departed to Fife, and
coming to Hallzairdes, was humanely received of the Lady of Grange, an ancient
and godly Matron (the Lord at his coming was absent.) In his company was only
with him William Kirk^ldy, now Lord of Grange, and some other that waited upon
his Chamber. The Lady at Supper, perceiving him pensive, began to comfort
him, and wills him to take the Work of GOD in good part: My portion, said he,
of this world is short, for I will not be with you fifteen days. His servants
repairing unto him, asked where he would have provision made for Christmas, The
King foretells his own death.
which then approached: he answered with a disdainful countenance, I cannot
tell, choose you the place; but this I can tell you, Or Christmas day you will
be masterlesse, and the Realm without a King. Because of his displeasure, no
man durst make contradiction unto him. So after that he had visited the Castle
of Carny, pertaining to the Earl of Crawfurde, where the said Earls daughter,
one of his Mistresses was, he returned to Falkland, and took bed. And albeit
there appeared unto him no signs of death, yet he constantly affirmed, Before
such a day, I shall be dead. In this mean time was the Queen upon the point of
her delivery in Lynlitquow, who was delivered the 8 of December, in the year
of God, 1542 years, Reginae Nativitas.
of Mary, that then was born, and now does reign for a scourge to this Realm,
as the progress of her whole life has to this day declared. The certainty that
a daughter was born unto him coming to his ears, he turned from such as spoke
with him, and said, The devil go with it, it will end as it began, it came
from a woman, and it will end with a woman. From Mary, daughter to Robert
Bruise, married to Walter Stuart, he feared that his daughter should be married
to one of another Name and Family; but you see by Gods providence, the Crown
remains in one and the same Family and Name to this day, notwithstanding the
many Plots of the pretenders to the Crown both at home and abroad. After that
he spoke not many words that were sensible, but ever harped on his old song,
Fie, fled Oliver, is Oliver taken, all is lost. In this mean time, in his great
extremity, comes the Cardinal (a fit comforter for a desperate man) he cries
in his ear; Take order, Sir, with your Realm, who shall rule during the
minority of your daughter: ye have known my service, What will ye have done?
Shall there not be four Regents chosen? And shall not I be principal of them?
Whatsoever the King answered, Documents were taken, That so it should be, as my
Lord Cardinal thought expedient. As many affirm, a dead man's hand was made to
subscribe one blank, that they might write above what it pleased them best; the
Cardinal having hired one Henry Balfour, a Priest, to make a false Testament;
which was done accordingly, but in vain. This finished, the Cardinal posted to
the Queen, lately before delivered, Mark the Queens mourning for the King.
as is said. At the first sight of the Cardinal, she said, Welcome, my Lord,
is not the King dead? What moved her so to conjecture, diverse men are of diverse
judgments. Many whisper that of old his patte was in the pot, and that the
suspicion thereof caused him to be inhibite the Queens company. Others stick
not to say, That the King was hastened away by a Potion.
Howsoever it was before, it is plain, That after the Kings death, and during
the Cardinals life, whosoever guided the Court, he gate his secret business
sped, of that gracious Lady, either by day or by night. Howsoever the tidings
liked her, she mended with as great expedition of that daughter, as ever she
did before of any son she bare. Levit. 12.
The time of her Purification was sooner than the Leviticall Law appoints: but
she was no Jew, and therefore in that she offended not. The noise of the death
of King James divulgate, who departed this life the 13 day of December, Regis
exitus.
in the year of God 1542 aforesaid, the hearts of men began to be disclosed.
All men lamented that the Realm was left without a male to succeed. Yet some
rejoiced that such an enemy to Gods Truth was taken away. He was called of
some; A good poor man's King: Diverse Charact^rs of the late King arise post
fun^ra virtu^
of others he was termed, A murderer of the Nobility, and one that had decreed
their whole destruction. Some praised him for the repressing of theft and
oppression; others dispraised him for being much given to women. The Prelates
and Clergy feared a change in the Kings mind, as he had expressed himself
some few years before. And thus men spoke even as their affection led them, and
yet none spoke altogether besides the truth; for part of these aforesaid were
so manifest, that as the virtues could not be denied, so could not the vices by
any craft be cloked. Yet to speak truth of him, his vices may justly be
attributed to the times, and his breeding, and not any wickedness in his
nature; for he gave many expressions of a good nature, namely, in his sobriety
and justice, etc. The question of Government was through this Realm universally
moved. The Cardinal proclaimed the Kings last Will, and therein were expressed
four Protectors or Regents, of whom himself was the first and principal, and
with him were joined the Earls of Huntley, Argyle, and Murhay: this was done on
Monday, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh. But the Monday following took the
whole Regents remission for their usurpation: for by the stout and wise
counsel of the Lord of Grange, did the Earl of Arran, then so near to the
Crown, cause assemble the Nobility of the Realm, and required the equity of
their judgments in that his just suit to the Government of this Realm, during
the minority of her to whom he pretended to succeed, failing of her, and of her
lawful succession. His friends convened, the Nobility assembled, the day of
decision is appointed; the Cardinal and his faction opposes them, and are
against the Government of one man, and especially of any called Hammilton:
Character of the Hamiltons.
For who knows not (said the Cardinal) that the Hammiltons are cruel
murderers, oppressors of innocents, proud, avaritious, double, and false, and
finally, the pestilence in this Commonwealth? Whereto the Earl answered,
Defraud me not of my right, and call me what ye please: whatsoever my friends
have been, yet unto this day has no man cause to complain upon me, neither yet
am I minded to flatter any of my friends in their evil doing, but by Gods
grace shall be as forward to correct their enormities, as any within the Realm
can reasonably require of me; And therefore yet again, my Lords, in Gods Name,
I crave that ye do me no wrong, nor defraud me of my just Title, before ye have
experience of my Government. At these words, were all that feared God, or loved
honesty so moved, that with one voice they cried, That Petition is most just;
and unless ye will do against Gods Justice and Equity, it cannot be denied.
And so in despite of the Cardinal, and his suborned Faction, was he declared
Governor, and with public Proclamation so denounced to the people. The Kings
Palace, Treasure, Jewels, Garments, Horse, and Plate was delivered unto him by
the Officers that had the former charge; and he honored, feared; and obeyed,
more heartily than ever any King was before, Note the reasons why the Earl of
Arran was thus favored by the Country.
so long as he abode at God. The cause of the great favor that was born unto
him, was; That it was bruted that he favored Gods Word; and because it was
well known that he was one appointed to have been persecuted, as the Scroll
found in the Kings pocket after his death did witness. These two things,
together with an opinion that men had of his simplicity, bowed the hears of
many unto him in the beginning; who after, with dolor of hearts, were
compelled to change their opinions: but hereof we will after speak. The variety
of matters that occurred, we omit, such as the order taken for keeping of the
young Queen; of the provision for the mother; the calling home of the Douglas,
and other, such as appertain to a Universal History of the time. For, as before
we have said, we mind only to follow the progress of the Religion, and of
the matters that cannot be severed from the same.

1543
The Earl of Arran thus being established in the Government, godly men repaired
unto him, exhorted him to call to mind for what end God had exalted him to be
Governor, out of what danger he had delivered him, he being in the bloody
Scroll, as we saw before; and what expectation all men of honesty had of him,
because they saw him a soft man, they conceited goodness of him. At their
instant suit, more than of his own motion, was Thomas Guilliame, a black Friar,
called to be Preacher. The man was of sound judgment, of reasonable letters
(as for that age) and of a prompt and good utterance. His Doctrine was
wholesome, without great vehemence against superstition. Preached also sometime
John Rough, (who after for the verity of Christ Jesus suffered in England)
albeit not so learned, yet more simple, and more vehement against all impiety.
The Doctrine of these two provoked against them and against the Governor also,
the hatred of all such as more favored darkness than light; and their own
interest, more than God. The gray Friars (and amongst the rest Friar Scot, Note
Friar Scot.
who before had given himself forth for the greatest Professor of Christ Jesus
within Scotland, and under that color had disclosed, and so endangered many.)
These slaves of Satan rowped as they had been Ravens; yea rather they yelled
and roared as devils in hell; Heresy, heresy, Guilliame and Rough will carry
the Governor to the devil. The Town of Edinburgh, for the most part, was
devoured in superstition. Edward Hope, young William Adamson, Sibilla Lyndsay,
Patrike Lyndsay, Francis Aikman; And in the Cannongate, John Mackaw, and Nivian
Brown, with few others, had the burit of knowledge in these days. One Wilson,
servant to the Bishop of Dunckell, who neither knew new Testament nor the old;
made a despightfull railing Ballad, against the Preachers, and against the
Governor, for the which he narrowly escaped hanging. The Cardinal moved both
heaven and hell to trouble the Governor to stay the Preaching: but yet was the
Battle stoutly fought for a season; for he was taken and put first in Dalkeyt,
The Cardinal taken.
after in Seaton. But at length, by Bribes given to the said Lord Seaton, and
to the old Lord of Lethington, he was restored to Saint Andrews, from whence
he wrought all mischief, as we shall after hear. The PARLIAMENT approached
which was before EASTER, there began question of the abolishing of certain
Tyrannical ACTS made before, at the Devotion of the Prelates, for the
maintaining of their Kingdom of Darkness. To wit, That under pain of
Heresy, no man should read any part of the Scriptures in the Vulgar Tongue,
neither yet any Tractate or Exposition of any place of Scripture: Such Articles
began to come in question we say: And men began to enquire, If it were not
lawful to men that understood no Latin, to use the word of their Salvation in
the Tongue they understood, as it was for the Latin men to have it in Latin,
Grecians or Hebrews to have it in their Tongues. It was answered, That the
Church, he means the Prelates, first had forbidden all Tongues but the three
viz. Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. But men demanded, when that Inhibition was
given, and what Counsel had ordained it; considering that in the days of
Chrysostom, he complained, That the people used the Psalms and other holy
Books in their own Tongues: And if ye will say they were Greeks, and
understood the Greek Tongue; We answer, That Christ Jesus commanded his word
to be Preached to all Nations; now if it ought to be Preached to all Nations,
it must be Preached in the Tongue they understand. Then if it be lawful to
Preach, and hear it Preached in all Tongues; Why should it not be lawful to
read it, and hear it read in all Tongues? to the end that the people may try
the spirits, according to the commandment of the Apostle. Beaten with these and
other Reasons, they denied not but it might be read in the Uulgar Tongue,
provided if the Translation were true. It was demanded, What could be
reprehended in it? And when much searching was made, nothing could be found:
But that Love say they was put in the place of Charity: When the Question was
asked, What difference was betwixt the one and the other; and if they
understood the nature of the Greek term (...), they were dumb. Reasoned for the
party of the seculars, The L. Ruthwen, father to him that prudently gave
counsel to take just punishment upon that knave David, for that he abused the
unhappy K. Henry Stuart, in mo cases then one, a stout and a discreet man in
the cause of God, and M. Henry Balneves, an old professor. For the part of the
Clergy, one Hay, Dean of Lastarrik, and certain old Bishops with him. The
conclusion was, the Commissioners of Broughes, and a part of the Nobility,
required of the Parliament, that it might be Enacted, That it should be lawful
to every man to use the benefit of the Translation which then they had of the
Old and New Testament, together with the benefit of other Treatises containing
wholesome Doctrine, until such time as the Prelates and other Churchmen should
give and set forth unto them a Translation more correct. The Clergy hereto
long repugned. But in the end convinced by Reasons, 1543.
and by multitude of voices in their contrary, An Act of Parliament for reading
of the Scripture.
they also condescended; And so by Act of Parliament it was made free to all
men and women to read the Scriptures in their own Uulgar Tongue, and so were
all Acts made to the contrary abolished.

This was no small Victory of CHRIST JESUS, fighting against the conjured
enemies of his Verity; No small comfort to such as before were holden in such
bondage, that they durst not have read, The Lords Prayer; The ten Commandments;
nor, The Articles of their Faith in the Uulgar Tongue, but they should have
been accused of Heresy. Then might have been seen the Bible lying almost
upon every Gentleman's Table. The New Testament was borne about in many men's
hands. We grant that some (alas) profaned that blessed Word, for some that
perchance had never read ten Sentences in it had it most common in their hand,
they would chop their familiars on the cheek with it, Note the hypocrisy of
worldlings.
and say, This has line under my beds feet these ten years. Others would
glory, O how often have I been in danger for this Book, how secretly have I
stolen from my wife at midnight to read upon it. And this was done we say of
many to make cowrt, and curry favor thereby: For all men esteemed the
Governor to have been one of the most fervent Protestants that was in Europe.
Albeit we say that many abused that liberty, granted of God miraculously, yet
thereby did the knowledge of God wonderously increase, and God gave his holy
spirit to simple men in great abundance: Then were set forth works in our own
Tongue, besides those that came from England, that did disclose the pride, the
craft, the tyranny, and abuses of that Roman Antichrist. The fame of our
Governor was spread in diverse countries, So long as men follow God, they are
blessed
and many praised God for him. King Henry the eight sent unto him his
Ambassador M. Radulph Saidlair, who lay in Edinburgh a great part of the
Summer, his Commission and Negotiation was to contract a perpetual amity
betwixt England and Scotland. The occasion whereof God had so offered, that to
many men it appeared that from heaven he had declared his good pleasure in that
behalf. Nothing could be said against the lawfulness of Edwards birth.

Katharine of Spain and Anne Bullen being dead before his mother was married
to his father.


For to King Henry, of Jane Seymer (after the death of Queen Katherine, and of
all others that might have made his Marriage suspect) was given a son, Edward
the sixth of blessed memory, elder some years then our Mistress; and unto us
was left a Queen, as before we have heard. This wonderful providence of God
caused men of greatest judgment to enter into disputation with themselves,
Whether that with good conscience any man might repugne to the desires of the
King of England, considering that thereby all occasion of War might be cut
off, and great commodity might ensue to this Realm. The offers of King Henry
was so large, and his demands so reasonable, that all that loved quietness
were content therewith. There were sent from the Parliament to King Henry in
Commission, Sir James Lermont, and M. Henry Balnevis, who long remaining in
England, so travailed, that all things concerning the Marriage betwixt Edward
the sixth and Mary Queen of Scots was agreed upon, except the time of her
deliverance to the custody of Englishmen. Upon the final conclusion of the
which head, were added to the former Commissioners, William Earl of Glencarne,
and Sir George Douglas, to whom was given ample Commission and good
Instructions. In Scotland remained M. Radulph Saidlaire: advertisements past so
frequently betwixt, yea, the hands of our Lords liberally were anointed,
besides other commodities promised, and of some received, for diverse Prisoners
taken at Solway moss, were sent home free upon promise of their fidelity,
which as it was kept, the issue will witness. But in the end so well were all
once content, (the Cardinal, the Queen, Note well*
and the faction of France ever excepted) that solemnly in the Abbey of
Hallyrud-house was the Contract of Marriage made, betwixt the persons
aforesaid, together with all the Clauses and Conditions requisite for the
faithful observation thereof, read in public audience, subscribed, sealed,
approoved, and allowed of the Governor for his part, Nobility and Lords for
their parts, and that nothing should lack that might fortify the matter was
Christ's Body sacred (as Papists term it) broken betwixt the said Governor and
M. Saidlar Ambassador, and received of them both, as a sign and token of the
unity of their minds, immediately to keep that contract in all points, as
they looked of Christ Jesus to be saved, and after to be reputed men unworthy
of credit before the world. The Papists raged against the Governor, and
against the Lords that had consented and abode fast to the Contract, and to
confound all as after follows. But upon the returning of the aforesaid
Ambassadors from England, pacification was made for that time, for by the
judgments of eight persons for either party chosen, to judge whether that any
thing was done by the said Ambassadors in the Contracting of that Marriage,
which to do, they had not sufficient power from the Counsel and Parliament. It
was found that all things were done according to their Commission, The Queens
marriage the second time ratified.
and that so they should stand. And so were the Seals of England and Scotland
interchanged. Master James Fowls, then Clerk of the Register, received the
great Seal of England: And Master Saidlare received the great Seal of
Scotland. The heads of the Contract we pass by. These things newly ratified,
the Merchants made preparation to Sail, and to their Traffic, which by the
troubles of Wars had some years been hindered. From Edinburgh were fraughted
twelve Ships richly laden, according to the wares in Scotland: From other
Towns and Ports departed other, who all arrived upon the coasts of England
toward the South, to wit, in Yarmouth; and without any great necessity entered
not only Roads, but also within Ports and places of commandment, and where
that Ships might be arrested. And because of the late contracted amity and
gentle entertainment that they found at the first, they made no great
dispatch: But being (as they supposed) in security, in merrinesse they spent
the time, abiding upon the wind. In this mean time arrived from France to
Scotland the Abbot of Paislay (called now of late John Hamilton, He was before
sometimes called Cunningham, sometimes Colwan, so uncertain was it who was his
father.
bastard brother to the Governor, whom yet many esteemed son to the old
Bishop of Dunikelden, called Crichton (and with him M. David Panter, who after
was made Bishop of Rosse. The brute of the learning of these two, and their
honest life, and of their fervencie and uprightness in Religion was such, that
great hope there was that their presence should be comfortable to the Church of
God. For it was constantly affirmed of some, that without delay, the one or the
other would go to the Pulpit, and truly Preach Jesus Christ. But few days
disclosed their hypocrisy. For what terrors, what promises, or what
enchaunting boxes they brought from France, the common people knew not. But
shortly after, it was seen that Friar Guilliam^ was inhibited to Preach, and
so departed into England: John Rough to Kylle (a receptacle of Gods servants of
old.) The men of counsel, judgment, and godliness that had travailed to
promote the Governor, and that gave him faithful counsel in all doubtful
matters, were either craftily conveyed from him; or else by threatening to be
hanged were compelled to leave him. Of the one number was the Lord of Grange
aforesaid, M. Henry Balneves, M. Thomas Ballenden, and Sir David Lindesay of
the Mount: Men by whose labors he was promoted to honor, and by whose
council he so used himself at the beginning, that the obedience given to him
was nothing inferior to that obedience that any King of Scotland of many
years had before him, yea, in this it did surmount the common obedience, in
that it proceeded from love of those virtues that was supposed to have been in
him. Of the number of these that were threatened, were M. Michael Durham, M.
David Borthinke, David Forresse, and David Bothwell: who counseled him to have
in company with him, men fearing God, and not to nourish wicked men in their
iniquity, albeit they were called his friends, and were of his surname: This
counsel understood by the aforesaid Abbot, Note.
and by the Hamiltons (who then repaired to the Court, as Ravens to the
Carrion) in plain words it was said, My Lord Governor nor his friends will
never be at quietness, till a dozen of these knaves that abuse his Grace be
hanged. These words were spoken in his own presence, and in the presence of
some of them that had better deserved, then to have been so used: the speaker
was allowed for his plain and bold speaking. And so the wicked counsel
followed, honest and godly men left the Court and him, in the hands of such as
by their wicked counsel led him so far from God, that he falsified his
promise, dipped his hands in the blood of the Saints of God, and brought this
Commonwealth to the very point of utter ruin. Note.
And these were the first fruits of the Abbot of Paislay his counterfeit
Godliness and Learning: But hereof we will hear more. All honest and godly
men banished from the Court, the Abbot and his counsel begins to lay before
the inconstant Governor, the dangers that might ensue the alteration and
change of Religion. The power of the King of France, the commodity that might
come to him and his house, by retaining the ancient League with France, and the
great danger that he brought upon himself, if in one jote he suffers the
authority of the Pope to be violated or called in doubt within this Realm:
Considering that thereupon only stood the security of his pretended right to
the succession of the Crown of this Realm: For by Gods word could not be good
the divorcement of his father from Eliz. Hume, sister to the Lord Hume, his
lawful wife, and consequently his marriage with Beton, Niece to James Beton,
Bishop of S. Andrews ( Elizabeth Hume being alive) must be null, and he
declared Bastard. Caiphas spoke Prophecy, and yet wist not what he spoke: For
at that time there was hardly any man that truly feared God that minded any
such thing, but with their whole force would have fortified him in the place
that God had given unto him, and would never have called in question things
done in time of darkness. But this head we pass by till God declare his will
therein. Another practice was used: As for the Cardinal, he being set at
liberty (as before we have heard) ceased not to traffic with such of the
Nobility as he might draw to his faction, or corrupt by any means, to raise a
party against the said Governor, and against such as stood fast at the
Contract of Marriage and Peace with England. And so assembled at Lynlytquow,
the said Cardinal, the Earls Argyle, Huntlie, Bothwell, the Bishops and their
bands. And thereafter they passed to Strevelin, and took with them both the
Queens, the mother and the daughter; and threatened the deposition of the said
Governor, as Inobedient to their holy Mother the Church (so term they that
harlot of Babylon, This is the Prelates language.
Rome) The inconstant man, not thoroughly grounded upon God, left (by his own
fault) destitute of all good counsel, and having the wicked ever blowing in
his ear, What will you do? you will destroy your self and your house both for
ever. The unhappy man (we say) beaten with these temptations, rendered himself
to the appetites of the wicked; for he quietly stole away from the Lords that
were with him in the Palace of Halyrud-house, past to Sterlin, subjected
himself to the Cardinal and to his Council, received absolution, The
Governor violated his faith, refused God, and took absulution of the devil,
renouncing his Religion in the gray Friars.
renounced the profession of Christ Jesus his holy Gospel* and violated his
Oath that before he had made, for the observation of the Contract and League
made with England. At that time was our Queen crowned, and a promise made to
France. The certainty hereof coming to King Henry, our Scottish Ships were
stayed, the Sails taken from the Rigs, and the Merchants and Mariners were
commanded to sure custody. New Commission was sent to Master Radulph Saidler
(who then still remained in Scotland) to demand the cause of that sudden
alteration, and to travel by all means possible, that the Governor might be
called back to his former godly purpose, and that he would not do so foolishly,
and dishonestly, yea, so cruelly and unmercifully to the Realm of Scotland:
that he would not only lose the commodities offered, and that were presently
to be received. But that also that he would put it to the hazard of fire and
sword, and other inconveniences that might ensue the war that was to follow
upon the violation of his Faith. But nothing could avail. The devil kept fast
the grype that he got, yea all the days of his government: For the Cardinal
got his eldest son in pledge, whom he kept in the Castle of S. Andrews, while
the day that Gods hand punished his pride. King Henry perceiving that all hope
of the Governors repentance was lost, called back his Ambassadors, and that
with fearful threatenings as Edinburgh after felt: Denounced War, made our
Ships prises, and Merchants and Mariners lawful prisoners, which to the
Broughes of Scotland was no small hership. But thereat did the Cardinal and
Priests laugh, and jestingly he said, When we shall conquer England the
Merchants shall be recompensed. The Summer and the Harvest passed over without
any notable thing: For the Cardinal and Abbot of Paislay parted the prey
amongst them; The abused Governor bare the name only. In the beginning of
Winter came the Earl of Lenox to Scotland, sent from France in hatred of the
Governor, whom the King (by the Cardinals advice) promised to pronounce
Bastard, and so to make the said Earl Governor; First, All this was then said
by the Cardinal, Penes authorem fides est^.
because he himself was borne by Beto^, his fathers lawful wife, Elizabeth
Humes being yet alive; Next, because his Grandfather was borne by Mary Stuart
to James Hamilton, when her lawful husband Thomas Bo^d was yet alive. So the
Earl of Lenox did not only pretend to be lawfully next to the Crown, as the
late King James the fifth did often declare, That if he died without heir
male, he would settle the Crown upon him, but also lawful heir of the
Earldom of Arran, as being descended from Margaret Hamilton, borne to Mary
Stuart and James Hamilton, after the death of Thomas Boyd her former husband
(now by this time the inconstant Earl of Arran had given himself wholly to
the Cardinal) The Cardinal farther put the E. of Lenox in vain hope that the
Queen Dowager should marry him. He brought with him some money and more he
after received at the hands of Labrosse. But at length perceiving himself
frustrate of all expectation that he had, either by France, or yet by the
promise of the Cardinal; he concludes to leave France, and to seek the favor
of England: And so began to draw a faction against the Governor, and in hatred
of the others inconstancy many favored him in the beginning: For there
assembled at Christmas in the Town of Air, the Earls of Angus, Glencarne,
Cassilles; The Lord Maxwell, The Lord of Dumlanrig, The Sheriff of Air,
Campbell; with all the force that they and the Lords that remained constant at
the opinion of England might make; and after Christmas they came to light. The
Governor and Cardinal with their forces kept Edinburgh (for they were slackly
pursued) Men excused the Earl of Lenox in that behalf, and laid the blame
upon some that had no will of the Stewards Regiment. Howsoever it was, such an
appointment was made, that the said Earl of Lenox was disappointed of his
purpose, and narrowly escaped, and first gat him to Glasgow, and after to
Dumbartane. Sir George Douglas was delivered to be kept as pledge. The Earl
his brother was in the Lent after taken at the siege of Glasgow. It was bruted,
that both the brethren, and others with them had lost their heads, if by the
providence of God the English Army had not arrived in time. After that the
Cardinal had gotten the Governor wholly addict to his devotion, and had
obtained his intent above a part of his enemies: He began to practice, how that
such as he feared, and therefore deadly hated, should be set by the ears, one
against another (for in that thought the carnal man put his greatest
security) The Lord Ruthwen he hated, by reason of his knowledge of Gods Word.
The Lord Gray he feared, because at that time he used the company of such as
professed godliness, and bare small favor to the Cardinal. Now thus reasoned
the worldly wise man; Note the device of the wicked to set men by the (...)
If I can put enmity betwixt these two, I shall be rid of a great number of
unfriends; For the most part of the Country will either assist the one or the
other, and so will they be otherwise occupied, then to watch for my
displeasure. He finds the means without long process; for he labors with John
Chartarous (a man of stout courage and many friends) to accept the Provostrie
of S. Iohnston, which he purchased to him by donation of the Governor, with a
charge to the said Town, to obey him as their lawful Provost: Whereat not
only the said Lord Ruthwen, but also the Town being offended, gave a negative
answer; alleging that such intrusion of men to office was hurtful to their
privilege and freedom: which granted unto them free election of their Provost
from year to year, at a certain time appointed, which they could not nor
would not anticipate. Hereat the said John, offended, said, That he would take
that office by force, if they would not grant it unto him of benevolence. And
so departed and communed the matter with the Lord Gray, with Norman Leslie, and
with others his friends, whom he easily persuaded to assist him in that
pursuit. Because he appears to have the Governors right, and had not only a
charge to the Town, as is said, but also he purchased Letters to besiege it,
and to take it by strong hand, if any resistance were made unto him. Such
letters, we say, made many to favor his action. The other made for defense,
and so took the Master of Ruthuen, (the Lord that after departed into England)
the maintenance of the town, having in his company the Lord of Montcreif, and
other friends adjacent. The said John prepared for the pursuit, and upon Saint
Magdalens day in the morning, 1543
anno. 1543. approached with his Forces (the Lord Gray took upon him the
principal charge. It was appointed, that Norman Lesley, with his friends,
should have come by Ship with Munition and Ordnance, as they were in
readiness. But because the Tide served not so soon as they would: the o^^er
thinking himself of sufficient force for all that were in the Town, entered in
by the Bridge, where they found no resistance, till that the former part was
entered a pretty space within the Fish-Gate; And then the said Master of
Ruthuen with his Company stoutly recountred them, and so rudely repulsed the
foremost, that such as were behind gave back. The place of the retreat was so
strait, that men that durst not fight, could not fly at their pleasure (for
the most part of my Lord Grayes friends were upon the Bridge) and so the
slaughter was great; Note.
for there fell by the edge of the Sword threescore men And many trod under
foot died.
. The Cardinal had rather that the mishap had fallen on the other part: but
howsoever it was, he thought that such trouble was his comfort, and advantage.
The knowledge whereof came to the ears of the party discomfited, and was unto
them no small grief. For as many of them entered into that action for his
pleasure, so thought they to have had Fortification and assistance; whereof
finding themselves frustrate, they began to look more narrowly to themselves,
and did not so attend upon the Cardinals devotion, as they had wont to do
before: and so was a new jealousy engendered among them; Note.
for whosoever would not play the good servant unto him, As they went to
Dundie* they said they were going to burn the readers of the new Testament;
and that they would stick to the old; for Luther said they had made the new,
was reputed his enemy. The Cardinal drew the Governor to Dundie; for he
understood that the Earl of Rothesse, and Master Henry Balnaveis were with the
Lord Gray in the Castle of Huntley. The Governor sent and commanded the said
Earl and Lord, with the foresaid Master Henry to come unto him to Dundie, and
appointed the next day, at ten of the clock before noon; which hour they
decreed to keep, and for that purpose assembled their folks at Balgavie, or
thereby. The Cardinal advertised of their number (they were no more than 300
men) thought it not good that they should join with the Town; for he feared
his own estate, and so he persuaded the Governor to pass forth of Dundie
before nine hours, and to take the straight way to S. Iohnston: which perceived
by the foresaid Lords, they began to fear that they were come to pursue them,
and so put themselves in order, and array, and marched forward of purpose to
have bidden the uttermost. But the crafty fox foreseeing that in fighting stood
not his security, ran to his last refuge, that is, To manifest Treason, and so
consultation was taken how that the force of the others might be broken. And at
the first were sent the Lord of Grange, and the Provost of S. Andrews (knowing
nothing of the Treason) to ask why they molested my Lord Governor in his
journey. Whereto they answered, That they meant nothing less, for they came at
his Graces Commandment, to have kept the hour in Dundie appointed by him;
which because they saw prevented, and knowing the Cardinal to be their friend,
they could not but suspect their unprovided coming forth of the Town, and
therefore they put themselves in order, not to invade, but to defend, in case
they were invaded. This answer reported, was sent to the Bishop of Saint
Audrewes, the Abbot of Paisley, Master David Panter, the Lairds of Balcleuch
and Coldinknowes, to desire certain of the other company to talk with them;
which they easily obtained (for they suspected no treason.) After long
communication, it was demanded, If that the Earl and Lord, and Master Henry
aforesaid, would not be content to talk with the Governor, provi^ed that the
Cardinal and his company were on the place: They answered, That the Governor
might command them in all things lawful. But they had no will to be in the
Cardinals mercy. Fair promises enough were made for their security. Then was the
Cardinal and his Band commanded to depart, as that he did, according to the
purpose taken. The Governor remained, and a certain number with him: To whom
came without company, the said Earl, Lord, and M. Henry. After many fair words
given to them all, to wit, That he would have them agreed with the Cardinal,
and that he would have Master Henry Balnaves the worker and instrument thereof,
he drew them forwards with them toward Saint Iohnston, whereto the Cardinal
was ridden. They began to suspect (albeit it was too late) and therefore they
desired to have returned to their folks, for putting order unto them: But it
was answered, They should send back from the town, but they must needs go
forward with my Lord Governor: and so, partly by flattery, and partly by
force, they were compelled to obey; and as soon as they were in the Town, they
were apprehended, and on the morrow sent all three to the Black Nesse, where
they remained as it pleased the Cardinals graceless Grace, and that was till
the Band of Manred, and of service, set some of them at liberty. And thus the
Cardinal with his craft persuaded on every side; so that the Scots Proverb was
true in him, So long rinnes the Fox, as he fute hes. Whether it was at this
journey, or at another, that that bloody butcher executed his cruelty upon the
innocent persons in S. Iohnston, we cannot affirm: neither yet therein study
we to be curious, but rather we travel to express the verity, whenever it
was done, Note.
than scrupulously and exactly to appoint times* which yet we omit not, when
the certainty occurres. The verity of that cruel fact is this; A woman and her
child put to death because she prayed not to the Virgin Mary.
At S. Paul's day, before the first burning of Edinburgh, came to S. Iohnston
the Governor and Cardinal, and there upon envious delation, were a great
number of honest men and women called before the Cardinal, and accused of
heresy. And albeit they could be convinced of nothing, but only of suspicion
that they had eaten a Goose upon Friday, four men were adjudged to be hanged,
and a woman to be drowned; which cruel and most unjust sentence, was without
mercy put in execution: the husband was hanged, and the wife, having a sucking
babe upon her breast, Men put to death for eating a Goose upon Friday.
was drowned. O Lord, the Land is not yet purged from such beastly cruelty,
neither has thy just vengeance yet stricken all that were criminal of their
blood. But the day approaches when that the punishment of that cruelty, and of
others, will evidently appears. The names of the men that were hanged, were,
James Hunter, William Lamb, William Anderson, James Ruvals, Burgess of Saint
Iohnston. At that same time were banished, Sir Henry Eldar, John Eldar, Walter
Piper, Laurence Pullar, with diverse others, whose names come not to our
knowledge. That sworn enemy to Christ Jesus, and unto all in whom any spark of
knowledge appeared, had about that time in prison diverse; John Roger, a black
Friet, murdered.
amongst whom was John Roger, a black Friar, godly and learned, one that had
fruitfully preached Christ Jesus, to the comfort of many in Angus and Mearnes,
whom that bloody man caused to murder in the ground of the Sea Tower in S.
Andrews, and then caused to cast him over the wall, spreading a false brute,
That the said John seeking to fly, had broken his own neck. This ceased not
Satan by all means to maintain his kingdom of Darkness, and to suppress
the light of Christ's Gospel. But mighty is he against whom they ^^ght: for when
the wicked were in greatest security, then began God to show his anger. For the
third day of May, in the year of our Lord 1544 years, 1544.
without knowledge of any man in Scotland, (we mean of such as should have had
the care of the Realm) was seen a great Navy of Ships arriving toward the
Fyrth. The Posts came to the Governor and Cardinal (who both were in
Edinburgh) what multitude of Ships were seen, and what course they took. This
was on the Saturday before noon. Question was had, What should they mean? Some
said, It is no doubt but they are Englishmen, and we fear that they will land.
The Cardinal skipped, and said, It is the Island flote, they are come to make
a show, The English Army arrived in Scotland.
and to put us in fear. I shall lodge all the men of War in mine eye, that
shall land in Scotland. Still sits the Cardinal at his dinner, eating as
though there had been no danger appearing. Men assembled to gaze upon the
Ships, some to the Castle hill, some to the mountains, and other places
eminent. Note.
But there was no question, With what Forces shall we resist, if we be invaded.
Soon after six of the clock at night, were arrived, and had cast Ankor in the
Road of Leith, more than two hundred Sail. Shortly after, the Admiral shot a
flott Boat, which from Granton hills, till by East Leith, sounded the deep, and
so returned to her Ship. Hereof were diverse opinions; men of judgment foresaw
what it meant, but no credit was given to any that would say, They minded to
land, and so passed every man to his rest, as if the Ships had been a guard for
their defense. Upon the point of day upon Sunday the fourth of May, address
they for landing, and they ordered the Ships so, that a Galley or two laid
their snouts to the hills: the small Ships, called Pinnaces and light
Horsemen, approached as near as they could. The great Ships discharged their
Soldiers into the smaller Vessels, and they by Boats set upon dry Land before
ten of the clock, 10000 men, as was judged, and more. The Governor and
Cardinal seeing then the thing that they could not, or at least they would not
believe before, after they had made a brag to fight, fled as fast as horse
could carry them; so that after, they approached not within twenty miles of the
danger. The Earl of Angus, and Sir George Douglas were that night freed of
Ward (they were in Blackness) The said Sir George in merrinesse, said, I
thank King Henry, and my gentle Masters of England. The English Army betwixt
one and two of the clock entered into Leith, found the Tables covered, the
dinners prepared, such abundance of wine and victuals, besides the other
substance, that the like riches within the like bounds was not to be found
neither in Scotland nor England. Upon Monday the fifth of May, came to them
from Barwick and the borders, two thousand Horsemen, who being somewhat
reposed, the Army upon the Wednesday marched toward the Town of Edinburgh,
spoiled and burnt the same, and so did they the Palace of Halyrud-house.
Endinburgh burnt and spoiled by the English.
The Horsemen took the House of Craigmiller, and gat great spoils therein; for
it being judged the strongest House near the Town, after the Castle of
Edinburgh, and all men sought to save their movables therein. But the
stoutnesse of the Lord gave it over, without shot of Hacke but, and for his
reward was caused to march upon his feet to London: He is now Captain of
Dumbar, and Provost of Edinburgh. The Englishmen seeing no resistance, hurled
by force of men Cannons upon the street, to the Butter trone, and above, and
hazarded a shot against the fore-entry of the Castle; but that was to their own
pains; For they lying without Trench or Gabion, were exposed to the force of
the whole Ordnance of the said Castle, which shot, and that not all in vain,
for the Wheel and Axletree of one of the English Cannons was broken, and some
of their men slain, and so they left with small honor, that enterprise taken
rather of rashness, than of any advised counsel. When the most part of the
day they had spoiled and burnt, toward the night they returned to Leith, and
upon the morrow returned to Edinburgh, and executed the rest of Gods judgments
for that time. And so when they had consumed both the Towns, they laded the
Ships with the spoils thereof, and they by Land returned to Barwick, using the
Country, for the most part, at their own pleasure. This was a part of the
punishment which God took upon the Realm for the infidelity of the Governor,
Note.
and for the violation of his solemn Oath. But this was not the end; for the
Realm was divided into two factions; the one favored France, the other the
League lately contracted with England: The one did in no things credit thoroughly
the other, so that the Country was in extreme calamity: for to the Englishmen
were delivered diverse Strengths, such as Carelaverock, Lochmaben, and Langham:
the most part of the Borderers were confederate with England: And albeit at
Ancrome mure in February, in the year of God 1544. was Sir Rafe Ewers, 1544.
with many other Englishmen slain, and the year after were some of the said
strengths recovered, yet was it not without great loss and detriment of the
Commonwealth: For in the month of January, in the year of God 1545. Monsieur
de Lorge, Lorge comes to Scotland
with Bands of men of War, came from France, for a destruction to Scotland: For
upon their brag was an Army raised; forwards they go toward Warke, 1545.
even in the midst of harvest. The Cardinals Banner was that day displayed,
and all his Files were charged: to be under it many had before promised, but at
the point it was left so bare, that with shame it was shut up into the pock
again, and they after a show returned with more shame to the Realm, then hurt
to their enemies. The black book of Hamilton makes mention of great vassallage
done at that time by the Governor and the French: but such as with their eyes
saw the whole progress, Note.
knew that to be a lie, and do repute it amongst the venial sins of that
race, The character of Hamilton.
which is to speak the best of themselves they can. That winter following so
nurtured the Frenchmen, that they learned to eat (yea to beg) cakes (which at
their entry they scorned) without jesting; they were so miserably used, that
few returned into France again with their lives. The Cardinal then had almost
fortified the Castle of S. Andrews, which he made so strong in his opinion,
that he regarded neither England nor France. The Earl of Lenox, as is said,
disappointed of all things in Scotland, passed into England, where he was
received of King Henry into protection, who gave him to wife Lady Margaret
Douglas, of whom was borne Henry, sometime husband to our Queen and Mistress.
While the inconstant Governor was sometimes dejected, and sometimes raised up
again by the Abbot of Paislay (who before was called, Chaster then any maiden)
began to show himself; for after he had taken by craft the Castles of
Edinburgh and Dumbar, he took also possession of his enemies wife, the Lady
Stanehouse. The woman is and has been famous, Note.
and is called, Lady Gilton: her Ladyship was holden always in poverty. But
how many wives and virgins he has had since, and that in common, the world
knows, albeit not all, and his bastard birds bear some witness. Such is the
example of holiness, that the flock may receive of the Papisticall Bishops. In
the midst of all the calamities that came upon this Realm, after the defection
of the Governor from Christ Jesus, came into Scotland that blessed Martyr of
God M. George Wischarde, George Wischarde
in company of the Commissioners before mentioned in the year of our Lord
1544. a man of such graces, as before him was never heard within this Realm,
yea, and are rare to be found yet in any man, notwithstanding this great light
of God that since his days has shined unto us: he was not only singularly
learned, as well in all Godly knowledge, as in all honest humane Science: but
also he was so clearly illuminated with the spirit of Prophecy, that he saw
not only things pertaining to himself, but also such things as some Towns,
and the whole Realm afterward felt, which he forespake not in secret, but in
the audience of many, as in their own places shall be declared. The beginning
of his Doctrine was in Mount Rosse, therefrom he departed to Dundie, where with
great admiration of all that heard him, he taught the Epistle to the Romans:
Note a fals^ brother.
till that by procurement of the Cardinal, Robert Mile, then one of the
principal men in Dundie, and a man that of old had professed knowledge, and
for the same had suffered trouble, gave, in the Queens and Governors name,
Inhibition to the said Master George, that he should trouble their Town no
more, for they would not suffer it: And this was said to him being in the
public place; which heard, he mused a pretty space, with his eyes bent unto
the heaven. And thereafter looking sorrowfully to the speaker, and unto the
people, he said, God is witness that I never minded your trouble, but your
comfort: yea, your trouble is more dolourous unto me, then it is unto your
selves: But I am assured, that to refuse Gods word and to chase from yo^ his
messenger shall not preserve you from trouble, but it shall bring you into it:
For God shall send unto you messengers who will not be afraid of burning, nor
yet for banishment. I have offered unto you the word of Salvation, and with the
hazard of my life I have remained amongst you. Now ye your selves refuse me, M.
Wischard his words in Dundie.
and therefore must I leave my Innocence to be declared by my God, if it be
long prosperous with you, I am not led with the Spirit of Truth. But if trouble
unlooked for apprehend you, acknowledge the cause, and turn to God. For he is
merciful, but if ye turn not at the first, he will visit you with fire and
sword. These words pronounced, he came down from the Preaching place. In the
Church present was the Lord Marshall, and diverse noble men, who would have had
the said M. George to have remained, or else to have gone with them into the
Country. But for no request would he either tarry in the town or on that side
of Tay any longer. But with possible expedition past to the West-land, where he
began to offer Gods word, which was of many gladly received, till that the
Bishop of Glasgow, Dumbar, by instigation of the Cardinal, came with his
gatherings to the Town of Air to make resistance to the said M. George, and
did first take the Church. The Earl of Glencarne being thereof advertised,
repaired with his friends to the Town with diligence, and so did diverse
Gentlemen of Kyle (amongst whom was the Lord of Lefnoreise, a man far
different from him that now lives, in the year of our Lord 1566. in manners
and Religion) of whom to this day yet many live, and have declared themselves
always zealous and bold in the cause of God, as after will be heard. When all
were assembled, conclusion was taken that they would have the Church. Whereto
the said M. George utterly repugned^ saying, Let him alone, his Sermon will not
much hurt* Let us go to the Market Cross: And so they did, where he made so
notable a Sermon, that the very enemies themselves were confounded. The Bishops
Sermon.
The Bishop Preached to his Jackmen, and to some old Bosses of the Town. The
sum of all his Sermon was, They say we, should Preach; Why not? Better late
thrive, then never thrive. Hold us still for your Bishop; and we shall provide
better the next time. This was the beginning and the end of the Bishops Sermon:
Who with haste departed the Town, but returned not to fulfill his promise. The
said M. George remained with the Gentlemen in Kyle, till that he gat sure
knowledge of the estate of Dundie. He Preached commonly at the Church of
Gastonne, and used much in the Barrie. He was required to come to the Church of
Machlyne, and so he did: But the Sheriff of Air caused to man the Church, for
preservation of a Tabernacle that was there beautiful to the eye. The persons
that held the Church was George Campbell of Mongarswood, that yet lives Anno
1566. Mung^ Campbell of Bro^^syde, George Rid in Dandilling the Lord of
Tempilland.

Some zealous of the Parish, amongst whom was Hugh Campbell of Kingarcleuch,
offended that they should be debarred their Parish Church, concluded by force
to enter. But the said M. George withdrew the said Hugh, and said unto him,
Brother, Christ Jesus is as mighty upon the fields as in the Church; And I
find that ^e himself after Preached in the Desert, at the sea side, and other
places judged profane then, he did in the Temple of Jerusalem. It is the word
of Peace that God sends by me: The blood of no man shall be shed this day for
the Preaching of it. And so withdrawing the whole people, he came to a ditch in
a More-edge, upon the South-west side of Machlyne, upon the which he ascended:
The whole multitude stood and sat about him (God gave the day pleasant and
hot) he continued in Preaching more then three hours: In that Sermon God
wrought so wonderfully with him, Note.
that one of the most wicked men that was in that country, named Larence
Ranckin, Lord of Sheld, was converted. The tears ran from his eyes in such
abundance, that all men wondered; His conversion was without hypocrisy, for
his life and conversation witnessed it in all times to come. While this
faithful servant of God was thus occupied in Kyle, word rose, that the Plague
of Pestilence rose in Dundie, which began four days after that the said M.
George was inhibited Preaching, and was so vehement, that it passed almost
credibility, to hear how many departed every four and twenty hours. The
certainty understood, the said Master George took his leave of Kyle, and that
with the regrate of many. But no request could make him to remain; Note M.
Wescharde his zeal to gain souls.
His reason was, They are now in trouble, and they need comfort: Perchance this
hand of God will make them now to magnify and reverence that word which before
(for the fear of men) they set at l^ght price. Coming unto Dundie, the joy of
the faithful was exceeding great. He delayed no time, but even upon the morrow
gave signification that he would Preach. And because the most part were either
sick, or else were in company with those that were sick, he choosd the head of
the East port of the Town for his Preaching place, and so the whole stood or
sat within, the sick and suspected without the Port or gate. The Text upon the
which his first Sermon was made, he took from the hundred and seventh Psalm;
The Sentence thereof, He sent his Word and healed them; And therewith joined
these words, It is neither herb nor plaster, O Lord, but thy Word heals
all. In which Sermon he most comfortably did entreat of the dignity and utility
of Gods word, the punishment that comes for the contempt of the same; the
promptitude of Gods mercy to such as truly turn to him; yea, the great
happiness of them whom God takes from this misery, even in his own gentle
visitation, which the malice of man can neither mend nor pair. By the which
Sermon he so raised up the hearts of all that heard him, that they regarded no
death, but judged them more happy that should depart, then such as should
remain behind. Considering that they knew not if they should have such a
comforter with them at all times. He spared not to visit them that lay in the
very extremity. He comforted them as he could, being such a multitude; He
caused minister all things necessary to those that could use meat or drink, and
in that point was the Town wondrous beneficial; for the poor was no more
neglected then was the rich. While he was spending his life to comfort the
afflicted, the Devil ceased not to stir up his own son the Cardinal again,
who corrupted by money a desperate Priest, named Sir John Weighton, to slay the
said M. George, who looked not to himself in all things so circumspectly as
worldly men would have used. And upon a day the Sermon ended and the people
departing, no man suspecting danger, and therefore not heeding the said M.
George; The Priest that was corrupted stood waiting at the foot of the steps,
his gown loose, and his dagger drawn in his hand under his gown. The said
Master George, as that he was most sharp of eye and judgment, A Priest
appointed by the Cardinal to stab M. George Wischarde.
marked him, and as he came near, he said; My friend, what would you do? And
therewith he clapped his hand upon the Priests hand wherein the dagger was,
which he took from him. The Priest abashed fell down at his feet, and openly
confessed the verity as it was. The noise rising, and coming to the ears of
the sick. They cried, Deliver the traitor to us, or else we will take him by
force; And so they burst in at the gate: But M. George took him in his arms,
and said, Whosoever troubles him shall trouble me, for he has hurt me in
nothing, but he has done great comfort to you and me, to wit, he has let us
to understand what we may fear, in times to come we will watch better: And so
he appeased both the one part and the other, and saved the life of him that
sought his. When the Plague was so ceased that almost there was none sick, he
took his leave of them, and said, That God had almost put an end to that
battle. He found himself called to another place. The Gentlemen of the West
had written unto him that he should meet them at Edinburgh; for they would
require Disputation of the Bishops, and that he should be publicly heard,
whereto he willingly agreed. But first he passed to Montrosse to salute the
Church there, where he remained, occupied sometimes in Preaching, but most part
in secret Meditation: In the which he was so earnest, that night and day he
would continue in it, while he was so occupied with his God, the Cardinal drew
a secret draught for his slaughter; He caused to write unto him a Letter, The
second attempt of the Cardinal for the killing of M. George Wischarde.
as it had been from his most familiar friend, the Lord of Kinneir, desiring
him with all possible diligence to come unto him, for he was stricken with a
sudden sickness. In the mean time had the traitor provided 60 men with Jacks
and Spears to lie in wait within a mile and half to the town of Montrosse for
his dispatch. The Letter coming to his hand, he made haste at first (for the
boy had brought a horse) and so with some honest men he passed forth of the
Town, but suddenly he stayed, and musing a space, Note the spirit of Prophecy.
returned back, whereat they wondering, he said, I will not go, I am forbidden
of God, I am assured there is treason; Let some of you, says he, go to yonder
place, and tell me what ye find. Diligence made; They found the Treason as it
was, which being shown with expedition to M. George, he answered, I know that I
shall end my life in that blood-thirstie man's hands, but it will not be on this
manner. The time approaching that he had appointed to meet the Gentlemen at
Edinburgh, he took his leave at Montrosse, and sore against the judgment of
the Lord of Dune, entered on his journey, and so returned to Dundie. But
remained not, but passed to the house of a faithful brother named James
Watson, who dwelt in Inner-Gowrie, distant from the said Town two miles, and
that night (as information was given to us, by William Spadin and John Watson,
both men of good credit) before day he passed forth into a yard, the said
William and John followed privily, and took heed what he did, when he had gone
up and down in an alley a reasonable space, with many sobs and deep groans, h^
fell upon his knees, and sitting thereon, his groans increased. And from hise
knees he fell upon his face. And then the persons aforenamed, heard weeping,
and as it were, an indigest sound of prayers, in the which he continued near an
hour, and after began to be quiet, and so arose, and came into his bed. They
that waited upon him came before, as if they had bin ignorant, till that he
came in, and then began they to demand where he had been: But that night he
would answer nothing. Upon the morrow they urged him again; and while that he
dissembled, they said, M. George, Be plain with us, for we heard your mourning,
and saw you both upon your knees, and upon your face. With dejected visage, he
said, I had rather ye had been in your beds, and it had been more profitable
for you; for I was scarce well occupied. When they instantly urged him to let
them know some comfort, he said, I will tell you, That I am assured that my
travel is near an end, and therefore call to God with me, that now I shrink
not when the battle waxes most hot. And while that they weeped and said, That
was small comfort unto them; he answered, God shall send you comfort after me.
Prophecy spoken by Master George Whischarde of the Church of Scotland.
This Realm shall be illuminated with the light of Christ's Gospel, as clearly
as ever any Realm since the days of the Apostles. The House of God shall be
builded in it; yea, it shall not lack (whatsoever the enemy imagine in the
contrary) the very Kepstone, meaning, That it should once be brought to the
full perfection. Neither (said he) shall this be long to* there shall not many
suffer after me, till that the glory of God shall evidently appear, and shall
once triumph in despite of Satan. But alas, if the people shall be after
unthankful, then fearful and terrible shall the plagues be that shall follow.
And with these words he marched forwards in his journey toward S. Iohnston,
and so to Fyfe, and then to Leyth, where he arrived; and hearing no word of
those that appointed to meet him, to wit. The Earl of Cassels, and the
Gentlemen of Kyle and Cuninghame, he kept himself secret a day or two. But
beginning to wax sorrowful in spirit, and being demanded of the cause, of such
as were not in his company before, he said, What differ I from a dead man,
except that I eat and drink? To this time God has used my labors to the
instruction of others, and unto the disclosing of darkness, and now I lurk as
a man that were ashamed, and durst not show himself before men. By these and
the like words, they that heard him understood that his desire was to preach,
Note the resolution of a Preacher.
and therefore said, Most comfortable it was unto us to hear you; but because
we know the danger wherein ye stand, we dare not desire you. But dare ye and
others hear (said he) and then let my God provide for me as best pleases him.
Finally, it was concluded, That the next Sunday he should preach in Leith, as
he did, and took the Text, The Parable of the sower that went forth to sow
seed, Matthew. 13. And this was upon the fifteenth day before Christmas. The
Sermon ended, the Gentlemen of Lowthan, who then were earnest Professors of
Christ Jesus, thought not expedient that he should remain in Leith, because
that the Governor and Cardinal were shortly to come to Edinburgh, and
therefore they took him with them, and kept him sometimes in Brunston,
sometimes in Langnidrie, and sometimes in Ormeston. For these three diligently
waited upon him. The Sunday following, he preached in the Church of Enneresk,
besides Mussilburgh, both before and at after noon, where there was a great
confluence of people, amongst whom was Sir George Douglas, who after the Sermon
said publicly, I know that my Lord Governor. and my Lord Cardinal shall hear
that I have been at this preaching (for they were then at Edinburgh) Say unto
them, That I will avow it, and will not only maintain the Doctrine that I have
heard, but also the person of the Teacher, to the uttermost of my power. Which
words greatly rejoiced the people, and the Gentlemen then present. One thing
notable in that Sermon we cannot pass by: Amongst others, Two gray Friars.
there came two gray Friars, and standing in the entry of the Church door, they
made some whispering to such as came in: which perceived, the Preacher said to
the people that stood near them, I heartily pray you to make room to those two
men, it may be that they be come to learn. And unto them he said, Come near
(for they stood in the very entry of the door) for I assure you ye shall hear
the Word of verity, which shall either seal in you this same day your salvation
or condemnation. And so proceeded he in Doctrine, supposing they would have
been quiet: But when he perceived them still to trouble the people that stood
near them (for vehement was he against the false worshipping of God) he turned
unto them the second time, and with an irefull countenance said, O Sergeants of
Satan, and deceivers of the souls of men, Will ye neither hear Gods Truth,
nor suffer others to hear it; Depart, and take this for your portion, God
shall shortly confound and disclose your hypocrisy within this Realm; ye
shall be abominable unto men, and your places and habitations shall be
desolate. This Sentence he pronounced with great vehemence in the midst of the
Sermon: And turning to the people, he said, You wicked men have provoked the
Spirit of God to anger. And so he returned to his matter, and proceeded to the
end. The days travel was ended, he came to Langindrie, and the two next
Sundays preached in Tranent, with the like grace, and like confluence of
people. In all his Sermons after his departure from Augus, he forespake the
shortness of the time that he had to travel, and of his death, the day
whereof approached nearer than any would believe. In the latter end of those
days that are called the holy days of Christmas, past he, by consent of the
Gentlemen, to Hadington, where it was supposed the greatest confluence of
people should be, both by reason of the Town, and of the Country adjacent.
The first day before noon, the auditors were reasonable, and yet nothing in
comparison of that which used to be in that Church. But the afternoon, and the
next day following before noon, the auditory was so slender, that many wondered.
The cause was judged to have been, That the Earl Bothwell, who in those bounds
used to have great credit and obedience, by procurement of the Cardinal, had
given inhibition, as well unto the Town, as unto the Country, that they
should not hear him, under the pain of his displeasure. The first night he lay
within the Town, with David Forest, now called the General, a man that long
professed the truth, and upon whom many in that time depended. The second night
he lay in Lethington, the Lord whereof was ever civil, albeit not persuaded
in Religion. The day following, before the said M. George past to the Sermon,
there came to him a boy, with a Letter from the Westland; which received and
read, he called for John Knox, who had waited upon him carefully from the time
he came to Louthaine, with whom he began to enter into purpose, That he wearied
of the world, for he perceives that men began to be weary of God. The cause of
his complaint was; The Gentlemen of the West had written unto him, That they
could not keep the meeting at Edinburgh. The said Io. Knox wondering that he
desired to keep any purpose before Sermon (for that was not his accustomed use
before) said, Sir, the time of Sermon approaches, I will leave you for the
present to your meditation. And so he took the Bill containing the purpose
aforesaid, and left him: the said Master George walked up and down behind the
high Altar more than half an hour. His weary countenance and visage declared
the grief and alteration of his mind. At last he passes to the Pulpit; but
the Auditory was small, he should have begun to have treated of the second
Table of the Law: but thereof in that Sermon spoke he very little. He began on
this manner: O Lord, How long shall it be that thy holy Word shall be despised,
and men shall not regard their own salvation? I have heard of thee, Hadington,
That in thee would have been, at any vain Clarke Play, two or three thousand
people; and now to hear the Messenger of the Eternal God, of all the Town or
Parish, cannot be numbered one hundred persons: Sore and fearful shall the
plagues be, that shall ensue upon of this thy contempt, with fire and sword
shall thou be plagued: Yea, thou Hadington in special, Vengeance against
Hadington.
strangers shall possess thee, and you the present inhabitants shall either in
bondage serve your enemies, or else ye shall be chased from your own
habitations; and that because ye have not known, nor will not know the time of
Gods merciful visitation. In such vehemence and threatening continued that
servant of God, near an hour and an half; in the which he declared all the
plagues that ensued as plainly, as after our eyes saw them performed. In the
end he said, I have forgotten my self, and the matter that I should have
treated of: But let these my last words concerning public Preaching remain in
your minds, till that God send you new comfort. Thereafter he made a short
Paraphrase upon the second Table, with an Exhortation to patience, to the fear
of God, and unto the works of mercy, and so ended, as it were making his last
Testament, as the issue declared fully. The Spirit of Truth and of true
Judgment were both in his heart and mouth: for that same night was he
apprehended before midnight, in the house of Ormeston, Master Wischarde taken
at Ormeston.
by the Earl Bothwell, made for money butcher to the Cardinal. The manner of
his taking was thus: Departing from the town of Hadington, he took his
goodnight, as it were, for ever, Note.
of all his acquaintance, especially from Hew Douglas of Langindrie. John Knox
pressing to have gone with the said Master George, he said, Nay, He means Gods
people.
return to your children, and God bless you; one is sufficient for one
Sacrifice. And so the said John Knox albeit unwillingly obeyed, and returned
with Hew Douglas of Langindrie, Master George having to accompany him the
Lord of Ormeston, John Sandelandes of Calder younger, the Lord of Brounston,
and others, with their servants, passed upon foot (for it was a vehement Frost)
to Ormeston. After supper he held comfortable purpose of Gods chosen children,
and merrily said, Methinke that I desire earnestly to sleep: And therewith he
said, Shall we sing a Psalm? And so he appointed the One and fiftieth Psalm,
which was put in Scottish Meeter, and began thus, Have mercy on me now good
Lord after thy great mercy, etc. Which being ended, he past to his Chamber, and
sooner then his common diet, was to pass to bed with these words, And grant
quiet rest. Before midnight the place was beset about, that none could escape
to make advertisement. The Earl Bothwell came and called for the Lord, and
declared the purpose, and said, That it was but in vain to make him to hold his
house, for the Governor and the Cardinal with all their power were coming
(and indeed the Cardinal was at Elphinston, not a mile distant from Ormeston)
But if he would deliver the man to him, he would promise upon his Honor, The
Lord Bothwels promise.
That he should be safe, and that it should pass the power of the Cardinal to
do him any harm or hurt. Allured with these words, and taking counsel with
the said Master George, (who at the first word said, Open the gates, the
blessed will of my God be done.) They received in the Earl Bothwell himself,
with some Gentlemen with him: To whom Master George said, I praise my God, that
so honorable a man as you, M Georges words to the Earl Bothwell.
my Lord, receives me this night, in the presence of these noble men: For now
I am assured, That for your Honors sake, ye will suffer nothing any ways to
be done to me, but by the order of Law. I am not ignorant that all their Law is
nothing but corruption, and a cloak to shed the blood of the Saints. But yet I
less fear to die openly, than secretly to be murdered. The said Earl
Bothwell answered, I shall not only preserve your body from all violence that
shall be purposed against you against order of Law, but also I promise here in
the presence of these Gentlemen, That neither shall the Governor nor the
Cardinal have their will of you, But I shall retain you in mine own hands,
and in mine own house, till that either I shall make you free, or else restore
you in the same place where I receive you. The Lairds aforesaid, said, My Lord,
If ye will do as you have spoken, and as we think your Lordship will do, then
do we here promise unto your Lordship, That not only we our selves shall serve
you all the days of our life, but also we shall procure the whole professors
within Lothan to do the same. And upon either the preservation of this our
brother, or upon his delivery again to our hands; we being reasonably
advertised to receive him, That we, in the name and behalf of our friends,
shall deliver to your Lordship, or any sufficient man that shall deliver to us
again this servant of God, our Band of Manred in manner requisite. And thus
promise made in the presence of God, and hands stricken upon both the parties
for observation of the promise, the said Master George was delivered to the
hands of the said Earl Bothwell; who immediately departing with him, came to
Elphinston, where the Cardinal was. Who knowing that Calder Younger, and
Brunston, were with Johan Cocburne Lord of Ormeston, sent back with expedition
to apprehend them also. The noise of Horsemen being heard, the servants gave
advertisement, That more then departed, or was there before, were returned. And
while that they dispute what should be the motive, the Cardinals Garrison had
seized both the outer and inner Close. They called for the Lord, and for the
Lord of Calder, who presenting themselves, demanded what their COMMISSION was.
To bring you two, and the Lord of Brouneston to my Lord GOVERNOR. They were
nothing content (as they had no cause) and yet they made fair countenance, and
entreated the Gentlemen to drink, and to bait their horses, till that they
might put themselves in readiness to ride with them. In this mean time
Brounston conveyed himself first secretly, and then by speed of foot to
Ormiston wood, and from thence to Dundallon, and so escaped that danger; the
other two were put into the Castle of Edinburgh, where the one, to wit, Calder
Zounger, remained until his baud of Manred to the Cardinal, was the means of
his deliverance: And the other, to wit, Ormiston, freed himself by leaping off
the wall of the Castle, betwixt ten of the clock and eleven before noon: And so
breaking Ward, he escaped prison, which he unjustly suffered. The servant of
God M. George Wischarde, was carried first to Edinburgh, thereafter brought
back, for fashion sake, to the house of Hailles again, which was the
principal place that then the Earl Bothwell had in Lothiane. But as gold and
women have corrupted all worldly and fleshly men from the beginning, so did
they him: For the Cardinal gave gold, and that largely; and the Queen, with
whom the said Earl was then in the Glunders, promised him favor in all his
lawful suites to women: if he would deliver the said M. George, to be kept in
the Castle of Edinburgh. He made some resistance at the first, by reason of his
promise. But an effeminate man cannot long withstand the assaults of a gracious
Queen, and so was the servant of God transported to Edinburgh, where the
Cardinal then had a convention of Prelates, wherein somewhat was said of
redressing the abuses of the Church, and reforming the lives of the Clergy,
but it took no effect. M. Wischarde remained but few days in Edinburgh: For
that bloody woolfe the Cardinal, ever thirsting after the blood of the
servant of God, so traveled with the abused Governor, that he was content
that Gods servant should be delivered to the power of that Tyranny. And so
small inversion being made, Pilate obeyed the petition of Caiaphas, and of his
fellows, and adjudged Christ to be crucified. The Cardinal seeing it was
forbidden by the Canon Law to Priests to sit as Judges upon life and death,
although the crime were Heresy, sent to the Governor, desiring him to name
some Lay-Judge to pronounce Sentence against M. Wischarde. The Governor had
freely condescended to the Cardinals request, without delay, if David Hamilton
of Preston, a godly and wise man, had not remonstrated unto him, That he could
expect no better end then Saul, since he persecuted the Saints of God, for that
Truth which he professed once with such a show of earnestness; the profession
thereof, being the only cause of his advancement to that high degree wherein
he was: The Governor moved at this Speech of David Hamiltons, answered the
Cardinal; That he would not meddle with the blood of that good man; and told
him, That his blood should be on him, for he himself would be free of it. At
this the Cardinal was angry, and said he would proceed, and that he had sent
to the Governor of mere civility, without any need. And so the servant of
God, delivered to the hand of that proud and merciless Tyranny, triumph was
made by the Priests. The godly lamented, and accused the foolishness of the
Governor: For by the retaining of the said M. George, he might have caused
Protestants and Papists (rather proud Romanists) to have served; The one, to
the end the life of their Preacher might have been saved; The other, for fear
that he should have set him at liberty again, to the confusion of the Bishops.
But where God is left (as he had plainly renounced him before) what can
counsel or judgment avail? How the servant of God was dealt withal, and
what he did from the day that he entered within the sea Tower of S. Andrews,
which was in the end of January, 1546.
in the year of God 1546. unto the first of March the same year when he
suffered, we cannot certainly tell, except we understand he wrote somewhat in
prison, but that was suppressed by the enemies. The Cardinal delayed no time,
but caused all Bishops, yea, all the Clergy that had any pre-eminence, to be
called to S. Andrews, against the seven and twentieth day of February, that
consultation might be had in that question; which in his mind was no less
resolved, then Christ's death was in the mind of Caiaphas. But that the rest
should bear the like burden with him, he would that they should before the
world subscribe whatsoever he did. In that day was wrought a wonder, not unlike
that which was at the accusation and death of Jesus Christ, when Pilate and
Herod, who before were enemies, were made friends, by consenting of them both
to Christ's condemnation; Note.
differs nothing, except that Pilate and Herod were brethren under their father
the Devil, in the estate called Temporal; And these two of whom we are about
to speak, were brethren (sons of the same father the Devil) in the estate
Ecclesiastical. If we interlace merrynesse with earnest matters, pardon us
good Reader, for the fact is so notable that it deserves long remembrance.

The proud Cardinal, and the glorious fool Dumbar.
The Cardinal was known proud; and Dumbar Archbishop of Glasgow was known a
glorious fool: And yet because sometimes he was called the Kings Master, he
was Chancellor of Scotland. The Cardinal comes even the same year, in the
end of harvest before to Glasgow, upon what purpose we omit. But while they
remain together, the one in the Town, the other in the Castle; Question
rises for bearing of their Crosses. A question worthy of such two Prelates.
The Cardinal alleged, That by reason of his Cardinalship, and that he was
Legatus natus, and Primate within Scotland, in the kingdom of Antichrist; That
he should have the pre-eminence, and that his Cross should not only go
before, but that also it should only be borne wheresoever he was. Good
Gukstone Glakstone, the aforesaid Archbishop, lacked no reasons, as he thought,
for maintenance of his glory. He was an Archbishop in his own Diocese, and in
his own Cathedral Seat and Church, and therefore ought to give place to no
man. The power of the Cardinal was but begged from Rome, and appertains but
to his own person, and not to his Bishopric, for it might be, that his
successor should not be Cardinal, but his dignity was annexed with his
office, and did appertain to all that ever should be Bishops of Glasgow.
Howsoever these doubts were resolved by the Doctors of Divinity of both the
Prelates, yet the decision was as ye shall hear; Coming forth (or going in,
all is one) at the Queere door of Glasgow Church, begins striving for state
betwixt the Crosse-bearers, so that from glouming they came to shouldring, and
so from shouldring they go to buffets, and from dry blowe-neffaling; and then
for charities sake, they cry, Disperst^ dedit pauperibus, and essay which of
the Crosses was finest metal, which staff was strongest, and which
Crosse-bearer could best defend his Masters pre-eminence; and that there should
be no superiority in that behalf, to the ground go both their Crosses. And then
began no little fray, but yet a merry game, for rockets were rent, tippets were
torn, crowns were knapped, and side gowns might have been seen wantonly to
wagge from the one wall to the other: Many of them lacked beards, and that was
the more pity, and therefore could not buckle other by the brises, as bold men
would have done. But fie on the Jackmen, that did not their duty: For had the
one part of them recountred the other, then had all gone right; but the
Sanctuary we suppose saved the lives of many. How merrily so ever this be
written, it was bitter mirth to the Cardinal and his court. It was more then
irregularity* yea, it might well have been judged laese majeste to the son of
perdition, the Popes own person; and yet the other in his folly, as proud as a
Peacocke, would let the Cardinal know, that he was a Bishop, when the other
but Beton, before he gat the Abbey of Aberbroth. This enmity was judged
mortal, and without all hope of reconciliation. But the blood of the innocent
servant of God, buried in oblivion all that bragging and boast. For the
Archbishop of Glasgow was the first unto whom the Cardinal wrote, signifying
unto him what was done, and earnestly craving of him, that he would assist with
his presence and counsel, how that such an enemy to their estate might be
suppressed. And thereto was not the other slow, but kept time appointed, sat
next to the Cardinal, waited and subscribed first in rank, and lay over the
East block-house with the said Cardinal, till the Martyr of God was consumed
with fire: for this we may note, That all these beasts consented in heart to
the slaughter of that Innocent. So did they approve it with their presence,
having the whole ordnance of the Castle of S. Andrews, bent toward the place
of execution, which was near to the Castle, ready to have shot, if any would
have made defense or rescue to Gods servant. The manner of his Accusation,
Process, and Answers follows, as we have received from certain Records,
which we relate truly, as near as possibly we can.

Upon the last of February was sent to the prison where the servant of God lay,
1546.
the Deane of the Town, by the commandment of the Cardinal and his wicked
counsel, and there summoned the said Master George, that he should on the
morrow following appear before the Judge, then and there to give account of
his seditious and Heretical Doctrine. To whom the said Master George answered;
What needs (said he) the Cardinal to summon me to answer for my Doctrine
openly before him, under whose power and Dominion I am thus straightly bound in
irons? May not he compel me to answer, of his extort power? Or believes he
that I am unprovided to render account of my Doctrine? To manifest your selves
what men ye are, it is well done that ye keep your old Ceremonies and
Constitutions made by men. Upon the next morrow the Lord Cardinal caused his
servants to address themselves in their most warlike array, with Jack,
Knapscall, Splent, Spear, and Axe, more seemly for the war then for the
Preaching of the true word of God. And when these armed Champions, marching in
warlike order, had conveyed the Bishops into the Abbey-church, incontinently
they sent for M. George, who was conveyed unto the said Church by the Captain
of the Castle, and the number of an hundred men, addressed in manner aforesaid,
like a Lamb led they him to the sacrifice. As he entered in at the Abbey-Church
door, there was a poor man lying vexed with great infirmities, asking of his
alms, to whom he flung his purse, and when he came before the Cardinal, by
and by the Sub-prior of the Abbey, Who was a learned man and heartily favored
the pure Religion, in secret.
called Deane John Winrame, stood up in the Pulpit, and made a Sermon to all
the congregation there then assembled, taking his matter out of Matthew. 13.
Whose Sermon was divided into four parts. The first was, A short and brief
declaration of the Evangelist. The second, of the interpretation of the good
seed: And because he called the Word of God the good seed, and Heresy the evil
seed; he declared what Heresy was, and how it should be known. He defined it
on this manner; Bona heresios definitio, etc.
Heresy is a false Opinion, defended with Pertinacie, clearly repugning the
Word of God. The third part of his Sermon was, The cause of Heresy within that
realm, and all other realms. The cause of Heresy (said he) is the ignorance of
them which have the cures of men's souls: to whom it necessarily belongs to
have the true understanding of the Word of God, Note the cause of Heresy.
that they may be able to win again the false Teachers of Heresies, with the
sword of the Spirit, which is, the word of God: and not only to win again, but
also to overcome, as faith Paul to Timothy, A bishop must be faultlesse, as
becomes the minister of God, not stubborn, nor angry, no drunkard, no fighter,
not given to filthy lucre, but harberous, one that loved goodness,
sober-minded, righteous, holy, temperate, and such as cleaves unto the true
Word of Doctrine. That he may be able with wholesome learning, and to impugn
that which they say against him. The fourth part of his Sermon was, how
Heresies should be known; Heresies (quoth he) be known on this manner; The
Proof of Heresy.
As the God-smith knows the fine gold from the unperfit, by the touchstone;
So likewise may we know Heresy by the undoubted Touchstone, that is, The
true, sincere, and undefiled Word of God. At the last he added, That Heretics
should be put down in this present life. To which Proposition, the Gospel he
treated of appears not to repugne, Let them both grow to the harvest. The
harvest is the end of the world, nevertheless he affirmed, That they should be
put down by the civil Magistrate, and Law. And when he ended his Sermon,
incontinent they caused M. George to ascend into the Pulpit, there to hear his
Accusation and Articles, for right against him stood one of the fat flock, a
monster, John Lawder, a Priest, laden full of cursings, written in paper of the
which he took out a roll, both long, and also full of outrages, threatenings,
maledictions, and words of devilish spite and malice, saying to the innocent M.
George, so many cruel and abominable words, and hit him so spitefully with the
Popes thunder, that the ignorant people dreaded lest the earth then would have
swallowed him up quick. Notwithstanding he stood still with great patience,
hearing their sayings, not once moving or changing his countenance. When that
this fat sow had read thorowout all his lying menaces, his face running down
with sweat, and froathing at the mouth like a boar: He spate at M. Georges
face, saying, What answers thou to these sayings? Thou runagate, traitor,
thief, which we have duly proved by sufficient witness against thee. Master
George hearing this, sat down upon his knees in the Pulpit, making his prayer
to God. When he had ended his Prayer, sweetly and Christianly, he answered unto
them all in this manner:

Master George his ORATION.
MAny and horrible sayings unto me a Christian man, many words abominable for
to hear, have ye spoken here this day, which not only to teach, but also to
think, I thought it ever great abomination. Wherefore I pray your discretions
quietly to hear me, that ye may know what were my Sayings, and the manner of
my Doctrine. This my Petition (my Lords) I desire to be heard for three causes.
The first is, Because through preaching of the Word of God, your discretions,
to know what my words and Doctrine are, and what I have ever taught in my time
in this Realm, that I perish not unjustly, to the great perils of your selves.
Wherefore both for the glory of God, your own health, and safeguard of my
life, I beseech your discretions to hear me, and in the mean time I shall
recite my Doctrine, without any color.

First and chiefly, since the time that I came into this Realm, I taught
nothing but the ten Commandments of God, the twelve Articles of the Faith, and
the Prayer of the Lord in the mother Tongue. Moreover, in Dundie I taught the
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans. And I shall show your discretions
faithfully what fashion and-manner I used, when I taught without any humane
dread. So that your discretions give me your ears benevolent and attentive.

Suddenly then, with a loud voice cried the accuser, the fat sow, Thou
Heretic, Note.
Runnagate, Traitor, and Thief, It was not lawful for thee to preach; thou
have taken the power at thine own hand, without any authority of the Church.
We forthinke that thou have been a Preacher so long. Then said the whole
Congregation of the Prelates, with their accomplices, these words; If we give him
license to Preach, he is so crafty, and in holy Scriptures so exercised, that
he will persuade the people to his opinion, and raise them against us. M.
George seeing their malicious and wicked intent, appealed to an indifferent and
equal Judge. To whom the accuser, John Lawder aforesaid, with hoggish voice
answered, Is not my Lord Cardinal the second person within this Realm,
Chancellor of Scotland, Archbishop of Saint Andrews, Bishop of Merepose, Note.
Commendator of Arbroth, Legatus natus, Legatus a Latere. And so reciting as
many Titles of his unworthy Honors as would have laden a Ship, much sooner an
Ass: Is not he ( quoth John Lawder) an equal JUDGE apparently to thee. Whom
other desire thou to be thy JUDGE? To whom this humble man answered, saying,
I refuse not my Lord Cardinal, but I desire the Word of God to be my Judge,
the Temporal estate with some of your Lordships mine auditors, because I am
here my Lord Governors prisoner. Whereupon the pridefull and scornful people
that stood by, mocked him saying, Such man, such Judge, speaking seditious and
reproachful words against the Governor, and other of the Nobles, meaning them
also to be heretics. And incontinent, without all delay, they would have given
sentence upon M. George, and that without further Process, had not certain men
there councelled my Lord Cardinal to read again the Articles, and to hear
his answers thereupon, that the people might not complain of his wrongful
condemnation. And shortly for to declare. These were the Articles following,
with his Answers, as far they would give him leave to speak. For when he
intended to mitigate their leasings, and show the manner of his Doctrine, by
and by they stopped his mouth with another Article.

The first Article.
Thou false Heretic, Runnagate, Traitor, and Thief, Deceiver of the people,
despisest the Church, and in like case contemnes my Lord Governors Authority.
And this we know of surety, That when thou preachedst in Dundie, and was
charged by my Lord Governors Authority to desist; nevertheless thou would
not obey, but persevered in the same: And therefore the Bishop of Breachen
cursed thee, and delivered thee into the Devils hand, and gave thee then
Commandment, That thou should preach no more; yet notwithstanding thou did
continue obstinately.

The Answer.
My Lords, I have read in the Acts of the Apostles, That it is not lawful, for
the threats and menaces of men, to desist from the preaching of the Gospel:
Therefore it is written, We shall rather obey God than men. I have also read
the Prophet Malachie; I shall curse your blessings, and bless your cursings,
says the Lord. Believing firmly, That he would turn your cursings into
blessings.

The second Article.
Thou false heretic did say, That a Priest standing at the Altar saying
Mass, was like a Fox wagging his tail in July.

The Answer.
My Lords, I said not so. These were my sayings, The moving of the body
outward, without inward moving of the heart, is naught else but the playing of
an Ape, and not the true serving of God. For God is a secret searcher of men's
hearts. Therefore who will truly adore and honor God, he must in spirit and
verity honor him. Then the accuser stopped his mouth with another Article.

The third Article.
Thou false heretic Preachest against the Sacraments, saying, That there are
not seven Sacraments.

The Answer.
My Lords, It is not so by your pleasures, I taught never of the number of the
Sacraments, whether there were seven or eleven: so many as are instituted by
Christ, and are shown to us by the Gospel, I profess openly. Except it be the
Word of God, I dare affirm nothing.

The fourth Article.
Thou false heretic have openly taught, That Auricular Confession is not a
blessed Sacrament, and thou say, That we should only confess us to God, and
to no Priest.

The Answer.
My Lords, I say, That Auricular Confession, seeing that it has no promise of
the Gospel, truly it cannot be a Sacrament. Of the Confession to be made to
God, there are many testimonies in Scripture, as when David says, Note.
I thought that I would acknowledge mine iniquity against my self unto the
Lord, and he forgave the trespasses of my sins. Here confessing signifies the
secret knowledge of our sins before God. When I exhorted the people on this
manner, I reproved no manner of Confession: And farther, Saint James says,
Acknowledge your sins one to another, and so let you have peace among your
selves. Here the Apostle means nothing of Auricular Confession, but that we
should acknowledge and confess our selves to be sinners before our brethren,
and before the world, and not to esteem our selves, Note.
as the Gray Friars do, thinking themselves already purged. When that he had
said these words, the horned Bishops and their accomplices cried and gyrned with
their teeth, saying, See ye not what colors he has in his speech, that he may
beguile us, and seduce us to his opinion?

The fifth Article.
Thou false heretic did say openly, That it was necessary for every man to
know and understand his Baptism; which is contrary to General Councels, and
the Estates of holy Church.

The Answer.
My Lords, I believe there be none so unwise here, that will make Merchandise
with any Frenchmen, or any other unknown stranger, except he know and
understand first the condition or promise made by the Frenchman or stranger.
So likewise I would that we understood what thing we promise in the name of the
Infant unto God in Baptism. Then said M. Peter Chaplin, That he had the devil
within him, and the spirit of terror. Then answered him a child, saying, The
devil cannot speak such words as yonder man does speak.

The sixth Article.
Thou false Heretic, Traitor, and Thief, thou said, That the Sacrament of
the Altar was but a piece of bread baken upon the ashes, and no other thing
else; and all that is there done, is but a superstitious Rite, against the
Commandment of God.

The Answer.
Oh Lord God! so manifest lies and blasphemies, the Scripture does not teach
you. As concerning the Sacrament of the Altar (my Lords) I never taught any
thing against the Scripture, the which I shall (by Gods grace) make manifest
this day, I being ready therefore to suffer death. The lawful use of the
Sacrament is most acceptable unto God. But the great abuse of it, is very
detestable unto him: But what occasion they have to say such words of me, I
shall shortly show your Lordships. I once chanced to meet with a Jew, when I
was sailing upon the water of Rhene; Note.
I did enquire of him, What was the cause of his pertinacie, that he did not
believe that the true Messiah was come, considering that they had seen all the
Prophesies which were spoken of him, to be fulfilled: Moreover, the Prophesies
taken away, and the Scepter of Judah. By many other testimonies of the Scripture
I witnessed to him, and proved that the Messiah was come, the which they called
Jesus of Nazareth? This Jew answered again unto me, When Messiah comes, he
shall restore all things, and he shall not abrogate the Law which was given
unto our Fathers, as ye do; for why? We see the poor almost perish through
hunger amongst you, yet you are not moved with pity toward them: But amongst
us Jews, though we be poor, there are no beggars found. Secondarily, It is
forbidden by the Law to fain any kind of Imagery, of things in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, or in the Sea under the earth, but one God only to
honor. But your Sanctuaries and Churches are full of Idols. Thirdly, a piece
of bread baked upon the ashes, ye adore and worship, and say that it is your
God. I have rehearsed here but the sayings of a Jew, which I never affirmed to
be true. Then the Bishops shook their heads, and spitted on the ground; and
what he meaned in this matter further, they would not hear.

The seventh Article.
Thou false heretic did say, That extreme Unction was not a Sacrament.

The Answer.
My Lords, forsooth I never taught of extreme Unction, in my Doctrine, whether
it was a Sacrament or no.

The eighth Article.
Thou false heretic did say, That holy water is not so good as Wash, and
such like. Thou contemnest conjuring, and say, That holy Churches cursing
avails not.

The Answer.
My Lords, as for holy water, what strength it is of, I taught never in my
Doctrine. Conjurings and Exorcisms, if they were conformable to the Word of
God, I would commend them; but in as much as they are not conformable to the
Commandment and Word of God, I reprove them.

The ninth Article.
Thou false Heretic and runagate, have said, That every man is a Priest; and
likewise thou say, That the Pope has no more power then another man.

The Answer.
My Lords, I taught nothing but the Word of God, I remember that I have read in
some places of S. John, and S. Peter, of the which one says, He has made us
kings and priests. The other says, He has made us the kingly Priesthood.
Wherefore I have affirmed, Any man understanding and perfect in the Word of God,
and the true faith of Jesus Christ, to have his power given him from God, and
not by the power or violence of men, but by the virtue of the Word of God, the
which word is called, The power of God, Note this against the legality of the
Bishops.
as witnesses S. Paul, evidently enough. And again I say, Any unlearned man,
and not exercised in the Word of God, nor yet constant in his Faith, whatsoever
estate or order he be of; I say, he has no power to bind or to loose, seeing
he wants the instrument by the which he binds and loses, that is to say,
The Word of God. After that he had said these words, all the Bishops laughed,
and mocked him: When that he beheld their laughing; Laugh ye (said he) my
Lords? Though that these my sayings do seem scornful, and worthy of derision
to your Lordships, nevertheless they are very weighty to me, and of a great
value; because that they stand not only upon my life, but also upon the honor
and glory of God. In the mean time many godly men, beholding the woodnesse and
great cruelty of the Bishops, and the invincible patience of the said M.
George, did greatly mourn and lament.

The tenth Article.
Thou false Heretic said, That a man had no free will, but is like to the
Stoics, which say, That it is not in man's will to do anything, but that all
desire and concupiscence comes of God, of whatsoever kind it be of.

The Answer.
My Lords I said not so, truly, I say, That as many as believe in Christ
firmly, unto them is given liberty conformable to the saying of S. John, If
the Son make you free, then shall you verily be free: Of the contrary, as
many as believe not in Christ Jesus, they are bond-servants of sin: He that
sins, is bound to sin.

The eleventh Article.
Thou false Heretic say, It is as lawful to eat flesh upon Friday, as on
Sunday.

The Answer.
Pleases it your Lordships, I have read in the Epistles of S. Paul, That who
is clean, unto him all things are clean: Of the contrary, to the filthy men
all things are unclean. A faithful man, clean and holy, sanctifies by the
Word, the creature of God; but the creature makes no man acceptable unto God.
So that a creature cannot sanctify any impure and unfaithful man. But to the
faithful man all things are sanctified by the prayer of the word of God. After
these sayings of M. George, then said the Bishops with their accomplices; What
needed we any witness against him, has he not here openly spoken blasphemy?

The twelfth Article.
Thou false Heretic do say, That we should not pray unto Saints, but to
God only; Say whether thou have said this or no, say shortly.

The Answer.
For the weakness and infirmity of the hearers, he said, without doubt
plainly, That Saints should not be honored, nor called upon. My Lords (said
he) there are two things worthy of note. Note.
The one is certain, and the other uncertain. It is found plainly and certain
in Scriptures, That we should worship and honor one God, according to the
saying of the first Commandment, Thou shall only worship and honor thy Lord
God with all thine heart. But as for praying to, and honoring of Saints, there
is great doubt amongst many, whether they hear or no the invocation made unto
them. Therefore I exhorted all men equally in my Doctrine, That they should
leave the unsure way, and follow the way which was taught us by our Master
Christ. He is only our Mediator, and makes intercession for us to God his
Father. He is the door by the which we must enter in: He that enters not in
by this door, but climeth another way, is a thief and a murderer. He is the
verity and life: he that goes out of the way, there is no doubt he shall fall
into the mire: Yea, verily he is fallen into it already. This is the fashion of
my Doctrine, the which I have ever followed. Verily that which I have heard and
read in the Word of God, I taught openly and in no corners, and now ye shall
witness the same, if your Lordships will hear me: Except it stand by the Word
of God, I dare not be so bold to affirm any thing. These sayings he rehearsed
diverse times.

The thirteenth Article.
Thou false Heretic have Preached plainly, That there is no Purgatory, and
that it is a fained thing, for any man after this life to be punished in
Purgatory.

The Answer.
My Lords, as I have oftentimes said heretofore; Without express witness and
testimony of Scriptures, I dare affirm nothing. I have often, and diverse times
read over the Bible, and yet such a term found I never, nor yet any place of
Scripture applicable thereto. Therefore I was afraid ever to teach of that
thing which I could not find in Scripture. Then said he to M. John Lawder, his
accuser; If you have any testimony of the Scripture, by the which you may prove
any such place, show it now before this auditory. But that dolt had not a word
to say for himself, but was as dumb as a Beetle in that matter.

The fourteenth Article.
Thou false Heretic have taught plainly against the Vows of Monks, Friars,
Nuns, and Priests, saying, That whosoever was bound to such like Vows, they
vowed themselves to the state of damnation. Moreover, That it was lawful for
Priests to marry wives, and not to live sole.

The Answer.
Of this, my Lords, I have read in the Gospel, That there are three kind of
chaste men, some are gelded from their mothers womb: some are gelded by men,
and some have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heavens sake; Verily, I say,
these men are blessed by the Scripture of God. But as many as have not the gift
of chastity; nor yet for the Gospel, have overcome the concupiscence of the
flesh, and have vowed chastity; ye have experience, although I should hold my
tongue, to what inconveniences they have vowed themselves. When he had said
these words, they were all dumb, thinking it better to have ten concubines then
one wife.

The fifteenth Article.
Thou false Heretic, and runnagate say, That thou will not obey our
General Provincial Counsels.

The Answer.
My Lords, what your general Counsels are, I know not, I was never exercised
in them, but to the pure Word of God, I gave my labors. Read here your
general Counsels, or else give me a book, wherein they are contained, that I
may read them; if they be agreeable with the Word of God, I will not disagree.
Then the ravening Wolves turned unto madness, and said; Wherefore let we him
speak any farther? Read forth the rest of the Articles, and stay not upon them.
Amongst those cruel Tigers, there was one false hypocrite, This was Fri^^ Scot.
a seducer of the people, called John Scot, standing behind John Lawders
back, hasting him to read the rest of the Articles, and not to tarry upon his
witty and godly answers; For we may not abide them (quoth he) no more then the
devil may abide the sign of the Cross, when it is named.

The sixteenth Article.
Thou Heretic say, That it is vain to build to the honor of God costly
Churches, seeing that God remains not in Churches made by men's hands, nor yet
can God be in little space, as betwixt the Priests hands.

The Answer.
My Lords, Solomon says, If that the heaven of heavens cannot comprehend thee,
how much less this house which I have builded. And Job consented to the same
sentence, saying, Seeing that he is higher then the heavens, therefore what
can thou build unto him; he is deeper then the hell, then how shall thou know
him, he is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea, so that God cannot
be comprehended in one place, who is infinite. These sayings notwithstanding, I
said never that Churches should be destroyed: But of the contrary I affirmed
ever, That Churches should be maintained and upholden, Note.
that the people should be assembled in them to hear the Word of God Preached.
Moreover, wheresoever is the true Preaching of the Word of God, and the lawful
use of the Sacraments, undoubtedly there is God himself: So that both these
sayings are true together; God cannot be comprehended in any one place: And
wheresoever are two or three gathered in his Name, there is he present in the
midst of them. Then said he to his accuser, If thou think any otherwise;
Then I say, Show forth thy reasons before this auditory. Then he without all
reason was dumb, and could not answer a word.

The seventeenth Article.
Thou false Heretic contemnest fasting, and say thou should not fast.

The Answer.
My Lords, I find that fasting is commanded in the Scripture, therefore I were
a slanderer of the Gospel, if I contemned fasting. And not so only, but I have
learned by experience, that Fasting is good for the health and conservation of
the body. But God only knows who fasteth the true Fast.

The eighteenth Article.
Thou false Heretic have Preached openly, saying, That the souls of men
shall sleep to the latter day of judgment, and shall not obtain life
immortal until the last day.

The Answer.
God full of mercy and goodness forgive them that say such things of me. I
wot, and know surely by the Word of God, that he who has begun to have the
Faith of Jesus Christ, and to believe firmly in him; I know surely, I say,
that the soul of that man, shall never sleep, but ever shall live an
immortal life, the which life from day to day is renewed in Grace, and
augmented, nor yet shall ever perish, or have an end, but shall ever live
immortal with Christ the head. To the which life, all that believe in him
shall come, and rest in eternal glory. Amen.

WHen that the Bishops with their accomplices, had accused this innocent man, in
manner and form aforesaid, incontinently they condemned him to be burnt as an
Heretic, not having respect to his godly answers, and true reasons which he
alleged, nor yet to their own consciences; Thinking verily that they should
do to God good sacrifice, conformable to the sayings of Jesus Christ, in the
Gospel of Saint John the 16. Chapter; They shall excommunicate you, yea, and
the time shall come, that he which kills you, shall think that he has done
to God good service.

The Prayer of Master George Wischarde.
O Immortal God, how long shall thou suffer the rage and great crudelitie of
the ungodly, to exercise their fury upon thy servants which do further thy
Word in this world, seeing they desire to do the contrary; That is, to choke
and destroy thy true Doctrine and Verity, by the which thou have showed thee
unto the world which was all drowned in blindness and misknowledge of thy
Name. O Lord, we know surely that thy true servants must needs suffer for thy
Names sake, persecution, affliction, and troubles in this present life, which
is but a shadow, as thou have showed to us by thy Prophets and Apostles. But
yet we desire thee (merciful Father) that thou would conserve, defend, and
help thy congregation, which thou have chosen before the beginning of the
world, and give them thy grace to hear thy Word, and to be thy true servants
in this present life.

Then by and by they caused the common people to remove, whose desire was
always to hear that Innocent man speak. Then the sons of darkness pronounced
their sentence definitive, not having respect to the Judgment of God. When all
this was done and said, the Cardinal causes his tormentors to pass again
with the meek Lamb unto the Castle, until such time as the fire was made
ready. When he was come into the Castle, then there came two fiends, two
gray-Friers, Friar Scot and his mate, saying, Sir, you must make your
confession unto us. He answered, I will make no confession: Go fetch me yonder
man that preached unto us this day, and I will confer with him. Then they
sent for the Sub-prior of the Abbey, who came to him with all diligence. And
conferred with him a pretty while, at last burst forth in tears, but so soon
as he was able to speak, he asked him, If he would receive the Communion;
Master Wischarde answered, He would most willingly, if he could have it
according to Christ's institution under both kinds. The Sub-prior went to the
Cardinal and his Prelates, he told them, That Master Wischarde was an innocent
man; which he said, not to intercede for his life; but to make known the
innocence of the man unto all men, as it was known to God. At these words the
Cardinal was angry, and said to the Sub-Prior, Long ago we knew what you
were; Then the Sub-Prior demanded, Whether they would suffer M. Wischarde to
receive the Communion or no; They answered, No. A while after M. Wischarde had
ended with the Sub-Prior, the Captain of the Castle, with some other friends,
came to him, and asked him; If he would break fast with them; He answered, Most
willingly, for I know you to be most honest and godly men; So all being ready,
he desired them to sit down, and hear him a while with patience; Then he
discoursed to them about half an hour concerning the Lords Supper, his
Sufferings and Death for us; He exhorts them to love one another, laying
aside all rancor, envy, and vengeance as perfect members of Christ, who
intercedes continually for us to God the Father. After this he gave thanks, and
blessing the Bread and Wine, he took the Bread and brake it, and gave to every
one of it, bidding each of them, Remember that Christ had died for them, and
feed on it spiritually* So taking the Cup, he bade them, Remember that Christ's
blood was shed for them, etc. And after he gave thanks and prayed for them.
When he had done, he told them, That he would neither eat nor drink more in
this life; and so retired to his Chamber. Immediately after came to him (sent
from the Cardinal) two executioners; one brought him a coat of Linen died
black, and put it upon him; The other brought some baggs full of Powder, which
they tied to several parts of his body: Thus having dressed him, they brought
him to an outer Room, near to the gate of the Castle; Then the fire was made
ready, and the Stake at the West port of the Castle, near to the Priory. Over
against the place of execution, the Castle Windows were hung with rich hangings
and Velvet Cushions, laid for the Cardinal and Prelates, who from thence did
feed their eyes with the torments of this innocent man. The Cardinal dreading
that Master George should have been taken away by his friends; Before had
commanded to bend all the ordnance of the Castle right against the place of
execution; and commanded all his Gunners to be ready, and stand beside their
Gunnes, unto such time as he was burnt. All this being done, they bound Master
George his hands behind his back, and with sound of Trumpet, led him forth
with the Soldiers, from the Castle, to the place of their cruel and wicked
execution. As he came forth of the Castle gate, there met him certain beggars,
asking of him alms for Gods sake; To whom he answered, I want my hands,
wherewith I was wont to give you alms; But the merciful Lord, of his
benignity and abundant grace, that feeds all men, vouchsafe to give you
necessaries both unto your bodies and souls. Then afterward met him two false
Fiends, (I should say Friars) saying, M. George, pray to your Lady, that she
may be a Mediatrix for you to her Son: To whom he answered meekly; Cease,
tempt me not, I entreat you. After this he was led to the fire, with a rope
about his neck, and a chain of iron about his middle.

When that he came to the fire he sat down upon his knees, and rose again;
And thrice he said these words; O thou Savior of the world, have mercy on me:
Father of heaven, I commend my spirit into thy holy hands. When he had made
this Prayer, he turned him to the people, and said these words, having obtained
leave to speak a little: I beseech you Christian brethren and sisters, that ye
be not offended at the Word of God, for the affliction and torments which ye
see already prepared for me. But I exhort you that ye love the Word of God for
your salvation, and suffer patiently, and with a comfortable heart, for the
Words sake, which is your undoubted salvation, and everlasting comfort.
Moreover, I pray you, show my brethren and sisters, which have heard me often
before, that they cease not, nor leave off to learn the word of God which I
taught them, after the grace given unto me, for no persecutions nor troubles in
this world, which last not: And show unto them that my Doctrine was no wives
fables, after the constitutions made by men; And if I had taught men's doctrine,
I had gotten greater thanks by men. But for the Words sake and true Gospel,
which was given to me by the grace of God, I suffer this day by men, not
sorrowfully, but with a glad heart and mind. For this cause I was sent, That I
should suffer this fire for Christ's sake. Consider and behold my visage, ye
shall not see me change my color: This grim fire I fear not, and so I pray you
for to do, if that any persecution come unto you for the Words ^ake; and not to
fear them that slay the body, Note.
and have no power afterward to slay the soul. Some have said of me, That I
taught that the soul of man should sleep until the last day: But I know
surely, and my faith is such, That my soul shall sup with my Savior this
night, ere it be six hours, for whom I suffer this. Then he prayed for them
which accused him, saying, I beseech the Father of heaven to forgive them that
have of any ignorance, or else of any evil mind forged lies upon me; I forgive
them with all my heart: I beseech Christ forgive them that have condemned me to
death this day ignorantly. And last of all, he said to the people on this
manner; I beseech you brethren and sisters to exhort your Prelates to the
learning of the Word of God* that they may be ashamed to do evil, and learn to
do good; And if they will not convert themselves from their wicked error,
there shall hastily come upon them the wrath of God, which they shall not
eschew. Many faithful words said he in the mean time, taking no heed or care
of the cruel torments which were then prepared for him. Then the Executioner
that was his tormentor, sat down upon his knees, and said, Sir, I pray you
forgive me, for I am not guilty of your death. To whom he answered, Come hither
to me: When he was come to him, he kissed his cheek, and said, Lo here is a
token that I forgive thee, my heart, do thy Office: And then by and by the
Trumpet sounding, he was tied to the stake, and the fire kindled. The Captain
of the Castle, for the love he bore to M. Wischarde, drew so near to the fire,
that the flame thereof did him harm; he wished M. Wischarde to be of good
courage, and to beg from God the forgiveness of his sins; to whom M. Wischarde
answered thus; This fire torments my body, but no ways abates my spirit. Then
M. Wischarde looking toward the Cardinal, said, He who in such state, from
that high place, feeds his eyes with my torments, within few days shall be
hanged out at the same window, to be seen with us much ignominy, as he now
leans there in pride. Then with this, the Executioner drawing the Cord, stopped
his breath; presently after, the fire being great, he was consumed to powder.
The Prelates would not suffer any prayers to be made for him, according to their
Custom. After the death of Master Wischarde, the Cardinal was cried up by his
flatterers, and all the rabble of the corrupt Clergy, as the only Defender of
the Catholic Church, and punisher of heretics, neglecting the authority of
the sluggish Governor: And it was said by them, That if the great Prelates of
latter days, both at home and abroad, had been so stout and zealous of the
credit of the Catholic Church, they had not only suppressed all heretics,
but also kept under the Laymen, who were so froward and stubborn. On the
other side, when that the people beheld the great tormenting of that innocent,
they could not withhold from piteous mourning, and complaining of the innocent
lambs slaughter. After the death of this blessed Martyr of God, began the
people in plain speaking, to damn and detest the cruelty that was used; yea,
men of great birth and estimation and honor at open tables avowed, That the
blood of the said Master George should be revenged, or else it should cost life
for life: and that in a short time they should be like hogs kept for slaughter,
by this vicious Priest, and wicked Monster, which neither minded God, nor cared
for man. Amongst those that spoke against the Cardinals cruelty, John Lesley,
brother to the Earl of Rothes was chief, with his Cozen Norman Lesley, who had
been a great follower of the Cardinal, and very active for him but a little
before, fell so foul with him, that they came to high reproaches one with
another. The occasion of their falling out was a private business, wherein
Norman Lesley said he was wronged by the Cardinal: On the other side, the
Cardinal said he was not with respect used by Norman Lesley his inferior. The
said John Lesley in all companies spared not to say, That that same dagger
(showing forth his dagger) and that same hand should be put in the Cardinals
breast. These brutes came to the Cardinals ears: Note.
but he thought himself stout enough for all Scotland: For in Babylon, that
is, in his new Block-House, he was sure, as he thought, and upon the fields he
was able to match all his enemies: And to speak the truth, the most part of the
Nobility of Scotland had either given unto him their Bands of Manred, or else
were in confederacy, and promised amity with him, and so he gave his bastard
eldest daughter in Marriage to the Earl of Crawford his eldest son and heir,
and caused the Wedding to be celebrate with such State, as if she had been a
Princes lawful daughter. He only feared them in whose hands God did deliver
him, and for them he laid his nets so secretly (as that he made a full count)
that their feet could not escape, as we shall after hear. And something of his
former practices we may recompt. After Easter he came to Edinburgh, to hold the
Seingnye (as the Papists termed then their unhappy Assembly of Baals shaven
sort) It was bruted that something was purposed against him at that day by the
Earl of Angus and his friends, whom he mortally feared, and whose destruction
he sought; but it failed, and so returned he to his strength; yea, to his god
and only comfort, as well in heaven as in earth; and there he remained without
all fear of death, promising to himself no less pleasure then did the rich man
of whom mention is made by our Master in the Gospel; for he did not only say,
Eat and be glad, my soul, for thou have great riches laid up in store for many
days; but he said, Tush, a fig for the fools, and a button for the bragging
of heretics, and their assistance in Scotland: Is not my Lord Governor mine?
witness his eldest son in pledge at my table. Have I not the Queen at my own
devotion (he meant of the mother Mary that now 1566 raigns) Is not France my
friend, 1566
and I am friend to France? What danger should I fear? And thus in vanity the
carnal Cardinal delighted himself a little before his death. But yet he had
devised to have cut off such as he thought might trouble him: For he had
appointed the whole Gentlemen of Fyfe to have met him at Falkland the Monday;
but he was slain upon the Saturday before. His treasonable purpose was not
understood, and it was this; That Norman Lesley, Sheriff of Fyfe, and apparent
heir to his Father the Earl of Rothes* the foresaid John Lesley, Father brother
to Norman; the Lairds of Grange, elder and younger; Sir James Learmond of
Darsie, and Provost of Saint Andrews; and the faithful Lord of Raith, should
either have been slain, or else taken, and after to have been used at his
pleasure. This enterprise was disclosed after his slaughter, partly by Letters
and Memorialls found in his chamber, but plainly affirmed by such as were of
the counsel. Many purposes were devised, how that wicked man might have been
taken away; But all fails, till Friday the twenty eighth of May, 1546.
anno 1546. when the aforesaid Norman came at night to Saint Andrews, William
Kirkaldie of Grange younger, was in the Town before, waiting upon the purpose.
Last came John Lesley as aforesaid, who was most suspected: What conclusion
they took that night, it was not known, but by the issue that followed. But
early upon the Saturday in the morning, the 29 of May, were they in sundry
Companies in the Abbey Churchyard, not far distant from the Castle: First, the
Gates being open, and the Drawbridge letten down, for receiving of Lime and
Stones, and other things necessary for building (for Babylon was almost
finished) First, we say, assayed William Kirkcaldie of Grange younger, and with
him six persons, and getting entry, held purpose with the Porter, If my Lord
was walking; who answered, No: (and so it was indeed, How the Cardiall was
occupied the night before that in the morning he was slain.
for he had been busy at his compts with Mistress Marion Ogilbie that night,
who was espied to depart from him by the privy Posterne that morning; and
therefore quietness, after the rules of Physic, and a morning sleep, was
requisite (for my Lord.) While the said William and the Porter talks, and his
servants made them to look the work and workmen, approached Norman Lesley with
his company; and because they were in great number, they easily gat entry.
They address to the midst of the Court: and immediately came John Lesley,
somewhat rudely, and four persons with him: The Porter fearing, would have
drawn the Bridge; but the said John being entered thereon, stayed it, and leapt
in* And while the Porter made him for defense, his head wa^ broken, the Keys
taken from him, and he cast into the ditch, and so the place was seized. The
shout arises; the workmen, to the number of more then a hundred, ran off the
walls, and were without hurt put forth at the Wicket Gate. The first thing that
ever was done, William Kirkaldie took the Guard of the privy Posterne, fearing
lest the Fox should have escaped. Then go the rest of the Gentlemen's Chambers,
and without violence done to any man, they put more then fifty persons to the
Gate: The number that enterprised and did this, was but sixteen persons. The
Cardinal wakened with the shouts, asked from his window, What meant that
noise? It was answered, That Norman Lesley had taken his Castle: Which
understood, he ran to the Posterne; but perceiving the passage to be kept
without, he returned quickly to his Chamber, took his two handed sword, and
caused his Chamberlain to cast Chests and other impediments to the door. In
this mean time came John Lesley unto it, and bids open. The Cardinal asking,
Who calls; he answered, My name is Lesley. He demanded, Is that Norman? The
other says, Nay, my name is John. I will have Norman, says the Cardinal, for
he is my friend. Content your self with such as are here, for other you shall
have none. There were with the said John, James Melvene, a man familiarly
acquainted with Master George Wischarde, and Peter Carmichaelle, a stout
Gentleman. In this mean time, while they force at the door, the Cardinal hides
a box of gold under coals that were laid in a secret corner. At length he
asks, Will ye save my life? The said John answered, It may be that we will.
The Cardinals demand.
Nay (says the Cardinal) Swear unto me by Gods wounds, and I will open you.
Then answered the said John, It that was said, is unsaid; and so cried; Fire,
fire, (for the door was very strong) and so was brought a chimley full of
burning coals, which perceived, the Cardinal or his Chamberlain (it is
uncertain) opened the door, and the Cardinal sat down in a chair, The
Cardinals confession.
and cried, I am a Priest, I am a Priest, ye will not slay me. The said John
Leslie (according to his former Vows) stroke him first once or twice, and so
did the said Peter. But James Melvin (a man of nature most gentle and most
modest) perceiving them both in choler, withdrew them, and said, This work and
judgment of God (although it be secret) ought to be done with greater gravity.
And presenting unto him the point of the sword, The fact and words of James
Melvin.
said, Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but especially of the shedding of
the blood of that notable instrument of God M. George Wischarde, which albeit
the flame of fire consumed before men, yet cries it for vengeance upon thee,
and we from God are sent to revenge it. For here before my God, I protest, That
neither the hatred of thy person, the love of thy riches, nor the fear of any
trouble thou could have done to me in particular, moved, or moves me to
strike thee; But only because thou have been, and remainest an obstinate enemy
against Christ Jesus and his holy Gospel. And so he stroke him twice or thrice
through with a stog sword: And so he fell, never word heard out of his mouth,
The Cardinals last words.
but I am a Priest, fie, fie, all is gone.

While they were thus busied with the Cardinal, the fray rose in the Town, the
Provost assembles the Commonalty, and comes to the house side, crying, What
have ye done with my Lord Cardinal? Where is my Lord Cardinal? Have ye slain
my Lord Cardinal? They that were within answered gentlely; Best it were for
you to return to your own houses, for the man ye call the Cardinal has
received his reward, and in his own person will trouble the world no more. But
then more inragedly they cry, We shall never depart till that we see him. And
so was he brought to the East block-house head, and showed dead over the wall,
to the faithless multitude, which would not believe before they saw, and so
they departed without Requiem aeternam, and requiescat in pace, sung for his
soul. Now because the weather was hot (for it was in May, as ye have heard)
and his funerals could not suddenly be prepared, it was thought best to keep
him from stinking to give him great salt enough, a cope of lead, and a corner
in the bottom of the sea Tower (a place where many of Gods children had been
imprisoned before) to await what exequies his brethren the Bishops would
prepare for him. Advertisement to the Reader.
These things we write merrily, but we would that the Reader should observe
Gods just judgments, and how that he can deprehend the worldly wise in their
own wisdom, make their table to be a snare to trap their own feet, and their
own purposed strength to be their own destruction. These are the works of our
God, whereby he would admonish the tyrants of this earth, that in the end he
will be revenged of their cruelty, what strength soever they make in the
contrary. But such is the blindness of man (as David says) that the posterity
does ever follow the footsteps of their wicked fathers, and principally in
their impiety. For how little differs the cruelty of that bastard, that yet is
called Bishop of S. Andrews, from the cruelty of the former we will after hear.

The death of this aforesaid Tyrant, as it was pleasing to some, to wit, to
those who had received the Reformation of Religion, for they were mightily
afraid of him* and also to sundry Romanists whom he kept under as slaves; so on
the other side it was dolorous to the Priests, dolorous to the Governor,
dolorous to the Queen Dowager: for in him perished faithfulness to France,
Note.
and the comfort to all Gentle-women, and especially to wanton widows: His
death must be revenged. To the Court again repaires the Earl of Angus, and his
brother Sir George; labor is made for the Abbacie of Arbroth, and a grant was
once made of the same (in memory whereof George Douglas, bastard son to the
said Earl, is yet called Postulant.) But it was more proper (think the
Hamiltons) for the Governors itching, then for reward to the Dowglasses; And
yet in hope thereof, the said Earl, and Sir George his brother, were the first
that voted, that the Castle of S. Andrews should be besieged: Diverse Gentlemen
of Fyfe went into the Castle, and abode there with the Leslies during the first
siege; and John Rough was Preacher to them. The Bishop, The Bishop of S Andrews
was glad, and yet made himself to be angry at the slaughter of the Cardinal.
to declare the zeal that he had to revenge the death of him that was his
predecessor (and for his riches he would not have had him living again) still
blew the coals. And first he made summons, then he denounced accursed, at last
rebels, not only the first enterprisers, but all such also as after did
accompany them. And last of all a siege was concluded, which began in the end
of August (for the 23 day thereof departed the Soldiers from Edinburgh) and
continued near to the end of January. At what time, because they had no other
hope of winning of it, but by hunger, and thereof also they despaired, for they
within had broken through the East wall, and made a plain passage by an iron
gate to the sea, which greatly relieved the besieged, and abased the besiegers;
for then they saw that they could not stop them of victuals, unless that they
should be masters of the sea, and that they clearly understood they could not
be; for the English Ships had once been there, and had brought William
Kirkcaldie from London, and with much difficulty (because the said gate was
not then prepared) and some loss of men, had rendered him to the Castle
again; and had taken with them to the Court of England, John Leslie, and
Master Henry Balnaves, for perfecting of all Contracts betwixt them and the
King Henry, who promised to take them into his protection, Upon what conditions
King Henry took the castle of S. Andrews into his protection.
upon condition only that they should keep the Governors son, my Lord of
Arrane, and stand friends to the Contract of Marriage, whereof before we have
made mention. These things clearly understood (we say) by the Governor and his
Counsel, the Priests and the shaven sort; they concluded to make an
appointment, to the end, that under Truce, they might either get the Castle
betrayed, or else some principal men of the company taken at unawares. The
first ^iege lasted from August to January.
In which dressing was the Abbot of Dunfermeling principal; and for that
purpose had the Lord of Monquhanie (who was most familiar with those of the
Castle) labored with foot and hand, and proceeded so in his traffic, that
from entering in day light, at his pleasure, he gat license to come in in the
night, whenever it pleased him. But God had not appointed so many to be
betrayed, albeit that he would that they should be punished, and that justly,
as hereafter we shall hear.

The Heads of the colored appointment were;
1. That they should keep the Castle of S. Andrews still, while that the
Governor and the authority of Scotland should get unto them a sufficient
absolution from the Pope Antichrist of Rome, for the slaughter of the Cardinal
aforesaid. 2. That they should deliver pledges for the deliverie of that house,
as soon as the aforesaid absolution was delivered unto them. 3. That they,
their friends, familiars and servants, and others to them pertaining, should
never be pursued in Law, by authority, for the slaughter aforesaid. But that
they should enjoy commodities, spiritual or temporal, whatsoever they
possessed before the said slaughter, even as if it had never been committed.
That they of the Castle should keep the Earl of Arran so long as their Pledges
were kept.
And such like Articles liberal enough, for they never minded to keep word of
them, as the issue did declare. John Rough left the Castle, seeing he could do
little good upon those that were within, so addicted were they to their evil
ways; he went into England to Preach Gods Word there.

The appointment made, all the godly were glad, for some hope they had that
thereby Gods Word should somewhat bud, as indeed so it did: For John Rough (who
soon after the Cardinals slaughter entered within the Castle and had continued
in it during the whole siege) having left the Castle, because he could do
little good upon those that were with him; so addicted were they to their evil
ways, began to Preach in the city of S. Andrews. And albeit he was not the
most learned, yet was his doctrine without corruption, and therefore well liked
of the people. At the Easter after Anno 1547. came to the Castle of S. Andrews,
1547.
John Knox, John Knox goes into the Castle of S. Andrews.
who wearied of removing from place to place, by reason of the persecution that
came upon him by the Bishop of S. Andrews, was determined to have left
Scotland, and to have visited the Schools of Germany (of England then he had no
pleasure, by reason that although the Popes name was suppressed, yet his laws
and corruptions remained in full vigor.) But because he had the care of some
Gentlemen's children, whom certain years he had nourished in godliness. Their
fathers solicited him to go to S. Andrews, that himself might have the benefit
of the Castle, and their children the benefit of his Doctrine. And so (we say)
came he the time aforesaid to the said place; and having in his company Francis
Douglas of Langnidrie, George his brother, and Alexander Cokburne, eldest son
then to the Lord of Ormeston, began to exercise them, after his accustomed
manner. Besides the Grammar and other books of humane Learning, he read unto
them a Catechism, account whereof he caused them give publicly in the Parish
Church of S. Andrews. He read moreover unto them the Gospel of John, proceeding
where he left at his departure from Langnidrie, where before his residence was,
and that Lecture he read in the Chapel within the Castle at a certain hour.
They of the place, but specially M. Hen. Balnaves and John Rough Preacher,
perceiving the manner of his Doctrine, began earnestly to travel with him,
that he would take the Function of Preacher upon him: but he refused,
alleging that he would not run where God had not called him, meaning, that he
would do nothing without a lawful vocation. Whereupon they privily amongst
themselves advising, having with them in counsel Sir David Lindsay of the Mount
Sir David Lindsay King of Arms then, who fore the time had good light both in
Divine and Humane knowledge, as his works tell us.
, they concluded that they would give a charge to the said John, and that
publicly, by the mouth of the Preacher. And so upon a certain day, a Sermon of
the Eelection of Ministers, what power the Congregation (how small soever that
it was, passing the number of two or three) had above any man, namely, in the
time of need, as that was, in whom they supposed, and espied the gifts of God
to be; and how dangerous it was to refuse, and not to hear the voice of such
as desire to be instructed. These and other heads (we say) declared the said
John Rough Preacher, directed by his words to the said John Knox, The first
Vocation by name of John Knox.
saying, Brother, ye shall not be offended, albeit that I speak unto you that
which I have in charge even from all those that are here present, which is
this: In the Name of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and in the name of these
that presently call you by my mouth, I charge you that ye refuse not this holy
Vocation, but as ye tender the glory of God, the increase of Christ's Kingdom,
The edification of your Brethren, and the comfort of me, whom ye understand
well enough to be oppressed by the multitude of labors, That ye take upon you
the public office and Charge of Preaching, even as ye look to avoid Gods
heavy displeasure, and desire that he shall multiply his Graces upon you. And
in the end he said to those that were present, Was not this your Charge to me?
And do ye not approve this Vocation? They answered, It is, and we approve it.
Whereat the said M. John abashed, burst forth in most abundant tears, and
withdrew himself to his Chamber: His countenance and behavior, from that day,
till the day that he was compelled to present himself to the public place of
Preaching, did sufficiently declare the grief and trouble of his heart; for no
man saw any sign of mirth of him, neither yet had he pleasure to accompany any
man, for many days together. The necessity that caused him to enter in the
public Place, besides the Vocation aforesaid, was Dean John Annan (a rotten
Papist) had long troubled John Rough in his Preaching. The said John Knox had
fortified the Doctrine of the Preacher by his Pen, and had beaten the said Dean
John from all defenses, Dean John. Annan.
that he was compelled to fly to his last refuge; that is, To the authority of
the Church, which Authority, said he, damned all Lutherans and Heretics, and
therefore he needed no further disputation. John Knox answered, Before we hold
our selves, or that ye can prove us sufficiently convinced, we must define the
Church by the right notes given to us in Gods Scripture, of the true Church: we
must discern the Immaculate Spouse of Jesus Christ, from the mother of
Confusion, Spiritual Babylon; lest that imprudently we embrace a Harlot,
instead of the chaste Spouse; yea, to speak it in plain words, Lest that we
submit our selves to Satan, thinking that we submit our selves to Jesus
Christ: For as for your Roman Church, as it is now corrupted, and the
Authority thereof, wherein stands the hope of your Victory, I no more doubt but
that it is the Synagogue of Satan; and the Head thereof, called the Pope, to
be that man of Sin of whom the Apostle speaks, then that I doubt that JESUS
CHRIST suffered by the procurement of the visible Church of Jerusalem. The
offer of John Knox first and last unto the Papists.
Yea, I offer my self by word or writing, to prove the Roman Church this day
farther to degenerate from the purity which was in the days of the Apostles,
then was the Church of the Jews from the Ordinance given by Moses, when they
consented to the innocent death of JESUS CHRIST. These words were spoken in the
open audience of the Parish Church of Saint Andrews, after the said Dean John
had spoken what it pleased him, and had refused to dispute. The people hearing
the offer, cried with one consent, We cannot all read your writings, but we
can all hear your Preaching: Therefore we require you in the Name of God, That
ye let us hear the approbation of that which ye have affirmed: The first
public ^reaching of John Knox, made in the Parish Church of S. Andrew^^.
For if it be true, we have been miserably deceived. And so the next Sunday
was appointed to the said John, to express his mind in the public Preaching
place: Which day approaching, the said John took the Text written in Daniel,
the seventh Chapter, beginning thus; And another King shall rise after them,
and he shall be unlike unto the first, and he shall subdue three Kings, and
shall speak words against the most High, and shall consume the Saints of the
most High, and think that he can change Times and Laws: And they shall be
given unto his hands until a time, and times, and dividing of times, etc. In
the beginning Babylon, for the most part, and made a short discourse of the
four Empires, The Babylonian, The Persian, That of the Greeks, And the fourth
of the Romans; in the destruction whereof, rose up that last Beast, which he
affirmed to be the Roman Church; for to none other power that ever has yet
been, do all the notes that God has showed to the Prophet appertain, except
to it alone; And unto it they do so properly appertain, that such as are not
more then blind, may clearly see them. But before he began to open the
corruptions of Papistrie, he defined the true Church, showed the true notes of
it, whereupon it was built, why it was the Pillar of Verity, and why it could
not err; to wit, Because it heard the voice of the only Pastor, JESUS CHRIST,
would not hear a stranger, neither would be carried with every wind of
Doctrine. Every one of these heads sufficiently declared, he entered to the
contrary; and upon the notes given in his Text, he showed that the Spirit of
God in the new Testament gave to this King other new names; to wit, The man of
sin, The Antichrist, The Whore of Babylon. He showed, That this man of sin, or
Antichrist, was not to be restrained to the person of any one man only, no
more then by the fourth Beast, was to be understood the person of any one
Emperor. But by such names the Spirit of God would forewarne his chosen of a
body and a multitude, having a wicked head, which should not only be sinful
himself, but also should be occasion of sin, to all that should be subject unto
him (as Christ Jesus is the cause of Justice to all the Members of his Body)
and is called the Antichrist, that is to say, One contrary to Christ, because
that he is contrary to him in Life, Doctrine, Laws, and Subjects. And there
began to decipher the lives of diverse Popes, and the lives of all the
Shavelings for the most part: Their Doctrine and Laws, he plainly proved to
repugne directly to the Doctrine and Laws of God the Father, and of Christ
Jesus his Son. This he proved by conferring the Doctrine of Justification
expressed in the Scriptures, which teach that man is justified by Faith only;
That the blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all our sins. And the Doctrine
of the Papists, Contra Dei Spiritu^ ad G^lat. cap. 2 v^r 17. and 11.
which attribute Justification to the works of the Law, yea, to the works of
men's inventions, as Pilgrimage* Pardons, and other such baggage. That the
Papisticall laws repugned to the Laws of the Gospel, he proved, by the Laws
made of observation of days, Note.
abstaining from meats, and from Marriage, which Christ Jesus made free; and
the forbidding whereof, Saint Paul calls the doctrine of devils. In handling
the notes of that Beast given in the Text, he willed men to consider if these
notes (There shall another rise, unlike to the other, having a mouth speaking
great things and blasphemous) could be applied unto any other, but to the Pope,
and his kingdom: For if these (said he) be not great words and blasphemous,
The great word^ which Ant. christ speaks.
The Head of the Church, most holy, most blessed, that cannot err; That can
make right of wrong, and wrong of right; That of nothing can make somewhat; And
that had all verity in the Shrine of his breast; yea, That had power of all, and
none power of him. Nay, not to say, That he does wrong, although he draw ten
thousand Millions of souls with himself to hell. If these (said he) and many
other, easy to be shown in his own Cannon-Law, be not great and blasphemous
words, and such as never mortal men spoke before, let the world judge. And yet
(said he) is there one most evident of all, to wit, John in his Revelation
says, That the Merchandise of that Babylonian Harlot, among other things,
shall be the bodies and souls of men. Now let very Papists themselves judge, If
any before them, took upon them power to relax the pains of them that were in
Purgatory, as they affirm to the people that daily they do, by the merits of
their Mass, and of their other trifles. In the end he said, If any here (and
there were present Master John Maire, John Knox had been disciple in his first
years to John Maire,
the University, the Sub-Prior, and many Cannons, with some Friars of both the
Orders) that will say, That I have alleged Scripture, Doctor, or History,
otherwise then it is written, let them come unto me with sufficient witness,
and by conference I shall let them see, not only the Original where my
Testimonies are written, but I shall prove, That the Writers meant as I have
spoken. Of this Sermon, which was the first that ever John Knox made in
public, was diverse brutes: Some said, He not only hewes the branches of
Papistry, but he strikes at the root also, to destroy the whole. Others said,
If the Doctors, and Magistri nostri, defend not now the Pope and his Authority,
which in their own presence is so manifestly impugned, the devil may have my
part of him, and of his Laws both. Others said, Master George Wischarde spoke
never so plainly, and yet he was burnt, even so will he be. In the end others
said, The Tyranny of the Cardinal made not his cause the better, Note.
neither yet the suffering of Gods servant made his cause the worse. And
therefore we would counsel you and them to provide better defenses then fire
and sword; for it may be that else ye will be disappointed; men now have other
eyes then they had then. This answer gave the Lord of Nydrie, a man fervent
and upright in Religion. The bastard Bishop, who yet was not execrated
(consecrated the Sub-Prior of S. Andrews, who ( Sede vacant) was Vicar
General, That he wondered that he suffered such Heretical and Schismatic
Doctrine to be taught, and not to oppose himself to the same. Upon this
rebuke, was a convention of gray-Friers, and black-Fiends appointed, with the
said Sub-Prior Deane John Winrame, in S. Leonards Yard, whereunto was first
called John Rough, and certain Articles read to him. And thereafter was John
Knox called for. The cause of their convention, and why that they were called,
is expounded. And the Articles were read, which were these.

1. No mortal man can be the head of the Church. 2. The Pope is an Antichrist,
and so is no member of Christ's mystical body. 3. Man may neither make nor
devise a Religion that is acceptable to God, but man is bound to observe and
keep the Religion that from God is received, without chopping or changing
thereof. 4. The Sacraments of the New Testament, ought to be ministered as they
were instituted by Christ Jesus, and practiced by his Apostles, nothing ought
to be added unto them, nothing ought to be diminished from them. 5. The Mass
is abominable Idolatry, blasphemous to the death of Christ, and a profanation
of the Lords Supper. 6. There is no Purgatory, in the which the souls of men
can either be pined or purged after this life. But heaven rests to the
faithful, and hell to the reprobate and unfaithful. 7. Praying for the dead
is vain, and to the dead is Idolatry. 8. There is no Bishop, except he Preach
even by himself, without any Substitute. 9. The Tithes by Gods Law do not
appertain of necessity to the Churchmen.
The strangeness (said the Sub-Prior) of these Articles which are gathered
forth of your Doctrine have moved us to call for you, to hear your own answers.
John Knox said, I for my part praise my God, that I see so honorable, and
apparently so modest and quiet an Auditory: But because it is long since that I
have heard, that ye are one that is not ignorant of the Truth, I may crave of
you in the Name of God, yea, and I appeal your conscience, before that supreme
Judge; That if ye think any Article there expressed, contrary unto the Truth of
God, That ye oppose your self plainly unto it, and suffer not the people to be
therewith deceived. But on the other side, if in your conscience ye know the
Doctrine to be true, then will I crave your Patrocinie thereto; That by your
authority the people may be moved the rather to believe the Truth, whereof many
doubts, by reason of your thoughts. The Sub-Prior answered, I came not here as
a Judge, but only familiarly to talk, and therefore I will neither allow nor
condemn. But if ye list, I will reason.

The Sub-Prior. Why may not the Church (said he) for good causes devise
Ceremonies to decore the Sacraments, and other Gods Service.


John Knox. Because the Church ought to do nothing, but in Faith, and ought not
to go before, but is bound to follow the voice of the true Pastor.


The Sub-Prior. It is in Faith that the Ceremonies are commanded, and they have
proper significations to help our Faith, as the hards in Baptism signify the
roughness of the Law, and the oil the softness of Gods mercy; and likewise
every one of the Ceremonies has a godly signification, and therefore they both
proceed from Faith, and are done in Faith.


John Knox. It is not enough that man invent a Ceremony, and then give it a
signification according to his pleasure. For so might the Ceremonies of the
Gentiles, and this day the Ceremonies of Mahomet be maintained. But if that any
thing proceed from Faith, it must have the Word of God for its assurance. For
ye are not ignorant; That Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of
God. Now if that ye will prove that your Ceremonies proceed from Faith, and do
please God, ye must prove that God in express words has commanded them. Or
else shall you never prove that they proceed from Faith, nor yet that they
please God; but that they are sin, and do displease him, according to the
words of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.


The Sub-Prior. Will ye bind us so straight, that we may do nothing without
the express Word of God. What and I ask drink, Think ye that I sin? and yet
I have not Gods Word for me. This answer gave he as might appear to shift over
the Argument upon the Friar, as that he did.


John Knox. I would ye should not jest in so grave a matter, neither would I
that ye should begin to hide the Truth with Sophistry, and if ye do, I will
defend it the best that I can. And first to your drinking, I say, that if ye
either eat or drink without assurance of Gods Word, that in so doing ye
displease God, and sin in your very eating and drinking. For says not the
Apostle (speaking even of meat and drink) That the creatures are sanctified
unto men, even by word and prayer. The word is this, All things are clean to
the clean. Now let me hear this much of your Ceremonies, and I shall give you
the Argument, but I wonder that they compare things profane and holy things so
indiscreetly together. The Question was not, nor is not of meat or drink,
whereinto the Kingdom of God consists not. But the Question is of Gods true
worshipping, without the which we can have no society with God. And here it is
doubted, if we may take the same freedom in the using of Christ's Sacraments,
that we may do in eating and drinking. One meat I may eat, another I may
refuse, and that without scruple of conscience. I may change one with another,
even as often as I please. Whether may we cast away what we please, and retain
what we please? If I be well remembered, Moses in the Name of God says to the
people of Israel; All that the Lord thy God commands thee to do, that do thou
to the Lord thy God, add nothing to it, diminish nothing from it. By these
rules think I that the Church of Christ will measure Gods Religion, and not by
that which seems good in their own eyes.


The Sub-Prior. Forgive me, I spoke it but in mowes, and I was dry. And now
father (said he, to the Friar) follow the argument, ye have heard what I have
said, and what is answered to me again.


Arbugkill gray-Frier. I shall prove plainly that Ceremonies are ordained by
God.


John Knox. Such as God has ordained we allow, and with reverence we use them.
But the question is of those that God has ordained, such as in Baptism, are
spittle, salt, candle, (except it be to keep the barn from the cold) hardes,
oil, and the rest of the Papisticall inventions.


Arbugkill. I will even prove those that ye damn to be ordained of God.


John Knox. The Proof thereof I would gladly hear.


Arbugkill. Says not Saint Paul, that another foundation then Jesus Christ,
may no man lay. But upon this foundation, Some build gold, silver, and precious
stones, some hay, stubble, and wood. The gold, silver, and the precious stones
are the Ceremonies of the Church, which do abide the fire, and consumes not
away, etc. This place of Scripture is most plain, says the foolish fiend.


John Knox. I praise my God through Jesus Christ, for I find his promise sure,
true, and stable. Christ Jesus bids us not fear when we shall be called before
men to give confession of his Truth, for he promises that it shall be given
unto us in that hour what we shall speak. If I had sought the whole
Scriptures, I could not have produced a place more proper for my purpose, nor
more potent to confound you. Now to your Argument. The Ceremonies of the Church
(say ye) are gold, silver, and precious stones, because they are able to abide
the fire. But I would learn of you, What fire is it which your Ceremonies do
abide? And in the mean time, while ye be advised to answer, I will show my
mind, and make an Argument against yours, upon the same Text. And first, I
say, that I have heard this Text adduced for a proof of Purgatory, but for
defense of Ceremonies, I never heard nor yet read it. But omitting whether ye
understand the mind of the Apostle or not; I make my Argument and say: That
which can abide the fire, can abide the Word of God; But your Ceremonies cannot
abide the Word of God. Ergo, They cannot abide the fire. And if they may not
abide the fire, then are they not gold, silver, nor precious stones. Now if ye
find any ambiguity in this term Fire, Note.
which I interpret to be the Word, find ye me another fire, by the which
things builded upon Jesus Christ should be tried, then God and his Word, which
both in the Scriptures are called fire; and I shall correct mine Argument.


Arbugkill. I stand not thereupon, but I deny your Minor; to wit, That our
Ceremonies may not abide the trial of Gods Word.


John Knox. I prove, That abides not the trial of Gods Word, which Gods Word.
condemns: But Gods Word condemns your Ceremonies; Therefore they do not abide
the trial thereof. Optima Collatio.
But as a thief abides the trial of the Inquest, and thereby is condemned to
be hanged, even so may your Ceremonies abide the trial of Gods Word, but not
else. And now in few words to make plain that wherein ye may seem to doubt, to
wit, that Gods Word damnes your Ceremonies, it is evident: For the plain and
strait Commandment is, Deuteronomy. 4.
Not that thing that appears good in thine eyes shall thou do to the Lord thy
God but what the Lord thy God has commanded thee, that do thou; add nothing
to it, diminish nothing from it. Now unless that ye be able to prove that God
has commanded your Ceremonies, this his former Commandment will damn both you
and them.


The Friar somewhat abashed what first to answer, while he wanders about in the
mist, he falls in a foul mire. For alleging that we may not be so bound to
the Word, Note.
he affirmed, That the Apostles had not received the Holy Ghost when they did
write their Epistles, but after they received him, and then they ordained
Ceremonies (few would have thought that so learned a man would have given so
foolish an answer, and yet it is even as true as he did bear a gray Coull) John
Knox, hearing the answer, start, and said, If that be true, I have long been in
an error, and I think I shall die therein. The Sub-Prior said to him, Father,
What say ye? God forbid that ye affirm that; for then farewell the ground of
our faith. The Friar astonished, made the best shift that he could to correct his
fault, but it would not be. John Knox brought him often again to the ground of
the Argument. But he would never answer directly, but ever fled to the
authority of the Church: whereto the said John answered ofter then once, That
the Spouse of Christ had neither power nor authority against the Word of God.
Then said the Friar, If so be, ye will leave us no Church. Indeed, said the
other, in David I read that there is a Church of the Malignants; Psalm. 26.5.
for he says, Odi Ecclesiam malignantium: That Church ye may have without the
Word, and doing many things directly fighting against the Word of God. Of that
Church, if ye will be, I cannot hinder you. But as for me, I will be of none
other Church, except of that which has Jesus Christ to be Pastor, which hears
his voice, and will not hear a stranger. In this Disputation many other things
were merrily skoft over: For the Friar after his fall could speak nothing to
any purpose. For Purgatory, he had no better proof but the authority of
Virgil, in the sixth of his Aeneiads; and the pains thereof to him was an Evil
wife. John Knox answered that, and many other things as he himself witnesses,
Friar Arbucki^ls proof of Purgatory.
in a Treatise that he did write in the Galleys, containing the sum of his
Doctrine, and the confession of his Faith, and sent it to his familiars in
Scotland, with his exhortation, That they should continue in the Truth, which
they had professed, notwithstanding any worldly adversity that might ensue
thereof. The cause of the inserting of this Disputation.
Thus much of that disputation have we inserted here, to the intent that men
may see how Satan ever travelleth to obscure the Light, and how God by his
power working in his weak vessels, confounds the craft, and discloseth the
darkness of Satan.

After this the Papists and Friars, had no great heart of further disputation
or reasoning, but invented another shift, which appeared to proceed from
godliness, The practices of Papists, that their wickedness should not be
disclosed.
and it was this: Every learned man in the Abbey, and in the Universitie should
Preach in the Parish Church his Sunday about. The Sub-Prior began, followed the
Official, called Spittall (Sermons was penned) to offend no man, followed all
the rest in their ranks. And so John Knox smelled out the craft, and in his
Sermons which he made upon the Weeke-dayes, he prayed to God, that they should
be as busy in Preaching, when there should be more want of it, then there was
then. The protestation of John Knox.
Always (said he) I praise God that Christ Jesus is Preached, and nothing is
said publicly against the Doctrine that ye have heard. If in my absence they
shall speak any thing which in my presence they do not; I protest that ye
suspend your judgment, till that it please God ye hear me again.

God so assisted his weak Soldier, and so blessed his labors, that not only
all these of the Castle, but also a great number of the Town openly professed
by participation of the Lords Table, in the same purity, that now it is
ministered in the Churches of Scotland, with that same Doctrine that he had
taught unto them. M. James Balfoure once joined with the Church, and did
profess all Doctrine, taught by John Knox.
Amongst whom was he that now either rules, or else misrules Scotland, to wit,
Sir James Balfour (sometimes called M. James) the chief and principal
Protestant, that then was to be found within this Realm. This we write because
that we have heard, that the said Master James alleges, that he was never of
this our Religion, but that he was brought up in Martin Luthers opinion of the
Sacrament, and therefore he cannot communicate with us. But his own conscience,
and two hundred witnesses besides, know that he lies, and that he was one of
the chief (if he had not been after his cups) that would have given his life,
if men might credit his words, for defense of the doctrine, that the said John
Knox taught. But albeit that those that never were of us (as none of
Monquhauneys house have showed themselves to be) depart from us, it is no great
wonder. Filius sequitur patris iter.
For it is proper and natural, that the children follow the father, and let
the godly beware of that race and progeny, by eschewing it. For if in them be
either fear of God, or love of virtue, further then the present commodity
persuades them, men of judgment are deceived. But to return to our History.
The rage of the marked beasts at the Preaching of the Truth.
The Priests and Bishops enraged at all these proceedings that were in Saint
Andrews, ran now upon the Governor, now upon the Queen, now upon the whole
Counsel, and there might have been heard complaints and cries* What are we
doing? Shall we suffer this whole Realm to be infected with pernicious
Doctrine; fie upon you, and fie upon us. The Queen, and Monsieur d'Osell (who
then was a secretis mulierum in the Court) comforted them, The first coming of
Galleys* Anno 1547. And the second Siege of the Castle

The treasonable act of the Governor, and Queen Dowager.


and willed them to be quiet, for they should see remedy or it were long. And
so it proved indeed: For upon the nine and twentieth day of June, appeared in
the sight of the Castle of Saint Andrews, one and twenty French Galleys with a
great Army, the like whereof was never seen in that Haven before. This
treasonable means had the Governor, the Bishop, the Queen, and Monsieur
d'Osell, under their appointment drawn. But to excuse their Treason, eight
days before, they had presented an Absolution unto them, as sent from Rome,
containing, after the aggravation of the crime, this clause, remittimus
irremissibile, Note.
that is, The answer given to the Governor, when the Castle of S. Andrews was
required to be delivered.
We remit the crime that cannot be remitted: Which considered by the worst of
the company that was in the Castle, answer was given, That the Governor and
Council of the Realm had promised unto them a sufficient and assured
absolution, which that appears not to be, and therefore they could not
deliver the House, neither thought they that any reasonable man would require
them so to do, considering that promise was not kept unto them. The next day
after that the Galleys were arrived, they summoned the House: Which being
denied (because they knew then no Magistrates in Scotland) they prepared for
Siege; and first they began to assault by Sea, and shot two days; but thereof
they neither got advantage nor honor, for they threw down the Slates of
houses; but neither slew man, nor did harm to any wall. But the Castle handled
them so, The Gunners goddess.
that Sancta Barbara (the Gunners goddess) helped them nothing, for they lost
many of their Rowers, men chained in the Galleys, and some Soldiers both by
Sea and Land. And farther, a Galley that approached nearer then the rest, was
so beaten with the Cannon, and other Ordinance, that she was stricken under
water, and almost drowned, and so she had been, had not the rest given her
succor in time, and drawn her to the west Sands, without the sho^ of the
Castle, and afterward to Dundie; where they remained, till that the Governor,
who then was at the Siege of Langhope, came unto them with the rest of the
French Faction. The Siege by Sea and Land was laid about the Castle of S.
Andrews the three and twentieth day of July: The Trenches were cast, Ordnance
was planted upon the Abbey Church, and upon Saint Salvators College (and yet
was the Steeple thereof burnt) and some upon the street that leads to the
Castle, Commonly called, The old College.
which so annoyed the Castle, that neither could they keep their Block-house,
the Sea Tower head, nor the west wall; for in all those places men were slain
by great Ordnance: yea, they mounted the Ordnance so high upon the Abbey
Church, that they might discover the ground of the court of the Castle in
diverse places. Moreover, within the Castle was the plague (and diverse therein
died) which more affrayed some that were therein, then did the external force
without. But Io. Knox was of another judgment; for he ever said, That their
corrupt life, having fallen into all kind of licentiousness, The sentence of
John Knox ^o the Castle of S. Andrews b^^fore it was won.
puffed up with pride of their success, and relying upon England for help in
case of need, could not escape the punishment of God; and that was his
continual advertisement, from the time that he was called to Preach. When they
triumphed of their Victory (the first twenty days they had many prosperous
chances) he lamented, and ever said, They saw not what he saw: when they
bragged of the force and thickness of their walls, Note.
he said they should be but egge-shells. When they vaunted, England will rescue
us, he said, Ye shall not see them; but ye shall be delivered into your enemies
hands, and shall be carried into a strange Country.

Upon the nine and twentieth of July at night, was the Ordnance planted for the
Battery thirteen Cannons, whereof four were Cannons Royal, King Henry of
England being dead.
called double Cannons, besides other Pieces. The Battery began at four of the
clock in the morning; and before ten hours of the day, the whole South quarter,
betwixt the fore Tower, and the East Blockhouse, was made faltable. The lower
Gallery was stopped, diverse slain in it; and the East Block-house was shot off
from the place. Betwixt ten of the clock and eleven, there fell a shower of
rain, that continued near an hour, the like whereof had seldom been seen; it
was so vehement, that no man might abide without a house. The Cannons were left
alone. Prior of Cappua Leon St^ozi.
Some within the Castle were of judgment, that men should have issued, and put
all in the hands of God. But because that William Kirkcaldie was coming with
the Prior of Cappua, who had the Commission of that Journey from the King of
France, nothing was enterprised. And so appointment made, and the Castle
rendered, upon Saturday the last of July. The Heads of the Appointment were;
That the lives of all within the Castle should be saved, as well English as
Scots, that they should be safely transported to France. And in case that upon
conditions which by the King of France should offered unto them, The Castle of
S. Andrews refused in greatest extremity to treat with the Governor, fearing
the cruelty of his weak nature, in revenging the death of his Cousin the
Cardinal.
they could not be content to remain in service and freedom there, they
should upon the King of France his expenses be safely conveyed to what Country
they would, other then Scotland. With the Governor they would have nothing
ado, neither with any Scottish-man, for they had all traitorously betrayed them
(which, said the Lord of Grange elder, a man simple, and of most stout
courage, I am assured God shall revenge it or it be long.) The Galleys well
furnished with the spoil of the Castle aforesaid, after certain days returned
to France, and escaped a great danger (for upon the back of the Sands they all
chocked) they arrived at Felcam in November, and thereafter passed up the water
of Sequane, and lay before Roan, where the principal Gentlemen who looked for
freedom, were dispersed, and put in sundry prisons; the rest were left in the
Galleyes, and there miserably use. Amongst whom, the foresaid Master James
Balfour was, with his two brethren, David and Gilbert; which we write, because
that we hear that the said Master James, principal misguider now of Scotland,
denies that he had any thing to do with the Castle of Saint Andrews, or yet
that ever he was in the Galleys: among others, John Knox was in the Galleys all
the Winter. Then was the joy of the Papists, both of Scotland and of France,
even in full perfection; for this was their song of triumph: Priests content
you now, Priests content you now,
For Norman and his company have filled the Galleys fow.


The Pope wrote Letters to the King of France, and so did he to the Governor
of Scotland, thanking him heartily for taking pains to revenge the death of his
kind creature the Cardinal of Scotland, desiring them to continue in their
begun severity, that such things thereafter should not be attempted. So were
all those that were deprehended in the Castle, condemned to perpetual prison:
And the ungodly judged, That after this, Christ Jesus should never triumph in
Scotland. On thing we cannot pass by: From Scotland was sent a famous Clerk
(laugh not Reader) M. John Hammilton of Milburne, with credit to the King of
France, and unto the Cardinal of Loraine (and yet he had neither French nor
Latin, and some say his Scottish tongue was not very good.) The sum of his
Negotiation was, That those of the Castle should be sharply handled: In the
which Suit he was heard with favor, and was dispatched from the Court of
France with Letters, and great credit, which that famous Clerk forgate by the
way. For passing up to the Mountain of Dumbartane, before his letters were
delivered, he brake his neck, and so God took away a proud ignorant enemy. But
now to our History. These things against promise (for Princes have no Fidelity
further then for their own advantage) done at Roan, Nulla fides Rogni Socii,
etc.
the Galleys departed to Nantes in Britanie. Where, upon the water of Lore,
they lay the whole Winter. In Scotland that Summer was nothing but mirth, for
all went with the Priests even at their own pleasure. The Castle of S. Andrews
was razed to the ground; the Block-house thereof cast down, and the walls
round about demolished. Whether this was to fulfill their law, which commands
that places where Cardinals are slain, so to be used; or else for fear that
England should have taken it, as after they did Brouchtie Rock, we remit to the
judgment of such as were of counsel.

This same year, in the beginning of September, enters Scotland an Army of
ten thousand men from England by Land, Pinckey Cl^^ch.
and some Ships with Ordnance come by Sea. The Governor and the Bishop hereof
advertised, gathered together the Forces of Scotland, and assembled at
Edinburgh. Duke of Sommerset.
The Protector of England, with the Earl of Warwick and their Army, remained
at Praeston, and about Praeston Panes; for they had certain Offers to propose
unto the Nobility of Scotland, concerning the promise before made by them, unto
the which King Henry before his death gently required them to stand fast: And
if they would so do, of him nor of his Realm they should have no trouble, but
the help and the comfort that he could make them in all things lawful. And
hereupon there was a Letter directed to the Governor and Council; which
coming to the hands of the Bishop of Saint Andrews, he thought it could not be
for his advantage that it should be divulgate; and therefore by his craft it
was suppressed. Upon the Friday the seventh of September, the English Army
marched toward Leith, and the Scottish Army marched from Edinburgh to Ennernes.
The whole Scottish Army was not assembled, and yet the skirmishing began; for
nothing was concluded but Victory, The security of the Scotishmen at Pinckey
Clewch.
without stroke. The Protector, the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Gray, and all
the English Captains were playing at the Dice. No men were stouter then the
Priests and Channons with their shaven crowns, and black Jacks. The Earl of
Warwick, and the Lord Gray, who had the chief charge of Horsemen, perceiving
the Host to be molested with the Scottish Preachers, and knowing that the
multitude were neither under order nor obedience (for they were divided from
the great Army) sent forth certain Troops of Horsemen, and some of their
Borderers, either to fetch them, or else to put them out of their sight, so
that they might not annoy the Host. Fridays chase.
The Skirmish grew hot, and at length the Scotish-men gave back, and fled
without gain turn: The chase continued far, both toward the East, and toward
the West; in the which many were slain, and he that now is Lord Home, was
taken, which was the occasion that the Castle of Home was after surrendered to
the English men. The loss of these men neither moved the Governor, nor yet
the Bishop his bastard brother, bragging, That they would revenge the matter
well enough upon the morrow; for they had hands enough (no word of God) the
English heretics had no faces, Brags.
they would not abide. Upon the Saturday the Armies of both sides past to
Array. The English Army takes the middle part of Fawside hill, having their
Ordnance planted before them, and having their Ships and two Galleys brought as
near the Land, as water would serve. The Scottish Army stood first in a
reasonable strength, and good order, having betwixt them and the English Army
the water of Esk (otherwise called Mussylburgh water) But at length a charge
was given, in the Governors behalf, with sound of Trumpet, That all men should
march forward, and go over the water. Some say that this was procured by the
Abbot of Dunfermeling, and Master Hew Rig, for preservation of Carbarrie. Men
of judgment liked not the journey; for they thought it no wisdom to leave
their strength. But commandment upon commandment, and charge upon charge was
given, which urged them so, that unwillingly they obeyed. The Earl of Angus
being in the Vant-guard, had in his company the Gentlemen of Fyfe, of Angus,
Mearnes, and the Westland, with many others, that of love resorted unto him;
and especially those that were professors of the Gospel, for they supposed that
England would not have made great pursuit of him. He passed first through the
water, and arrayed his Host, direct before the enemies: Followed the Earl of
Huntley, with his Northland men: Last come the Governor, having in his company
the Earl of Argyle, with his own friends; and the Body of the Realm. The
Englishmen perceiving the danger; and how that the Scotish-men intended to
have taken the top of the hill, made to prevent the peril. The Lord Gray was
commanded to give the charge with his men at Arms, which he did, albeit the
hazard was very unlikely. For the Earl of Angus Host stood even as a wall, and
received the first assaulters, upon the points of their Spears (which were
longer then those of the Englishmen) so rudely, The repulse of the Horsemen
of England.
that fifty Horse and men of the first rank lay dead at once, without any hurt
done to the Scottish Army, except that the Spears of the former two Ranks were
broken. Which Discomfiture received, the rest of the Horsemen fled, yea, some
passed beyond Fawside Hill; the Lord Gray himself was hurt in the mouth, and
plainly denied to chage again; for he said, It was alike to run against a
Wall. The Galleyes and the ships, and so did the ordnance, planted upon
Myde-hill shoot terribly. But the ordnance of the Galleys shooting amongst the
Scottish Army affraied them wonderously. And while that every man labored to
draw from the North, from whence the danger appeared, they begin to fail, and
with that were the English footmen marching forward: Albeit that some of their
horsemen were upon the flight. The Earl of Angus army stood still, looking
that either Huntly or the Governor should have recountred the next battle.
But they had decreed that the favorers of England, and the Heretics (as the
priests called them) and the Englishmen should part it betwixt them for that
day. The fear rises, and at an instant, they which before were victors, and
were not yet assaulted with any force (except with ordnance, as is said) cast
from them their spears and fled: So that Gods power was so evidently seen, that
in one moment, yea at one instant time, both the armies were fleeing. The shout
came from the hill, from those that hoped no victory upon the English part. The
shout rises (we say) They flee, they flee, but at the first it could not be
believed, till at the last, it was clearly seen, that all had given back, and
still began the cruel slaughter (which was the greater, by reason of the late
displeasure of the men of arms) the chase and slaughter lasted till near
Edinburgh upon the one part, and toward Dalketh upon the other. The number of
the slain upon the Scottish side, were judged nigh ten thousand men. The Earl
of Huntly was taken and carried to London: But he relieved himself, being
surety for many reasons, Honesty or unhonesty, we know not, but as the brute
was, he used policy with England. In that same time was slain the Master of
Erskin, dearly beloved of the Queen: for whom she made great lamentation, and
bare his death many days in mind. When the certainty of the discomfiture
came, she was in Edinburgh, abiding upon tidings. But with expedition she
posted that same night to Sterlin with Monsieur Dosell, Note.
who was as fearful as a Fox when his hole is smoaked. And thus did God take
the second revenge upon the perjured Governor, with such as assisted him to
defend an unjust quarrel. Albeit that many innocents fell amongst the midst
of the wicked. The English army came to Leyth, and their taking order with
their prisoners and spoil, they returned with this victory (which they looked
not for) to England. That Winter following was great hearships made upon all
the borders of Scotland, Broughtie mountain was taken by the Englishmen, and
besieged by the Governor, Note.
but still kept: And at it was slain Gawine, the best of the Hamiltons, and the
ordnance left. Whereupon the Englishmen encouraged, began to fortify upon the
hill above Broughty house, which was called, The fort of Broughty, and was very
noisome to Dundie, which it burnt and laid waste, and so did it the most part
of Angus, which was not assured, and under friendship with them.

The Lent following was Hadington fortified by the English men: The most part
of Lothian, from Edinburgh East, was either assured or laid waste. Note.
This did God plague in every quarter. But men were blind, and would not, nor
could not consider the cause. The Lairdes Ormeston and Brunstone, were
banished, and after sore assaulted, and so were all those of the Castle of S.
Andrews. The sure knowledge of the troubles of Scotland coming to France, there
was prepared a Navy and Army. The Navy was such as never was seen to come
from France for the support of Scotland, for besides the Galleys, being twenty
two in number, they had threescore great Ships, besides Victuallers. How soon
so ever they took the plain seas, the red Lion of Scotland was displayed, and
they holden as rebels unto France (such policy is no falsehood in Princes) for
good peace stood betwixt France and England. Note.
And the King of France approved nothing that they did. The chief men to whom
the conducting of the Army was appointed, were Monsieur Dandelott, Monsieur de
Terms, and Peter Strozi. In their journey they made some harship upon the
coast of England, but it was not great. They arrived in Scotland in May, in the
year of our Lord 1549. 1549.
The Galleys did visit the Fort of Broughtie, but did no more at that time.
Preparations were made for the siege of Hadington, but it was another thing,
that they meant, as the issue declared. The whole body of the Realm assembled,
The Parliament at Hadington.
the form of a Parliament was set to be holden there, to wit, in the Abbey of
Hadington. The principal head was, the Marriage of the Princess (by the State
before contracted to King Edward) to the King of France, and of her present
deliverie, by reason of the danger she stood in, by the invasion of the old
enemies of England. Some were corrupted with buds, some deceived by flattering
promise, and some for fear were compelled to consent; for the French Soldiers
were the officers of Arms in that Parliament. Note.
The Lord of Balcleuch, a bloody man, with many Gods-wounds, swore, They that
would not consent, should do worse. The Governor got the Title of Duke of
Chattelherauld, with the order of the Cockle, and a Pension of 12000. lib.
turn. with a full discharge of all intermissions, with King James the fifth his
treasure and substance whatsoever, with possession of the Castle of Dumbartane,
till that issue should be seen of the Queens body. With these and other
conditions stood he content to sell his Sovereign out of his own hands, The
Dukes fact and what appears to follow thereof.
which in the end will be his destruction. God thereby punishing his former
wickedness (if speedy repentance prevent not Gods judgments, which we
heartily wish) Huntly, Argyle, and Angus, were likewise made Knights of the
Cockle; and for that and other good deeds received, Experience has taught, and
further will declare.
they sold also their part. Shortly none was found to resist that unjust
demand. And so was she sold to go to France; To the end, that in her youth, she
should drink of that liquor that should remain with her all her life time for a
plague to this Realm, and for her own ruin. And therefore albeit that now a
fire comes out of her, that consumes many, let no man wonder she is Gods hand,
in his displeasure punishing our former ingratitude. Let men patiently abide
Gods appointed time, and turn unto him with hearty repentance, then God will
surely stop the fire that now comes from her, by sudden changing her heart to
deal favorably with his people; or else by taking her away, or by stopping her
to go on in her course by such means as he shall think meet in his wisdom, for
he having all in his hand disposes of all, and does with all according to his
own will, unto which we must not only yield, but also be heartily pleased with
it, since it is absolutely good, and both by Sacred and Profane History we are
taught to do so; for in them we find, That Princes have been raised up by his
hands to punish his people; But when they turned unto him with hearty
repentance, he either turned the heart of the Prince to deal kindly with his
people, or else did take him away, or at least did stop his violent course
against his people. Of this, the examples are so frequent, that we spare to
name them here. But to return to our History.

This conclusion, That our Queen (without further delay) should be delivered
to France. The siege of Hadington.
The siege continued, great shooting, but no assaulting, and yet they had fair
occasion offered unto them. For the Englishmen approaching to the Town, for
the comforting of the besieged, with powder, victuals, Tuesdayes chase.
and men, lost an Army of six thousand men. Sir Robert Bows was taken, and the
most part of the borderers were taken or slain. And so might the Town justly
have despaired of any further succor to have been looked for. But yet it held
good for the stout courage and prudent government of Sir James Wolford General,
who did so encourage the whole Captains and Soldiers, that they determined to
die upon their walls. But from the time that the Frenchmen had gotten the
Bone, for the which the Dog barked, the pursuit of the Town was slow. The siege
was raised, and the Queen she was conveyed by the west seas to France, with 4
Galleys and some Ships. And so the Cardinal of Loraine got her in his keeping,
a morsel I assure you, meet for his own mouth. We omit many things that
occurred in this time, as the sitting down of the Ship, called, The Cardinal
(the fairest Ship in France) betwixt S. Colmes Inch and Cramond, without any
occasion except negligence, for the day was fair and weather calm. But God
would show, Note.
that the Country of Scotland can bear no Cardinals. In this time also was
there a Combat betwixt the Galleys and the English Ships. They shot frankely a
while. An English Ship took fire, or else the Galleys had come short home, and
as it was, they fled without mercy, till that they were above S. Colmes Inch.
The Captains left the Galleys, and took a Fort, made in the Inch, for their
defense. But the English Ships made no pursuit (except that they burnt the
Cardinal, where she lay) and so the Galleys and the Galley-men did both escape.

Order was taken that the next September some Galleys should remain in
Scotland, and that the rest should return to France, as they did all, except
one that was taken by an English Ship, (by an English Ship, only we say) as
they were passing betwixt Dover and Calice.

That winter remained Monsieur de Arfe in Scotland, with the bands of
Frenchmen. They fortified Enneresk, to stay the English that they should not
invade Edinburgh and Leyth. Some skirmishes there were betwixt the one and the
other, but no notable thing done, except that the French had almost taken
Hadington; The occasion whereof was this:

The Frenchmen thinking themselves more then masters in all parts of Scotland,
and in Edinburgh principally, thought they could do no wrong to no
Scottish-man. For a certain Frenchman delivered a Colvering to George Tod,
Scottish-man, to be stocked, who bringing it through the street, another
Frenchman claimed it, and would have taken it from the said George, but he
resisted, alleging that the Frenchman did wrong: Thus began parties to
assemble, as well to the Scottish-man as to the French, so that two of the
Frenchmen were stricken down, and the rest chased from the Cross to
Nudris-winde-head. The Provost being in the street, apprehended two of the
French, and was carrying them to the Tolbuith, but from Monsieur de Essies
lodging, or close, issued forth Frenchmen, to the number of threescore
persons, with drawn swords, and resisted the said Provost. Then the Town
assembling, repulsed them, till that they came to the nether Bow. And there
Monsieur de la Chapelle, with the whole bands of Frenchmen armed recountred
the said Provost, The slaughter of the Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh.
and violently repulsed him (for the Town was without weapons, for the most
part) and so made invasion upon all that they met. And first in the entry of
the Bow were slain David Kyrk, and David Barber (being at the Provosts back)
and afterward was slain the said Provost himself, being Lord of Stanehouse,
and Captain of the Castle, James Hamilton his son, William Chapman, M. William
Stuart, William Purvesse, and a woman named Elizabeth Stuart. And thereafter
tarried within the Town by force, from five of the clock till after seven at
night, and then retired to the Cannon gate, as to their receptacle and refuge.

The whole Town, yea the Governor and Nobility commoved at the unworthiness
of this bold attempt, craved justice upon the malefactors, or else they would
take justice of the whole. The Queen craftily enough, Monsieur de Essie, and
Monsieur Doseil, labored for pacification, and promised, That unless the
Frenchmen by themselves alone, should do such an act as might recompense the
wrong that they had done, that then they should not refuse, but that Justice
should be executed to the rigor. These fair words pleased our fools, and so
were the French bands the next night directed to Hadington, to the which they
approached a little after midnight so secretly, that they were never espied till
that the foremost were within the outer Court, and the whole Company in the
Churchyard, not two pair of Buts length distant from the Town. The Soldiers
Englishmen were all asleep except the watch, the which was slender; and yet
the shout arises, Bows and Bills, Hadington almost surprised by the French.
Bows and Bills; which is signification of extreme defense, to avoid the
present danger in all Towns of war. They affrighted arise, weapons that first
came to hand serve for the need. One amongst many came to the Eastgate, where
lay two great pieces of Ordnance, and where the enemies were known to be, and
cried to his fellows, that were at the gate making defense. Beware before, and
so fires a great piece, and thereafter another, which God so conducted, that
after them was no further pursuit made: for the Bullets redounded from the wall
of the Frier-Church, to the wall of S. Katherines Chapel, which stood
directly over it, and from the wall of the said Chapel to the said Church
wall again, so often, that there fell more then an hundred of the French at those
two shots only. They shot often; but the French retired with diligence, and
returned to Edinburgh without harm done, except the destruction of some
drinking Beer, which lay in the Sands, Chapel, and Church. And this was
satisfaction more then enough, for the slaughter of the foresaid captain, and
Provost, and for the slaughter of such as were slain with them. This was the
beginning of the French fruits.

This winter, in the time of Christmas, was the Castle of Hume recovered from
the English, by the negligence of the Captain, named Dudley. This winter also
did the Lord of Raith most innocently suffer, The recovery of the Castle of
Home.
and after was forsalted, because that he wrote a Letter to his son John
Melvin, who then was in England, which was alleged to have been found in the
house of Ormeston; The death of the Lord of Raith.
but many suspected the pranks and craft of Ninian Cokburne, now called Captain
Ninian, to whom the said Letter was delivered. But howsoever it was, the cruel
beast the Bishop of S. Andrews, and the Abbot of Dunfermeling, ceased not, till
that the head of that noble man was stricken from him; especially, because that
he was known to be one that unfainedly favored the Truth of Gods Word, and was
a great friend to those that were in the Castle of S. Andrews, of whose
deliverance, and of Gods wonderful working with them during the time of their
bondage, we will now speak, lest that in suppressing of so notable a work of
God, we should justly be accused of ingratitude. First then, the principalls
being put in several houses, The entertainment of those of the Castle of S.
Andrews, during their Captivity.
as before we have said, great labors were made to make them have a good
opinion of the Mass: But chiefly, travel was taken upon Norman Leslie, the
Lord of Grange, the Lord of Pitmillie, who were in the Castle of
Scherisburgh, that they would come to Mass with the Captain: Who answered,
That the Captain had commandment to keep their bodies, but he had no power to
command their consciences. Note.
The Captain replied, That he had power to command, and to compel them to go
where he went. They answered, That to go to any lawful place with him, they
would not refuse: But to do any thing that was against their conscience, they
would not, neither for him, nor yet for the King. The Captain said, Will ye not
go to the Mass? They answered, No; and if ye compel us, yet we will displease
you farther; for we will use our selves there, that all those that are present
shall know we despise it. These same answers (and somewhat sharper) William
Kirkcaldie, Peter Carmichell, and such as were with them in Mount S. Michell,
gave to their Captain; for they said, They would not only hear Mass every
day, but that they would help to say it, providing that they might stick the
Priests, or else they would not. M. Henry Balnaves, who was in the Castle of
Roan, was most sharply assaulted of all; for because he was judged learned (as
he was and is indeed) therefore learned men were appointed to travel with him;
with whom he had many conflicts, but God so ever assisted him, that they
departed confounded, and he by the power of Gods Spirit remained constant in
the Truth, and professing of the same, without any wavering, or declining to
Idolatry. In the prison he wrote a comfortable Treatise of Justification, Note.
and of the works and conversation of a man justified; which is extant to this
day. Those that were in the Galleys, were threatened with torments, if they
would not give reverence to the Mass (for at certain times the Mass was said
in the Galleys, or else hard by upon the shore, in presence of the Forsaris)
but they could never make the poorest of that company to give reverence to that
Idol: yea, when upon the Saturday at night they sung their Salve Regina, Note.
all the Scottish men put on their caps, This book was printed 1584. at
Edinburgh, by Tho. Vtro^^^.
their hoods, or such things as they had to cover their heads; and when that
others were compelled to kiss a painted board (which they called nostre Dame)
they were not pressed after once; for this was the chance. Soon after their
arrival at Nantes, their great salve was song, and a glorious painted Lady was
brought in to be kissed, and amongst others was presented to one of the Scottish
men then chained. A merry fact.
He gently said, Trouble me not; such a jewel is accursed, and therefore I
will not touch it. The Patron and the Arguiser, with two Officers, having the
chief charge of all such matters, said, Thou shall handle it: and so they
violently thrust to his face, Note.
and put it betwixt his hands. Who seeing the extremity, took the Idol, and
advisedly looking about him, he cast it into the River, and said, Let our Lady
now save her self; she is light enough, let her learn to swim. After that was
no Scottish man urged with that Idolatry. These are things that appear to be of
no great importance; and yet if we do rightly consider, they express the same
obedience that God requires of his people Israel, Jerem. 10.
when they should be carried to Babylon: for he gave charge unto them, When
they should see the Babylonians worship their gods of gold, silver, metal, and
wood, they should say, The gods that have not made heaven and earth, shall
perish from the heaven, and out of the earth. That confession gave that whole
number, during the time of their bondage, in the which would God they had
continued in their freedom; for then had not M. James Balfour been Official,
neither yet born a Cope for the pleasure of the Bishop. Note.
But to proceed: The said M. James Balfour being in the Galley with John Knox;
and being wondrous familiar with him, would oftentimes ask his judgment, If
he thought that ever they should be delivered? Whose answer was ever, from the
day that they entered into the Galleys, That God would deliver them from that
bondage, to his glory, even in this life. And lying betwixt Dundie and S.
Andrews, the second time that the Galleys returned to Scotland, the said John
Knox being so extremely sick, that few hoped his life, the said Master James
willed him to look to the Land, Quamvis multa sunt justorum mala etc.
and asked if he knew it? who answered, Yes, I know it well, for I see the
Steeple of that place, where God in public opened my mouth to his glory: And I
am fully persuaded, Note diligently the Prophecy.
how weak soever that I now appear, that I shall not depart this life, till
that my tongue shall glorify his holy Name in the same place. This reported
the said M. James, in the presence of many famous witnesses, many years before
that ever the foresaid John set his feet in Scotland this last time to Preach.

John Knox his answer and counsel to the captives.
William Kirkcaldie, then of Grange younger, Peter Carmichell, Robert and
William Leslies, who were altogether in Mount S. Michell, wrote to John Knox,
asking counsel if they might with safe conscience break their prison? Whose
answer was, That if without the blood of any shed or spilt by them for their
deliverance, they might set themselves at freedom, that they might safely do
it: But to shed any man's blood for their freedom, thereto would he never
consent. Adding further, That he was assured that God would deliver them, and
the rest of that company, even in the eyes of the world, but not by such means
as they looked for. That was by the force of friends, or by their other
labors. By such means he affirmed, they should not be delivered, but that God
would so work in in the deliverance of them, that the praise thereof should
redound to his glory only. He wills therefore every one to take the occasion
that God offered unto them. Providing that they did nothing against Gods
express Commandment for deliverance of themselves. He was the more earnest in
giving his counsel, because the old Lord of Grange and others repugned to
their purpose; fearing lest that the escaping of the others, should be an
occasion of their worse entreatment. Whereunto the said John answered, That
such fear proceeded not from Gods Spirit, but only from a blind love of thy
self, and therefore that no good purpose was to be stayed, for things that were
in the hands and power of God. And added, That in one instant, God delivered
the whole company into the hands of unfaithful men, but so would he not
relieve them: But some would he deliver by one means, and at one time, and
others must abide for a season upon his good pleasure. This counsel in the end
was embraced, Le jour de Roys au soir quand else erient le Roy boit.

The escaping of William Kirkcaldie and of his fellows forth of Mount Saint
Michell.


upon the Kings even, when French men commonly use to drink liberally. The
aforesaid four persons having the help and conducting of a boy of the house,
bound all that were in the Castle, put them in sundry houses, locked the doors
upon them, took the Keys from the Captain, and departed without harm done to
the person of any, or without touching of any thing that appertained to the
King, Captain, or the house.

Great search was made through the whole Country for them. But it was Gods good
pleasure so to conduct them, that they escaped the hands of the faithless,
albeit it was with long travel, and great pain and poverty sustained; for the
French boy left them, and took with him the small money that they had: And so
neither having money, nor knowledge of the Country. And farther, fearing that
the boy should discover them (as that in very deed he did) they purposed to
divide themselves, to change their garments, and to go in sundry parts. The two
brethren, Will. and Rob. Leslie (who now are become, Note.
the said Robert especially, enemies to Christ Jesus, and unto all virtue) came
to Roan; Will. Kirkcaldie, and Peter Carmichell, in beggars garment came to
Conquet; and by the space of 12 or 13 weeks they traveled as poor Mariners,
from Port to Port, till at length they gat a French Ship, landed in the West of
Scotland, and from thence came to England, where they met before them the said
Io. Knox, who that same Winter was delivered, and Alexander Clerk in his
company. The said John was first appointed Preacher to Barwick, then to
Newcastle, last he was called to London, and to the South part of England,
where he remained till the death of King Edward the sixth. When he left England,
he then passed to Geneva, and there remained at his privy study, till that he
was called by the Congregation that then was assembled at Franckford, to be
Preacher to them: which Vocation he obeyed (albeit unwillingly) at the
commandment of that notable servant of God, John Calvin: At Franckford he
remained, till that some of the learned (whose names we suppress) more given
to unprofitable Ceremonies, then to sincerity of Religion began to quarrel
with the said John; and because they despaired to prevail before the Magistrate
there, To show what is contained in this Admonition, we have caused it to be
printed at the end of this History.
for the establishing of their corruptions, they accused him of treason
committed against the Emperor, and against their Sovereign Queen Mary; That
in his Admonition to England he called the one little inferior to Nero, and
the other more cruel then Iesabell; The Magistrate perceiving their malice,
and fearing that the said John should fall in the hands of his accusators, by
one mean or by other gave advertisement secretly to him to depart their City,
for they could not save him, if he were required by the Emperor, or by the
Queen of England in the Emperors name. And so the said John returned to
Geneva, from thence to Diep, and thereafter to Scotland, as we shall after hear.

The time and that Winter that the Galleys remained in Scotland, were delivered
M. James Balfour his two brethren, David and Gilbert, John Anchinlek, John
Sibald, John Gray, William Gutrie, and Stevin Bell. The Gentlemen that remained
in prisons, were by the procurement of the Queen Dowager to the Cardinal of
Loraine, and to the King of France, set at liberty in the month of July, 1550
anno 1550. who shortly thereafter were called to Scotland, their peace
proclaimed, and they themselves restored to their lands, in despite of their
enemies. And that was done in hatred of Duke Hamilton, because that then France
began to have the Regiment of Scotland in their own hands. Note.
Howsoever it was, God made the hearts of their enemies to set them at liberty
and freedom. There rested a number of common servants yet in the Galleys, who
were all delivered upon the Contract of peace that was made betwixt France and
England, after the taking of Bullen; and so was the whole company set at
liberty, none perishing (no not before the world) except James Melvin, who
departed from the misery of this life in the Castle of Breast in Britaigne. This
we write, to let the posterity to come to understand how potently God wrought
in preserving and delivering of those that had but a small knowledge of his
truth, and for the love of the same hazarded all. That if either we now in our
days having greater light, Note diligently.
or our posterity that shall follow us, shall see a fearful dispersion of
such as oppose themselves to impiety, or take upon them to punish the same
otherwise then laws of men will permit: If we, say we, or they, shall see such
left of men, yea, as it were despised and punished of God, yet let us not damn
the persons, that punish vice (and that for just cause) nor yet despair but
that the same God that dejects (for causes unknown to us) will raise up again
the persons dejected to his glory and their comfort. And to let the world
understand in plain terms what we mean, The slaughter of that villain Davie.
that great abuser of this Commonwealth, that pultron, and vile knave Davie,
was justly punished the ninth of March, in the year of our Lord 1565. for
abusing of the Commonwealth, and for his other villainies, which we lift not to
express, by the counsel and hands of James Douglas Earl of Mortoun, Patrick
Lord Lindsay, and the Lord Ruthwen, with other assisters in the company, who
all for their just act, and most worthy of all praise, are now unworthily left
of all their brethren, and suffer the bitterness of banishment and exile But
this is our hope in the mercies of our God, That this same blind Generation
whether it will or not, shall be compelled to see, That he will have respect to
them that are injustly pursued, That he will pardon their former offenses, That
he will restore them to the liberty of their Country and Commonwealth again;
And that he will punish (in despite of man) the head and the tail, that now
troubles the just, and maintains impiety. The head is known, the tail has
two branches. The rulers of Mary, anno ^566. and their prediction.
The temporal Lords that maintain such abominations as we see, and flattering
counselors of State, blasphemous Balfour, now called clerk of Register,
Sinclare Dean of Lestarrig, and Bp. of Brechen, blind of one eye in the body,
but of both of his soul, upon whom God shortly after took vengeance. Leslie
Preistesgate, Abbot of Londrosse, and Bishop of Rosse. Simon Preston, of
Cragmillar, a right Epicurian: Whose end will be ere it be long according to
their works. But now to return to our History.

Hadington being kept, and much hearship done about in the Country (for what
the Englishmen destroyed not, that was consumed by the French) God begins to
fight for Scotland: For in the Town he sent a Plague so contagious, that with
great difficulty could they have their dead buried. They were often refreshed
with new men, but all was in vain. Hunger and plague within, and the pursuit of
the enemy with a camp volant lay about them, and intercepted all victuals
(except when they were brought by a Convoy from Barwick) so constrained them
that the Council of England was conpelled in the spring time, to call their
Forces from that place. And so spoiling and burning some part of the Town, they
left it to be occupied to such as first should take possession, and those were
the Frenchmen, with a mean number of the ancient inhabitants, and so did God
perform the words and threatenings of M. George Wischard, who said, Note.
That for that contempt of Gods Messenger, they should be visited with sword
and fire, with pestilence, strangers and famine; All which they found in such
perfection, that to this day yet, that Town has neither recovered the former
beauty, nor yet men of such wisdom and ability, as then did inhabit it.
Hereafter was Peace contracted betwixt France, England, and Scotland; yea, a
several Peace was contracted betwixt Scotland and Flanders together with all
the Easterlings. So that Scotland had peace with the world. But yet would their
Bishops make War against God: For as soon as ever they got any quietness,
they apprehended Adam Wallace, alias, Fian, a simple man without great
learning, but one that was zealous in godliness, and of an upright life: He,
with his wife Beatrice Levingstonne, frequented the company of the Lady
Ormeston, for instruction of her children, during the trouble of her husband,
who then was banished. This Bastard, called Bishop of S. Andrews, took the said
Adam forth of the place of Wynton (men supposed that they thought to have
apprehended the Lairde) and carried him to Edinburgh, where after certain days
he was presented to judgment in the Church of the Black Thieves, The
accusation of Adam Wallace and his answers.
alias, Friars, before Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Huntly, and diverse others
besides. The Bishops and their rabble, they began to accuse him (Master John
Lawder was his accusator) That he took upon him to Preach. He answered, That he
never judged himself worthy of so excellent a vocation, and therefore he never
took upon him to Preach; but he would not deny, that sometimes at Table, and
sometimes in some other privy places he would read and had read the
Scriptures, and had given such exhortation as God pleased to give to him, The
Papisticall manner of accusation.
to such as pleased to hear him. Knave, quoth one, What have you to do to
meddle with the Scripture? I think, (said he) it is the duty of every
Christian, to seek the will of his God, and the assurance of his salvation
where it is to be found, and that is within the Old and New Testament. What
then (said another) shall we leave to the Bishops and Churchmen for to do? if
every man shall be a babbler upon the Bible. It becomes you (said he) to speak
more reverently of God; and of his blessed Word: if the Judge were uncorrupted
he would punish you, for your blasphemy. But to your Question, I answer; That
albeit ye and I, and other five thousand within this Realm should read the
Bible, and speak of it, what God should give us to speak, yet left we more to
the Bishops to do, then either they will do, or can do. For we leave to them
publike^y to Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to feed the flock, which he
has redeemed by his own blood, and has commanded the same to all true
Pastors. And when we leave this unto them, me thinks, we leave to them a heavy
burden; And that we do unto them no wrong, although we search our own salvation
where it is to be found, considering that they are but dumb Dogs, and unsavory
Salt, that has altogether lost the season. The Bishops hereat offended, said,
What prating is this? Note.
Let his accusation be read. And then was begun, False Traitor, Heretic;
Adam Wallace his accusations and answers.
Thou Baptizedst thine own Child. Thou said, There is no Purgatory; Thou
said, That to pray to Saints, and for the dead, is Idolatry, and a vain
Superstition, etc. What say thou to these things. He answered, If I should
be bound to answer, I would require an upright and an indifferent Judge. The
Earl of Huntly disdainefully said; Foolish man, Will thou desire any other
Judge then my Lord Dukes Grace, great Governor of Scotland; and my Lords the
Bishops, and the Clergy here present? Whereto he answered; The Bishops can be
no Judges to me, for they are open enemies to the Doctrine that I profess. And
as for my Lord Duke, I cannot tell whether he has the knowledge that should be
in him that should judge and discern betwixt Lies and the Truth, the
Inventions of men, and the true worshipping of God. I desire Gods Word (and
with that he produced the Bible) to be judge betwixt the Bishops and me, and I
am content that ye all hear; and if by this Book I shall be convinced, to have
taught, spoken, or done, in matters of Religion, any thing that repugneth to
Gods will, I refuse not to die. But if I cannot be convinced (as I am assured
by Gods Word I shall not) then I in Gods name desire your assistance, That
malicious men execute not upon me unjust Tyranny. The Earl of Huntley said,
What a babbling fool is this? Thou shall get none other Judges then these that
sit here. Whereunto the said Adam answered; The good will of God be done: But
be ye assured, Note.
my Lord, with such measure as ye mete to others, with the same measure it
shall be met to you again. I know that I shall die, but be ye assured, that my
blood shall be required at your hands. Alexander, Earl of Glencarne, yet
alive, said to the Bishop of Orknay, and others that sat nigh him,
Protestation of the Earl of Glencarne.
Take heed all you my Lords of the Clergy, for here I protest, for my part,
that I consent not to his death: And so without fear prepared the said Adam to
answer. And first to the Baptizing of his own Child, Note.
he said, It was and is as lawful to me, for lack of a true Minister, to
Baptize my own Child, as that it was to Abraham to Circumcise his son Ismael,
and his family. And as for Purgatory, Praying to Saints, and for the dead, I
have often read (said he) both the New and Old Testaments, but I neither could
find mention, nor assurance of them; And therefore I believe that they are but
mere inventions of men, devised for covetousness sake. Well, quoth the
Bishop, ye hear this, my Lords. What say thou of the Mass, speires the
Earl of Huntly? He answered, I say, my Lord, as my Lord Jesus Christ says,
That which is in greatest estimation before men, is abomination before God.
Then all cried out, Heresy, Heresy. And so was the simple servant of God
adjudged to the fire, which he patiently sustained that same day at afternoon
upon the Castle-hill.

And so began they again to pollute the land which God had lately plagued, for
yet their iniquity was not come to full ripeness, as that God would that they
should be manifested to this whole Realm (as this day they are) to be Fagots
prepared for everlasting fire; and to be men whom neither Plagues may correct,
nor the light of Gods Word convert from their darkness and impiety.

The Peace as is said, is contracted. The Queen Dowager past by sea to France,
with Galleys that for that purpose were prepared, and took with her diverse of
the Nobility of Scotland. The Earls Huntley, Glencarne, Mershell, Cassiles:
The Lords Maxwell, Fleiming, Sir George Douglas, together with all the late
Kings natural sons, and diverse Barons, and Gentlemen of Ecclesiastical
estate; the Bishop of Galloway, and many others, with promise that they should
be richly rewarded for their good service. What they received we cannot tell,
but few were made rich at their returning. The Dowager had to practice somewhat
with her brethren, the Duke of Gwise, and the Cardinal of Loraine. The weight
whereof the Governor after felt; for shortly after her return, was the
Governor deposed of the government (justly by God, but most unjustly by man)
and she made Regent, in the year of our Lord 1554. and a Crown put upon her
head, as seemly a sight (if men had eyes) as to put a Saddle upon the back of
an unruly Cow. And so began she to practice, practice upon practice, How France
might be advanced, her friends made rich, and she brought to immortal glory:
For that was her common talk, So that I may procure the wealth and honor of my
Friends, and a good fame unto my self, I regard not what God do after with me.
And in very deed, in deep dissimulation to bring her own purpose to effect,
she passed the common sort of women, as we will after hear. But yet God, to
whose Gospel she declared her self enemy, in the end frustrated her of all
her devices. Thus did light and darkness strive within the Realm of Scotland:
The darkness ever before the World suppressing the light, from the death of
that notable servant of God, The death and virtues of Edward the sixth.
Master Patricke Hamilton, until the death of Edward the sixth, the most godly
and most virtuous King that had been known to have reigned in England, or
elsewhere, these many years by past, who departed the miseries of this life
the sixth of July, Anno 1553. The death of this Prince was lamented of all the
godly within Europe, for the graces given unto him of God, as well of nature,
as of erudition and godliness, passed the measure that accustomably is used to
be given to other princes in their greatest perfection, and yet exceeded he not
16 years of age. What Gravity, above age? What Wisdom, wherein he passed all
understanding or expectation of man? And what Dexterity in answering in all
things proposed, were in that excellent Prince. The Ambassadors of all
Countries (yea, some that were mortal enemies to him, and to his Realm,
amongst whom the Queen Dowager of Scotland was not the least) could and did
testify: For the said Queen Dowager returning from France through England,
communed with him at length, and gave record when she came to this Realm, That
she found more wisdom and solid judgment in young King Edward, then she
would have looked for in any three Princes that were then in Europe. His
liberality toward the godly and learned that were in other Realms persecuted
was such, as Germans, Frenchmen, Italians, Scots, Spaniards, Polonians,
Grecians, and Hebrews born, can yet give sufficient document. For how
honorably was Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, John Alasco, Emanuel Gualterus, and
many others upon his public stipends entertained, their parents can witness,
and they themselves during their lives would never have denied. After the death
of this most virtuous Prince; of whom the godless people of England (for the
most part) were not worthy, Satan intended nothing less then the light of
Jesus Christ utterly to have been extinguished within the whole Isle of
Britain. For after him was raised up in Gods hot displeasure, that Idolatresse
and mischievous Mary of the Spaniards blood, a cruel persecutrix of Gods
people, as the acts of her unhappy reign can sufficiently witness. And in
Scotland that same time (as we have heard) reigned that crafty practiser, Mary
of Loraine, then named Regent of Scotland, who bound to the devotion of her two
brethren, the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal of Loraine, did only abide the
opportunity to cut the throat of all those, in whom she suspected any knowledge
of God to be within the Realm of Scotland. And so thought Satan that his
kingdom of darkness was in quietness and rest, as well in the one Realm as
in the other. But that provident eye of our eternal God, who continually
watches for preservation of his Church, did so order all things, that Satan
shortly after found himself far disappointed of his conclusion taken. For in
that cruel persecution used by Queen Mary of England, Who first after the
death of King Edward began to preach in Scotland.
were godly men dispersed into diverse nations; of whom it pleased the goodness
of God to send some unto us for our comfort and instruction. And first came a
simple man, William Harlaw, whose erudition, although it excel not, yet for
his whole and diligent plainness in Doctrine, is he to this day worthy of
praise, and remains a fruitful member within the Church of Scotland. After
him came that notable man John Willocke, as one that had some Commission to the
Queen Regent, from the Duchess of Emden. But his principal purpose was to
essay what God would work by him in his native country. These two did
sometimes in several companies assemble the brethren, who by their
exhortations began greatly to be encouraged, and did show that they had an
earnest thirst of godliness. And last came John Knox in the end of the
harvest, Anno 1555. who first being lodged in the house of that notable man of
God James Sime, began to exhort secretly in that same house, whereunto repaired
the Lord of Dun, David Forresse, and some certain personages of the Town,
Elizabeth Adamson, and her death.
amongst whom was Elizabeth Adamson, then spouse to James Barrone Burgess of
Edinburgh, who by reason that she had a troubled conscience delighted much in
the company of the said John, because that he, according to the grace given
unto him, opened more fully the Fountain of Gods Mercies, then did the common
sort of Teachers, that she had heard before (for she had heard none except
Friars) and did with such greediness drink thereof, that at her death she did
express the fruit of her hearing, to the great comfort it of all those that
repaired unto her. For albeit she suffered most grievous torment in her body,
yet out of her mouth was heard nothing, but praising of God, except that
sometimes she lamented the troubles of those that were troubled by her. Being
sometimes demanded by her sisters; What she thought of that pain which she then
suffered in body, in respect of that wherewith sometimes she was troubled in
spirit. She answered, A thousand year of this torment, and ten times more
joined unto it, is not to be compared in the quarter of an hour that I
suffered in my spirit. I thank my God, through Jesus Christ, that has
delivered me from that fearful pain, and welcome be this, even so long as it
pleases his godly Majesty to exercise me therewith. A little before her
departure, she desired her sisters and some others that were beside her, to
sing a Psalm, and amongst others she appointed the 103. Psalm, beginning, My
soul praise thou the Lord always, which ended, she said, At the Teaching of
this Psalm, began my troubled soul, first effectually to taste of the mercy
of my God, which now to me is more sweet and precious, then if all the
kingdoms of the earth were given to me to possess them a thousand years. The
Priests urged her with their Ceremonies and Superstitions. To whom she
answered, Depart from me ye Sergeants of Satan: for I have refused, and in your
own presence do refuse all your abominations. That which you call your
Sacrament, and Christ's body (as ye have deceived us to believe in times past)
is nothing but an Idol, and has nothing to do with the right Institution of
Jesus Christ, and therefore in Gods Name I command you not to trouble me. They
departed, alleging, That she raved, and wist not what she said. And she
shortly after slept in the Lord Jesus, to no small comfort of those that saw
her blessed departing. This we could not omit of this worthy woman, who gave so
notable a Confession, before that the great light of Gods Word did universally
shine thorowout this Realm.

At the first coming of the said John Knox, he perceiving diverse who had a
zeal to godliness, make small scruple to go to the Mass, or to communicate
with the abused Sacraments in the Papisticall manner, began as well in privy
Conference as in Preaching, to show the impiety of the Mass, and how
dangerous a thing it was, to communicate in any sort with Idolatry: wherewith
the conscience of some being affrighted, the matter began to be agitate from
man to man. And so was the said John called to Supper, by the Lord of Dun, for
that same purpose, where were assembled David Forresse, Master Robert Lockart,
John Willocke, and William Maitland of Lethington younger, a man of good
Learning, and of sharp wit and reasoning. The Question was Proposed, and it
was answered by the said John; That in no wise it was lawful to a Christian to
present himself to that Idol. Nothing was omitted that might serve for the
purpose, and yet was every head so fully answered, Note.
and especially one, whereunto they thought their great defense stood: To wit,
That Paul at the commandment of James, and of the Elders of Jerusalem, passed
to the Temple, and fained himself to pay his vow with others. This, we say,
and other things, were so fully answered, that William Maitland concluded,
saying, I see very perfectly that our shifts will serve nothing before God,
seeing that they stand us in so small stead before men. The answer of John Knox
to the fact of Paul, and to the commandment of James was; Note.
That Paul's fact had nothing to do with their going to Mass. For to pay Vows
was sometimes Gods Commandment, as was never Idolatry: But their Mass from the
original, was, and remained odious Idolatry; Therefore the fact was most
unlike. Secondarily, said he, I greatly doubt whether either James his
commandment or Paul's obedience, proceeded of the holy Ghost: We know their
counsel tends to this, Note.
That Paul would show himself one that observed diligently the very small
points of the Law, to the end he might purchase to himself the favors of the
Jews, who were offended at him, by reason of the bruites that were spread, That
he taught defection from Moses. Now while he obeyed their counsel, he fell
into the most desperate danger that ever he sustained before; whereby it was
evident, That God approved not that mean of reconciliation; but rather, that he
plainly declares, That evil should not be done, that good might come of it.
Evil it was for Paul to confirm those obstinate Jews in their Superstition by
his example; Note diligently.
worse it was to him to expose himself and the Doctrine which before he had
taught to slander and mockage. And therefore concluded the said John, That the
fact of Paul, and the sequel that thereof followed, appeared rather to fight
against them that would go to the Mass, then to give unto them any assurance
to follow his example; unless that they would that the like trouble should
instantly apprehend them, that apprehended him for obeying worldly-wise
council. After these, and like reasonings, Mass abhorred.
the Mass began to be abhorred of such as before used it for the fashion and
avoiding of slander (as then they termed it) John Knox, at request of the Lord
of Dun, followed him to his place of Dun, where he remained a month, daily
exercised in Preaching, whereunto resorted the principal men of that country.
After this returning, his residence was most in Calder, whither repaired unto
him, the Lord Erskin, the Earl of Argyle, then Lord of Lorne, and Lord James,
then Priour of S. Andrews, and after Earl of Murrey, where they heard, and so
approved his Doctrine, that they wished it to have been public. That same
Winter he taught commonly in Edinburgh, and after Christmas, by the conduct of
the Lord of Bar, and Robert Campbell of Kingieancleuch, he came to Kyle, and
taught in the Bar, in the house of the Ca^nell, in the Kingieancleuch, in the
Town of Air, and in the houses of Uchiltrie and Gathgirth, and in some of them
he ministered the Lords Table. Before Easter the Earl of Glencarne sent for him
to his place of Fynlaston, where after Sermon, he also ministered the Lords
Table. Whereof besides himself, were partakers, his Lady, two of his sons, and
certain of his friends. And so returned he to Calder, where diverse from
Edinburgh, and from the Country about, assembled, as well for the Doctrine, as
for the right use of the Lords Table, which before they had never practiced.
From thence he departed the second time to the Lord of Dun, and teaching then
in greater liberty, the Gentlemen required, That he should minister likewise
unto them the Table of the Lord Jesus, where were partakers, the most part of
the Gentlemen of the Mernes, who God be praised, to this day do constantly
remain in the same doctrine which then they professed. To wit, That they
refused all society with Idolatry, and bent themselves to the uttermost of
their powers to maintain the true Preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as
God should offer unto them Preachers and opportunity. The brute hereof spread
(for the Friars from all quarters flocked to the Bishops) the said John Knox
was summoned to appear in the Church of the black Friars in Edinburgh, the
fifteenth day of May, which day the said John decreed to keep, and for that
purpose John Erskin of Dun, with diverse other Gentlemen assembled to the Town
of Edinburgh. But that Diet held not. For whether the Bishops perceived
informalitie in their own proceedings, or if they feared danger to ensue upon
their extremity, it is unknown unto us. But the Saturday before the day
appointed, they cust their own summons, and the said John, the same day of the
summons taught in Edinburgh, in a greater audience then ever before he had done
in that Town. The place was the Bishop of Dunkelles, his great lodging, where
he continued in Teaching ten days, before and after noon. The Earl of
Glencarne allured the Earl of Masrchell, who with Henry Drummond (his
counselor for that time) heard an exhortation (but it was in the night) who
were so well contented with it, that they both willed the said John to write
unto the Queen Regent somewhat that might move her to hear the Word of God.
Note.
He obeyed their desire, and wrote that which after was published* which we
have caused to be Printed at the end of this Book, and is called, The Letter to
the Queen Dowager; Which was delivered unto her own hands by the said Alexander
Earl of Glencarne: Which Letter when she had read, within a day or two, she
delivered it to the proud Prelate Betone, Bishop of Glasgow, and said in
mockage; Please you my Lord to read a Pasquill: Which words coming to the ears
of the said John, was the occasion that to his Letter he made his additions, as
yet may be seen. As concerning the threatenings pronounced against her own
person, and the most principal of her friends; let these very flatterers see
what had failed of all that he had written.

While John Knox was thus occupied in Scotland, Letters came to him from the
English Church that was assembled at Geneva (which was separated from that
superstitious and contentious company that was at Franckford) commanding him in
Gods Name, as he that was their chosen Pastor, to repair unto them for their
comfort. Upon the which the said John took his leave from us, almost in every
congregation where before he had Preached, and exhorted us to Prayers, to
Reading of the Scriptures, and mutual conference, until such time as God
should give unto us greater liberty. And hereupon he sent before him to Deep,
his mother in Law Elizabeth Bows, and his wife Marjory, with no small dolor
of their hearts, and of many of us. He himself by procurement and labors of
Robert Campell of Kingi^ancleuch, remained behind in Scotland, and passed to
the Earl of Argile, who then was in the castle Campbell, where he taught
certain days. The Lord of Glenurqahay (which yet lives) being one of his
auditors, willed the said Earl of Argile to retain him still, but he
resolved on his journey, would not at that time stay for no request, adding,
That if God blessed those small beginnings, and if that they continued in
godliness, whenever they pleased to command him, they should find him
obedient. He said, That once he must needs visit that little flock which the
wickedness of men had compelled him to leave. And so in the month of July he
left this Realm, and past to France, and so to Geneva. Immediately after, the
Bishops summoned him, and for nonappearance burnt him in effigy, at the
Cross of Edinburgh, in the year of our Lord 1555. from the which unjust
Sentence the said John made his appellation, 1555.
and caused to Print the same, and direct it to the Nobility and Commons of
Scotland, Note.
as yet may be read. In the Winter that the said John abode in Scotland, You
will find this Appellation at the end of this book.
appeared a Comet, the course whereof was from the South and South-West, to the
North and North-east. It was seen the months of November, December, and
January; It was called, The fiery bosom. Soon after died Christierne King of
Denmark; and War arose between Scotland and England, the Commissioners of both
Realms were disappointed, who almost the space of six months had been upon the
conditions of Peace, and were upon a near point of conclusion. The Queen
Regent with her Council of the French faction decreed, War against England by
the means of the Queen Regent.
War at New Battle, without giving any advertisement to the Commissioners for
the part of Scotland.

Such is the fidelity of Princes, guided by Priests, whenever they seek
their own affections to be served. In the end of that next harvest was seen
upon the borders of England and Scotland a strange fire, which descended from
the heaven, and burnt diverse corns in both the Realms, but most in England.
There was presented to the Queen Regent, by Robert Ormestone, a Calfe, A calfe
with two heads.
having two heads, whereat she skipped, and said, It was but a common thing.
The War began in the end of the harvest, as is said, and conclusion was taken
that Warke should be assieged. The Army and Ordnance past forward to Maxwell
Hewcht. The Queen Regent remained in the Castle of Hume, and thinking that all
things were in assurance, Monsieur Dosell, then Lieutenant for France, gave
charge that the Canons should be transported over the water of Tweid, which was
done with expedition (for the French in such facts are expert) but the Nobility
of Scotland nothing content of such proceedings, The fact of the Nobility of
Scotland, at Maxwel Hewcht
after consultation amongst themselves, past to the Pavilion of Monsieur
Dosell, and in his own face declared, That in no ways would they invade
England. And therefore commanded the Ordnance to be retired: And so it was
without further delay. This put an affray in Monsieur Dosells breeches, and
kindled such a fire in the Queen Regents stomach, as was not well slacked till
her breath failed. And thus was that enterprise frustrate. But yet War
continued, during the which, the Gospel of Jesus Christ began wonderously to
flourish. For in Edinburgh began publicly to exhort William Harlow, John
Douglas who had (being with the Earl of Argyle) Preached in Leyth, and
sometimes exhorted in Edinburgh. Paul Meaffen began publicly to Preach in
Dundie, The second return of John Willock to Scotland.
and so did diverse others in Angus and the Mernes. And last, at Gods good
pleasure arrived John Willocke, the second time from Emden, whose return was
so joyful to the brethren, that their zeal and godly courage daily increased.
And albeit he contracted a dangerous sickness, yet he ceased not from labors,
but taught and exhorted from his bed some of the Nobility (of whom some are
fallen back, amongst them the Lord Seaton is chief) with many Barons and
Gentlemen his auditors, Lord Seton an Apostata.
and by him were godly instructed, and wonderously comforted. They kept their
conventions, and held counsels with such gravity and closeness, that the
enemies trembled. The Images were stolen away in all parts of the Country.
The abolishing of Images, and trouble therefore.
And in Edinburgh was that great Idol called Saint Gyle, first drowned in the
North Loch, after burnt, which raised no small trouble in the Town; for the
Friars rooping like Ravens upon the Bishops, the Bishops ran upon the Queen,
who to them was favorable enough, but that she thought it could not stand with
her advantage to offend such a multitude as then took upon them the defense of
the Gospel, The Preachers summoned.
and the name of Protestants. And yet consented she to summon the Preachers:
whereat the Ptotestants neither offended, neither yet thereof afraid,
determined to keep the day of Summons, as that they did. Which perceived by the
Prelates and Priests, The practice of Prelates, and what thereof ensued.
they procured a Proclamation to be publicly made, That all men that were come
to the Town without commandment of the Authority, should with all diligence
repair to the Borders, and there remain fifteen days: For the Bishop of
Galloway in this manner of rhyme said to the Queen; Madame, because they are
come without order; I read ye send them to the Border. Now so had God provided,
That the quarter of the Westland (in the which was many faithful men) was that
same day returned from the Border; who understanding the matter to proceed from
the malice of the Priests, assembled themselves together, and made passage to
themselves, till that they came to the very privy chamber, where the Queen
Regent and the Bishops were. The Gentlemen began to complain upon their strange
intertainment, considering that her Majesty had found in them so faithful
obedience in all things lawful. While the Queen began to craft, a zealous and
a bold man, James Chalmers of Gaithgyrth, said, Madame, we know that this is
the malice and device of the Jewels, The bold words of James Chalmers of
Gaithgyrth.
and of that bastard (meaning the Bishop of S. Andrews) that stands by you;
we avow to God we shall make a day of it. They oppress us and our Tenants, for
feeding of their idle bellies: They trouble our Preachers, and would murder
them and us: Shall we suffer this any longer? No, Madame, it shall not be. And
therewith every man put on his steel Bonnets. There was heard nothing of the
Queens part, but, My joys, my hearts, What ails you? Me means no evil to you
nor to your Preachers: The Bishops shall do you no wrong, ye are all my loving
Subjects; I know nothing of this Proclamation; the day of your Preachers shall
be discharged, and me will hear the controversy that is betwixt the Bishops
and you; they shall do you no wrong. My Lords (said she to the Bishops) I
forbid you either to trouble them or their Preachers. O crafty flatterer!
And unto the Gentlemen, who were wonderously commoved, she turned again and
said, O my hearts, should ye not love the Lord your God with all-your heart,
with all your mind? And should ye not love your neighbors as your self? With
these and the like words she kept the Bishops from buffets at that time. And so
the day of Summons being discharged, began the brethren universally farther to
be encouraged. But yet could the Bishops in no sort be quiet; for Saint Gyles
day approaching, they gave charge to the Provost-Ballies, and counsel of
Edinburgh, either to get again the old Saint Gyle, or else upon their expenses
to make a new Image. The command of the Bishop
The Counsel answered, That to them the charge appears very unjust; for they
understood that God in some places had commanded Idols and Images to be
destroyed: The answer of Edinburgh.
But where he had commanded Images to be set up, they had not read; and desired
the Bishop to find a warrant for his commandment. Whereat the Bishop offended,
Edinburgh appealeth from the sentence of the Bishop of S. Andrews.
admonished, under pain of cursing, which they prevented by a former
appellation, appealing from him, as a partial and corrupt Judge, unto the
Popes Holiness; and so great things shortly following that, passed in
oblivion. Yet would not the Priests and Friars cease to have that great
solemnity, and manifest abomination, which they accustomedly had upon Saint
Gyles day; to wit, They would have that Idol borne, and therefore was all
preparations duly made. A Marmouset Idol was borrowed from the gray Friars (a
silver piece of James Carmichell was laid in pledge) it was fast fixed with
Iron nails, upon a barrow called there Fertor. Triumph for hearing of stock
Gyle.
Their Asses, bloody Priests, Friars, Channons, and rotten Papists, with Tabors
and Trumpeters, Banners and Bag-pipes: And who was there to lead the reign,
but the Queen Regent her self, with all her shavelings, for honor of that
Feast. Well, about goes it, and comes down the high street, and down to the
common Cross. The Queen Regent dined that day in Alexander Carpentar his
house, betwixt the Bows: And so when the Idol returned back again, she left
it, and past in to her dinner. The hearts of the brethren were wonderously
enflamed; and seeing such abomination so manifestly maintained, were decreed to
be revenged. They were divided in several companies, whereof not one knew of
another. There were some temporizers that day (amongst whom David Forresse,
called the General, was one) who fearing the chance to be done, as it fell,
labored to stay the brethren; but that could not be: For immediately after
that the Queen was entered in the lodging, some of those that were of the
enterprise drew nigh to the Idol, as willing to help to bear him; and getting
the Fertor upon their shoulders, began to shoulder, thinking that thereby the
Idol would have fallen, but that was provided and prevented by the Iron nails,
as we have said. And so began one to cry, The down casting of stock Gyle, and
the discomfiture of Baals Priests.
Down with the Idol, down with it: And then without delay it was pulled down.
Some brag made the Priests Patrones at the first; but when they saw the
feebleness of their god (for one took him by the heels, and dading his head
to the street, left Dagon without a head or hands, and said, Fie upon thee,
thou young Saint Gyle, thy father would have tarried for such.) This considered
(we say) the Priests and Friars fled faster then they did at Pinckey Clewch.
There might have been so sudden a fray as seldom has been amongst that sort
of men within this Realm; for down goes the Crosses, off goes the Surplices,
round Caps, Cornets with the Crowns. The gray Friars gaped, the black Friars
blew, the Priests panted and fled, and happy was he that first gat the house;
for such a sudden fray came never amongst the generation of Antichrist within
this Realm before. By chance there lay upon a stayre a merry Englishman; A
merry Englishman.
and seeing the discomfiture to be without blood, thought he would add some
merrinesse to the matter: and so cried he over the staire, and said, Fie upon
you whorsons, why have you broken order, down the street they passed in array,
and with great mirth: why flee the villains now without order? turn and strike
every man a stroke for the honor of his God; fie cowards fie, ye shall never
be judged worthy of your wages again. But exhortations were then unprofitable:
For after that Bell had broken his neck, Note.
there was no comfort to his confused Army. The Queen Regent laid up this
amongst her other inventions, till that she might have seen the time proper to
have revenged it. Search was made for the doers, but none could be deprehended:
For the brethren assembled themselves in such sort, in companies, singing
Psalms, and praising God, that the proudest of the enemies were astonished.
This Tragedy of Saint Gyles was so terrible to some Papists, that Durie,
sometimes called for his filthiness Abbot Stottikin, and then entitled,
Bishop of Galloway, left his Riming, The death of the Bishop of Galoway, and
his last confession.
wherewith he was accustomed, and departed this life even as he had lived. For
the Articles of his belief were. I refer. Decarte you. Ha, ha, the four
Kings and all made. The devil go with it; It is but a varlet. From France we
thought to have gotten a Rubie; And yet is he nothing but a Cahoobie. Qualis
vita, finis ita.
With such Faith and such Prayers departed out of this life that enemy of God,
who had vowed and plainly said, The Vow of that marked beast Dury, B. o^
Galloway.
That in despite of God, so long as they that then were Prelates lived, should
that Word (called the Gospel) never be Preached within this Realm. After him
followed that belly-God Master David Panter, called, Bishop of Rosse, even with
the like documents, The death of M David Panter.
except that he departed eating and drinking, which, together with the rest
that thereupon depended, was the pastime of his life. The most part of the
Lords that were in France at the Queens Marriage* although that they got their
leave from the Court, yet they forgot to return to Scotland. For whether it was
by an Italian Posset, or French Feggs, or by the Pottage of their Apothecary
(he was a Frenchman) there departed from this life, the Earl of Cassiles, the
Earl of Rothesse, Lord Fleming, and the Bishop of Orknay, The death of the
Bishop of Orknay Reid, and^
whose end was even according to his life: For after that he was driven back by
a contratious wind, and forced to land again at Deep, perceiving his sickness
to increase, he caused to make his bed betwixt his two coffers (some said upon
them) such was his God, the gold that therein was enclosed, that he could not
depart therefrom, so long as memory would serve him. The Lord James, then Prior
of S. Andrews, had (by all appearance) licked of the same broth that
dispatched the rest, for thereof to his death, his stomach does testify. But
God preserved for a better purpose. This same Lord James, after Earl of
Murray, and the said Bishop were commonly at debate in matters of Religion; and
therefore the said Lord, hearing of the Bishops disease, came to visit him: and
finding him not so well at a point, as he thought he should have been, and as
the honor of the country required, said unto him; Fie, my Lord, how lie you
so? will you not go to your Chamber, and not lie here in this utter Room.
Orknays answer and his friends home.
His answer was; I am well where I am, my Lord, so long as I can tarry, for I
am near unto my friends (meaning his coffers, and the gold therein.) But my
Lord (said he) how long have you and I been in plea for Purgatory, Note.
I think that I shall know ere it be long whether there be such a place or
not. While the other did exhort him to call to mind the promises of God, and
the virtue of Christ's death: He answered, Nay my Lord, let me alone, for you
and I never agreed in our life, and I think we shall not agree now at my
death, I pray you therefore let me alone. The said Lord James departed to his
Lodging, and the other shortly after departed this life; whither, the great day
of the Lord will declare.

When the word of the departing of so many Patrons of Papistry, and of the
manner of their departing, came unto the Queen Regent, after astonishment and
musing, The Queen Regents sentence of the death of her Papists.
she said; What shall I say of such men? They left me as beasts, and as beasts
they die: God is not with them, neither with that which they enterprise. While
these things were in doing in Scotland and France, that perfect hypocrite,
Master John Synclare, then Deane of Lestarrige, and now Lord President, and
Bishop of Brechin, began to Preach in his Church of Lestarrige, and at the
beginning held himself so indifferent, Dean of Lestarrige hypocrite began to
preach.
that many had opinion of him, That he was not far from the Kingdom of God. But
his hypocrisy could not long be cloaked: for when he understood that such as
feared God began to have a good opinion of him, and that the Friars and others
of that sect began to whisper, That if he took not heed in time to himself and
unto his Doctrine, he would be the destruction of the whole state of the
Church. This by him understood, he appointed a Sermon, in the which he promised
to give his judgment upon all such heads, as then were in controversy in the
matters of Religion. The bruit hereof made his audience great at the first: But
that day he so handled himself, that after that no godly man did credit him:
for he not only gainsaid the Doctrine of Justification and of Prayer, which
before he had taught, but also he set up and maintained Papistry to the
uttermost prick, yea, Holy Water, Pilgrimage, Purgatory, and Pardons were of
such virtue in his conceit, That without them he looked not to be saved. In
this mean time the Clergy made a brag, That they would dispute. But M. David
Panter, M. David Panters counsel (...) his forsworn brethren the Bishops.
which then lived and lay at Lestarrige, dissuaded them therefrom, affirming,
That if ever they disputed, but where themselves were both Judge and party,
and where that fire and sword should obey their decree, that then their cause
was marred for ever: For their victory stood neither in God nor in his Word;
but in their own wills, and in the things concluded by their own counsels
(together with sword and fire) whereto (said he) these new up-start fellows
will give no place, but they will call you to your Count-book, and that is, to
the Bible; and by it ye will no more be found the men that ye are called, then
the Devil will be approved to be God. And therefore if ye love your selves
enter never into disputation, neither yet call ye the matter into question, but
defend your possession, or else all is lost. Caiaphas could not give any better
counsel to his companions, but yet God disappointed both them and him, as
after we shall hear. At this same time some of the Nobility directed their
Letters to call John Knox from Geneva, for their comfort, and for the comfort
of their brethren the Preachers, and others that then courageously fought
against the enemies of Gods Truth. The Tenor of their Letter is this.

Grace, Mercy, and Peace for Salvation. DEarly Beloved in the Lord,
the faithful that are of your acquaintance in these parts (thanks be unto
God) are steadfast in the belief wherein ye left them, The second Vocation of
John Knox, by Letters of the Lords.
and have a godly thirst and desire day by day of your presence again: Now if
the Spirit of God will so move you, and grant time unto you, we all heartily
desire you, in the Name of the Lord, That ye would return again into these
parts, where you shall find all the faithful that ye left behind you, not
only glad to hear your doctrine, but also ready to jeopard their lives and
goods for the setting forward of the glory of God, as he will permit. And
albeit the Magistrates in this Country be as yet but in the state ye left them
in, yet at the making hereof we have no experience of any more cruelty to be
used, then was before: But rather we have belief, That God will augment his
Flock, because we see daily the Friars, enemies to Christ's Gospel, in less
estimation with the Queen, and the Nobility of our Realm. This, in few words,
is the mind of the faithful being present, and others absent. The rest of our
minds this faithful Bearer will show you at length. Thus fare ye well in the
Lord.

At Sterlin the tenth of March, Anno 1556. This is the true Copy of the Letter,
being subscribed by the names underwritten. Sic subscribitur, Glencarne.
Lorne, now Argyle. Erskin. James Stewart.



The Letters were delivered to the foresaid John in Geneva, by the hands of
James Sym, who now rests with Christ, and of James Barrone, who yet lives.
In the Month of May, immediately after these Letters were received and advised
upon, he took consultation, as well with his own Church, as with that notable
servant of God John Calvine, and with other godly Ministers; who all with one
consent said, That he could not refuse that Vocation, unless he would declare
himself rebellious unto his God, and unmercifull to his Country: And so he
returned answer, with promise to visit them with reasonable expedition, and so
soon as he might put order to that dear Flock that was committed to his
Charge. And so in the end of the next September after, he departed from Geneva,
and came to Deape, where there met him contrary Letters, as by his answer
thereto we may understand.

The Spirit of Wisdom, Constancy and Strength, be multiplied with you, by
the favor of God our Father, and by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ACcording to my promise, my Right Honorable, I came to Deape the four and
twentieth day of October, of full mind, by the good will of God, with the
first Ships, to have visited you. But because two Letters not very pleasing
unto the flesh were there presented unto me, I was compelled to stay for a
time. The one was directed to my self, from a faithful brother, which made
mention, that a new consultation^ was appointed for final conclusion of the
matter before purposed; and willed me therefore to abide in these parts till
the determination of the same. The other Letter was directed from a Gentleman
to a friend, with charge to advertise me, That he had communed with all those
that seemed most frank and fervent in the matter; and that in none did he
find such boldness and constancy as was requisite for such an enterprise; but
that some did (as he writes) repent that ever any such thing was moved: Some
were partly ashamed, and others were able to deny that ever they did consent to
any such purpose, if any trial or question should be taken thereof, etc. Which
Letters when I had considered, I was partly confounded, and partly was pierced
with anguish and sorrow. Confounded I was, that I had so far traveled in the
matter, moving the same to the most godly and most learned that this day we
know to live in Europe, to the effect that I might have their judgments and
grave counsels, for assurance as well of your consciences, as of mine, in all
enterprises. And then that nothing should succeed of so long consultation,
cannot but redound, either to your shame or mine. For either it shall appear
that I was mavelous vain, being so solicited, where no necessity required; Or
else that such as were movers thereto, lacked the ripeness of judgment in
their first Vocation. To some it may appear, a small and light matter, that I
have cast off, and as it were abandoned, as well my particular care, as my
public Office and Charge, leaving my house and poor family destitute of all
head, save God only, and committing that small (but to Christ dearly beloved)
flock, over the which I was appointed one of the Ministers, to the charge of
another. This, I say, to worldly men, may appear a small matter: But to me, it
was and is such, that more worldly substance then I will express, could not
have caused me willingly to behold the eyes of so many grave men weep at once
for my cause, as that I did in taking my last good night from them: To whom if
it please God that I return, and question be demanded, What was the impediment
of my purposed journey, judge you what I shall answer. The cause of my dolor
and sorrow (God is my witness) is for nothing pertaining either to my
corporal contentment, or worldly displeasure; but it is for the grievous
plagues and punishments of God, which assuredly shall apprehend, not only you,
but every inhabitant of that miserable Realm and Isle, except that the power of
God, by the liberty of his Gospel, deliver you from Bondage. I mean not only
that perpetual fire and torment prepared for the devil, Note.
and for such as denying Christ Jesus, and his known Verity, do follow the
sons of wickedness to perdition (which most is to be feared) but also that
thraldom and misery that shall apprehend your own bodies, your children,
subjects, and posterity, whom ye have betrayed (in conscience I can except none
that bear the name of Nobility) and presently fight to betray them and your
Realm to the slavery of strangers. The War begun (although I acknowledge it to
be the work of God) shall be your destruction, unless that betime remedy be
provided. God open your eyes, that ye may epsy and consider your own miserable
estate. My words shall appear to some, sharp, and undiscreetly spoken. But as
charity ought to interpret all things to the best, so ought wise men to
understand, That a true friend cannot be a flatterer. Especially, when the
questions of salvation both of body and soul are moved; and that not of one,
nor of two, but as it were of a whole Realm or Nation. What are the sobs, and
what is the affection of my troubled heart, God shall one day declare: But this
will I add to my former rigor and severity, to wit, If any persuade you for
fear of dangers that may follow, to faint in your former purpose, be he so wise
and friendly, let him be judged of you both foolish, Note.
and your mortal enemy: Foolish, for because he understood nothing of Gods
approved wisdom; and enemy unto you, because he labored to separate you from
Gods favor, provoking his vengeance, and grievous plagues against you: because
he would, That ye should prefer your worldly rest to Gods praise and glory; and
the friendship of the wicked, to the salvation of your brethren. I am not
ignorant that fearful troubles shall ensue your enterprise (as in my former
Letters I did signify unto you. Let the Papists themselves judge of what
spirit these sentences could proceed.
) But O joyful and comfortable are the troubles and adversities, which man
sustaineth for accomplishment of Gods will revealed by his word! For how
terrible soever they appear to the judgment of the natural man, yet are they
never able to devour, nor utterly to consume the sufferers: For the invisible
and invincible power of God sustaineth and preserves according to his promise,
all such as with simplicity do obey him. The subtle craft of Pharaoh many
years joined with his bloody cruelty, was not able to destroy the male children
of Israel; neither were the waters of the Red Sea, much less the rage of
Pharaoh able to confound Moses, and the company which he conducted, and that
because the one had Gods Promise that they should multiply; and the other had
his Commandment to enter into such dangers. I would your wisedoms should
consider that our God remains one, and is immutable; and that the Church of
Christ Jesus has the same promise of protection and defense, The duty of the
Nobility.
that Israel had of multiplication: And farther, That no less cause have ye to
enter into your former enterprise, then Moses had to go to the presence of
Pharaoh (for your vassalls, yea your brethren are oppressed, their bodies and
souls holden in bondage, and God speaks to your consciences, (unless ye be
dead with the blind world) that ye ought to hazard your own lives (be it
against Kings or Emperors) for their deliverance. For only for that cause are
ye called Princes of the people. The letter lost by negligence and troubles.
And ye receive of your Brethren, Honor, Tribute, and Homage, at Gods
Commandment, not by reason of your Birth and Progeny (as the most part of men
do falsely suppose) but by reason of your Office and Duty, which is to vindicate
and deliver your subjects and brethren from all violence and oppression to the
uttermost of your power. Advise diligently, I beseech you, with the points of
that Letter which I directed to the whole Nobility; and let every man apply the
matter and case to himself; for your conscience shall one day be compelled to
acknowledge, That the Reformation of Religion, and of public enormities, God
grant that our Nobility would yet understand.
does appertain to more then to the Clergy, or chief Rulers, called Kings.
The mighty Spirit of the Lord Jesus rule and guide your counsels to your
eternal glory, your eternal comfort, and to the consolation of your brethren.
Amen.

From Deape the 27 of October. 1557.

These Letters received and read, together with others directed to the whole
Nobility, and some to particular Gentlemen, as to the Lairds of Dun and
Petarrow, new consultation was had what was best to be done; and in the end it
was concluded, That they would follow forward their purpose once intended, Note.
and would commit themselves, and whatsoever God had given them, into his
hands, rather then they would suffer Idolatry so manifestly to reign, and the
Subjects of that Realm so to be defrauded, as long as they had been of the
only food of their souls, the true Preaching of Christ's Gospel. And that every
one should be the more assured of other, a common Bond was made, and by some
subscribed: The tenor thereof follows.

The first Covenant of Scotland.
WE perceiving how Satan in his members, the Antichrists of our time, cruelly
do rage, seeking to overthrow and destroy the Gospel of Christ, and his
Congregation, ought, according to our bounden duty, to strive in our Masters
Cause, 1557
Those that then did oppose Popery, were called the Congregation.
even unto the death, being certain of the Victory in him: The which our duty
being well considered* We do promise before the Majesty of God, and his
Congregation, That we (by his grace) shall with all diligence continually apply
our whole power, substance, and our very lives, to maintain, set forward, and
establish the most blessed Word of God, and his Congregation: And shall labor
according to our power, to have faithful Ministers, truly and purely to
minister Christ's Gospel and Sacraments to his people. We shall maintain them,
nourish them, and defend them; the whole Congregation of Christ, and every
Member thereof according to our whole powers, and waging of our lives, against
Satan and all wicked power that does intend Tyranny or trouble against the
foresaid Congregation. Unto the which holy Word, and Congregation, we do join
us; and so do forsake and renounce the Congregation of Satan, with all the
superstitious abomination and idolatry thereof. And moreover, shall declare our
selves manifestly enemies thereto, By this our faithful Promise before God,
Note.
testified to this Congregation, by our Subscription at these Presents. The
Earl of Argyle the first man in this Covenant.


At Edinburgh the third of December, anno 1557. God called to witness. Sic
subscribitur. A. Earl of Argyle. Glencarne. Mortoun. Archibald, Lord of Lorne.
John Erskin of Dun, Et caetera.



A little before that this Bond was subscribed by the fore-written, and many
other Letters were directed again to Io. Knox from the said Lords, The third
Vocation of John Knox, by the Lords and Churches of Scotland.
together with their Letters to M. Calvin, craving of him, That by his
authority he would command the said John once again to visit them. These
Letters were delivered by the hands of M. John Gray, in the Month of November,
anno 1558. who at that same time past to Rome, for expedition of the Bows of
the Bp. of Rosse, to M. Henry Sinclar. Immediately after the subscription of
this foresaid Bond, the Lords and Barons professing Christ Jesus, convened
frequently in counsel: in the which these Heads were concluded: First, It is
thought expedient, advised, and ordained, That in all Parishes of this Realm
the Common Prayer be read weekly on Sunday, and other Festival days publicly
in the Parish Churches, with the Lessons of the Old and New Testament,
conformed to the order of the Book of Common Prayers. And if the Curats of the
Parishes be qualified, to cause them to read the same. And if they be not, or
if they refuse, that the most qualified in the Parish use and read the same.
Secondly, It is thought necessary, that Doctrine, Preaching, and Interpretation
of Scriptures be had and used privately in quiet houses, without great
conventions of the people thereto, while afterward that God move the Prince to
grant public Preaching by faithful and true Ministers.

These two heads concerning the Religion, and some others concerning the
policy being concluded, the old Earl of Argyle took the maintenance of John
Douglas, caused him to Preach publicly in his house, and reformed many things
according to his counsel. The same boldness took diverse others, as well
within Towns, as in the country, which did not a little trouble the Bishops and
Queen Regent: As by this Letter and Credit committed to Sir David Hamilton,
from the Bishop of S. Andrews to the said Earl of Argyle may be clearly
understood.

The Bishops Letter to the old Earl of Argyle.
MY Lord, after most hearty commendations, this is to advertise your Lordship
that we have directed this Bearer our Cousin toward your Lordship, in such
business and affairs as concerns your Lordships honor, profit, and great
well-being, as the said Bearer will declare to your Lordship at more length. I
pray your Lordship, effectuously to advert thereto, and to have care to use
your Lordships friends, that always has wished the honor, profit, and
prosperity of your Lordships house, as of our own. I pray you give credit to
the Bearer. Jesus have your Lordship in everlasting keeping.

Of Edinburgh, the five and twentieth day of March, Anno 1558. Sic
subscribitur. Your Lordships at all power Saint Andrews.


Follows the Credit.
MEmorandum, To Sir David Hamilton, to my Lord Earl of Argyle, in my behalf,
and let him see and hear every Article.

1. Imprimis, To repeat the ancient blood of his house, how long it has stood,
how notable it has been, and so many Noblemen has been Earls, Lords and
Knights thereof: How long they have reigned in their parts, true and obedient
both to God and the Prince, without any spot in their days in any manner of
sort: And to remember how many notable men are come of his house. 2. Secondly,
To show him the great affection I bear toward him, his blood, house, and
friends, and of the ardent desire I have of the perpetual standing of it in
honor and fame, with all them that are come of it: Which is my part, for many
and diverse causes, as you shall see. 3. Thirdly, To show, my Lord, how heavy
and displeasing it is to me, now to hear, That he who is and has been so
Noble a man, should be seduced and abused, by the flattery of such an infamed
person of the Law, and men sworn Apostate, that under the pretense that he
gives himself forth as a Preacher of the Gospel and Verity, under that
color, sets forth Schisms and Divisions in the holy Church of God, with
Heretical Propositions, thinking that under his maintenance and defense, to
infect this Country with Heresy, persuading my said Lord, and others, his
children and friends, that all that he speaks is Scripture, and conform
thereunto, albeit that many of his Propositions are many years past condemned
by general Councels, and the whole state of Christian people. 4. Fourthly, To
show to my Lord how perilous this is to his Lordship and his house, and decay
thereof, in case that authority should be sharp, and should use rigor conform
both to Civil and Canon, and also your own Municipall law of this Realm. 5.
Fifthly, to show his Lordship how woe I would be, either to hear, see, or know
any displeasure that might come to him, his son, or any of his house or
friends, and especially in his own time and days. And as how great displeasure
I have now to hear great and evil bruites of him that should in his old age, in
a manner, vary from his faith, and to be altered therein when the time is that
he should be most sure and firm therein. 6. Sixthly, To show his Lordship that
there is delation of that man called Douglas, or Grant, of sundry Articles of
Heresy which lies to my charge and conscience to put remedy to, or else all
the pestilentious Doctrine he sowes, and such like, all that are corrupt by his
Doctrine, and all that he draws from our Faith and Christian Religion, will
lie to my charge before God: and I to be accused before God for overseeing of
him, if I put not remedy thereto, and correct him for such things he is delated
of. And therefore that my Lord consider, and weigh it well, how highly it lies
both to my honor and conscience: for if I favor him, I shall be accused for
all them that he infects and corrupts in Heresy. 7. Seventhly, Therefore I
pray my Lord, in most hearty manner to take this matter in the best part for his
own conscience, honor, and weal of himself, house, friends, and servants:
and sik like for my part, and for my conscience and honor. Then considering
that there are diverse Articles of Heresy to be laid to him, that he is dilated
of, and that he is presently in my Lords company: That my Lord would by some
honest way part with this man, and put him from him, and from his sons company:
For I would be right sorry that any being in any of their companies should be
called for such causes, or that any of them should be bruited to hold any sik
man. And this I would advertise, my Lord, and have his Lordships Answer and
Resolution, before any Summons passed upon him. 8. Eighthly, Item, If my Lord
would have a man to instruct him truly in the Faith, and Preach to him, I
would provide a learned man to him, and I shall answer for his true Doctrine,
and shall Pand my soul that he shall teach nothing but truly, according to our
Catholic Faith. Of Edinburgh, this last of March 1558.
Sic subscribiter. Saint Andrews.
Moreover, I hope your Lordship will call to good remembrance, and weigh the
great and heavy murmr against me, both by the Queen, the Churchmen,
Spiritual and Temporal estates, and well given people, moaning, crying, and
murmuring at me greatly, That I do not my Office: To those such infamous
persons with such perversed Doctrine within my Diocesses, and this Realm, by
reason of my Legacy and Primacie, which I have the rather sustained and long
suffered, Flesh and blood is preferred to God with the Bishop.
for the great love that I had to your Lordship and posterity, and your friends
and your house: As believing surely your Lordships wisdom should not have
maintained and meddled with such things that might do me dishonor or
displeasure, considering that I have bin ready to put good order thereto
always, but have modestly abstained, for the love of your Lordship and house
aforesaid, that I bear truly; knowing and seeing the great harm, and
dishonor, and lack apparently that might come there through, in case your
Lordship remedy not the same hastily, whereby we might both be quiet of all
danger, which doubtless will come upon us both, if I use not my Office, or
that he be called, while that he is now with your Lordship, and under your
Lordships protection.

Subscribed again. Saint Andrews.




By these former Instructions thou may perceive (Gentle Reader) what was the
care that this Pastor, or rather Impostour, with his Accomplices took to feed
the flock committed to their charge (as they allege) and to gain-stand false
Teachers: Here is often mention of conscience, of Heresy, and such other terms
that might fray the ignorant, and deceive the simple. But we hear no crime in
particular laid to the charge of the accused, and yet is he condemned as a
forsworn Apostata. This was my Lords conscience, which he learned of his
fathers the Pharisees, old enemies to Christ Jesus, who condemned him before
they heard him. But who ruled my Lords conscience, when he took his cousins
wife, the Lady Gilton. Consider thou the rest of his persuasions, and thou
shall clearly see, That honor, estimation, love to house and friends, is the
best ground that my Lord Bishop has, why he should persecute Jesus Christ in
his members. We thought good to insert the answers of the said Earl, which
follow.

Memorandum, This present Writ is to make answer particularly to every Article,
directed from my Lord of S. Andrews to me, by Sir David Hamilton, which
Articles are in number nine; and here repeated and answered, as I trust, to
his Lordships contentment.
1. THe first Article puts me in remembrance of the antiquity of the blood
of my house, how many Earls, Lords, and Knights has been thereof; how many
Noblemen descended of the same house, how long it continued true to God and
the Prince, without spot, in their days, in any manner of sort.

Answer, True it is, my Lord, that there is well-long continuance of my house,
by Gods providence, and benevolence of our Princes whom we have served, Note.
and shall serve truly, next to God. And the like obedience, toward Gods and
our Princes remains with us yet, or rather better, (praised be the Lords
Name) neither know we any spot toward our Princess, and her due obedience.
And if there be offense toward God, he is merciful to remit our offenses. For
he will not the death of a sinner. Like as it stands in his omnipotent power
to make up houses, to continue the same to alter them, to make them small or
great, or to extinguish them according to his own inscrutable wisdom. For in
exalting, depressing, and changing of houses, the laud and praise must be given
to that one eternal God, in whose hands the same stands.

2. The second Article bears the great affection and love your Lordship
bears toward me and my house, and of the ardent desire ye have of the
perpetual standing thereof in honor and fame with all them that are coming of
it.

Answ. Forsooth it is your duty to wish good unto my house, and unto them that
are coming of the same; not only for the faithfulness, amity, and society
that has been between our forefathers; but also for the late conjunction of
blood that is between our said house, if it be Gods pleasure that it have
success. Which should give sufficient occasion to your Lordship to wish good
to my house and perpetuity, with Gods glory, without which nothing is
perpetual, unto whom be praise and worship for ever and ever. Amen.

3. Thirdly, Your Lordship declares how displeasant it is to you that I should
be seduced by an infamed person of the Law, and by the flattery of a forsworn
Apostata, that under pretense of his giving forth, makes us to understand,
That he is a Preacher of the Gospel, and therewith raises Schisms and
Divisions in the whole Church of God: And by our maintenance and defense would
infect this Country with Heresy, alleging that to be Scripture, which these
many years past has been condemned as Heresy by the general Counsels, and
whole estate of Christian people.

Answ. The God that created heaven and earth, and all that is therein, preserve
me from seducing: for I dread others; many under the color of godliness are
seduced, and think that they do God a pleasure, when they persecute one of them
that profess his Name. What that man of the Law is, we know not; we hear none
of his flattery, his perjured Oath of Apostasy is unknown unto us: But if he
have made any unlawful Oath, contrary to Gods commandment, it were better to
violate it, then to observe it. He Preaches nothing to us but the Gospel, if he
would do otherwise, we would not believe him, nor yet an Angel of heaven: we
hear him sow no Schisms nor Divisions, but such as may stand with Gods Word,
which we shall cause him to confess, in presence of your Lordship and the
Clergy, when ye require us thereto. And as to it that has been condemned by
general Councels, we trust you know well, that all the general Councels have
been at diversity among themselves, and never two of them universally agreeing
in all points, in so much as they are of men. But the Spirit of Verity that
bears testimony of our Lord Jesus, has not, neither can err. For heaven and
earth shall perish, ere one jot of it perish. Beyond this, my Lord, neither
teaches he neither will we accept of him, but that which agrees with the Word
of God, set forth by the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, left
to our salvation in express words. And so my Lord, to condemn the Doctrine not
examined, is not required: For when your Lordship pleases to hear the
confession of that man's Faith, the manner of his Doctrine, which agrees with
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I will cause him to assist to judgment, and shall
be present there at Gods pleasure, that he may render reckoning of his belief,
and our Doctrine to the superior Powers, according to the prescription of that
blood of the eternal Testament, sealed by the Immaculate Lamb; To whom with
the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

4. The fourth Article puts me in remembrance, how dangerous it is, if the
Authority would put me to it, and my House, according to comely and common
Laws, and our own municipiall Laws of this Realm, and how it appears to the
decay of our House.

Answ. All Laws are (or at least should be) subject to Gods Law, which Law
should be first placed, and planted in every man's heart, it should have no
impediment. Men should not abrogate it, for the defense and setting up of their
own advantage. If it would please Authorities to put at our House, Note
diligently.
for confessing of Gods Word, or for maintenance of his Law: God is mighty
enough in his own Cause, he should be rather obeyed then man. I will serve my
Prince, with body, heart, goods, strength, and all that is in my power, except
that which is Gods duty, which I will reserve to him alone; that is, To worship
him in truth and verity, and as near as I can to conform to his written Word,
to his own honor, and obedience of my Princess.

5. The fifth Article puts me in remembrance how woe your Lordship would be, to
hear, to see, or know any displeasure that might come to me, my son, or any of
my House, and especially in my time and days: And as to hear the great and
evil brute of me, that should now in my old age in a manner, begin to vary in
my Faith, and to be altered therein, when it is time that I should be most sure
and firm therein.

Ans. Your Lordships good will is ever made manifest unto me in all your
Articles, that you should be sorry to hear, see, or know my displeasure, for
the which I am bound to render your Lordship thanks, and shall do the same
assuredly. But as for wavering in my Faith, God forbid that I should so do: For
I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth; And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Savior. My Lord, I vary not in my Faith; but I praise
God, that of his goodness now in my latter days, has of his infinite mercy
opened his bosom of grace unto me, to acknowledge him the eternal Wisdom,
his Son Jesus Christ, my one sufficient Satisfaction, to refuse all Idolatry,
Superstition, and Ignorance, wherewith I have been blinded in times past, and
now believe that God will be merciful unto me; for now he has declared his
blessed Will clearly to me, before my departing out of this transitory life.

6. The sixth Atticle declares, That there are delations of sundry points of
Heresy upon that man, Douglas or Grant, which lies to your charge and
conscience to put remedy to; or else that all the pestilentious doctrine he
sowes, and all whom he corrupts with his seed, will be required at your
hands, and all whom he draws from your Christian Faith; and if ye should suffer
him, that ye will be accused for all them whom he infecteth with Heresy; and
therefore to regard your Lordships honor and conscience therein.

Answ. What is his surname I know not, but he calls himself Douglas; for I
know neither his father nor his mother: I have heard him teach no Articles of
heresy, but that which agrees with Gods Word. For I would maintain no man in
heresy or error. Your Lordship regards your conscience in the punishment
thereof: I pray God that ye do so, and examine well your conscience. He
preaches against Idolatry; I remit to your Lordships conscience, if it be
heresy or not. He preaches against adultery and fornication, I refer that to
your Lordships conscience. He preaches against hypocrisy, I refer that to
your Lordships conscience. He preaches against all manner of abuses, and
corruption of Christ's sincere Religion, I refer that to your Lordships
conscience. My Lord, I exhort you, in Christ's Name, to weigh all these affairs
in your conscience, and consider if it be your duty also, not only to suffer
this, but in like manner to do the same. This is all, my Lord, that I vary in
my old age, and in no other thing, but that I knew not these offenses to be
abominable to God, and now knowing his will by manifestation of his Word, abhor
them.

7. The seventh Article desires me to weigh these matters in most hearty
manner, and to take them in best part, for the weal of both our consciences,
my house, friends and servants, and put such a man out of my company, for fear
of the rumor and brute that should follow thereupon, by reason he is delated
of sundry heresies: And that your Lordship would be sorry to hear any of your
servants delated or bruted for such a cause, or for holding of any such men;
and that your Lordship would understand mine answer hereunto, or any summons
passed thereupon.

Answ. I thank your Lordship greatly, that ye are so solicited for the weal of
me and of my house, and are so humane, as to give me advertisement, before ye
have summoned, of your own good will and benevolence. I have weighed these
matters, as highly as my judgment can serve me, both for your Lordships honor
and mine. And when that I have reasoned all that I can do with my self in it; I
think it always best to serve God, and obey his manifest Word, and not be
obstinate in the contrary, Note.
and to give their due obedience to our Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, and
to hear the voice of Gods Prophets, declaring his good promise to them that
repent, and threatening to obstinate wicked doers, everlasting destruction. Your
Lordship knows well the man, he has spoken with your Lordship: I thought you
content with him, I hear no occasion of offense in him, I cannot well want
him, or some Preacher. I cannot put away such a man, without I knew him an
offender, as I know not; for I hear nothing of him, but such as your Lordships
self hears of him, and such as he yet will profess in your presence,
whenever your Lordship requires. Such a man that is ready to present himself
to judgment, should not be expelled without knowledge of the cause; for like
as I answered before in another Article, when your Lordship pleases, that all
the Spiritual and Temporal men of estate in Scotland be assembled, I shall
cause him to render an account of his belief and Doctrine in your presences,
then if he deserves punishment and correction, let him so suffer; if he be
found faithful, let him live in his faith.

8. The eight Article proposes to me, That your Lordship would take the labor
to get me a man to instruct me in your Catholic Faith, and to be my Preacher,
for whose Doctrine ye would lay your soul, that he would teach nothing, but
truly conform to your faith.

Answ. God Almighty send us many of that sort, that will preach truly, and
nothing but a Catholic or Universal Christian Faith; and we Highland rude
people have miss of them. And if your Lordship would get and provide me such a
man, I should provide him a corporal Living, as to my self, with great thanks
unto your Lordship: For truly, I and many more have great miss of such men.
And because I am able to sustain more then one of them, I request your Lordship
earnestly, to provide me a man as ye wrote; for the harvest is great, but the
laborers are few.

9. The last and ninth Article puts me in remembrance to consider what
murmr your Lordship suffers, and great brute, at many men's hands, both
Spiritual and Temporal, and at the Queens hand, and other well given people,
for not putting order to these affairs; and that your Lordship has abstained
from execution hereof, for love of my House and Posterity, to the effect that
my self should remedy it, for fear of the dishonor that might come upon us
both for the same: which being remedied, might bring us out of all danger.

Answ. My Lord, I know well what murmr and indignation your Lordship suffers
at enemies hands of all estates, for not pursuing of poor simple Christians:
And I know, That if your Lordship should use their counsel, who would by
bloodshedding and burning of poor men, to make your Lordship serve their
wicked appetites; Yet your Lordship knows your own duty, and should not fear
the danger of men, as of him whom ye profess. And verily, my Lord, there is
nothing that may be to your Lordships relief in this behalf, but I will use
your Lordships counsel therein, and further the same, Gods honor being first
provided, and the Truth of his eternal Word having liberty. And to abstain for
my love from pursuit, as your Lordship has signified, I am indebted to your
Lordship, as I have written diverse times before. But there is one above, for
whose fear ye must abstain from bloodshedding, or else, my Lord, knock in your
conscience. Last of all, your Lordship please to consider how desirous some are
to have sedition amongst friends; how mighty the devil is to sow discord; how
that many would desire no better game, but to hunt us at other. I pray your
Lordship beguile them, we will agree upon all purposes with Gods pleasure,
standing to his glory. There are diverse Houses in Scotland near us, that
profess the same God secretly; they desire but that ye begin the bargain at
us; and when it begins at us, God knows the end thereof, and who shall bide the
next put. My Lord, consider this; make no Preparative of us: Let not the vain
exhortation of them that regard little of the weal and strength of both our
Houses, stir up your Lordship as they would, to do against God, your own
conscience, and the weal of your posterity for ever. And therefore now in the
end I pray your Lordship weigh these things wisely; and if ye do otherwise, God
is God, was, and shall be God, when all is wrought that man can work.


This answer received, the Bishop and his accomplices found themselves somewhat
disappointed; for the Bishops looked for nothing less, then for such Answers
from the Earl of Argyle; and therefore they made them for their extreme
defense, that is, To corrupt, and by buds to stir up the Queen Regent against
us; as in the second Book we shall more plainly hear. Shortly after that, God
called to his mercy the said Earl of Argyle from the miseries of this life;
whereof the Bishops were glad; for they thought that their great enemy was
taken out of the way, but God disappointed them: For as the said Earl departed
most constant in the true Faith of Jesus Christ, with a plain renounciation of
all Impiety, Superstition, and Idolatry; so he left it to his Son in his
Testament, That he should study to set forward the public and true preaching
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Note the Earl of Argyle his Testament.
and to suppress all Superstition and Idolatry to the uttermost of his power.
In which point small fault can be found with him unto this day. 10 Maii, Anno
1568. God be merciful unto other offenses. Amen.

The Blind, Crooked, Lame, Widows, Orphans, and all other poor, so visited by
the hand of God as cannot work:
To all the flock of Friars within this Realm, we wish restitution of wrongs
past, and reformation in times coming, for Salvation.
YE your selves are not ignorant (and though ye would be) it is now (thanks be
to God) well known to the whole world, by his most infallible Word, That the
Benignity or Alms of all Christian people pertains to us alone; which ye,
being whole of body, strong, sturdie, and able to work, what under pretense of
poverty (and yet nevertheless possessing most easily all abundance) what
through cloked and hidden humility (though your proudnesse is known) and what
fained holiness (which now is declared to be Superstition and Idolatry) have
these many years, expressly against Gods Word, and the practice of his holy
Apostles, to our great torment (alas) most falsely stolen from us. And as ye
have by your false doctrine and wresting of Gods Word, learned of your father
Satan, induced the whole people, high and low, into a sure hope and belief,
That to clothe, feed, and nourish you, is the only most acceptable Alms
allowed before God; and to give a penny, or a piece a bread once in a week is
enough for us. Even so ye have persuaded them to build you great Hospitals, and
maintain you therein by their force, which only pertains now to us by all Law,
as builded and given to the poor, of whose number ye are not, nor can be
reputed, neither by the Law of God, nor yet by no other Law proceeding of
Nature, Reason, or Civil Policy. Wherefore seeing our number is so great, so
indigent, and so heavily oppressed by your false means, that none takes care
of out misery: And that it is better for to provide there our impotent members,
which God has given us, to oppose to you in plain controversy, then to see
you hereafter (as ye have done before) steal from us our houses, and our selves
in the mean time to perish and die for want of the same. We have thought good
therefore, ere we enter with you in the conflict to warn you, in the Name of
the great God, by this public writing, affixt in your gates where ye now
dwell, that ye remove forth of our said Hospitals, betwixt this and the Feast
of Whit-sunday next: So that we the only lawful proprietaries thereof, may
enter thereinto, and afterward enjoy the commodities of the Church, which ye
have hereunto wrongfully holden from us. Certifying you, if ye fail, we will
at the said term, in whole number (with the help of God, and assistance of his
Saints in earth, of whose ready support we doubt not) enter and take possession
of our said Patrimony, and eject you utterly forth of the same.

Let him therefore that before has stolen, steal no more, but rather let him
work with his hands, that he may be helpful to the poor.

From all Cities, Towns, and Villages of Scotland, January 1. 1558.
The Bishops continued in their Provincial Council even unto that day that
John Knox arrived in Scotland, and that they might give some show to the people
that they minded Reformation; they dispersed abroad a rumor thereof, and set
forth somewhat in Print, which of the people was called, The two-penny Faith.
Amongst their acts there was much a do, for Caps, Shaven crowns, Typpets, Long
Gowns, and such other trifles.

Item, That none should enjoy Office, or Benefice Ecclesiastical, except a
Priest.

Item, That no Churchman should nourish his own children, in his own company
but that every one should hold the children of others.

That none should put his own son in his own benefice.

That if any were found in open Adultery, for the first fault he should lose
the third of his Benefice, for the second time the half, and for the third the
whole Benefice.

But here from appealed the Bishop of Murray, and other Prelates, saying, That
they would abide at the Canon Law. And so they might well enough do, so long as
they remained Interpreters, Dispensators, Makers, and Disanullars of the Law.
But let the same Law have the true interpretation, and just execution, and the
Devil shall as soon be proved a true and obedient servant unto God, as any of
that sort shall be proved a Bishop, or yet to have any just authority within
the Church of Christ Jesus. But we will return to our History.

The persecution was decreed as well by the Queen Regent as by the Prelates.
Note.
But there rested a point which the Queen Regent and France had not at that
time obtained; Here is one Solecisme in State expression, newly invented by the
Court Parasites.
to wit, That the Crown matrimonial should be granted to Francis, husband to
our Sovereign, and so should France and Scotland be but one kingdom. The
Subjects of both the Realms to have equal liberty, Scottishmen in France,
and Frenchmen in Scotland. The glister of the profit that was judged hereof to
have ensued to Scottishmen, at the first sight blinded many men's eyes. But a
small wind caused that mist suddenly to vanish away: For the greatest Offices
and Benefices within the Realm were appointed for the Frenchmen: Monsieur Ruby
kept the great Seal; Vielmort was Controller; Melrosse and Kelso should have
been a commends to the poor Cardinal of Loraine. The freedoms of Scottish
Merchants were restrained in Roane, and they compelled to pay Tole and
Taxations others then their ancient Liberties did bear. To bring this head to
pass; to wit, to the Matrimonial Crown, the Queen Regent left no point of the
Compass unsailed with the Bishops and Priests. She practiced on this manner;
Ye may clearly see that I cannot do what I would within this Realm: for these
Heretics and Confederates of England are so banded together, that they stop
all good order. But will ye be favorable unto me in this suit of the
Matrimonial Crown, to be granted to my daughters husband, Then shall we see
how I shall handle these Heretics and Traitors ere it be long. And in very
deed in these her promises she meant no deceit in that behalf. Unto the
Protestants she said; I am not unmindfull how often ye have solicited me for
Reformation in Religion, and gladly would I consent thereunto, but ye see the
power and craft of the Bishop of S. Andrews, together with the power of Duke
Hamilton, and of Churchmen ever to be bent against me in all my proceedings:
so that I may do nothing, unless the full authority of this Realm be
delivered to the King of France, which cannot be, but by donation of the Crown
Matrimonial, which thing, if ye will bring to pass, then devise ye what ye
please in matters of Religion, and they shall be granted. With this Commission
and Credit, was Lord James, then Prior of S. Andrews, directed to the Earl of
Argyle, with more other promises then we list to rehearse. By such dissimulation
to those that were simple and true of heart, inflamed she them to be more
fervent in her Petition, then her self appeared to be. And so at the
Parliament holden at Edinburgh, in the month of October, in the year of God
1558. it was clearly voed, no man reclaiming (except the Duke for his
interest) and yet for it there was no better Law produced, Note.
except that there was a solemn Mass appointed for that purpose in the
Pontifical. To call the Crown Matrimonial, is an absurd Solecisme, newly
then invented at Court.
This head obtained, whereat France and she principally shot, what faith she
kept to the Protestants, in this our second Book shall be declared. In the
beginning whereof we may more amply rehearse some things, that in this our
first are summarily touched.

The end of the first Book.
The Second Book OF THE HISTORY OF Things done in SCOTLAND, in the Reformation
of Religion: Beginning in the year of our Lord God 1558.
OUr purpose was to have made the beginning of our History, from the things
that were done, from the year of God 1558. till, Note.
The Reformation of Religion, And now in these later days it has pleased God
in his goodness to grant the pure and Primitive Discipline also unto the
Church of Scotland.
which of Gods mercy we once possessed, and yet in Doctrine, and in the right
use of administration of Sacraments do possess.

But because diverse of the godly (as before is said) earnestly required, That
such persons as God raised up in the midst of darkness, to oppose themselves
to the same, should not be omitted: We obeyed their Request, and have made a
short Rehearsal of all such matters as concern Religion, from the death of
that notable Servant of God, Master Patricke Hamilton, unto the aforesaid
year, when that it pleased God to look upon us more mercifully then we
deserve, and to give unto us greater boldness, and better (albeit not without
hazard and trouble) success in all our enterprises then we looked for, as the
true Narration of this second Book shall witness. The PREFACE whereof
follows.

The Preface.
LEst that Satan by our silence shall take occasion to blaspheme, and to
slander us the Protestants of the Realm of Scotland, as that our fact tended
rather to Sedition and Rebellion, then to Reformation of Manners, and abuses in
Religion, We have thought expedient so truly and briefly as we can, to commit
to writing the causes moving us (as we say, and great part of the Nobility and
Barons of the Realm) to take the sword of just Defense, against those that
most unjustly seek our destruction. And in this our confession we shall
faithfully declare, What moved us to put our hands to the Reformation of
Religion; How we have proceeded in the same; What we have asked, and what
presently we require of the sacred Authority. To the end that our Cause being
known, as well our enemies as our brethren in all Realms, may understand how
falsely we are accused of tumult and Rebellion, and how unjustly we are
persecuted by France, and by their Faction. And also that our brethren natural
Scotish-men, of whatsoever Religion they be, may have occasion to examine
themselves, If they can with safe conscience oppose themselves to us, who seek
nothing but Christ Jesus his glorious Gospel to be preached, his holy
Sacraments to be truly ministered, Superstition, Tyranny, and Idolatry to be
suppressed in this Realm, And finally, This our native Country to remain
free from the Bondage and Tyranny of Strangers.

While that the Queen Regent practiced with the Prelates, how that Christ Jesus
blessed Gospel might utterly be suppressed within Scotland, God so blessed the
labors of his weak servants, that no small part of the Barons of this Realm
began to abhor the Tyranny of the Bishops: The first dou^t.
God did so open their eyes, by the light of his Word, that they could clearly
discern betwixt Idolatry, and the true honoring of God: Yea, men almost
universally began to doubt whether they could (God not offended) give their
bodily presence to the Mass, or yet offer their children to the Papisticall
Baptism. The doubts when the most godly, The second.
and the most learned in Europe had answered, both by word and writing,
affirming, That neither of both we might do, without peril of our souls, we
began to be more troubled: For then also began men of estimation, and those
that bare rule amongst us, to examine themselves concerning their duties, as
well toward Reformation of Religion, as toward the just defense of their
brethren most cruelly persecuted. And so began diverse questions to be moved; to
wit, If that with safe conscience such as were Judges, Lords, and Rulers of the
People, might serve the higher Powers in maintaining of Idolatry, Note.
in persecuting their Brethren, and in suppressing Christ's Truth: Or, Whether
they to whom God in some case has committed the Sword of Justice, might suffer
the blood of their Brethren to be shed in their presence, without any
declaration that such Tyranny displeased them. Scriptures answering the doubts.
By the plain Scriptures it was found, That a lively faith required a plain
Conf^ssion when Christ's Truth is oppugned, That not only are they guilty that
do evil, but also they that consent to evil. And plain it is, That they consent
to evil, who seeing iniquity openly committed, by their silence seem to
justify and avow whatsoever is done.

These things being resolved, and sufficiently proved by evident Scriptures of
God, we began every man to look more diligently to his Salvation: For the
Idolatry and Tyranny of the Clergy (called the Churchmen) was and is so
manifest, that whosoever does deny it, declares himself ignorant of God, and
enemy to Christ Jesus. We therefore, with humble confession of our former
offenses, with Fasting, and Supplication unto God, began to seek some remedy in
so present a danger. And first it was concluded, That the Brethren in every
Town at certain times should assemble together, to Common Prayers, to
exercise, in reading of the Scriptures, till it should please God to give the
gift of Exhortation by Sermon unto some, for the Comfort and Instruction of the
rest.

And this our weak beginning God did so bless, that within a few Months the
hearts of many were so strengthened, that we sought to have the face of a Church
amongst us, and open crimes to be punished without respect of persons: And for
that purpose by common Election, were Elders appointed, to whom the whole
Brethren promised Obedience: For at that time we had no public Ministers of
the Word; only did certain zealous men (amongst whom was the Lord of Dun,
This was called the privy Church.
David Forresse, Master Robert Lockhart, Master Robert Hammilton, William
Harlawe, and others) exhort their Brethren, according to the gifts and graces
granted unto them. But shortly after did God stir up his servant Paul Methuen
(his latter fall ought not to deface the work of God in him) who in boldness
of spirit began openly to Preach Christ Jesus in Dundie, in diverse parts of
Angus, and in Fyfe; and so did God work with him, that many began openly to
renounce their old Idolatry, and to submit themselves to Christ Jesus, and unto
his blessed Ordinances; Insomuch that the Town of Dundie began to erect the
face of a Public Church Reformed, in the which the Word was openly Preached,
and Christ's Sacraments truly ministered.

In this mean time did God send to us our dear Brother John Willock, John
Willocke.
a man godly, learned, and grave, who after his short abode at Dundie, repaired
to Edinburgh, and there (notwithstanding his long and dangerous sickness) did
so encourage the Brethren by godly Exhortations, that we began to deliberate
upon some public Reformation; For the corruption in Religion was such, that
with safe conscience we could no longer sustain it: Yet because we would
attempt nothing without the knowledge of the sacred Authority, with one
consent, after the deliberation of many days, it was concluded, That by our
public and common Supplication, we should attempt the favor, support, and
assistance of the Queen then Regent, to a godly Reformation: And for that
purpose, with all diligence after we had drawn our Oration and Petition as
follows, we appointed from amongst us a man whose age and years deserved
Reverence, whose honesty and worship might have craved audience of any
Magistrate on the earth; and whose faithful Service to the Authority at all
times has been such, that in him could fall no suspicion of unlawful
disobedience. This Orator was that ancient and honorable Father, Sir James
Sandelandes of Calder, The Lord of Calder, elder.
Knight; to whom we gave Commission and Power in all our names then present,
before the Queen Regent to speak this:

THE FIRST ORATION AND PETITION Of the Protestants of SCOTLAND: To the Queen
Regent.
ALbeit we have of long time contained our selves in that modesty (most noble
Princess) that neither the exile of body, loss of goods, nor perishing of
this mortal life, was able to make us to ask at your Majesty Reformation,
and redress of those wrongs, and of that sore grief patiently borne by us in
bodies and minds of long time: Yet are we now by very conscience, and by the
fear of our God compelled to crave at your Majesty's feet, remedy against the
most unjust tyranny, used against your Majesty's most obedient Subjects, by
those that be called the State Ecclesiastical. Your Majesty cannot be
ignorant what controversy has been, and yet is, concerning the true Religion,
and right worshipping of God. And how the Clergy (as they will be termed)
usurp to themselves such Empire above the consciences of men; That whatsoever
they command, must be obeyed; and whatsoever they forbid, must be avoided;
without further respect to Gods Pleasure, Commandment, or Will, revealed to us
in his most holy Word; or else there abides nothing for us but Faggot, Fire,
and Sword. The tyranny of the Clergy
By the which many of our brethren most cruelly and most unjustly have been
stricken of late years within this Realm, which now we find to trouble and
wound our consciences. For we acknowledge it to have been our bounden duties
before God, either to have defended our brethren from those cruel murderers
(seeing we are a part of that power which God has established in this Realm)
or else to have given open testification of our Faith with them: Which now we
offer our selves to do, lest that by our continual silence we shall seem to
justify the cruel tyranny of those men, which does not only displease us:
but your Majesty's wisdom most prudently does foresee, that for the quieting
of this intestine dissension, Note.
a public Reformation, as well in the Religion, as in the temporal government
were most necessary. And to the performance thereof, most gravely and most
godly (as we are informed) ye have exhorted as well the Clergy as the
Nobility, to employ their study, diligence, and care. We therefore, in
conscience, dare not any longer dissemble in so weighty a matter, which
concerns the glory of God, and our salvation: Neither now dare we withdraw
our presence or counsel, or Petitions, lest that the adversaries hereafter
should object to us, That place was granted for Reformation, and yet no man
sued for the same: and so shall our silence be prejudicial unto us in time to
come. And therefore we knowing no order placed in this Realm, but your
Majesty, and your grave counsel, set to amend, as well the disorder
Ecclesiastical, as the defaults in the temporal Regiment, most humbly
prostrate our selves before your feet, asking justice and your gracious help,
against them that falsely traduce and accuse us, as that we were Heretics, and
Schismatikes, under that color seeking our destruction, for that we seek the
amendment of their corrupted lives, and Christ's Religion to be restored to the
original purity. The Petition.
Further we crave of your Majesty with open and patent ears, to hear those
our subsequent requests, and to the joy and satisfaction of our troubled
consciences, bountifully to grant the same, unless by Gods plain Word any be
able to prove that justly they ought to be denied.

Here begins the particular Demands.
FIrst, Humbly we ask, That as we have by the Laws of this Realm, after long
debate obtained to read the holy Books of the Old and New Testament, in our
Vulgar Tongue, as Spiritual food to our souls: so from henceforth it may be
lawful, that we may meet publicly or privately to our Common Prayers in our
Vulgar Tongue, to the end that we may increase and grow in knowledge, and be
induced by fervent and often Prayer, to commend to God the holy Universal
Church, the Queen our Sovereign, her honorable and gracious Husband, the
ability of their succession, your Majesty Regent, the Nobility, and whole
State of this Realm.

Secondly, If it shall happen in our said meetings any hard place of Scripture
to be read, of which, without explanation, hardly can arise any profit to the
hearers, that it shall be lawful to any qualified persons in knowledge, being
present, to interpret and open up the said hard places, to Gods glory, and to
the profit of the Auditory. And if any think that this liberty should be
occasion of Confusion, Debate, or Heresy, we are content that it be provided
that the said Interpretation shall underly the judgment of the godly, and most
learned within the Realm at this time.

Thirdly, That the holy Sacrament of Baptism may be used in the Vulgar Tongue,
that the Godfathers and Witnesses may not only understand the points of the
League and Contract made betwixt God and the Infant, but also that the Church
then assembled, more gravely may be informed and instructed of their duties,
which at all times they owe to God, according to that promise made unto him,
when they were received into his household by the lavacre of spiritual
regeneration.

Fourthly, We desire that the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or of his
blessed Body and Blood may likewise be ministered unto us in the Vulgar Tongue,
and in both kinds, according to the plain Institution of our Savior Christ
Jesus.

And lastly, We most humbly require, That the wicked, slanderous, and
detestable life of Prelates, and of the state Ecclesiastical, may be reformed,
that the people by them have not occasion (as of many days they have had) to
contemn their Ministry, and the Preaching, whereof they should be
Messengers. And if they suspect that we rather envying their honors, or
coveting their riches and possessions, then Zealously desiring their amendment
and salvation, do travel and labor for this Reformation: The offer.
We are content, that not only the Rules and Precepts of the New Testament,
but also the Writings of the ancient Fathers, and the godly and approved Laws
of Justinian the Emperor, decide the controversy betwixt us and them. And if
it shall be found, that either malevolently or ignorantly we ask more then
these three forenamed have required, and continually do require of able and
true Ministers in Christ's Church, we refuse not correction, as your Majesty
with right judgment shall think meet. But if all the forenamed shall condemn
that which we condemn, and approve that which we require; Then we most
earnestly beseech your Majesty, that notwithstanding the long custom which
they have had to live at their lust, that they be compelled either to desist
from Ecclesiastical administration, or to discharge their duties, as becomes
true Ministers. So that the grave and godly face of the Primitive Church
reduced; Ignorance may be expelled; True Doctrine and good Manners may once
again appear in the Church in this Realm. These things we, as most obedient
Subjects, require of your Majesty, in the Name of the eternal God, and of his
Son Christ Jesus, in presence of whose Throne judicial, ye, and all other that
here in earth bears authority shall give account of your temporal regiment.
The spirit of the Lord Jesus move your Majesty's heart to Justice and Equity.

These our Demands being proposed, the State Ecclesiastical began to storm,
The practice of Satan.
and to devise all manner of lies to deface the equity of our cause. They
bragged as that they would have public Disputation, which also we most
earnestly required, Disputation with condition
two things being provided; First, That the plain and written Scriptures of
God should decide all Controversies: Secondly, That our brethren, of whom some
were then exiled, and by them unjustly condemned, might have free access to
the said Disputation, and safe conduct to return to their dwelling places,
notwithstanding any Process which before had been laid against them in matters
concerning Religion. But these being by them utterly denied (for no Judge would
they admit, but themselves, their Counsels, and Canon Law) They and their
faction began to draw certain Articles of reconciliation, The offer of the
Papists.
promising unto us, If we would admit the Mass to stand in its former
reverence and estimation; Grant Purgatory after this life; Confess prayer to
Saints, and for the dead, and suffer them to enjoy their accustomed Rents,
Possession, and Honor: That then they would grant us to pray, and baptize in
the Vulgar Tongue, so that it were done secretly, and not in the open assembly.
But the grosenesse of these Articles was such, that with one voice we refused
them, and constantly craved justice of the Queen Regent, and a reasonable
answer of our former Petitions. The Queen then Regent, a woman crafty,
dissimulate, and false-thinking, to make her profit of both parties, The grant
of the Queen Regent.
gave to us permission to use our selves godly, according to our desires
provided, that we should not make public assemblies in Edinburgh nor Lies,
and did promise her assistance to our Preachers, until some uniform order
might be established by a Parliament. To them (we mean the Clergy) she quietly
gave signification of her mind, promising that how soon any opportunity should
serve, she should so put order to these matters, that after they should not be
troubled: for some say, they gave her a large purse 40000. l. Turn. or Scots,
gathered by the Lord of Earleshale. We nothing suspecting her doubleness nor
falsehood, departed fully contented with her answer, and did use our selves so
quietly, that for her pleasure we put silence to John Douglas, who publicly
would have preached in the Town of Lies; for in all things we sought the
contentment of her mind, so far as God should not be offended against us, for
obeying her in things as we thought unlawful.

Shortly after these things, that cruel Tyrant and unmercifull hypocrite,
falsely called, Bishop of S. Andrews, apprehended that blessed Martyr of Christ
Jesus, Walter Mill, The apprehension of Walter Mill.
a man of decrepite age, whom most cruelly and most unjustly he put to death by
fire in Saint Andrews, the twenty eighth day of April, in the year of God
1558. Which thing did so highly offend the hearts of all godly, 1558.
that immediately after his death, began a new fervencie among the whole people,
yea, even in the Town of Saint Andrews, began the people plainly to condemn
such unjust cruelty. And in testification that they would his death should
abide in recent memory, there was cast together a great heap of stones in the
place where he was burnt. The Bishop and Priests thereat offended, caused once
or twice to remove the same, Note.
with denunciation of cursing, if any man should there lay any stones. But in
vain was that wind blown, for still was the heap made, till that the
Priests and Papists did steal away by night the stones to build their walls,
and to other their private uses.

We suspecting nothing that the Queen Regent was consenting to the forenamed
murder, most humbly did complain of such unjust cruelty, requiring that
justice in such cases should be ministered with greater indifferency. She as a
woman born to dissemble, The hypocrisy of the Queen Regent.
and deceive, began with us to lament the cruelty of the Bishop, excusing her
self as innocent in that cause, for that the sentence was given without her
knowledge. Because the man sometimes had been a Priest; therefore the Bishops
Official did proceed upon him without any commission of the Civil authority,
ex officio, as they term it. We yet nothing suspecting her falsehood, required
some order to be taken against such enormities, which she promised as often
before. But because shortly after there was a Parliament to be holden, for
certain affairs, pertaining rather to the Queens profit particular, then to
the commodity of the Commonwealth, we thought good to expose our matter unto
the whole Parliament, and by them to seek some redress: we therefore with one
consent did offer to the Queen and Parliament a Letter, in this Tenor: The
Form of the Letter given in Parliament.
UNto your Majesty, and unto your Right honorable Lords, Barons, and Burgesses
of this present Parl. Humbly means, and shows your Majesty's faithful and
obedient subjects, That where we are daily molested, slandered, and injured by
wicked and ignorant persons, place-holders of the Ministers of the Church, who
most untruely cease not to infame us, as heretics, and under that name they
most cruelly have persecuted diverse of our brethren; and farther intend to
execute their malice against us, unless by some godly order their fury and
rage be bridled and stayed. And yet in us they are able to prove no crime
worthy of punishment, unless that to read the holy Scriptures in our
Assemblies, to invocate the Name of God in public Prayers, with all sobriety
to interpret and open the places of Scripture that be read to the further
edification of the brethren assembled; and truly, according to Christ Jesus
his holy Institution, to minister the Sacraments, be crimes worthy of
punishment: other crimes (we say) in us they are not able to convince. And to
the premises we are compelled, for that the said Place-holders discharge no
part of their duties rightly to us, neither yet to the people subject to us;
and therefore, unless we should declare our selves altogether unmindfull of
our own salvation, we are compelled in very conscience to seek how that we and
our brethren may be delivered from the thraldom of Satan: For now it has
pleased God to open our eyes, and manifestly we see, That without extreme
danger of our souls, we may in no ways communicate with the damnable Idolatry,
and intolerable abuses of the Papisticall Church. And therefore most humbly
require we of your Majesty, and of your Right Honorable Lords, Barons, and
Burgesses assembled in this present Parliament, prudently to weigh, and as it
becomes just Judges, to grant these our most just and reasonable Petitions:

First, Protestation.
Seeing that the controversy in Religion which has long continued betwixt the
Protestants of Almany, Helvetia, and other Provinces; and the papisticall
Church is not yet decided by a lawful and general Counsel: And seeing that
our consciences are likewise touched with the fear of God, as was theirs in the
beginning of their controversy, we most humbly desire, That all such Acts of
Parliament as in the time of darkness gave power to the Churchmen to execute
their tyranny against us, by reason that we to them were delated as heretics,
may be suspended and abrogated, till a General Council lawfully assembled,
have decided all controversies in Religion. And lest that this mutation should
seem to set all men at liberty to live as they list, we secondarily require
that it be Enacted by this present Parliament, That the Prelates and their
Officers be removed from place of Judgment, only granting unto them
nevertheless the place of accusators in the presence of a Temporal Judge;
before whom the Church men accusators shall be bounden to call any by them
accused of heresy: To whom also they shall be bounden to deliver an
authenticke Copy of all Depositions, Accusations, and Process laid against any
person accused. The Judge likewise delivering the same to the party accused,
assigning unto him a competent term to answer to the same, after he has taken
sufficient caution. De judicio sisti.

Thirdly, We require, That all lawful defenses be granted to the person
accused; as, If he be able to prove that the witnesses be persons unable by Law
to testify against him, that then their Accusations and Depositions be null,
according to justice.

Item, That place be granted to the party accused to explain and interpret his
own mind and meaning; which confession we require be inserted in public
Acts, and be preferred to the deposition of any witness, seeing that none
ought to suffer for Religion, that is not found obstinate in his damnable
opinion.

Last, We require that our brethren be not condemned for heretics, unless by
the manifest Word of God they be convinced to have erred from that faith which
the holy Spirit witnesses to be necesiary to Salvation: And if so they be, we
refuse not but that they be punished according to justice; Unless by wholesome
admonition they can be reduced to a better mind.

These things require we to be considered of by you, who are in the Place of
the Eternal God (who is God of Order and Truth) even in such sort, as ye will
answer in presence of his Throne judicial: Requiring further, That favorably
you would have respect to the tenderness of our consciences, and to the
trouble which appears to follow in this Commonwealth, if the tyranny of the
Prelates, and of their adherents be not bridled by God and just Laws. God move
your hearts deeply to consider your own duties, and our present troubles.




These our Demands did we first present to the Queen Regent, because that we
were determined to enterprise nothing without her knowledge, most humbly
requiring her favorably to assist us in our just action. She spared not
amiable looks, and good words in abundance. But always she kept our Petition
close in her pocket. When we required secretly of her Majesty that our Petition
should be proposed to the whole Assembly: She answered, That she thought not
that expedient; for then would the whole Ecclesiastical Estate be contrary to
her proceedings, which at that time was great: For the Matrimonial Crown was
asked, and in that Parliament granted. But, said she, how soon order can be
taken with these things, which now may be hindered by the Churchmen, ye shall
know my good mind. And in the mean time whatsoever I can grant unto you,
shall gladly be granted. We yet nothing suspecting her falsehood, were content
to give place for a time to her pleasure and pretended reason. And yet thought
we expedient somewhat to protest, before the dissolution of the Parliament: For
our Petition was manifestly known to the whole Assembly; as also how that for
the Queens pleasure we had ceased to pursue the uttermost. Our Protestation was
formed in manner following.

The Form of the Protestation made in the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, Anno
1558.
IT is not unknown to this Honorable Parliament, what controversy is now
lately risen betwixt those that will be called the Prelates and Rulers of the
Church, and a great number of us the Nobility and Communalty of the Realm, for
the true worshipping of God, for the duty of Ministers, for the right
Administration of Christ Jesus holy Sacraments. How that we have complained by
our supplication to the Queen Regent, That our consciences are burdened with
unprofitable Ceremonies; And that we are compelled to adhere to Idolary: That
such as take upon them the Office Ecclesiastical, discharge no part thereof as
becomes true Ministers to do; and finally, That we and our brethren are most
injuriously oppressed by their usurped authority. And also we suppose it is a
thing sufficiently known, That we were of mind at this present Parliament to
seek redress of such enormities: but considering that the troubles of the time
do not suffer such Reformation as we by Gods plain Word do require, we are
enforced to delay that which most earnestly we desire: And yet lest that our
silence should give occasion to our adversaries to think that we repent of our
former enterprisers, we cannot cease to protest, for remedy against that most
unjust tyranny which we heretofore have most patiently sustained.

And first we protest, That seeing we cannot obtain a just Reformation
according to Gods Word, that it be lawful to us to use our selves in matters
of Religion and conscience, as we must answer unto God, unto such time as our
adversaries be able to prove themselves the true Ministers of Christ's Church,
and to purge themselves of such crimes as we have already laid to their charge,
offering our selves to prove the same whenever the sacred Authority please to
give us audience.

Secondly we protest, That neither we, nor yet any other of the godly that list
to join with us in the true Faith which is grounded upon the invincible Word of
God, shall incur any danger of life or lands, or any political pain, for not
observing such Acts as heretofore have passed in favor of our adversaries,
neither yet for violating of such Rites as man without Gods Commandment or Word
has commanded.

We thirdly protest, That if any tumult or uprore shall arise amongst the
members of this Realm for the diversity of Religion; Let the Papists observe.
and if it shall chance that abuses be violently reformed, that the crime
thereof be not imputed to us, who most humbly do now seek all to be reformed by
an Order. But rather whatsoever inconvenience shall happen to follow for lack
of Order taken, Note.
that may be imputed to those that do refuse the same.

And last we protest, That these our requests, proceeding from conscience, do
tend to none other end, but to the reformation of the abuses in Religion only:
Most humbly beseeching the sacred Authority to take us faithful and obedient
subjects into protection against our adversaries, and to show unto us such
indifferency in our most just Petition, as it becomes Gods Lieutenants to do
to those that in his Name do call for defense, against cruel oppressors, and
blood-thirsty Tyrants.


This our Protestation publicly read, we desired it to have been inserted in
the common Register, but that, by the labor of enemies, was denied unto us.
Nevertheless the Queen Regent said, Me will remember what it protested, and me
shall put good order after this to all things that now be in controversy. And
thus after she by craft had obtained her purpose, we departed ed, in good hope
of her favor, praising God inour hearts, that she was so well inclined toward
godliness. The good opinion that we had of her sincerity, caused us not only
to spend our goods, and hazard our bodies at her pleasure, but also by our
public Letters written to that excellent servant of God John Calvine we did
praise and commend her, for her excellent knowledge in Gods Word, Letters to
John Calvine.
and good will toward the advancement of his glory; requiring of him, That by
his grave counsel, and godly exhortation, he would animate her Majesty
constantly to follow that, which godlily she had begun. We did farther sharply
rebuke both by word and writing, all such as appeared to suspect in her any
venom or hypocrisy, or that were contrary to that opinion which we had
conceived of her godly mind. But how far we were deceived in our opinion, and
abused by her craft, did suddenly appear: For how soon that all things
pertaining to the commodity of France were granted by us, and that Peace was
contracted betwixt King Philip and France, and England and us, she began to
spue forth, and disclose the latent venom of her double heart. Then began she
to frown, and to look forwardly to all such as she knew did favor the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. She commanded her household to use all abominations at Easter;
and she first her self, to give example to others, did communicate to the Idol
in open audience; she controlled her household* and would know where that every
one received there Sacrament. And it appeared, That after that day that malice
took more violent and strong possession in her, then it did before; for from
that day forward she appeared altogether altered, insomuch that her countenance
and facts did declare the venom of her heart: For incontinent she caused our
Preachers to be summoned; for whom when we made intercession, beseeching her
Majesty not to molest them in their Ministry, unless any man were able to
convince them of false Doctrine, she could not bridle her tongue from open
blasphemy, but proudly she said, Blasphemy.
In despite of you and your Ministers both, they shall be banished out of
Scotland, albeit they preached as true as ever did Saint Paul. Note.
Which proud and blaspemous answer, She had gotten her lesson from the
Cardinal. Forefather to the now Earl of Lowdone, Chancellor. Queen Regents
answer.
did greatly astonish us: and yet ceased we not most humbly to seek her favor;
and by great diligence, at last we obtained that the Summons at that time were
delayed: For to her were sent Alexander Earl of Glenclarne, and Sir Hues
Campbell of Lowdone Knight, Sheriff of Air, to reason with her, and to crave
some performance of her manifold promises; to whom she answered, It becomes not
subjects to burden their Princes with promises, further then it pleased them
to keep the same. Both the Noble men faithfully and boldly discharged their
duty, and plainly forewarned her of the inconveniences that were to follow:
wherewith she somewhat astonished, said she would advise.

In this mean time did the Town of Perth, called Saint Iohnston, embrace the
Truth, S. Iohnston embraced the Gospel.
which did provoke her to a new fury; in which she willed the Lord Ruthuein
Provest of that Town, so suppress all such Religion there. Lord Ruthuens
answer.
To the which when he answered, That he could make their bodies to come to her
Majesty, and to prostrate themselves before her, till that she was fully
satiate with her blood: but to cause them to do against their conscience, he
could not promise. She in fury did answer, That he was too mallapart, to give
her such answer, affirming that both he and they should repent it. She
solicited M. James Haliburntoun Provest of Dundie, to apprehend Paul Methuen,
who fearing God, gave secret advertisement to the man to avoid the Town for a
time. She sent forth such as she thought most able to persuade at Easter, to
cause Montrosse, Dundie, S. Iohnston, and other such places as had received the
Gospel, to communicate with the Idol of the Mass, but they could profit
nothing, the hearts of many were bent to follow the Truth revealed, and did
abhor Superstition and Idolatry. Whereat she more highly commoved, did Summon
again all the Preachers to appear at Sterlin, the tenth day of May, in the
year of our Lord 1559. 1559
Which understood by us, we with all humble obedience sought the means how she
might be appeased, and our Preachers not molested: but when we could prevail
nothing, it was concluded by the whole brethren, The first assembly at S.
Iohnston.
That the Gentlemen of every Country should accompany their Preachers, to the
day and place appointed; Whereto all men were most willing. And for that
purpose, the Town of Dundie, the Gentlemen of Angus and Mernes, passed forward
with their Preachers to S. Iohnston, without Armor, as peaceable men, minding
only to give confession with their Preachers. And lest that such a multitude
should have given fear to the Queen Regent, the Lord of Dun, a zealous,
prudent, and godly man, passed before to the Queen, then being at Sterlin, to
declare to her, That the cause of their Convocation, was only to give
confession with their Preachers, and to assist them in their just defense. The
Lord of Dun, stayed the congregation, and the Preachers.
She understanding the fervencie of the people, began to use craft with him,
soliciting him to stay the multitude, and the Preachers also, with promise that
she would take some better order. He a man most gentle of nature, and most
addict to please her in all things not repugnant to God, Note.
wrote to those that then were assembled at S. Iohnston, to stay, and not to
come forward, showing what promise and hope he had of the Queens favor. At the
reading of his Letters, some did smell the craft and deceit, and persuaded to
pass forward, until that a discharge of the former Summons should be had,
alleging that otherwise their Process of Rebellion should be executed
against the Preachers: And so should not only they, but also all such as did
accompany them, be involved in a like crime. Others did reason, That the Queens
promise was not to be suspected, neither yet the Lord of Duns request to be
contemned, and so did the whole multitude with their Preachers stay.

In this mean time that the Preachers were summoned, to wit, the second of May
1559. arrived John Knox from France, 1559
who lodging two nights only in Edinburgh, hearing the day appointed to his
brethren, repaired to Dundie, where he earnestly required them, That he might
be permitted to assist his brethren, and to give confession of his Faith with
them, which granted unto him, he departed unto S. Iohnston with them, where he
began to exhort, according to the grace of God granted unto him. The Queen
perceiving that the Preachers did not appear, began to utter her malice; and
notwithstanding any request made to the contrary, gave commandment to put them
to the Horn; inhibiting all men, under pain of high Rebellion, to assist,
comfort, receive, or maintain them in any sort: which extremity perceived by
the said Lord of Dun, he prudently withdrew himself (for otherwise by all
appearance he had not escaped imprisonment.) For the Master of Maxwell, a man
zealous and stout in Gods Cause (as then appeared) under the cloak of another
small crime, was that same day committed to ward, because he did boldly
affirm, That to the uttermost of his power, Note.
he would assist the Preachers and the Congr^gation, notwithstanding any
sentence which unjustly was, At this time the Professors of the Gospel were
called the Congregation.
or should be pronounced against them. The Lord of Dun coming to S. Iohnston,
exposed the case even as it was, and did conceal nothing of the Queens craft
and falsehood: Which understood, the multitude was so inflamed, that neither
could the exhortation of the Preachers, nor the commandment of the Magistrate,
stay them from destroying the places of Idolatry. The manner whereof was: The
Preachers had declared before how odious Idolatry was in Gods presence: What
commandment he had given for the destruction of the monuments thereof: The
taking down of the F^iers in Saint Iohnston.
What Idolatry, and what abomination was in the Mass. It chanced that the next
day, which was the eleventh of May, after that the Preachers were exiled, that
after the Sermon, which was very vehement against Idolatry, a certain Priest
in contempt would go to the Mass; and to declare his malapart presumption, he
would open up a glorious Tabernacle, which stood upon the high Altar: There
stood beside, certain godly men, and amongst others, a young boy, who cried
with a bold voice, This is intolerable, Note.
that when God by his Word has plainly condemned Idolatry, we shall stand and
see it used in despite. The Priest hereat offended, gave the child a great
blow; who in anger took up a stone, and casting at the Priest, hit the
Tabernacle, and brake down an Image: And immediately, the whole multitude threw
stones, and put hands on the said Tabernacle, and on all other Monuments of
Idolatry; Which they dispatched before the tenth man in the Town were
advertised (for the most part were gone to diner) which noised abroad, the
whole multitude assembled, not of the Gentlemen, neither of them that were
earnest Professors, but of the rascal multitude, who finding nothing to do in
that Church, did run without deliberation to the Gray and Blackfriars, and
notwithstanding that they had within them very strong guards kept for their
defense, yet were their gates incontinent burst up. The first invasion was upon
Idolatry, and thereafter the common people began to seek some spoil. And in
very deed the Gray-Friers was a place so well provided, that unless honest men
had seen the same, we would have feared to have reported what provision they
had, The Gray Friars their provision.
their sheets, blankets, beds, and coverlets were such, that no Earl in
Scotland had better: Their naperie was fine, they were but 8 persons in the
Convent, and yet had they 8 puncheons of salt Beef (consider the time of the
year, the eleventh of May) wine, beer, and ale, beside store of victuals
belonging thereto. The like abundance was not in the Blackfriars, and yet
there was more then became men professing poverty. The spoil was permitted to
the poor: For so had the Preachers before threatened all men, That for
covetousness sake, none should put their hand to such a Reformation, that no
honest man was enriched thereby the value of a groat. Their conscience so moved
them, that they suffered those hypocrites to take away what they could, of that
which was in their places. The Prior of the Charter House was permitted to take
with him even as much gold and silver as he was able to carry. Note.
So were men's consciences beaten with the Word, that they had no respect to
their own particular profit, Note.
but only to abolish Idolatry, the places and Monuments thereof, in which they
were so busy, and so laborious, that within two days these three great
places, Monuments of Idolatry, to wit, the Black and Gray Thieves, and
Charter House Monks (a building of wondrous cost and greatness) was so
destroyed, that the walls only did remain of all those great edifices. Which
reported to the Queen, she was so enraged, A godly vow.
That she did vow utterly to destroy S. Iohnston, man, woman, and child, and
to consume the same by fire, and thereafter to salt it, in sign of a
perpetual desolation. We suspecting nothing such cruelty, but thinking that
such words might escape her in choler without purpose determined, because she
was a woman, set on fire by the complaints of those hypocrites, who flocked
unto her as Ravens to a carrion. We (we say) suspecting nothing such beastly
cruelty, returned to our own houses: leaving in S. Iohnston, John Knox to
instruct the people, because they were young and rude in Christ. But she, set on
fire partly by her own malice, partly by commandment of her friends in France,
and not a little by bribes, which she and Monsieur Dosell received from the
Bishops and the Priests here at home, did continue still in her rage. And first
she sent for all the Nobility, The complaint of the Queen Regent.
to whom she complained, That we meaned nothing but Rebellion: She did
grievously lament the destruction of the Charter House, because it was a Kings
foundation, and there was the tomb of King James the first, and by such other
persuasions she made the most part of them grant to pursue us. And then
incontinent sent she for her French men: For that was, and ever has been her
joy, to see Scottish men dip one with another blood. No man was at that time
more frank against us then was Duke Hamilton, led by that cruel beast the
Bishop of Saint Andrews, and by those that yet abuse him, the Abbot of
Kilvinning, and Matthew Hamilton of Milburne, two chief enemies to the Duke
and to his whole house, but in so far as thereby they may procure their own
particular profit. These and such other pestilent Papists ceased not to cast
fagots on the fire continually, crying, Forward upon these Heretics, we shall
once rid this Realm of them. The certainty hereof coming to our knowledge,
some of us repaired to the Town again, about the two and twentieth day of
May, and there did abide for the comfort of our brethren: Where after
Invocation of the Name of God, we began to put the Town and our selves in such
strength, as we thought might best serve for our just defense. Note.
And because we did not utter despair of the Queens favor, we caused to form
a Letter to her Majesty, as follows.

To the Queens Majesty Regent, all humble obedience and duty premised.
AS heretofore with jeopard of our lives, and yet with willing hearts we have
served the authority of Scotland, and your Majesty now Regent in this Realm,
in service to our bodies dangerous, and painful, so now with most dolorous
minds we are constrained by unjust tyranny purposed against us, to declare
unto your Majesty, That except this cruelty be stayed by your wisdom, we
shall be compelled to take the sword of just defense, Note.
against all that shall pursue us for the matter of Religion, and for our
conscience sake: which ought not, nor may not be subject to mortal creatures,
further then by Gods Word man is able to prove that he has power to command
us. We signify moreover unto your Majesty, That if by rigor we be compelled
to seek the extreme defense, that we will not only notify our innocence and
Petition to the King of France, to our Mistress and to her husband; but also
to the Princes and Counsel of every Christian Realm, declaring unto them,
That this cruel, Note.
unjust, and most tyrannical murder intended against Towns and multitudes,
was, and is the only cause of our revolt from our accustomed obedience, which
in Gods presence we faithfully promise to our Sovereign Mistress, to her
husband, and unto your Majesty Regent. Provided that our consciences may live
in that Peace and Liberty, which Christ Jesus has purchased to us by his
blood, and that we may have his Word truly Preached and holy Sacraments
rightly ministered unto us, without which we firmly purpose never to be subject
to mortal man: O where is this fervencie now?
For better we think to expose our bodies to a thousand deaths, then to hazard
our souls to perpetual damnation, by denying Christ Jesus, and his manifest
Verity, which thing not only do they who commit open Idolatry, but also all
such as seeing their brethren pursued for the cause of Religion, O would God
that the Nobility should yet consider.
and having sufficient means to comfort and assist them, do nevertheless
withdraw from them their dutiful support. We would not your Majesty should be
deceived, by the false persuasions of those cruel beasts the Churchmen, who
affirm, That your Majesty needs not greatly to regard the loss of us that
profess Christ Jesus in this Realm. If (as God forbid) ye give ear to their
pestilent counsel, and so use against us this extremity pretended, it is to be
feared, That neither ye, neither yet your posterity shall at any time after
this find that obedience and faithful service within this Realm, which as
all times you have found in us. We declare our judgments freely, as true and
faithful Subjects. God move your Princely heart favorably to interpret our
faithful meaning: Further advertising your Majesty, That the self same
thing, together with all things that we have done, or yet intend to do, we will
notify by our Letters to the King of France. Asking of you, in the Name of the
eternal God, and as your Majesty tenders the peace and quietness of this
Realm: That ye invade us not with any violence, till we receive answer from
our Mistress and her husb^nd, and from their advised Counsel there. And thus
we commit your Majesty to the protection of the omnipotent. From Saint
Johnston, the 22 of May 1559.

Sic subscribitur. Your Majesty's obedient Subjects in all things, not
repugnant to God. The faithful congregation of Christ Jesus in Scotland.


To the same purpose we wrote to Monsieur Dosell in French, requiring of him,
That by his wisdom he would mitigate the Queens rage, and the rage of the
Priests, otherwise that flame which then began to burn, would so kindle, that
when some men would, it could not be slackned. Adding further, That he declared
himself no faithful servant unto his Master the King of France, if for the
pleasure of the Priests he would persecute us, and so compel us to take the
sword of just defense. In like manner we wrote to Captain Serre la Bourse, and
to all other Captains and French Soldiers in general, admonishing them that
their Vocation was not to fight against us natural Scotish-men, nor yet that
they had any such Commandment of their Master: We besought them therefore not
to provoke us to enmity against them, and to consider that they had found us
favorable, in their most great extremities. We declared farther unto them,
That if they entered in hostility and bloody War against us, that the same
should remain longer then their own lives, to wit, even in all posterity to
come, so long as natural Scotish-men should have power to revenge such
cruelty, and most horrible ingratitude. These Letters were caused to be spread
abroad in great abundance, to the end that some might come to the knowledge of
men. The Queen Regent her Letter was laid upon her Cushion in the Chapel
Royal at Sterlin, where she was accustomed to sit at Mass; she looked upon
it, and put in the pocket of her Gown: Monsieur d' Osel and the Captains,
received theirs, delivered even by their own soldiers (for some amongst them
were favorers of the Truth) who after the reading of them, began to pull their
own beards, for that was the modest behavior of Monsieur d' Osell, when truth
was told unto him, so that it repugned to his fantasy. These our Letters were
suppressed to the utmost of their power, and yet they came to the knowledge of
many. But the rage of the Queen and the Priests could not be stayed, but
forward they move against us, who then were but a very few and mean number of
Gentlemen in S. Iohnston; we perceiving the extremity to approach, did write to
all brethren to repair toward us for our relief, to the which we found all men
so ready bent, that the Work of God was evidently to be espied: the Tenor
whereof follows. And because that we would omit no diligence to declare our
innocence to all men, we formed a Letter to those of the Nobility, who then
persecuted us, as after follows: To the Nobility of Scotland. The
Congregation of Christ Jesus within the same, desire the spirit of righteous
Judgment
BEcause we are not ignorant that ye the Nobility of this Realm, who now
persecute us, employing your whole study and force to maintain the kingdom of
Satan, of superstition and Idolatry, are yet nevertheless divided in opinion.
We the Congregation of Christ Jesus, by you unjustly persecuted, The first of
the Nobility.
have thought good, in one Letter, to write unto you severally. Ye are divided,
we say, in opinion; for some of you think that we who have taken this
enterprise to remove Idolatry, and the Monuments of the same, to erect the true
Preaching of Christ Jesus, in the bounds committed to our Charges, are
heretics, seditious men, and troublers of this Commonwealth, and therefore no
punishment is sufficient for us; and so blinded with this rage, and under
pretense to serve the Authority, ye proclaim War and destruction without all
order of Law against us. To you, we say, that neither your blind zeal, neither
yet the color of Authority, shall excuse you in Gods presence, who commands
none to suffer death till that he be openly convinced in judgment, to have
offended against God, and against his Law written; which no mortal creature is
able to prove against us: for whatsoever we have done, the same we have done at
Gods commandment, who plainly commands Idolatry, and all Monuments of the same
to be destroyed and abolished. The constant request of the Protestants of
Scotland.
Our earnest and long request has been, and is, That in open Assembly it may
be disputed, in presence of indifferent auditors, Whether that these
abominations, named by the pestilent Papists, Religion, which they by fire and
sword defend, be the true Religion of Jesus Christ or not? Now this humble
request denied unto us, our lives are sought in most cruel manner: And the
Nobility (whose duty is to defend innocents, and to bridle the fury and rage of
wicked men, Note the duty of Noblemen.
were it of Princes or Emperors) do notwithstanding follow their appetites, and
arm your selves against us your brethren, and natural Contrymen: yea,
against us that be innocent and just, as concerning all such crimes as be laid
to our charges. If ye think that we be criminal, because that we dissent from
your opinion, consider, we beseech you, that the Prophets under the Law, the
Apostles of Christ Jesus after his Ascension, his Primitive Church and holy
Martyrs, did disagree from the whole world in their days. And will ye deny but
that their action was just, and that all those that persecuted them were
murderers before God? May not the like be true this day? What assurance have
ye this day of your Religion, which the world that day had not of theirs? ye
have a multitude that agree with you, and so had they: ye have antiquity of
time, and that they lacked not: ye have Counsels, Laws, and men of reputation,
that have established all things, as ye suppose: but none of all these can make
any Religion acceptable unto God, which only depended upon his own will,
revealed to man in his most sacred Word. Note.
It is not then a wonder that ye sleep in so deadly a security in the matter of
your own salvation; considering that God gives unto you so manifest tokens,
that ye and your leaders are both declined from God. For if the tree shall be
judged by the fruit (as Christ Jesus affirms that it must needs be) then of
necessity it is, That your Prelates, and the whole rabble of their Clergy be
evil trees: For if Adultery, Probation against the Papists.
Pride, Ambition, Drunkenness, Covetousness, Incest, Unthankfulness,
Oppression, Murder, Idolatry, and Blasphemy, be evil fruits, there can none
of that Generation which claim to themselves the title of Churchmen, be judged
to be good trees: For all these pestilent and wicked fruits do they bring forth
in greatest abundance. And if they be evil trees (as ye your selves must be
compelled to confess they are) advise prudently with what consciences ye can
maintain them to occupy the room and place in the Lords Vineyard. Do ye not
consider that in so doing ye labor to maintain the servants of sin in their
filthy corruption, and so consequently ye labor that the devil may reign,
and still abuse this Realm by all iniquity and tyranny, Against such as under
color of authority persecute their brethren.
and that Christ Jesus and his blessed Gospel be suppressed and extinguished.
The name and the cloak of the authority which ye pretend, will nothing excuse
you in Gods presence, but rather shall ye bear double condemnation, for that ye
burden God, as that his good Ordinances were the cause of your iniquity: All
Authority which God has established, is good and perfect, and is to be obeyed
of all men, yea, under pain of damnation. But do ye not understand, Difference
betwixt the person and the Authority.
That there is a great difference betwixt the Authority which is Gods
Ordinance, and the persons of those which are placed in Authority; the
Authority and Gods Ordinances can never do wrong, for it commands that vice
and wicked men be punished, Note.
and virtue with virtuous men and just be maintained. But the corrupt person
placed in this Authority, may offend, and most commonly does contrary to this
Authority: and is then the corruption of man to be followed, by reason that it
is clothed with the name of Authority? Or shall those that obey the wicked
commandment of those that are placed in Authority, be excusable before God? Not
so, not so, but the plagues and vengeances of God taken upon Kings their
servants and subjects, Note diligently.
do witness to us the plain contrary. Pharaoh was a King, Pharaoh his fact
and had his Authority of God, who commanded his subjects to murder and
torment the Israelites, and at last most cruelly to persecute their lives: But
was their obedience (blind rage it should be called) excusable before God? the
Universal plague does plainly declare, That the wicked Commander, and those
that obeyed, were alike guilty before God. And if the example of Pharaoh shall
be rejected, Note.
because he was an Ethnicke, then let us consider the facts of Saul: He was a
King anointed of God, appointed to reign over his people; The fact of King Saul.
he commanded to persecute David, because (as he alleged) David was a
Traitor, and Usurper of the Crown: And likewise commanded Ahimeleck the High
Priest and his fellows to be slain: But did God approve any part of this
obedience? evident it is, That he did not. And think ye that God will approve
in you, that which he did condemn in others? be not deceived; with God there
is no such partiality. If ye obey the unjust commandments of wicked Rulers, ye
shall suffer Gods vengeance and just punishment with them. And therefore, as ye
tender your own salvation, we most earnestly require of you moderation, and
that ye stay your selves, and the fury of others, from persecuting of us, till
our cause be tried in open and lawful Judgment. The second sort of the
Nobility.
And now to you who are persuaded of the justice of our cause, who sometimes
have professed Christ Jesus with us, Note.
and who also have exhorted us to this enterprise, and yet have left us in our
extreme necessity, at least look out through your fingers in this our trouble,
as that the matter appertained not unto you, we say, That unless (all fear and
worldly respects set aside) ye join your selves with us, that as of God ye are
reputed Traitors, so shall ye be excommunicated from our Society, and from all
participation with us in the Administration of Sacraments: the glory of this
Victory which God shall give to his Church, yea, even in the eyes of men, shall
not appertain to you, but the fearful judgment which apprehended Ananias, and
his wife Saphira, Let both the one part and the other judge if God have not
justified the cause of the innocents.
shall apprehend you and your posterity. Ye may perchance contemn and despise
the Excommunication of the Church now by Gods mighty power erected amongst us,
as a thing of no force: But yet doubt we nothing, but that our Church, and the
true Ministers of the same, have the same power which our Master Christ Jesus
granted to his Apostles in these words, Whose sins ye shall forgive, shall be
forgiven; and whose sins ye shall retain, shall be retained, and that because
they preach, and we believe the same Doctrine which is contained in his most
blessed Word: and therefore, except that ye will contemn Christ Jesus, ye
neither can despise our threatening, neither yet refuse us calling for your just
defense. From whence this courage did proceed the issue did declare.
By your fainting, and by extracting of your support, the enemies are
encouraged, thinking that they shall find no resistance: in which point, God
willing, they shall be deceived; for if they were ten thousand, and we but one
thousand, they shall not murder the least of our brethren, but we (God
assisting us) shall first commit our lives into the hands of God for their
defense. But this shall aggravate your condemnation, for ye declare your selves
both Traitors to the Truth once professed, and murderers of us and of our
brethren, Note.
from whom ye withdraw your dutiful and promised support, whom your only
presence (to man's judgment) might preserve from this danger. For our enemies
look not to the power of God, but to the force and strength of man; when the
number is mean to resist them, then rage they as bloody wolves; but a part
equal or able to resist them by appearance, does bridle their fury. Examine
your own consciences, and weigh that Sentence of our Master Christ Jesus,
saying, Whosoever denies me, or is ashamed of me before men, I shall deny him
before my Father. Now is the day of his Battle in this Realm, if ye deny us
your brethren, suffering for his Names sake, ye do also deny him, as himself
does witness, in these words, Whatsoever ye did to any of these little ones,
that ye did to me, and what ye did not to one of these little ones, that ye did
not to me: If these sentences be true as concerning meat, drink, clothing, and
such things a appertain to the body, shall they not be likewise true in these
things that appertain to the preservation of the lives of thousands, whose
blood is now sought, for profession of Christ Jesus? And thus shortly we leave
you, who sometimes have professed Christ Jesus with us, to the examination of
your own consciences. And yet once again of you, who blinded by superstition,
persecute us: We require moderation, till our cause may be tried; which if ye
will not grant unto us for Gods Cause, yet we desire you to have respect to the
preservation of your common Country, which we can no sooner betray into the
hands of strangers, then that one of us destroy and murder another. Consider
our Petitions, and call for the spirit of righteous judgment.




These our Letters being divulgate, some began to reason, Whether in conscience
they might invade us, or not, considering that we offered due obedience to the
Authority, requiring nothing, but liberty of conscience, and our Religion and
fact to be tried by the Word of God. Our Letters came with convenient
expedition to the hands of our brethren in Cuninghame and Kyle, who assembled
at the Church of Craggie; where after some contrarious reasons, Alexander Earl
of Glencarne, in zeal burst forth in these words, Let every man serve his
conscience, I will, by Gods grace, see my brethren in S. Johnston: The Earl of
Glencarne his resolution.
Yea, albeit never man should accompany me, yet I will go, and if it were but a
Pike upon my shoulder; for I had rather die with that company, then live after
them. These words so encouraged the rest, that all decreed to go forward, as
that they did so stoutly, that when the Lion Herault in his coat of Arms,
commanded all men under pain of treason to return to their houses by public
sound of trumpet in Glasgow, never man obeyed that charge, but all went
forward, as we shall after hear. When it was clearly understood that the
Prelates and their adherents suppressing our Petitions so far as in them lay,
did kindle the fury of all men against us: it was thought expedient to write
unto them some Declaration of our minds, which we did in this form following.

To the generation of Antichrist, the pestilent Prelates, and their Shavelings
within Scotland, the Congregation of Christ Jesus within the some says,
TO the end that ye shall not be abused, thinking to escape just punishment,
after that ye in your blind fury have caused the blood of many to be shed:
This we notify and declare unto you, That if ye proceed in this your malicious
cruelty, ye shall be dealt withal wheresoever ye shall be apprehended, as
murderers and open enemies to God and unto mankind. And therefore betimes
cease from this blind rage: Remove first from your selves, your bands of
bloody men of war, and reform your selves to a more quiet life, and hereafter
mitigate ye the authority, which without crime committed on our part ye have
inflamed against us, or else be ye assured, That with the same measure that ye
have measured against us, and yet intend to measure to others, it shall be
measured unto you; that is, As ye by tyranny intend not only to destroy our
bodies, but also by the same to hold our souls in bondage of the Devil, subject
to Idolatry: So shall we with all force and power, which God shall grant unto
us, execute just vengeance and punishment upon you, yea, we shall begin that
same war which God commands Israel to execute against the Canaanites, that
is, contract of peace shall never be made till that ye desist from your open
Idolatry and cruel persecution of Gods children. And this we signify unto
you, in the name of the eternal God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, whose Verity
we profess, and Gospel we have Preached, and holy Sacraments rightly
ministered, so long as God will assist us to gain stand your Idolatry. Take this
for advertisement and be not deceived.


Notwithstanding these our Requests and Advertisements, Monsieur Dosell and his
French men, with the Priests and their bands, marched forward against S.
Iohnston, and approached within ten miles of the Town; then repaired the
brethren from all quarters for our relief. The Gentlemen of Fyfe; Angus,
Mernes, with the Town of Dundie were there, they that first hazarded to resist
the enemy: and for that purpose was chosen a place of ground, a mile and more
distant from the Town. In this mean time, the Lord Ruthuen, Provest of the Town
of S. Iohnston, and a man whom many judged godly and stout in that action (as
in very deed he was even unto his last breath) left the Town, and departed
first to his own place, and after to the Queen; whose defection and revolt was
a great discouragement to the hearts of many, and yet did God so comfort them,
that within the space of twelve hours after, the hearts of all men were set up
again. For those that were then assembled, did not so much hope of victory by
their own strength, as by the power of him, whose Verity they professed, and
began one to comfort another, till the whole multitude was erected in a
reasonable hope. The day after that the Lord Ruthuen departed, which was the
four and twentieth of May, Speakers sent by the Queen to S. Iohnston.
came the Earl of Argyle, Lord James Prior of S. Andrews, and the Lord Semple,
directed from the Queen Regent, to enquire the cause of that Convocation of
Lieges there. To whom when it was answered, That it was only to resist the
cruel tyranny devised against that poor Town, and the inhabitants of the
same. They asked if we minded not to hold that Town against the authority, and
against the Regent. To the which Question answered the Lairds of D^n and
Pitarro, with the Congregation of Angus and Mernes, the Master of Lindsay, the
Lairds of Londy, Balvarde, and others Barons of Fyfe. That if the Queens
Majesty would suffer the Religion there begun to proceed, Note the answer.
and not trouble their brethren and sisters that had professed Christ Jesus
with them, That the Town, they themselves, and whatsoever to them pertained,
should be at the Queens commandment. Which answer understood, The false
suggestion of the Queen Regent
the Earl of Argyle and the Prior (who both were then Protestants) began to
muse, and said plainly, That they were far otherwise informed by the Queen, to
wit, That we meant no Religion, but a plain Rebellion. To the which when he
had answered simply, and as the truth was, to wit, That we Convened for none
other purpose, but only to assist our brethren, who then were most unjustly
persecuted, and therefore we desired them faithfully to report our answer, and
to be intercessors to the Queen Regent, That such cruelty should not be used
against us, considering that we had offered in our former Letters, as well to
the Queens Majesty, as to the Nobility, our matter to be tried in lawful
judgment. They promised fidelity in that behalf, which also they kept. The
day after, which was the five and twentieth of May, before that the said Lords
departed, in the morning John Knox desired to speak with the same Lords, which
granted unto him, he was conveyed to their Lodging by the Lord of Balvarde;
and thus began,

The Oration of John Knox to the Lords.
THe present troubles, honorable Lords, ought to move the hearts, not only of
the true servants of God, but also of all such as bear any favor unto our
Country and natural Contrymen, to descend within themselves, and deeply
to consider, what shall be the end of this pretended tyranny. The rage of
Satan seeks the destruction of all those that within this Realm profess
Christ Jesus, and they that inflame the Queen, and you the Nobles against us,
regard not who prevail, provided that they may abuse the world, and live at
their pleasure, as heretofore they have done: yea, I fear that some seek
nothing more, then the effusion of Scottish blood, to the end that their
possessions may be more patent to others. But because that this is not the
principal which I have to speak, omitting the same to be considered, by the
wisdom of those to whom the care of the Commonwealth appertains.

1. I most humbly require of you, my Lords, in my name, to say to the Queen
Regent, That we in whom she in her blind rage does persecute, are Gods
servants, faithful and obedient Subjects to the authority of this Realm:
That that Religion which she pretends to maintain by fire and sword, is not
the true Religion of Christ Jesus, but is express contrary to the same, a
superstition devised by the brain of man, Let the Papists rather ambitious
Romanists, judge.
which I offer my self to prove against all that within Scotland will
maintain the contrary, liberty of tongue being granted unto me, and Gods
written Word being admitted for judge.

2. I further require your honors in my name to say unto the Queen, That as
often before I have written, so now I say, That this her enterprise shall not
prosperously succeed in the end, and albeit for a time she trouble the Saints
of God, for she fights not against man only, but against the eternal God, and
his invincible Verity, and therefore the end shall be her confusion, unless
betimes she repent and desist.

These things I require of you, in the Name of the eternal God, as from my
mouth, to say unto her Majesty, adding, That I have been, and am a more
assured friend to her Majesty, then they, that either flattering her, as
servants to her corrupt appetites, or else inflame her against us, who seek
nothing but Gods glory to be advanced; Vice to be suppressed; and Verity to be
maintained in this poor Realm.

They all three did promise to report his words so far as they could, which
afterward we understood they did; yea the Lord Sempill himself, a man sold
unto sin, enemy to God and all godliness, did yet make such report, That the
Queen was somewhat offended, that any man should use such liberty in her
presence. She still proceeded in her malice, for immediately thereafter she
sent her Lion Herald with Letters, straightly charging all men to avoid the Town
under the pain of Treason. Which Letters, after he had declared them to the
chief men of the Congregation, he publicly proclaimed the same upon Sunday
the 27 of May. In this mean time came sure knowledge to the Queen, to Duke
Hamilton, and to Monsieur Dosell, That the Earl of Glencarne, the Lords
Uchiltrie and Boyde, the young Sheriff of Air, the Lairds of Craggy, Wallace,
Sesnock, Carnell, Bar, Gairgirth, and the whole congregation of Kyle and
Cuninghame approached for our relief, and in very deed they came in such
diligence, and such a number, That as the enemy had just cause to fear; so have
all that profess Christ Jesus, just matter to praise God, for their fidelity
and stout courage in that need: For by their presence was the tyranny of the
enemy bridled. Their diligence was such, The diligence of the Earl of
Glencarne, and of the brethren of the wast, for the relief of S. Iohnston.
that albeit the passage by Sterlin and six miles above was stopped (for there
lay the Queen with her bands, and caused the Bridges to be cut upon the waters
of Forth, Gudy, and Teith, above Sterlin) yet made they such expedition through
desert and mountain, that they prevented the enemy, and approached within six
miles of our Camp, which then lay without the Town awaiting upon the enemy,
before that any assured knowledge came to us of their coming. Their number was
judged to twenty five hundred men, whereof there was twelve hundred Horsemen.
The Queen understanding how the said Earl and Lords, with their company
approached, caused to beset all ways, that no advertisement should come to us:
To the end, That we despairing of support, might condescend to such appointment
as she required. And sent first to require that some discreet men of our number
would come and speak to Duke Hamilton and Monsieur Dosell, (who then with their
Army lay at Achtererdoch, ten miles from S. Iohnston) to the end, that some
reasonable appointment might be had. She had persuaded the Earl of Argyle and
all others, That we meant nothing but Rebellion; and therefore had he promised
unto her, That in case we would not stand content with a reasonable
appointment, he would declare himself open enemy unto us, notwithstanding that
he professed the same Religion with us. From us were sent the Lord of Dun, the
Lord of Inuerquhartye, and Thomas Scot of Abbotshall, to hear what appointment
the Queen would offer. The Duke and Monsieur Dosell required, That the Town
should be made patent, and that all things should be referred to the Queens
pleasure. To the which they answered, That neither they had commission so to
promise, neither durst they in conscience so persuade their brethren: But if
the Queen would promise, The Petition of the Protestants, for the rendering of
S Iohnston.
That no inhabitant of the Town should be troubled for any such crimes as might
be alleged against them, for the late mutation of Religion and abolishment of
Idolatry, and for down-casting the places of the same; If she would suffer the
Religion begun to go forward, and leave the Town at her departing free from
the Garrisons of French Soldiers; That they would labor at the hands of their
brethren, that the Queen should be obeyed in all things. Monsieur Dosell
perceiving the danger to be great, if that a sudden appointment should be made,
and that they were not able to execute their tyranny against us, after that
the Congregation of Kyle (of whose coming we had no advertisement) should be
joined with us, with good words dismissed the said Lairds to persuade the
brethren to quiet concord. To the which we were all so well minded, that with
one voice they cried; Cursed be they that seek effusion of blood; Let us
possess Christ Jesus, and the benefit of his Gospel, and none within Scotland
shall be more obedient Subjects then we shall be. With all expedition were sent
from Sterlin again (after that the coming of the Earl of Glencarne was
known, for the enemy for fear quaked) the Earl of Argyle and Lord James
aforesaid. And in their company a crafty man Master Gauin Hamilton, Abbot of
Kilwinning, who were sent by the Queen to finish the appointment aforesaid. But
before that they came, was the Earl of Glencarne and his honorable company
arrived in the Town: and then began all men to praise God, for that he had so
mercifully heard them in their most extreme necessity, and had sent unto them
such relief as was able without effusion of blood to stay the rage of the
enemy. The Earl of Argyle and Lord James did earnestly persuade the
agreement, to the which all men were willing: but some did smell the craft of
the adversary, to wit, That they were minded to keep no point of the promise
longer then they had obtained their intent. With the Earl of Glencarne came
our loving brother John Willock, John Knox was in the Town before. These two
went to the Earl of Argyle and Lord James, The answer of the Earl of Argyle
and L. James, Prior of S. Andrews.
accusing them of infidelity, in so far as they had defrauded their brethren of
their dutiful support, and comfort in their greatest necessity. They answered
both, That their heart was constant with their brethren, and that they would
defend that Cause to the uttermost of their power. But because they had
promised to labor concord, and to assist the Queen in case we refused
reasonable offers, in conscience and honor they could do no less then be
faithful in their promise made: And therefore they required that the brethren
might be persuaded to consent to that reasonable appointment; The promise of
the foresaid.
promising in Gods presence, That if the Queen did break in any jot thereof,
that they with their whole powers would assist and concur with the brethren
in all times to come. This promise made, the Preachers appeased the multitude,
and obtained in the end that all men did consent to the appointment foresaid;
which they obtained not without great labors; and no wonder, for many foresaw
the danger to follow: yea the Preachers themselves in open Sermon did affirm
plainly, That they were assuredly persuaded that the Queen meant no truth. But
to stop the mouth of the adversary, Note.
who unjustly did burden us with Rebellion, they most earnestly required all
men to approve the appointment, and so to suffer hypocrisy to disclose it
self. This appointment was concluded the 28 of May, and the day following, at
two in the after noon, departed the Congregation from Saint Iohnston, after
that John Knox had in his Sermon exhorted all men to constancy, and unfainedly
to thank God, for that it had pleased his mercy to stay the rage of the enemy
without effusion of blood; Also that no brother should be weary, nor faint, to
support such as should after be likewise persecuted: for (said he) I am assured
that no part of this promise made shall be longer kept, then till the Queen and
her Frenchmen to have the upper hand. Many of the enemies were at the same
Sermon: For after that the appointment was made, they had free entry in the
Town to provide Lodgings. Before the Lords departed, was this Bond, whose
Tenor follows, as it was written and subscribed.

The second Covenant at Perth.
AT Perth the last of May, the year of God 1559 years, 1559

the Congregations of the West Country, with the Congregations of Fyfe, Perth,
Dundie, Angus, Mernes, and Monrosse, being convened in the Town of Perth, in
the Name of Jesus Christ, for setting forth of his glory, understanding nothing
more necessary for the same, then to keep a constant amity, unity, and
fellowship together, according as they are commanded by God, are confederate,
and become bounden and obliged in the presence of God, to concur and assist
together in doing all things required of God in his Scripture, that may be to
his glory; And at their whole powers to destroy and put away all things that
does dishonor to his Name, so that God may be truly and purely worshipped.
And in case that any trouble be intended against the said Congregation, or any
part or member thereof, the whole Congregation shall concur, assist, and
convene together, to the defense of the same Congregation or person troubled:
And shall not spare Labors, Goods, Substance, Bodies and Lives, in maintaining
the liberty of the whole Congregation, and every member thereof, against
whatsoever person shall intend the said trouble for cause of Religion, or any
other cause depending thereupon, or lay to their charge, under pretense thereof,
although it happen to be colored with any other outward cause. In witnessing
and testimony of the which, the whole Congregation aforesaid have ordained and
appointed the Noblemen and persons underwritten, to subscribe these Presents.

Sic subscribitur, Arch Argyle, James Steward, Glencarne. R. Lord Boid, Lord
Wchiltrie, Matthew Campbell of Tarmganart.



The 29 of May entered the Queen, the Duke, Monsieur d'Osell, and the
Frenchmen, The first slaughter at the entry of the Frenchmen.
who in discharging their Volley of Hacquebutes, did well mark the house of
Patrike Murray, a man fervent in Religion, and that boldly had sustained all
danger in that trouble; against whose stayr they directed six or seven Shot
even against the faces of those that were there lying; all men escaped, except
the son of the foresaid Patrike, a boy of ten or twelve years of age; who being
slain, was had to the Queens presence: but she understanding whose son he was,
said in mockage, It is pity it chanced on the son, and not on the father; but
seeing that so it is chanced, we cannot be against fortune. Idolatry erected
against the appointment.
This was her happy entry in Saint Iohnston, and the great zeal she bears to
Justice. The swarm of Papists that entered with her, began straight to make
provision for their Mass; and because the Altars were not so easy to be
repaired again, they provided Tables, whereof some before used to serve for
Drunkards, Dicers, and Carders, but they were holy enough for the Priest and
his Pageant. The Queen began to rage against all godly and honest men, their
houses were oppressed by the French, the lawful Magistrates, as well Provest
as Baylies, were unjustly, and without all order, deposed from their Authority:
a wicked man, void of Gods fear, and destitute of all virtue, the Lord of
Kilfans, was entrusted by her, Provest of the Town: Whereat all honest men
offended, left their own houses, and with their wives and children sought
amongst their brethren some resting place for a time. Against the appointment
the second time.
She took order that four Colors of the Soldiers should abide in the Town to
maintain Idolatry, and to resist the Congregation. Honest and indifferent men
asked why she did so manifestly violate her promise? She answered, That she was
bound to keep no promise to heretics: And moreover, That she promised only to
leave the Town free of French Soldiers; which (said she) she did, Second
answer of the Queen Regent.
because that these that therein were left were Scotishmen. But when it was
reasoned in her contrary, That all those that took wages of France were counted
French Soldiers, she answered, Princes must not be straightly bounden to keep
their promises: The third an^wer.
My self (said she) would make little conscience to take from all that sort
their lives and inheritance, if I might do it with as honest an excuse. And
then she left the Town in extreme Bondage: The departure of the Earl of
Argyle, and Lord James from the Queen Regent.
After that her ungodly Frenchmen had most cruelly used the most part of those
that remained in the ^ame, the Earl of Argyle, and Lord James foresaid
perceiving in the Queen nothing but mere tyranny and falsehood, mindful of
their former promises made to their brethren, did secretly convey themselves,
and their Companies of the Town, and with them departed the Lord Ruthuen, of
whom before mention is made; then the Earl of Menteth, and the Lord of
Tullybardin, who in Gods presence did confederate and bind themselves
together, faithfully promising one to assist and defend another against all
persons that would pursue them for Religion sake; and also that they with their
whole force and power would defend the brethren persecuted for the same Cause.
The Queen highly offended at the sudden departure of the persons aforesaid,
sent charges to them to return, under the highest pain of her displeasure. But
they answered, The answer the Earl of Argyle.
That with safe conscience they could not be partakers of so manifest tyranny
as was by her committed, and of so great iniquity as they perceived devised by
her, and her ungodly counsel the Prelates, This answer was given to her the
first day of June, and immediately the Earl of Argyle, and Lord James repaired
toward S. Andrews; and in their Journey gave advertisement by writing to the
Lord of Dun, to the Lord of Petarrow, to the Provest of Dundie, and others,
professors in Angus, to visit them in S. Andrews the fourth of June, for
Reformation to be made there: which day they kept, and brought in their company
John Knox, who the first day after his coming to Fyfe, did preach in Carreal,
the next day in Anstruther, minding the third day, which was the Sunday, to
preach in S. Andrews. The Bishop hearing of Reformation to be made in his
Cathedral Church, thought time to stir, or else never, and therefore
assembled his colleagues, and confederate fellows, besides his other friends,
and came to the Town upon the Saturday at night, accompanied with a hundred
Spears, of mind to have stopped John Knox from Preaching. The two Lords and
Gentlemen aforesaid were only accompanied with their quiet households, and
therefore was the sudden coming of the Bishop the more fearful; for then was
the Queen and her Frenchmen departed from Saint Iohnston, and were lying in
Falkland, within twelve miles of S. Andrews; and the Town at that time had not
given profession of Christ, and therefore could not the Lords be assured of
their friendship. Consultation being had, many were of mind that the Preaching
should be delayed for that day, and especially that Io. Knox should not preach,
for that did the Bishop affirm that he would not suffer, considering that by
his Commandment the Picture of the said John was before burnt. He willed
therefore an honest Gentleman, Robert Colwill of Cleisse, The Bishops good
mind toward John Knox.
to say to the Lords, That in case John Knox presented himself to the
Preaching-place, in his Town and principal Church, he should make him be
saulted with a Dozen of Culverings, whereof the most part should light upon his
nose. After long deliberation had, the said John was called, that his own
judgment might be had; When many persuasions were made that he should delay
for that time, and great terrors given in case he should enterprise such a
thing; as it were in contempt of the Bishop, he answered, God is witness that
I never preached Christ Jesus in contempt of any man, John Knox his answer to
the Lords, and the rest of the brethren.
neither mind I at any time to present my self to that place, having either
respect to my own private commodity, either yet to the worldly hurt of any
creature: But to delay to preach to morrow (unless the body be violently
withheld) I cannot in conscience: For in this Town and Church began God
first to call me to the dignity of a Preacher, from the which I was re^t by the
tyranny of France, and procurement of the Bishops, as ye well enough know, how
long I continued prisoner, what torment I sustained in the Galleys, and what
were the sobs of my heart, is now no time to recite. This only I cannot
conceal, which more then one have heard me say when my body was absent from
Scotland, That my assured hope was, in open audience to preach in Saint
Andrews, before I departed this life. And therefore (said he) my Lords, seeing
that God above the expectation of many has brought my body to the same place
where first I was called to the Office of a Preacher, and from the which most
unjustly I was removed: I beseech your Honors not to stop me from presenting
my self unto my Brethren: And as for the fear of danger that may come to me,
let no man be solicit, for my life is in the custody of him whose glory I
seek; and therefore I cannot so fear their boast nor tyranny, that I will
cease from doing my duty, when of his mercy he offers the occasion. I desire
the hand and weapon of no man to defend me, only do I crave audience; which if
it be denied here unto me at this time, I must seek further where I may have
it. At these words the Lords were fully content that he should occupy the
place, which he did upon Sunday the tenth of June, and did treat of the
ejection of the buyers and the sellers forth of the Temple of J^rusalem; as it
is written in the Evangelists Matthew and John, and so he applied the
corruption that was then, to the corruption that is in Papistry: and Christ's
fact, to the duty of those to whom God gives power and zeal thereto, The
Reformation of S. Audrews.
that as well the Magist^ates, the Provest and Baylies, as the communalty for
the most part within the Town, did agree to remove all Monuments of Idolatry,
which also they did with expedition. The Bishop advertised h^reof, departed
that same day to the Queen, who lay with her Frenchmen, as is said, in
Falkland. The hot fury of the Bishop did so kindle her choler (and yet the love
was very cold betwixt them) that without farther delay conclusion was taken, to
invade Saint Andrews, For the old Earl of Argyle was dead.
and the two young Lords aforesaid, who then were very slenderly accompanied.
Posts were sent from the Queen with all diligence to Cowper, distant only six
miles from Saint Andrews, to prepare Lodgings and Victuals for the Queen and
her Frenchmen. Lodgings were assigned, and F^rriers were sent before. Which
thing understood, counsel was given to the Lords to march forward, and to
prevent them before they came to Cowper: which they did, giving advertisement
to all brethren with all possible expedition to repair toward them, which they
also did, with such diligence, Cowper-Moore.
that in their Assembly the wondrous Work of God might have been espied: For
when at night the Lords came to Cowper, they were not an hundred Horse, and
some few Footmen whom the Lord James, brought from the Coast ^ide; and yet
before the next day at noon (which was Tuesday the thirteenth of June) their
number passed three thousand men, which by Gods providence came unto the Lords
from Lowthiane the Lairds of Ormeston, Calder, Hatton, Lestarrig, and Colston,
who albeit they understood at their departing from their own houses no such
trouble, yet were they by their good counsel very comfortable that day. The
Lord Ruthuen came from Saint Iohnston with some Horsemen with him: The Earl
of Rothesse Sheriff of Fyfe, came with an honest Company. The Towns of Dundie
and S. Andrews declared themselves both stout and faithful. Cowper, because it
stood in greatest danger, was assisted with the whole Force. Finally, God did
so multiply our number, That it appeared as men had rained from the clouds. The
enemy understanding nothing of our Force assured themselves of Victory. Who had
been in Falkland the night before, might have seen embracing and kissing,
betwixt the Queen, the Duke, and the Bishop: But Master Gawin Hamilton, gaper
for the Bishopric of S. Andrews, above all others, was lovingly embraced of
the Queen; For he made his solemn Vow, M. Gawin Hamiltons Vow.
That he would fight, and that he would never return till he brought those
Traitors to her Majesty, either quick or dead. And thus before midnight did
they send forward their Ordnance, themselves did follow before three of the
clock in the morning. The Lords hereof advertised, assembled their company
early in the morning upon Cowper-moore; where by the advice of M. James
Haliburtoun Provest of Dundie, was chosen a place of ground convenient for our
defense: For it was so chosen* That upon all sides our Ordnance might have
beaten the enemy, and yet we have stood in safety, if we had been pursued till
we had come to hand strokes. The Lord Ruthuen took the charge of the horsemen,
and ordered them so, That the enemy was never permitted to epsy our number;
the day was dark, which helped thereto. The enemy (as before is said) thinking
to have found no resistance, after that they had twice or thrice made show unto
us, as that they would retire, marched forward with great expedition, and
approached within a mile before that ever their horsemen stayed, and yet they
kept betwixt us and them a water, for their strength. It appeared to us, That
either they marched for Cowper or S. Andrews: and therefore our Horsemen in
their Troop, and a part of the Footmen with the Ordnance marched somewhat
always before them for safety of the Town. The Lords, with the Gentlemen of
Fyfe, and so many of Angus and Mearns as were present, kept themselves close in
a knot, near to the number of a thousand Spears. The Towns of Dundie and S.
Andrews were arrayed in another battle, who came not to the sight of the
enemy, till that after twelve of the clock the mist began to vanish, and then
passed some of their Horsemen to a mountain, from the height whereof they
might discern our number. Which perceived by them, their Horsemen and
Footmen stayed incontinent, Posts ran to the Duke and Monsieur Dosell, to
declare our number, and what order we kept: And then were Mediators sent to
make appointment, but they were not suffered to approach near to the Lords,
neither yet to the view of our Camp; which put them in great fear. Answer was
given unto them, First answer at Cowper-moore.
That as we had offended no man, so would we seek appointment of no man; but if
any would seek our lives (as we were informed they did) they should find us,
if they pleased to make diligence. This answer received, were sent again the
Lord Lindsay, and Lord of W^nchton, who earnestly requested us to concord, and
that we would not be the occasion that innocent blood should be shed. We
answered, The second answer.
That neither had we quarrel against any man, neither yet sought we any man's
blood: only we were convened for defense of our own lives unjustly sought by
others. We added further* That if they could find the mean, that we and our
brethren might be free from the tyranny devised against us, that they should
reasonably desire nothing which should be denied for our part. This answer
received, the Duke and Monsieur Dosell, having Commission of the Queen Regent,
required, That Assurance might be taken for eight days; to the end that
indifferent men in the mean time might commune upon some final agreement of
those things which were then in controversy. Hereto did we fully consent,
albeit that in number and force we were far superior, and for testification
hereof, we sent unto them our hand writs; and we likewise received theirs with
promise, That within two or three days some discreet men should be sent to us
to S. Andrews, with further knowledge of the Queens mind. The tenor of the
assurance was this.

The Assurance.
WE James Duke of Chattellerault, Earl of Arrane, Lord Hamilton; and my Lord
Dosell, Lieutenant for the King in these parts, for our selves, our
assistaries, and partakers, being presently with us in company. By the tenor
hereof promits faithfully in honor to my Lords Archibald Earl of Argyle, and
James, Commendater of the Priory of S. Andrews, to their assistants and
partakers being presently with them in company: That we and our company
aforesaid, shall retire incontinent to Falkland, and shall with diligence
transport the French men, and our other folks now presently with us, and that
no French men or other Soldiers of ours, shall remain within the bounds of
Fyfe, but so many as before the raising of the last Army lay in Disert,
Kirkcaldie, and Kinghorne, and the same to lie in the same places only, if we
shall think good. And this to have effect for the space of eight days
following the date hereof exclusive, That in the mean time certain Noblemen,
by the advice of the Queen and the rest of the Council may convene to talk of
such things, as may make good order and quietness amongst the Queens Lieges.
And further, We, nor none of our assisters being present with us, shall invade,
trouble, or disquiet the said Lords nor their assisters, during the said space.
And this we bind and oblige us upon our loyal fidelity and honor, to
observe and keep in every point above-written, without fraud or guile. In
witness whereof, we have subscribed these presents with our own hands.

At Garlebanke the 13 day of June 1559. Subscribed. James Hamilton. Meneits,
Dosell.



And this received, we departed first, because we were thereto requested by the
Duke; and so we returned to Cowper, lauding and praising God, for his mercy
showed, and thereafter every man departed to his dwelling place. The Lords and
a great part of the Gentlemen passed to S. Andrews, who there abode certain
days, still looking for those that were promised to come from the Queen for
appointment to be made. But we perceiving her craft and deceit (for under that
assurance, she meant nothing else but to convey her self, her Ordnance, and
Frenchmen over the water of Forth) took consultation what should be done for
delivering S. Iohnston from these ungodly Soldiers, and how our brethren
exiled from their own houses, The delivery of S. Iohnston.
might be restored again. It was concluded, That the brethren of Fyfe, Angus,
Mernes, and Stratherne, should Convene at S. Iohnston the four and twentieth
day of June for that purpose, and in the mean time were these Letters written
by the Earl of Argyle and Lord James to the Queen then Regent.

Letters to the Queen Regent.
MAdame, after our hearty commendations of service, this shall be to show your
Majesty, That upon the 13 day of June, we were informed by them that were
Communers betwixt the Duke, Monsieur Dosell, and us, That we should have spoken
unreverently of your Majesty, which we beseech your Majesty, for the true
service that we have made, and are ready to make at all times to your Majesty,
That of your goodness you will let us know the sayers thereof, and we shall do
the duty of true Subjects, to defend our own innocence: As we take God to
witness, of the good Zeal and Love we bear toward you, to serve you with
true hearts, and all that we have, as well lands as goods; desiring no other
thing for our service, but the liberty of our conscience to serve our Lord God,
as we shall answer to him, which your Majesty ought and should give us
unrequired. Moreover, please your Majesty, That the Duke and the Noblemen
being in Sterlin for the time, by your Majesty's advice, solicited us to press
the Congregation assembled at the Town of Perth, to Commune of Concord, where
we did our exact diligence, and brought it to pass, as your Majesty knows.
And there is a point, that we plainly see it not observed to us, which is, That
no Soldier should remain in the Town after your Majesty's departing. And
suppose it may be inferred, That it was spoken of French Soldiers only, yet
we took it otherwise, like as we do yet, That Scottish-men, or any other
Nation, taking wages of the King of France, are reputed and holden French
Soldiers. Therefore seeing we of good will and mind brought that matter to
your Majesty's contentment, it will please your Majesty of your goodness to
remove the Soldiers and their Captains, with others that have gotten charge of
the Town, That the same may be guided and ruled freely, as it was before, by
the Ballyes and Counsel conform to their infeoffments given to them, by the
ancient and most excellent Kings of this Realm, to elect and choose their
officers at Michaelmas, and they to endure for the space of one year, conform
to the old Rite and Custom of this Realm: which being done by your Majesty,
we trust the better success shall follow thereupou to your Majesty's content,
as the bearer will declare at more length to your Majesty; Whom God preserve.


To Saint Iohnston, with the Gentlemen before expressed, did Convene the Earl
of Monteith, the Lord of Glaneurquhair, and diverse others, who before had not
presented themselves for defense of their brethren. When the whole multitude
was Convened, a Trumpet was sent by the Lords, commanding the Captains and
their Bands, To avoid the Town, and to leave it to the ancient Liberty and
just Inhabitants of the same; Also commanding the Lord of Kilfawnes, put in
Provest by the Queen, The summoning of S. Iohnston.
with the Captains aforesaid, To open the gates of the Town, and make the same
patent to all our Sovereigns lieges, to the effect, That as well true Religion
now once begun therein, may be maintained, and Idolatry utterly suppressed, as
also the said Town might enjoy and brook their ancient Laws and Liberties,
unoppressed by men of War, according to their old Privileges granted to them
by the ancient Princes of this Realm, and conform to the provision contained
in the Contract of Marriage, made by the Nobility and Parliament of this Realm
with the King of France, bearing namely, That our old Laws or Liberties should
not be altered: Adding thereto, If they foolishly resisted, and therein
happened to commit murder, That they should be treated as murderers. To the
which they answered proudly, That they would keep and defend that Town,
according to their promise made to the Queen Regent. This answer received,
preparation was made for the Siege and assault. For amongst all, it was
concluded that the Town should be set at liberty, to what danger soever their
bodies should be exposed. While preparation was in making, came the Earl of
Huntly, the Lord Erskin, Master John Ballenden, Justice Clerk, requiring that
the pursuit of the Town should be delayed. Communing at S. Iohnston.
To speak to them were appointed, the Earl of Argyle, Lord James, and Lord
Ruthuen, who perceiving in them nothing but a drift of time, without any
assurance that the former wrongs should be redressed, gave unto them a short
and plain answer, That they would not delay their purpose an hour: and
therefore willed them to certify the Captains in the Town, That if by pride
and foolishness they would keep the Town, and in so doing slay any of their
brethren, that they should every one die as murderers. The Earl of Huntly,
Huntly.
displeased at this answer, departed, and was highly offended that he could not
dress such an appointment, as should have contented the Queen and the Priests.
After their departing the Town was again summoned: but the Captains supposing
that no sudden pursuit should be made, and looking for relief to have been
sent from the Queen, abode in their former opinion. And so upon Saturday the
nine and twentieth of June, at ten of the clock at night, commanded the Lord
Ruthuen who besieged the west Quarter, to shoot the first Volley, which being
done, the Town of Dundie did the like, whose Ordnance lay on the east side of
the Bridge. The Captains and Soldiers within the Town, perceiving that they
were unable long to resist, required assurance till twelve hours upon the
morrow; promising, That if before that hour there came unto them no relief
from the Queen Regent, that they would render the Town: Provided that they
should be suffered to depart the Town with Ensign displayed. We thirsting the
blood of no man, and seeking only the liberty of our brethren, condescended to
their desires, albeit that we might have executed against them judgment
without mercy, for that they had refused our former favors, and had slain one
of our brethren, and hurt two in their resistance, and yet we suffered them
freely to depart without any further molestation. The Town being delivered from
their thraldom, upon Sunday the six and twentieth of June thanks was given to
God for this great benefit received, and consultation was taken, what was
further to be done. In this mean time, zealous men considering, how obstinate,
proud, and despightfull, the Bishop of Murray had been before, The Bishop of
Murray.
how he had threatened the Town by his Soldiers and friends who lay in Scone,
thought good that some order should be taken with him, and with that place,
which lay near to the Towns end. The Lords wrote unto him (for he lay within
two miles of S. Iohnston) That unless he would come and assist them, they
neither could spare nor save his place. He answered by his writing, That he
would come, and would do as they thought expedient; that he would assist them
with his Force, and would consent with them against the rest of the Clergy in
Parliament. But because this answer was slow in coming, the Town of Dundie
partly offended for the slaughter of their men, and especially bearing no good
favor to the said Bishop, for that he was and is chief enemy to Christ Jesus,
and that by his counsel alone was Walter Mile our brother put to death, they
marched forward: To stay them was first sent the Provest of Dundie, and his
brother Alexander Halyburtoun Captain; who little prevailing, was sent unto
them John Knox; but before his coming, they were entered to the pulling down of
the Idols and dortoir. And albeit the said Master James Halyburtoun, Alexander
his brother, and the said John, did what in them lay to have stayed the fury of
the multitude, yet were they not able to put order universally, and therefore
they sent for the Lords, Earl of Argyle and Lord James, The destruction of
Scone.
who coming with all diligence, labored to have saved the place and the place
and the Church. But because the multitude had found buried in the Church a
great number of hid goods, of purpose to have preserved them to a better day
(as the papists speak) the Towns of Dundie and S. Iohnston could not be
satisfied, till that the whole reparation and Ornaments of the Church (as they
term it) were destroyed. And yet did the Lords so travel, that they saved the
Bishops Palace, with the Church and place for that night: For the two Lords did
not depart, till they brought with them the whole number of those that most
sought the Bishops displeasure. The Bishop greatly offended that any thing
should have been enterprised in reformation of his place, asked of the Lords
his Band and handwriting, which not two hours before he had sent unto them;
which delivered to his Messenger Sir Adam Brown, advertisement was given, That
if any farther displeasure chanced unto him, he would that he should not blame
them. The Bishops servants that same night began to fortify the place again,
and began to do violence to some that were carrying away such Baggage as they
could come by. The Bishops Girnall was kept the first night by the labors of
John Knox, who by exhortation removed such as violently would make
interruption. The same night departed from S. Iohnston the Earl of Argyle, and
L. James, as after shall be declared. The cause of the burning of Scone.
The morrow following, some of the poor, in hope of spoil, and some of Dundie,
to consider what was done, passed up to the said Abbey of Scone; whereat the
Bishops servants offended, began to threaten and speak proudly: and as it was
constantly affirmed, one of the Bishops sons thrust through with a Rapier one of
Dundie, for because he was looking in at the Girnell door. This brute noysed
abroad, the Town of Dundie was more enraged then before; who putting themselves
in Armor, sent word to the inhabitants of S. Iohnston, That unless they would
support them to avenge that injury, they should never after that day occure
with them in any action. The multitude easily enflamed, gave the Alarm, and so
was that Abbey and Palace appointed to Saccage, in doing whereof they took no
long deliberation, but committed the whole to the merciement of fire. Whereat
no small number of us were so offended, that patiently we could not speak, to
any that were of Dundie or Saint Iohnston. A poor aged matron seeing the flame
of fire to pass up so mightily, and perceiving that many were thereat
offended, Speaking of an ancient matron when Scone was burning.
in plain and sober manner of speaking, said, Now I see and understand that
Gods judgments are just, and that no man is able to save where he will punish:
since my remembrance this place has been nothing else but a Den of Whore
mongers: It is incredible to believe how many wives have been adulterate, and
virgins deflowred by the filthy beasts which have been fostered in this den;
but especially by that wicked man who is called the Bishop. If all men knew as
much as I, they would praise God, and no man would be offended. This woman
dwelt in the Town nigh to the Abbey. At whose words were many pacified,
affirming with her, That it was Gods just Judgment. And assuredly if the
labors or travel of any man could have saved that place, it had not been at
that time destroyed: for men of greatest estimation labored with all diligence
for the safety of it. While these things were done at Saint Iohnston, the Queen
fearing what should follow, determined to send certain Bands of French
Soldiers to Sterlin, of purpose to stop the passage to us that then were upon
the North side of Forth. Which understood, the Earl of Argyle and Lord James
departed secretly in the night, and with great expedition preventing the
French, The taking of Stirlin.
they took the Town (before whose coming the rascal multitude put hands on
the thieves, I should say Friars places, and utterly destroyed them) whereat
the Queen and her Faction not a little afraid, with all diligence departed
from Edinburgh to Dumbar. And so we with reasonable diligence marched forward
to Edinburgh, for Reformation to be made there; where we arrived the 29 of
June. The Provest for that time, the Lord Seaton, Lord Shaton.
a man without God, without honesty, and oftentimes without reason, had before
greatly troubled and molested the brethren, for he had taken upon him the
protection and defense of the Black and Gray Friars; and for that purpose did
not only lie himself in one of the Colleges every night, but also constrained
the most honest of the Town to watch those monsters, to their great grief and
trouble. But hearing of our sudden coming, The coming of the Congregaon to
Edinburg.
he abandoned his charge, and left the spoil to the poor, who had made havoc
of all such things as was moveable in those places before our coming, and left
nothing but bare walls; yea, not so much as door or window: whereby we were the
lesser troubled in putting order to such places. After that we had deliberate
certain days what was best to be done, and what order was to be taken for
suppressing all Monuments of Idolatry within that Town, and the places next
adjacent, determination was taken to send some Message to the Queen then
Regent. For she had bruted (as her accustomed manner was, by advice of her
counsel, ever to forge lies) that we sought nothing but her life, and a plain
revoltment from the lawful obedience due to our Sovereign her Authority, as
by the Tenor of these Letters may be seen.

FRANCIS and MARIE By the Grace of God, King and Qneen of Scots, Doulphin and
Doulphinesse of Viennois:
To Our loved Lion King of Arms, etc. Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and
severally specially constitute, greeting.
Forasmuch as our dearest Mother Marie, Queen Dowager Regent of Our Realm, and
Lords of our Secret Council, perceiving the seditious tumult raised by one
part of our Lieges, naming themselves, The Congregation; who under pretense of
Religion have put themselves in Arms. And that Our Mother, for satisfying of
every man's conscience, and pacifying of the said troubles, had offered unto
them to appoint a Parliament to be holden in January next to come (this was a
manifest lie, for this was neither offered, nor by her once thought upon, till
we required it) or sooner, if they had pleased, for establishing of a
Universal order in matters of Religion by Our advice, and States of Our
Religion, and in the mean time to suffer every man to live at liberty of
Conscience without trouble, unto the time that the said order were taken by
advise of Our foresaid States. And at last, because it appears much to stand
upon Our Borough of Edinburgh, offered in like manner to let the inhabitants
thereof choose what manner of Religion they would set up and use for that time,
so that no man might allege that he was forced to do against his conscience.
Which offer the Queen, Our said dearest Mother was at all times, Let the Reader
mark how this agrees with our time.
and yet is ready to fulfill. Nevertheless the said Congregation being of
mind to receive no reasonable offers, has since by open deed declared, That
it is no Religion, nor any thing thereto pertaining that they seek, but only
the subversion of Our Authority, and usurpation of Our Crown: In manifest
witnessing whereof, they daily receive Englishmen with Messages unto them, and
sends such like into England: And last of all, have violently intermitted,
withtaken, and yet withholds, the Irons of Our Coyning-House, which is one of
the chief Points that concerns Our Crown: And such like have intromitted
with our Palace of Halyrud-house. Our Will is therefore, etc. That ye pass to
the Market Cross of Our said Borough of Edinburgh, or any other place within
the same, and there by open Proclamation, in Our Name and Authority, command
and charge all and sundry persons of the said Congregation, or yet being
presently within Our said Borough, other then the inhabitants thereof, that
they within six hours next after Our said Charge, depart forth of the same,
under the pain of Treason. And as that ye command all and sundry persons to
leave their company, and to adhere to Our Authority; with Certification, That
such as do the contrary, shall be reputed and holden as manifest Traitors to
Our Crown.


These Letters did not a little grieve us, who most unjustly were accused; for
never a sentence of the Narrative true, except, That we stayed the Irons, and
that for just cause; to wit, Because that daily there was such number of
hard-heads printed, that the baseness thereof made all things exceeding dear;
And therefore we were counseled by the wisest to stay the Irons while further
order might be taken. The Queen Regent with all possible diligence posted for
her Faction: Master James Balfour was not idle in the mean time. The Lords, to
purge themselves of these odious crimes, wrote to her a Letter in form as after
follows: PLease your Majesty to be advertised, That it is come to our
knowledge, that your Majesty has set forth by your Letters openly proclaimed,
The third Letter to the Queen Regent.
That we, called by name, The Congregation, under pretense and color of
Religion convene together to no other purpose, but to usurp our Sovereigns
Authirity, and to invade your person, representing theirs at this present.
Which things appear to have proceeded of sinister information made to your
Majesty by our enemies, considering that we never minded such thing, but only
our mind and purpose was and is, To promote and set forth the glory of God,
Maintain and defend the true Preachers of his Word, And according to the same
abolish and put away Idolatry and false abuses which may not stand with the
said Word of God. Beseeching your Majesty to bear patiently therewith, and
interpose your Authority to the furtherance of the same, as is the duty of
every Christian Prince, and good Magistrate. For as to the obedience of our
Sovereigns Authority in all Civil and Politic matters, we are and shall be
as obedient, as any other your Majesty's subjects within the Realm. And that
our convention is for no other purpose, but to save our Preachers and their
auditors from the injury and violence of our enemies: Which should be more
amply declared by some of us in your Majesty's presence, if ye were not
accompanied with such as have pursued our lives, and sought our blood. Thus we
pray Almighty God to save your Highness in his eternal tuition.

At Edinburgh the 2 of July, 1559.



And for further purgation hereof, it was thought necessary that we should
simply expose as well to her Majesty, as to the whole people what were our
requests and just petitions: And for that purpose after that Safe Conduct was
purchased and granted, we directed unto her two grave men of counsel, to wit,
the Lairds of Pittarrow and Cuninghamehead, to whom we gave commission and
power, first to expose our whole purpose and intent, which was no other then
before, at all times we had required; to wit, First, That we might enjoy the
liberty of conscience. Secondly, That Christ Jesus might be truly preached,
and his holy Sacraments rightly ministered unto us. Thirdly, That unable
Ministers might be removed from Ecclesiastical Administration: And that our
Preachers might be relaxed from the Horn, and permitted to execute their
charges, without molestation unto such as either by a general Council
lawfully convened, or by a Parliament within the Realm the controversies in
Religion were decided. And for declaration that her Majesty was hereto willing
that the Bands of Frenchmen, who then were a burden intolerable to the
Country, and to us so fearful, that we durst not in peaceable and quiet
manner haunt the places where they did lie, should be sent to France their
native Country: Which things granted, Her Majesty should have experience of
our accustomed obedience. To these Heads she did answer at the first so
pleasantly, that she put both our Commissioners in full esperance that all
should be granted, and for that purpose she desired to speak with some of
greater Authority; promising, That if they would assure her of their dutiful
obedience, that she would deny nothing of that which was required. For
satisfaction of her mind, we sent again the Earl of Glencarne, The craftines
of the Queen Regent may yet be espied.
the Lord Ruthwen, the Lord Uchiltrie, and the said Lord of Pittarrow, with
the same Commission as before. But then she began to handle the matter more
craftily, complaining that she was not sought in a gentle manner. And that they
in whom she had put most singular confidence, had left her in her greatest
need. And such other things pertaining nothing to the Commission, she proposed
to spend and drive the time. They answered, That by unjust tyranny devised
against them and their brethren (as her Majesty did well know) they were
compelled to seek the extreme remedy, and therefore that her Majesty ought
not to wonder though godly men left the company, where they neither found
fidelity nor truth. In the end of this communing; which was the twelfth day of
July 1559. 1559.
She desired to have talked privately with the Earl of Argyle and Lord James,
Prior of S. Andrews; for else (as she alleged) she could not but suspect that
they pretended to some other higher purpose then Religion. She and her crafty
Counsel had abused Duke Hamilton, persuading him and his friends, That the
said Earl and Lord James had conspired, Accusations.
first to deprive our Sovereign her daughter of her authority, Mark the
crafty calumnies.
and thereafter the Duke and his Successors of their pretended Title to the
Crown of Scotland. By these invented lies she inflamed the hearts of many
against us, insomuch that some of our own number began to murmr. Which
perceived, as well the Preachers in their public Sermons, as we our selves by
our public Proclamation, gave purgation and satisfaction to the people,
plainly and simply declaring what was our purpose, taking God to witness,
That no such crimes were ever entered into our hearts, as most unjustly was laid
to our charge. The Counsel after consultation, thought not expedient that the
said Earl and Lord James should talk with the Queen in any sort; for her
former practices put all men in suspicion, That some deceit lurked under such
colored communing. She had before said, That if she could by any mean sunder
these two from the rest, she was assured shortly to come by her whole purpose.
And one of her chief Counsel in those days (and we fear but too inward with
her yet) said, That ere Michaelmas day they two should lose their heads; and
therefore all men feared to commit two such young plants to her mercy and
fidelity. It was therefore finally denied that they should talk with the Queen,
or any appertaining to her, but in places void of all suspicion, where they
should be equal in number with those that should talk with them. The Queen
perceiving that her craft could not prevail, was content that Duke Hamilton,
and that Earl of Huntley, with others by her appointed, should convene at
Preston, The communing at Preston.
to Commune with the said Earl and Lord James, and such others as the Lords of
the Congregation would appoint, to the number of an hundred on each side: Of
the which number, eight persons only should meet for conference. The
principals for their party, were the Duke, and Earl Huntly, the Lords Erskin
and Somerwell, M. Gawin Hamilton, and the Justice Clerk. From us were directed
the Earls of Argyle and Glencarne, the Lords Ruthuen and Lord James, Boyde and
Uchiltrie, the Lairds Dun and Pittarrow. Who Convening at Preston, spoke the
whole day without any certain conclusion: For this was the practice of the
Queen and of her faction, By drift of time to weary our company, who for the
most part, had been upon the fields from the tenth day of May: That we being
dispersed, she might come to her purpose, in which she was not altogether
deceived: For our Commons were compelled to scatter for lack of expenses: And
our Gentlemen partly constrained by lack of furnishing, and partly hoping some
final appointment, after so many Communings, returned for the most part to
their dwelling places, for reposing of themselves. The Queen in all those
Conventions seemed that she would give liberty to Religion; The demand of the
Queen Regent, and answer of the Protestants
Provided, That wheresoever she was, our Preachers should cease, and the Mass
should be maintained. We perceiving her malicious craft, answered, That as we
would compel her Majesty, to no Religion; so could we not in conscience, for
the pleasure of any earthly treasure, put silence to Gods true Messengers:
neither could we suffer that the right administration of Christ's true
Sacraments should give place to manifest Idolatry, for in so doing we should
declare our selves enemies to God, to Christ Jesus his Son, to his eternal
Verity, and to the liberty and establishment of his Church within this
Realm: For your request being granted, There can no Church within the same be
so established, but at your pleasure, and by your residence and remaining
there, ye might overthrow the same. This our last answer we sent unto her with
the Lord Ruthuen and Lord of Pittarrow, requiring of her Majesty in plain
words, to signify unto us, What hope we might have of her favor toward the
upsetting of Religion? We also required, That she would remove her Frenchmen,
who were a fear to us, and a burden most grievous to our Country; and that
she would promise to us in the word of a Prince, That she would procure no man
to be sent in. And then should we not only support to the uttermost of our
powers to furnish Ships and Victuals for their transporting, but also upon our
honors should we take her body into our protection. The last offers of the
Protestants to the Q. Regent.
And should promise, in the presence of God and the whole Realm, to serve our
Sovereign her daughter, and her Majesty Regent, as faithfully and as
obediently, as ever did we Kings within Scotland. That moreover we should cause
our Preachers give reason of their Doctrine in her audience to any that pleased
to impugn any thing that they did or taught. Finally, That we should submit
our selves to a lawful Parliament. Provided that the Bishops, as the party
accused and our plain enemies, should be removed from judgment.

To no point would she answer directly, but in all things she was so general
and so ambiguous, that her craft appeared to all men. She had gotten assured
knowledge that our company was scattered (for her Frenchmen were daily amongst
us, without molestation or hurt done unto them) and therefore she began to
disclose her mind, The scoffing of the Queen Regent.
and said, The Congregation has reigned these two months past; Me my self
would reign now other two. The malice of her heart being plainly perceived,
deliberation was had what was to be done. It was concluded, That the Lords,
Barons, and Gentlemen, with their chief domestics, should remain in
Edinburgh that whole Winter, for establishing of the Church there. And because
it was found, That by the corrupting of our Money the Queen made to her self
immoderate gains, Note.
for maintaining of her Soldiers, to the destruction of the whole
Commonwealth: It was thought necessary, That the Printing yrons, and all
things pertaining should be stayed, for fear that she should privily cause to
transport them to Dumbar. In this mean time came assured word, first, That the
King of France was hurt, and after that he was dead. Which albeit it ought to
have put her in mind of her own estate and wicked enterprises: The death of
Henry King of France.
for he that same time in the fullness of his glory (as she her self used to
speak) had determined most cruel persecution against the Saints of God in
France, even as she her self was here persecuting in Scotland: and yet he so
perished in his pride, That all men might see that Gods just vengeance did
strike him, even when his iniquity was come to full ripeness. Albeit we say,
That this wondrous work of God in his sudden death, ought to have danted her
fury, and given unto her admonition, That the same God could not suffer her
obstinate malice against his Truth, long to be unpunished: Yet could her
indurate heart nothing be moved to Repentance; for hearing of the staying of
the Printing yrons, she raged more outragiously then before, and sending for
all such as were of her faction, exposed her grievous complaint, aggravating
the same with many lies, Note how this agrees with our times.
to wit, That we had declared that which before she suspected: For what could
we mean else but usurpation of the Crown, when we durst put hands to the
Coining-house, which was a portion of the patrimony of the Crown. She further
alleged, That we had spoiled the Coining-House of great sums of money. To the
which we answered, both by our Letters sent to her and her Counsel, and by
public Proclamation to the people, That we without usurpation of any such
thing, justly appertaining to the Crown of Scotland, Answer to the calumny.
did stay the Printing yrons, in consideration that the Commonwealth was
greatly hurt by corrupting of our money. And because we were born Counselors
of this Realm, sworn to procure the profit of the same, we could do no less of
duty and of conscience, Note, Nobles.
then to stay that for a time, which we saw so abused, That unless remedy were
found, should turn to the utter detriment of the whole body of this Realm. And
as to her false accusation of spoil, we did remit us to the conscience of M.
Robert Richeson, master of the Coining-house, who from our hands received
silver, gold, and metal, as well Coined as un-Coined, so that with us there
did not remain the value of a Bawbee, or Farthing. This our Declaration and
purgation notwithstanding, she, partly by her craft and policy, and partly by
the labors of the Bishops of Saint Andrews and Glasgow, procured the whole
number that were with her, to consent to pursue us with all cruelty and
expedition, before that we could have our company (which then was dispersed for
new furnishing) assembled again. The certainty hereof coming to our knowledge
the Saturday at night, being the 25 of July, we did what in us lay to give
advertisement to our brethren: but impossible it was that the Wast, Angus,
Mernes, Straitherne or Fyfe, in any number could come to us. For the enemy
Marched from Dumbar upon the Sunday, and approached within two miles of us
before Sunrising upon Monday. For they verily supposed to have found no
resistance, being assured that the Lords only with certain Gentlemen remained
with their private houses: calling upon God for counsel in that straight, we
sought what was the next defense. We might have left the Town, and might have
retired our selves without any danger, but then we should have abandoned our
brethren of Edinburgh, and suffered the Ministry thereof to have decayed;
which to our hearts was so dolorous, that we thought better to hazard the
extremity then so to do. For then the most part of the Town appeared rather to
favor us then the Queens faction, and did offer unto us the uttermost of their
support, which for the most part they did faithfully keep. The same did the
Town of Leith, Leith left us the congregation.
but they kept not the like fidelity. For when we were upon the field, marching
forward for their support (for the French marched nigh to them) they rendered
themselves without further resistance. And this they did, as is supposed, by
the treason of some within themselves, and by persuasion of the Lord of
Lestarrig, who before declared himself to be one of us; and notwithstanding
that same day rendered himself undesired to Monsieur Dosell. Their unprovided
and sudden defection astonished many, and yet we retired quietly to the side of
Cragingate, which place we took for resisting the enemy. In the mean time
diverse mediators passed betwixt us, amongst whom the Lord Ruthuen for our part
was principal. Alexander Erskin did much travel to stay us and our Soldiers,
that we should not join with them of Leith, till that they, as is said, had
rendered themselves to the French. The said Alexander did often promise that the
French would stay, provided, That we would not join with those of Leith. But
after that they were rendered, we heard nothing of him but threatening and
discomfortable words. Before it was eight of the clock in the morning, God had
given unto us both courage, and a reasonable number to withstand their fury.
The Town of Edinburgh, so many as had subject themselves to discipline, and
diverse others besides them, behaved themselves both faithfully and stoutly. The
Gentlemen of Lowthiane, especially Calder, Hatton, and Ormeston, were very
comfortable, as well for their counsel as for their whole assistance. Some
Gentlemen of Fyfe prevented the Frenchmen, other were stopped by reason that
the French had passed Leith. Always the enemy took such a fear, That they
determined not to invade us where we stood, but took purpose to have passed to
Edinburgh, by the other side of the water of Leith: and that because they had
the Castle to their friend, which was to us unknown, for we supposed the Lord
Erskin, Captain of the same, either to have been our friend, or at least to
have been indifferent. But when we had determined to fight, The Lord Erskin and
his fact.
he sent word to the Earl of Argyle, to Lord James, his sisters son, and to
the other Noblemen, That he would declare himself, both enemy to them and to
the Town, and would shoot at both, if they made any resistance to the
Frenchmen to enter into the Town. This his treasonable defiance sent us, by
the Lord of Ricarton did abate the courage of many, for we could not fight,
nor stop the enemy, but under the mercy of the Castle and whole Ordnance
thereof. Hereupon was consultation taken, and in conclusion, it was found less
damage to take an appointment, albert the Conditions were not such as we
desired; then to hazard battle betwixt two such enemies. After long talking,
certain heads were drawn by us, which we desired to be granted.

First, That no member of the Congregation should be troubled in life, lands,
goods or possessions, by the Queen her Authority, nor any other justice within
the Realm, for any thing done in the late Innovation, till a Parliament (which
should begin the tenth of January) had decreed things in controversy. 2. That
Idolatry should not be erected, where it was at that day suppressed. 3. That
the Preachers and Ministers should not be troubled in their Ministry where
they are already established, neither yet stopped to preach wheresoever they
should chance to come. 4. That no Bands of men of War should be laid in
Garrison within the Town of Edinburgh. 5. That the Frenchmen should be sent
away at a reasonable day; and that none other should be brought into the
Country without consent of the whole Nobility and Parliament.


But these our Articles were altered, and another form disposed, as follows.

At the Linkes of Leith, the 24 of July, 1559. It is appointed in manner
following:
IN the first Congregation and their company, others then the inhabitants of
the said Town, shall remove themselves forth of the said Town the morrow at
ten hours before noon the 25 of July, and leave the same void and rid of them
and their said company conform to the Queens Majesty's pleasure and desire.

Item, The said Congregation shall cause the Irons of the Coyning-house taken
away by them, be rendered and delivered to Master Robert Richeson; And likewise
the Queens Majesty's Palace of Halyrud-house to be left, and rendered again to
M. John Balfour, or any other, having her Majesty's sufficient power in the
same matter, as it was resolved; and that betwixt the making of these Articles,
and the morn at ten of the clock. For observing and keeping of these two
Articles above written, the Lord Ruthuen, and the Lord of Pittarrow have
entered themselves pledges.

Item, The said Lords of the Congregation, and all the members thereof, shall
remain obedient subjects to our Lord and Ladies Authority, and to the Queen
Regent in their place; In contemplation of these Articles, arose this proverb,
Good day, Sir. John, till Ianury; Welcome, Sir John, till January.
And shall obey all Laws, and laudable Customs of this Realm, as they were
used before the moving of this tumult and controversy, excepting the cause of
Religion, which shall be hereafter specified.

Item, The Congregation, nor any of them, shall not trouble or molest a
Churchman by way of deed, nor yet shall make them any impediment in the
peaceable brooking, enjoying, and uptaking of their Rents, Profits, and Duties
of their Benefices, but that they may freely use and dispose upon the same,
according to the Laws and Custom of this Realm, to the tenth of January next
to come.

Item, The said Congregation, nor none of them, shall use in no ways from
thenceforth any force or violence in casting down of Churches, Religious
places, or apparel thereof, but the same shall stand harmless of them, unto
the tenth day of January.

Item, The Town of Edinburgh shall without compulsion use and choose what
Religion, and manner thereof they please, to the said day; so that every man
may have freedom to use his own conscience to the day aforesaid.

Item, The Queen shall not interpose her Authority to molest or trouble the
Preachers of the Congregation, nor their Ministry (to them that please to use
the same) nor no other of the said Congregation, in their bodies, lands, goods,
or possessions, Pensions, or whatsoever other kind of goods they possess; nor
yet suffer the Clergy, or any other, either Spiritual or Temporal
Jurisdiction to trouble them in any manner of sort, privately or openly, for
the cause of Religion, or any other action depending thereupon, to the said
tenth day of January within written; and that every man in particular live in
the mean time according to his own conscience.

Item, That no men of War, French nor Scots, be laid in daily Garrison within
the Town of Edinburgh, but to repair thereto to do thsir lawful business, and
thereafter to retire them to their Garrisons.

This alteration in words, and Order was made without knowledge and consent of
those whose counsel we had used in all such causes before: For some of them
perceiving we began to faint, and that we would appoint with unequal
conditions, said, God has wonderously assisted us in our greatest dangers: He
has stricken fear in the hearts of our enemies, when they supposed themselves
most assured of Victory: Our case is not yet so desperate, that we need to
grant to things unreasonable and ungodly; Note.
which if we do, it is to be feared, That things shall not so prosperously
succeed as they have done heretofore.

When all things were communed and agreed upon by mid persons, the Duke, and
the Earl of Huntlie, who that day were against us, desired to speak with the
Earls of Argyle and Glencarne, the Lord James, and others of our party; who
obeying their requests, met with them at the Quarrel holes betwixt Leith and
Edinburgh, who in conclusion promised to our Lords, The promise of the Duke and
Earl of Huntly.
That if the Queen brake to us any one jot of the Appointment then made, that
they should declare themselves plain enemies to her, and friends to us. As much
promised the Duke that he would do, in case that she would not remove her
Frenchmen at a reasonable day; for the oppression which they did was manifest
to all men. This Appointment made and subscribed by the Duke, Monsieur Dosell
and the Earl of Huntlie, the 25 of July, we returned to the Town of
Edinburgh, where we remained till the next day at noon, when after Sermon,
dinner, and Proclamation made at the Market Cross, in form as follows, we
departed.

Form of the Proclamations.
FORASMUCH as it has pleased God that Appointment is made betwixt the Queen
Regent and us the Lords Protestants of this Realm; We have thought good to
signify unto the chief Heads of the Appointment; which be these: First, That
no member of the Congregation shall be troubled in life, lands, goods, or
possessions by the Queen, by her Authority, nor by any other justice within
this Realm, for any thing done in this late Innovation, till that a Parliament
has decided things that be in controversy. Secondly, That Idolatry shall not
be erected where it is now at this day suppressed. Thirdly, That the Preachers
and Ministers shall not be troubled in the ministration, where they are already
established, neither yet stopped to Preach wheresoever they shall happen to
travel within this Realm. Fourthly, That no Bands of men of War shall be laid
in Garrison within the Town of Edinburgh.


The chief Heads of appointment concerning the liberty of Religion, and
conservation of our brethren, we thought good to notify unto you by this
Proclamation; that in case wrong or injury be done by any of the contrary
faction, to any member of our Body, complaint may be made unto us, to whom we
promise, as we will answer to our God, our faithful support, to the uttermost
of our powers.

At this Proclamation, made with sound of Trumpet, were offended all the
Papists: for first they alleged, It was done in contempt of Authority.
Secondarily, That we had proclaimed more then was contained in the Appointment.
And last, That we in our Proclamation had made no mention of any thing promised
unto them. Answer to the complaint of the Papists.
To such murmures we answered, That no just Anthority could think it self
contemned, because that the truth was by us made manifest unto all, who
otherwise might have pretended ignorance. Secondly, That we had proclaimed
nothing which was not finally agreed upon in word and promise betwixt us and
those with whom the Appointment was made, whatsoever the Scribes had after
written, who in very deed had altered both in words and sentences our Articles,
as they were first conceived: And yet if their own writings were diligeutly
examined, the self-same thing shall be found in substance. And last, To
proclaim any thing in their favors, we thought it not necessary, knowing that
in that behalf they themselves would be diligent enough. And in this we were
nothing deceived, for within fifteen days after, there was not a Shaveling in
Scotland, to whom Tenths, or any other Rents pertains, but he had that
Article of the Appointment by heart, That the Churchmen should be answered of
Tenths, Rents, and all other duties; and that no man should trouble or molest
them. We departing from Edinburgh the 26 of July, came first to Linlithqow, and
after to Sterlin, where after consultation, the Band of defense, and
maintenance of Religion, and for mutual defense every one of the other, was
subscribed of all that were there present.

The tenor of the Bond was thus:
WE foreseeing the craft and sleight of our Adversaries, The third Bond of
mutual defense at Sterlin*
who try all manner of ways to circumvient us, and by privy means intend to
assail every one of us particularly, by fair heights and promises,
therethrough to separate one of us from another, to our utter ruin and
destruction. For remedy thereof, we faithfully and truly bind us in the
presence of God, and as we tender the maintenance of true Religion, That none
of us shall in time coming pass to the Queen Dowager, to talk or commune with
her, for any Letter or Message sent by her unto us, or yet to be sent with
consent of the rest, or common consultation thereupon: and how soon that either
Message or Writing should come from her unto us, with all diligence we shall
notify the same one to another; so that nothing shall proceed therein without
common consent of us all.

At Sterlin the first day of August, 1559.

This Band subscribed, and we foreseeing that the Queen and Bishops meant
nothing but deceit, thought good to seek aid and support of all Christian
Princes against her tyranny, Note.
in case we should be more sharply pursued. And because that England was of the
same Religion, and lay next unto us, it was judged expedient first to prove
them; which we did, by one or two Messengers, as hereafter, in its own place,
shall be more amply declared. After we had abided certain days in Sterlin,
the Earl of Argyle departed to Glasgow; and because he was to depart to his
own Country (with whom also passed the Lord James) to pacify some trouble,
which by the craft of the Queen was raised in his absence; he required the
Earl of Glencarne, Lord Boyd, Lord Uchiltrie, and others of Kyle, to meet
there, for some order to be taken that the brethren should not be oppressed;
which with one consent they did, and appointed the tenth of September for the
next convention at Sterlin.

^he first knowledge of the escaping of the E^rle of Arran out of France.
While these things were in doing at Glasgow, Letters and a servant came from
the Earl of Arran, to the Duke his father, signifying unto him, That by the
providence of God he had escaped the French Kings hands, who most treasonably
and most cruelly had sought his life, or at the least to have committed him to
perpetual prison: For the same time the said French King, seeing he could not
have the Earl himself, caused put his younger brother, Let this be noted.
a child of such age as could not offend, in strait prison, where he yet
remained, to wit, in the Month of October, the year of our Lord 1559. Which
things were done by the power and craft of the Queen Dowager, at the time that
the Duke and his friends were most ready to set forth her cause. These Letters
received, and the estate of her two sons known, The just reward of the Du^e
for leaving God.
of whom one was escaped, and the other cast in vile prison, the Duke desired
communing with the said Earl of Argyle; who partly against the will of some
that loved him, rid unto the Duke from Glasgow to Hammilton, where abiding a
night, he declared his judgment to the Duke, and to his friends, especially to
Master Gawane Hammilton. The Duke required him and the Lord James to write
their friendly and comfortable Letters to his son; which they most willingly
did, and thereafter addressed them to their journey. But the very day of their
departing, came one Boutancourt (from the Queen Regent with Letters, as was
alleged) from the King and Queen of France, to the Lord James, which he
delivered with a bragging countenance, and many threatening words: the Tenor of
his Letter was this: The King his Letter to the Lord James.
MY Cousin, I have greatly marvelled when I understood the troubles that are
happened in these parts. And yet I more marvel, That ye, in whom I had whole
confidence, and who has the Honor to be so near the Queen my wife, and has
received from the late King my Father, from the Queen my wife, and from me such
graces and favors that ye should be so forgetful, as to make your self the
Head, and one of the principal beginners and nourishers of the tumults and
seditions that are seen there: The which because it is so strange to me, and so
far against the profession that ye at all times have made, I cannot well
believe it. But if it be so, I cannot think but ye have been entised and led
thereto by some persons, that have seduced you and caused you commit such a
fault as I am assured you repent of already, which will be a great pleasure to
me, to the effect I may lose a part of the occasion I have to be miscontent
with you* as I will you to understand I am. Seeing you have so far deceived the
esperance I had of you and your affection toward God, and the weal of our
service, unto the which ye know, ye are as much and more obliged then any other
of the Lords there. For this cause, desiring that the matters may be duly
amended, and knowing what ye can therein, I thought good on this manner to
write unto you, and pray you to take heed to return to the good way, from which
ye have declined, and cause me know the same by the effects, That you have
another intention then this, which the follies bypast makes me now to
believe, doing all that ever ye can to reduce all things to their first estate,
and put the same to the right and good obedience that you know to be due unto
God and unto me. Brags ^now.
Otherwise ye may be well assured, that I will put to my hand, and that in good
earnest, that you and all they who have done and do as ye do, shall feel
(through your own fault) that which ye have deserved and merited. Even as I
have given charge to this Gentleman, present bearer, to make you know more
largely of my part: for which cause I pray you credit him, even as ye would do
my self. Praying God, my cousin, to have you in his holy and worthy protection.

Written at Paris the 17 day of July 1559.



The same Messenger brought also Letters from the Queen our Sovereign, more
sharp and threatening then the former: For her conclusion was; Vous en sentires
la poincture a iamais.

His credit was, Note.
That the King would spend the Crown of France, if that he were not revenged
upon such seditious persons. That he would never have suspected such
inobedience, and such defection from his own sister in him. To the which the
said Lord James answered first by word, and then by writing, as follows: The
Lord James his Letter to the King.
Sir, MY most humble duty remembered, Your Majesty's Letters I received from
Paris the 17 of July last, importing in effect, That your Majesty does marvel
that I being forgetful of the graces and favors showed me by the King of
blessed memory, your Majesty's father, and the Queen my Sovereign, should
declare my self head, and one of the principal beginners of these alleged
Tumults and Seditions in these parts, deceiving thereby your Majesty's
expectation in all times had of me, with assurance, That if I did not declare
by contrary effects my repentance, I, with the rest that had put, or yet
puts hand to this Work, should receive that reward, which we had deserved
and merited.

SIR, It grieves me very heavily that the crime of ingratitude should b^ laid
to my charge, by your Majesty; and the rather, That I perceive the same to
have proceeded of sinister information of them (whose part it was not to have
reported so, if true service past had been regarded.) And as touching the
repentance, and declaration of the same by certain effects, That your Majesty
desires I show. My conscience persuades me in these proceedings to have done
nothing against God, not the dutiful obedience toward your Majesty, and the
Queen my Sovereign. Otherwise it should not have been to be repented and also
amended already, according to your Majesty's expectation of me. But your
Majesty being truly informed and persuaded, That the thing which we have
done, makes for the advancement of Gods glory, without any manner of
derogation to your Majesty's due obedience; We doubt not but your Majesty
shall be well contented with our proceedings, which being grounded upon the
commandment of the eternal God, we dare not leave the same unaccomplished,
only wishing and desiring, your Majesty did know the same, and the truth
thereof, as we were persuaded in our consciences, and all them that are truly
instructed in the eternal Word of our God, upon whom we cast our care from all
dangers that may follow the accomplishment of his eternal will, and to whom we
commend your Majesty, beseeching him to illuminate your heart with the Gospel
of his eternal Truth, Note.
to know your Majesty's duty toward your poor Subjects, Gods chosen people,
and what you ought to crave justly of them again: for then we should have no
occasion to fear your Majesty's wrath and indignation, nor your Majesty's
suspicion in our inobedience. The same God have your Majesty in his eternal
saveguard.

At Dunbartane the 12 of August 1559.



This answer directed to the Queen our Sovereign, and Francis her husband, the
Queen Dowager received, and was bold upon it, as she might well enough, for it
was supposed, That the former Letters were forged here at home in Scotland. The
answer read by her, she said, That so proud an answer was never given to King,
Prince, nor Princess. And yet indifferent men, thought that he might have
answered more sharply, and not have transgressed modesty nor truth: For where
they burden him with the great benefits which of them he had received, if in
plain words he had purged himself; affirming, That the greatest benefit that
ever he received of them, Note.
was to spend in their service, that which God by others had provided for him;
no honest man would have accused him, and no man could have been able to have
convinced him of a lie; But Princes must be pardoned to speak what they please.

The residence of John Willock in Edinburg.
For the comfort of the brethren, and continuance of the Church in Edinburgh,
was left there our dear brother John Willock* who for his faithful labors
and bold courage in that battle, deserves immortal praise. For when it was
found dangerous that John Knox, who before was elected Minister to the Church,
should continue there: the brethren requested the said John Willock to abide
with them, lest that for lack of Ministers, Idolatry should be erected up
again. To the which he so gladly consented, That it might evidently appear,
that he preferred the comfort of his brethren and the continuance of the Church
there to his own life. One part of the Frenchmen were appointed to lie in
Garrison at Leith, (that was the first benefit which they gate for their
confederacy with them) the other part were appointed to lie in the Canon-gate,
the Queen and her train abiding in the Abbey. Our brother John Willock the day
after our departure preached in S. Giles Church, and fervently exhorted the
brethren to stand constant to the Truth which they had professed. At this, and
some other Sermons was the Duke, and diverse other of the Queens faction. This
liberty of Preaching, and resort of all people thereto did highly offend the
Queen and the other Papists. And first they began to give terrors to the Duke,
affirming, That he would be reputed as one of the Congregation, if he gave his
presence to the Sermons. Thereafter they began to require, That Mass might be
set up again in S. Giles Church, and that the people should be set at liberty
to choose what Religion they would. For that said they was contained in the
appointment, That the Town of Edinburgh should choose what Religion they listed.
For obtaining hereof were sent to the Town the Duke, the Earl of Huntly, and
the Lord Seaton, to solicit all men to condescend to the Queens mind, wherein
the two last did labor what they could, the Duke not so, but as a beholder, of
whom the brethren had good hope, and after many persuasions and threatenings
made by the said Earl and Lord, the brethren stoutly and valiantly in the Lord
Jesus, gainsaid their most unjust Petitions. Reasoning, That as in conscience
they might not suffer Idolatry to be erected, where Christ Jesus was truly
Preached; so could not the Queen nor they require any such thing, unless she
and they would plainly violate their Faith, and chief Article of the
appointment. For it is plainly appointed, That no member of the Congregation
shall be molested in any thing; That at the day of the appointment they
peaceably possessed. But so it was, That we the brethren and Protestants of the
Town of Edinburgh, with our Ministers the day of the appointment, did peaceably
enjoy Saint Giles Church, appointed us for Preaching of Christ's true Gospel,
and right ministration of his holy Sacraments. Therefore without manifest
violation of the appointment, you cannot remove us therefrom, until a
Parliament have decided the Controversy. This answer given, the whole brethren
departed, and left the foresaid Earl, and Lord Seaton, then Provest of
Edinburgh, still in the Tolbuith. Who perceiving that they could not prevail
in that manner, began to entreat that they would be quiet, and that they would
so far condescend to the Queens-pleasure, as that they would choose them another
within the Town, or at the least be content that Mass should be said, either
after or before their Sermon. To the which, answer was given; That to give
place to the devil (who was the chief Inventer of the Mass) for the pleasure
of any creature, Note.
they could not. They were in possession of that Church which they could not
abandon, neither yet could they suffer Idolatry to be erected in the same,
unless by violence they should be constrained so to do. And then they were
determined to seek the next remedy. Which answer received, the Earl of Huntly
did lovingly entreat them to quietness, faithfully promising, That in no sort
they should be molested, so that they would be quiet, and make no farther
uproare. To the which they were most willing, for they sought only to serve
God, as he had commanded, and to keep their possession, according to the
appointment: which by Gods grace they did, till the month of November,
notwithstanding the great boasting of the enemy. For they did not only convene
to the Preaching, daily suppl^cations and administration of Baptism, but also
the Lords Table was ministered, even in the eyes of the very enemy, to the great
comfort of many afflicted consciences, and as God did strongly work with his
true Ministers, and with his troubled Church: so did not the devil cease to
inflame the malice of the Queen, and of the Papists with her. For that after
her coming to the Abbey of Halyrud-house, she caused Mass to be said first in
her own Chapel, and after in the Abbey where the Altars before were cast
down. She discharged the Common Prayers, and forbade to give any portion to
such as were the principal young men who read them. The Queen Regents malice
against poor men.
Her malice extended in like manner to Cambu^kenneth, for there she discharged
the portions of as many of the Canons as had forsaken Papistry: She gave
commandment and inhibition, that the Abbot of Lyndors should be answered of any
part of his living in the North, because he had submitted himself to the
Congregation, and had put some Reformation to his place: By her consent and
procurement was the Preachers Chair broken in the Church of Leith, and
Idolatry was erected in the same, where it was before suppressed. Her French
Captains, with their Soldiers in great companies, in time of Preaching and
Prayers resorted to Saint Giles Church in Edinburgh, and made their common
deambulation therein with such loud talking, as no perfect audience could be
had. And although the Minister was there-through often times compelled to cry out
on them, Praying to God to rid them of such Locusts, they nevertheless
continued still in their wicked purpose devised and ordained by the Queen, to
have drawn our brethren of Edinburgh and them in cumber, so that she might have
had any colored occasion to have broken the League with them. Yet by Gods
grace they behaved themselves so that she could find no fault in them, Note.
albeit in all these things before-named, and in every one of them she is
justly accounted to have gaine-said the said appointment. We pass over the
oppressing of our brethren in particular, which had been sufficient to have
proved the appointment to have been plainly violated. For the Lord Seaton,
without any occasion offered unto him, brake a chase upon Alexander Whitlam, as
he came from Preston, accompanied with M. William Knox, toward Edinburgh, and
ceased not to pursue him, till he came to the Town of Ormeston. And this he
did, supposing that the said Alexander had been John Knox. In all this mean
time, and while that more Frenchmen arived, they are not able to prove that we
brake the appointment in any jote, except that a horned Cap was taken off a
proud Priests head, and cut in four quarters, because he said, He would wear it
in despite of the Congregation. In this mean time, the Queen, then Regent,
knowing assuredly what force was shortly to come unto her, ceased not, by all
means possible to cloak the in-coming of the French, and to inflame the hearts
of our Contrymen against us. And for that purpose she first wrote unto Duke
Hamilton, in form, as follows.

The Queen Regents false flattering Letter to Duke Hamilton.
MY Lord and Cousin, after hearty commendations, We are informed that the Lords
of the West-land Congregation intend to make a Convention and assembly of your
kin and friends upon Gowan Moore, besides Glasgow, on Monday come eight days,
the 28 day of August instant, for some high purpose against us, which we can
scantly believe, considering they have no occasion on Our part so to do. And
albeit we know the Appointment was made against and without Our advise, yet we
accepted the same at your desire, and have since made no cause, whereby they
might be moved to come in the contrary thereof. Like as we are yet minded to
keep firm and stable all things promised by you in Our behalf. We think on
the other part, it is your duty to require them, that they violate not their
part thereof in no wise. And in case they mean any evil toward Us, and so will
break their promise, We believe ye will at the uttermost of your power convene
with us, and compel them to do that thing which they ought, if they will not;
praying you to have your self, your kin and friends, in readiness to come to
us, as ye shall be advertised by Proclamation, in case the Congregation
assemble themselves for any purpose against Us, or the Tenor of the said
Appointment: Assuring you, without they gather, and give first occasion, We
shall not put you to any pains in that behalf. And that you advertise Us by
writ what we may trust to herein by this Bearer, who will show you the fervent
mind we bear to have good concord with the said Congregation, what offers We
have made them, and how desirous we are to draw them to the obedience of Our
Sovereigns Authority, to whom you shall give credit: and God keep you.

At Edinburgh the tenth of August, 1559.

The like Letter she wrote to every Lord, Baron, and Gentleman, of this Tenor.

The Queen Regents Letter to the Barons.
TRusty friend, after hearty commendations, We doubt not but you have heard of
the Appointment made beside Leith, betwixt the Duke, the Earl of Huntlie, and
Monsieur Dosell, on the one part; And the Lords of the Congregation, on the
other part: Which Appointment We have approved in all points, albeit it was
taken without Our advise, and is minded to observe and keep all the contents
thereof for Our part. Nevertheless, as We are informed, the Lords of the
Congregation intend shortly to convene all such persons as will assist them,
for enterprising of some high purpose against Us, Our Authority, and Tenor of
the said Appointment; which we cannot believe, seeing they neither have, nor
shall have any occasion given thereto on Our part. But in case against all
reason they should mean any such thing, We have thought it good to give warning
to Our special friends of the advertisement We have gotten; and amongst the
rest, to you, whom We esteem of that number, praying you to have your self,
your kin and folks in readiness to come to Us, and so forth, as in the other
Letter above sent to the Duke, word by word.


After that by these Letters, and by the decitfull surmising of her soliciters,
she had somewhat stirred up the hearts of the people against us, then she began
openly to complain, That we were of mind to invade her Person, The practice of
the Queen Regent.

See how this agrees with our times.


That we would keep no part of the Appointment, and therefore she was compelled
to crave assistance of all men, against our unjust pursuit. And this practice
she used, as before is said, to abuse the simplicity of the people, that they
should not suddenly epsy for what purpose she brought in her new bands of men
of War, who did arrive about the midst of August, to the number of 1000 men:
The rest were appointed to come after with Monsieur de la Brosse, and with the
Bishop of Ammians, who arrived the nineteenth day of September following, as if
they had been Ambassadors: The arrival of th French.
But what was their Negotiation, the effect did declare, and they themselves
could not long conceal; for by both tongue and pen they uttered, That they were
sent for the extermination of all those that would not profess the Papist call
Religion in all points. The Queens practice and craft could not blind the eyes
of all men, neither yet could her subtilty hide her own shame, but that many
did espy her deceit; and some spared not to speak their judgments liberally,
who foreseeing the danger, gave advertisement, requiring that provision might
be found, before that the evil should exceed our wisdom and strength to put
fit remedy to it: For prudent men foresaw, That she pretended a plain conquest;
Note.
but to the end that the people should not suddenly stir, she would not bring
in her full force at once (as before is said) but by continual traffic
purposed to augment her Army, so that in the end we should not be able to
resist. But the greatest part of the Nobility, and many of the people, were so
enchanted by her treasonable soliciters, that they would not hear nor credit
the truth plainly spoken. The French then after the arriving of their new men,
began to brag: then began they to divide the Lands and Lordships according to
their own fantasies; The division of the Lords lands by the French.
for one was styled, Monsieur de Argyle; another, Monsieur le Prior; the third
Monsieur de Ruthwen; y^a, they were assured, in their own opinion, to possess
whatsoever they listed; so that some asked for the Rentalls and Revenues of
diverse men's lands, to the end that they might choose the best: And yet in this
mean time she was not ashamed to set out a Proclamation in this form:

A Proclamation set forth by the Queen Regent, to blind the vulgar People.
How like to the Procl^mations of our times this is, let the Reader judge.
FOrasmuch as We understand that certain seditious persons have of malice
invented and blown abroad diverse rumors and evil brutes, intending thereby to
stir up the hearts of the people, and so to stop all manner of reconciliations
betwixt us and our subjects being of the number of the Congregation, and
consequently to kindle and nourish a continual strife and division within this
Realm, to the manifest subversion of the whole State thereof; And amongst
other purposes, have maliciously devised for that effect, and have persuaded
too many, That We have violated the Appointment lately taken, in so far as any
more French men since came in, and that we do mind to draw in great Forces of
men of War forth of France, to suppress the Liberty of this Realm, oppress
the inhabitants thereof, and make up strangers with their lands and goods.
Which reports are all (God knows) most vain, fained, and untrue: For it is of
truth, That nothing has been done on our part since the said Appointment,
whereby it may be alleged that any part thereof contravened; nor yet was at
that time any thing commoved or concluded to stop the sending in of Frenchmen,
as may clearly appear by inspection of the said Appointment, which the Bearer
hereof has present to show. Whatsoever number of men of War be arrived, We
have such regard to Our honor, and quietness of this Realm, that in case in
the room of every Frenchman that is in Scotland, there were an hundred at our
command, yet should not for that any jot that is p^omised be broken, or any
alteration made by our provocation, Let the Bishop of Amians Letters* and
Monsieur de la Brosse Letters written to France* witness that.
but the said Proclamation truly and surely should be observed in every point.
If the said Congregation will in like manner faithfully keep their part
thereof: Nor yet mean we to trouble any man in the peaceable possession of
their goods, and rooms: Nor yet to enrich the Crown, and far less any
strangers, with your substance; for Our dearest son and daughter the King and
Queen, are by Gods provision placed in the room where all men of judgment may
well consider they have no need of any man's goods. And for Our Self, we seeking
nothing but dutiful obedience unto them, Confer this with our times.
such as good subjects ought to give to their Sovereign, without diminution of
your liberties and privileges, or alteration of your Laws. Therefore We have
thought good to notify unto you Our good mind foresaid, and desire you not to
give ear nor credit to such vain imaginations, whereof, before God, no part
entered in our conceit, nor suffer your selves be thereby led from your due
obedience, assuring you, ye shall ever find with Us truth in promise, and a
motherly love toward all you, Few days after declares the truth of this.
behaving your selves as Our obedient subjects. But of one thing We give you
warning, That whereas some Preachers of the Congregation in their public
Sermons speak irreverently and slanderously, as well of Princes in general, as
of Our Self in particular, and of the obedience of higher Powers, inducing the
people by that part of their Doctrine, to defection from their duty; which
pertains nothing to Religion, but rather sedition and tumult, things direct
quite contrary to Religion. Therefore We desire you to take order in your Towns
and bounds, that when the Preachers repair thither, they use themselves more
modestly in these behalfs, and in their Preaching not to meddle so much with
Civil Policy, and Public Government, nor yet name Us, or other Princes, but
with reverence, otherwise it will not be suffered. And seeing you have
presently the Declaration of Our Intention, We desire likewise to know what
shall be your part to Us, that We may understand what to trust for at your
hands, whereof we desire a plain Declaration in writing with this Bearer,
without delay.

At Edinburgh the 28 of August, 1559.
This Proclamation she sent by her Messengers through all the Country, and had
her solicitors in all parts, who painfully traveled to bring men to her
opinion; amongst whom these were the principal; Sir John Ballenden, Justice
Clerk, Master James Balfour, Official of Lowthian; Master Thomas and Master
William Scots, sons to the Lord of Balwerie; Sir Robert Carnegie, and Master
Gaw^n Hammilton, who for fainting of the brethrens hearts, and drawing many to
the Queens fa^tion against their native Country, have declared themselves
enemies to God, and Traitors to the Commonweal: But above all others* Master
James Balfour, Official for the time, ought to be abhorred; for he of an old
professor, is become a new denier of Christ Jesus, and manifest blasphemer of
his eternal Verity, against his knowledge and conscience, seeking to betray his
brethren and native Country into the hands of a cruel and unfaithful Nation.
The answer to this former Proclamation was made in form as follows.

To the Nobility, Burgess, and Commonty of this Realm of Scotland, the Lords,
Barons, and others Brethren of the Congregation, wishes increase of all
wisdom; with advancement of the glory of God, and of the Commonwealth.
THe love of our native Country craveth, the defense of our honors requires,
and the sincerity of our consciences compels us (dear brethren) to answer in
some part to the last Writs and Proclamations set forth by the Q Regent, no
less to make us and our Cause odious, then to abuse your simplicity, Confer
this with our times.
and to work your final destruction, conspired of old, and now already put to
work. And first, where she alleges, That certain seditious persons have of
malice invented and blown abroad diverse rumors, tending thereby (as she
alleges) to stir up the hearts of the people to sedition, by reason that the
Frenchmen are crept in of late in our Country. True it is (dear brethren)
that all such as bear natural love to their Country, to you their brethren
inhabitants thereof, to our houses, wives, children, the esperance of our
posterity; and to be short, To our Commonwealth, and to the ancient Laws and
Liberties thereof, cannot but in heart lament, and with mouth and tears
complain, the most crafty assaults devised and practiced, to the utter ruin of
all these things forenamed. This is so manifestly gone to work, that even in
our eyes, our dear brethren, true members of our Commonwealth, are most
cruelly oppressed by strangers; in so far, as some are banished their own
houses, some robbed and spoiled of their substance purchased by their just
labors in the sweat of their brows, some cruelly murdered at the pleasure of
these inhumane soldiers, and altogether have their lives in such fear and
dread, as if the enemy were in the midst of them; so that nothing can seem
pleasant unto them which they possess in the bowels of their native Country;
so near judged every man (and not without just cause) the practice used upon
their brethren, to approach next unto them, their wives, childrens, houses, and
substances, which altogether are cast at the feet of strangers men of War, to
be by them thus abused at their unbridled lusts desire. Now if it be sedition
(dear brethren) to complain, lament, and pour forth before God the sorrows and
sobs of our dolorous hearts, crying to him for redress of those enormities
(which elsewhere is to be found) which altogether do proceed of the unlawful
holding of strange Soldiers over the heads of our brethren. If this to
complain be sedition, then indeed (dear brethren) can none of us be purged of
that crime; for as in very heart we condemn such inhumane cruelty, with the
wicked and crafty pretense thereof, so can we not, nor dare we, neither by
mouths speaking, nor yet by keeping silence, justify the same. Neither do we
here aggravate the breaking of the Appointment made at Leith (which always
has manifestly been done) but herein we remember what oath we have made to our
Commonwealth, and how the duty we ought to the same compels us to cry out,
That the Queen by wicked and ungodly counsel goes most craftily about utterly
to oppress the same, and the ancient Laws and Liberties thereof: As well
against the King of France his promise, her own duty, in respect of the high
promotions that she has received thereby: which justly should have caused her
to have been in deed, that which she would be called (and is nothing less in
verity) to wit, a careful mother over this Commonwealth. Let the Nobility
judge hereof.
But what motherly care she has used toward you, ye cannot be ignorant of.
Have ye not been, even from the first entry of her Reign, ever smitten and
oppressed with unaccustomed and more exorbitant Taxations then ever were used
within this Realm? Yea, and how far was it sought here to have been brought in
upon you and your posterity, under color to have been laid up in store for the
wars. The inquisition taken of all your goods, moveable and unmovable by way
of Testament, the seeking of the whole C^ale and Salt of this Realm to have
been laid up in store, and in garnell, and she alone to have been Merchant
thereof does teach you by experience some of her motherly care. Again, What
favor to our Commonwealth does she at this instant bear, when even now
presently, and of a long time bygone, by the Ministry of some (who better
deserve the Gallows then ever did Cochran) she does so corrupt the good money,
and has brought it to such business, and such a deal of strife, that all men
that had their eyes open may perceive an extreme beggary to be brought
there-through upon the whole Realm. So that the whole exchange and traffic
to be had with Foreign nations (a thing most necessary in all Commonwealths)
shall thereby be utterly extinguished, and all the gains received thereby is,
That she therewith entertaineth strangers upon our heads. For brethren, you
know that her money has served for no other purpose in our Commonwealth this
long time bygone. And the impunity of those wicked Ministers (whom lately we
spoke of) has brought the matter to such a licentious enormitie and plain
contempt of the Commonweal, that now they spare not plainly to break down
and convert the good and weighty money Coined in our Sovereigns lesser age
into this their corrupted skruife and baggages of Hard-heads and Non-sunts, Let
Sir Robert Richardson and others answer to this.
most like as she and they had conspired to destroy all the whole good Coin of
this Realm; and consequently that part of the Commonweal. Besides all this,
their clipped and r^nged Sols which had no passage these three years past in
the Realm of France are commanded to have course in this Realm, to gratify
thereby her new-come Soldiers, and all these things together are done without
the advice or consent of the Nobility and Counsel of thi^ Realm; and
manifestly there-through against our ancient Laws and Liberties. Thirdly, her
last and most weighty proceeding, more fully declares the motherly care her
Majesty bears to our Commonweal and us, when in time of Peace, without any
occasion of Foreign Wars, thousands of Strangers are laid here and there upon
the necks of our poor members of this Commonweal. Their idle bellies fed
upon the poor substance of the Commonaltie conquest by their just labors in
the painful sweat of their brows, which to be true, Dumbar, North-Barwick,
Travent, Pres^on, Panes, Missilburgh, Leith, Cannongat, Kinghorne, Kirkcaldie,
Disert, with the depauperate souls that this day dwell therein can testify.
Whose oppression as doubtless it is entered in before the Justice-seat of God,
so ought it justly to move our hearts to have pity and compassion upon these
our poor brethren, and at our powers to provide remedy for the same. And
albeit her strangers had been garnished with money (as you know well they were
not) yet can there here lying be no ways but most hurtful to our
Commonwealth, seeing that the fertility of this Realm had never been so
plentiful that it was able of any continuance to sustain it self and
inhabitants thereof, without support of Foreign Countries, far less able
besides the same to sustain thousands of strangers wherewith it is burdened,
to the dearthing of all victuals, as the murmr and complaint of Edinburgh
this day does testify. But to what effect the Commonweal is thus burdened,
the end does declare. For shortly were they brought to the fields against our
Sovereigns true Lieges, even us your brethren, who (God knows) sought nothing
else but peace of conscience, under protection of our Sovereign, and
Reformation of these enormities, for no other cause but that we would not
renounce the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and subdue our necks under the tyranny of
that wicked Man of sin, the Roman Antichrist and his forsworn Shavelings, who
at that time most tyrannically oppressed our souls with hunger of Gods true
Word, and rest our goods and substances, to waste the same upon their foul
lusts and stinking harlots. But (O dear brethren) this was not the chief
pretense and final scope of her proceedings (as these days do well declare)
for had not God given in our hearts to withstand that oppression, with weapons
of most just defense, thou, O Saint Iohnston and Dundie, had been in no better
state then your sister of Leith is this day. For though we in very deed (God is
witness) meant then nothing, but in the simplicity of our hearts, the
maintenance of true Religion, and safety of our brethren, Professors of the
same, yet lay there another serpent lurking in the breast of our adversaries, as
this day (praise to God) is plainly opened to all that list to behold, to wit,
To bring you and us both under the perpetual servitude of strangers. For we
being appointed, as ye know, touching Religion to be reasoned with all in the
Council, at the day affixed, and no occasion made to break the same on our
side (as is well known) yet come there forth writings and complaints, See how
this agrees with our times.
That this day and that day we were prepared to invade the Queens person (when
in very truth there was never such thing thought, as the very deed has
declared.) But because she was before deliberate to bring in Frenchmen to both
our destructions, that you should not stir therewith, she made you to
understand, That those Bands came only for safety of her own person. O craft,
brethren! O subtilty! But behold the end: They are come (yet not so many, no
not the sixth part that she desired and looked for) and how, not only with
weapons to defend her person, but with wives and children to plant in your
native rooms, as they have already begun in the Town of Leith, the principal
Port and Staple of this Realm. The gernall and furniture of the Council, and
seat of Justice. And here will they dwell, till they may reinforce themselves
with greater number of their Fellow Soldiers, to subdue then the rest, if God
withstand not. And yet her Majesty feared nor shamed not to write, if they
were a hundred Frenchmen for every one of them that is in Scotland, The cause
of the Frenchmens coming with wives and children.
yet they should harm no man. Tell thou now Leith if that be true; If this be
not a crafty entry to a manifest conquest forethought of old, judge you
dear brethren: Thus to fortify our Towns, and even the principal Port of our
Realm, and to lay so strong Garrisons of strangers therein, not only without
any consent of the Nobility and Council of this Realm, but also express
against their mind (as our Writ sent to her Majesty bears record) if this
be not to oppress the ancient Laws and Liberties of our Realm, let all wise
men say to it. And further, to take the Barne-yards new gathered, the Gernalls
replenished, and to sit down therein, and by force to put the just possessours
and ancient inhabitants therefrom, with their wives, children, and servants to
shift for themselves in begging, if they have no other means, they being true
Scottish-men, members of our Commonwealth, and our dear brethren and sisters,
borne, fostred, and brought up in the bowels of our common and native Country,
if this be not the manifest declaration of their old pretense, and mind
toward the whole Scottish Nation; let your own conscience (brethren) be judge
herein. Was all Leith of the Congregation? Note.
No, I think not, yet were all alike served. Let this motherly care then be
tried by the fruits thereof: First, by the great and exorbitant Taxations used
upon you, and yet ten times greater pressed at, as ye know. Secondly, the utter
depravation of our Coin, to purchase thereby money to entertain strangers,
French Soldiers upon you, and to make them strong holds, lest you should
sometime expel them out of your native rooms. Thirdly, by the daily
re-inforcing of the said French Soldiers in strength and number, with wives
and children, planting in your brethrens houses and possessions. Indeed her
Majesty is, and has been at all times careful to procure by her craft of
fair words, of fair promises, and sometimes of buds to allure your simplicity
to that point, to join your selves to her Soldiers, to daunt and oppress us,
that you the remnant (we being cut off) may be an easy prey to her sleights:
Which God of his infinite goodness has now discovered to the eyes of all that
list to behold. But credit the works (dear brethren) if ye will not credit us,
and lay the example of Foreign nations, yea, even of our brethren, before your
eyes, and procure not your own ruin willingly. If you tender true Religion,
you see how her Majesty bears her self plain enemy thereto, and
maintains the tyranny of those idle bellies the Bishops, against Gods
Church: If Religion be not persuaded unto you, yet cast you not away the care
you ought to have over your Commonwealth, which you see manifestly and
violently ruined before your eyes: If this will not move you, remember your
dear wives, children and posterity, your ancient heritages and houses, and
think well these strangers will regard no more your right thereunto, then they
have done your brethren of Leith, when ever occasion shall serve. But if you
purpose (as we doubt not but that all those that either have wit or manhood
will declare and prove indeed) to brook your ancient rooms and heritages,
conquered most valiantly, and defended by your most noble Progenitors, against
all strangers, invaders of the same, as the French pretends plainly this day,
if ye will not be slaves unto them, and to have your lives, your wives, your
children, your substance, and whatsoever is dear unto you cast at their feet,
to be used and abused at the pleasure of strange Soldiers, as you see your
brethrens at this day before your eyes. If you will not have experience some
day hereof in your own persons (as we suppose the least of you all would not
gladly have, but rather would choose with honor to die in defense of his own
native room, then live and serve so shameful a servitude) then brethren let
us join our forces, and both with wit and manhood resist their beginnings, A
proverb.
or else our liberties hereafter shall be dearer bought. Let us surely be
persuaded, when our neighbors houses be on fire, that we dwell not without
danger. Let no man withdraw himself herefrom, and if any will be so unhappy
and mischievous (as we suppose none to be) let us altogether repute, hold and
use him (as he is in deed) for an enemy to us, and to himself, and to his
Commonweal. The eternal and omnipotent God, the true and only revenger of
the oppressed, be our comfort and Protector against the fury and rage of the
Tyrants of this world: And especially from the insatiable covetousness of the
Cardinal of Guyse, and the Hamiltons. Amen.


Besides this our public Letter, some men answered certain heads of the
Queens said Proclamation on this manner.

If it be sedition to speak the truth in all sobriety, and to complain, when
they are wounded, or to call for help against unjust tyranny before that their
throats be cut, then can we not deny, but we are criminal and guilty of
tumult and sedition. For we have said, That our Commonweal is oppressed, that
we and our brethren are hurt by the tyranny of strangers, and that we fear
bondage and slaverie, seeing that multitudes of cruel murderers are daily
brought into our Country without our counsel, knowledge, and consent. We
dispute not so much whether the bringing in of more Frenchmen be violating of
the appointment (which the Queen and her faction cannot deny to be manifestly
broken by them in more causes then one) as that we would know, if that the
heaping of strangers upon strangers, above us, without our counsel or consent,
be a thing that may stand with the Liberty of our Realm, and with the profit
of our Commonwealth. It is not unknown to all men of judgment, That the
fruits of our Country, in the most common years, be no more then sufficient
reasonable to nourish the born inhabitants of the same. But now seeing we have
been vexed with wars, taken upon us at the pleasure of France, by the which the
most fruitful portion of our Country in Corn has been wasted. What man is
so blind, but that he may see, That such bands of ungodly and idle Soldiers
can be nothing else but an occasion to famish our poor brethren. And in this
point we refuse not (which is the chief) the judgment of all natural
Scottish-men. The Queen Regent alleged, That although there was an hundred
Frenchmen for one that is in Scotland, yet she is not minded to trouble any
unjust possession. Whereto we answer, That we dispute not what she intended
(which nevertheless by probable conjectures it is to be suspected) but always
we affirm, that such a multitude of Frenchmen is a burden not only
unprofitable, but also intolerable to this poor Realm; especially being
treated as they are by her and Monsieur Dosell: For if their wages be paid out
of France, then are they both (the Queen, we say, and Monsieur Dosell) traitors
to the King and Counsel; Note.
for the poor Commons of this Realm have sustained them with the sweat of
their brows, since the contracting of the Peace, and somewhat before.

What motherly affection she has declared to this Realm, and to the
inhabitants of the same, her works have evidently declared, even since the
first hour that she has borne Authority. And albeit men will not this day see
what danger hangs over our heads, yet fear we that ere it be long, experience
shall teach some, that we have not feared without cause. The cruel murder and
oppression used by those whom now she fostereth, is to us a sufficient argument
what is to be looked for when her number is so multiplied, that our force shall
not be able to gainstand their tyranny. Where she complains of our Preachers,
affirming that unreverently they speak of Princes in general, and of her in
particular, inducing the people thereby to defection from their duty, etc. And
therefore that such a thing cannot be suffered. Because this occasion is laid
against Gods true Ministers, we cannot but witness what course and order of
Doctrine they have kept, and yet keep in that point.

In public prayers they recommend to God all Princes in general, The doctrine
of our Preachers concerning obedience to be given to Magistrates.
and the Magistrates of this our native Realm in particular. In open audience
they declare the Authority of Princes and Magistrates to be of God, and
therefore they affirm that they ought to be honored, feared, and obeyed, even
for conscience sake; provided that they command nor require nothing expressly
repugning to Gods Commandment and plain Will revealed in his holy Word.
Moreover, they affirm, That if wicked persons abusing the Authority established
by God, move Princes to command things manifestly wicked, That such as can and
do bridle those inordinate appetites of misled Princes, cannot be accused as
resistaries of the Authority, which is Gods good Ordinance. To bridle the rage
and fury of misled Princes in free Kingdoms and Realms, they affirm it
appertains to the Nobility, sworn and borne Counselors of the same, and also
to the Barons and people, whose votes and consents are to be required in all
great and weighty matters of the Commonwealth; which if they do not, they
declare themselves criminal with their misled Princes, and so subject to the
same vengeance of God, which they deserve, for that they pollute the seat of
Justice, and do as it were make God author of Iniquity. They proclaim and cry,
That the same God who plagued Pharaoh, repulsed Sennacherib, struck Herod with
worms, and made the bellies of dogs the grave and sepulcher of the spiteful
Jesabell, will not spare misled Princes, who authorize the murderers of
Christ's members in this our time. On this manner they speak of Princes in
general, Let such as this day live, witness what God has wrought since the
writing and publication hereof.
and of your Majesty in particular. This only we have heard one of our
Preachers say, rebuking the vain excuses of such as flatter themselves by
reason of Authority; Many now adays (said he) will have no other Religion nor
faith, then the Queen and Authority had: But is it not possible that the Queen
be so far blinded, that she will have no Religion, nor no other faith, then may
content the Cardinal of Loraine? And may it not likewise be true that the
Cardinal is so corrupt, that he will admit no Religion which does not
establish the Pope in his kingdom? Note.
But plain it is, That the Pope is Lieutenant to Satan, and enemy to Christ
Jesus, and to his perfect Religion. Let men therefore consider what danger they
stand in, if their salvation shall depend upon the Queens faith and Religion.
Further, we never heard any of our Preachers speak of the Queen Regent, neither
publicly nor privately. Where her Majesty declares, It will not be suffered
that our Prerchers meddle with Policy, or speak of her, or of other Princes,
but with reverence: we answer, That as we will justify and defend nothing in
our Preachers which we find not God to have justified and allowed in his
Messengers before them; so we dare not forbid them openly to reprehend that
which the Spirit of God, speaking in the Prophets and Apostles, has
reprehended before them. Helias did personally reprove Achab and Jesabell of
idolatry, of avarice, The Prophets have meddled with policy, and have reproved
the corruptions thereof.
of murder, and such like: Esaias the Prophet called the Magistrates of
Jerusalem in his time, companions to thieves, Princes of Sodom, bribe-takers,
and murderers; he complained that their silver was turned into dross, That
their wine was mingled with water, and that Justice was bought and sold.
Jeremie says, That the bones of King Jehoiakim should wither with the Sun.
Christ Jesus called Herod a Fox; and Paul calls the high Priest a painted
wall, and prays unto God that he should strike him, because that against
justice he commanded him to be smitten. Now if the like (and greater)
corruptions be in the world this day, Who dare enterprise to put to silence the
Spirit of God, which will not be subject to the appetites of misled Princes.


We have said before, That the tenth of September was appointed for a
convention to be holden at Sterlin, The coming of the Earl of Arran to
Scotland, and his joining with the Congregation.
to the which repaired the most part of the Lords of the Congregation. At that
same time arrived the Earl of Arran, who after he had saluted his father, came
with the Earl of Argyle and Lord James to Sterlin, to the said convention; in
which diverse godly men complained of the tyranny used against their brethren.
And especially that more Frenchmen were brought in to oppress their Country.
After the consultation of certain days, the principal Lords with my Lord
Arran, and the Earl of Argyle past to Hammilton for consultation to be taken
with the Duke. And in this mean time came assured word that the Frenchmen had
begun to fortify Leith; which thing, as it did more evidently discover the
Queens craft, so did it deeply grieve the hearts of all the Nobility there, who
with one consent agreed to write unto the Queen in form as follows.

At Hammilton the 29 day of September. MAdame, Letters to the Queen Regent.

we are credibly informed that your Army of Frenchmen should instantly begin
to plant in Leith, and to fortify the same, of mind to expel the ancient
inhabitants thereof, our brethren of the Congregation, whereof we marvel not a
little, that your Majesty should so manifestly break the Appointment made at
Leith, without any provocation made by us and our brethren. And seeing the same
is done without any manner of consent of the Nobility and counsel of this
Realm, we esteem the same not only oppression of our poor brethren, and
in-dwellers of the said Town, but also very prejudicial to the Commonwealth,
and plain contrary to our ancient Laws and Liberties. We therefore desire your
Majesty to cause the same work enterprised to be stayed, and not to attempt so
rashly and so manifestly against your Majesty's promise, against the
Commonwealth, ^he ancient Laws and Liberties thereof (which things, besides
the glory of God, are most dear and tender to us, and only our pretense)
otherwise assuring your Majesty, we will complain to the whole Nobility and
Commonalty of this Realm, and most earnestly seek for redress thereof. And
thus recommending our humble service unto your Highness, whom we commit to the
Eternal Protection of God, expecting earnestly your answer.

At Hammilton the day and year aforesaid: By your Majesty's humble and obedient
servitours.


This Letter was subscribed with the hands of the Duke, the Earls of Arran,
Argyle, Glencarne, and Menteth; by the Lords Ruthwen Uchiltrie, Boyd, and by
diverse others Barons and Gentlemen. To this request she would not answer by
wret, but with a Letter of credit she sent Sir Robert Carnegie, and Master
Danid Borthwike, two, whom amongst many others, she abused, and by whom she
corrupted the hearts of the simple. They traveled with the Duke, to bring him
again to the Queens Faction: Labrosse and the Bishop of Amians were shortly
before arrived, and, as it was bruted, were directed as Ambassadors, but they
kept close their whole Commission; they only made large promises to them that
would be theirs, The Petition of la Brosse.
and leave the Congregation. The Queen did grievously complain, That we had
intelligence with England, and the conclusion of their Commission was to
solicit the Duke to put in all in the Queens Will, and then she would be
gracious enough. It was answered, The answer.
That no honest men durst commit themselves to the mercy of such throat-cutters
as she had about her; whom if she would remove, and join to her a Council of
natural Scotish-men, permitting the Religion to have free passage, then should
none in Scotland be more willing to serve her Majesty then should the Lords and
Brethren of the Congregation be. At the same time the Duke and the Lords wrote
to my Lord Erskin, Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, in form as follows.

Letter to the Lord Erskin.
MY Lord and Cousin, after our hearty commendations, this present is to
advertise you, That we are credibly informed that the Army of Frenchmen now in
this Realm, without any advice of the Council or Nobility, are fortifying, or
else shortly intends to fortify the Town of Leith, and expel the ancient
inhabitants thereof, whereby they proclaim to all that will open their ears to
hear, or eyes to see, what is their pretense. And seeing the faithfulness of
your antecessors, and especially of your Father of honorable memory, who was
so recommended and dear to the Estates and Counselors of this Realm, through
affection they perceived in him toward the Commonwealth thereof, that they
doubted not to give in his keeping the key, as it were, of the Council, of the
Justice and Policy of this Realm, the Castles of Edinburgh and Sterlin, we
cannot but believe ye will rather augment the honorable favor of your House
by steadfast favor and loyalty to our Common wealth, then through the subtle
persuasions of some (which care not what after shall come to you and your
House, at the present would abuse you to the performance of their wicked
enterprises and pretenses against our Commonwealth) utterly destroy the same.
And herefore seeing we have written to the Queen to desist from the enterprise,
otherwise that we will complain to the Nobility and Commonalty of the Realm,
and seek redress thereof; We likewise beseech you as our tender friend,
brother and member of the same Commonwealth with us* that in no wise you
meddle with, or assent to that ungodly enterprise against the Commonwealth:
And likewise that ye would save your body, and the jewels of this Country,
committed to yours and your predecessors loyalty and fidelity toward your
native Country and Commonwealth, if ye thinki to be reputed, hereafter one of
the same: And that ye would rather be brother to us then to strangers; for we
do gather by the effects, the secrets of men's hearts, otherwise unsearchable
unto us. Thus we write, not that we are in doubt of you, but rather to warn
you of the danger, in case ye suffer your self to be enchanted with fair
promises, and crafty Counselors: For let no man flatter himself; we desire all
men to know; That though he were our father (seeing God has opened our eyes to
see his Will) if he be enemy to the Common wealth, Note.
which is now assailed, and we with it, and all true members thereof, he shall
be known, and as he is indeed enemy to us, to our lives, our houses, babes,
heritages, and whatsoever is contained within the same: For as the Ship
perishing, What can be safe that is within? So the Common wealth being
betrayed, What particular member can live in quietness. And therefore in so
far as the said Castles are committed to your credit, we desire you to show
your faithfulness and stoutnesse, as ye tender us, and whatsoever appertains
to us. And seeing we are assured ye will be assailed both with craft and force,
as now by warning we help you against the first, so against the last ye shall
not miss in all possible haste to have our assistance, only to show your
self a man. Save your person by wisdom, strengthen your self against force:
And the Almighty God assist you in both, that one aid the other, and open the
eyes of your understanding to see and perceive the craft of Satan and his
supposts.

At Hamilton the 29 day of September, 1559. By your Brethren.


The Duke and Lords understanding that the Fortifications of Leith proceeded,
appointed their whole Forces to convene at Sterlin the 15 day of October. that
from thence they might march forward to Edinburgh, for the redress of the
greatest enormities which the French did to the whole Country, The tyranny of
the French.
which by them was so oppressed, that the life of all honest men was bitter
unto them. In this mean time the Lords directed their Letters to diverse parts
of the Country, making mention what danger did hang over all men, if the
French should be suffered to plant in this Country at their pleasure. They
made mention farther, How humbly they had besought the Queen Regent, That she
would send away to France her Frenchmen, who were a burden unprofitable and
grievous to this Commonwealth, and how that she notwithstanding did daily
augment their number, bringing wives and children, a plain declaration of a
plain conquest.

The Queen Regent perceiving that her craft began to be espied, by all means
possible traveled to blind the people; Note how this agrees with our times
And first she sent forth her pestilent Post forenamed, in all parts of the
Country, to persuade all men, that she offers all things reasonable to the
Congregation; and that they refusing all reason, pretended no Religion, but a
plain revolt from Authority. She tempted every man, in particular, as well
those that were of the Congregation, as those that were neutralls. She
assaulted every man as she thought most easily he might have been overcome. To
the Lord Ruthuen she sent the Justice Clerk, and his wife who is daughter to
the wife of the said Lord, what was their Commission and credit, is no further
known, then the said Lord has confessed, which is, That large promise of
profit was promised, if he would leave the Congregation, and be the Queens. To
Lord James, Prior of Saint Andrews, was sent Master John Spens of Condie, with
a Letter and Credit, as follows.

The Memorial of Master John Spens of Condie, the thirtieth of September.
1. YE shall say, That the Queens great favor toward you moves her to this.

2. That she now knows that the occasion of your departing from her, was the
favor of the Word, and of the Religion, with the which, albeit she was
offended, yet knowing your heart* and the hearts of the other Lords firmly
fixed thereupon, she will bear with you in that behalf, and at your own
sights she will set forward that Cause at her power, as may stand with Gods
Word, Note.
the common policy of this Realm, and the Princes honor (note good Reader
what venom lurked here, for plain it is that the policy which she pretended,
and the Princes honor will never suffer Christ Jesus to reign in this Realm.)

3. To speak of the occasion of assembling of these men of War, and
fortifying of Leith, you must know, That it was given to the Queen to
understand by some about her, that it is not the advancement of the Word and
Religion which is sought at this time, but rather a pretense to overthrow or
alter the authority of your Sister, of the which she believes still that ye
are not participant: and considering the tenderness betwixt you and your
Sister, she trusted more in you, Let this be noted, O cra^ty flatter^r!
in that behalf, then in any living. But before the Earl of Arrane arrived,
and that the Duke departed from her faction, she ceased not continually to cry,
That the Prior sought to make himself King; and so not only to deprive his
Sister, to make himself King, but also to defraud the Duke and his house of
their pretension. But foreseeing a storm, she began to seek a new wind.

She further wills him, to offer the sending away of the men of War, if the
former suspicion could be removed, she lamented the trouble that appeared to
follow, if the matter should long stand in debate, she promised her faithful
labors for reconciliation, and required the same of him. Requiring further,
Faith, Honor, and kindness toward his Sister, and to advertise for his part,
what he desired; with promise, That he might obtain what he pleased to desire.


To this Letter and Credit the said Lord James answered as follows.

MADAME,
I Received your Highness Writ, and have heard the credit of the Bearer, and
finding the business of such importance, that dangerous it were to give hasty
answer. And also your Demands are such, That with my honor I cannot answer
them privately by my self, I have thought good to delay the same till that I
may have the judgment of the whole Council. For this point I will not
conceal from your Majesty, That amongst us there is a solemned Oath, that
none of us shall traffic with your Majesty secretly, neither yet that any of
us shall treat or deal for himself particularly: Which Oath, for my part, I
purpose to keep unviolated to the end. But when the rest of the Noblemen shall
conveene, I shall leave nothing that lies in my power undone, that may make
for the quietness of this poor Realm: Provided, That the glory of Christ
Jesus be not hindered by our concord. And if your Majesty shall be found so
tractable, as now ye offer, I doubt not to obtain of the rest of my brethren
such favor toward your service, as your Majesty shall have just occasion to
stand content: For I take God to record, That in this action I have neither
sought, neither yet seek any other thing then to increase Gods glory, and the
Liberty of this poor Realm to be maintained. Further, I have showed unto
your Messenger what things have misliked me in your proceedings, even from such
a heart as I wish to God you knew fully, and all men else. And this, with
hearty commendation of service to your Majesty, I heartily commit your
Highness to the eternal protection of the omnipotent.

At Saint Andrews, the first of October. Sic subscribitur. Your Majesty's
humble and obedient Servitour. I. St.


Note.
This answer received, she raged, as hypocrisy uses when it is pricked, and
perceiving that she could not work what she would at the hands of men
particularly, she set forth a Proclamation, universally to be proclaimed, in
the tenor as follows.

The Queens Proclamation.
FOr so much as it is understood by the Queen, that the Duke of Chattellawralt
has lately directed his Missives into all parts of this Realm, making mention
that the Frenchmen late arrived with their wives and children, are begun to
plant in Leith, to the ruin of the Commonweal, which he and his partakers
will not pass over with patient beholding, desiring to know what will be every
man's part. And that the fortification of Leith, is a purpose devised in France,
and that therefore Monsieur de la Brosse, and the Bishop of Amiens, are come to
this country. A thing so vain and untrue, that the contrary thereof is known
to all men of free judgment. Therefore the Queen, willing that the occasions
whereby her Majesty was moved so to do, be made patent, and what have been her
proceedings since the appointment last made on the Linkes beside Leith. To the
effect that the truth of all things being made manifest, every man may
understand how unjustly that a desire to suppress the liberty of this Realm is
laid to her charge; we have thought expedient to make this discourse following.
First, although after the said appointment, diverse of the said Congregation,
and that not of the meanest sort, has violently broken the points thereof, and
made sundry occasions of new cumber. The same was in a part winked at, and
over-looked, in hope that they in time would remember their duty, and abstain
from such evil behavior, which conversion her Majesty ever sought, rather
then any punishment, with such care and solicitude by all means, and in the
mean time nothing was provided for her own security. But at last by their
frequent Messages to and from England, Elizabeth was come to the crown of
England the year before, by the death of Mary.
their intelligence then was perceived, yet her Majesty trusted the Queen of
England (let them seek as they please) will do the office of a Christian
Princess, in time of a sworn Peace, through which, force was to her Majesty,
seeing so great defection of great personages, to have recourse to the Law of
Nature. And like as a small Bird, being pursued, will provide some nest, so her
Majesty could do no less in cases of pursuit, but provide some sure retract
for her self and her company, and to that effect chose the Town of Leith, as a
place convenient therefore: because it was her dearest daughters property, and
no other person could claim Title or Interesse thereto, and also because in
former times it had been fortified: About the same time that the seeking
support of England was made manifest, arrived the Earl of Arrane, False lying
tongue God has confounded thee.
and adjoined himself to the Congregation, upon further promise then the
pretended quarrel, or Religion that was to be set up by them in authority, and
so to pervert the whole obedience, and as some of the Congregation at the same
time had put into their hands, and taken the Castle of Brochtie, put forth the
keepers thereof. Immediately came from the said Duke to her Majesty unlooked
for, a Writ, beside many others complaining of the fortification of the said
Town of Leith, in hurt of the ancient inhabitants thereof, brethren of the said
Congregation, whereof he then professed himself a Member. And albeit that the
Bearer of the said Writ was an unmeet Messenger, in a matter of such
consequence, yet her Majesty directed to him two persons of good credit and
reputation, with answer; Offering, If he would cause amends to be made for that
which was committed against the Laws of the Realm, to do further then could
be craved of reason. And to that effect, to draw some conference, which by his
fault and his Colleagues took no end; nevertheless they continually since
continue in their doings, God has purged his people of that false accusation.
usurping the authority, commanding and charging free Boroughs to choose
Provests and officers of their naming, and to assist to them in the purpose
they would be at: and that they will not suffer provision to be brought for
sustentation of her Majesty's houses. A great part have so plainly set aside
all reverence and humanity, whereby every man may know, That it is no matter
of Religion, but a plain usurpation of the authority: and no doubt but simple
men of good Zeal in former times, therewith falsely have been deceived. But as
to the Queens part (God who knows the secrets of all hearts well knows, and
the world shall see by experience) that the fortification of Leith was devised
for no other purpose, but for recourse to her highness and her company, in
case they were pursued. Wherefore, as good Subjects that have the fear of God
in their hearts, will not suffer themselves by such vain persuasions to be led
away from their due obedience: but will assist in defense of their Sovereigns
quarrel, against all such as shall pursue the same wrongfully. Therefore her
Majesty ordains the officers of Arms to pass to the Market-Crosses of all
the head Buroughs of this Realm, and there by open Proclamation command and
charge all and sundry the Lieges thereof, that none of them take in hand to put
themselves in arms, nor take part with the said Duke or his assistaries, under
the pain of Treason.

These Letters being divulgate, the hearts of many were stirred, for they
judged the Narration of the Queen Regent to have been true, others understood
the same to be utterly false. But because the Lords desired that all men should
judge in their cause, they set out the Declaration subsequent.

The DECLARATION of the Lords, against the former PROCLAMATION.
WE are compelled unwillingly to answer the grievous accusations most unjustly
laid to our charges by the Queen Regent, and her perverse Counsel, who cease
not by all craft and malice to make us odious to our dearest brethren, Note.
natural Scottish-men, as that we pretended no other thing, but the subversion
and overthrow of all just authority, when God knows we sought nothing, but,
That such authority as God approves by his Word, be established, honored,
and obeyed amongst us. True it is, that we have complained (and continually
must complain, till God send redress) That our common Country is oppressed
with strangers; That this inbringing of Soldiers with their wives and
children, and planting of men of War in our free Towns; appears to us a
ready way to conquest. And we most earnestly require all indifferent persons to
be judge betwixt us and the Queen Regent in this cause, to wit, Whether our
complaint be just or not? For, for what other purpose should she thus multiply
strangers upon us, but only in respect of conquest: The avarice of those of
Loraine and Guise.
Which is a thing of late divised by her and her avaritious house. We are not
ignorant that six years ago the question was demanded of a man of honest
reputation; What number of men was able to daunt Scotland, and to bring it to
the full obedience of France? She alleged, That to say that the fortification
of Leith was of purpose devised in France, and that for that purpose were
Monsieur de la Brosse, and the Bishop of Amiens sent to this Country; Is a
thing so vain and untrue, that the contrary thereof is notorious to all men of
free judgment. But evident it is, whatsoever she alleged, That since their
arrival Leith was begun to be fortified. She alleged, That she seeing the
defection of great Personages, was compelled to have recourse to the Law of
Nature, and like a small bird pursued to provide for some sure retract to her
self and her company. But why does she not answer for what purpose did she
bring in her new Bands of men of War? Note.
Was there any defection espied before their arrival? was not the Congregation
under Appointment with her? Which whatsoever she alleged, she is not able to
prove that we have violated in any chief point, before that her new
throat-cutters arrived, yea, before that they began to fortify Leith, a place,
says she, most convenient for her purpose; as indeed it is, for the receiving
of strangers at her pleasure: for if she had feared the pursuit of her body,
she had Inche, Colme, Dumbar, and Blackness, Forts and Strengths already made;
yet all these could not so well serve her turn as Leith, because it was her
daughters property, and none other could have title unto it, and because it had
been fortified often before. That all men may know the just title her daughter
and she had to the Town of Leith, The title that the Queen has or had to Leith.
we shall in few words declare. It is not unknown to the most part of this
Realm, that there has been an old hatred and contention betwixt Edinburgh and
Leith; Edinburgh continually seeking constantly to possess the liberty of
Leith which by donation of ancient Kings they have long enjoyed: And Leith, by
the contrary aspiring to a liberty and freedom in prejudice of Edinburgh. The
Queen Regent, a woman that could make her profit at all hands, was not ignorant
how to compass her own business, and therefore secretly she gave
advertisement to some of Leith, that she would make their Town free, if that
she might do it with any color of Justice. The Lord of Lestarrig sup. riour
to Leith.
By which promises the principal men of them did travel with the Lord of
Lestarrig, a man neither prudent nor fortunate, to whom the superiority of
Leith appertained, That he should fell his whole Title and Right to our
Sovereign for a certain sum of Money, which the inhabitants of Leith paid,
with a large Taxation more, to the Queen Regent, in hope to be made free, in
desp^ght and defraud of Edinburgh: Which Right and Superiority when she had
gotten, and when the Money was paid, the first fruits of their liberty they now
eat with bitterness, is, That strangers shall possess their Town: This is the
just Title which her daughter and she might claim to that Town. And where she
alleged, That it was fortified before; we ask, If that was done without the
consent of the Nobility and Estates of the Realm, as now she and her crafty
counselors do, in despite and high contempt of us the lawful and borne
Counselors of this Realm. How far we have sought support of England, or of
any other Prince, and how just cause we had and have so to do, we shall shortly
make manifest unto the world, To the praise of Gods holy Name, and to the
confusion of all those that slander us for so doing: For this we fear not to
confess, That as in this our enterprise, against the Devil, Idolatry, and the
maintainers of the same, we chiefly and only seek Gods glory to be notified
unto man, Note.
sin to be punished, and virtue to be maintained: So where power fails in our
selves, we will seek it wheresoever GOD shall offer the same: And yet in so
doing, we are assured neither to offend GOD, neither yet to do any thing
repugnant to our Duties. We heartily praise God, who moved the heart of the
Earl of Arran to join himself with us his persecuted brethren. But how
malicious a lie it is, That we have promised to set him up in Authority, the
issue shall declare: God we take to record, That no such thing has entered into
our hearts, neither yet has the said Earl, neither any to him appertaining,
moved us unto any such matter: which if they should do, yet are we not so
slender in judgment, that inconsiderately we would promise that, which after
we would repent. We speak and write to the praise of Gods glory; Note
diligently.
the least of us knows better what obedience is due to a lawful Authority,
then she and her counsel does practice the Office of such as worthily may sit
upon the Seat of Justice: For we offer, and we perform all obedience which God
has commanded; and we deny neither Toll, Tribute, nor Fear, to her nor her
Officers, we only bridle her blind rage, in the which she would erect and
maintain Idolatry, and would murder our brethren, who refuse the same: But she
does utterly abuse the Authority established by God, she prophaneth the Throne
of his Majesty on earth, making the Seat of Justice, which ought to be the
Sanctuary and Refuge of all godly and virtuous persons unjustly afflicted, to
be a den and receptacle to Thieves, Murderers, Idolaters, Whoremongers,
Adulterers, and of Blasphemers of God, and all godliness. It is more then
evident what men they are, and long have been, whom she by her power
maintains and defends; and also what has been our conversation, The
wickedness of the Bishops.
since it has pleased God to call us to his knowledge, whom now in her fury
she cruelly persecuteth. We deny not the taking of the houses of Brochtie; and
the causes being considered, we think that no natural Scottish man will be
offended at our fact. When the assured knowledge came to us that the
Fortification of Leith was begun, every man began to inquire, The cause that
Broughtie Craig was taken.
What danger might ensue to the rest of the Realm, if the French should plant
in diverse places, and what were the places that might annoy us. In conclusion
it was found, That the taking of the said house by French men, should be
destruction to Dundie, and hurtful to S. Iohnston, and to the whole Country;
and therefore it was thought expedient to prevent the danger, as that we did,
for preservation of our brethren and common Country. It is not unknown what
enemies those two Towns have, and how gladly would some have all good order and
policy overthrown in them. The conjectures that the Frenchmen were of mind
shortly to have taken the same place, were not obscrure: but whatsoever they
pretended, we cannot repent that we (as said is) have prevented the danger; and
would God that power had been in the same manner to have foreclosed their
enterprise at Leith: Let all men judge.
For what trouble this poor Realm shall endure before that those murderers and
unjust possessors be removed from the same, the issue will declare. If her
accusations against the Duke, and that we refused conference, be truly and
simply spoken, The Dukes answer.
we will not refuse the judgment of those very men, whom she alleges to be
of such reputation. They know that the Duke did answer, That if the Realm
should be set at liberty from the bondage of those men of War, which presently
did oppress it, and was so fearful to him, and to his brethren, that they
were compelled to absent themselves from the places where she and they made
residence: That he and the whole Congregation should come and give all dutiful
obedience to our Sovereign her daughter, and unto her, as Regent for the time:
But to enter into conference so long as she kept above him and his brethren
that fearful scourge of cruel strangers, he thought no wise man would
counsel him. And this his answer we approve, adding further, That she can make
us no promise which she can keep, Note.
nor we can credit, so long as she is forced with the strength, and ruled by
the counsel of France. We are not ignorant that Princes think it good policy
to betray their subjects by breaking of promises, be they never so solemnly
made. We have not forgotten what counsel she and Monsieur Dosell gave to the
Duke, against those that slew the Cardinal, and kept the Castle of S.
Andrews, Note.
which was this, That what promise they list to require should be made unto
them; but as soon as the Castle was rendered, and things brought to such pass
as was expedient, that he should chop the heads from every one of them. To the
which the Duke answered, That he would never consent to so treasonable an act,
but if he promised fidelity, he would faithfully keep it. Monsieur Dosell said
in mockage to the Queen in French, That is a good simple nature, but I know no
other Prince that would so do. If this was his judgment in so small a matter,
what have we to suspect in this our Cause? For the question is not of the
slaughter of one Cardinal, but of the just abolishing of all tyranny, which
that Roman Antichrist has usurped above us; of the suppressing of Idolatry,
and of the Reformation of the whole Religion, by that vermin of shavelings
utterly corrupted. Now if the slaughter of a Cardinal be a sin irremissible,
Note.
as they themselves affirm; and if faith ought not to be kept to heretics, as
their own law speaks, What promise can she that is ruled by the counsel and
commandment of a Cardinal, The quarrel betwixt France and the Congregation of
Scotland.
make to us that can be sure? Where she accuses us, That we usurp Authority to
command and charge free Boroughs, to choose Provests and Officers of our naming,
etc. We will that the whole Boroughs of Scotland testify in that case, Whether
we have used any kind of violence, but lovingly exhorted such as asked our
support to choose such in Office, as had the fear of God before their eyes,
loved equity and justice, and were not noted with avarice and bribing. But
wonder it is with what face she can accuse us of that, whereof we are innocent,
and she so openly criminal, that the whole Realm knows her iniquity: In
that case has she not compelled the Town of Edinburgh to retain a man to be
their Provest most unworthy of any Regiment in a well-ruled Commonwealth? The
Lord Seaton unworthy of Regiment.
Has she not enforced them to take Bayliffes of her appointment? and some of
them so meet for their Office in this troublesome time, Optim^ collatio
as a sowter is to sail a Ship in a stormy day. She complains that we will
not suffer provision to be made for her house: In very deed we unfainedly
repent that before this we took not better order that these murderers and
oppressors whom she pretends to nourish for our destruction, had not been
disappointed of their great provision of Victuals which she and they have
gathered, to the great hurt of the whole Country: But as God shall assist us
in times coming, we shall do diligence somewhat to frustrate their devilish
purpose. What both what she and we pretend, we doubt not but God (who cannot
suffer the abuse of his own Name long to be unpunished) shall one day declare,
and unto him we fear not to commit our Cause. Let the Papists judge if God has
not given judgment to the displeasure of their hearts.
Neither yet fear we in this present day, that against us she makes a
malicious lie, where that she says, That it is not Religion that. we go about,
but a plain usurpation of Authority. God forbid that such impiety should enter
in our hearts, that we should make his holy Religion a cloak and covertour of
our iniquity: From the beginning of this controversy, it is evidently known
what have been our requests; which if the rest of the Nobility and Commonalty
of Scotland will cause to be performed unto us, if then in us appear any sign
of Rebellion, let us be reputed and punished as traitors. But while strangers
are brought in to suppress us, our common wealth and posterity; Note.
while Idolatry is maintained, and Christ Jesus his true Religion despised,
while idle bellies, and bloody tyrants the Bishops are maintained, and Christ's
true Messengers persecuted; while finally, virtue is contemned, and vice
extolled; while that we a great part of the Nobility and Commonalty of this
Realm are most unjustly persecuted, What godly man can be offended that we
shall seek Reformation of these enormities (yea, even by force of Arms, seeing
that otherwise it is denied unto us) we are assured that neither God, The
causes that moved the Nobility of this Realm to oppose the Q. Regent.
neither nature, neither any just Law forbids us. God has made us
Counselors by birth of this Realm, Nature binds us to love our own
Country, and just Laws command us to support our brethren unjustly pursued,
yea, the Oath that we have made to be true to this Commonwealth compelled us
to hazard whatsoever God has given us, before that we see the miserable ruin
of the same. If any think it is not Religion which now we seek, we answer,
That it is nothing else but the zeal of the true Religion which moves us to
this enterprise: The some mind remains to this day.
For as the enemy does craftily foresee, That Idolatry cannot universally be
maintained, unless that we be utterly suppressed, So do we consider that the
true Religion (the purity whereof we openly require) cannot universally be
erected, unless strangers be removed, and this poor Realm purged of those
pestilences which before have infected it. And therefore in the Name of the
Eternal God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, whose Cause we sustain, we require
all our brethren natural Scotish-men prudently to consider our Requests, and
with judgment to discern betwixt us and the Queen Regent, with her faction,
and not to suffer themselves to be abused by her craft and deceit, That to lift
their weapons against their brethren, who seek nothing but Gods glory, Or yet
to extract from us their just and dutiful support, This promise was forgot,
and therefore God plagued.

Wha spirit could have hoped for victory in so desperate dangers.


seeing that we hazard our lives for preservation of them and us, and of us and
our posterity to come: Assuring such as shall declare themselves favorers of
her Faction and enemies unto us, That we shall repute them, whenever God
shall put the Sword of Justice in our hands worthy of such punishment as is due
for such as study to betray their Countries into the hands of strangers.

This our answer was formed and divulgate in some places, but not universally,
by reason of our day appointed to meet at Sterlin, as before is declared. In
this mean time the Queens Posts ran with all possible expedition to draw men to
her devotion. And in very deed she found more favorers of her iniquity then we
suspected. For a man that of long time had been one of our number in
profession, offered (as himself did confess) his service to the Queen, to
travel betwixt her Majesty and the Congregation for concord; she refused not
his offer, but knowing his simplicity, Note.
she was glad to employ him for her advantage. The man is Master Robert
Lockard, a man of whom many have had and still have good opinion, as touching
his Religion. But to enter in the managing of such affairs, not so fit as
godly and wise men would require: he travelleth not the less earnestly in the
Queen Regents affairs, and could not be persuaded, but that she meant
sincerely, and that she would promote the Religion to the uttermost of her
power. He promised in her name, That she would put away her Frenchmen, and
would be ruled by the counsel of natural Scottish-men: when it was reasoned
in his contrary, That if she were so minded to do, she could have found
Mediators a great deal more fit for that purpose. He feared not to affirm,
That he knew more of her mind, then all the French or Scots that were in
Scotland; yea, more then her own brethren that were in France. He traveled
with the Earl of Glencarne, the Lords of Uchiltrie and Boyd, with the Lord of
Dun, and with the Preachers, to whom he had certain secret Letters, which he
would not deliver, unless that they would make a faithful promise, That they
should never reveal the thing contained in the same. To the which it was
answered, That in no ways they could make such a promise, by reason that they
were sworn one to another, and altogether in one body, That they should have
no secret intelligence, nor deal with the Queen Regent, but that they should
communicate with the great Counsel whatsoever she proposed unto them, so they
did answer unto her, as by this answer written by John Knox to the Queen Regent
may be understood. The tenor whereof follows.

To the Queen Regent.
MADAME,
MY duty humbly premised: Your Majesty's servant, Master Robert Lockard, most
instantly has required me and others to whom your Majesty's Letters, as he
alleged, were directed, to receive the same in a secret manner, and to give
him answer accordingly; but because some of the number that he required, were,
and are of the great Counsel of this Realm, and therefore are solemnly
sworn to have nothing to do in a secret manner, neither with your Majesty,
nor with any that comes from you, or from your Counsel. And so they could not
receive your Majesty's Letters with such conditions as the said Master Robert
required, therefore thought he good to take back to your Majesty again the
said Letters close; And yet because, as he reports, he has made to your
Majesty some promise in my name, at his request, I am content to testify by
my Letter and Subscription, the sum of that which I did communicate with him.
In Dondie, after many words betwixt him and me, I said, That albeit diverse
sinister reports had been made of me, yet did I never declare any evident token
of hatred nor enmity against your Majesty. For if it be the office of a true
friend to give true and faithful counsel to them whom he sees run to
destruction for lack of the same, I could not be proved enemy to your Majesty,
but rather a friend unfeigned. For what counsel I had given to your Majesty,
my Writings, as well my Letter and Addition to the same, now Printed, as diverse
others which I wrote from S. Johnston, may testify. I further added, That such
an enemy was I unto you, that my tongue did both persuade, and obtain, That
your authority and Regiment should be obeyed of us in all things lawful, till
you declare your self open enemy to this Commonwealth, as now, alas, ye have
done. This I willed him moreover to say to your Majesty, That if ye following
the counsel of flattering men, having no God but this world and their belly,
did proceed in your malice against Christ Jesus his Religion, and true
Ministers, that ye should do nothing else but accelerate and hasten Gods plague
and vengeance upon your self and those that follows you. And that ye (if ye
did not change your purpose hastily) should bring your self in such extreme
danger, that when ye would seek remedy it should not be so easy to be found as
it had been before. This is the effect and sum of all that I said at that time,
and willed him if he pleased to communicate the same to your Majesty. And the
same yet again I notify unto your Majesty by this my Letter,

written and subscribed at Edinburgh, the 26 day of October 1559. Sic
subscribitur. Your Majesty's to command in all godliness, John Knox.
Postscriptum.
God move your heart yet in time to consider, That ye fight not against men,
but against the eternal God, and against his Son Jesus Christ, the only
Prince of the Kings of the earth.




At which answer, the said M. Robert was so offended, that he would not deliver
his Letters, saying, That we were ungodly, and injurious to the Queen Regent,
if we suspected any craft in her. To the which it was answered by one of the
Preachers, That time should declare whether he or they were deceived, if she
should not declare her self enemy to the true Religion which they professed,
if ever she had the upper hand, then they would be content to confess, That
they had suspected her sincerity without just cause. But if she should declare
her malice no less in times coming then she had done before they required
that he should be more moderate, then to condemn them whose conscience he
knows not, and this was the end of his travel for that time. After that he
had troubled the conscience of many godly and quiet persons. For he and others
who were her hired posts, ceased not to blow in the ears of all men, That the
Queen was heavily dealt with, That she required nothing but obedience to her
daughter, That she was content that the true Religion should go forward, Note
how calumnies prevail upon the world for a time.
and that all abuses should be abolished, and by this mean they brought a
grudge and division among our selves. For many (and our brethren of Lowthian
especially) began to murmr, That we sought another thing then Religion, and
so ceased to assist us certain days, after that we were come to Edinburgh,
which we did according to the former Diet the 16 day of October. This grudge
and trouble amongst our selves was not raised by the aforesaid M. Robert only,
but by those pestilents whom before we have expressed, and M. James Balfoure
especially, whose venomous tongues against God and his true Religion, as they
deserve punishment of men, so shall they not escape Gods vengeance, unless
that speedily they repent.

After our coming to Edinburgh, the day forenamed, we assembled in Counsel,
and determined to give new advertisement to the Queen Regent of our convention,
and in such sort, and so with common consent we sent unto her our Request, as
follows.

The second Admonition to the Queen Regent.
MAdame, Your Majesty may call to mind, how at our last Convention at
Hamilton, we required your Highness in most humble manner to desist from the
fortifying of the Town of Lies, then enterprised and begun, which appeared to
us (and yet does) an entry to a conquest and overthrow of our Liberties, and
altogether against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, seeing it was begun,
and yet continues without any advice and consent of the Nobility and Counsel
of this Realm. Wherefore now, as often before, according unto our duty to our
Commonwealth, we most humbly require your Majesty, to cause your Strangers
and Soldiers whatsoever, to depart the said Town of Lies, and make the same
patent, not only to the inhabitants, but also to all Scottish men, our
Sovereign Ladies Leiges; assuring your Highness, That if refusing the same, ye
declare thereby your evil mind toward the Commonwealth, and Liberty of this
Realm, we will (as before) move and declare the causes unto the whole Nobility
and Commonalty of this Realm. And according to the oath which we had sworn for
the maintenance of the Commonweal, in all manner of things to us possible, we
will provide remedy therefore, requiring most humbly your Majesty's answer in
haste with the Bearer, because in our eyes the act continually proceeds,
declaring your determination of conquest, which is presumed of all men, and not
without cause. And thus after our commendation of service, we pray Almighty God
to have your Majesty in his eternal tuition.


These our Letters received, our Messenger was threatened, and withholden a
whole day, thereafter he was dismissed; without any other answer, But that she
would send an answer, when she thought expedient. In this mean time, because
the rumor ceased not, that the Duke usurped the authority, he was compelled
with the sound of trumpet at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh to make his
Purgation as follows, the 19 of October.

The Purgation of the Duke.
FOrasmuch as the Duke of Chatellarault, understanding the false report made by
these about the Queen Regent against him, That he and his son the Lord Arrane,
should pretend usurpation of the Crown and authority of this Realm, when in
very deed, he, nor his said son never once has made any show of any such
thing, but only in simplicity of heart, Now the Duke seeing the Queens party
decline, and the Protestant party grow strong, he once more changes the
profession of his Religion, and joyneth with the Protestants, as strongest.
moved parley by the violent pursuit against Religion, and true Professors
thereof, partly by compassion of the Commonwealth, and poor Commonalty of
this Realm, oppressed with strangers; he joined himself to the rest of the
Nobility, with all hazard, to support the common Cause of the one and of the
other; and has thought expedient to purge himself and his said son in
presence of you all, as he had done in presence of the counsel of that said
crime of old, even by Summons laid to his charge the second year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lady: Which accusation has continued ever against him, as
guilty of that crime; he therefore now openly and plainly Protests, That
neither he nor his said son, sues nor seeks any preeminence, either to the
Crown or authority, but as far as his puissance may extend, is ready, and ever
shall be, and his son also, to concur with the rest of the Nobility his
brethren, and all others, How true this is, the whole and constant course of
the family can tell.
whose hearts are touched to maintain the common causes of Religion, and
Liberty of their native Country, plainly invaded by the said Regent, and her
said Soldiers, who only do forge such vain reports, to withdraw the hearts of
true Scottish-men from the succor they owe of bounden duty to their
Commonweal oppressed. Wherefore exhorting all men, that will maintain the
true Religion of God, or withstand this oppression or plain conquest
enterprised by strangers upon our native Scottish-men, not to credit such false
and untrue reports. But rather concur with us and the rest of the Nobility,
to set our Country at liberty, expelling strangers therefrom, which doing, ye
shall show your selves obedient to the ordinance of God, which was established
for maintenance of the Commonweal and true members of the same.

The 21 of October. came from the Queen Regent M. Robert Forman, Lion King of
Arms, who brought unto us a Writing in this Tenor and Credit.

AFter commendations, We have received your Letter of Edinburgh, the 19 of this
instant, which appears to us, rather to have come from a Prince to his
Subjects, then from Subjects to them that bear authority. For answer whereof,
we have presently directed unto you this Bearer, Lion Herald King of Arms,
sufficiently instructed with our mind, to whom ye shall give credence.

At Leith, October. 21. 1559. Sic subscribitur. Mary R.


His Credit is this.
Let this be noted, and let all men judge of the purpose of the French and how
good and wise Patriots they were, who sold our Sovereign to France for their
private profit, and they by name were (...) Hamiltons.
THat the Queen wonders how any durst presume to command her in that Realm,
which needs not to be Conquest by any force, considering that it was already
Conquest by Marriage. That Frenchmen could not justly be called strangers,
seeing that they were Naturalized; and therefore that she would neither make
that Town patent, neither yet send any man away, but as she thought expedient.
She accused the Duke of violating his promise. She made long Protestation of
her love toward the Commonwealth of Scotland, and in the end commanded, That
under the pain of Treason all assistaries to the Duke and unto us, should
depart from the Town of Edinburgh.


This answer received, credit heard, preconceived malice sufficiently espied,
consultation was taken what was expedient to be done. And for the first, it was
concluded, That the Herald should be stayed, till further determination should
be taken.

The whole Nobility, The order of the suspension of the Queen Regent from
Authority within Scotland.
Barons and Burgesses then present, were commanded to convene in the Tolbuith
of Edinburgh, the same one and twentieth day of October, for deliberation of
those matters, where the whole cause being exposed by the Lord Ruthuen, the
question was propounded, Whether she that so contemptuously refused the most
humble request of the borne Counselors of the Realm, being also but a Regent,
whose pretenses threatened the bondage of the whole Commonwealth, ought to be
suffered so tyrannically to domineer over them. And because that this question
had not been before disputed in open assembly, it was thought expedient that
the judgment of the Preachers should be required; who being instructed in the
case, John Willock, who before had sustained the burden of the Church in
Edinburgh, commanded to speak, made discourse as follows:

Affirming, The discourse of John Willock.
first, That albeit Magistrates be Gods Ordinance, having of him Power and
Authority, yet is not their Power so largely extended, but that it is bounded
and limited by God in his Word.

And secondarily, That as subjects are commanded to obey their magistrates, so
are the Magistrates commanded to give some duty to their subjects, so that God
by his Word has prescribed the Office of the one and of the other.

Thirdly, That albeit God has appointed Magistrates his Lieutenants on earth,
and has honored them with his own Title, calling them Gods, That yet he did
never so firmly establish any, but at his pleasure, he seeing just cause, might
deprive them.

Fourthly, That in deposing of Princes, and those that have been in Authority,
God did not always use his immediate power, but sometimes he uses second
means, which his wisdom thought good, and Justice approved: As by Asa, he
removed Maacha his own mother from Honor and Authority which before she had
used. By Iehu, he destroyed Ioram, and the whole posterity of Achab. And by
diverse others he has deposed from Authority those whom before he had
established by his own Word. And hereupon concluded he, That since the Queen
Regent denied her chief duty to the subjects of this Realm, which was, To
minister Justice to them indifferently, The causes.
to preserve their Liberties from invasion of strangers, and to suffer them to
have Gods Word freely and openly preached amongst them. Seeing moreover that
the Queen Regent was an open and obstinate Idolatresse, a vehement maintainer
of all Superstition and Idolatry, as also she openly declares the Country to
be conquest, and no more free. And finally, That she utterly despises the
counsel and requests of the Nobility: he could see no reason why they the
borne Counselors, Nobility, and Barons of the Realm might not justly deprive
her from all Regiment and Authority amongst them.

Hereafter was the judgment of John Knox required, The judgment of John Knox
in the deposition of the Queen Regent.
who approving the sentence of his brother, added, first, That the iniquity of
the Queen Regent and disorder, ought in no wise to withdraw neither our hearts,
neither yet the hearts of other subjects from the obedience due unto our
Sovereign.

Let no man then for private ends, and bywayes, do any thing against their
Prince, under pre^ence of the public.
Secondly, That if we deposed the said Queen Regent rather of malice and private
envy, then for the preservation of the Commonwealth, and for that her sins
appeared incurable, That we should not escape Gods just punishment, howsoever
that she had deserved rejection from honors.

And thirdly, he required, That no such sentence should be pronounced against
her, but that upon known and open repentance, and upon her conversion to the
Commonwealth, and submission to the Nobility, place should be granted unto her
of regresse to the same honors from the which for just causes she justly might
be deprived.

The Votes of every man particularly by himself required, and every man
commanded to speak as he would answer to God, what his conscience judged in
that matter, there was none found amongst the whole number, who did not by his
tongue consent to her deprivation. Thereafter was her Process committed to
Writing, and registered as follows.

Articles against the Queen Regent.
1559
AT Edinburgh the one and twentieth day of October, 1556.
the Nobility, Barons and Burgesses convened, to advise upon the affairs of the
Commonwealth, and to aid, support and succor the same, perceiving and
lamenting the enterprised destruction of their said Commonwealth, and
overthrow of the liberties of their native Country, by the means of the Queen
Regent, and certain strangers her privy Counselors, plain contrary to our
Sovereign Lord and Ladies mind, and direct against the counsel of the
Nobility, to proceed by little and little, even unto the uttermost ruin; So
that the urgent necessity of the Commonwealth may no longer suffer delay, and
earnestly craveth our support. Seeing therefore that the said Q. Regent
(abusing and overpassing our Sovereign Lord and Ladies Commission given and
granted to her) has in all her proceedings pursued the Barons and Burgesses
within this Realm, The enormities committed by the Queen Regent.
with Weapons and Armor of strangers, without any Process and order of Law,
they being our Sovereign Lord and Ladies true Lieges, and never called nor
convinced of any crime by any judgment lawful. As first, at S. Iohnston, in
the month of May, she assembled her Army against the Town, and the
Inhabitants thereof, never called nor convinced of any crime, only because
they professed the true Worship of God, conform to his most sacred Word. 2. And
likewise in the month of June last, without any order or calling going before,
invaded the persons of sundry Noblemen and Barons with force of Arms,
convened at S. Andrews, only for Cause of Religion, as is notoriously known,
they never being called nor convinced of any crime. 3. Again, laid Garrisons
the same month upon the Inhabitants of the said Town, oppressing the liberties
of the Queens true Lieges: For fear of which her Garrisons, a great part of the
Inhabitants thereof fled from the Town, and durst not resort again unto their
houses and heritages, until they were restored by Arms; they notwithstanding
never being called nor convinced of any crime. 4. Further, at that same time
did thrust in upon the heads of the Inhabitants of the said Town, Provest, and
Bailiffs, against all order of Election, as lately in this month of September
she had done in other Towns of Edinburgh and Iedburgh, and diverse other places,
in manifest oppression of our Liberties. 5. declaring her evil mind toward
the Nobility, Commonalty, and whole Nation, she has brought in strangers, and
daily pretends to bring in greater force of the same, pretending a manifest
Conquest of our native rooms and Country, as the deed it self declares; in so
far, as she having brought in the said strangers without any advise of Council
and Nobility, and contrary to their express mind sent to her in Writing, has
placed and planted her said strangers in one of the principal Towns and parts
of the Realm, sending continually for greater Forces, willing thereby to
suppress the Commonweal, and liberty of our native Country, to make us and
our posterity slaves to strangers for ever; which, as it is intolerable to
Commonwealths and free Countries, so it is very prejudicial to our Sovereign
Lady and her Heirs whatsoever, in case our Sovereign Lady decease without
Heirs of her Person. And to perform these her wicked enterprises, conceived
(as appears) of inveterate malice against our whole Country and Nation,
caused (without any consent or advise of the Council and Nobility) to coin
lead Money, so base, and of such quantity, that the whole Realm shall be
depauperate, and all Traffic with foreign Nations everted thereby. 6.
Again, she so places and maintains against the pleasure of the Council of
this Realm, a stranger in one of the greatest Offices of credit in this
Realm, that is in keeping of the Great Seal thereof, Her daughter followed the
same, for to Davie was delivered the Great Seal.
wherein great perils may be engendered to the Commonweal, and Liberty
thereof. 7. Further, lately sent the Great Seal forth of this Realm by the
said stranger, against the advice of the said Council, to what effect, God
knows. 8. And has also by this means altered the old Law and Custom of this
our Realm, ever obser-served in the Graces and Pardons granted bo our
Sovereigns to all their Lieges, being repentant of their offenses committed
against their Majesty's, or the Lieges of the Realm. And has introduced a new
captious style and form of the said Pardons and Remissions, conform to the
practices of France, tending thereby to draw the said Lieges of this Realm, by
process of time, into a deceivable snare, and further shall creep in the whole
subversion and alteration of the remanent Laws of this Realm, contrary to the
Contents of the Appointment of Marriage. 9. And also Peace being accorded
amongst the Princes, retains the great Army of strangers, after commandment
sent by the King of France to retire the same, making excuse that they were
retained for the suppressing the attempts of the Lieges of this Realm; albeit
the whole subjects thereof of all estates, Note.
is, and ever has been ready to give all dutiful obedience to their
Sovereigns, and their lawful ministers proceeding by Gods Ordinance: And the
same Army of strangers not being paid in wages, was laid by her upon the necks
of the poor Commonalty of our native Country, who were compelled by force to
defraud themselves, their wives and children, of that poor substance which they
might purchase with the sweat of their brows, to satisfy their hunger and
necessities, and quit the same to sustain the idle bellies of her strangers;
through the which, in all parts rose such heavy lamentation and complaint of
the Commonalty, accusing the Counsel and Nobility of their sloth, that as the
same oppression we doubt not has entered in before the Justice Seat of God, so
has it moved our hearts to pity and compassion. And for redress of the same,
with other great offenses committed against the public weal of this Realm,
we have convened here as said is: and as oftentimes before have most humbly and
with all reverence desired and required the said Queen Regent to redress the
said enormities, Note.
and especially to remove her strangers from the necks of the poor Commonalty,
and to desist from enterprising of fortification of Strengths within this
Realm, against the express will of the Nobility and Council of the same; yet
we being convened the more strong for fear of her strangers, who we saw presume
no other thing, but with Arms to pursue our lives and possessions, Besought her
to remove the fear of the same, and make the Town Patent to all our Sovereign
Lord and Ladies Lieges. The same in no wise would she grant unto, but when some
of our company in peaceable manner went to view the Town, there was both great
and small Munition shot forth at them. And seeing therefore that neither
access was granted to be used, nor yet she would join her self to us to
consult upon the Affairs of our Commonwealth, as that we be borne Counselors
to the same by ancient Laws of the Realm: But fearing lest the judgment of
the Counsel would reform, as necessity required* the aforesaid enormities, she
refuses all manner of assistance with us, and by force and violence intends
to suppress the Liberties of our Commonweal, and of us the favorers of the
same. We therefore, so many of the Nobility, Barons, and Provests of our
Boroughs, as are touched with the care of the Commonweal (unto the which we
acknowledge our selves, not only borne, but also sworn Protectors and
Defenders, against all and whatsoever invaders of the same) and moved by the
foresaid proceedings notorious, and with the lamentable complaint of oppression
of our Commonalty, our fellow members of the same. Perceiving farther, That the
present necessity of our Commonweal may suffer no delay, being convened (as
said is) presently in Edinburgh, for support of our Commonweal, and ripely
consulted and advised, taken the fear of God before our eyes, for the causes
foresaid, which are notorious, with one consent and common vote. Every man in
order his judgment being required, in the Name and Authority of our Sovereign
Lord and Lady, suspend the said Commission granted by our said Sovereign to
the said Queen Dowager, Note.
discharging her of all Administration or Authority she has, or may have
thereby, unto the next Parliament; to be set by our advice and consent: And
that because the said Queen, by the foresaid faults notorious, declares her
self enemy to our Commonweal, abusing the Power of the said Authority, to
the destruction of the same: And likewise we discharge all members of her said
Authority from thenceforth; and that no Coin be coined from thenceforth,
without express consent of the said Council and Nobility, conform to the Laws
of this Realm, which we maintain, And ordain this to be notified and
proclaimed by Officers of Arms, in all head Boroughs within the Realm of
Scotland.

In witness of the which our common consent and free Vote, we have subscribed
this present act of suspension with our hands, day, year, and place aforesaid.
Sic subscribitur. By us the Nobility and Commons of the Protestants of the
Church of Scotland.

After that this our act of suspension was by sound of Trumpet divulgate at the
Market-Crosse of Edinburgh, we dismissed the Herald with this Answer.

MADAME,
WE received your Answer, and heard the credit of Lion King of Arms, whereby
we gathered sufficiently your perseverance in evil mind toward us, the glory
of God, our Commonweal, and Liberty of our native Country. For safety of the
which, according to our duty, we have in our Sovereign Lord and Ladies name
suspended your Commission, and all administration of policy which you may
pretend thereby, being most assuredly persuaded, That your proceedings are
direct contrary to our Sovereign Lord and Ladies will, which we ever esteem to
be for the weal, and not for the hurt of this our Commonwealth. And as you
will not acknowledge us our Sovereign Lord and Lady, their true Barons, and
Leiges for your Subjects and Counsel, no more will we acknowledge you for any
Regent or lawful Magistrate unto us, seeing, if any authority ye have by
reason of our Sovereigns Commission granted unto you, The same for most worthy
reasons is worthily suspended by us, Note.
in the name and authority of our Sovereign, whose counsel we are of in the
affairs of this our Commonweal. All done in the Soveraign^ Name, as they do
now a-day^
And forasmuch as we are determinate with hazard of our lives to set that Town
at liberty wherein you have most wrongfully planted your Soldiers and
strangers; For the reverence we owe to your person, as mother to our Sovereign
Lady, we require your Highness to transport your person therefrom, seeing we
are constrained for the necessity of the Commonweal, to follow the same by
Arms, being denied often the liberty thereof by sundry requisitions made often
before. Again, we desire you cause depart with you out of the said Town, any
person having Commission in Embassy, if any such be, or in Lieutenantship of
our Sovereigns, together with all Frenchmen Soldiers, being within the same
(whose blood we thirst not, because of the old amity and friendship betwixt the
Realm of France and us; which amity by the occasion of the marriage of our
Sovereign Lady to the King of that Realm, should rather increase then
decrease.) And this we pray your Highness and them both to do, within the
space of twenty four hours, for the reverence we owe to your persons. And
thus recommending our humble service to you, we commit your Highness to the
eternal protection of God. At Edinburgh, the 24 of October 1559.

Your Highness humble servitors


The day following we summoned the Town of Leith by the sound of Trumpet, in
form as follows.

I Require and charge in the name of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, and of the
Counsel presently in Edinburgh, That all Scots and Frenchmen of whatsoever
estate and degree they be, depart out of the Town of Lies within the space of
twelve hours, and make the same patent to all and sundry our Sovereign Ladies
Leiges: For seeing we have no such hatred at either the one or the other that
we thirst the blood of any of the two, for the one is our natural brother,
born, nourished, and brought up within the bowels of one common Country, and
with the other our nation has continued long amity and allie, and hops that
so shall do, so long as they use us as friends, and not strive to make slaves
of friends, which this strengthening of our Towns pretends. And therefore
most heartily desire, that one and the other to desist from fortifying or
maintaining of this Town, in our Sovereigns and their said Counsels name,
requiring them to make the same free within the space of twelve hours.

Defiance given, there was skirmishing, without great slaughter, preparation of
Scales and Ladders was made for the Assault, which was concluded by common
consent of the Nobility and Barons. The Scales were appointed to be made in
Saint Giles Church, so that Preaching was neglected, which did not a little
grieve the Preachers, and many godly with them. The Preachers spared not openly
to say, That they feared the success of that enterprise should not be
prosperous, because the beginning appeared to bring with it some contempt of
God and of his Word; other places, said they, had been more apt for such
Preparations, then where the people conveaned to Common Prayers and unto
Preaching. In very deed the audience was wonderfully troubled all that time,
which (with other disorder espied amongst us) gave occasion to our Preachers to
affirm, Note.
That God could not suffer such contempt of his Word and abuses of his Grace,
long to be unpunished. The Queen had amongst us her assured espies, who did not
only signify unto her what was our estate: but also what was our counsel,
purposes, and devices. Some of our own company were vehemently suspected to be
the very betrayers of all our secrets; for a boy of the Officials of Lowthian,
Master James Balfour, was taken carrying a Writ, which did open the most secret
thing that was devised in the Council; Treason among the counsel.
yea, those very things which were thought to have been known but to very few.
By such domestical enemies were not only our purposes frustrate, but also our
determinations were often times overthrown and changed. The Dukes friends gave
unto him such terrors, The Duke and his friends fearful.

The ungodly Soldiers.


that he was greatly troubled, and by his fear, were troubled many others. The
men of War (for the most part were men without God or honesty) made a mutiny,
because they lacked a part of their wages. They had done the same in
Linlithquow before, where they made a Proclamation, That they would serve any
man, to suppress the Congregation, and set up the Mass again. They made a
fray upon my Lord Argyles Hie-land men, and slew one of the principal men of
his Chamber, who notwithstanding, behaved himself so moderately, and so
studious to pacify that tumult, that many wondered, as well of his prudent
council and stoutnesse, as of the great obedience of his company. The ungodly
Soldiers in hatred of goodness and good men, continuing in their disorder,
mocked the Lord of Tullibarne, and other Noblemen, who exhorted them to
quietness. All these troubles were practiced by the Queen, The Queen^ Regents
practices.
and put in execution by the Traitors among our selves: Who albeit then
lurked, and yet are not manifestly noted, yet we doubt not but God shall make
them known to their confusion, and to the example of others. To pacify the
men of War a collection was devised: But because some were poor, and some
were niggards and avaritious, there could no sufficient sum be obtained. It was
thought expedient that a Coyne-House should be made; That every Nobleman
should Coin his Silver-work and Plate, The fact of the council.
to supply the present necessity. And there-through David Forresse, John Heart
and others, who before had charge of the Coyning-House, did promise their
faithful labors. But when the matter came to the very point, The treason of
John (...).
the said John Heart and others of his faction stole away, and took with them
the instruments apt for that purpose; Whether this was done by the falsehood and
feebleness of the said John, or the practicing of others, is yet uncertain.
Rested then no hope amongst our selves, that any Money could be furnished: And
therefore it was concluded by a few of those whom we judged most secret, That
Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James Crofts, then having charge at Barwick, should be
tempted, If they would support us with any reasonable sum in that urgent
necessity. And for that purpose was the Lord of Ormeston directed unto them,
in so secret manner as we could devise. But yet our counsel was disclosed to
the Queen, who appointed the Lord Bothwell (as himself confessed) to wait upon
the returning of the said Lord, as that he did with all diligence, and so
being assuredly informed, by what way he came, the said Earl Bothwell foreset
his way, and coming upon him unaware, did take him, after that he was evil
wounded in the head, for neither could he get his ledd Horse, not his steel
Bonnet; with him was taken the sum of four thousand Crowns of the Sun, Note
the kindness of the English in need.
which the forenamed Sir Ralph and Sir James most lovingly had sent for our
support. By the brute hereof coming to our ears, our dolor was doubled, not
so much for loss of the Money, as for the loss of the Gentlemen whom we
suspected to have been slain, or at the least, that he should be delivered to
the Queen hands. And so upon the sudden the Earl of Arrane, the Lord James,
the Master of Maxwell, with the most part of the Horsemen, took purpose to
pursue the said Earl Bothwell, if they might apprehend him in Crychton or
Morhan, whitherto (as they were informed) he had retired himself after his
treasonable act: We call his act treasonable, because that three days before
he had sent his especial servant, Master Michael Balfo^re, to us to Edinburgh,
to purchase of the Lords of the Council License to come and speak with us,
which we granted, after that he had promised, That in the mean time he should
neither hurt us, The E. Bothwe^l false in promise and his treasonable fact.
nor yet any to us appertaining, till that he should write his answer again,
Whether that he would join with us or not. He gave us farther to understand,
That he would discharge himself of the Queen, and thereafter would assist us.
And yet in this mean time he cruelly and traitorously hurt and spoiled the
Nobleman aforesaid. Albeit that the departure and counsel of the Earl of
Arrane and Lord James, with their company aforesaid, was very sudden and
secret, yet was the Earl Bothwell, then being in Crychton, advertised, and so
escaped with the money which he took with himself, as the Captain of his
house John Somerwaile (which was taken without long pursuit) confessed and
affirmed; Note.
Because that the Noblemen that sought redress, sought rather his safety and
reconciliation, then destruction and hatred. They committed his house to the
custody of a Captain, to wit, Captain Forbesse. To whom, and to all Soldiers
there left, was given a sharp commandment, That all things found within the
said house of Crychton (which were put in inventory, in presence of the Lords)
should be kept till that the Earl Bothwell should give answer, Whether he
would make restitution or not: time of advertisment was granted unto him, the
whole day subsequent, till going down of the sun. In absence of the said Lords
and horsemen (we mean the same day that they departed, which was the last of
October) the Provest and Town of Dundie, together with some Soldiers, passed
forth of the Town of Edinburgh, and carried with them some great Ordnance, to
shoot at Leith. The Duke, the Earl of Glencarne, and the rest of the Noblemen
were gone to the Preaching, where they continued almost till noone. The French
being advertised by one named Clerk (who after was apprehended) that our
horsemen were absent, and that the whole company were at dinner, issued, and
with great expedition came to the place where our Ordnance was laid. The first
departing of the Congregation.
The Town of Dundie with a few other, resisted a while, as well with the
Ordnance as hakbuts, but being left by our ungodly and feeble Soldiers, who
fled without stroke offered or given, they were compelled to give back, and so
to leave the Ordnance to the enemies, who further pursued the fugitives, to
wit, to the midst of the Canongate, and to the foot of Leith wind. The cruelty
of the French.
Their cruelty began then to discover it self, for the maimed, the aged, the
women and children, found no greater favor in their fury, then did the strong
man, who made resistance. It was very apparent, that among our selves there was
some treason. For when upon the first alarm all men made haste for relief of
their brethren, whom in very deed we might have saved, and at least we might
have saved the Ordnance, and have kept the Cannongate from danger. For we were
once marched forward with bold courage, Note this diligently.
but then (we say) was a shout raised amongst our selves (God will disclose the
traitors one day) affirming, That the whole French Company were entered in at
Leith-winde upon our backs. What clamor and disorder did then suddenly arise,
we list not to express with multiplication of words. The horsemen, and some of
those that ought to have put order to others, over-rode their poor brethren at
the entry of the nether Bow. The cry of discomfort arose in the Town, the
wicked and malignant blasphemed. The feeble (amongst whom the Justice Clerk,
Sir John Ballenden was) fled without delay. With great difficulty could they be
kept in at the West Port. M. Gawan Hamilton cried with a loud voice, Drink now
as ye have brewed. The French perceiving by the clamor of our fray, followed
as said is, to the midst of the Cannon-gate, to no great number, but a twenty
or thirty of their foot loss; for in the mean time the rest retired themselves
with our Ordinance. The Earl of Argyle.
The Earl of Argyle and his men were the first that stopped the flying of our
men, and compelled the Port to be opened after that it was shut. But in very
deed, Lord Robert Stewart, Lord Robert Stewart.
Abbot of Halyrud-house was the first that issued forth; after him followed
many upon the backs of the French. At last came the Duke, and then was no man
more busy, then was M. Gawan Hamilton aforesaid. The French burnt a
Back-house, and took some spoil from the poor of the Cannon-gate. They slew a
Papist, and a drunken Priest named Sir Thomas Sklaitter, an aged man, a woman
giving suck, and her child; and of our Soldiers, to the number of ten:
Certain were taken, amongst whom Captain Mowet was one, M. Charles Geddes,
domestic to the Master of Maxwell. The Capt. of the Castle that day shot a
Shot at the French, declaring them thereby friends to us, and enemy to them,
but he suddenly repented of well-doing. The Castle shot one Shot.
The Queen glad of Victory, sat upon the Rampart, to salute and welcome her
victorious soldiers: one brought a Kirtle, another a Petticoat, the third a
Pot or Pan; and of envy, more then womanly laughter, she asked, Where bought ye
your ware? Ie pense que vous l'aues achete sans argent. The Queen Regents
rejoicing and unwomanly behavior.
This was the great and motherly care which she took for the trouble of the
poor subjects of this Realm. The Earl Bothwell lifted up in his own conceit,
by reason of this our repulse and discomfiture, utterly refused any
restitution; and so within two days after was his house spoiled, in which were
no things of great importance, his Evidences, and certain Clothing excepted.
From that day back the carriage of money was dejected, with great difficulty
could men be retained in the Town; yea, some of the greatest estimation
determined with themselves to leave the enterprise; many fled away secretly,
and those that did abide (a very few excepted) appeared destitute of counsel
and manhood. The counsel of the Master of Maxwell.
The Master of Maxwell, a man stout and witty, foreseeing the danger, desired
most gravely either to take such order, that they might remain to the terror
of the enemy, or else that they should retire themselves with their Ordnance,
and Banners displayed in order. But the wits of men being dashed, no counsel
could prevail. We continued from Wednesday the last of October, till Monday
the fifth of November, never two or three abiding firm in one opinion the
space of four and twenty hours. The pestilent wits of the Queens practisers
did then exercise themselves (God shall recompense their malicious craft in
their own bosom, we doubt not) for they caused two godly and forward young
men, the Lairds of Farnihaste and Cesfurd, who once had gladly joined
themselves with us, to withdraw themselves and their friends. The same they
did to the Earl Morton, who promised to be ours, but did not plainly join.
They enticed the Captain of the Castle to deny us support, in case we were
pursued. And finally, the counsel of some was no less pestiferous against us,
then was the counsel of Achitophel against David, and his discomfited
soldiers. (Render Lord to the wicked according to their malice.) Upon Monday
the fifth of November did the French issue out of Leith betimes in the morning,
for keeping of the Victuals which should have come to us, we being troubled
among our selves, and as said is divided in opinions, were neither circumspect
when they did issue, neither yet did we follow with such expedition as had been
meet for them that would have sought our advantage. Our soldiers could
scarcely be driven forth of the Town: The Earl of Arran, Lord James, and
certain with them, made haste; many honest men then followed, and made such
diligence, that they caused the French once to retire somewhat affrayedly. The
rest that were in Leith perceiving the danger of their fellows, issued out for
their succor. The Earl of Arran and Lord James aforesaid, The last
disc^m^^tu^e upon Monday.
being more forward then prudent and circumspect, did compel the Captains, as
is alleged, to bring their men so nigh, that either they must needs have
hazarded battle with the whole Frenchmen (and that under the mercy of their
Cannons also) or else they must needs retire in a very narrow corner: For our
men were approached near to Lestarrig: The one part of the French were upon the
North toward the Sea, the other part marched from Leith to Edinburgh; and yet
they marched so, that we could have foughten with neither Company before that
they should have joined. We took purpose therefore to retire toward the Town,
and that in haste, left that the former Company of the French should either
have invaded the Town before that we could have come to the rescue thereof, or
else have cut us off from the entry of the Abbey of Halyrud-house; as
apparently they had done, if that the Lord of Grange, and Alexander Whitlaw,
with a few Horsemen, had not stayed both their Horsemen and Footmen. The
Company which was next us perceiving that we retired, with speed sent forth
their skirmishers, to the number of three or four hundred, who took us at a
disadvantage, before us having the mire of Lestarrig betwixt us and them: and
we were enclosed by the Park ditch, so that in no wise we could avoid their
shot. The Horsemen followed upon our heels, and slew diverse. Our own Horsemen
over-rode our Footmen; and so by reason of the narrowness of the place, there
was no resistance made. The Earl of Arran, the Lord James, in great danger,
lighted amongst the Footmen, exhorting them to have some respect to order, and
to the safety of their brethren, whom by their flying they exposed to murder,
and so were criminal of their death. Captain Alexander Halyburnetoun, a man
that feared God, tarried with certain of his Soldiers behind, and made
resistance, till that he was first shot, and then taken; but being known, those
cruel murderers wounded him in diverse parts to the death, and yet as it were
by the power of God, he was brought in to the Town, where in few, but yet most
plain words, he gave Confession of his Faith, testifying, That he doubted
nothing of Gods mercy, purchased to him by the Blood of Christ Jesus, neither
yet that he repented that it pleased God to make him worthy to shed his blood,
The death of Alexander Haliburnton Captain.
and spend his life in defense of so just a Cause. And thus, with the dolor of
many, he ended his dolor, and did enter (we doubt not) into that blessed
Immortality, within two hours after our departure. There were slain to the
number of twenty four or thirty men, the most part poor. There was taken the
Lord of Pitmillie, the Lord of Pharnie younger, the Master of Bowchane,
George Cuwell of Dundie, and some others of lower rank, John Dumbar Lieutenant
to Captain Movet, Captain David Murray had his horse slain, and himself hurt
in the leg.

Few days before our first departure, How, and why William Maitland left Leith.
which was upon Alhallow Even, William Maitland of Lethington younger,
Secretary to the Queen, perceiving himself not only to be suspected as one
that favored our part, but also to stand in danger of his life, if he should
remain amongst so ungodly a company; for whenever matters came in question,
he spared not to speak his conscience: which liberty of tongue, and gravity of
judgment, the French did highly disdain. Which perceived by him, he conveyed
himself away in the morning, and tendered himself to M. Kirkcaldie Lord of
Grange; who coming to us, did exhort us to constancy, assuring us, That in the
Queen there was nothing but craft and deceit. He traveled exceedingly to have
retained the Lords together, and most prudently laid before their eyes the
dangers that might ensue their departing from the Town: but fear and dolor
had so seized the hearts of all, that they could admit no consolation. The
Earl of Arran, and the Lord James offered to abide, if any reasonable company
would abide with them; but men did so steal away, that the wit of man could not
stay them: yea, some of the greatest determined plainly, That they would not
abide. The Captain of the Castle, The Lord Erskin declared himself enemy to the
Congregation.
then Lord Erskin, would promise unto us no favor, but said, He must needs
declare himself friend to those that were able to support and defend him. Which
answer given to the Lord James, discouraged those that before determined to
have abidden the uttermost, rather then to have abandoned the Town, so that
the Castle would have stood their friend: but the contrary declared, every man
took purpose for himself. The complaints of the brethren within the Town of
Edinburgh was lamentable and sore: the wicked then began to spue forth the
venom which then lurked in their cankred hearts: The godly, as well those that
were departed, as the inhabitants of the Town, were so troubled, that some of
them would have preferred death to life at Gods pleasure. For avoiding of
danger, it was concluded, That they should depart at midnight. The Duke made
provision for his Ordnance, and caused it to be sent before, but the rest was
left to the care of the Captain of the Castle, who received it, as well that
which appertained to the Lord James, as that of Dundie. The despightfull
tongues of the wicked rayled upon us, calling us Traitors and Heretics; every
one provoked other to cast stones at us: One cried, Alas if I might see another
defy given; The despite of the Papists of Edinburgh.
Give advertisement to the Frenchmen, that they may come, and we shall help
them now to cut the throats of these heretics. And thus, as the sword of
dolor passed through our hearts, so were the cogitations and former
determinations of many hearts then revealed: For we would never have believed
that our natural Contrymen and women could have wished our destruction so
unmercifully, The worst is not yet come upon our enemies.
and have so rejoiced in our adversity (God move their hearts to repentance)
for else we fear that he whose Cause we sustain, shall let them feel the weight
of the yoke of cruel strangers, into whose hands they wished us to have been
betrayed. We stayed not, till we came to Sterlin, which we did the day after
that we departed from Edinburgh; for it was concluded, that there consultation
should be taken, What was the next remedy in so desperate a matter. The next
Wednesday, which was the 7 of November, John Knox preached ( John Willock was
gone into England, as before he appointed) and treated of the 5, 6, 7, and 8
Verses of the 80 Psalm, where David, in the person of the afflicted people of
God, speaks this in the fourth Verse:

The Sermon of John Knox in Sterlin, in the greatest of our trouble.
O thou the eternal, the God of Hosts, how long shall thou be against the
prayer of thy people?

5: Thou have fed us with the bread of tears, and have given to us tears to
drink in great measure.

6. Thou have made us a strife unto our neighbors, and our enemies laughed us
to scorn amongst themselves.

7. O God of Hosts, turn us again, make thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved, etc.


This Psalm had the said John begun in Edinburgh, as it were foreseeing our
calamity, of which in very deed he did not obscurely speak, but he plainly did
admonish us, That he was assured of troubles suddenly to come, and therefore he
exhorted all men to prayers. He treated the first three Verses in Edinburgh, to
the comfort of many.

The Argument of the 80 Psalm.
He declared the Argument of the Psalm, affirming for his judgment, That it
was made by David himself, who in the Spirit of Prophecy foresaw the miserable
estate of Gods people, especially after the ten Tribes were divided, and
departed from the obedience of Judah; for it was not (said he) without cause,
that Joseph, Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasse was especially named, and not Judah;
to wit, Because that they came first to calamity, and were translated from
their own Inheritance, while that Judah yet possessed the Kingdom. Note.
He confessed that justly they were punished for Idolatry committed; but he
affirmed, That amongst them there remained some true worshippers of God, for
whose comfort were the Prophets sent, as well to call them to repentance, as to
assure them of deliverance, and of the promises of God to be performed unto
them.

The Division.
He divided the Psalm into three parts; to wit, 1. In a Prayer. 2. In the
ground whereupon their Prayer was founded. 3. And in the lamentable complaints,
and the Vow they made unto God.


Their Prayer was, That God should convert and turn them, That he should make
his face to shine upon them, And that he should restore them to their former
dignity.

The Grounds and Foundations of their Prayers were,
1. That God himself had become Pastor and Governor unto them. 2. That he had
taken the protection of them into his own hand. 3. That he had chosen his
habitation amongst them. 4. That he had delivered them from Bondage and
Thraldom. 5. That he had multiplied and blessed them with many notable
Benedictions.
Upon those two parts he gave these Notes.
First, That the felicity of Gods people may not be measured by any external
appearance; for often it is, That the same people to whom God becomes not
only Creator, but Pastor and Protector, is more severely dealt with, then
those Nations where very ignorance and contempt of God reigns. Secondly, That
God never made his acquaintance and league with one people by his Word, Note.
but that there he had some of his elect, who albeit they suffered for a time
in the midst of the wicked, yet in the end they found comfort, and felt in very
experience, that Gods promises are not vain. Thirdly, That those prayers were
dyted unto the people by the holy Ghost, before they came to the uttermost of
trouble, to assure them that God, by whose Spirit the Prayer was dyted, would
not contemn the same in the midst of their calamities.
The third part, containing the lamenable complaint, he treated on in Sterlin,
in presence of the Duke, and of the whole Council.

In the exposition thereof, he declared wherefore God in wisdom sometimes
suffered his chosen Flock to be exposed to mockage and dangers, and to
appearing destruction; to wit, That they may feel the vehemence of Gods
indignation, Note diligently.
That they may know how little strength is in themselves, That they may leave a
testimony to the Generations following, as well of the malice of the Devil
against Gods people, as of the mavelous work of God in preserving his little
flock by far other means than man can epsy.

In explaning these words, How long shall thou be angry, O Lord, against the
prayer of thy people; he declared how dolorous and fearful it was to fight
against that temptation, that God turned away his face from our prayers, for
that was nothing else than to comprehend and conceive God to be armed to our
destruction: which temptation no flesh can abide nor overcome, unless the
mighty Spirit of God interpose himself suddenly.

The example he gave, The impaciency of Saul, when God would not hear his
prayers.

The difference betwixt the Elect and Reprobate in that Temptation, he plainly
declared to be, that the Elect sustained by the secret power of Gods Spirit,
did still call upon God, albeit he appeared to contemn their prayers: which
(said he) is the sacrifice most acceptable to God, and is in a manner even to
fight with God, and to overcome him, as Jacob did in wrestling with his Angel.

But the Reprobate (said he) being denied of their requests at Gods hand, do
either cease to pray and contemn God, who straightly commands us to call
upon him in the day of adversity, or else they seek at the Devil, that which
they see they cannot obtain by God.

2. In the second part he declared how hard it was to this corrupt nature of
ours not to rejoice and put confidence in our selves when God gives victory,
Note.
and therefore how necessary it was that man by affliction should be brought to
the knowledge of his own infirmity* least that he being puffed up with vain
confidence, he make an Idol of his own strength, as did King Nebuchadnezzar.

He did gravely dispute upon the nature of the blind world, which in all ages
had insolently rejoiced when God did chasten his own children, whose glory and
honor because the Reprobate can never see, therefore they despi^e them, and
the wondrous works of God in them. And yet (said he) the joy and rejoicing of
the world, is but mere sorrow, because the end of it tends to sudden
destructon, as the riotous banqueting of Baltasar declares, applying these
heads to the time and persons (he said) if none of Gods children had suffered
before us the same injuries that presently we sustain, these our troubles
would appear intolerable, such is our tender delicacie, and self-love of our
own flesh. That these things which we lightly pass over in others, we can
greatly complain of, if they touch our selves.

I doubt not but that some of us have ofter then once read this Psalm, as also
that we have read and heard the travel and troubles of our ancient Fathers.
But which of us, either in reading or hearing their dolours and temptations did
so descend into our selves that we felt the bitterness of their passions? I
think none. And therefore has God brought us to some experience in our own
persons.

But yet because the matter may appear obscure, unless it be more properly
applied; I cannot in conscience but use such plainness as God shall grant unto
me. Our faces are this day confounded, our enemies triumph, our hearts have
quaked for fear, and yet they remain oppressed with sorrow and shame. But what
shall we think to be the very cause that God has thus dejected us; Speciali^
Applicatio.
if I shall say, Our sins, and former unthankfulness unto God, I speak the
truth, but yet I speak more generally then the present necessity requires: For
when the sins of men are rebuked in general, seldom it is that man descends
within himself, accusing and condemning in himself that which most displeases
God; but rather he doubts that to be a cause, which before God is no cause
indeed. For example, The Israelites fighting against the Tribe of Benjamin,
were twice discomfited with the loss of 40000 men. They lamented and bewailed
both first and last; but we find not that they came to the knowledge of their
offense and sin which was the cause that they fell by the edge of the sword,
but rather they doubted that to have been a cause of their misfortune, which
God had commanded, for they asked, Shall we go and fight any more against our
brethren the sons of Benjamin. By which question it is evident, That they
supposed that the cause of their overthrow and discomfite was, Because they had
lifted the sword against their brethren and natural Contrymen: And yet the
express Commandment of God that was given unto them, did deliver them from all
crime in that cause. There is no doubt, but that there was some cause in the
Israelites that God gave them so over into the hands of these wicked men,
against whom he sent them, by his own express Commandment, to execute his
Judgments. Such as do well mark the History, and the estate of that people,
may easily see the cause why God was offended: All the whole people had
declined from God, Let Scotland yet take heed.
Idolatry was maintained by the common consent of the multitude, and, as the
Text says, Every man did that which appeared good in his own eyes. In this
mean time the Levite complained of the villainy that was done unto himself, and
unto his wife, which oppressed by the Benjamites of Gibeah, died under their
filthy lusts: which horrible fact enflamed the hearts of the whole people to
take vengeance upon that abomination (and therein they offended) but in this
they failed, That they go to execute judgment against the wicked without any
repentance, or remorse of conscience of their own former offenses, and
defection from God. And farther, Because they were a great multitude, and the
other were far inferior unto them: They trusted in their own strength, and
thought themselves able enough to do their purpose, without any invocation of
the Name of God: But after that they had twice proved the vanity of their own
strength, they fasted and prayed; and being humbled before God, they received a
more favorable answer, and assured promise of the Victory. The like may be
amongst us, albeit suddenly we do not epsy it: And to the end that every man
may the better examine himself, I will divide the whole company into two sorts
of men. The one are those that from the beginning of this trouble have
sustained the common danger with their brethren: The other be these which be
joined to our fellowship. In the one and in the other I fear that just cause
shall be found, why God should thus have humbled us. And albeit that this
appear strange at the first hearing, yet if every man shall examine himself, I
speak as that his conscience dyteth him, I doubt not but he shall subscribe to
my sentence. Let us begin at our selves who longest has continued in this
Battle. When we were a few number in comparison of our enemies, when we had
neither Earl nor Lord (a few excepted) to comfort us, we called upon God, and
took him for our Protector, Defense, and only Refuge. Amongst us was heard no
bragging of multitude, nor of our strength nor policy, we did only sob to God
to have respect to the equity of our Cause, and to the cruel pursuit of the
tyrannical enemy. But since that our number had been thus multiplied, and
chiefly since the Duke with his friends have been joined with us, there was
nothing heard, but, This Lord will bring these many hundred Spears; This man
has the credit to persuade this Country; If this Earl be ours, no man in
such bounds will trouble us. And thus the best of us all, that before felt Gods
potent hand to our defense, has of late days put Flesh to be our Arm. But
wherein yet had the Duke and his friends offended? Let janglers and inconstant
m^n note.
It may be, That as we have trusted in them, so have they put too much
confidence in their own strength. But granting it be not so, I see a cause
most just, why the Duke and his friends should thus be confounded amongst the
rest of their brethren. I have not yet forgotten what was the dolor and
anguish of my own heart, when at Saint Iohnston, Cooper-Moure, and Edinburgh
Craigs, those cruel murderers that now has put us to this dishonor,
threatened our present destruction; The Duke and his friends at all three
Journeys was to them a great comfort, and unto us a great discouragement: For
his name and authority did more astonish us, then did the force of the other;
yea, without his assistance, they could not have compelled us to appoint with
the Queen upon so unequal Conditions. I am certain, if the Duke has
unfainedly repented of that his assistance to those murderers unjustly
pursuing us: yea, I am certain, if he has repented of the innocent blood of
Christ's blessed Martyrs which was shed by his fault: But let it be, that so he
has done (as I hear that he has confessed his offense before the Lords and
Brethren of the Congregation) yet I am assured, That neither he, Le the House
of Hamilton remember this.
neither yet his friends, did feel before this time the anguish and grief of
hearts which we felt, when their blind fury pursued us; and therefore has God
justly permitted both them and us to fall into this confusion at once; us, for
that we put our trust and confidence in man; Conclusio.
and them, because that they should feel their own hearts, how bitter was the
cup which they made others to drink before them. Rests that both they and we
turn to the Eternal our God (who beats down to death, to the intent that he
may raise up again to leave the remembrance of his wondrous deliverance, to
the praise of his own Name) which if we do unfainedly, I no more doubt but
that this our dolor, confusion, and fear, shall be turned into joy, honor,
and boldness, then that I doubt that God gave Victory to the Israelites over
the Benjamites, Let the Papists and greatest enemies witness.
after that twice with ignominy they were repulsed and driven back: yea,
whatsoever shall become of us and our mortal carcasses, I doubt not but that
this Cause (in despite of Satan) shall prevail in this Realm of Scotland.
For as it is the eternal Truth of the eternal God, so shall it once
prevail, howsoever for the time it be impugned. It may be that God shall
plague some for that they delight not in the Truth, albeit for worldly
respects they seem to favor it: Yea God may take some of his dearest children
away before that their eyes see greater troubles. But neither shall the one nor
the other so hinder this action, but in the end it shall triumph.

This Sermon ended, in the which he did vehemently exhort all men to amendment
of life, to Prayers, and to the Works of Charity, the minds of men began
wonderously to be erected: and immediately after dinner the Lords passed to
counsel, unto the which the said John Knox was called to make invocation of
the Name of God (for other Preachers were none with us at that time) in the end
it was concluded, That William Maitland aforesaid, should pass to London, to
expose our estate and condition to the Queen and Counsel, and that the
Noblemen should depart to their home and quiet to the 16 day of December:
Which time was appointed to the next Convention in Sterlin, as in this our
third Book following shall be more amply declared. With this we end the second
Book of the History of the progress of Religion within Scotland.

Look upon us, O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercies, for we are brought even
to the deep of the dungeon. The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF The Progress of true Religion WITHIN The Realm of SCOTLAND.
AFter this our dolorous departing from Edinburgh, the fury and rage of the
French increased, for then durst neither man nor woman that professed Christ
Jesus within the Town be seen. The houses of the most honest men were given by
the Queen to Frenchmen for a part of their reward. Proclamation against the
Earl of Arran^.
The Earl Bothwell by sound of Trumpet Proclaimed the Earl of Arrane
Traitor, with other despightfull words, which all was done for the pleasure,
and by the suggestion of the Queen Regent, who then thought the battle was
won without further resistance. Great practicing she made for obtaining of
the Castle of Edinburgh. The French made their fagots with other preparations
to assault the said Castle, either by force or else by Treason: But God wrought
so mightily with the Captain, the Lord Erskin, at that time, that neither the
Queen by flattery, nor the French by treason prevailed. Advertisement with all
diligence past to the Duke of Guise, Re (...).
who then was King of France (as concerning power to command) requiring him to
make expedition, if he desired the full conquest of Scotland; Who delayed no
time, but with a new Army sent away his brother Marquis Dalbuif, and in his
company Marticks, promising that he himself should follow. But the righteous
God, who in mercy looks upon the affliction of those that unfainedly sob unto
him, fought for us by his own outstretched arm: For upon one night upon the
coast of Holland were drowned of them eighteen Ensigns, The drowning of the
French. Dominus pro nobis.
so that only rested the Ship, in the which were two principals aforesaid,
with their Ladies, who violently driven back to Deep, were compelled to
confess, That God fought for the defense of Scotland.

From England returned Robert Melvin, who past in company to London with the
Secretary, a little before Christmas, and brought unto us certain Articles to
be answered, as by the contract that after was made, more plainly shall
appear. Whereupon the Nobility assembled at Sterlin, and returned answer with
diligence; Whereof the French advertised, they marched to Linlithquow, spoiled
the Dukes house, and wasted his lands of Kinneill, and after came to Sterlin,
where they remained certain days (the Duke, the Earls of Argyle and
Glencarn, with their friends passed to Glasgow. The Earl of Arrane and Lord
James passed to Saint Andrews. For charge was given to the whole Nobility
Protestants, to keep their own bodies, till that God should send them further
support.) The French took purpose first to assault Fyfe, for as it was their
great indignation. Their purpose was to have taken and fortified the Town and
Abbey, with the Castle of Saint Andrews, and so they came to Culrosse, after to
Dunfermeling, and then to Brunteiland, where they began to fortify: but
desisted there from, and marched to Kinghorn, upon the occasion as follows.
When certain knowledge came to the Earl of Arrane and to Lord James, That the
French were departed from Sterlin, they departed also from S. Andrews, and
began to assemble their Forces at Cowper, and sent their men of War to
Kinghorne, unto whom there resorted diverse of the coast side, of mind to
resist rather at the beginning, then when they had destroyed a part of their
Towns. But the Lords had given an express commandment, That they should
hazard nothing, till that they themselves were present. And for that purpose
was sent unto them the Lord Ruthuen, a man of great experience, and inferior
to few in stoutnesse: In his company was the Earl of Sudderland, sent from the
Earl of Huntly, as he alleged, to comfort the Lord* in their affliction. But
others whispered, That his principal Commission was unto the Queen Regent. The
Earl of Sudderland shot
Howsoever it was, he was hurt in the arm by the shot of an Haquebut, for the
men of War and the rascal multitude, perceiving certain Boats of Frenchmen
landing, which came from Leith, purposed to stop their landing, and so not
considering the enemies that approached from Brunteiland: unadvisedly they
rushed down to the Pretticure (so is that Bay by West Kinghorne called) and at
the sea coast began the skirmishing. But they never took heed to the enemy that
approached by land, till that the horsemen charged them upon the back, and the
whole bands came directly in their faces, and so were they compelled to give
back with the loss of six or seven of their men, and with the taking of some,
amongst whom were two that professed Christ Jesus, one named Paul Lambert, a
Dutch man, and a French boy, fervent in Religion, and clean of life, whom in
despite they hanged over the Steeple of Kinghorne. Thou shall revenge, O Lord,
in thy appointed time. The cause that in so great a danger there was so small a
loss, next unto the merciful providence of God, was the sudden coming of my
Lord Ruthuen; for even as our men had given back, he and his Company came to
the head of the Bray, and did not only stay the Frenchmen, but also some of
ours brake upon their Horsemen, and so repulsed them, that they did no further
hurt to our Footmen. In that recounter was the Earl of Sudderland foresaid
shot in the arm, and was carried back to Cowper. The Frenchmen took
Kinghorne, where they lay and wasted the Country about, Note the French favor
to their friend^
as well Papists as Protestants; yea, even those that were confederate with
them, such as Seafield, Weames, Balmowto, Balwearie, and others, enemies to
God, and traitors to their Country; of those (we say) they spared not the
Sheep, the Oxen, the Kine, and Horses, and some say that their wives and
daughters gat favor of the French Soldiers, and so did recompense the Papists
in their own bosoms; for besides the defiling of their houses, as said is, two
of them received more damage, then did all the Gentlemen that professed the
Gospel within Fyfe, the Lord of Grange only excepted, whose house of the
Grange the Frenchmen overthrew with Gunpowder. The Queen Regent proud of this
Victory, burst forth into her blasphemous railing, and said, Where is now John
Knox his God? my God is now stronger then his, yea even in Fyfe. She posted to
her friends in France news that thousands of the heretics were slain, and the
rest were fled, and therefore required that some Nobleman of her friends would
come and take the glory of that Victory. Upon that information was Marticks
with two Ships, and some Captains and Horses directed to come into Scotland,
but little to their own advantage, as we shall after hear.

The Lords of the Congregation offended at the foolishness of the rascal
multitude, called to themselves the men of War, and remained certain days at
Cowper, unto whom repaired John Knox, and in our greatest desperation Preached
unto us a most comfortable Sermon: his Text was, John 6.
The danger wherein the Disciples of Christ Jesus stood when they were in the
midst of the Sea, and Jesus was upon the mountain. His Exhortation was,
Exhortation of John Knox.
That we should not faint, but that we should still row against the contrarious
blasts, till that Jesus Christ should come; for, said he, I am assuredly
persuaded that God will deliver us from this extreme trouble, as that I am
assured, That this is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which I preach unto you this
day. The fourth watch is not yet come, abide a little, the Boat shall be saved,
and Peter, which has left the Boat, shall not drown. I am assured, That albeit
I cannot assure you by reason of this present rage, God grant that ye may
acknowledge his hand, after that your eyes have seen his deliverance. In that
Sermon he comforted many, and yet he offended the Earl of Arran; for in his
discourse upon the manifold assaults the Church of God sustained, Note.
he brought for example the multitude of strangers that pursued Iehosaphat
after he had reformed Religion. He spoke of the fear of the people, yea, and of
the King himself at the first. But after he affirmed, that Iehosaphat was
stout; and to declare his courage in his God, he comforted his people and his
Soldiers; he came forth in the midst of them, he spoke lovingly unto them. He
kept not himself (said he) enclosed in his chamber, but frequented the
multitude, and rejoiced them with his presence, and godly comfort. These and
the like sentences took the said Earl to be spoken in reproach of him, because
he kept himself more close and solitary then many men would have wished. After
these things, determination was taken, That the Earl of Arrane, and Lord
James, with men of War, and some Companies of Horsemen, should go to Disert,
and there lie to wait upon the French, to stop them from destroying the
Seacoast, as they intended utterly to have done. The said Earl, and Lord
James did as they were appointed, albeit their Company was very small; and yet
they did so valiantly, that it passed almost credit; for twenty and one days
they lay in their clothes, their Boots came never off: They had skirmishing
almost every day, yea, some days from morning to night. The French were four
thousand Soldiers, besides their favorers and faction of the Country. The
Lords were never together five hundred Horsemen, with an hundred Soldiers,
and yet they held the French so busy, that for every horse was slain to the
Congregation, they lost four French Soldiers. William Kirkcaldie of Grainge,
the day after that his house was cast down, sent his defiance to Monsieur
Dosell, and unto the rest, declaring that to this hour he had used the French
favorably, yea he had saved their lives, when that he might have suffered
their throats to have been cut; but seeing they had used him with that rigor,
let them not look for the like favors in time to come. And unto Monsieur
Dosell he said, He knew that he should not get him in skirmishing, because he
knew he was a very coward: but it might that he should quite him a common
either in Scotland, or else in France. The said William Kirkcaldie, and the
Master of Lindsay, escaped many dangers. The Master had his horse slain under
him; and William was almost betrayed in his house at Halyards. But yet they
never ceased, for night and day they waited upon the French: They laid
themselves in a secret place with some Gentlemen before the day to wait upon
the French, who used commonly to issue in Companies to seel^ their prey: And so
came forth one Captain Batu with his hundred, and began to spoil; whom the
Master, after Lord Lindsay, and William suffered, without declaration of
themselves, or of their Company, till that they had them more then a mile from
Kinghorne, and then began the horsemen to break; which perceived, the French
altogether drew to a place called Glames house, and made for debate; some took
the house, other defended the Court and Yards: The hazard appeared very
unlikely, for our men had nothing but Spears, and were compelled to light upon
their feet: The other were within ditches, and every man had a Culverin; the
shot was fearful to many, and diverse were hurt, amongst whom was Robert
Hamilton, and David Kirkcaldie, brother to the said Lord, who both were
supposed to have been slain: the said Lord perceiving men to faint, and begin
to recule, said, Fie, let us never live after this day, that we shall recule
for French scybalds and rascals. And so the Master of Lindsay and he burst in
at the gate, and others followed. The Master struck with his Spear at la Bartu,
and glasing upon his harness, for fear stumbled upon his knees; but recovering
suddenly, he fastened his Spear, and bare the said Captain backward, who because
he would not be taken, was slain, and fifty of his Company with him. Those that
were in the house, with some others, were saved, and sent to Dundie to be kept.
This mischance to the Frenchmen, The slaughter of a French Captain, with his
Band.
made them to be more circumspect in straying and wandering abroad into the
Country, and so the poor people gat some relief. To furnish the French with
Victuals, was appointed Capt. Culan, with two ships, who traveled betwixt the
South shore and Kinghorne for that purpose: For his wages he spoiled Kinghorne,
Kirkcaldie, and so much of Disert as he might. For remedy whereof, were
appointed two Ships from Dundie, Andrew Sands, a very stout and fervent man in
the Cause of Religion, was the principal. This same time arrived Martickes,
who without delay landed himself, the Coffers, and the principal Gentlemen
that were with him, at Leith, leaving the rest in the Ships till better
opportunity: But the said Andrew and his company striking Sail, Note.
and making as they would cast Ankor hard beside them, boarded them both, and
carried them to Dundie: in them were gotten some horses, and much harness,
with some other trifles, but of money we heard naught. Hereat the French
offended, avowed the destruction of Saint Andrews and Dundie, and so upon a
Monday in the morning, the thirteenth of January, they marched from Disert, and
passed the water of Levin, ever keeping the Coast, by reason of their Ships and
Victuals, as said is: about noon they espied Ships (which were seen that
morning by us that were upon the land, but were not known) Monsieur Dosell
affirmed them to be French Ships, and so the Soldiers triumphed, shot their
Volley for a salve, and marched forward to Kingcraig, fearing no resistance.
But shortly after, the English Ships met with Captain Culen, and seized upon
him and his Ships, which made them a little to muse. Then suddenly came M.
Alexander Wood, who had been upon the Admiral, and assured Monsieur Dosell
that they were English men, The arrival of the English Ships.
and that they were the forwarners of a greater number that followed, who were
sent for support of the Congregation. There might have been seen pulling of
beards for anger, and might have been heard such despite as cruel men use to
spue forth when God bridleth their fury. Note.
Weariness and the night constrained them to lodge there: They supped
scarcely, because their Ships were taken, in the which were their victuals and
Ordnance, which they intended to have placed in Saint Andrews. They themselves
durst not stray abroad to seek, and the Lord of Wemes carriages, which
likewise was coming with furnishing unto them, were stayed. And therefore
betimes in the morning they retired toward Kinghorne, and made more expedition
in one day in returning, then they did in two in marching forward. The storm
which had continued near the space of a month, brake in the time of their
returning, whereby many thought that they should have been stayed, till that
reasonable company might have been assembled to have foughten with them. And
for that purpose did William Kirkcaldie cut the Bridge of Tullibody: The Bridge
of Tullibody.
But the French, expert enough in such feats, took down the Roof of a Parish
Church, and made a Bridge over the same water called Donane, and so they
escaped, and went to Sterlin, and thereafter to Leith; yet in their return
they lost diverse, amongst whom there was one whose miserable end we may
rehearse. As the French spoiled the Country in their returning, one Captain
or Soldier, we cannot tell, but he had a red Cloak, and a gilt Murriow, entered
upon a poor woman that dwelt in the white side, and began to spoil. The poor
woman offered unto him such bread as she had ready prepared, But he in no wise
therewith content, would have the Meal, and a little salt Beef which the poor
woman had to sustain her own life, and the lives of her poor children; neither
could tears, nor pitiful words, mitigate the merciless man, but he would have
whatsoever he might carry. Note the death of a plunderer.
The poor woman perceiving him so bent, and that he stooped down in her Tub,
for the taking forth of such stuff as was within it, first coped and turned up
his heels, so that his head went down. And thereafter, whether by her self, or
if any other company come to help her, but there he ended his unhappy life, God
so punishing his cruel heart, who could not spare a miserable woman in that
extremity. Let all such Soldiers receive such reward, O Lord, seeing that thou
only art the revenger of the oppressed.

And now, because that from this time forward frequent mention will be made of
the comfortable support that we in our greatest extremity received by Gods
providence from our neighbors of England, we think it expedient simply to
declare by what instruments that matter was first moved, Remark the Scots
acknowledgement of the English help.
and by what means it came to pass that the Queen and Council of England,
showed themselves so favorable unto us.

As John Knox had forewarned us by his Letters from Geneva, of all dangers
that he foresaw to ensue our enterprise; so when he came to Deipe, mindful of
the same; and resolving with himself, what remedy God would please to offer, he
took boldness to write to Sir William Cecil, Secretary of State in England,
with whom the said John had been before familiarly acquainted, intending
thereby to renew acquaintance, and so to open further of his mind. The tenor
of his first Letter follows: The spirit of Judgment, Wisdom, and
Sanctification, I wish unto you, by Jesus Christ.
John Knox his first Letter to Sir William Cecile.
AS I have no pleasure with long writing to trouble you (Right Honorable) whose
mind I know to be taken up with most grave matters, so I mind not greatly to
labor by long Preface, to conciliate your favors, which I suppose I have
already (howsoever rumors brute the contrary) as the favor it becomes one
member of Christ's Body to have of another: The contents therefore of my present
Letter shall be absolved in 2 points: In the former, I purpose to discharge in
few words my conscience toward you: And in the other, sum what must I speak,
for my own defense, and in defense of that poor Flock of late assembled in the
most godly reformed Church and City of the world, Geneva: To you, Sir, I say,
that as from God you have received, life, wisdom, honors, and the present
estate in the which you now stand, so ought you wholly to apply the same to the
advancement of his glory, who only is the author of life, the fountain of
wisdom, and who most assuredly does and will honor and glorify them that with
simple hearts do glorify him; which alas in times past you have not done, but
being overcome with common iniquity, you have followed the world, in the way of
perdition: for to the suppressing of Christ's true Evangel, to the erecting of
Idolatry, and to the shedding of the blood of Gods most dear Children; Have
you by silence consented and subscribed this your most horrible defection from
the known Truth, and once professed, has God to this day mercifully spared?
Yea, to man's judgment he has utterly forgotten, and pardoned the same: He
has not dealt with you as he has done with others (of like knowledge) whom in
his anger (but yet most justly according to their deserts) he did shortly
strike after their desertion: But you, guilty in the same offenses, has he
fostered and preserved, as it were in his own bosom, during the time of that
most miserable thraldom, of that professed enemy of God, mischievous Mary: And
now has set you at such liberty, as the fury of Gods enemies cannot hurt you,
except that willingly against his honor, you take pleasure to conspire with
them. As this benefit which you have received is great, so must Gods Justice
require of you a thankful heart; For seeing that his Mercy has spared you,
being Traitor to his Majesty; Seeing further, That amongst your enemies he
has preserved you; And last, seeing, although worthy of hell, he has promoted
you to honor and dignity; of you must he require (because he is just) earnest
repentance for your former defection; and heart mindful of his merciful
providence, and a will so ready to advance his glory, That evidently it may
appear, Note.
that in vain you have not received these graces of God; to performance
whereof, of necessity it is, That carnal wisdom and worldly policy (to the
which both, you are bruted too much inclined) give place to Gods simple and
naked Truth: very love compells me to say, That except the Spirit of God purge
your heart from that venom, which your eyes have seen to have been destruction
to others, that you shall not long escape the reward of dissemblers. Call to
mind what your ears heard Proclaimed, in the Chapel of S. James, when this
Verse of the first Psalm was handled, Not so, O wicked, not so, but as the
dust which the wind tosseth, etc. And consider, that now you travel in the
same way which then they did occupy, to speak plainly, now you are in that
estate and credit, in the which you shall either comfort the sorrowful and
afflicted, for righteousness sake, or else you shall molest or oppugn the
Spirit of God speaking in his Messengers; the Comforters of the afflicted for
godliness, has promise of comfort, in their greatest necessities: but the
troubles of Gods servants (how contemned that ever they appear before the
world) are threatened to have their Names in execration to the posterities
following. The examples of the one and of the other, are not only evident in
Scriptures, but also have been lately manifested in England. And this is the
conclusion of that, which to your self, I say, except that in the cause of
Christ's Evangell, you be found simple, sincere, fervent, and unfeigned, you
shall taste of the same cup, which politic heads have drank in before you.

The other Point concerning my self, and that poor flock now dispersed, and as
I hear say, rudely used, is this; By diverse Messengers I have requested such
Privileges as Turks commonly do grant to men of every Nation; to wit, That
liberty should be granted to me freely to pass through England, to the end
that with greater expedition I might repair toward my own Country, which
now begins to thirst for Christ's Truth. This request I thought so
reasonable, that almost I had entered the Realm, without license demanded; and
yet I understand that it has been so rejected, that the soliciters thereof,
did hardly escape imprisonment; and some of that poor flock I hear to be so
extremely handled, That those who most rudely have shed the blood of Gods most
dear Children finds this day amongst you greater favors, Note.
then they do; Alas, this appears much to repugne to Christian Charity: for
whatsoever has been mine offense, this I fear not to affirm in their cause;
That if any that has suffered exile in those most dolorous days of
persecution, deserve praise and commendation, for Peace, Concord, sober and
quiet living, it is they. And as for me, how criminal that ever I be in Gods
presence, for the multitude of my sins; yet before his Justice-seat I have a
testimony of a clear Conscience, That since my first acquaintance with
England, willingly I never offended person within it, except in open Chair, to
reprove that which God condemns, can be judged offense: but I have (say you)
written a Treasonable Book against the regiment and Empire of women; If that be
my offense, the poor flock is innocent (except such as this day do fastest cry
Treason) For Sir (in Gods presence I do write) with none in that company did I
consult before the finishing of the same. Therefore in Christ's Name I require,
That the blame may be upon me alone. The writing of that Book I will not deny,
but to prove it Treasonable, I think it shall be hard; for Sir, No more do I
doubt of the Truth of my Proposition, then that I doubt that this was the
voice of God, which first did pronounce this penalty against women; In dolor
shall thou bear thy children. It is bruited, That my book is, or shall be
written against, or answered: If so be Sir, I greatly fear, That flatterers
shall more hurt then help the matter which they would seem to maintain; for
except my error be plainly shown and confuted, by better authority then by
such Laws as from year to year may and do change, I dare not promise silence
in so weighty a business; lest that in so doing, I shall appear to betray the
Verity which is not subject to the mutabilitie of time. And if any think me
either enemy to the person, or yet to the Regiment of her, whom God has now
promoted, they are utterly deceived in me, for the miraculous Work of God,
comforting his afflicted by an infirm vessel, I do acknowledge, and I will
obey the power of his most potent hand (raising up whom best pleases his
Mercy, to suppress such as fight against his glory) albeit that both nature,
and Gods most perfect Ordinance repugne to such Regiment. More plainly to
speak, If Queen Elizabeth shall confess, That the extraordinary dispensation
of Gods great mercy, makes that lawful unto her, which both nature and Gods
Laws do deny unto all women; then shall none in England be more willing to
maintain her lawful authority then I shall be: But if (Gods wondrous work
set aside) she ground (as God forbid) the justness of her Title upon
consuetude Laws and Ordinances of men: Then I am assured, That as such foolish
presumption does highly offend Gods supreme Majesty; so do I greatly fear,
That her ingratitude shall not long lack punishment. And this in the name of
the eternal God, and of his Son Jesus Christ (before whom, both you and I
shall stand to make an account of all counsel we give) I require you to
signify unto her Majesty, in my name; Adding, That only humility and
desertion of her self before God, shall be the firmness and stability of the
Throne, which I know shall be assaulted mo ways then one. If this you conceal
from her Majesty, I will make it patent to the world, That thus far I have
communicated with you; having also further to speak, if my judgment may be
heard. Alas, Sir, is my offense (although in that time, and in that matter, I
had written ten Books) so heinous, that I cannot have License, by Preaching of
Christ Jesus, to refresh those thirsty souls, which long have lacked the Water
of Life: No man will I presently accuse, but I greatly fear, That the Leprous
have no great pleasure to behold fair faces in clear glass: Note.
Let none be afraid, that I require to frequent the Court, or yet to remain
any long time in England; but only thirsts, in passing through to my native
Country, to communicate with you, and some others, such things as willingly I
list not to commit to Paper, neither to the Credit and knowledge of many. And
then in the North parts to offer Gods favors, to such as I suppose do mourn
for their desertion. And this, I trust, shall be no less profitable to the
Queen, and to all godly within England, then it should be pleasing to me in the
flesh.

This is the third time that I have begged License to visit the hungry and
thirsty amongst you, which if now be denied, as before God, I have a
testimony, that I seek not for my self, but the advancement of Christ's
Evangell, and the comfort of such, as whom I know afflicted: so shall the godly
understand that England in refusing me refuses a friend, how small that ever
the power be. The mighty Spirit of the Lord Jesus moove your heart deeply to
consider your duty unto God, and the estate of that Realm, in which by his
appointment you now serve.

From Deep, the 10 of April, 1559. Yours to command in godliness, John Knox.




To this Letter was no answer made: for shortly the said John Knox made forward
to Scotland by sea, when he landed the third of May, and had such success, as
is in the second book declared. The said John being in S. Andrews, after
Cowper-Moore, entered in deep discourse with the Lord of Grange; As England had
interest then not to suffer Scotland to perish, so likewise Scotland has
interest now, not to see Eng^and undon^*
the danger is very evident, but the support was not easy to be seen. After
many words John Knox burst forth as follows; If England would foresee their
own commodity, yea, if they would consider the danger wherein themselves stand,
they would not suffer us to perish in this quarrel; for France has no less
decreed the conquest of England then of Scotland. After long reasoning, it was
concluded betwixt them two, That support should be craved of England: And for
that purpose the said Lord of Grange, first wrote to Sir Henry Percie, and
after rode from Edinburgh and spoke with him; to whom he made so plain
demonstration of the danger appearing to England, that he took upon him to
write to Secretary Cecil, who with expedition returned answer back again,
giving him to understand, That our enterprise altogether misliked not the
Council, albeit that they desired further resolution of the principal Lords.
Which thing understood, it was concluded to write to him plainly our whole
purpose. The tenor of our Letter was this: The first Letter to Sir William
Cecill, from the Lords of the Congregation.
THe contents of a Letter directed by you (right Worshipful) to Sir Henry
Percie, was notified unto us by Master Kirkcaldie of Grange this Sunday the 26
of July: 1559.
By the which we perceive that the said Lord of Grange, of zeal, and
faithful heart which he bears to the furtherance of this our great, and
before the world, dangerous enterprise, has traveled with you, as with an
unfeigned favourer of Christ's true Religion, and of the liberty of our
Country, for knowledge of your minds toward us, in case that we be assaulted
by any foreign invasion, or greater power then we be well able to resist.
Your comfortable answer to this question we have considered, to our joy and
comfort, as also your motions, Note the Quaeres.
and what you demand; To wit, What the Protestants within this Realm do
purpose; To what end we mean to direct our actions; How we will, and how we be
able to accomplish the same; What doubts we have of any adversary power; And
finally, in case that support should be sent from you, What manner of amity
might ensue betwixt these two Realms, And Answers.
etc. To the which, in brief, we answer; That our whole and only purpose (as
God knows) is to advance the glory of Christ Jesus, the true Preaching of his
Gospel within this Realm. To remove superstition, and all sort of external
Idolatry, to bridle to our powers the fury of those that heretofore have
cruelly shed the blood of our brethren; and to our uttermost, to maintain the
liberty of this our Country from the tyranny and thraldom of strangers, as
God shall assist us. How we be able to accomplish these premises, is to us
unknown, only our hope is good, That he that has begun this good work in us,
and has by his power to this hour confounded the faces of our adversaries
will perform the same to his glory, Let the enemies say, if their hope be not
frustrate.
which chiefly we seek in this our enterprise. Because we suppose, That neither
our present danger, neither yet the warlike preparation which France makes
against us, are hid from you, nor from the counsel, we omit that part. As
touching the assurance of a perpetual amity to stand betwixt these two
Realms: As no earthly thing of us is more desired, so crave we of God to make
us the instruments, by which this unnatural debate which long has continued
betwixt us may once be composed, Note diligently.
to the praise of Gods Name, and to the comfort of the faithful in both
Realms. And if your wisedoms can foresee and devise the means and assurances
how the same may be brought to pass, persuade your selves not only of our
consent and assistance, but also of our constancy, as men can promise, unto our
lives end. Yea farther, of charge and commandment by us to be left to our
posterity, That the Amity betwixt us (in God) contracted and begun, may be by
them kept inviolate for ever. As for the revolting from you to France, which ye
seem to fear and suspect at their pleasure, we utterly abhor that infidelity;
for now does the voice of God continually sound in our ears, That such as
profane the terrible and reverent Name of God, shall not escape vengeance. Our
Confederacy, Amity and League shall not be like the Pactions made by worldly
men, for worldly profit* but as we require it for Gods Cause, so will we call
upon his Name for the observation of the same. Moreover, if we should lack any
thing in Temporal commodity, yet should we never have occasion to return to
them: for we now perceive and feel the weight of their yoke, and intend (by
Gods grace) to cut away such instruments as by whom this Realm was before
abused. True it is, That as yet we have made no mention of any change in
Authority, neither yet were we minded to do any such thing, till extreme
necessity compels us thereto. But seeing it is now more then evident, That
France, and the Queen Regent here, with her Priests, pretends nothing but the
suppressing of Christ's Gospel, the ruin of us, and the subversion of this poor
Realm, committing our innocence to God, and unto the judgment of all godly
and wise men, we are determined to seek the next remedy; in which we heartily
require your counsel and assistance. And thus far we have enterprised to
make you participant of our purpose, because in the said Letters ye required
the said Master Kirkcaldie some farther assurance then his own word or
writing, which we doubt not but ye shall shortly receive, from more then from
us. We dare not hastily make the Assembly, neither of Nobles, Note.
neither of Barons, privy in this Cause, for dangers that may ensue by policy
and craft of the adversaries; your wisdom, we doubt not, will communicate these
only with such as ye know favorers of such a godly Conjunction. It should
much help, in our opinion, if the Preachers, both in persuasion, and in public
Prayers (as ours do here) would commend the same unto the people. And thus,
after our most humble commendations to the Queens Majesty (whose Reign we
wish may be prosperous and long, to the glory of God, and comfort of his
Church) we heartily commit you to the protection of the Omnipotent.

From Edinburgh the 17 of July, 1559.



With this our Letter John Knox wrote two, one to the said Secretary, and
another to the Queens Majesty her self: The Tenor whereof follows thus: John
Knox his second Letter to M. Cecile, for the delivery of one other to the Queen.
SIR,
AFter my humble commendations, please you deliver this other enclosed to the
Queen: It contains a few and simple words of my Confession what I think of
her Authority, how it is just, and what may make it odious in Gods presence. I
hear that there is one Confutation set forth against the first blast; God grant
that the writers thereof have no more sought the favors of this present world,
no less the glory of God, and the stable good of his Country, then he who
enterprised in that blast to utter his conscience. When I shall have time
(which now is somewhat precious unto me) to peruse that work, I will
communicate my judgment with you.

The time is now, Sir, that all, who either thirst for Christ to reign in this
Isle, or yet the hearts of the Inhabitants be joined together in love unfeigned,
ought rather to study how the same might be brought to pass, then vainly to
travel for the maintenance of that, whereof already we have seen the danger,
and feel the smart: If the most part of women be wicked, and such as willingly
we would not should reign over us: And if the most godly, and such as have are
graces, be yet mortal, we ought to take heed, lest in establishing of one
judged godly, and profitable to her Country, we make an Interest and Title to
many; by whom not only will the Truth be impugned, but also will the Country
be brought into bondage. God give you, and other favorers of your Country
eyes to see, and wisdom to avoid the dangers appearing.

By diverse Letters I have required license to have visited the North parts of
England, but as yet I have received no favorable answer. The longer, Sir, this
it be delayed, the less comfort will the faithful there receive; yea, the
weaker will the Queens favor be: If I were not an unfeigned friend to her
Majesty, I would instantly beg such liberty; which to me, I know, will neither
be profitable nor pleasing in the flesh. The common things here, I doubt not
you know: some things I have (as often times I have written) which gladly I
would communicate, but I mind not to commit them to Paper and Ink; find
therefore the means that I may speak with such a one as you will credit in all
things.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ rest with you.

I heartily beseech you to have my service recommended to the Queens Majesty,
adding, That whosoever makes me odious to her Majesty, seeks somewhat
besides the glory of God, and her Majesty's prosperity, and therefore cannot be
assured and unfeigned friends from, etc.


The Letter sent from the said John to the Queens Majesty of England, being
enclosed in the foresaid M. Ceciles Letter.
To the virtuous and godly Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England:
John Knox desires the perpetual comfort of his holy Spirit. MADAME,
AS your Majesty's displeasure against me, most unjustly conceived, has been
and is to my wretched heart a burden grievous, and almost intolerable, so is
the testimony of a clear conscience to me a stay and uphold, that I sink not
in despair, how vehement soever the temptations appear: For in Gods presence,
my conscience bears me record, That maliciously, nor of purpose, I never
offended your Majesty, nor your Realm: And therefore, howsoever I be judged of
man, I am sure to be absolved of him, who only knows the secrets of hearts.
I cannot deny the writing of a Book against the usurped Authothority, and
unjust Regiment of Women; neither yet am I minded to recant, or call back any
principal Point or Proposition of the same, till truth and verity do further
appear. But why that your Majesty, or any such, who unfainedly favor the
liberty of England, be offended at the Author of such a Work, I can perceive no
just occasion: For first, my Book touched not your Majesty's Person in
special, neither is it prejudicial to any Liberty of the Realm, if the time
of my writing be indifferently considered. How could I be enemy to your
Majesty's Person, for delivery whereof, I did more study, and undertake
further, then any of those who now accuses me? And as concerning your
Government, How could or can I envy that? which most I have wished for, and for
which (as my weak memory will suffer) I render thanks unfainedly to God, to
wit, That it has pleased him of his eternal goodness to exalt your head
(which sometime was in danger) to the manifestation of his glory, and
extirpation of Idolatry. And as for my offense, which I have committed against
England, either by writing that Book, or by any other work, I will not refuse
that moderate and indifferent men judge and discern betwixt me, and those that
accuse me, viz. Whether of the parties do most hurt to the Liberty of England:
I, who affirm that no woman may be exalted above any Realm, to make the
Liberty of the same thrall, and subject to a strange, proud, and cruel Nation:
Or they, that approve whatsoever pleases Princes for the time. If I were as
well disposed to accuse, as some of them (to their own shame) have declared
themselves, I nothing doubt, but that in few words I should let reasonable men
understand, That some that this day lowly crouch and bow to your Majesty, and
labor to make me odious in your eyes, did in your adversity neither show
themselves faithful friends to your Majesty, neither yet so loving and
careful of the native Country, as they would be esteemed. But omitting the
accusation of others, for my own purgation, and your Majesty's satisfaction, I
say, That nothing contained in my book, is or can be prejudicial to your
Majesty's just Regiment, providing that you be not found ungrate unto God,
ungrate you will be proved in the presence of his Throne (howsoever that
flatterers justify your fact) if you transfer the glory of that honor in
which you now stand, to any other thing, then to the dispensation of his mercy,
which only makes that lawful to your Majesty, which Nature and Law denies
to all women, to command and bear rule over men. Neither would I that your
Majesty should fear, That this your humiliation before God, should in any case
infirm or weaken your Majesty's just and lawful Authority; Nay, Madame, such
unfeigned confession of Gods benefits received, will be the establishment of the
same, not only to your self, but also to your seed and Posterity: Where
contrariwise, a proud conceit, and elevation of your self, will be the occasion
that your Reign will be unstable, troublesome, and short. God is witness,
That unfainedly I both love and reverence you Majesty; yea, I pray that your
Reign may be both prosperous and quiet, and that for the quietness which
Christ's Members, before persecuted, have received under you. But yet if I
should flatter your Majesty, I were no friend, but a deceivable traitor; and
therefore in conscience I am compelled to say, That neither the consent of the
people, the process of time, nor multitude of men, can establish a Law which
God shall approve; but whatsoever he approves by his Eternal Word, that shall
be approved, and stay constantly firm; and whatsoever he condemns, shall be
condemned, though all men on earth should travel for the justification of the
same. And therefore, Madame, the only way to retain and keep the benefits of
God, abundantly of late days poured upon you and your Realm, is unfainedly to
render unto God, to his mercy, and undeserved grace, the whole glory of this
your exaltation, forget your Birth, and all Title which hereupon does hang; and
consider deeply, How for fear of your life you did decline from God, and bow to
Idolatry, going to Mass under your sister Mary her persecution of Gods Saints:
Let it not appear a small offense in your eyes, That you have declined from
Christ Jesus, in the day of your Battle: Neither yet would I that you should
esteem that mercy to be vulgar and common which you have received, viz. That
God has covered your offense, Has preserved your Person, when you were most
unthankful; And in the end, has exalted and raised you up, not only from the
dust, but also from the ports of death; to rule above his people, for comfort
of his Kirk. It appertains to you therefore, to ground the justice of your
Authority, not on that Law, which from year to year does change, but upon the
eternal providence of him, who contrary to the ordinary course of Nature, Note.
and without your deserving, has exalted your head: If thus in Gods presence
you humble your self; as in my heart I glorify God for that rest granted to
his afflicted Flock within England, under you a weak Instrument; so will I with
tongue and pen justify your Authority and Regiment, as the holy Ghost has
justified the same in Deborah, that blessed Mother in Israel. But if you
neglect (as God forbid) these things, and shall begin to brag of your Birth,
and to build your Authority and your Regiment upon your own Law; flatter you
who so lists, your felicity shall be short. Interpret my words in the best
part, as written by him, who is no enemy to your Majesty. By diverse Letters I
have required to visit your Realm, not to seek my self, neither yet my own
ease and benefit: which if you now refuse and deny me, I must remit my cause to
God, adding this for conclusion, that commonly it is seen, That such as refuse
the counsel of the faithful (appear it never so sharp) are compelled to follow
the deceit of flatterers to their own perdition. Note.
The mighty Spirit of the Lord Jesus move your heart to understand what is
said, and give unto you the direction of his Spirit, and so rule you in all
your actions and enterprises, that in you God may be glorified, his Kirk
edified, and you your self, as a lively Member of the same, may be an example
of virtue and godliness of life to all others. So be it.

Of Edinb. 28 July, 1559.



These Letters were directed by Alexander Whitlaw, a man that often had hazarded
himself, and all that he had for the Cause of God, and for his friends, being
in danger for the same Cause. Within a day or two after the departing of the
said Alexander, there came a Letter from Sir Henry Percie to John Knox,
requiring him to meet him at Annick the third day of August, for such affairs
as he would not write nor yet communicate with any, but with the said John
himself, while he was preparing himself for the journey (for Secretary Cecill
had appointed to have met him at Stampford) the Frenchmen furiously came forth
of Dumbar, of purpose to have surprised the Lords being in Edinburgh, as in the
second Book before is declared, which stayed the journey of the said John, till
that God had delivered the innocents from that great danger, and then was he
sent, having in his company M. Robert Hamilton, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, directed from the Lords with full Commission and Instructions to
decline their whole case and estate wherein they stood. Their passage was from
Pittenweame by sea, they arrived at Holy-Iland, and being advertised that Sir
Henry Percie was absent from the North; They addressed themselves to Sir James
Crofts, then Captain of Barwick, and Warden of the East Marches of England.
They showed unto him their Credit and Commission; He received them courteously,
and comforted them with his faithful Counsel, Sir James Crofts counsel.
which was, That they should travel no further, neither yet should they be
seen in public, and that for diverse considerations. First, The Queen Regent
had her spies in England. Secondly, The Queen and the Council that favored
our faction, would that all things should be secret so long as they might. And
last, said he, I think it not expedient, that in such rarity of Preachers, ye
two be any long time absent from the Lords of the Congregation. And therefore
(said he) ye shall do best to commit to writing your whole mind and Credit,
and I shall promise to you upon my honor, to have answer at you, and at the
Lords again, before that ye your selves can be at London. And where that your
Letters cannot express all things so fully, as your presence could, I shall
supply the same, not only by my pen, but also by my own presence, to such as
will inform the Council sufficiently of all things. The said John and M.
Robert followed his Council (for it was faithful, and proceeded of love at
that time) they tarried with him very secretly within the Castle of Barwick two
days. In the which time returned Alexander Whitlaw aforesaid, with answer to
the Lords, and unto John Knox. The tenor of whose Letter was this: Master
Cecils Letter to John Knox.
Master Knox,
NOn est masculus neque f^min^, omnes enim ut ait Paulus, unum sumus in Christo
Jesus benedictus vir qui confidit in Domino, and erit Dominus fiducia ejus. I
have received you Letters, at the same time that I thought to have seen your
self at Stamford. What is now hitherto the cause of your let, I know not. I
forbear to descend to the bottom of things, until I may confer with such
one as ye are. And therefore if your chance shall be hereafter to come hither,
I wish you furnished with good Credit, and power, to make good resolution.
Although my answer to the Lords of the Congregation be somewhat obscure, yet
upon further understanding ye shall find the matter plain. I need to wish you
no more prudencie then Gods grace, whereof God send you plenty. And so I end,

Sic subscribitur. Yours as a member of the same body in Christ, M. Cecill.
From Oxford the 28 of July, 1559.



Albeit the said John received this Letter at Barwick, yet would he answer
nothing till that he had spoken with the Lords whom he found in Sterlin, and
unto whom he delivered the answer sent from the Council of England (for
Alexander Whitlaw took sickness betwixt Barwick and Edinburgh, and was
troubled by the Lord Seaton, as in the former Book is declared) the answer
sent by Master Cecill was so general, that many amongst us despaired of any
comfort to come from that Country. And therefore were determined that they
would request no further. John Knox labored in the contrary, but he could
prevail no further, but that he should have license and liberty to write as
he thought best: And so took he upon him to answer for all, in form as
follows. Answer to Master Cecils writing.
TWo causes hindered me (Right Worshipful) to visit you in any part in England.
Before this no signification of your mind and pleasure was made unto me, for
only did Sir Henry Percie will me to come and speak with him, which
conveniently at that time I could not do, by reason that the Frenchmen (which
was the second cause of my stay) did then most furiously pursue us, while our
company was dispersed, and then durst I not be absent for diverse
inconveniences; neither did I think my presence with you greatly necessary,
considering that the matter (which I most desired) was opened and proposed. To
the which I would have wished, That a more plain and especial answer should
have been made. For albeit Master Whitlaw by his Credit, Master Kirkcaldie by
his Letter, and I, both by Letters and by that which I had received from Sir
James Crofts, did persuade your good minds; yet could not the council be
otherwise persuaded, but that this alteration in France had altered your former
purpose. It is not unknown what good will we three do bear to England: And
therefore I wish, That rather your Pen, then our Credit, or any thing written
to any of us, should assure the Lords and others, of your good minds (who are
now in number but five hundred.) Unless that money be furnished without delay
to pay the Soldiers for their service past, and to retain another thousand
footmen, with three hundred horsemen; till some stay be had in this danger,
these Gentlemen will be compelled to leave the fields. I am assured, as flesh
may be of flesh, That some of them will take a very hard life, before that ever
they compose, either with the Queen Regent, or with France: but this I dare not
promise at all, unless in they see greater forwardness. To support us, will
appear excessive; and to break promise with France, will appear dangerous. But
the loss of expenses, in mine opinion, ought not to be esteemed from the first
payment, neither yet the danger from the first appearance. Note a braggadoshie.
France is most fervent to conquer us, and avoweth, That against us they will
spend the Crown (so did mine own ears hear Butten Court brag) But most
assuredly I know, That unless by us they thought to make an entry to you,
Note.
that they would not buy our poverty at that price. They labor to corrupt some
of our great men by money (and some of our number are poor, as before I wrote,
and cannot serve without support) some they threatened, and against others they
have up one party in their own Country. In this mean time, if ye lie by as
neutralls, what will be the end, you may easily conjecture. And therefore, Sir,
in the bowels of Christ Jesus, I require you to make plain answer, What the
Gentlemen here may trust to, and what the Queens Majesty will do, may without
long delay be put in execution. I rest in Christ Jesus.

Of Saint Iohnston the day of, etc.



Answer with great expedition was returned to this Letter, desiring some men of
credit to be sent to the Lords to Barwicke, for the receiving of the money for
the first support, with promise, That if the Lords of the Congregation meant no
otherwise then before they had written, and if they would enter into League
with honest Conditions, they should neither lack men nor money to their just
Causes. Upon this answer was directed from the Lords to Barwicke, Note.
Master Henry Balnaves, a man of good credit in both the Realms; who suddenly
returned with such a sum of money as served all the public affairs till
November next; when John Cockburne of Ormeston, sent for the second support,
and receiving the same, unhappily fell into the hands of the Earl Bothwell,
was wounded, taken, and spoiled of a great Sum: upon which mischance, followed
all the rest of the troubles before rehearsed. In the second Book preceding, we
have declared how Secretary Leehington was directed to England: But one thing
before we have passed by: In that our greatest dejection, this order was taken;
That the Duke, the Earl of Glencarne, Lord Boyd, Lord Uchiltrie, and their
friends, should remain together at Glasgow, for comfort of the Country, and
for giving of answers, as occasion should require; and that the Earl of
Arrane, the Lord James, the Earl of Rothesse, the Master of Lindsay, and their
adherents, should continue together within Fyfe for the same causes, that
advertisements might go from the one to the other, as need required. Note.
In the Negotiation of the Secretary Lethington with the Queen and Council of
England (in the which he traveled with no less wisdom and faithfulness,
then happy success) many things occurred that required the resolution of the
whole Lords.

After that the Queen and Council of England had concluded to send their Army
to Scotland for expelling of the French, the Duke of Norfolk was sent to
Barwick with full instructions, power and Commission to do in all things
concerning the present affairs of Scotland, as the Queen and Council in their
own persons had power to do. Hereupon the said Duke required such a part of the
Lords of Scotland, as had power and Commission from the whole, to meet him at
such a day and place as pleased them to appoint. This advertisement came first
to Glasgow by the means of the Master of Maxwell: Which read and considered by
the Lords, conclusion was taken that they would meet at Carleil, and that was
the procurement of the said Master of Maxwell for his ease. Hereupon were
Letters directed from the Lords being in Glasgow, to Lord James, requiring him
with all possible expedition to repair toward them, for the purpose
aforesaid. Which Letters read and advised upon, commandment was given to John
Knox to make the answer. For so it was appointed at division of the Lords, that
he should answer for the part of those that were in Fyfe; and M. Henry Balnaves
for the part of them that abode at Glasgow. The said John answered as follows.

To the Duke, and the other Lords at Glasgow.
AFter humble commendation of my service: Albeit I have written more then once
to Master Henry Balnaves, what things have misliked me in your slow
proceedings, as well in supporting your brethren, who many days have sustained
extreme danger in these parts, as in making provision how the enemy might
have been annoyed, who lay few in number, nigh to your Quarters in Sterlin. And
in making likewise provision, how the expectation of our friends, who long have
waited for your answer, might have been satisfied. Albeit (I say) that of these
things I have before complained, yet, in conscience, I am compelled to signify
unto your Honors, That unless of these and other enormities I shall see some
redress, I am assured, That the end shall be such, Note.
as godly men shall mourn, that a good Cause shall perish for lack of Wisdom
and Diligence. In my last Letters to Master Henry Balnaves, I declared, That
your especial friends in England wonder, that no greater expedition is made,
the weight of the matter being considered. If the fault be in the Duke and his
friends, I wrote also, That the greatest loss should be his and theirs in the
end. And now I cannot cease, both to wonder and lament, That your whole
Council was so destitute of Wisdom and Discretion, as to charge this poor
man the Priour, to come to you to Glasgow, and thereafter to go to Carleil, for
such affairs as are to be handled. Was there none amongst you who did foresee
what inconveniences might ensue his absence from these parts? I cease to speak
of the dangers by the enemy. Your friends have lain in your Haven now fifteen
days past, (what was their former travel it is not unknown) they have never
received comfort of any man (him only excepted) more then if they had lain
upon the coast of their mortal enemy. Do ye not consider, That such a company
shall need comfort and provision from time to time? Remove him, and who abides
there who carefully will travel in that or any other weighty matter in these
parts? Did ye not farther consider, That he that had begun to meddle with the
Gentlemen, who have declared themselves back-friends heretofore; and also that
order should have been taken for such as have been neutrall; now by reason of
his absence, the one shall escape without admonition, and the other shall be at
their own liberty. I am assured that the enemy shall not sleep, neither in
that, nor in other affairs, to undermine you and your whole Cause, and
especially to hurt this part of the Country, to revenge their former folly. If
none of these former causes should have moved you to have considered that such
a journey (at such a time) was not meet for him, neither yet for them that must
accompany him: yet discreet men would have considered, that the men that have
lien in their jacks, and traveled their horses continual the space of a
month, required some longer rest, first to themselves, then but especially to
their horses, before they had been charged to such a journey, as yet they have
not had. The Priour may for satisfaction of your unreasonable minds,
enterprise the purpose; but I am assured he shall not be able to have six
honest men in all Fyfe to accompany him; and how that either stands with your
Honors, or with his safety, judge ye your selves. But yet wonder it is, that ye
did not consider, To what pain and grief shall ye put our friends of England,
especially the Duke of Norfolk and his Council, whom ye shall cause to travel
the most wearisome and troublesome way that is in England. In mine opinion,
whosoever gave you that counsel, either lacked right judgment in things to be
done, or else had too much respect to his own ease, and too small regard to the
travel and damage of their brethren. A common cause, requires a common
concurrence, and that every man bear his burden proportionable. But prudent and
indifferent men epsy the contrary in this cause, especially of late days; for
the weakest are most grievously charged, and they to whom the matter most
belongs, and to whom justly greatest burden is due, are exempted in a manner,
both from travel and expenses. To speak the matter plainly, wise men do
wonder, what the Dukes friends do mean, that they are so slack and backward in
this cause; In other actions they have been judged stout and forward, and in
this, which is the greatest that ever he or they had in hand, they appear
destitute both of grace and courage. I am not ignorant that they that are most
inward of his counsel, Note.
are enemies to God, and therefore cannot but be enemies to this Cause. But
wonder it is, That he and his other friends should not consider, That the loss
of this godly enterprise, shall be the rooting out of them and their posterity
from this Realm. Considering, my Lords, That by Gods providence ye are joined
with the Duke in this common Cause, admonish him plainly of the danger to come,
will him to beware of the counsel of those that are plainly infected with
Superstition, Note.
with Pride, and with the venom of particular profit: which if he do not at
your admonition, he shall smart before he be aware. And if ye cease to put him
in mind of his duty, it may be that for your silence ye shall drink some
portion of the plague with him. Take my plain speaking, as proceeding from him
that is not your enemy, being also uncertain, when I shall have occasion to
write hereafter. God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ assist you with the
Spirit of wisdom and fortitude, that to his glory, and to your Lordships
common comfort, ye may perform that thing which godlily was once begun, Amen.

From Saint Andrews the 6 of February in haste, 1559. Sic subscribitur, Your
Lordships to command in godliness, J. K.


Upon the receipt of this Letter, and consultation had hereupon, a new
conclusion was taken; to wit, That they would visit the said Duke of Norfolk
at Barwicke where he was. Thus far we have digressed from the text of our
History, to let the Posterity that shall follow understand by what instruments
God wrought the familiarity and friendship that after we found in England. Now
we return to our former History.

The parts of Fyfe set at freedom from the Bondage of these bloody worms,
solemn thanks were given in S. Andrews unto God for his mighty deliverance.
Shortly after the Earl of Arrane and Lord James apprehended the Lairds of
Wemes, Seafield, Bawgony, Durie, and others, that assisted the French, but they
were set shortly at freedom upon such conditions, as they minded never to keep,
for such men have neither faith nor honesty. Master James Balfour, who was the
greatest practiser, and had drawn the Band of the Balfours, escaped. The
English Ships daily multiplied, till that they were able to keep the whole
Fyrth, whereat the French and Queen Regent enraged, began to execute their
tyranny upon the parts of Lowthiane that lay nigh to Edinburgh. Let M. David
Borthwicke witness what favor his wife and place of Adeston found of the
French, for all the service that he did to the Queen Regent.

In the midst of February were directed to England, from the Duke and the
Congregation, the Lord James, Lord Ruthuen, the Mast of Maxwell, the Master of
Lindsay, Master Henry Balnaves, and the Lord of Pittarrow; who with their
honest companies and Commission departed by Sea all, except the Master of
Maxwell, to Barwicke; Where there met them the Duke of Norfolk, Lieutenant to
the Queen of England, and with him a great company of the Gentlemen of the
North, with some also of the South, having full power to contract with the
Nobility of Scotland, as they did, upon such Conditions as are in the same
Contract specified: and because we have heard the malicious tongues of wicked
men make false report of that our fact, we have faithfully and truly inserted
in this our History the said Contract, as well that which was made at Leith,
during the siege, as that which was first made at Barwicke, that the memory
thereof may abide to our Posterity, to the end that they may judge with
indifferency, Whether that we have done any thing prejudicial to our
Commonwealth, or yet contrarious unto the dutiful obedience which true
subjects owe to their Superiors; Note.
whose Authority ought to defend and maintain the Liberty and Freedom of the
Realms committed to their Charge, and not to oppress and betray the same to
stranger. The Tenor of our Contract follows:

The Contract at Barwick.
JAMES, Duke of Chattellarault, Earl of Arrane, Lord Hamilton, and others of
the Council, Nobility, and principal States of Scotland;
To all and sundry whose knowledge these presents shall come, Greeting.
We have well considered, and are fully persuaded, in what danger, desolation,
and misery, the long enmity with the Kingdom of England has brought our
Country heretofore: how wealthy and flourishing it shall become, if those two
Kingdoms, as they are joined in one Island by Creation of the World, so they
may be knit in a constant and assured friendship. The considerations grounded
upon a most infallible Truth, ought no less to have moved our Progenitors
and for fathers then us. But the present danger hanging over our heads, by the
unjust dealing of those, of whom we have always best deserved, has caused us
to weigh them more earnestly then they did. The misbehaviour of the French
Monsieurs, I had almost said Monsters, here, has of late years been so great.
The oppressions and cruelty of the Soldiers, the tyranny and ambition of
their Superiors and Rulers, so grievous to the people, the violent subversion
of our liberty, and conquest of the land, whereat they have by most crafty and
subtle means continually pressed, has been, I say, so intolerable to us all,
that at last when we could not obtain redress by humble suits, and earnest
supplications presented to the Queen Dowager, who both for duties sake, and
place, she does occupy, ought to have been most careful of our state, we have
been by very necessity constrained, not only to assay our own Forces, but
also to implore the Queens Majesty of Englands aid and support, which her
Majesty has most willingly granted, upon certain conditions specified in a
Treaty past at Barwick, betwixt the Duke of Norfolk, Lieutenant to her
Majesty, on the one part, and certain our Commissioners on the other part,
whereof the Tenor follows. At Barwick the 27 day of February, the year of
our Lord God 1559 years* It is appointed, and finally Contracted, betwixt the
noble and mighty, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England, and
Lieutenant to the Queens Majesty of the said Realm, in the Name and behalf of
her Highness on the one part; and the Right Honorable Lord James Stewart,
Patrick Lord Ruthuen, Sir John Maxwell of Terregles, Knight, William Maitland
of Lethington younger, John Wischarde of Pittarrow, and Master Henry Balnaves
of Halhill; in name and behalf of the Noble and Mighty James, Duke of
Chattellarault of Scotland, and the Lords of the Congregation, joined together
in this Cause, for maintenance and defense of the ancient Rights and Liberties
of their Country on the other part, in form as after follows: That is to
say, That the Queen having sufficiently understood, as well by information sent
from the Nobility of Scotland, as by the proceedings of the French, that they
intend to conquer the Realm of Scotland, suppress the liberty thereof, and
unite the same unto the Crown of France perpetually, contrary to the Laws of
the said Realm, and the Pacts, Oaths, and Promises of France. And being
thereto most humbly and earnestly required by the said Nobility; for, and in
the name of the whole Realm, shall accept the said Realm of Scotland the said
Nobility and subjects thereof into her Majesty's protection and maintenance,
only for preservation of the same in their own freedoms and liberties, and
from conquest, during the time that the Marriage shall continue betwixt the
Queen of Scots and the French King, and a year after: And for expelling out of
the same Realm of such as presently and apparently goes about to practice the
said Conquest, her Majesty shall with all speed send into Scotland a convenient
aid of men of War, both Horse and Foot, to join with the power of Scottish men,
with Artillery, Munition, and all other Instruments of War meet for that
purpose, as well by Sea as by Land, not only to expel the present Power of
the French within that Realm oppressing the same, but also to stop, as far as
conveniently may be, all greater Forces of French to enter therein, for the
like purpose, and shall continue her Majesty's aid to the said Realm,
Nobility, and subjects of the same, unto the time the French (being enemies to
the said Realm) be utterly expelled hence; and shall never transact, compose,
nor agree with the French, nor conclude any League with them, except the Scots
and the French shall be agreed, that the Realm of Scotland may be left in a
due freedom by the French; nor shall leave the maintenance of the said Nobility
and subjects, whereby they might fall as a prey into their enemies hands, as
long as they shall acknowledge their Sovereign Lady the Queen, and shall
endeavor their selves to maintain the liberty of their Country, and the State
of the Crown of Scotland. And if in case any Forts or Strengths within the
Realm be won out of the hands of the French at this present, or at any time
hereafter by her Majesty's aid, the same shall be immediately demolished by the
Scotish-men, or delivered to the said Nobility aforesaid, at their option and
choice; neither shall the power of England fortify within the ground of
Scotland, being out of the bounds of England, but by the advice of the Duke,
Nobility, and States of Scotland. For the which causes, and in respect of her
Majesty's most gentle clemency, and liberal support, the said Nobility, as
well such as be joined, as such as shall hereafter join with them already
joined, for the defense of the liberty of that Realm, shall to the uttermost
of their power aid and support her Majesty's Army against the French and their
partakers, with Horsemen and Footmen, and with Victuals, by Land and Sea,
with all manner of other aid, to the best of their power, and so shall continue
during the time that her Majesty's Army shall remain in Scotland.

Item, They shall be enemies to all such Scottish men and French as shall in any
wise show themselves enemies to the Realm of England, Let us mark our advantage
from France.
for the ayding and supporting of the said Nobility in the delivery of the
Realm of Scotland from Conquest. Item, They shall never assent nor permit that
the Realm of Scotland shall be conquered, or otherwise knit to the Crown of
France, then it is at this present, only by Marriage of the Queen their
Sovereign to the French King, and it be ruled by the Laws and Liberties of the
Realm, as it ought to be. Item, In case the Frenchmen shall at any time
hereafter invade, or cause to be invaded the Realm of England, they shall
furnish the number of two thousand Horsemen, and one thousand Footmen at the
least, or such part of either of them, at the charge of the Queen of England,
and shall conduct the same to pass from the borders of Scotland, next England,
upon her Majesty's charges, to any part of the Realm of England, for defense
of the same. And in case the invasion be on the North parts of England, on the
North side of the water of Tyne toward Scotland, or against Barwick, on the
North side of the water of Tweid. They shall convene and gather their whole
Forces upon their own charges, and shall join with the English power, and
shall continue in good and earnest pursuit of the Quarrel of England, during
the space of thirty days, or so much longer, as they were accustomed to tarry
in the fields for defense of Scotland. At the commandment of their Sovereigns
at any time by past: and also the Earl of Argyle: Lord Justice of Scotland,
being presently joined with the rest, shall employ his force and good will,
where he shall be required by the Queens Majesty to reduce the North parts of
Ireland to the perfect obedience of England, Note.
conform to a mutual and reciproque contract to be made betwixt her Majesty's
Lieutenant or Deputy of Ireland being for the time, and the said Earl;
wherein shall be contained what he shall do for his part, and what the said
Lieutenant or Deputy shall do for his support, in case he shall have to do
with James Mackconell, or any others of the Isles of Scotland, or Realm of
Ireland. For performance and sure keeping whereof, they shall for their part
come to the said Duke of Norfolk, the pledges presently named by him, before
the entry of her Majesty's Army in Scottish ground, to remain in England for
the space of six months, and to be there exchanged upon deliverance of new
hostages, of like, or as good condition as the former; or being the lawful
sons, brethren, or heirs of any of the Peers or Barons of Parliament, that
have, or hereafter shall show themselves and persist open enemies to the French
in this quarrel, and so forth from six months to six months, or four
months to four months, as shall best please the party of Scotland. And the
time of continuance of the hostages, shall be during the marriage of the Queen
of Scots to the French King, and a year after the dissolution of the said
Marriage, until further order may be had betwixt both the Realms, for Peace
and Concord. And furthermore, the said Nobility, being Peers and Barons of
Parliament joined together, shall subscribe and seal these Articles and
agreement, within the space of twenty or thirty days at the uttermost, next
following the day of the delivering of the said hostages, and shall also
procure and persuade all others of the Nobility that shall join themselves
hereafter with the said Lords for the cause above-specified, likewise to
subscribe and seal those Articles, at any time after the space of twenty days
after their conjunction, upon requisition made by them on the party of the
Queens Majesty of England. And finally, the said Nobility joined together,
certainly perceiving that the Queens Majesty of England is thereunto moved,
only upon respect of Princely honor and neighborhood, for defense of the
freedom of Scotland from Conquest, and not of any other sinister intent, does
by these presents testify and declare, That they, nor any of them, mean by
this agreement to withdraw any due obedience to the Sovereign Lady the Queen,
nor in any lawful thing to withstand the French King her husband and head,
that during the marriage shall not tend to the subversion and oppression of the
just and ancient Liberties of the said Kingdom of Scotland. For preservation
whereof, both for their Sovereigns honor, and for the continuance of the
Kingdom in its ancient state, they acknowledge themselves bound to spend their
Goods, Lands, and Lives. And for performance of this present Contract for the
part of England, the Queens Majesty shall confirm the same, and all Clauses
therein contained, by her Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to
be delivered to the Nobility of Scotland, upon the entry of the Pledges
aforesaid, within the ground of England. In Witness whereof, the said Duke of
Norfolk has subscribed these Points, and thereunto affixed his Seal, the day,
year, and place aforesaid. Which Contract we find honest and reasonable; and
that our said Commissioners therein has considerately respected the
Commonweal of this Realm, of us, and our posterity; And therefore do
ratify, allow, confirm and approve the same, with all Clauses and Articles
therein contained by these Presents. In Witness hereof we have subscribed the
same with our Hands and sealed with our Seals of Arms in such causes accustomed
are appended.

At the Camp before Leith the tenth day of May, the year of God 1560 years.
Follow the Subscriptions. The Subscriptions.
The Duke of Chattellarault. Earl of Arrane. Earl of Glencarne. Earl of
Rothesse. Earl of Argyle. Earl of Huntlie. Earl of Morton. Earl of Menteth.
Lord Ogilbye. Lord James Steward. Alexander Gordon. Lord Boyd. Lord Uchiltrie.
Gawin Hamilton of Kilwinning. Abbot of Culrosse. Lord Bothwike. Lord of Saint
John. Lord John Abirbr^thok. Lord Simmerwaile. Lord Robert Steward. Abbot of
Kynlosse. James Stewart of Saint Colmes Inche.



The Instructions given, subscribed, to the said Commissioners following:
1. IN the first place, if it shall be asked of you by the Duke of Norfolk, and
by other the Queens Majesty's appointed Commissioners, If your Pledges be in
readiness; ye shall answer, That they are, and in Saint Andrews the 25 of this
instant, and shall be ready to be delivered in Hostage for security of our
promises and part of the contract, they offering and making security for their
part by the Queens Majesty's Subscription and Great Seal, and delivering the
same unto you. Providing, That they choose and make their election of the
Pledges as is commoned. 2. Secondly, If the said Commissioners shall demand of
you, What enterprise the Army of England shall take in hand at their first
incoming; Ye shall answer in general; The expulsion of the French Soldiers
out of this Realm; and first and in especial, out of the Town of Leith,
seeing their great Forces are there. 3. Item, If it shall be asked of you; At
what place our friends and brethren of England shall be met? Note.
And, at what day? What number? And, What Noblemen in company? Ye shall
refer all these things to their election and choice. 4. Item, If it shall be
asked of you, How the Armies shall be furnished with Victuals, and especially
the Horsemen? Ye shall answer, That with their advice sufficient order shall
be taken therein. 5. Item, If it be required, How the Munition shall be
carried, and oxen furnished to that effect? You shall answer, as we have given
in Commission to Lethington, which we ratify. 6. Item, If it shall be asked,
Who shall be Lieutenant to the Army of Scotland? Ye shall answer, The Duke of
Chattellarault. 7. Item, If it shall be enquired, What number our whole Army
extends to? Ye shall answer, They will be, God willing, five thousand men. 8.
Item, If it shall be asked, What manner of way Leith shall be assaulted? Ye
shall desire all preparations to be in readiness, and the advice to be taken
after the placing of the Armies, and view of the strength shortly. 9. Item, If
it shall be asked concerning the Castle of Edinburgh, If they will stand
friends or not? Ye shall declare our diligence made, and to be made shortly*
herein; but for the present we can assure them of nothing. 10. Item, If it be
asked, In case the Castle be enemy, Where the Army shall be placed? Ye shall
answer, For the first in Muschilbrough and Tranent, and those parts, till the
Battery and all preparations be in readiness. 11. Item, In case it be
enquired of all by-lyers and neutrals, and in especial of the Lord of Huntley,
and the North? Ye shall answer in general; A good hope is had of the most part
thereof: And touching the Lord of Huntley in especial, Ye shall show how he
has sent Writings to my Lord of Arrane, with a servant of credit, to assure
him of his assistance. And for that cause has desired Letters of suspension of
the Queen Dowagers Commission to be sent to him to be used in those parts; and
other Letters to arrest the Clergies Rents and Hires, both in those parts; With
Proclamations to cause all men to be in readiness to pass forwards for
maintaining of the Religion, and expulsing of strangers. The Nobility has
written to him, That he may come to him in proper person; Whereof the answer is
not returned as yet. 12. Item, If it shall be asked the place and manner of
meeting of our folks, or of us and them, in case Sterlin be kept? We refer the
answer hereof to your discretions. 13. Item, If it shall be asked, That their
leaden money shall have passage for their necessities? Ye shall reason the
commodity and discommodity thereof with the Council. 14. Item, If it shall be
asked, What Pioners shall be had? Ye shall answer, the number being expressed,
and money in readiness to so sold or pay them, They shall have sufficiency.
15. Item, If they shall desire, That we declare our causes unto the Princes of
Almaigne and the King of Denmark or Germany, desiring their assistance; Ye
shall answer, That we think the same good, and shall speedily take order
therewith. 16. Item, If it shall be desired of you to confirm for us and in
our name the things past and granted by our former Commissioner, the young
Lord of Lethington: Ye shall in all points for us, and in our name, confirm
the same, so far as it shall make either for the weal and conjunction of the
two Realms, or this present Cause, or yet for the security of our part for
fulfilling of the same. And as ye shall accept their offers tending to the same
end; and such security on that part as ye may purchase, and especially such as
we have heretofore expressed: Given at Glasgow the 10. of February 1559. 17.
Item, We give and grant you full power to augment or diminsh the said Heads and
Articles, as ye think the weal of the cause shall require in all points.
Sic subscribitur. John of Menteth. Andrew of Rothesse. R. Boyd. William Murray
of Tulibarn. John Erskin of Dun. James Hamilton. Alexander Gordon. Alexander
Argyle. Glencarne. Uchiltrie. James Haliburntoun.


Shortly after this Contract were our pledges delivered to Master Winter
Admiral of the Navy, that came to Scotland, a man of great honesty, so far
as ever we could epsy in him; who were safely conveyed to Newcastle, and so
the English Army by land began to assemble toward the border. Whereof the
French and Queen Regent assured, they began to destroy what they could in the
Towns and Country about: for the whole Victuals they carried to Leith, the
Mills they brake, the Sheep, Oxen and Kine, yea the Horses of poor Laborers
all made they to serve their Tyranny. And finally, they left nothing which the
very enemies could have devised, Note.
except that they demolished not Gentlemen's houses, and burnt not the Town of
Edinburgh. In which point God bridled their fury, to let his afflicted
understand, That he took care for them. Before the coming of the Land Army,
the French past to Glasgow, and destroyed the Country thereabout. What
tyranny Marticks used upon a poor Scottish Soldier, it is fearful to
hear, and yet his fact may not be omitted. Note a cruel ^act.
Silver would they give none to the poor man, and they were so slow to depart
out of the Town; That albeit the Drum stroke, the Ensign could not be gotten.
There was a poor Crafts-man, who had bought for his Victuals a brown Loaf, and
was eating a morsel of it, and was putting the rest of it into his bosom. The
Tyrant came to him, and with the poor wretches own dagger first stroke him in
the breast, and after threw it at him, and so the poor man staggering and
falling, the merciless tyrant ran him through with his Rapier, and thereafter
commanded him to be hanged over the stayre. Lord thou will look and recompense
such Tyranny, how contemptible soever the person was.

The second of April, 1560
the year of our Lord 1560. the Army of the Land entered into Scotland, the
conducting whereof was committed to the Lord Gray, who had in his company the
Lord Scrope, Sir James Crofts, Sir Henry Percie, Sir Francis Lake, with many
other Captains and Gentlemen, having charge some of Footmen, and some of
Horsemen. The Army by Land was esteemed ten thousand men. The Queen Regent
past to the Castle of Edinburgh, and some others of her faction: At Preston met
them, the Duke, the Earl of Argyle ( Huntlie came not till that the siege was
confirmed) Lord James, the Earl of Glencarne, and Menteth, Lords Ruthuen,
Boyd, Uchiltrie, with all the Protestants, Gentlemen of the West, Fyfe, Angus,
and Mearnes, so that in few days the Army was great. After the deliberation of
two days had at Inneresk, the whole Camp marched forward with Ordnance, and
all preparations necessary for the siege, and came to Lestarrig the Palm
Sunday Even. The French had put themselves in Battle Array upon the Linkes
without Leith, and sent forth their skirmishers; who beginning before ten of
the clock, continued skirmishing till after four of the clock at afternoon,
when there was given upon them a charge by some Horsemen of Scotland, and some
of England: But because the principal Captain of the Horsemen of England was
not present, the whole Troops durst not charge, and so was not the overthrow
and slaughter of the French so great as it once appeared to have been; for the
great Battle was once at the trot; but when it perceived that the great Force
of Horsemen stood still, and charged not, they returned, and gave some rescue
to their fellows that fled; and so there fell only in that defeat about three
hundred Frenchmen. God would not give the Victory so suddenly, lest that man
should glory in his own strength. The small Victory that was gotten, Note.
put both the English and Scottish in overgreat security, as the issue
declared. The French enclosed within the Town, the English Army began to plant
their Pavilions betwixt Leith and Lestarrig. The Ordnance of the Town, and
especially that which lay upon Saint Anthonies Steeple, did them great
annoyance; against which place were bent eight Cannons, which shot so
continually, and so just, that within few days that the Steeple was condemned,
and all the Ordnance that was on it discomfited, which made the Englishmen
somewhat more negligent, then it became good men of War to have been: For
perceiving that the French made no pursuit without their Walls, they took an
opinion that they should never issue more, and that made some of the Captains
for pastime go to the Town. The Soldiers for their ease laid their Armor
beside them, and as men without danger, fell to the Dice and Cards; and so upon
the Easter Monday, at the very hour of noon, the French issued both upon Horse
and Foot, and with great violence entered within the English Trenches, slew and
put to flight all that was found therein. The Watch was negligently kept, and
so were the Succors slow and long in coming; For the French, before that any
resistance was made unto them, approached hard to the great Ordnance: But then
the Horsemen trooped together, and the Footmen gat themselves in Array, and so
repulsed the French back again to the Town; but the slaughter was great, some
say it double exceeded that which the French received the first day. And this
was the fruit of their security and ours, which after was remedied: For the
English men most wisely considering themselves not able to besiege the Town
round about, devised to make Mounts at diverse quarters of it, in the which they
and their Ordnance lay in as good strength, as they did within the Town: The
common soldiers kept the Trenches, and had the said mountains for their
saveguard and refuge, in case of any greater pursuit then they were able to
sustain. The patience and stout courage of the English men, Note.
but principally of the Horsemen, is worthy of all praise: For where was it
ever heard, That eight thousand (they never exceeded that number that lay in
Camp) should besiege four thousand of the most desperate throat-cutters that
were to be found in Europe, and to lie nigh unto them in daily skirmishing, the
space of three months and more? The Horsemen night and day kept Watch, and
did so valiantly behave themselves, that the French gat no advantage, from that
day back to the day of the assault, whereof we shall shortly hear. In this mean
time was this other Band made of all the Nobility, Barons, and Gentlemen
professing Christ Jesus in Scotland, and of diverse others that joined with us,
for expelling of the French, amongst whom the Earl of Huntlie was a prime man.
The Band follows.

The last Band at Leith.
AT Edinburgh the seven and twentieth of April, the year of our Lord 1560
years, 1560.

We whose names are underwritten, have promised and obliged our selves
faithfully in the presence of God, The fourth Covenant.
and by these Presents do promise, That we together in general, and every one
of us in special by himself, with our bodies, goods, friends, and all that we
can do, shall set forward the Reformation of Religion, according to Gods Word,
and procure by all means possible, that the Truth of Gods Word may have free
passage within this Realm, with due Administration of the Sacraments, and all
things depending upon the said Word, and such like; deeply weighing with our
selves the misbehaviour of the French Ministers here, the intolerable
oppression committed by the French men of War upon the poor subjects of this
Realm, by maintenance of the Queen Dowager, under color and pretense of
Authority: The tyranny of their Captains and Leaders, and manifest danger of
Conquest, in which this Country at this present stands, by reason of diverse
Fortifications upon the Seacoast, and other novelties of late attempted by
them; promising, That we shall each one with another, all of us, together with
the Queen of Englands Army, presently come in for our deliverance, effectually
concur, join in one, take and hold one plain part for expulsion of the said
strangers, oppressors of our Liberty, forth out of this Realm, and recovery of
our ancient Freedoms and Liberties, to the end that in time coming, we may
under the obedience of the King and Queen our Sovereigns be only ruled by the
Laws and Customs of the Country, and borne men of the Land; And that never one
of us shall have privy intelligence, by writing, message, or communication with
any of our enemies or adversaries in this Cause, but by advice of the rest (at
least of five) of the counsel. Again, That we shall tender the common Cause,
as if it were the cause of every one of us in particular: And that the causes
of every one of us now joined together being lawful and honest, shall be all
our causes in general; And that he that is enemy to the Cause aforesaid, shall
be enemy to us all, in so far, That what person soever will plainly resist
these our godly enterprises, and will not concur as a good and true member of
this our Commonwealth, we shall fortify the said Authority of the Council,
Now hereupon came the pursuit.
to reduce them to their duty, like as we shall fortify the said Authority of
the Council in all things tending to the furtherance of the said Causes. And
if any particular debate, quarrel, or controversy shall arise, for whatsoever
cause that is past, present, or to come, betwixt any of us (as God forbid) in
that case, we shall submit our selves, and our said questions, to the decision
of the Council, or to Arbitrators to be named by them, etc. Providing always,
That this be not prejudicial to the ordinary Jurisdiction of Judges, but that
men may pursue their Actions by order of Law, Civilly or Criminally, as it
pleases them.

This Contract and Band came not only to the ears, but also to the sight of
the Queen Dowager: whereat she stormed not a little, and said, The malediction
of God I give unto them that counseled me to persecute the Preachers, and to
refuse the Petitions of the best part of the true subjects of this Realm. Let
the Princes now adays make use of this.
It was said to me, That the English Army could not continue in Scotland ten
days; but now they have lien near a month, and are more like to remain, So
now the worldlings speak unto the King concerning the Scots into England.
then they were at the first day that they came. They that gave information to
the Queen, spoke as worldly wise men, and as things appeared to have been; for
the Country being almost in all the parts thereof wasted, the Victuals next
adjacent to Leith, either brought into their Provision, or else destroyed; the
Mills, and other places, as before is said, being cast down, it appeared that
the Camp could not have been furnished (except it had been by their own Ships;
and as that could not have been of any long continuance, Note.
so should it have been little comfortable.) But God confounded all worldly
wisdom, and made his own Benediction as evidently to appear, as if in a manner
he had fed the Army from above: For all kind of Victual there was more
abundant, and at more easy prices in the Camp all the time that it lay, after
that eight days were past, then either they have been in Edinburgh any of two
years before, or it has been in this Town to this day, the 20 of May, Anno
1566.

The people of Scotland so much abhorred the tyranny of the French, that they
would have given the substance that they had, to have been rid of that
chargeable burden, which our sins had provoked God to lay upon us, in
delivering and giving into the hands of a woman, whom our Nobility in their
foolishness sold unto strangers, and with her the Liberty of this Realm. God
for his great mercy sake preserve us yet from further Bondage, in which we are
like to fall, if he provide not remedy; The Hamiltons ^am^ly.
for our Nobility will yet remain blind still, and will follow their
affection, come after what so may. But to return to our History. The Camp
abounding in all necessary Provision, order was taken for continuation of the
Siege; and so the Trenches were drawn as near the Town as possibly they might.
The great Camp removed from Lestarrig, to the West side of the water of Leith;
and so were the Cannons planted for the Battery, and did shoot at the Southwest
wall: But by reason all was earth, the Breach was not made so great upon the
day, but that it was sufficiently repaired upon the night: whereof the
Englishmen beginning to be weary, determined to give the Breach an Assault, as
that they did upon the seventh day of May, beginning before the day light, and
continued till it was nigh seven a clock. And albeit that the English and
Scottish with great slaughter of the Soldiers of both were repulsed, yet was
there never a sharper assault given by so few hands; for they exceeded not a
thousand men, that assaulted the whole two quarters of the Town, and yet they
damned the whole Block-house, yea, they once put the French clean off their
Walls, and were upon both the East and West Block-house, but they lacked
backing, for their Scales lacked six quarters of the just height; And so while
the former were compelled to fight upon the top of the wall, their fellows
could not join to support them, and so were they by multitude driven back
again, when it was once thought that the Town was won. Sir James Crofts was
blamed of many for not doing his duty that day, for he was appointed with a
sufficient number of the most able men, to have assaulted the Northwest quarter
upon the Sea side, where at a low water (as at the time of the assault it was)
the passage was easy. Note this diligently.
But neither he nor his approached to their quarter appointed. He had before at
the first coming in, spoken with the Queen Regent, at the fair Block-house of
the Castle of Edinburgh: Whether she had enchanted him or not, we know not, but
by suspicion of that day in which he deceived the expectation of many, and so
far as man could judge, was the cause of that great repulse; some ascribed
the shortness of the Ladders to him; but that omitted which might have
proceeded of negligence, his absence from the pursuit of his Quarter, was the
cause that such French as were appointed there to defend, seeing no pursuer
came to the relief of their fellows, and so they two joining together, with
great slaughter gave the repulse to our Company. The French-mens harlots, of
whom the most part were Scottish whores, did no less cruelty then did the
Soldiers: For besides that they charged their Pieces, and ministered unto them
other weapons, some continually cast stones, some carried Chimneyes of burning
fire, some brought Timber and other impediments of weight, which with great
violence they threw over the wall upon our men, but especially when they began
to turn back. Now albeit in all this we acknowledge, We must go to the first
cause in all things.
to be the secret work of God, who by such means would beat down as well the
pride of England as of Scotland, yet neither ought the feebleness nor falsehood
of man be excused, neither yet the cruelty of the adversaries concealed. The
Queen Regent sat all the time of the assault (which was both terrible and long)
upon the fore-Wall of the Castle of Edinburgh, and when she perceived the
overthrow of us, and that the Ensigns of the French were again displayed upon
the Walls, she gave a gawfe of laughter, and said; Now will I go to the Mass,
and praise God for that which mine eyes have seen. And so was Friar Black ready
for that purpose, whom she her self a little before had deprehended with his
Harlot in the Chapel. But Whoredom and Idolatry agree well together, and that
our Court can witness this day, the 16 of May 1566. The French proud of the
Victory, The inhumanity of the merc^l^ss* French.
stripped naked all the slain, and laid their dead carkases before the hot Sun
along the wall, where they suffered them to lie more days then one: Unto the
which, when the Queen Regent looked, The Qu^en Regents cruel heart.
for mirth, she leapt, and said; Yonder is the fairest tapistrie that ever I
saw, I would that the whole fields that is betwixt this place and you were
strowed with the same stuff. This fact was seen of all, and her words were
heard of some, and it was misliked of many. Against the which John K^ox spoke
openly in Pulpit, and boldly affirmed, That God should revenge that contumely
done to his Image, which not only in the furious and godless Soldiers, but
even in such as rejoiced thereat. And the very experience declared, That he was
not deceived: For within few days after (yea, some say, that same day) began
her belly and loathsome legs to swell, and so continued, till that God did in
his wisdom take her away from this world, as after we shall hear.

After the Defeat received, the Queen Regent and her faction were fully
persuaded that the Siege would rise, and that the English Army would depart.
And so began the Papists wonderously to brag; and yet God did frustrate their
expectation: for the Army concluded to remain, till new advertisement came
from the Queen and Counsel. The comfortable Letter of the Duke of Norfolk.
The Duke of Norfolk, who then lay at Barwick, commanded the Lord Gray to
continue the Siege; and promised, That he should not lack men, so long as any
were to be had betwixt Trent and Twead, for so far was he Lieutenant: he
further promised his own presence, in case he should be required, and for
assurance thereof, he sent his own Tents, such as seldom before had been seen
in Scotland, with his Officers and provision. And with expedition were sent two
thousand fresh men, whereby the Camp greatly comforted, began to forget the
former discomfiture, and to sustain the daily skirmishing, as they did before:
In the which, the French after the day of the assault did ever receive the
hurt, and the repulse, as the slaughter of many that came to the Cole-rake did
witness. The greatest damage that either English or Scottish received after
that day, was the slaughter of two Gentlemen, the one master of household to my
Lord James, Robert Colwin of Clesch, a man stout, modest, and wise, who was
shot in the thigh with a Falcon, or Harquebute of Croke, and so departed the
misery of this life within two hours after. The other was Alexander Lockart,
brother to the Lord of Bar, who rashly discovering himself in the Trenches,
was shot in the head, and immediately thereafter departed this life. While the
Siege thus continued, a sudden fire chanced in Leith, which devoured many
houses, and much Victual, and so began God to fight for us, as the Lord Erskin
in plain words said to the Queen Regent; Madame (quoth he) I can see no more,
Note.
but seeing that men may not expel unjust possessours forth of this land, God
himself would do it; For your fire is not kindled by man. Which words offended
the Queen Regent not a little (whose sickness daily increasing) great craft
she used, That Monsieur Dosell might have been permitted to have spoken with
her, belike she would have bidden him farewell, (for their old familiarity
was great) but that denied, she Writ, as it had been to her Chyrurgeon and
Apothecarie, showing her sickness, and requiring some Drogs. The Letter being
presented to the Lord Gray, he espied the craft, for few Lines being written
above, and so much White-Paper left, he said, Drogs are abundant and fresher in
Edinburgh, then they can be in Leith. There lurketh here some other mystery,
and so he began to try, and by holding the Paper to the fire, he perceives
some writing appear, and so began he to read; but what it was no other man can
tell, for immediately he burnt the Bill, and said to the Messenger; Albeit I
have been her Secretary, yet tell her, I shall keep her council; But say to
her, Such Wares will not sell till a new Market. The answer received, she was
nothing content, and then traveled she earnestly, That she might speak with
the Earls Argyle, Glencarne, Mershall, and with the Lord James. After
deliberation it was thought expedient, that they should speak with her, but not
all together, lest that some part of the Guisians practice had lurked under the
color of such friendship. Let the Princes now make use of these words of this
dying Queen.
Her regrate was unto them all, That she had behaved her self so foolishly, as
that she had compelled them to seek the support of others, then of their own
Sovereign, and said, That she sore repented, that ever it came to that
extremity: but she was not the wight, but the wicked counsel of her friends
on the one part, and the Earl of Huntley on the other: for if he had not been,
she would have fully agreed with them at their Commoning at Preston: They gave
unto her both the Council and the Comfort which they could in that extremity,
and willed her to send for some godly learned man, of whom she might receive
instruction, for these ignorant Papists that were about her, understood nothing
of the Mystery of our redemption. Upon their motion was John Willock sent for,
with whom she talked a reasonable space, and who did plainly show unto her as
well the virtue and strength of the death of Jesus Christ, as the vanity and
abomination of that Idol the Mass: She did openly confess, That there was no
salvation, but in and by the death of Jesus Christ; but of the Mass we heard
not her Confession. Some say she was anointed with extreme Unction, after the
Papisticall manner, which was a sign of small knowledge of the Truth; and of
less Repentance of her former Superstition: Yet howsoever it was, Christ Jesus
gate no small Victory over such an enemy. For albeit before she had Vowed,
That in despite of all Scotland, the Preachers of Jesus Christ should either
die, or be banished the Realm: yet was she compelled not only to hear, That
Christ Jesus was Preached, and all Idolatry openly rebuked, and in many places
suppressed: Note.
but also she was constrained to hear one of the principal Ministers within
the Realm, and to approve the chief head of our Religion, wherein we dissent
from all Papists and Papistrie. Shortly thereafter she finished her life, The
death of the Queen Regent.
unhappy to Scotland, from the first day she entered into it, unto the day that
she departed this life, which was the ninth day of June, in year of God 1560.
The Guisian Counsels, as they were wicked and cruel to the people, so they
proved mischievous to themselves, and to them that followed them, to this day.

Upon the sixteenth day of June, after the death of the Queen Regent, came to
Scotland Monsieur Randam, and with him the Bishop of Valance in Commission from
France, to negotiate a Peace: From England there came Sir William Cecill,
chief Secretary, and Doctor Whitton. Their negotiation was longsome; Note a
Character of Popishly addicted French officers of State.
for both England and we fearing deceit, sought by all means that the contract
should be sure. And they on the other part, meaning to gratify such as had
sent them (who meant nothing but mere falsehood) protracted time to the
uttermost: yea, while that those of Leith were very scarce of victuals, and
those of the Inch had perished, had not been that by policy they gat a ship
with Victuals, and some Munition, which was upon Midsommer Even, whereof they
made no small triumph, which also for a season stayed the appointment, yet in
the end Peace was concluded, in form as follows.

The Articles Translated and agreed by John, Bishop of Valance, and Monsieur
Randam, Deputies to the King and Queen of Scotland, upon the matters presented
to them, by way of Petition, for the part of Nobility and people of Scotland.
IN the first, Upon the Complaint and Petition of the said Nobility, and the
people of this Country, and the number of men of War sustained by their
Majesty's in these parts in the time of Peace. It is humbly remonstrated to the
said Deputies, that they would provide convenient remedy thereunto, for the
comfort and relief of the Country. The said Deputies considering the said
desires to be just, and conformable to reason, condescended, agreed, and
assured, That the King and Queen should procure no French Men of War, nor no
other nation to come to these parts in time coming. But if strangers would
pretend to enter into this Realm with a Navy or Army, to occupy the same:
In the which cause provision shall be made by their Majesty's, the judgment
and counsel of the States of the Realm being had thereto, and that the French
Men of War being now in the Town of Leith, shall be sent to France the same
time, that the Navy and Army of Englishmen and Scottish-men be scattered and
departed both by sea and land, the which shall be done in the best manner may
be, as at more large consideration shall be had thereupon, and as to the bands
of Scottish men of war, being at the said place, they shall be broken, and
the men of war licensed to depart. Moreover, as to the Forts of Dumbar, and
Incheketh* that there shall remain in them an 120. Frenchmen of war only,
which shall be parted and distributed in these two places, and there shall
remain no more in Dumbar, but threescore men of war, so it be affirmed by the
Captains chosen to that effect by both the parties, that for the keeping of the
same, a greater number is not need full: also to depart when the States of the
Realm can find any good and sure remedy upon the expenses made in the said
places, to keep the same from peril of invasion or ruin thereof from them
that would pretend to occupy the same, they shall immediately show the same
unto their Majesty's as hastily as may be done: and in the mean time the number
of the said men of war shall not be augmented. And in like manner, it shall not
be lawful to the said men of war, to do any injuries to any persons, nor yet
to maintain and defend any Scottish men, of what quality soever they be of,
against the will and authority of the Magistrates of the Realm, nor to receive
them in the said places that the Minister of Justice may not put hands on them,
nor yet shall intromit in any manner of way, with the quarrels and discords of
the Lords, and other particular men of this Realm: But they themselves shall be
bound in cases of any quarrel, to be punished after the Laws and constitutions
of this Realm, and to answer for themselves before the Judges Ordinaries of the
same. Last of all, that from henceforth they be not compelled to take on
credit, they shall be every month satisfied of their wages, so that two
Scottish Lords chosen by the Council, may present it, at the Wapon shawing and
musters of the said men of war, and also to visit the said Forts, to see if
the number of them be liked, and it shall not be lawful to the said men of war
to take any victuals for their sustentation, or for munition of the said
places, but by payment of ready money numerate, and with the pleasures of them
that delivers the same unto them: And therefore the said Lords obliges
themselves to give them so much as is needful unto them, they having to pay
therefore.

Item, upon the petition pre^ented unto the said Lords Deputies, anenst the
demolition of the fortifications, the said Deputies consent, agree and
assures, that the fortification of Leith shall be demolished, and that two,
three, or four Captains shall be chosen by both the parties to view the Castle
of Dumbar, and if it be found by them, that the reparation, amplification* and
fortifying made thereof now after the peace* greater number of men to the
keeping thereof be required, the reparation and fortification thereof shall be
abolished, so soon as may be done, and shall remain only untouched that thing
while we may make the said Castle more sure, and in less danger from
invasion. Providing not the less that no greater number of men therein be
required for keeping of the same. Moreover, Note how they limit the Prince.
in times coming the King and Queen shall make no mo^ new Forts within this
Realm* and shall not augment them, that are else made, nor shall repair them
that are demolished without counsel and consent of the Estates; nor yet shall
transport to these parts, any Artillery, Munition of War, Powder, or
Victuals, but so much as may serve for keeping of the said places by the space
of six months, or a year.

Item, Anenst the Demand made about the debts contracted by the French men of
War in this Country, The said Deputies consents, That the King and Queen
shall cause to be restored all that which happens to be found given and
granted to the Kings Lieutenant, and his Captains, and other Officers, for the
nourishment, sustentation, and maintenance of the said Frenchmen; or that
which is found owing by the Lieutenants for service of their Majesty's, that
may appear by writ, or confession of parties.

Item, Upon the Petition made anenst the Convention of States of this Realm,
the said Deputies Consented and Accorded, etc. That the States of the Realm
may convene and hold a Parliament the twentieth day of the month of July next
to come; upon the which day the Parliament shall be continued, as the use is,
unto the first day of the month of August following. Providing always, That
before they begin to handle any thing in the said Parliament, all tumult of War
be discharged, and cease, that they who are present may be free without fear of
men of War, or others; and that in this mean time a Messenger be sent by the
said Deputies to the King and Queen, to certify them of the things agreed,
treated and accorded, requesting their Majesty's humbly to be contented with
the same. And the said Convention shall be as lawful in all respects, as the
same had been ordained and done by express Commandment of their Majesty's.
Providing that no matter be treated therein before the said first day of August.

Item, Note how the Prince is limitated, and his will is not a Law.
Upon the Article presented concerning War and Peace, the said Deputies
Consented, Accorded, etc. That the King and Queen neither make Peace nor War on
their parts, but by the Counsel, Judgment, and consent of the States,
according to the Ordinance of the Country, and as was observed by their
Predecessors.

Item, Upon the Petition presented to the said Deputies concerning the
Government and Regiment of the Policy, they have Consented, etc. That four and
twenty worthy men of this Realm be chosen by the States, of the which the King
and the Queen shall choose seven, and the States five; which in their Majesty's
absence shall take order, and make one ordinary Council for the administration
aforesaid, so that no man of whatsoever quality he be, shall have the power to
order any thing to be done touching the said business, without the mediation,
authority, and consent of them; and the said Counselors shall convene together
as often as they can conveniently, but shall convene no less nor fix together.
And when any matter of importance occurreth, they shall all be called to
consult, and order to be taken by them, or the most part of them, if need be:
And if it happen any of the said seven chosen by the King and Queen to decease,
their Majesty's shall choose another forth of the said number of four and twenty
in the place of him that deceased. And if any of the said five chosen by the
States dies, the remnant forechosen by them shall name another of the number
of 24. Moreover, if it be thought expedient to the said States that other two
be augmented to the said number of 12. then and in that cause, the King and
Queen shall choose one, and the States another; and so was this Article agreed
under condition, that is to say, That the same be no prejudice in times coming
to the King and Queen, and Rights of the Crown. And the said Deputies offered
their labors to make mediation to the King and Queen, for maintaining Pensions
and Expenses of the said Counselors, and ordinary Officers of the said
Council, to be provided of the Rents and Revenues of the Crown.

Item, Upon the Petition made to the said Depu^ies anenst the Officers of this
Realm, they consented and accorded, etc. That in time to come the King and
Queen shall not depute any stranger in the administration of the Civil and
Common Justice, and likewise in the Office of Chancery, Keeper of the Seal,
the Treasurer, Controller, and every like Offices, and shall not use them, but
shall be content with their own subjects borne in the Realm. Moreover, It
shall not be lawful to put the Office of Treasury, Note.
Controller, into the hands of any Churchman, or other which are not able to
exercise the said Offices; the which Treasurer and Controller shall be provided
of sufficient Commission to use the said Offices: But it shall be lawful to
them to dispose or sell Wards of Marriages, or other casualties, or any other
things whatsoever they be, pertaining to their Offices, without advice and
consent of the said Council, to the effect that the Council may know that all
things be done to the profit of the King and Queen: And yet they will not bind
or astraint the King or Queen to this Article, that they may not give when they
think expedient.

Item, They accorded, That in the first Convention and Parliament of the States
of this Realm, there shall be Constituted, Ordained, and Established, an Act
of Oblivion, which afterward shall be confirmed by the Kings and Queens
Majesty's, by the which the remembrance of bearing Armor, and other things
which have been done shall be buried and forgotten, from the sixth day of the
month of March, in the year of our Lord God 1558 years: And by the same Act,
they which have contravened the Laws of the Realm, shall be excused, and free
of all pains contained therein, even so as if it had never been contravened.
Providing, That the Privilege of the said Act be not extended to them which
the States of the Realm shall judge unworthy thereof.

Item, It is agreed and concluded, That in the said Convention or Parliament,
the States of the Realm, as the Custom is, and ordinarily is required, shall
be called; in the which all they that have used to convene and to be present,
may come without all fear or force done, or to be done to them by any person;
so that the said States shall oblige them. That where in time coming any
Sedition, or gathering of men of War shall happen to be without command of the
Council, being of the number of twelve, the Realm and Country shall repute
the causers thereof, and they that convene, as Rebels, and shall pursue them
as such like, that they may be punished by the Laws of the Realm, so that the
K. and Q. shall not be compelled in time coming to send any men of War
strangers in these parts, for obtaining due obedience of their subjects.

Item, They Offered, Accorded, and Agreed, That there shall be a general peace
and reconciliation amongst all Lords and subjects of this Realm, so that they
that are called of the Congregation, and they which are not of the same, shall
lay no reproach to others for the things which are done from the said sixth day
of March, 1558.

Item, They Offered, Accorded, and Affirmed, That the King and Queen shall not
pursue, revenge, nor make any persecution for the things that have been done,
nor yet shall they suffer the same to be done by their subjects Frenchmen, but
shall have all things in Oblivion, as if the same had never been done. And such
like the Lords of this Realm of Scotland shall do in all business betwixt them
and the Frenchmen on their. And if by sinister information, or any other
occasion, their Majesty's have conceived evil opinion against their subjects,
they shall utterly forget and change the same: Nor shall they deprive any of
them, nor take from them any of them, their Subjects, the Offices, Benefices,
or Estates, which they have brooked and enjoyed in the said Realm before, by
reason of any things they have meddled with, from the said sixth day of March,
1558. And further, shall make no occasion of deprivation, nor deposing of them
by any other color, without just cause, but rather they shall esteem and use
them in time coming, as good and obedient subjects. Providing, That the said
Lords, and other subjects on their part, make to their Majesty's all obedience
such like, as other faithful and natural subjects owe to their Sovereigns.

Item, It is Accorded and Agreed, That it shall be lawful to none of the Lords
and Nobility of Scotland, or any other, to make Convocation of men of War, but
in the ordinary cause approved by the Laws and Custom of the Realm; And none
of them shall cause any men of War strangers to come to their parts; and much
less shall attempt to do any thing against the King and Queen, or against the
Authority of the Council, and other Magistrates of the Realm; and they which
have presented the Petition shall be bound thereunto. And in case any of them,
or others, find occasion to invade or take Armor against any man as he
pretends, after that he has communicated the matter with the Council of the
Realm, he shall present his Complaint to their Majesty's, and generally they
shall oblige them under the said pains, to do the things which pertains to
good and faithful Subjects, for the quietness and tranquillity of the Realm,
and Rights of their Sovereign.

Item, It is Agreed, That if any Bishops, Abbots, or other Churchmen, shall
find or allege them to have received any injuries, either in their persons
or goods, the Complaints shall be seen and considered by the States of the said
Convention and Parliament, and there shall be made redress, as they shall
find according to reason; and in the mean time no man shall stop them, but
they shall brook and enjoy their goods, nor shall do any hurt, injury or
violence to them: And if any does contravene to this Article, he shall be
pursued by the Lords as a perturber of a good Common-wealc.

Item, It is Accorded, etc. That the said Lords shall bind them to observe,
and cause to be observed, all and sundry Points and Articles agreed in this
Treaty; And if it happen that any of them, or any other should gainsay the
same, the remnant Lords, and residue of the whole people, shall be enemies to
him, and shall pursue him till he be chastned, and punished according to his
demerits.

Item, It is Concluded, etc. That all the whole Realm may know that the King
and Queen are not willing to keep any remembrance of the troubles and
differences past, and so far as concerns the Nobility, and other subjects of
this Realm; That their Majesty's desire is to use them humanely, and to be
favorable unto them, the said Deputies have promised and accorded, That the
Duke of Chattellarault, and all other Noblemen of Scotland, shall be restaured
and settled again in all their goods and benefices, which they had enjoyed in
France; That they may brook and enjoy the same, in the same manner as they did
before those debates, the said sixth day of March, and year aforesaid, even as
the said controversies had never chanced. And also that all Capitulations and
Articles agreed upon in times past, and especially those that were appointed in
the King and Queens Contract shall be observed and kept, as well for the part
of their Majesty's, as for the part of the Nobility and people of Scotland. And
as concerning David, son to the Duke of Chattellarault, now being in Bois de
Vincennes, liberty shall be granted unto him to return into Scotland, and to
do as he pleases. Moreover, when the said Deputies exposed that some time it
might chance, That the King might have need and use of his great Guns and
Artillery in France, the said Lords having consideration thereof, accorded,
That no other Artillery be translated out of this Realm, but those which were
sent and brought in, from the said day of the decease of Francis King of
France, of good memory, to these parts: And that all other Artillery and
Munition be reposed into the places whence they were taken forth, and in
special they that have the Arms of Scotland, shall be put into the places
whence they were taken forth of. And there shall be Noblemen of Scotland
appointed therefore, and two for the part of the Kings Majesty, are to be
deputed to agnosce and view the same before the Shipping thereof.

And moreover, That whereas in the names of the Nobility and people of Scotland
certain Articles concerning Religion and other Points have been presented,
which the said Deputies will not touch; and considering the weight and
importance of them, has remitted the same to be cognosced and decided by their
Majesty's; The said Lords and Nobility do promise, That a certain number of
Noblemen should be chosen in the next Convention and Parliament to be sent to
their Majesty's, which shall expose to their Highnesses those things that shall
be thought needful for the state of their business, and for the forementioned
and other Articles and Points undecided by the Deputies, to the effect they may
know their Majesty's intention and good will concerning those things which shall
be exposed from the Country: the which also shall have with them a confirmation
and ratification by the states of the Realm, of those articles which are
concorded, etc. by the Deputies; to whom also the same time or before shall be
given and delivered, and like Confirmation and Ratification made by their
Majesty's, so being that the said States send their Ratification aforesaid.

The Proclamation of the things above-written, made the 8 of July, in the year
of God 1560.
TO the glory of the Almighty Lord God, and to the comfort of all Christians,
the most puissant Prince and Princess, and most Christian King and Queen
Francis and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of France and Scotland:
and by the most puissant Princess Elizabeth, by the same Grace, Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, etc. It is accorded, and Reconciliation of Peace
and Amity made, which is to be observed inviolably, amongst them, their
Subjects, Realms and Countries. For as much as in name of the said Prince and
Princess it is commanded, and straightly charged to all manner of persons under
their obedience, or being in their service, from henceforth to desist from all
hostility both by Sea and Land, and to keep a good Peace the one with the
other, and with charge, that none shall break the same under peril of, etc.

These things transacted, and the Peace Proclaimed, as is said, sudden
provision was made for transporting of the French to France, of whom the most
part were put in the English Ships, who also carried with them the whole spoil
of Leith: The profit th^^ Leith got of their promise liberty.
and that was the second benefit which they received of their late promised
liberty, the end whereof is not yet. The English Army departed by land the 16
day of July, in the year of God 1560. The most part of our Nobility
Protestants, honorably conveyed them (as in very deed they had well deserved)
But Lord James would not leave the Lord Gray with the other Noblemen of
England, till that they entered into Barwick. After whose returning, the
Council began to look as well upon the affairs of the Commonwealth, as upon
the matters that might concern the stability of Religion. As before we have
heard the Parliament was concluded to begin the tenth of July, and to be
continued till the first of August next, and therefore the Lords made the
greater haste and diligence, that all things should be put in convenient order.
But before all things the Preachers exhorted them (for then in Edinburgh were
the most part of the chief Ministers of the Realm) to be thankful unto God,
and next to provide that the Ministers should be distributed, as the necessity
of the Country required. A day was appointed, when that the whole Nobility,
and the greatest part of the Congregation assembled in S. Giles Church in
Edinburgh, where after the Sermon made for that purpose, public thanks were
given unto God for his merciful deliverance, in form as follows.

Thankesgiving for our deliverance with Prayers.
O Eternal and everlasting God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has not
only commanded us to Pray, and promised to hear us; but also willest us to
magnify thy mercies, and to glorify thy Name, when thou show thy self
pitiful, and favorable unto us, especially when thou deliverest us from
desperate dangers: for so did thy servants, Abraham, David, Iehosaphat, and
Ezechias, yea, the whole people of Israel omitted not the same, when thou by
thy mighty hand did confound their enemies, and did deliver them from fear
and danger of death intended. We ought not, nor can we forget, O Lord, in how
miserable estate stood this poor Country, and we the just inhabitants of the
same, not many days past; When Idolatry was maintained; When cruel strangers
did bear rule; When Virgins were defloured, Matrones corrupted, Men's Wives
violently and villanously oppressed, The blood of innocents shed without mercy.
And finally, when the unjust commandments of proud tyrants were obeyed as Law.
Out of these miseries (O Lord) could neither our wit, policy nor strength
deliver us, yea, thou did show to us how vain was the help of man, where thy
blessing gives not victory. In these our anguishes, O Lord, we sobbed unto
thee, we cried for thy help, and we reclaimed thy Name, as thy troubled flock
persecuted for thy Trueths sake. Mercifully have thou heard us (O Lord)
mercifully, we say, because that neither in us, neither yet in our confederates
was there any cause why that thou should have given unto us so joyful and
sudden a deliverance. For neither of us both ceased to do wickedly, even in the
midst of our greatest troubles, and yet have thou looked upon us so pitifully,
as that we had given unto thee most perfect obedience. For thou have
disappointed the counsels of the crafty; Thou have bridled the rage of the
cruel; and thou have of thy mercy set this our perishing Realm, at a
reasonable liberty. Oh give us hearts (thou Lord, that only give all good
gifts) with reverence and fear to meditate thy wondrous works late wrought in
our eyes. Let not the remembrance of the same unthankfully to slip from our
wavering minds. We grant and acknowledge, O Lord, That whatsoever we have
received, shall fall into oblivion with us, and so turn to our condemnation;
unless thou by the power of thy Spirit keep and retain us in recent and
perpetual memory of the same. We beseech thee therefore, O father of mercies,
that as of thy undeserved grace, thou have partly removed our darkness;
suppressed Idolatry; and taken from above our heads the devouring sword of
merciless strangers, that so it would please thee to proceed with us in this
thy grace begun. And albeit that in us there is nothing that may move thy
Majesty, to show us this favor; yet for Christ Jesus, thy only welbeloved
Sons sake, whose Name we bear, and whose Doctrine we profess; we beseech thee
never to suffer us to forsake or deny this Verity which now we profess. But
seeing that thou have mercifully heard us, and have caused thy Verity to
triumph in us; so we crave of thee continuance to the end, that thy godly Name
may be glorified in us thy creatures. And seeing that nothing is more odious in
thy presence (O Lord) then is ingratitude and violation of an Oath and Covenant
made in thy Name. And seeing thou have made our Confederates of England the
Instrument by whom we are now set at this liberty, Note a Covenant betwixt
England and Scotland.
and to whom in thy Name we have promised mutual faith again. Let us never
fall to that unkindnesse (O Lord) that either we declare our selves unthankful
unto them, 1560.
or prophaners of thy holy Name. Confound thou the Counsel of those, that go
about to break that most godly League contracted in thy Name, and retain thou
us so firmly together by the power of thy holy Spirit, that Satan have never
power to set us again at variance nor discord. Give us thy grace to live in
that Christian charity, which thy Son our Lord Jesus has so earnestly
commended to all the members of his body, that other Nations provoked by our
example, may set aside all ungodly war, contention and strife, and study to
live in tranquillity and peace, as it becomes the Sheep of thy Pasture, and
the people that daily look for our final deliverance by the coming again of
our Lord Jesus. To whom with thee and the Holy Spirit be all honor, glory and
praise now and ever. Amen.

Hereafter were the Commissioners of Boroughs, with some of the Nobility and
Barons, appointed to see the equal distribution of Ministers to change and
transport, as the most part should think expedient. And so was John Knox
appointed to Edinburgh, Christopher Goodman (who the most part of the troubles
had remained in Air) was appointed to Saint Andrews, Adam Heriot to Aberdeene,
Master John Row to Saint Iohnston, Paul Meaffen (to whom was no infamy then
known) to Iedburgh, William Christison to Dundie, David Fargeson to
Dunfermelin, and Master David Lindsay to Leith. There were nominated for
Superintendents, and Overseers, that all things in the Church should be carried
with Order, and well, Master John Spottiswood for Lowthian, Master John Wyram
for Fyfe, Master John Willock for Glasgow, the Lord of Dun for Angus and
Mearnes, Master John Carswell for Argyle and the Isles. These to be elected at
the days appointed; unless that the Countries whereto they were to be
appointed, could in the mean time find out men more able and sufficient, or
else show such causes as might disable them from that employment.

The Parliament approaching, due advertisement was made by the Council, to all
such as by Law and ancient Custom had, or might claim to have Title therein.
The assembly was great, notwithstanding some, as well of those that be called
Spiritual as Temporal Lords, contemptuously did absent themselves. And yet
the chief Pillars of the Papisticall Church gave their presence, such as the
Bishops of Saint Andrews, Dumblane, and Dunkell, with others of the inferior
sort, beside those that had renounced Papisterie, Some Prelates left Antichrist,
and did adher^ unto Christ.
and openly professed Jesus Christ with us, such as the Bishop of Galloway, the
Abbots of Lindrosse, Culrosse, Saint Colmes Inch, New-battell, Halyrud-house,
the Priour of Saint Andrews, Coldinghame, Saint-Mary I Will, the Sub-priour of S.
Andrews, and diverse others, whom we observed not. At the same time of
Parliament John Knox publicly Preached upon some Texts of the Prophet Haggai,
the Doctrine was proper for the time. In application whereof he was so special
and so vehement, that some (having greater respect to the world then to Gods
glory) feeling themselves pricked, William M^itlands mockage of God.
said in mockage, We may now forget our selves, and bear the Barrow to build
the house of God. God be merciful to the speaker, for we fear yet he shall
have experience, That the building of his own house (the house of God being
despised) shall not be so prosperous, and of such firmitie as we desire it
were. And albeit some mocked, yet others were godly moved, who did assemble
themselves together, to consult what things were to be proposed to that present
Parliament: And after deliberation, was this subsequent supplication offered.

The Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and other true Subjects of this Realm,
professing the Lord Jesus within the same.
To the Nobility and States of Parliament presently assembled within the said
Realm, desire Grace, Mercy and Peace, from God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with the increase of his holy Spirit.
PLease your Honors to call to remembrance, how diverse and sundry times, we
(with some of your selves) most humbly Petitioned, at the feet of the late
Queen Regent, for freedom and liberty of Conscience, with a godly Reformation
of abuses, which by the malice of Satan and negligence of men, are crept into
the Religion of God, and are maintained by such as take upon them the name of
Clergy. And albeit that our godly and most reasonable suit was then
disdainfully rejected, whereof no small troubles have ensued, as your Honors
well know, yet seeing that the same necessity yet remains, that then moved
us; And moreover, that God of his mercy has now put into your hands, to take
such order; As God thereby may be glorified; This Commonwealth quieted; And
the Policy thereof established: We cannot cease to crave of your Honors the
redress of such enormities, as manifestly are (and of long time have been)
committed by the place-holders of the Ministry, and others of the Clergy
within this Realm. And first, seeing that God of his great mercy has by the
light of his Word manifested to no small number of this Realm, That the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, received by the said Clergy, and maintained
through their tyranny by fire and sword, contained in it self many
pestiferous errors, which cannot but bring damnation to the souls of such as
therewith shall be infected; such as are the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; of
the Adoration of Christ's Body, under the form of Bread, as they term it; of
the Merits of Works, and Justification that they allege comes thereby;
together with the Doctrine of the Papisticall Indulgences, Purgatory,
Pilgrimage, and Praying to Saints departed, which all either repugne to the
plain Scriptures, or else have no ground in the Doctrine of our Master Jesus
Christ, his Prophets and Apostles.

1. We humbly therefore crave of your Honors, That such doctrine and Idolatry
as by Gods Word are both condemned, so may they be abolished by Act of this
present Parliament, and punishment appointed for the transgressors.

Secondarily, seeing that the Sacraments of Jesus Christ are most shamefully
abused and profaned by that Roman Harlot and her sworn vassals; and also
because that the true Discipline of the ancient Church is utterly now amongst
that Sect extinguished: For who within the Realm are more corrupt in life and
manners then are they that are called the Clergy, living in whoredom,
adultery, deflouring Virgins, corrupting Matrons, and doing all abomination,
without fear of punishment. We humbly therefore desire your Honors to find
remedy against the one and the other.

3. Thirdly, Because that man of sin falsely claims to himself the titles of,
The Vicar of Christ, The Successor of Peter, The Head of the Church, That he
cannot err, That all power is granted unto him, etc. By the which usurped
Authority, he takes upon him the distribution and possession of the whole
Patrimony of the Church, whereby the true Ministry of the Word of God long time
has been altogether neglected, the godly learning despised, the Schools not
provided, and the poor not only frauded of their portion, but also most
tyrannously oppressed: we likewise hereof desire remedy. And lest that your
Honors should doubt in any of these premises, we offer our selves evidently to
prove, That in all the rabble of the Clergy there is not one lawful Minister,
if Gods Word, the practices of the Apostles, the sincerity of the Primitive
Church, and their own ancient Laws, shall judge of lawful Election. We further
offer to prove them all thieves and murderers, yea, rebels and traitors to the
lawful Authority of Emperors, Kings and Princes, and therefore unworthy to be
suffered in any reformed Commonwealth. How maliciously they murdered our
brethren, for no other cause, but for that they offered to us the light of Gods
Word, your Honors cannot be ignorant; and into what hazard their tyranny has
brought this whole Realm, the Ages after will consider. If ye look for other
fruit in times to come, then ye have seen in them whom we accuse, we are
assured ye shall be deceived. Now has God, beyond all expectation of man, made
you, who sometimes were suppliants with us for Reformation, Judges, as it were,
in the Cause of God: At least, he has so subdued your enemies unto you, that
by violence they are not able to suppress the Verity, as heretofore they have
done. We therefore, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, crave of your Honors, That
either they may be compelled to answer to our former accusations, and unto such
others as justly we have to lay to their charges; or else that all affection
laid aside, ye pronounce them such by censure of this Parliament, and cause
them to be so reputed, as by us most justly they are accused: Especially, that
they may be discerned unworthy of honor, authority, charge or cure in the
Church of God, and so from henceforth never to enjoy voice in Parliament: Which
if ye do not, then in the fear of God, and by assurance of his Word we forewarn
you, That as ye leave a grievous yoke, and a burden intolerable upon the Church
of God in this realm, so shall they be thorns in your eyes, and pricks in your
sides, whom after, when ye would, ye shall have no power to remove. God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ give you upright hearts, seeking his glory, and
true understanding, what this day he who has delivered you from Bondage both
Spiritual and Temporal, craveth of you by his servants, and your Honors
answer most humbly require.


This our Supplication being read in audience of the whole Assembly, diverse men
were of diverse judgments; See how this agrees with our tim^s.
for as some there were that uprightly favored the Cause of God; so were there
many that for worldly respects abhorred a perfect Reformation (for how many
within Scotland who have the name of Nobility, and are unjust possessors of the
Patrimony of the Church) and yet were the Barons and Ministers called, and
commandment given unto them, to draw into plain and several Heads the sum of
that Doctrine which they would maintain, and would desire the present
Parliament to establish, as wholesome, true, and only necessary to be
believed, and to be received within the Realm: Which they willingly accepted;
and within four days presented this Confession as it follows, without
alteration of any one sentence.

The Confession of Faith professed and believed by the Protestants within the
Realm of Scotland, published by them in Parliament, and by the Estates thereof
Ratified and Approved, as wholesome and sound Doctrine, grounded upon the
infallible Truth of God.
MATTHEW. 24. And this glad Tidings of the Kingdom shall be preached thorowout
the whole world for a Witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come.
The Preface.
The States of Scotland, with the Inhabitants of the same professing Christ
Jesus his holy Gospel,
To their natural Contrymen, and unto all other Realms and Nations
professing the same Lord Jesus with them, Wish Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Spirit of righteous
Judgment, for Salvation.
LOng have we thirsted (dear Brethren) to have notified unto the world the sum
of that Doctrine which we profess, and for the which we have sustained infamy
and danger. But such has been the rage of Satan against us, and against
Christ Jesus his Eternal Verity lately now again borne amongst us, that to
this day no time has been granted unto us, to clear our consciences, as most
gladly we would have done: For how we have been tossed a whole year past, the
most part of Europe (as we do suppose) does understand. But seeing that of the
infinite goodness of our God (who never suffers his afflicted utterly to be
confounded) above expectation, have we obtained some rest and liberty, we could
not but set forth this brief and plain Confession of such Doctrine as is
proposed unto us, and as we believe and profess; partly for satisfaction of
our Brethren, whose hearts, we doubt not, have been, and yet are, wounded by
the despightfull railing of such as yet have not learned to speak well: And
partly for stopping the mouths of impudent blasphemers, who boldly condemn
that which they neither heard nor understood: Not that we judge that the
cankred malice of such is able to be cured by this simple Confession; No, we
know that the sweet savor of the Gospel is and shall be death unto the sons of
perdition. But we have chief respect to our weak and infirm Brethren, to whom
we would communicate the bottom of our hearts, lest that they be troubled or
carried away by diversity of rumors which Satan spreads against us, to the
defeating of this our most godly enterprise; Protesting, That if any man will
note in this our Confession any Articles or sentence repugning to Gods holy
Word, that it would please him of his gentleness, and for Christian charities
sake, admonish us of the same in writing; and we upon our Honors and fidelity
do promise unto him satisfaction from the mouth of God (that is, from his holy
Scriptures) or else Reformation of that which he shall prove to be amiss. For
God we take to Record in our consciences, That from our hearts we abhor all
Sects of Heresy, and all teachers of erroneous doctrine; And that with all
humility we embrace the purity of Christ's Gospel, which is the only food of
our souls; and therefore so precious unto us, that we are determined to suffer
the extremest of worldly danger, rather then that we will suffer our selves to
be defrauded of the same. For hereof we are most certainly persuaded, That
whosoever denies Christ Jesus, or is ashamed of him in presence of men, shall
be denied before the Father, and before his holy Angels. And therefore by the
assistance of the mighty Spirit of the same our Lord Jesus, we firmly purpose
to abide to the end in the confession of this our Faith.

The first Article. Of GOD.
WE confess and acknowledge one only God, Deuteronomy. 14. 1 Cor. ^ 8. Isai 44.4,
5. 1 Timothy 1 27. 1 King 8.17. 2 Chronicles. 8 18. Psalm 139 78. G^n. 17 1. 1 Timothy
6.15, 16 Exodus 3.14, 15. Matt. 28.19. 1 John 57. Gen 1.1. Heb. 1.^3. Act. 17.28.
Prove* 16.4.
to whom only we must cleave, whom only we must Worship, and in whom only we
must put our trust; who is Eternal, Infinite, Unmeasurable, Incomprehensi^le,
Omnipotent, Invisible, one in Substance, and yet distinct into three Persons,
The Father, The Son, And the holy Ghost; by whom we confess and believe all
things in heaven and earth, as well Visible as Invisible, to have been Created,
to be Retained in their being, and to be Ruled and Guided by his inscrutable
Providence, to such end as his eternal Wisdom, Goodness and Justice has
appointed them, to the manifestation of his own Glory.

II. Of the Creation of Man.
WE confess and acknowledge this our God to have Created man (to wit, Gen
1.26, 27*
our first Father Adam) of whom also God formed the Woman, etc. Col. 3.10.
to his own Image and Similitude; To whom he gave Wisdom, Lordship, Justice,
Free Will, and clear Knowledge of himself; so that in the whole Nature of man
there could be no imperfection: From which Honor and Perfection Man and Woman
did both fall; the Woman, Ephesians 4 24 Genesis 3.6. Genesis 2.^7.
being deceived by the Serpent; and Man, obeying to the voice of the Woman,
both conspiring against the Sovereign Majesty of God, who in express words
had before threatened death, if they presumed to eat of the forbidden Tree.

III. Of Original Sin.
BY which transgression, commonly called Original Sin, was the Image of God
utterly defaced in Man, Psalm 51.5. Romans 5 10. Romans 7.5. 2 Tit. 2.6. Ephesians. 2 23.
Romans 5.14, 12. Romans 6.23. John 3 5. Romans 5.1. Phil. 1.29.
and he and his Posterity of Nature became enemies to God, slaves to Satan,
servants to Sin, insomuch that Death everlasting has had, and shall have power
and dominion over all that has not been, are not, or shall not be regenerate
from above; which Regeneration is wrought by the power of the holy Ghost,
working in the hearts of the Elect of God an assured Faith in the Promises of
God revealed to us in his Word; by which Faith they apprehend Christ Jesus,
with the Graces and Benefits promised in him.

IIII. Of the Revelation of the Promises.
FOr this we constantly believe, That God, after the fearful and horrible
defection of man from his obedience, Genesis 3.15. Genesis 3.9. Genesis 12 3. Genesis 15 5,
6. 2 Samuel 7.14. Isai 7.14 Isai 9 6 Hag 2.6 John 8.38.
did seek Adam again, call upon him, rebuke his sin, convince him of the same,
and in the end made unto him a joyful Promise, to wit, That the Seed of the
Woman should break down the Serpents head; that is, He should destroy the
works of the devil: which Promise, as it was repeated and made more clear from
time to time, so was it embraced with joy, and most constantly retained of all
the faithful, from Adam to Noah, from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to
David, and so forth to the Incarnation of Jesus Christ; who all (we mean the
faithful Fathers) under the Law, did see the joyful days of Christ Jesus,
and did rejoice.

V. The Continuance, Increase, and Preservation of his Church.
Ezekiel. 6.5, 6.7, 8, 9, etc.
WE most constantly believe, That God Preserves, Instructs, Multiplieth,
Honors, Decoreth, and from death called to Life his Church in all Ages, Genesis
1 12. Genesis 13.1. Exodus 1.1 Exodus 1.20. Josh 3. and 23 4 1 Samuel 10.1. 1 Samuel 16
13 2 Samuel 7 12 2 King^ 17.15, 16, etc.
from Adam, till the coming of CHRIST JESUS in the Flesh: For Abraham he called
from his fathers Country, him he instructed, his Seed he multiplied, the same
he marvellously preserved, and more marvellously delivered from the Bondage of
Pharaoh; to whom he gave his Laws, Constitutions and Ceremonies. Them he
possessed in the Land of Canaan, to them after Judges, and after Saul, he gave
David to be King; to whom he made promise, That of the fruit of his Loins
should one sit forever upon his Regal Seat. To this same people from time to
time he sent Prophets to reduce them to the right way of their God, from the
which oftentimes they declined by Idolatry. And albeit for their stubborn
contempt of Justice, he was compelled to give them into the hands of their
enemies, 2 King. 24. 34, etc.
as before he threatened by the mouth of Moses: Insomuch that the holy City was
destroyed, Deu. 28.36, 38, etc.
the Temple burnt with fire, 2 Kin. 25.^. Dan. 9 2. Ezr. 1, etc. Hag. 1 14.
Zach. 3.1.
and the whole land left desolate the space of seventy years; yet of mercy did
he reduce them again to Jerusalem, where the City and Temple were reedified,
and they against all temptations and assaults of Satan, did abide till the
Messiah came, according to the promise.

VI. Of the Incarnation of Christ Jesus.
When the fullness of time came, Gal 4 4. Luke 1.31. Matthew. 1.18. Matthew. 2.1.
Romans 1.3. Matthew. 1.23. John. 1.2.45. 2 Timothy 2 5.
God sent his Son, his eternal Wisdom, the substance of his own Glory into
this World, who took the nature of manhood, of the substance of a woman; to
wit, of a Virgin, and that by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and so was
born, The just seed of David, The Angel of the great council of God, The very
Messiah promised, whom we acknowledge, and confess, Emanuel, very God and very
man, two perfect natures united and joined in one person. By which our
Confession, we condemn the damnable and pestilent Heresies of Arrius, Martion,
Eutiches, Nestorius, and such others, as either deny the Eternity of his
Godhead, or the Verity of his humane nature, or confound them, or yet divide
them.

VII. Why it behooves the Mediator to be very God and very man.
WE acknowledge and confess, Ephesians. 1.3.4, 15, 6.
That this most wondrous conjunction betwixt the Godhead and Manhood of
Christ Jesus, did proceed from the eternal and immutable Decree of God, whence
also our salvation springs and depends.

VIII. Of Election.
FOr that same eternal God, Ephesians. 1.11. Matthew 25 34. Ephesians. 1 21, 22. Heb 27
8. Psalm. 22.11. Heb 13.26. 1 Pet. 2.24* and 5.
who of mere grace elected us in Christ Jesus his Son, before the foundation
of the world was laid, appointed him to be our Head, our Brother, our Pastor,
and great Bishop of our souls: But because that the enmity betwixt the
justice of God and our sins, was such, That no flesh by it self, could, or
might have attained unto God; It behoved that the Son of God should descend
unto us, Psalm. 130.3. Psalm. 143.3. 1 Timothy 2.5.
and take himself a body of our body, flesh of our flesh, and bones of our
bones, and so become the perfect Mediator betwixt God and man; giving power to
so many as believe in him, to be the sons of God, John 1.12. John 20.17.
as he himself does witness. I pass up to my Father and your Father, to my
God and unto God: By which most holy fraternity, whatsoever we have lost in
Adam, is restored to us again. And for this cause are we nothing afraid to call
God our Father, not so much in that he has created us (which we have common
with the reprobate) as for that, that he has given to us his only Son to be
our Brother, Romans 5.17, 18.19.
and given unto us grace to embrace him for our only Mediator, as before is
said. It behoved further the Messiah and Redeemer to be very God and very Man,
Romans 8.15. Gal. 4 36. Act. 17.26. Heb. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 3 18. Isa. 53.8. Act.
2.4. 1 John 1 2.
because he was to suffer the punishment due for our transgressions, and to
present himself in the presence of his fathers judgment, as in our person to
suffer for our transgression and disobedience, by death to overcome him that
was Author of death. But because the only Godhead could not suffer death,
neither could only the Manhood overcome the same, he joined both together in
one person, Act. 20 28. 1 Timothy 3.16. John 3.16.
that the imbecilitie of the one should suffer and be subject to death (which
we had deserved) and the Infinite and Invincible power of the other; to wit, of
the Godhead should triumph, and purchase unto us life, liberty, and
perpetual Victory: and so we confess, and most undoubtedly believe.

IX. Christ's Death, Passion, Burial, etc.
Heb. 10.1, 12. Isa 53.5. Heb. 1 2.3. John 1.29. Matthew. 26.11. Deuteronomy. 20.23.
Matthew. 15.1, 2. Gal 3.13. Luke 23.1, 2. Matthew. 26.38. 2 Cor 5. Heb 9 12. Heb.
10.5.
THat our Lord Jesus offered himself a voluntary Sacrifice unto his Father for
us; That he suffered contradiction of sinners; That he was wounded and plagued
for our transgressions; That he being the clean and innocent Lamb of GOD, was
condemned in the presence of an earthly Judge; that we might be absolved before
the Tribunal Seat of our God: That he suffered not only the cruel death of
the Cross (which was accursed by the sentence of God) but also, That he
suffered for a season the wrath of his Father, which sinners had deserved. But
yet we avow, That he remained the only welbeloved and blessed Son of his
Father, even in the midst of his anguish and torment, which he suffered in body
and soul, to make the full satisfaction for the sins of his people. After
the which, we confess and avow, That there remains no other sacrifice for
sins; which if any affirm, we nothing doubt to avow, That they are
blasphemous against Christ's Death, and the everlasting purgation and
satisfaction purchased unto us by the same.

X. Resurrection.
WE undoubtedly believe, That in so much as it was impossible that the pains
of death should retain in bondage the Author of life, Act. 2.23. Act. 3.26.
Romans 6.5, 11. Act. 2.24 Romans 4 25. Heb. 2.14, 15. Matthew. 28 John 20.27 and 21.7.
that our Lord Jesus Crucified, Dead, and Buried, who descended into hell, did
rise again for our Justification, and destroying him who was the author of
death, brought life again to us that were subject to death, and to the bondage
of the fame: We know that his Resurrection was confirmed by the testimony of
his very enemies. By the Resurrection of the dead, Luke 24.41, 42, 43.
whose sepulchers did open, and they did arise and appeared to many within the
City of Jerusalem. It was also confirmed by the testimony of Angels, and by
the senses and judgments of his Apostles and others, who had conversation, and
did eat and drink with him after his Resurrection. Joh. 21.12, 13.


XI. Ascension.
WE nothing doubt, Luke 24.51. Act. 1.6. Matthew. 28.6. Matthew. 16.9. Luke 24 6.
John 20.9. Matthew. 28 18. 1 John 2.1. 1 Timothy 2.5. Psalm. 110 1. Matthew. 22 44.
Matthew. 12 36. Luke 20.42.43 Acts 1.1. Acts 3.19. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
but that the self-same Body, which was born of the Virgin, was Crucified,
Dead and Buried, and which did rise again, did ascend into the Heavens, for
accomplishment of all things: Where, in our names, and for our comfort, he has
received all power in heaven and in earth: Where he sits at the right hand
of the Father, enthronized in his Kingdom, Advocate and only Mediator for
us; which glory, honor, and prerogative, he alone amongst the Brethren shall
possess, till that all his enemies be made his foot stool, as that we
undoubtedly believe they shall be in the final judgment, to the execution
whereof, we certainly believe that the same our Lord Jesus shall visibly and
apparently return, as that he was seen to ascend. And there we firmly
believe that the time of refreshing and restitution of all things shall come,
Matthew. 25.34. Revel. 21.27. Esaias 66.24 Matthew 25.41. Matthew 9.44, 46, 48
insomuch that those that from the beginning have suffered violence, injury and
wrong for righteousness sake, shall inherit the blessed immortality promised
from the beginning. But contrary ways the stubborn, cruel, inobedient,
oppressors, filthy persons, adulterers, and all sorts of unthankful men, shall
be cast into the dungeon of utter darkness, Matthew. 22.13. 2 Pet. 3 11. 2 Cor.
5.11. Luke 21.28. John 15.4, etc. Esaias 7.14. Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. Heb. 1.11,
15. Heb. 10.21. 1 John 2.1. 1 Timothy 2.5.
where their worm shall not die, neither yet their fire be extinguished: the
remembrance of the which day, and of the judgment to be executed in the same,
is not only to us a Bridle, whereby our carnal lusts are reserved, but also
such inestimable comfort, that neither may the threatening of worldly Princes,
neither yet the fear of temporal death and present danger move us to renounce
and forsake that blessed society, which we the members have with our Head and
only Mediator Christ Jesus; whom we confess and avow to be the Messiah
promised, the only Head of the Church, our just Lawgiver, our only High
Priest, Advocate and Mediator. In whose honors and Offices, if a man or Angel
presume to intrude themselves, we utterly detest and abhor them, as
blasphemous to our Sovereign Governor Christ Jesus.

XII. Faith in the Holy Ghost.
THis our faith, Matthew. 16.17. John 14 26. John. 14.11. Acts 5.4. John 10.13.
Col. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.^. John 9.39. Revel 3.13.
and the assurance of the same proceeds not from flesh and blood; that is to
say, from no natural powers within us, but is the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, whom we confess, God equal with the Father, and with the Son, who
sanctified us, and brings us into all verity by his own operation, without
whom we should remain for ever enemies to God, and ignorant of his Son
Christ Jesus. For of nature we are so dead, so perverse and blind, that
neither we can feel when we were pricked, see the light when it shines, nor
assent to the will of God when it is revealed, only the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus quickens that which is dead, Matthew. 17.17. Matthew 9.19. Luke 9 41. John
6 63. Mic 7.8. 1 King. 8.8. Psalm. 10.3. Romans 5.10. John 3.5. Tit. 5.5. Romans 5
8. Psalm. 3.9. Psalm. 1.6. 2 Cor. 3.5. Ephesians 1 6.
removes the darkness from our minds, and boweth our stubborn hearts to the
obedience of his blessed will, and so as we confess that God the Father
created us when we were not, as his Son our Lord Jesus redeemed us, when we
were enemies to him; So also we confess that the Holy Ghost does sanctify,
and regenerate us without all respect of any merit proceeding from us, be it
before, or be it after our regeneration. To speak this one thing yet in more
plain words, as we willingly spoil our selves of all honor and glory of our
own Creation and Redemption, so do we also of our regeneration and
sanctification; for of selves we are not sufficient to think one good thought,
but he who has begun the good work in us, is only he that continues us in
the same, to the praise and glory of his undeserved grace.

XIII. The cause of good works.
Ephesians. 2.10. Phil. 3.13. John 15.5. Romans 8.9.
SO that the cause of good Works we confess to be, not of free Will, but the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, who dwelling in our hearts by true faith, brings
forth such good works, as God has prepared for us to walk in; for this we
most boldly affirm that blasphemy, it is to say that Christ Jesus abides in
the heart of such, as in whom there is no spirit of sanctification; and
therefore we fear not to affirm, that Murderres, Oppressors, cruel
Persecutors, Adulterers, Whoremongers, filthy Persons, Idolaters, Drunkards,
Thieves, and all workers of iniquity, have neither true faith, neither any
portion of the Spirit of Sanctification, which proceeds from the Lord Jesus,
so long as they obstinately continue in their wickedness. For how soon so ever
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus (which Gods Elect Children receive by true faith)
takes possession in the heart of any man, Romans 7.15, 16, 17.
so soon does he regenerate and renew the same man, so that he begins to hate
that which before he loved, and begins to love that which before he hated;
Gal. 5.17.
and from thence comes to that continual battle, which is betwixt the flesh
and the Spirit in Gods Children, while the flesh and natural man (according to
their own corruption) lusts for things pleasing and delectable to it self,
grudgeth in adversity, is lifted up in prosperity, and at every moment is
prone and ready to offend the Majesty of God; Romans 8 16. Romans 7.24. Some. 8 22.
Ephesians 4.17, 18, 19.
but the Spirit of God which gives witnessing unto our spirit, that we are the
sons of God, makes us to resist the Devil to abhor filthy pleasures, to
groan in Gods presence for deliverance from this bondage of corruption, and
finally to triumph over sin, that it reign not in our mortal bodies. This
battle have not the carnal men, 2 Timothy 2.26.
being destitute of Gods Spirit, but do follow and obey sin with greediness,
and without repentance, even as the Devil and their corrupt lusts do prick
them. But the Sons of God (as before is said) do fight against sin, do sob and
mourn when they perceive themselves tempted to iniquity, and if they fall, they
rise again with earnest and unfeigned repentance: and these things they do not
by their own power, but the power of our Lord Jesus (without whom they were
able to do nothing) works in them all that is good. John 15 5.


XIIII. What works are reputed good before God.
WE confess and acknowledge, Exodus 20.3, etc. Deuteronomy. 4.7, etc.
That God has given to man his holy Law, in which not only are forbidden all
such works as displease and offend his godly Majesty, but also are commanded
all such as please him, and as he has promised to reward. And these works be
of two sorts; the one are done to the honor of God; the other to the profit of
our neighbors: Luke 21.75. Mica 6.7.
And both have the revealed Will of God for their assurance; To have one God,
To worship and honor him, To call upon him in all our troubles, To reverence
his holy Name, To hear his Word, To believe the same, To communicate his holy
Sacraments, are the works of the first Table. Ephesians 6.17. Ezech. 22.104 1 Cor
6.19, 20 1 The 4.4, 5, 6 Jer. 22.3 9 9, etc.
To honor father and mother, Princes, Rulers, and superior Powers, To love
them, To support them, yea, To obey their Charges (not repugning to the
Commandment of God) To save the life of Innocents, To repress tyranny, To
defend the oppressed, To keep our bodies clean and holy, Esaias 50.1, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4 6. Rom 13.2. Ezekiel. 22.13. 1 John 3 4.
To live in sobriety and temperance, To deal justly with all men, both in word
and deed; and finally, To repress the appetite of our neighbors hurt, are the
good works of the second Table, which are most pleasing and acceptable unto
God, as those works are commanded by himself. The contrary thereof is sin most
odious, which always displeases him, and provokes him to anger; as, Not to
call upon him alone when we have need, Not to hear his Word with reverence, To
contemn and despise it, To have or to worship Idols, To maintain and defend
Idolatry, Lightly to esteem the reverent Name of God, To profane, abuse, or
contemn the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, Romans 14.23.
To disobey or resist any that God has placed in Authority (while they pass
not over the bounds of their Office) To murder, or consent thereunto, Heb. 1
16.
To bear hatred, or to suffer Innocent blood to be shed, 1 Samuel 15.22.
if we may gainstand it; and finally, The transgressing of any other
Commandment in the first or second Table, we confess and affirm to be sin, 1
Cor. 10.31.
by the which Gods hot displeasure is kindled against the proud and unthankful
world: 1 John 3.4.
So that good works we affirm to be those only that are done in Faith, and at
Gods Commandment, who in his Law has expressed what be the things that please
him: Esaias 29.19.
And evil works we affirm, not only those that are expressly done against
Gods Commandment, Matthew. 15.9.
but those also that in matters of Religion, and worshipping of God, have no
assurance, but the invention and opinion of man, Mar. 7.7.
which God from the beginning has ever rejected, as by the Prophet Isaiah, and
by our Master Christ Jesus, we are taught in these words; In vain do they
worship me, teaching doctrines which are the Precepts of men.

XV. The perfection of the Law, and the imperfection of man.
Levit. 18.5. Gal. 3.12. 1 Timothy 1.18. Romans 7.12. Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 5.29.
Romans 10.3. 1 Kin. 8.4, 6. Chron. 6.36. Eccles. 7.22. Prove. 20.9. 1 ^oh. 1.18.
John 1.18. Romans 10.4. Gal. 3 13. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Phil. 2.15. Isai. 64.6. Luke
17.10.
THe Law of God we confess and acknowledge most just, most equal, most holy
and most perfect, commanding those things, which being wrought in perfection,
were able to give life, and to bring man to eternal felicity. But our Nature
is so corrupt, so weak and imperfect, that we are never able to fulfill the
works of the Law in perfection; yea, if we say we have no sin (even after we
are regenerate) we deceive our selves, and the Verity of God is not in us. And
therefore it behooves us to apprehend Christ Jesus with Justice and
Satisfaction, who is the End and Accomplishment of the Law to all that believe,
by whom we are set at this liberty, that the curse and malediction of the Law
fall not upon us, albeit we fulfill not the same in all points: For God the
Father beholding us in the Body of his Son Christ Jesus, accepts our
unperfect obedience, as were perfect, and covered our works which are defiled
with many spots, with the Justice of his Son. We do not mean that we are set so
at liberty, that we owe no obedience to the Law (for that before we have
plainly confessed) but this we affirm, That no man in earth (Christ Jesus only
accepted) has given, gives, or shall give in work, that obedience to the Law,
which the Law requires; But when we have done all things, we must fall down
and unfainedly confess, That we are unprofitable servants. And therefore
whosoever boast themselves of the merits of their own works, or put their trust
in the works of Supererogation, they boast themselves of that which is not, and
put their trust in damnable Idolatry.

XVI. Of the Church.
AS we believe in God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, so do we most earnestly
believe, Mat. 28.20.
That from the beginning there has been, now is, Ephesians. 1.4. Col. 1.18.
and to the end of the world shall be, A Church; that is to say, A Company and
Multitude of men chosen of God, who rightly worship and embrace him by true
faith in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 5.23, 24, 25, 26.
who is the only Head of the same Church, which also is the Body and Spouse of
Christ Jesus, which Church is catholic, that is, Universal, because it
contains the elect of all Ages, all Realms, Nations and Tongues, be they of
the Jews, or be they of the Gentiles, who have Communion or Society with God
the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus, Apoc. 7.8.
through the Sanctification of his holy Spirit; and therefore it is called,
Communion (not of profane persons) but of Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
who are Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, have the fruition of the most
inestimable benefits; to wit, of one God, one Lord Jesus, one Faith, and one
Baptism; without the which Church there is neither life nor eternal felicity:
And therefore we utterly abhor the blasphemy of those that affirm, That men
that live according to equity and justice shall be saved, what Religion soever
they have professed: For as without Christ Jesus there is neither life nor
salvation: so shall there none be participant thereof, but such as the Father
has given unto his Son Christ Jesus, and those in time to come to him, avow
his doctrine, John 5.24. John 17.6. 1 Timothy 2.19 John 13.14. Ephesians. 1.10. Col.
1.10. Heb. 12.4.
and believe in him (we comprehend the Children, with the faithful Parents)
This Church is invisibly known only to God, who alone knows it, whom he
has chosen, and comprehends as well (as is said) the Elect that be departed
(commonly called the Church triumphant) as those that yet live, and fight
against sin and Satan, as shall live hereafter.

XVII. The immortality of the Souls.
THe Elect departed are in peace, Apoc. 14.13. Isai. 25* 8. Apoc 7.16, 17*
Apoc. 21.4. Apoc. 16.10, 11 Isai. 66.24. Mark 9.44, 36, 48.
and rest from their labors, not that they sleep, and come to a certain
oblivion (as some fantanstick heads do affirm) but that they are delivered
from all fear, all torment, and all temptation, the which we and all Gods Elect
are subject unto in this life, and therefore do bear the name of the Church
militant. As contrary always the reprobate and unfaithful departed, have
anguish, Luke 23.43. Luke ^6.24, 25.
torment and pain, that cannot be expressed, so that neither are the one nor
the other in such sleep, that they feel not joy or torment, as the Parable of
Christ Jesus in the sixteenth of Luke, his words to the Thief* Apoc. 6.9, 10.
and these words of the souls crying under the Altar: O Lord, thou that art
righteous and just, how long shall thou not revenge our blood upon them that
dwell upon the earth, does plainly testify.

XVIII. Of the Notes by the which the true Church is discerned from the false,
and who shall be Judge of the Doctrine.
BEcause that Satan from the beginnig has labored to deck his pestilent
Synagogue with the Title of the Church of God, Genesis 4.8. Genesis 21.^. Genesis 27.41.
Mar. 23.34. Ioh. 15.18, 19.
and has inflamed the hearts of cruel murderers to persecute, trouble and
molest the true Church and Members thereof, as Cain did Abel, Ishmael, Isaac,
Esau, Jacob, and the whole Priesthood of the Jews, Jesus Christ himself, John
11 35. Ioh. 15.20, 24.
and his Apostles after him. It is a thing most requisite, that the true Church
be discerned from the filthy Synagogue, by clear and perfect Notes, Act. 4.1,
etc. Act 5.17, etc. Genesis 4 1. Psalm. 48.1, 2.
lest we being deceived, receive and embrace to our own condemnation the one
for the other. The Notes, Signs, and assured Tokens whereby the Immaculate
Spouse of Christ Jesus is known from the horrible Harlot the Church malignant,
Mat 5.35. John 12.42. Ephesians. 2.20. Act. 2.42.
we affirm, are neither antiquity, title usurped, lineall descents, place
appointed, nor multitude of men approving any error; For Cain in age and title
was preferred to Abel and Seth. Jerusalem had prerogative above all places of
the earth, John 10, 27.
where also were the Priests lineally descended from Aaron, and greater
multitude followed the Scribes, John 18.37.
Pharisees, and Priests, then unfainedly believed and approved Christ Jesus and
his Doctrine; 1 Cor. 1 13.
and yet (as we suppose) no man of whole judgment will grant that any of the
forenamed were the Church of God: The Notes therefore of the true Church of
God, we believe, confess, and avow, to be first the true preaching of the Word
of God; 1 Cor. 11.20, 23.
in which God has revealed himself to us, as the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles do declare. Mat. 28 19 20 Mark 16.15. Rom 4 11. Matthew 18 20. 1 Cor
1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1 2. Ephesians. 1 1. Acts 16.9, 10.18.
Secondly, the right administration of the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, which
may be annexed to the word and promise of God, to seal and confirm the same
in our hearts. Lastly, Ecclesiastical discipline uprightly ministered, as Gods
Word prescribes, whereby vice is repressed, and virtue nourished, wheresoever
then these former Notes are seen, and of any time continual (be the number
never so few above two or three) there without all doubt is the true Church of
Christ, who according to his promise is in the midst of them; 1 Cor. 1. etc. A
and 20 17, etc. John 20.31. 2 Timothy 3 16 17 2 Pet. 1 20, 21.
not of that universal (of which we have before spoken) but particular, such
as was in Corinthus, Galatia, Ephesus, and other places in which the Ministry
was planted by Paul, and were of himself named the Churches of God: and such
Churches we the Inhabitants of the Realm of Scotland, professors of Christ
Jesus, confess us to have in our Cities, Towns, and places reformed: For the
Doctrine taught in our Churches, is contained in the written Word of God, to
wit, in the Books of the New and Old Testaments; in those Books we mean, which
of ancient have been reputed Canonical, in the which we affirm that all
things necessary to be believed for the salvation of mankind is sufficiently
expressed. John 5 29.
The interpretation whereof, we confess, neither appertains unto any private
nor public person; neither yet to any Church for any pre-eminence or
prerogative personal or local, which one has above another, but appertains
to the Spirit of God, Ephesians 4 4
by the which also the Scripture was written. When controversy then happens
for the right understanding of any place or sentence of Scripture, or for the
reformation of any abuse within the Church of God, we ought not so much to
look what men before us have said and done, as unto that which the Holy Ghost
uniformly speaks within the body of the Scriptures, and unto that which
Christ Jesus himself did, and commanded to be done. For this is a thing
universally granted, That the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of unity, is
in nothing contrary to himself. If then the interpretation, determination or
sentence of any Doctor, Church or Council, repugne to the plain Word of God,
written in any other place of Scripture, it is a thing most certain that there
is not the true understanding and meaning of the Holy Ghost; supposing that
Counsels, Realms, and Nations have approved and received the same. For we dare
not receive and admit any Interpretation, which directly oppugneth to any
principal point of our faith, to any other plain text of Scripture, or yet to
the rule of charity.

XIX. The Authority of the Scriptures.
ANd we believe and confess the Scriptures of God sufficient to instruct, and
make the man of God perfect, 1 Timothy 3.16, 17
so do we affirm and avow the Authority of the same to be of God, and neither
to depend on men nor Angels: We affirm therefore, That such as allege the
Scriptures to have no authority, but that which is received from the Church, to
be blasphemous against God, and injurious to the true Church, which always
hears and obeys the voice of her own Spouse and Pastor, Genes. 27.
but takes not upon her to be Mistress over the same.

XX. Of the General Counsels, of their Power, Authority, and Cause of their
Convention.
AS we not rashly condemn that which godly men assembled together in General
Counsels, lawfully gathered, have approved unto us: Gal 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
So without just examination dare we not receive whatsoever is obtruded unto
men, 1 Timothy 4.1.23. Col. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
under the name of General Counsels, for plain it is, that as they were men,
so have some of them manifestly erred, and that in matters of great weight and
importance. So far then as the Council proves the Determination and
Commandment, that it gives by the plain Word of God, so far do we reverence
and embrace the same. But if men under the name of a Council pretend to forge
unto us new Articles of our Faith, or to make Constitutions repugning to the
Word of God, Act. 15.1, etc.
then utterly we may refuse the same, as the Doctrine of Devils, which draws
our souls from the voice of our only God, to follow the Doctrines and
Constitutions of men. The cause then why General Counsels convened, 1 Timothy
3.15. Heb. 3.2. 1 Cor. 14.40.
was neither to make any perpetual Law (which God before had not made) neither
yet to forge new Articles of our belief, neither to give the Word of God
authority, much less to make that to be his Word, or yet the true
interpretation of the same, which was not before by his holy Will expressed in
his Word. But the cause of Counsels (we mean of such as merited the name of
Councels) was partly for Confutation of Heresies, and for giving public
Confession of their Faith to the posterities following, which both they did by
the authority of Gods written Word, and not by any opinion or prerogative that
they could not err, by reason of their general assembly. And this we judge to
have been the chief cause of General Counsels. The other was for good
policy and Order to be constituted and observed in the Church, in which (as in
the house of God) it becomes all things to be done decently, and in order: not
that we think that one Policy, and one Order in Ceremonies can be appointed
for all ages, times, and places; for as Ceremonies (such as men have devised)
are but temporal, so may, and ought they to be changed, when they rather
foster superstition, then that they edify the Church using the same.

XXI. Of the Sacraments.
AS the Fathers under the Law, Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.32. Genesis 17.4. Number. 9.13.
besides the verity of the Sacrifices had two chief Sacraments; to wit,
Circumcision and the Passover, the despisers and contemners whereof were not
reputed for Gods people: so we acknowledge and confess, That we now in time of
the Gospel, have two Sacraments only, instituted by the Lord Jesus, and
commanded to be used by all those that will be reputed to be Members of his
Body; to wit, Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.17. Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1
Cor. 11.24. and 10.16.
Baptism; and, The Supper, or Table of the Lord Jesus, called, The Communion
of his Body and Blood. And these Sacraments (as well of the Old as of the New
Testament) were instituted of God, not only to make a visible difference
betwixt his people, and those that were without his league; but also to
exercise the Faith of his children, and by participation of the same
Sacraments, to seal in their hearts the assurance of his ^romise, and of that
most blessed Conjunction, Union, and Society, which the Elect have with their
Head, Christ Jesus. And thus we utterly condemn the vanity of those, that
affirm Sacraments to be nothing else but naked and bare signs: Romans 6.3, 4,
5. Gal. 3.27.
No, we assuredly believe, That by Baptism we are ingrafted into Jesus Christ,
to be made partakers of his Justice, by the which our sins are covered and
remitted. And also, That in the Supper rightly used, Christ Jesus is so joined
with us, that he becomes the very nourishment and food of our souls. Not that
we imagine any Transubstantiation of Bread into Christ's natural Body; and of
Wine into his natural Blood (as the Papists have perniciously taught, and
damnably believed) but this Union and Communion which we have with the Body and
Blood of Christ Jesus in the right use of the Sacraments, is wrought by
operation of the holy Ghost, who by true Faith carries us above all things
that are visible, Mar. 16.19. Luke 24.51. Act. 1.11. Act. 3.21. 1 Cor. 10, etc.
carnal, and earthly, and makes us to feed upon the Body and Blood of Christ
Jesus, which was once broken and shed for us, which now is in the heaven, and
appears in the presence of his Father for us. And yet notwithstanding the far
distance of place which is betwixt his Body now glorified in the heaven, and us
now mortal in this earth: Yet we most assuredly believe, That the Bread that
we break is the Communion of Christ's Body; and, The Cup which we bless, is The
Communion of his Blood. So that we confess and undoubtedly believe, That the
faithful in the right use of the Lords Table, Ephesians. 5.30. Matthew. 27.50. Mar.
15.31. Luke 23.46. John 14.30. and 6.51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58.
so do eat the Body and drink the Blood of the Lord Jesus, That he remains in
them, and they in him: Yea, That they are so made flesh of his flesh, and bones
of his bones, That as the eternal Godhead has given to the flesh of Christ
Jesus (which of the own condition and nature was mortal, and corruptible)
life and immortality, so does Christ Jesus Flesh and Blood eaten and drunken
by us, give to us the same prerogatives; which albeit we confess, are neither
given unto us at that only time, neither yet by the proper power and virtue of
the Sacraments only; yet we affirm, That the faithful in the right use of
the Lords Table has such conjunction with Christ Jesus, as the natural man
cannot comprehend: yea, and further we affirm, That albeit the faithful
oppressed by negligence, and manly infirmity, does not profit so much as they
would at the very instant action of the Supper, yet shall it after bring forth
fruit; as lively seed sown in good ground; for the holy Spirit which can never
be divided from the right institution of the Lord Jesus, will not frustrate the
faithful, of the fruit of that mystical action; but all this we say comes by
true Faith, which apprehends Christ Jesus, who only makes his Sacraments
effectual unto us, and therefore whosoever slandereth us, as though we
affirmed or believed Sacraments to be openly naked and bare signs, do injury
unto us, and speak against a manifest truth. But this liberally and frankly we
must confess, That we make a distinction betwixt Christ Jesus in his natural
substance, and betwixt the elements in the Sacramental signs. 1 Cor. 11.28,
28.
So that we will neither worship the signs, in place of that which is
signified by them, neither yet do we despise and interpret them, as
unprofitable and vain, but do use them with all reverence, examining our selves
diligently before that so we do, because we are assured by the mouth of the
Apostle, that such as eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup unworthily, are
guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus.

XXII. Of the right administration of the Sacraments.
THat Sacraments be rightly ministered, we judge two things requisite: The one,
that they be ministered by lawful Ministers, whom we affirm to be only they
that are appointed to the Preaching of the Word, or unto whose mouths God has
put some Sermon of Exhortation, they being men of lawful choosing thereto by
some Church. The other, That they be ministered in such elements, and in such
sort as God has appointed. Else we affirm, That they cease to be right
Sacraments of Christ Jesus. And therefore it is, that we flee the society with
the Papisticall Church, in participation of their Sacraments; First, because
their Ministers are no Ministers of Jesus Christ (yea, Mat. 26.26, etc Mar.
14.22, etc Luke 22.19, etc 1 Cor. 11.24.
which is more horrible) they suffer women, whom the holy Ghost will not suffer
to teach in the Congregation, to Baptize. And secondly, because they have so
adulterate, both the one Sacrament and the other, with their own inventions,
that no part of Christ's action abides in the original purity, for Oil, Salt,
Spittle, and such like in Baptism, are but men's inventions, Adoration,
Veneration, bearing through Streets and Towns, and keeping of bread in Boxes,
are profanation of Christ's Sacraments, and no use of the same: For Christ
Jesus said, Take and eat, etc. Do ye this in remembrance of me. By which words
and charge he sanctified Bread and Wine to be the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood; to the end, that one should be eaten, and that all should drink of the
other, and not that they should be kept to be worshipped and honored as God,
as the blind Papists have done heretofore, who also have committed Sacrilege,
stealing from the people one part of the Sacrament; to wit, The blessed Cup.
Moreover, that the Sacraments be rightly used, it is required, That the end and
cause why the Sacraments were instituted, be understood and observed, as well
of the Minister as the Receivers: for if the opinion be changed in the
Receiver, the right use cease: which is most evident by the rejection of the
sacrifices (as also if the teacher teach false Doctrine) which were odious and
abominable unto God (albeit they were his own ordinances) because that wicked
men used them to another end then God has ordained. The same affirm we of the
Sacraments in the Papisticall Church, in which we affirm the whole action of
the Lord Jesus to be adulterate, as well in the external form, as in the end
and opinion; What Christ Jesus did, Note.
and commanded to be done, is evident by the three Evangelists who speak of the
Sacrament, and by S. Paul; what the Priest does at his Altar, we need not to
rehearse. The end and cause of Christ's institution, and why the self-same
should be used, is expressed in these words, Do ye this in remembrance of me, 1
Cor. 11.25, 26
as often as ye shall eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye shall show
forth (that is, extol, Preach, and magnify) the Lords death till he come. But
to what end, and in what opinion the Priests say their Masses, let the words of
the same their own Doctors and Writings witness; to wit, That they are
Mediators betwixt Christ and his Church, Heb. 9.27, 28
to offer unto God the Father, a Sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of the
quick and the dead: Which Doctrine, as blasphemous to Christ Jesus, and making
derogation to the sufficiency of his only Sacrifice once offered for
purgation of all those that shall be sanctified, we utterly abhor, detest,
and renounce.

XXIII. To whom Sacraments appertain.
Col. 2.11, 12
WE confess and acknowledge, That Baptism appertains as well to the infants
of the faithful, as unto those that be of age and discretion; Romans 4.11. Genesis
17.10. Mat. 28.19.
And so we condemn the error of the Anabaptists, who deny Baptism to
appertain to children, before that they have Faith and understanding. But the
Supper of the Lord we confess to appertain only to such as have been of the
household of Faith, can try and examine themselves, as well in their Faith, as
in their duties toward their neighbors. Such as eat at that holy Table
without Faith, 1 Cor. 28.29.
or being at dissension and division with their brethren do eat unworthily. And
therefore it is, that in our Churches Ministers take public and particular
examination of the knowledge and conversation of such as are to be admitted to
the Table of the Lord Jesus.

XXIV. Of the Civil Magistrate.
Romans 13.1. Titus 3.1. 1 Peter 13.2.
WE confess and acknowledge Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions and Titles, to be
distincted and Ordained by God, the powers and authorities in the same (be it
of Emperors in their Empires, of Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in
their Dominions, or of other Magistrates in free Cities) to be Gods holy
Ordinance, ordained for manifestation of his own glory, and for the singular
profit and commodity of mankind. Romans 13.2.
So that whosoever goes about to take away, or to confound the holy state of
Civil Policies, now long established; We affirm the same men not only to be
enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fight against Gods express will.
Romans 13.7.
We further confess and acknowledge, That such persons as are placed in
authority, are to be loved, honored, feared, and holden in most reverent
estimation, because they are the Lieutenants of God, in whose Session God
himself does sit and judge (yea, 1 Pet 2.17. Psalm 82.1.
even the Judges and Princes themselves) to whom by God is given the sword, to
the praise and defense of good men, and to revenge and punish all open
malefactors. To Kings, moreover Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, to affirm,
that chiefly and most principally the reformation and purgation of Religion
appertains, so that not only they are appointed for civil policy but also
for maintenance of the true Religion, and for suppressing of Idolatry and
Superstition whatsoever, 1 Chronicles. 22.23, 24, 25. Chap. 26. 2 Chronicles. 29.30, 31,
chap. 2 Chronicles. 34, and 35. chap.
as in David, Iosaphat, Ezekias, Josias, and others highly commended for their
zeal in the cause, may be espied. And therefore we confess and avow, that such
as resist the supreme Powers (doing that which appertains to their charge) do
resist Gods Ordinance, and therefore cannot be guiltless: And further we
affirm, that whosoever deny unto them their aid, counsel, and comfort, while
the Princes and Rulers vigilantly travel in the executing of their Office,
that the same men deny their help, support and counsel to God, who by the
presence of his Lieutenant craveth it of them.

XXV. The gifts freely given to the Church.
ALbeit that the word of God truly preached the Sacraments rightly ministered,
and discipline executed according to the Word of God, be the certain and
infallible signs of the true Church, Mat. 13.24, 25, 26, etc.
yet do we not so mean, that every particular person joined with such a
company, be an Elect Member of Christ Jesus, for we acknowledge and confess
that Darnell, Cockle, and Chafe may be sown, grow in great abundance, lie in
the midst of the Wheat, Mat. 13 20, 21
that is, the Reprobate may be joined in the society of the Elect, and may
externally use with them the benefits of the Words and Sacraments. Romans 10.9,
13.
But such being but temporal professors in mouth, but not in heart, do fall
back and continue to the end. And therefore have they no fruit of Christ's
death, resurrection and ascension. But such as with heart unfeigned believe, and
with mouth boldly confess the Lord Jesus (as before we have said) shall most
assuredly receive these gifts, Romans 7, etc. 2 Cor. 5.21.
first in this life remission of sins, and by faith only in Christ's blood,
in so much, that albeit sin remain and continually abide in these mortal
bodies, John 5.28, 29. Apoc 20.28. Heb 19 25, 26, 27.
yet it is not imputed unto us, but is remitted and covered with Christ's
justice. Secondly, in the general judgment there shall be given to every man
and woman resurrection of the flesh For the Sea shall give her dead, the earth
those that therein be enclosed; yea, the Eternal our God shall stretch out his
hand upon the dust, Mat 25 31. Apoc. 14.10.
and the dead shall arise incorruptible, and that in the substance of the same
flesh that every man now bears, to receive according to their works glory and
punishment, for such as now delight in vanity, Romans 26.7, 8, 9, 10.
cruelty, filthiness, superstition, or idolatry shall be adjudged to the fire
inextinguible, Phil. 3 21. 1 Cor, 15.28.
in the which they shall be tormented for ever, as well in their body, as in
their souls; which now give to serve the devil in all abomination. But such
as continue in well doing to the end, boldly professing the Lord Jesus, to
whose glorified Body all his Elect shall be like, when he shall appear again
to Judgment, and shall render up the Kingdom to God his Father, who then shall
be, and ever shall remain All in All things God blessed for ever: To whom, with
the Son, and with the holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever.
Amen.

Arise, O Lord, and let thine enemies be confounded; let them fly from thy
presence that hate thy holy Name: Give thy servants strength to speak thy Word
in boldness, and let all Nations attain to thy true knowledge.
This we confirmed, 1567. in the first Parliament of James 6 held by the Earl
Murray, and all Acts in any Parliament before whatsoever, against the truth,
abolished.
These Acts and Articles were read in face of Parliament, and ratified by the
three States of this Realm, at Edinburgh the 17 day of July, in the year of our
Lord 1560.

The Lord of the Articles are a Committee of 24. whereof in former times, there
was eight Lords, eight Churchmen, who were called Lords, and eight Commons: So
from the greater part they were named Lords, and of the Articles, Because all
Articles and Heads that are to pass in Parliament are first brought to them,
who having discussed them, sends them to the House of Parl^ament. The latin
Histories calls their Lords of the Articles Apolecti.
This our Confession was publicly read, first in audience of the Lords of the
Articles; and after, in the audience of the whole Parliament, where were
present, not only such as professed Christ Jesus, but also a great number of
the adversaries of our Religion, such as the forenamed Bishops, and some other
of the Temporal State, who were commanded in Gods Name to object, if they
could say any thing against that Doctrine. Some of our Ministers were present,
standing upon their feet, ready to have answered, in case any would have
defended Papistry, and impugned our affirmatives. But while that no objection
was made, there was a day appointed for concurrence in that and other Heads.
Our Confession was read every Article by it self over again, as they were
written in order, and the voice of every man was required accordingly. Of the
Temporal State, only gave their voice on the contrary, the Earl of Athol, the
Lords Simmerwaile and Borthwicke: And yet for their disassenting, they produced
no better reason, but, We will believe as our Fathers believed. The Bishops
(Papisticall we mean) spoke nothing. The rest of the whole three States by
their public Votes, affirmed the Doctrine; and the rather, Because that fain
the Bishops would, but durst say nothing on the contrary; The Earl Marshall
his pious voice in Parliament.
for this was the Vote of the Earl Marshall; It is long since I have had some
favor unto the Truth, and since that I have had a suspicion of the Papisticall
Religion. But I praise my God, who this day has fully resolved me in the one
and the other: For seeing that the Bishops, who for their learning can, and for
their zeal that they should bear to the Verity, would, as I suppose, have
gainsaid any thing that directly repugneth to the Verity of God. Seeing, I say,
the Bishops here present speak nothing in the contrary of the Doctrine
proposed, I cannot but hold it for the very Truth of God, and the contrary to
be deceivable Doctrine. And therefore so far as in me lies, I approve the one,
and condemn the other: And do farther ask of God, That not only I, but also
all my posterity, may enjoy the comfort of the Doctrine that this day our ears
have heard. And yet more I must Vote, as it were by way of Protestation, That
if any person Ecclesiastical shall after this oppose themselves to this our
Confession, that they that have no place nor credit; considering that they
having long advertisement, and full knowledge of this our Confession, none is
now found in lawful, free, and quiet Parliament to oppose themselves to that
which we profess: And therefore if any of this Generation pretend to do it
after this, I protest he be reputed rather one that loves his own commodity,
and the glory of the world, then the Truth of God, and the salvation of men's
souls.

After the Voting and Ratification of this our Confession by the whole Body of
the Parliament, there were also pronounced two Acts; the one against the Mass,
and the abuse of the Sacraments; and the other against the Supremacy of the
Pope. The Tenor whereof follows.

An Act against the Mass, and the Sayers and Hearers thereof.
IN the Parliament holden at Edinburgh the tenth of July, the year of God,
1560. This Act is particularly confirmed 1567. in the Parliament under James 6.
holden by the Earl Murr^y.

The said Parliament being continued to the first of August next thereafter
following, with continuation of days, upon the twenty fourth day of the said
month of August, the three States then being present: The which day, for so much
as Almighty God, by his most true and blessed Word, has declared the Reverence
and Honor which should be given to him; and by his Son Jesus Christ has
declared the true use of the Sacraments, willing the same to be used according
to his Will and Word; By the which it is notorious, and perfectly known, That
the Sacraments of Baptism, and of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, has
been this long time past, corrupted by the Papisticall Church, and by their
Ministers. And at this present time, notwithstanding the Reformation already
made according to Gods Word; yet nevertheless, there is some of the same Popes
Church that stubbornly persevereth in their wicked Idolatry, saying Mass, and
Baptizing conform to the Popes Church, profaning therethrough the Sacraments
aforesaid in quiet secret places, regarding therein neither God nor his Word:

Therefore it is Decreed and Ordained in this present Parliament, That no
manner of person or persons, in any time coming, administrate any of the
Sacraments secretly, in any manner of way, but they that are admitted, and
having power to that effect; Nor say Mass, nor yet hear Mass, nor be present
thereat, under the pain of confiscation of all their goods, and punishing of
their bodies at the discretion of the Magistrates within whose Jurisdiction
such persons happens to be apprehended for the first fault; banishing out of
the Realm for the second fault, and chastising by death for the third fault.
And Ordains all Sheriffs, Stewards, Baylies, and their Deputies, Provosts and
Bailiffs of Buroughs, and other Judges within this Realm, to make diligent
suit and inquisition within their Bounds, where any such usurped Ministry is
used, Masse-saying, or they that be present at the doing thereof, ratifying,
and approving the same, and take, and apprehend them, to the effect, that the
pains above written may be executed upon them.

Extractum de Libro Parliamenti, per me, etc.

Sic Subscribitur. Iacobus Magill.



The Act for the abolishing of the Pope, and his usurped Authority in SCOTLAND.
This also was confirmed by one particular Act 1567. by the Parliament holden
by the Earl Murray.
IN the Parliament holden at Edinburgh the tenth of July, the year of God 1560.
And thereafter continued to the first day of August next thereafter following,
with continuation of days upon the 24 of the said Month of August, the three
States then being present, understanding that the Jurisdiction and Authority of
the Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, used in this Realm in times past has been
very hurtsome and prejudicial to our Sovereigns Authority and Commonweal of
this Realm. Therefore has decreed and ordained, That the Bishop of Rome has
no Jurisdiction nor Authority in this Realm in times coming. And that none of
our said Sovereigns Subjects, claim, and desire in any time herafter title or
right by the said Bishop of Rome, or his sect, to any thing within this Realm,
under the pains of Baratrie, that is to say, Proscription, banishment, and
never to brook and enjoy honor, office, nor dignity within this Realm; and the
contraveners hereof to be called before the Justice, or his Deputies, or before
the Lords of the Session, and punished therefore, confirm to the Laws of this
Realm; and the furnishers of them with fynance of money, and purchasers of
their title of right, or maintainers or defenders of them, shall incur the same
pains: And that no Bishop, nor other Prelat of this Realm, use any Jurisdiction
in times to come, by the said Bishop of Romes Authority, under the pain
aforesaid.

Extractum de Libro Parliamenti, per me, Ut supra.



These and other things orderly done in lawful and free Parliament, we
directed to France to our Sovereign Sir James Sandelandes Lord of Saint- John,
with the Acts of the said Parliament, that by them they might be ratified,
according to the promises of their Majesty's Commissioners made to us, as by
the Contract of Peace may evidently appear. But how the said Lord of Saint John
was received and used, we list not to rehearse: But always no ratification
brought he unto us, but that we little regarded, or yet do regard; for all that
we did, was rather to show our dutiful obedience, then to beg of them any
strength to our Religion, Note this diligently.
which from God has full power, and needed not the suffrage of man, but in so
far as man had need to believe it, if that ever he shall have participation of
the life everlasting. But somewhat must we answer to such as since has
whispered, that it was but a pretended Parliament, a privy Convention and no
lawful Parliament. Quest.
Their reasons are, The King and Queen were in France, there was neither
Scepter, Sword, nor Crown born, etc. Answ.
And some Principal Lords were absent. We answer, That we rather wish the
Papists to be quiet then too curiously to travel in that Point: for it may be,
while they think to hurt us, they give the Queen and her authority a great
blow, and yet amend themselves nothing. For in whose default we pray you was
the Queen absent from this Realm? We think they will not be so shameless as
that they will blame the Protestants thereof. Her person was absent, and that
to no small grief of our hearts: But were not the States of her Realm assembled
in her name? Yea, had they not her full power and Commission, yea, the
Commission and commandment of her head the King of France, to convocate that
Parliament, and to do all things that may be done in lawful Parliament? Note
this I pray you for these days sake.
Even as if our Sovereigns had been there in proper persons: If they will limit
the power of Princes to the places only where their bodily presence is, it
will be thought strange; for so not only shall Kings be compelled to content
them with one Realm, but also with one City: For the bodily presence of Kings
can no more be in diverse cities at one instant, then that they can be in diverse
Realms. Hitherto we have understood, that wheresoever the great Councellers of
the King with his power and Commission are assembled, to do any thing at his
just commandment, That there is the Kings sufficient presence and authority,
wheresoever his own body be living at freedom and liberty; which if the
Papists deny, we will find faults with them, and with the Princes whom they
have abused, that more will annoy them, then any thing that we can lose by the
insufficiency of that Parliament: Which nevertheless we are bold to affirm
to have been more lawful and more free, then any Parliament that they are able
to produce this hundred years before it, or yet any that has ensued since it
was, (he means until 1566. when this Book was written) for in it the voices
of men were free, and given in conscience, in others they were bought, or given
at the devotion of the misled Prince. All things in it concluded, are able to
abide the trial, and not to be consumed at the proof of the fire: of others
the godly may justly call in doubt things determined. To the Sword and Scepter,
nor yet to the absence of some Lords, we answer nothing. For our adversaries
know well enough that the one is rather a pomp, and vainglorious ceremony,
then a substantial point of necessity required to a lawful Parliament: And
the absence of some prejudges not the powers of the present duly assembled:
Providing, that due advertisement be made unto them. But now we return to our
History.

The Parliament dissolved, consultation was had, how the Church might be
established in a good and godly policy, which by the Papists was altogether
defaced. Commission and charge was given to Master John Winram Sub-priour of S.
Andrews, Master John Spottiswood, John Willock, Master John Douglas Rectour of
S. Andrews, Master John Row, and John Knox, to draw in a Volume the Policy and
Discipline of the Church, as well as they had done the Doctrine, which they
did, and presented it to the Nobility, See how this agree^ with the worldlings
now adays.
who did peruse it many days. Some approved it, and willed the same to have
been set forth by a Law, others perceiving their carnal liberty and worldly
commodity somewhat to be impared thereby, grudged, in so much that the name of
the Book of Discipline became odious unto them. Every thing that repugned to
their corrupt imaginations was termed in their mockage, Devout imaginations.
The cause we have before declared, some was licentious, some had greedily
griped the possessions of the Church; and others thought that they would not
lack their part of Christ's Coat, yea, and that before that ever he was
Crucified, as by the Preachers they were often rebuked. The chief great man that
had professed Christ Jesus, and refused to subscribe the Book of Discipline,
What blessings has been since in the house of Erskin, they know best.
was the Lord Erskin. And no wonder, for besides that, he had a very evil
woman to his wife, if the Poor, the Schools, and the Ministry of the Church
had their own, his Kitchen would lack two parts and more, of that which he
unjustly now possesses. Assuredly some of us has wondered how men that
profess godliness could of so long continuance hear the threatenings of God
against thieves and against their houses, and knowing themselves guilty, in
such things as were openly rebuked, and that they never had remorse of
conscience, neither yet intended to restore any thing of that which long they
had stolen and reft. There were none within the Realm more unmercifull to the
poor Ministers then were they which had greatest rents of the Churches. But in
that we have perceived the old Proverb to be true; Nothing can suffice a
wretch. And again, The belly has no ears. Yet the same Book of Discipline was
subscribed by a great part of the Nobility; To wit, The Duke, the Earl of
Arrane, the Earls Argyle, Glencarn, Mershell, Menteth, Morton, Rothesse, Lord
James after Earl of Murray, Lords Yeaster, Boyd, Uchiltrie, Master of Maxwell,
Lord Lindsay elder, and the Master after Lord Barrons, Drunlaurige, Lothingwar,
Garleisse, Bargany, Master Alexander Gordon Bishop of Galloway, (this Bishop of
Galloway, as he renounced Popery, so did he Prelacie, witness his subscription
of the Book of Discipline, as the rest of the Prelates did who did join to the
Reformation) Alexander Campbell Deane of Marray, with a great number more
subscribed and approved the said Book of Discipline in the Town-Buith of
Edinburgh, the 27 day of January, the year of our Lord God 1560. by their
approbation; In these words: WE which have subscribed these presents, having
advised with the Articles herein specified, and as is abovementioned from the
beginning of this Book, thinks the same good and conform to Gods Word in all
points conform to the Notes and Additions thereto, Note how although the
Prelates being convinced of the truth, did subscribe unto it, yet it was with
this Pro^iso, That they should enjoy their rents for their lives.
asked, and promise to set the same forward at the uttermost of our powers.
Providing that the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates and Beneficed
men which else have adjoined themselves to us, brook the revenues of their
Benefices during their life times, they sustaining and upholding the Ministry
and Ministers, as is herein specified, for Preaching of the Word and
Ministering of the Sacraments.

What be the contents of the whole Book, and how that this promise was illuded
from time to time we shall after hear.

Shortly after the said Parliament were sent from the Council Ambassadors to
England, the Earls Morton and Glencarne, together with William Maitland of
Lethington, younger. The chief point of their Commission was earnestly to crave
the constant assistance of the Queens Majesty of England, against all
foreign invasion and common enemies.

That same time was the Castle of Semple hard besieged and taken. Because the
Lord thereof disobeyed the Laws and Ordinances of the Council in many things,
and especially in that, that he would maintain the Idolatry of the Mass, and
also, that he beset the way to the Earl of Arrane, with a great gathering, as
he was riding with his accustomed company. The Papists were proud, for they
looked for a new Army from France at the next Spring, and thereof was no small
appearance, if God had not otherwise provided. For France utterly refused the
confirmation of the Peace contracted at Leith, would ratify no part of our
Parliament, dismissed the Lord of Saint John, without a resolute answer, began
to gather new Bands of throat-cutters, and to make great preparation for Ships.
They further sent before them certain practisers, (amongst whom the Lord Seaton
who had departed with the French out of Leith was one) to raise up new troubles
within this Realm. Note men to their own country.
And all this came partly of the malice of the house of Guise, who had avowed
to revenge the displeasure of their sister both upon England and Scotland, and
partly by instigation of proud Beton, falsely called Bishop of Glasgow, of Dury
Abbot of Dunfermeling, and Saulles Seaton, and Master John Sinclair Deane of
Restalrige, with such others of the French faction, who had openly spoken, That
they had refused all portion of Scotland, unless that it were under the
government of a Frenchman. Recompense them (O Lord) as thou know most
expedient for thine own glory, and for the perpetual shame of all Traitors
to their Commonwealth. The certain knowledge of all these things came to our
ears, whereat many were afraid, and diverse suspected that England would not be
so forward in times to come, considering that their former expenses were so
great. The principal comfort remained with the Preachers, Note this for our
days.
for they assured us in Gods Name that God would perform in all perfection
that work in our hands. The beginning whereof he had so mightily maintained,
because it was not ours, but his own. And therefore exhorted us, That we should
constantly proceed to reform all abuses, and to plant the Ministry of the
Church, as by Gods word we might justify it; and then commit the success of
all to our God, Let this teach us to seek God.
in whose power the disposition of Kingdoms stands. And so we began to do,
for troubles appearing, made us give ear to the admonitions of Gods servants.
And while that we had scarcely begun again to implore the help of our God, and
to show some signs of our obedience unto his Messengers, and holy Word, Lo the
mighty hand of God from above sent unto us a wonderful and most joyful
deliverance: The death of the young King of France husband to our Queen.
For unhappy Francis, husband to our Sovereign, suddenly perished of a rotten
ear. But because the death of that young man was not only the cause of joy to
us in Scotland, but also by it were the faithful in France delivered as it
were from the present death. We think expedient to speak of the same somewhat
more largely.

These cruel and conjured enemies of God and of all godliness, the Duke of
Guise, the Cardinal of Loraine, and their faction, who then at their own
appetite played the Tyrants in France, had determined the destruction of all
that professed the true knowledge of Jesus Christ within that Realm. What
tyranny late before they had used at Amboyse, the History of France does
witness: now in Orleance in the month of November, conveaned the King,
unhappy Francis, the Queen our Sovereign, and the Queen mother of the King,
the Duke of Guise, with all his faction: The King of Navarre, and the Prince of
Condie, his brother.

So that great was the confluence of the Nobility, but greater was the
assembly of the murderers, for there was not a Hangman in all France which
was not there. The prisons were full of the true servants of God: The King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Condie were constituted Prisoners. The Sheriff of
Orleance, a man fearing God, was taken, and so were many others of the Town.
Briefly, there was none that professed God or godliness within that Town,
that looked not for the extremity, for the Walls and Gates were night and day
kept with the Garrisons of the Guysians, miserable men were daily brought in, to
suffer judgment, but none was suffered to depart forth, but at the devotion of
the Tyrants.

And so they proceeded till the tenth or twelfth of December, when that they
thought time to put their bloody council in execution, and for that purpose
conclusion was taken, That the King should depart out of the Town, and lie at
a certain place; which was done to this intent, That there should no suite be
made to the King for the safety of any man's life, whom they thought worthy of
death. And so was the Kings house in Orleance broken up, his beds, cofers, and
tapistrie sent away, his own boots put on, he sitting at the Mass
immediately hereafter to have departed, and so their tyranny to have begun.

When all things, we say, were in this readiness to shed the blood of
innocents, the eternal, our God, who ever watches for the preservation of his
own, began to work, and suddenly did put his own work in execution, for as
the said King sat at Mass, he was suddenly stricken with an Aposthume, in that
deaf ear that never would hear the Truth of God, and so was he carried to a
void and empty house, laid upon a palliase unto such time as a Cannaby was set
up unto him, where he lay till the fifteenth day of December, 15. December 1560.
in the year of God 1560. When his glory perished, and the pride of his
stubborn heart vanished in smoke; And so was the snare broken; The Tyrants
disappointed of their cruelty; Those that was appointed to death, raised, as
it were, out of their graves; And we, who by our foolishness had made our
selves slaves to strangers, were restored again to freedom and liberty of a
free Realm.

O that we had hearts deeply to consider what are thy wondrous works (O Lord)
that we might praise thee in the midst of this most obstinate and wicked
generation, and leave the memorial of the same to our posterities, which alas,
we fear shall forget these thy inestimable benefits.

Some in France, after the sudden death of Francis the 2. and calling to mind
the death of Charles the 9 in blood; and the slaughter of Henry the 2. did
remark the Tragical ends of these three Princes, who had persecuted Gods
servants so cruelly by their instruments the Guisians, and by their Pens both
in Prose and Verse, did advise all other Princes not to authorize any
Persecution or wrong done unto Gods servants, left they should have the like
end. And indeed the following Kings of France unto this day, has found this
true by their unfortunate and unexpected ends.

The death of this King made great alteration in France, England and Scotland;
France was erected in some esperance that the tyranny of the Guisians should no
longer reign above them, because God at unawares had broken the staff
whereupon they leaned; but alas, they were deceived: For the simplicity of some
was so abused, that against the Laws of the Realm, to the Queen mother was
committed the Regiment, which lifted up as well the Duke of Guise, as the
cruel Cardinal, for a season. The Queen of England, and the Council,
remitted our Ambassadors. The pride of the Papists of Scotland began to be
abated, and some that ever had shown themselves enemies unto us, began to
think, and plainly to speak (amongst whom the old Sheriff of Air was one) That
they perceived God to fight for us. The Earl of Arrane having suffered repulse
in his design to marry the Queen of England, he began to fancy unto himself
that the Queen of Scotland bare unto him some favor: And so he wrote unto her,
and sent for credit a Ring, which the said Queen our Sovereign knew well
enough. The Letter and Ring were both presented to the Queen, and by her
received: Such answer was returned to the said Earl, after the which he made
no further pursuit in that matter: And yet nevertheless he did bear it heavily
in heart, and more heavily then his friends would have wished; for grief he was
troubled in his understanding.

The certainty of the death foresaid was signified unto us both by Sea and
Land. By Sea received John Knox (who then had great intelligence both with the
Churches abroad, and some of the Court of France) That the King was mortally
sick, and could not well escape death. Which Letters received that same day at
afternoon he passed to the Duke to his own lodging at the Church of Field, with
whom he found the Lord James in conference alone: The Earl of Arrane was in
Iedburgh, to whom he opened such news as he had received, and willed them to be
of good comfort; for, said he, the advertiser has never deceived me: It is the
same Gentleman that first gave us knowledge of the slaughter of Henry King of
France; and showed unto them the Letter, but would not express the man's name.
While they were reasoning in diverse purposes, and he comforting them: For while
(we say) they three were familiarly communing together, there came a messenger
from the Lord Gray forth of Barwick, assuring him of the death of the K. of
France. Which noysed abroad, a general Convention of the Nobility was
appointed to be holden at Edinburgh the fifteenth day of January following, in
the which the Book of discipline was perused newly over again, for some
pretended ignorance, by reason that they had not heard it. In that assembly was
Master Alexander Anderson Subprincipall, and Under-Master of one of the Schools
of Aberdein, a man more subtle and crafty than either learned or godly,
called, who refused to dispute anent his faith, abusing a place of Tertullian,
to cloak his ignorance. It was answered unto him, That Tertullian should not
prejudge the Authority of the Holy Ghost, who by the mouth of Peter commands
us to give reason of our faith to every one that requires the same of us; It
was farther answered, that we neither required him, neither yet any man to
dispute in any point concerning our faith* which was grounded upon Gods Word,
and fully expressed in his holy Scriptures, for all that we believed without
controversy. But we required of him, as of the rest of Papists, that they
would suffer their Doctrine, Constitutions, and Ceremonies to come to trial.
And principally, that the Mass and the opinion thereof by them taught unto the
people, Note this well
might be laid to the square rule of Gods Word, and unto the right Institution
of Jesus Christ, That they might understand whether that their Preachers
offended, or not, in that, that they affirmed. The Action of the Mass to be
expressly repugning unto the last Supper of the Lord Jesus, The sayer of it to
commit horrible blasphemy in usurping up-him the Office of Christ, The hearers
to commit damnable Idolatry, and the opinion of it conceived to be a
derogation, and as it were a disanulling of Christ's death. While the said
Master Alexander denied, that the Priest took upon him Christ's office, to offer
for sin, as he alleged, a Mass book was produced, and in the beginning of the
Canon were these words read, Suscipe Sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem quam ego
indignus peccator offero tibi vivo Deo and vero, pro peccatis meis, pro
peccatis totius Ecclesiae vivorum and mortuum. Now said the reasoner, if to
off^r for the sins of the whole Church, was not the Office of Christ Jesus,
yea that Office that to him only might, and may appertain, let the Scripture
judge. And if a vile Knave, whom ye call Priest, proudly takes the same upon
him, let your own Books witness. The said Mr. Alexander answered, Christ
offered the propitiatory, and that could none do but he; but we offer the
remembrance. Note.
Whereto it was answered, We praise God that ye have denied a sacrifice
propitiatory to be in the Mass; and yet we offer to prove, that in more than a
hundredth places of your Papisticall Doctors this proposition is affirmed, The
Mass is said to be a Sacrifice propitiatory. But the second part, where ye
allege that ye offer Christ in remembrance; we ask first, Unto whom do ye
offer him? and next by what authority are ye assured of well-doing? In God the
Father there falls no Oblivion: And if ye will shift and say, that ye offer
it not as God, were forgetful, but as willing to apply Christ's merits to his
Church. We demand of you, What power and commandment have ye so to do? We know
that our Master Christ Jesus commanded his Apostles to do that which he did in
remembrance of him, But plain it is, that Christ took bread, gave thanks, brake
bread, and gave it to his disciples, saying, Take ye, eat ye, this is my body
which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me, etc. Here we find a
commandment, to take, to eat, to take and to drink; but to offer Christ's Body
either for remembrance or application, we find not: And therefore we say, To
take upon you an Office which is not given unto you, is unjust usurpation, and
no lawful power. The said Master Alexander being more then astonished, would
have shifted; but then the Lords willed him to answer directly, whereto he
answered, That he was better seen in Philosophy, then in Theology. Note
Lesley his answer.
Then was commanded M. John Leslie (who then was Parson of Une, and now Abbot
of Londors, and after was made Bishop of Rosse) to answer to the former
Argument; and he with great gravity began to answer, If our Master have nothing
to say to it, I have nothing; for I know nothing but the Cannon Law: And the
greatest reason that ever I could find there, is, Nolumus and Volumus, and yet
we understand that now That is, An. 1566 when this book was written.
he is the only Patron of the Mass. But it is no marvel, for we understand
that he is a Priests get and Bastard, and therefore we should not wonder,
albeit that the old truan Verse be true, Patrem sequitur sua proles. The
Nobility hearing that neither the one nor the other would answer directly,
said, We have been miserably deceived heretofore; for if the Mass may not
obtain remission of sins to the quick and to the dead, Wherefore were all the
Abbeys so richly doted and endowed with our Temporal lands.

Thus much we thought good to insert here, because that some Papists are not
ashamed now to affirm, That they with their reasons could never be heard, but
that all we did, we did by mere force; when that the whole Realm knows, That
we ever required them to speak their judgments freely, not only promising
unto them protection and defense, but also that we should subscribe with them,
if they by Gods Scriptures could confute us, and by the same Word establish
their assertions. But who can correct the leasings of such as in all things
show them the sons of the Father of all lies. Preserve us, Lord, from that
perverse and malicious Generation. Amen.

At this same Assembly was the Lord James appointed to go to France to the
Queen our Sovereign, and a Parliament was appointed to begin the 20 of May
next following; for at that time was the return of the said Lord James looked
for: and so was that Convention dissolved, without any other thing of
importance concluded. The said Lord James prepared him for his journey (for
albeit he past in the public affairs, he sustained the charge of his own
expenses; and yet there never past from this Realm in the company of one man
so many, and so honest through England to France. Note the liberality of the
Earl Murray.
) Before he departed, he was forewarned, as well of the danger in France, as of
the Queens craft (not that we then suspected her nature, but that we understood
the malice of her friends) he was plainly premonished, That if ever he
condescended that she should have Mass publicly or privately within the
Realm of Scotland, that then betrayed he the Cause of God, and exposed the
Religion even to the uttermost danger that he could do. Note this diligently.
That she should have Mass publicly, he affirmed that he would never consent:
But to have it secretly in her Chamber, Who could stop her? The danger was
shown, and so he departed.

The Form and Order of the Election of the Superintendent, and all other
Ministers at Edinburgh, March the 9. 1560. John Knox being then Preacher.
FIrst, was made a Sermon, in the which these Heads were handled: First, The
necessity of Ministers and Superintendents, or Overseers. The second, the
crimes and vices that might unable them of the Ministry. Thirdly, the virtues
required in them. Fourthly and lastly, Whether such as by public consent of
the Church were called to such Office, might refuse the same.

The Sermon finished, it was declared by the same Minister, maker thereof, That
the Lords of the Secret Council had given Charge and Power to the Churches of
Lowthian, to to choose Master John Spottiswood Superintendent or Overseer; And
that sufficient warning was made by public Edict to the Churches of Edinburgh,
Linliethquow, Sterlin, Tranent, Hadington, and Dumbar, as also to the Earls,
Lords, Barons, Gentlemen, and others, that have, or that might claim to have
Vote in Election, to be present that day, and that same hour. And therefore
enquiry was made, Who were present, and who were absent. After was called the
said John, who answering the Minister, demanded, If he knew any crime or
offense to the said Master John, that might unable him to be called to that
Office? and that he demanded thrice. Secondly, question was moved to the whole
multitude, If there was any other whom they put in Election with the said
Master John: The people were asked, If they would have the said Master John
Superintendent or Overseer? If they would honor and obey him as Christ's
Minister, and comfort and assist him in every thing pertaining to his Charge?

They answered: We will and do promise unto him such obedience, as becomes
Sheep to give unto their Pastor, so long as he remains faithful in his
Office.

Tne answers of the people, and their consent received, the questions were
propounded to him that was to be elected.

Question. Seeing that ye hear the thirst and desire of this people; Do ye not
think your self bound in conscience before God to support them, that so
earnestly call for your comfort, and for the fruit of your labors?

Answer. If any thing were in me able to satisfy their desire, I acknowledge
my self bound to obey God calling by them.

Question. Do ye seek to be promoted to this Office and charge, for any respect
of worldly commodity, Where then are Pluralities and fatness of Livings in our
days.
riches, or glory?

Answer. God knows the contrary.

Question. Believe ye not that the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
contained in the Books of the Old and New Testaments, are the only true, and
most absolute foundation of the Universal Church of Christ Jesus, in so much
that in the same Scriptures are contained all things necessary to be believed
for the salvation of mankind?

Answer. I verily believe the same, and do abhor and utterly refuse all
Doctrine alleged necessary to salvation, that is not expressedly contained in
the same.

Question. Is not Christ Jesus man of man, according to the flesh; to wit, The
Son of David, The seed of Abraham, Conceived by the holy Ghost, Born of the
Virgin his mother; and that he is the only Head and Mediator of his Church?

Answer. He is, and without him there is neither salvation to man, nor life to
Angel.

Question. Is not the same Lord Jesus, The only true God, The eternal Son of
the eternal Father, in whom all that shall be saved were elected before the
foundation of the world was laid?

Answer. I confess and acknowledge, and confess him in the Unity of his
Godhead, to be God above all things blessed for ever.

Question. Shall not they whom God in his eternal Council has elected, be
called to the knowledge of his Son, our Lord Jesus, and shall not they who of
purpose are called in this life, be justified, and justification and free
remission of sins is obtained in this life by free grace? Shall not the glory
of the sons of God follow in the general Resurrection, when the Son of God
shall appear in his glorious Majesty?

Answer. This I acknowledge to be the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the most
singular comfort of Gods children.

Question. Will ye not then contain your self in all Doctrine within the
bounds of this foundation? Will ye not study to promove the same, as well by
your life, as by your Doctrine? Will ye not, according to the graces and
utterance that God shall grant unto you, profess, instruct, and maintain the
purity of the Doctrine contained in the sacred Word of God, and to the
uttermost of your power? Let the Churchmen now adays look to this.
Will ye not gain-stand and convince the gainsayers, and the teachers of men's
inventions?

Answer. That do I promise in the presence of God, and of his Congregation
here assembled.

Question. Know ye not that the excellency of this Office to the which God
has called you, requires that your conversation and behavior be such, as
that ye may be irreprehensible, yea, even in the eyes of the ungodly?

Answer. I unfainedly acknowledge, and humbly desire the Church of God to pray
with me that my life be not slanderous to the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus.

Question. Because you are a man compassed with infirmities, will you not
charitably and with lowliness of spirit receive admonition of your brethren?
And if ye shall happen to slide or offend in any point, will ye not be subject
to the Discipline of the Church, as the rest of your brethren.

The Answer of the Superintendent or Minister to be elected. I acknowledge my
self a man subjected to infirmity, and one that has need of correction and
admonition, and therefore I most willingly subject my self to the wholesome
Discipline of the Church, yea, to the Discipline of the same Church by which I
am now called to this Office and Charge, and here in Gods presence and yours,
do promise obedience to all admonitions, secretly or publicly given; unto
which, if I be found inobedient, I confess my self most worthy to be
rejected, not only from this honor, but also from the society of the
faithful in case of my stubbornness. What can the P^elats say to this.
For the vocation of God to bear charge within his Church, makes not men
Tyrants nor Lords, but appoints them servants, Watchmen, and Pastors to the
flock.

Thus ended, question must be asked again of the multitude.

Question. Require ye any further of this your Superintendent, or Overseer and
Minister.

If no man answer, let the Minister proceed.

Question. Will ye not acknowledge this your brother for the Minister of Christ
Jesus, your Overseer and Pastor? Will ye not reverence the Word of God that
proceeds from his mouth? Will ye not receive of him the Sermon of Exhortation
with patience; not refusing the wholesome Medicine of your souls, although it
be bitter and unpleasing to the flesh? Will ye not finally maintain and comfort
him in his Ministry and watching over you, against all such as wickedly would
rebel against God and his holy Ordinance?

The people answered. We will: as we will answer to the Lord Jesus, who has
commanded his Ministers to be had in reverence, as his Ambassadors, and as men
that carefully watch for the salvation of our souls.

Let the Nobility be urged with this. Ye have heard the duty and profession
of this our brother by your consents appointed to this charge, as also the
duty and obedience which God requires of us toward him here in his
Ministry. But because that neither of both are able to perform any thing
without the especial grace of our God in Christ Jesus, who has promised to be
with us present even to the consummation of the world, with unfeigned hearts let
us crave of him his benediction and assistance in this work begun, to his
glory, and for the comfort of his Church.

The Prayer.
O Lord, to whom all power is given in heaven and on earth, thou that art the
eternal Son of the eternal Father, who have not only loved thy Church,
that for the redemption and purgation of the same, have humbled thy self to
the ignominious death of the Cross, and thereupon have shed thy most precious
and innocent blood, to prepare to thy self a Spouse without spot, but also to
retain this most excellent benefit in recent memory, have appointed in thy
Church, Teachers, Pastors, and Apostles, to instruct, comfort, and admonish
the same; Look upon us mercifully, O Lord, thou that only art King, Teacher,
and high Priest, to thine own flock: and send unto this our Brother, whom in
thy Name we have charged with the chief care of thy Church within the bounds of
L. such portion of thy holy Spirit, as thereby he may rightly divide thy Word,
to the instruction of thy flock, and to the confutation of pernicious errors
and damnable Superstitions. Give unto him, good Lord, a mouth and wisdom,
whereby the enemies of thy Truth may be confounded, the Wolves expelled and
driven from thy Fold, thy Sheep may be fed in the wholesome Pastures of thy most
holy Word, the blind and ignorant may be illuminated with thy true knowledge.
Finally, that the degrees of Superstition and Idolatry which now rests within
this Realm, being purged and removed, we may all not only have occasion to
glorify thee our only Lord and Savior, but also daily to grow in godliness
and obedience of thy most holy will, to the destruction of the body of sin, and
to the restitution of that image, to the which we were once created, and to the
which after our fall and defection we are renewed by participation of thy holy
Spirit, which by true Faith in thee we do profess, as the blessed of thy
Father, of whom the perpetual increase of thy graces we crave, as by thee our
Lord, King, and only Bishop we are taught to pray. Our Father, etc.

The Prayer ended, the rest of the Ministers, if any be, and Elders of that
Church present, in sign of their consent, shall take the elected by the hand.
The chief Minister shall give the Benediction, as follows;

God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has commanded his Gospel to be
Preached, to the comfort of his Elect, and has called thee to the Office of a
Watchman over his people, multiply his graces with thee, illuminate thee with
his holy Spirit; comfort and strengthen thee in all virtue; govern and guide
thy Ministry, to the praise of his holy Name, to the propagation of Christ's
Kingdom, to the comfort of his Church; and finally, to the plain discharge and
assurance of thine own conscience in the day of the Lord Jesus; to whom with
the Father and with the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, now and
ever. So be it. The last Exhortation to the elected.
TAke heed to thy self, and unto the flock committed to thy charge, feed the
same carefully, not as it were by compulsion, but of very love which thou
bear to the Lord Jesus. Walk in simplicity and pureness of life, as it
becomes the true servant and the Ambassador of the Lord Jesus. Usurp not
dominion nor tyrannical authority over thy brethren, be not discouraged in
adversity, but lay before thy self the example of the Prophets, Apostles, and
of the Lord Jesus, who in their Ministry sustained contradiction, contempt,
persecution, and death: fear not to rebuke the world of Sin, Justice, and
Judgment. If any thing succeed prosperously in thy Vocation, be not puffed up
with pride, neither yet flatter thy self, as that the good success proceeds
from thy virtue, industry or care. But let ever that sentence of the Apostle
remain in thine heart; What have thou which thou have not received? If thou
have received, why gloriest thou? Comfort the afflicted, support the poor, and
exhort others to support them. Be not careful for things of this life, but be
fervent in prayer to God for the increase of his holy Spirit. And finally,
behave thy self in this holy vocation, with such sobriety as God may be
glorified in thy Ministry. And so shall thou shortly obtain the Victory, and
shall receive the Crown promised, when the Lord Jesus shall appear in his
glory, whose omnipotent Spirit assist thee and us to the end.

Sing 23. Psalm. As the servants of God uprightly traveled to have vice
punished, and virtue planted; so did the devil ever stir up some in the
contrary of both. There was a Law made against fornicators and adulterers, that
the one and the other should be Carted through the Towns, and so banished, till
that their repentance was offered and received. And albeit this was not the
severity of Gods Law, especially against adulterers, yet was it a great bridle
to the malefactors, whereat the wicked did wonderously storm. It chanced that
one Sanderson a Fletcher or Boutcher, was deprehended to have put away his
lawful wife (under color that he was lawfully parted after the manner of the
Papisticall Religion) and had taken to him another in his house. The complaint
and slander proposed to the Church, and trial taken, That he was not married
with the second woman, neither that he was able to prove that he was divorced
by any order of the Law from the first, he was committed to the hands of the
Magistrates, who according to the Laws commanded him to be Carted. But the
rascal multitude enflamed by some ungodly Crafts-men, made insurrection, brake
the Cart, boasted and threatened the Officers, and took away the malefactor.
This was the beginning of farther evils, as we shall after hear. In this mean
time, while Lord James (we say) was in France, there came an Ambassador from
France, Ambassador from France, and his demands.

See the study of France to divide the two Kingdoms newly bound for mantenance
of Religion against the common enemies.


suborned, no doubt, with all craft that might, to trouble the state of
Religion. His Demands were, first, That the League betwixt us and England
should be broken. Secondly, That the ancient League betwixt France and Scotland
should be renewed. Thirdly, And that the Bishops and Churchmen should be
restored in their former places, and be suffered to intermit with their
Livings. The Council delayed answer, until the Parliament appointed in May.
In the mean time the Papists of Scotland practiced with him. The Earls of
Huntlie, Atholl, Bothwell, and others, intended to have taken Edinburgh before
the said Parliament. The whole Bishops assembled, and held Council in Sterlin.
Some whispering there was, that the Duke, and the Bishop of Saint Andrews were
too familiar; and some feared that the Authority of the Queen should have been
usurped, by reason of her absence, Note.
and that the Duke was the second Person, for thereat had some of his pressed
immediately after the death of the King of France. The Protestants
faithfulness ill rewarded.
The Protestants thereof advertised, prevented them, and came to Edinburgh. The
Earl of Arran stood constant with his brethren; there were some that carefully
and painfully traveled that nothing prejudicial to the Queens Authority
should be done in the absence of the Lord James, to whom the Queen has
recompensed evil for good service. Master James Magill in that point did both
stoutly and truly; for John Knox and he were then fallen in familiarity, in
which they yet continue, 20 Octobris 1567. by reason that the said Master James
had embraced the Religion, and professed it publicly. The Papists and Bishops
disappointed of their principal enterprise, A foolish play used in time of
darkness Hence we say any foolish thing to be like a play of Robin-Hood.
did yet make broyle for trouble: For the rascal multitude were stirred up to
make a Robin-Hood, which enormity was of many years left off, and condemned by
Stature and Act of Parliament; yet would they not be forbidden, but would
disobey and trouble the Town, especially upon the night: Whereat the Bailiffs
offended, took from them some Swords and Ensign, which was occasion that they
that same night made a mutiny; kept the Gates of the Town, and intended to
have pursued some men within their own houses; But that upon the restitution
of their Swords and Ensign, was stayed. And yet they ceased not to molest, as
well the Inhabitants of Edinburgh, as diverse Contrymen, taking from them
money, and threatening some with farther injuries: Wherewith the Magistrates of
the Town highly offended, took more diligent heed to such as resorted to the
Town, and so apprehended one of the principal of that disorder, named Balon,
Some say his name is Killone.
a Shoo-maker, whom they put to an Assizes; and being convinced (he could not
be absolved, for he was the chief man that spoiled John Mubray of ten Crowns of
the Sun) they thought to have executed Judgment upon him, and so erected a
Gibbet beneath the Cross. (Whether it came by Paction with the Provest and
some other, or by instigation of the Crafts-men, who ever have been bent too
much to maintain such vanity and riotousnesse, we fully know not) but suddenly
there did arise a tumult, the Tolbuith was broken up, and not only the said
Balon, who before was condemned, was violently taken forth, but also all other
malefactors were set at freedom, the Gibbet was pulled down, and
despightfully broken. And thereafter, as the Provest, and some of the Council,
assembled to the Clerks Chamber for consultation. The whole rascal banded
together, with some known and honest Crafts-men, and intended invasion on the
said Chamber; which perceived, the Provest, and such as were in his company,
past to the Tolbuith, suspecting nothing that they would have been so enraged,
to make new pursuit, after that they had obtained their intent: But they were
suddenly deceived; for from the Castle hill they came with violence, and with
stones, Guns, and such other Weapons as they had, and began to assault the said
Tolbuith, ran at the door of it, till that partly by stones cast from above,
and partly by a Pistol shot by Robert Norwell, (which hurt one Tuedy) they
were repulsed from the door. But yet ceased they not to cast and shoot in at
the windows, threatening death to all that were within. And in very deed the
malice of the Crafts-men, who were suspected to be the occasion of that tumult,
bare no good will to diverse of those that were with the Provest. The Arguments
that the Crafts-men were the causes of that uprore, besides their first
disorder that they had used before, in taking Sandersone from the execution of
punishment, are two. The former, Archibald Deware, Patricke Shaugzie, with
other six Deacons, came to John Knox, and willed him to solicit the Provest
and the Town to delay the execution. Who did answer, That he had so often
solicited in their favors, that his own conscience accused him, That they used
his labors for no other end, but to be a Patron to their impiety; for he had
before made intercession for William Harlaw, John Frissell, and others that
were convinced of the former tumult: They proudly said, That if it was not
stayed, both he and the Bailiffs should repent it. Who answered, He would not
hurt his conscience for the fear of any man: And so they departed; and the
tumult, as said is, immediately thereafter did arise. The second Argument is;
The tumult continued from two at afternoon, till after eight at night. The
Crafts-men were required to assemble themselves together for deliverance of the
Provest; but they past to their four hours penie, or afternoons Pint, and in
their jesting, said, They will be Magistrates alone, let them rule the
multitude alone. And so, contrary to the Oath which they had made, they denied
their assistance, counsel, and comfort to the Provest and Bailiffs, which are
arguments very probable that the said tumult rose by their procurement. The end
thereof was, That the Provest and Bailiffs were compelled to give their hands
writs, that they should never pursue any of those that were of that tumult, for
any crime that was done in that behalf. And this was proclaimed at the Cross,
after nine of the clock at night; and so was that trouble quieted: But the
Nobility vowed, That they would not spare it, nor forget it; and so a great
number of that faction were absent from the Town, till the arrival of the
Queen. The whole multitude were holden excommunicate, and were admitted to no
participation of the Sacraments, until such time as they satisfied the
Magistrates, and made humble suit unto the Church. Of the death of the Queen
Regent, we have heard before spoken; but of her Burial was nothing heard. And
it may appear, That such matters are unworthy of remembrance: And if all things
should be rightly weighed, we shall perceive Gods just Judgments, how secret
soever that they be. Before we heard the barbarous inhumanity that was used at
Leith by the French, who exposed the naked carcasses of the slain, as it were
in a spectacle despighting God. We have heard that the Queen Regent rejoiced at
the sight, but her joy was suddenly turned into sorrow, as we have heard. The
question was moved of her Burial: The Preachers boldly gainstood, Of the Queen
Regents death.
That any Superstitious Rites should be used within that Realm, which God of
his mercy began to repugne. And so conclusion was taken, That her Burial
should be deferred till farther advertisement; Note.
and so was she wrapped in a Coffin of Lead, and kept in the Castle, from the
ninth of June, until the 19 of October, when she by Pynours was carried to a
Ship, and so carried to France: what pomp was used there, we neither heard, nor
yet regard: But in it we see, That she that delighted that others lay without
Burial, gat it neither so soon as she her self (if she had been of the
counsel in her life) would have required it; Note.
neither yet so honorable in this Realm, as sometimes she looked for. As men
do, so they receive.

The Papists, a little before the Parliament, resorted in diverse Bands to the
Town, and began to brag, as that they would have defaced the Protestants: Which
thing perceived, the brethren assembled, and went in such Companies, and yet in
peaceable manner, that the Bishops and their Bands forsook the calsay or
street. The Brethren understanding what the Papists meant, convened in Council
in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh the seven and twentieth of May, the year of God
1561. and after consultation, concluded, That an humble Supplication should be
presented unto the Lords of the Secret Counsel, and unto the whole Assembly
that then was convened, in the which should these subsequent Heads be required,
and a Law to pass thereupon.

1. First, That Idolatry, and all Monuments thereof should be suppressed
thorowout the whole Realm: That the sayers, hearers, maintainers, and hanters
of the Mass, should be punished according to the Act of Parliament, as said
is. 2. That special and certain provision be made for the maintenance of the
Superintendents, Ministers, Exhorters and Readers: That Superintendents and
Ministers should be planted where none were: That punishment should be
appointed for such as disobeyed or contemned the Superintendents in their
Function. 3. That punishment may be appointed for the abusers of the
Sacraments, and for the contemners of the same. 4. That no Letters of the
Session, or Warrant from the Judge, be given to answer or pay to any person of
their Tenths, without especial provision that the Parishioners retain so much
in their own hands, as is appointed for the maintenance of the Ministry: And
that all such as are else given be called in and discharged; And likewise that
no Sheriffs give Precepts to that effect. 5. That neither the Lords of Session,
nor any other Judges, proceed upon such Precepts or Warnings past at the
instance of them that of late have obtained fewis of Vicarages and Parsons
Manses, and Churchyards: And that six akers (if so much there be of the
Gleebe) be always reserved to the Minister, according to the appointment of
the Book of Discipline. 6. That no Letters of Session, nor other Warrants, take
place while the stipends contained in the Book of Discipline for maintenance of
the Ministers, be first consigned in the hands at the least of the Principals
of the Parishioners. 7. That punishment be appointed against all such as
purchase, bring home, or execute within this Realm the Popes Bulls.
The Tenor of the Supplication was this:

PLease your Honors, and the wisedoms of such as are presently convened with
you in Council, to understand, That by many arguments we perceive what the
pestilent generation of that Roman Antichrist within this Realm pretends,
to wit, That they would of new erect their Idolatry, take upon them Empire
above our conscience, and so to command us, the true subjects of this Realm,
and such as God of his mercy has (under our Sovereign) subject unto us, in
all things to obey their appetites. Honesty craveth, and conscience moves us,
to make the very secrets of our hearts patent to your Honors in that behalf,
which is this; That before ever those Tyrants and dumb dogs Empire above us,
and above such as God has subjected unto us, that we the Barons and Gentlemen
professing Christ Jesus within this Realm, are fully determined to hazard
life, and whatsoever we have received of God in Temporal things. Note
diligently.
Most humbly therefore beseeching your Honors, That such order may be taken,
that we have not occasion to take again the Sword of just Defense into our
hands, which we have willingly (after God had given Victory both to your
Honors and us) resigned over into your hands; To the end that Gods Gospel may
be publicly Preached within this Realm, The true Ministers thereof reasonably
maintained, Idolatry suppressed, and the committers thereof punished, according
to the Laws of God and man. In doing whereof your Honors shall find us not
only obedient unto you in all things lawful, but also ready at all times to
bring under order and obedience such as would rebel against your just
authority, which in absence of our Sovereign we acknowledge to be in your
hands, beseeching your Honors with upright judgment and indifferency, to
look upon these our few Articles, and by these our brethren to signify unto us
such answer again, as may declare your Honors worthy of that place, whereunto
God (after some danger sustained) in his mercy has called you. Let this also
be considered, and referred to our times.
And let these enemies of God assure themselves, That if your Honors put not
order unto them, that we shall shortly take such order, That they shall neither
be able to do what they list, neither yet to live upon the sweat of the brows
of such as are no debtors unto them. Let your honors conceive nothing of us,
but all humble obedience in God. But let the Papists be yet once again
assured, That their Pride and Idolatry we will not suffer.

Directed from the assembly of the Church the 28 of May 1561. And sent by these
brethren; The Master of Lindsay, The Lord of Lochinvar, The Lord of
Pharmherst, The Lord of Whittingham, Thomas Menzeis Provest of Aberdeene, and
George Lowell Burgess of Dundie.

Upon the which Request and Articles, the Lords and Counsel aforesaid, made an
Act and Ordinance, answering to every head of the foresaid Articles, and
commanded Letters to be answered thereupon, which diverse Ministers raised and
copied, as in the Books of secret Council is yet to be found.

And thus gat Satan the second fall, Note.
after that he had begun to trouble the state of Religion, once established by
Law. His first assault was by the rascal multitude, opposing themselves to the
punishment of vice. The second was by the Bishops and their bands, in which he
thought utterly to have triumphed: And yet he in the end prospered worse then
ye have heard. In this mean time returned from France the Lord James, who
beside his great expenses, and the loss of a box wherein was his secret purse,
escaped a desperate danger in Paris: for his returning from our Sovereign (who
then was with the Cardinal of Loraine her Uncle in Rhemes) understood of the
Papists in Paris, they had conspired some treasonable act against him; for they
intended either to have beset his house by night, or else to have assaulted him
and his company as they walked in the streets: Whereof the said Lord James
advertised by the Rinegrave, by reason of old familiarity which was betwixt
them in Scotland; he took purpose suddenly and in good order, Note.
to depart from Paris, as he did the second day after that he arrived there:
And yet could not he depart so secretly, but that the Papists had their privy
ambushes: For upon the new decayed pont of change, they had prepared a
Procession, which met the said Lord and his Company even in the teeth; and
knowing that they would not do the accustomed reverence to them and their
Idols, they thought thereupon to have picked a Quarrel: And so as one part
passed by, without moving of hat to any thing that was there, they had suborned
some to cry, Hugonots, and so cast stones. But God disappointed their
enterprise; for the said Rinegrave, with other Gentlemen, being with the Lord
James, rebuked the foolish multitude, and over-rode some of the foremost, and so
the rest were dispersed, and he and his company safely escaped, and came with
expedition to Edinburgh, while that yet the Lords and assembly were together,
to the great comfort of many godly hearts, and to no little astonishment of the
wicked: for from the Queen our Sovereign he brought Letters to the Lords,
praying them to entertain quietness, and to suffer nothing to be attempted
against the contract of Peace which was made at Leith, till her own home
coming, and to suffer the Religion publicly established, to go forward, etc.
Whereupon the said Lords gave answer to the French Ambassador, a Nega^ive to
every one of his Petitions.

The Lords Answer to the French Ambassador.
Reader remark the advantages that Scotland has from France.
1. And first, That France had not deserved at their hands, that either they or
their posterity should enter with them again in any League or Confederacy,
offensive or defensive, seeing that so traitorously and cruelly they had
persecuted them, their Realm and Liberties, under pretense of amity and
Marriage. 2. Secondly, That besides their conscience, they could not take such
a worldly shame, as without offense committed to break the League, which in
Gods Name they had made with them, whom he has made instruments to set
Scotland at freedom from the tyranny of the French, at least of the Guisians
and of their faction. 3. And last, That such as they called Bishops and
Churchmen, they knew neither for Pastors of the Church, neither yet for any
just possessours of the patrimony thereof. A good Character of Bishops.
But understand them perfectly to be Wolves, Thieves, Murderers, and idle
Bellies; and therefore as Scotland has forsaken the Pope and Papistry, so
could not they be debtors to his forsworn Vassals.

With these answers departed the said Ambassador, and the Lords of secret
Counsel made an Act, that all places and Monuments of Idolatry should be
destroyed. And for that purpose was directed to the West, the Earl of Arrane,
having joined with him the Earls of Argile and Glencarne, together with the
Protestants of the West, who burnt Paslay (the Bishop of Saint Andrews, who was
Abbey thereof, narrowly escaped) cast down Failfurd, Kylwinning, and a part of
Cosraguell: The Lord James was appointed to the North, where he made such
Reformation, as nothing contented the Earl of Huntly, and yet seemed he to
approve all things. And thus God so potently wrought with us, Let us stick to
God, and he will not leave us.
so long as we depended upon him, that all the World might see his potent hand
to maintain us, and to fight against our enemies: yea, most to confound them,
when that they promised to themselves victory without resistance. Oh that we
would rightly consider the wondrous works of the Lord our God.

In the Treaty of Peace contracted at Leith, there were contained certain
Heads that required the Ratification of both Queens. The Queen of England,
according to her Promise, Subscription, and Seal, without any delay performed
the same, and sent it to our Sovereign, by her appointed Officers. But our
Sovereign (whether because her own crafty nature thereto moved her, or that
her Uncles chief Counselors so would, we know not) with many delays
frustrated the expectation of the Queen of England, as by the Copy of a Letter
sent from the Ambassador of England to his Sovereign we may understand.

The Ambassadors Letter.
MADAME,
I Sent Summer to the Queen of Scots for audience, who appointed me to come to
her the same day after dinner, which I did. To her I did remember your
Majesty's hearty commendations, and declared unto her your Majesty's like
gladsomnesse of her recoverie from her late sickness, whose want of health, as
it was grievous unto your Majesty, so, I told her, did you congratulate, and
greatly rejoice of the good terms of health she was in for the present. After
these offices of civilitie, I put her in remembrance again what had passed
from the beginning, in the matter of your Majesty's demand of Ratification,
according to the Tenor of the said Treaty, as well by me at the first, as
afterward by my Lord of Bedford, at his being here, and also followed sithence
again by me in open audience, and by my Letter to her being in Loraine, adding
hereto your Majesty's further commandment, and re-charge to me again presently
to renew the same demand, as before had been done.

At Paris the 23 of June 1561.

The said Queen made answer as follows.

Monsieur L'Ambassadour,
I Thank the Queen, my good sister, for this gentle visitation and
congratulation of this my recoverie, and though I be not yet in perfect health,
yet, I thank God, I feel my self in a very good case, and in way of a full
recoverie. And for answer to your demand (quoth she) of my Ratification, I do
remember all these things that you have recited unto me: And I would the Queen
my good sister should think that I do defer the resolute answer in this
matter, and performing thereof, until such time as I might have the advises of
the Nobles and States of mine own Realm, which I trust shall not be long a
doing, for I intend to make my voyage thither shortly. Fair words to no
purpose.
And though this matter (quoth she) does touch me principally, yet does it
also touch the Nobles and States of my Realm too: and therefore it shall be
meet that I use their advises therein. Heretofore they have seemed to be
grieved, that I should do any thing without them. And now they would be more
offended, if I should proceed in this matter of my self without their advises.
I do intend (quoth she) to send Monsieur Dosell to the Queen your Mistress my
good sister, who shall declare that unto her from me, that I trust shall
suffice her. By whom I will give her to understand of my journey into Scotland,
I mean to embarke at Calice. The King of France has lent me certain Galleyes
and Ships to convey me home, That was a secret Lardon.
and I intend to require of my good Sister those favors that Princes use to do
in those cases. She meant she would seek a safe conduct.
And though the terms wherein we have stood heretofore, have been somewhat
hard, Ever till that she may show her evil will.
yet I trust that from henceforth we shall accord together as Cosins and good
Neighbors. I mean (quoth she) to retire all the French men forth of Scotland,
who had given jealousy to the Queen my Sister, and discontent to my Subjects;
so as I will leave nothing undone to satisfy all parties, If France would have
sustained rhem they had not yet departed.

The second secret Lardon. The Arms of England were usurped.


trusting the Queen my good Sister will do the like; and that from henceforth
none of my disobedient Subjects (if there be any such) shall find aid or
support at her hands. I answered, That I was not desirous to fall into the
discourse how those hard terms first began, nor by what means they were
nourished, because therein I must charge some party with injury, and peril
offered to the Queen my Mistress, which was the very ground of those matters.
But I was well assured there could be no better occasion offered to put the
former unkindnesse in forgetfulness, then by ratifying the Treaty of Peace,
for that should repay all injuries past. And Madame, quoth I, where it pleased
you to suspend and delay the ratification, until you have the advices of the
Nobles and States of your Realm, the Queen my Mistress does nothing doubt of
their conformity in this matter, Your Papists and ours have practiced, and
still practice division.

So that she might have England to the Popes Religion I think she said not
amiss.

The fear of God in the heart of Elias (...) disobedi^^^ to cursed (...).


because the Treaty was made by their consents. The Queen answered, yea, by
some of them, but not by all; it will appear, when I come amongst them,
whether they be of the same mind that you say they were then of: But of this I
assure you, Monsieur Lambassadour (quoth she) I for my part am very desirous to
have the perfect and the assured amity of the Queen my good sister, and will
use all the means I can, to give her occasion to think that I mean it indeed. I
answered, Madame, the Queen my Mistress you may be assured will use the like
toward you, to move you to be of the same opinion toward her. Then (said she)
I trust the Queen your Mistress will not support nor encourage none of my
Subjects to continue in their disobedience, nor to take upon them things that
appertain not to Subjects (this we may answer here, It appertains to Subjects
to worship God as he has commanded, N^te.
and to suppress Idolatry, (...) his (...) well to (...) as (...) the subjects.
by whom so ever it be erected or maintained.) You know (quoth she) there is
much ado in my Realm about matters of Religion. And though there be a greater
number of a contrary Religion unto me then I would there were, yet there is no
reason that Subjects should give a Law to their Sovereign, and specially in
matters of Religion, which I fear (quoth she) my Subjects shall take in hand
(answer for the part of Scotland, and if so they had done, they had escaped
Gods heavy indignation which has been felt, and still hangs over this
Realm, for the Idolatry, and other abominations committed in the same, which
shall not cease till that it be suppressed) I answered, Madame, your Realm is
in none other case at this day, then all other Realms through Christendom are.
The proof whereof you see verified in this Realm. And you see what great
difficulty it is to give order in this matter, though the King of France and
all his Council be very desirous thereunto. Religion is of the greatest force
that may be; you have been long out of your own Realm, so as the contrary
Religion to yours had won tbe upper hand, and the greatest part of your Realm:
Your mother was a woman of great experience of deep dissimulation and policy,
as they term it now adays, and kept that Realm in quietness, till she began
to constrain men's consciences; and as you think it unmeet to be constrained by
your subjects, so it may please you to consider, The matter is as intolerable
to them to be constrained by you, Note.
in matters of conscience; for the duty due to God cannot be given to any
other, without offense of his Majesty. Why (said she) God does command subjects
to be obedient to their Princes, and commands Princes to read his Law, and
govern thereby themselves, and the people committed to their charges. Answer.
Yea, Madame (quoth I) in those things that be not against his Commandments.
Well (quoth she) I will be plain with you: The Religion that I profess, I take
to be most acceptable to God; and indeed, neither do I know, The third Lardon
of accusing England of inconstancy in Religion.
nor desire to know any other. Constancy does become all folks well, but none
better then Princes, and such as have rule over Realms, and specially in
matters of Religion (the Turk is as constant in his Alcoran, as the Pope and
his Sect are in his Constitutions) I have been brought up (quoth she) in this
Religion, and who might credit me in any thing, if I should show my self light
in this case. And though I be young, and not well learned, yet I have heard
this matter often disputed by my Uncle the Cardinal, with some that thought they
could say somewhat in the matter; and I found therein no great reason to change
my opinion (neither yet did the high Priest, when Christ Jesus did reason in
his presence. But what was the Cardinal compelled to confess at Poysie?)
Madame (quoth I) if you will judge well in that matter, you must be conversant
in the Scriptures, which are the Touchstone to try the right from the wrong.
Peradventure you are so partially affected to your Uncles arguments, that you
could not indifferently consider the other party: Yet this I assure you, Madam
(quoth I) your Uncle the Cardinal, in conference with me about these matters,
has confessed, That there be great errors and abuses come into the Church,
and great disorder in the Priests and Clergy, Notwithstanding his own disorder.
in so much that he desired and wished that there might be a Reformation of the
one, and of the other. I have oftentimes heard him say the like (quoth she.)
Then I said, Well, I trust God will inspire all you that be Princes, that there
may be some good order taken in this matter, so as there may be one Unity in
Religion through all Christendom. God grant (quoth she) but for my part you may
perceive I am none of those that will change my Religion every year. And, as I
told you in the beginning, I mean to constrain none of my subjects, but would
wish that they were all as I am; and I trust they shall have no support to
constrain me. I will send Monsieur Dosell (quoth she) to you before he go, to
know whether ye will any thing in England. I pray you so order your self in
this matter betwixt the Queen my good sister and me, that there may be perfect
and assured Amity betwixt us; for I know (quoth she) Ministers may do much good
and harm. I told her I would faithfully and truly make declaration of all that
she said unto me, unto your Majesty; and trusted that she would so satisfy
your Majesty by Monsieur Dosell in all things, as I should hereafter have no
more occasion to treat with her of any thing, but of the increase of Amity, of
which there should be no want on her behalf. This is the effect of the Queen of
Scotlands answer to your Majesty's demand of her said Ratification, and of my
Negotiation with her at this time.


These advertisements somewhat exasperated the Queen of England, and not
altogether without cause; for the Arms of England were before usurped by our
Sovereign, and by her husband Francis; and Elizabeth Queen of England was of
the Guysians reputed little better then a Bastard. It was appointed that this
title should be renewed. But hereof had our ill counseled and misled Queen no
pleasure, and especially after that her husband was dead; for, thought she, the
show of England shall allure many suitors to me. The Guisians, and the Papists
of both Realms, did not a little animate her in that pursuit: The effect
whereof will sooner appear then the godly of England would desire. Queen
Elizabeth, we say, offended with the former answer, wrote unto the Nobility and
States of Scotland in form as follows.

The Queen of Englands Letter to the States of Scotland.
RIght Trusty, and Right entirely Beloved Cousins, We greet you. We doubt not,
but as our meaning is, and has always been, since our Reign, in the sight of
Almighty God straight and direct toward the advancement of his Honor, and
Truth in Religion; and consequently, to procure Peace, and maintain Concord
betwixt both these Realms of England and Scotland; So also our outward acts
have well declared the same to the world, and especially to you, being our
neighbors, who have tasted and proved in these, our friendship and earnest
good will, more then we think any of your antecessors have ever received from
hence; yea, more then a great number of your selves could well have hoped for
of us, all former examples being well weighed and considered. And this we have
to rejoice of, and so may ye be glad, That where in the beginning of the
troubles in that Country, and of our succors meant for you, the jealousy, or
rather the malice of diverse, both in that Realm and in other Countries was
such, both to deprive both us in the yielding, and you in requiring our aid,
Note this false lie, and see how it answers to the calumnies of these days.
that we were noted to have meant the surprise of that Realm, by depriving of
your Sovereign the Queen of her Crown; and you, or the greatest part of you,
to have intended by our succor the like; and either to prefer some other to
the Crown, or else to make of that Monarchy a Commonweal; matters very
slanderous and false. But the end and determination, yea, the whole course and
process of the action on both our parts have manifested, both to the
slanderers, and to all others, That nothing was more meant and prosecuted, then
to establish your Sovereign the Queen, our Cousin and Sister in her State and
Crown, the possession whereof was in the hands of strangers. And although no
words could then well satisfy the malicious, yet our deeds do declare, That no
other thing was sought, but the restitution of that Realm to the ancient
Liberty, and as it were to redeem it from Captivity. Of these our purposes and
deeds, The Peace and Contract at Leith.
there remains among other arguments good testimony, by a solemn Treaty and
Accord made the last year at Edinburgh, by Commissioners sent from us, and from
your Queen, with full Authority in writing under both our Hands, and the great
Seals of both our Realms, in such manner as other Princes our Progenitors have
always used. By which Treaty and Accord, either of us have faithfully accorded
with other, to keep Peace and Amity betwixt our selves, our Countries and
subjects. And in the same also a good Accord is made, not only of certain
things happened betwixt us, but also of some differences betwixt the Ministers
of the late French King your Sovereigns husband and you the States of that
Realm, for the alteration of Laws and Customs of that Country attempted by
them. Upon which Accord there made and concluded, has hitherto followed, as
you know, surety to your Sovereigns State, quietness to your selves, and a
better Peace betwixt both Realms, then ever was heard of in any time past.
Nevertheless how it happens we know not (we can, for she in her conceit
thinks her self Queen of both) That your Sovereign either not knowing in
this part her own felicity, or else dangerously seduced by perverse Counsel,
Many Princes little regarded that.
whereof we are most sorry; being of late at sundry times required by us,
according to her Bond with us, signed with her own Hand, and sealed with the
great Seal of that Realm, and allowed by you, being the States of the same, to
ratify the said Treaty, in like manner as we by writing have done, and are
ready to deliver it to her, who makes such delatory answers thereunto, as what
we shall judge thereof, we perceive by her answer, That it is fit for us to
require of you: For although she has always answered since the death of her
husband, That in this matter she would first understand the minds of certain
of you, before that she would make answer. And so having now of long time
suspended our expectation, in the end, notwithstanding that she has had
conference both by Messengers, and by some of your selves, being with her, yet
she still delayed it, alleging to our Ambassador in France (who said that
this Treaty was made by your consents) it was not by consent of you all; and so
would have us to forbear, until she shall return into that her Country. And
now seeing this her answer depended, as it should seem by her words, upon your
opinions, we cannot but plainly let you all understand, That this manner of
answer, without some more fruit, cannot long content us: We have meant well to
our sister your Queen in time of offense given to us by her We did plainly,
without dissimulation, charge her in her own doubtful state: while strangers
possessed her Realm, we stayed it from danger. And now, having promised to
keep good Peace with her, and with you her subjects, we have observed it; and
shall be sorry if either she or you shall give us contrary cause. All power is
not then in the Prince, if the States have any, as they have.
In a matter so profitable to both the Realms, we think it strange that your
Queen has no better advice: And therefore we do require you all, being the
States of that Realm, upon whom the burden rests, to consider this matter
deeply, Note this,
and to make us answer, whereunto we may trust. And if you shall think meet she
shall thus leave the Peace imperfect, by breaking of her solemn promise,
contrary to the order of all Princes, we shall be well content to accept your
answer, and shall be as careless to see the Peace, as ye shall give us cause;
And doubt not, by the grace of God, but whosoever of you shall incline thereto,
shall soonest repent. You must be content with our plain writing. And on the
other side, if you continue all in one mind, to have the Peace inviolably
kept, and shall so by your advice procure the Queen to ratify it, we also
plainly promise you, That we will also continue our good disposition to keep
the same in such good terms as now it is: And in so doing, the honor of
Almighty God shall be duly sought and promoted in both Realms, The Queen your
Sovereign shall enjoy her State with your surety, and your selves possess
that which ye have with tranquillity; to the increase of your Families and
Posterities, which by the frequent Wars heretofore your antecessors never had
long in one state. To conclude, we require you to advertise us of what mind
you be, specially if you all continue in that mind, that you mean to have the
Peace betwixt both the Realms perpetually kept: And if you shall forbear any
longer to advertise us, ye shall give us some occasion of doubt, whereof more
hurt may grow then good. From, etc.


These Letters received and perused, albeit the States could not be convened,
yet did the Council, and some others also in particular, return answers with
reasonable diligence. The Tenor of our Letters was this: MADAME,
PLease your Majesty, that with judgment we have considered your Majesty's
Letters: And albeit the whole States could not suddenly be assembled, yet we
thought expedient to signify somewhat of our minds unto your Majesty. Far be
it from us, that either we take upon us, That infamy before the world, or
grudge of conscience before our God, that we should lightly esteem the
observation of that Peace lately contracted betwixt these two Realms. By what
motives our Sovereign delayed the ratification thereof, we cannot tell: But of
us (of us, we say, Madame, that have protested fidelity in our promise) her
Majesty had none. Your Majesty cannot be ignorant, That in this Realm there
are many enemies; and farther, That our Sovereign has Counselors, whose
judgments she in all such causes preferred to ours. Note.
Our obedience binds us, not only reverently to speak and write of our
Sovereign, but also to judge and think: And yet your Majesty may be well
assured, That in us shall be noted no blame, if that Peace be not ratified to
your Majesty's contentment: For God is witness, That our chief care in this
earth, next the glory of God, is, That constant Peace may remain betwixt these
two Realms, whereof your Majesty and Realm shall have sure experience, so
long as our counsel or votes may stop the contrary. The benefit that we have
received is so recent, Note the Scots acknowledgement.
that we cannot suddenly bury it in forgetfulness. We would desire your
Majesty rather to be persuaded of us, That we to our powers will study to
leave it in remembrance to our posterity. And thus with lawful and humble
commendation of our service, we commit your Majesty to the Protection of the
Omnipotent.

Of Edinburgh the sixteenth day of July, 1561.



There were some others that answered some of the Ministers of England somewhat
more sharply, and willed them not to accuse nor threaten so sharply, till that
they were able to convince such as had promised fidelity, of some evident
crime, which although they were able to lay to the charge of some, yet respect
would be had to such as long had declared themselves constant procurers of
quietness and peace. The sudden arrival of the Queen made great alteration
even in the Council, as after we will hear. In this mean time, the Papists by
surmising troubled what they might, their Posts, Letters, and Complaints were
from day to day directed, some to the Pope, some to the Cardinal of Loraine,
and some to our Queen. The principal of those Curriers were Master Steven
Wilson, Master John Leslie, called Nolumus and Volumus, Master James
Throgmorton, and others, such as lived, and still live by the traffic of that
Roman Antichrist.

The Preachers vehemently exhorted us to establish the Book of Discipline, by
an Act and public Law; affirming, That if they suffered things to hang in
suspense, when God had given unto them sufficient power in their hand, they
should after sob for it, but should not get it. The Books of Discipline have
been of late so often published, that we shall forbear^ to Print them at this
time, hoping that no good men will refuse to follow the same, till God in a
greater light establish a more perfect.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF The Progress and Continuance of true Religion within
SCOTLAND.
IN the former Books (Gentle Reader) thou may clearly see how potently God
has performed in these our last and wicked days, as well as in the ages that
have passed before us, the promises that are made to the servants of God, by
the Prophet Isaiah, in these words, Isaiah 40 31.
They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint. This promise, we say, such as Satan has not utterly blinded, may see
performed in us, A true acknowledgment o^ man's weakness, to the glory of God;
and as it was then, so has it been in this last Reformation.
the Professors of Christ Jesus, within this Realm of Scotland, with no less
evidence, then it was in any age, that ever passed before us. For what was our
force? What was our number? Yea, what wisdom or worldly policy was in us, to
have brought to any good end so great an enterprise? our very enemies can bear
witness. And yet in how great purity God did establish amongst us his true
Religion, as well in Doctrine as in Ceremonies? To what confusion and fear were
Idolaters, adulterers, and all public transgressors of Gods Commandments
within short time brought, the public Orders of the Church, yet, by the mercy
of God preserved, and the punishment executed against malefactors, can
testify unto the world. For as touching the administration of the Sacraments
used in our Churches, we are bold to affirm, That there is no Realm this day
upon the face of the earth, that has them in greater purity; yea, we can
speak the Truth, whomsoever we offend, there is none (no Realm I mean) that
has them in the like purity, for all others, how sincere that ever the
Doctrine be that by some is taught, retain in their Churches, and in the
Ministers thereof, some footsteps of Antichrist, As it was then, so it is now,
by Gods mercies ^o that Nation.
and dregs of Papistry: But we (all praise to God alone) have nothing within
our Churches that ever flowed from that man of Sin. And this we acknowledge to
be the strength given to us of God, because we esteemed not our selves wise in
our own eyes; but understanding our own wisdom to be but mere foolishness
before our God, laid it aside, and followed only that which we found approved
by himself.

In this point could never our enemies cause us to faint; for our first
Petition was, The first Petition of the Protestants of Scotland.
That the Reverend face of the first, Primitive and Apostolic Church should be
reduced again to the eyes and knowledge of men. And in that point (we say) our
God has strengthened us, till that the Work was finished, as the world may see.
And as concerning the suppressing of vice, yea, and of the abolishing of all
such things as might nourish Impiety within the Realm, the Acts and Statutes of
the principal Towns reformed, will yet testify: Let this be noted for example.
For what Adulterer, what Fornicator, what known Masse-monger or pestilent
Papist durst have been seen in public, within any Reformed Town within this
Realm, before that the Queen arrived? And this Victory to his Word, and
terror to all filthy livers, did God work by such as yet live, and remain
witnesses (whether they will or not) of the aforesaid works of God.

We say our God suffered none of these, whom he first called to the Battle to
perish or to fall, the while that he made them Victors of their enemies: For
even as God suffered none of those whom he called from Egypt, to perish in the
Red Sea, how fearful that ever the danger appeared; so suffered he none of us
to be approved, nor yet to be taken from this life, till that now the Pharaohs,
then one, was drowned, and we set at freedom, without all danger of our
enemies; to let both us and our Posterity understand, That such as follow the
conducting of God, cannot perish, albeit they walked in the very shadow of
death. But from whence (alas) comes this miserable dispersion of Gods people
within this Realm this day, in May 1561? And what is the cause that now the
just is compelled to keep silence, good men are banished, Murderers, and such
as are known unworthy of common Society) if Justice were put in execution)
bear the whole Regiment and sway within this Realm?

The cause of the trouble within Scotland, flowed from the Courtiers who seemed
to profess the Evangell.
We answer, Because that suddenly the most part of us declined from the purity
of Gods Word, and began to follow the world, and so again shake hands with the
devil, and with Idolatry, as in the fourth Book we will hear.

For while that Papists were so confounded, that none within the Realm durst
more avow the hearing or saying of Mass, then the thieves of Tiddisdale durst
avow their stouth or stealing, in the presence of any upright Judge: No ware
Protestants found who are not ashamed at Tables, and other open places, to
ask, Why may not these men have their Mass, and the form of their Religion?
What can that hurt us, or our Religion? And from these two, Why and What, at
last sprang out this Affirmative, The Queens Mass and her Priests will we
maintain; This hand and this Rapier shall fight in their defense, etc.

The Inconveniences were shown both by Tongue and Pen; but the advertisers were
judged to be men of unequal Spirits; Their Credit was defaced at the hands of
such, as before were not ashamed to have used their Counsel in matters of
greater importance, to have refused the Mass.

But then my Lord, my Master may not be thus used; he has that Honor to be
the Queens Brother; He means the Lo^d James, Earl Murray.
And therefore we will that all men shall understand, That he must tender her
as his Sister: And whosoever will counsel him to displease her, or the least
that pertains unto her, shall not find him their friend; yea, they are worthy
to be hanged, that would so counsel him, etc. These and the like reasons took
such deep root in flesh and blood, and was (as yet alas they are) preferred to
God, and to his Messengers, rebuking vice and vanity, that from thence has all
our misery proceeded.

For as before, The corruption that entered the Queens Court.
so even yet, although the Ministers be set to beg, the Guard and the men of
War must be served; Though the blood of the Ministers must be spilt, yet it
is the Queens Servants that did it. Although Mass be multiplied in all
Quarters of the Realm, Who can stop the Queens Subjects to live of the Queens
Religion? Although Innocent men be Imprisoned, it is the Queens pleasure. So
she is offended at such men, The Theology of the Court, and their reason^.
although under pretense of Justice, Innocents be murdered: The Lords shall
weep, but the Queens mind must be satisfied. Nobles of the Realm, Barons and
Counselors are banished, their Escheats disposed of, and their lives most
unjustly pursued. Wicked Counselors ^athers all their mischiev^us plots upon
misled Princes, and causes them to take all things upon them

This was written when the second rank of the Lord was banished, Anno 1560
after Dan^^s s^aughter.


The Queen has lost her trusty Servant David, he was dear unto her; and
therefore for her Honor sake, she must show rigor to revenge his death. And
yet farther, albeit that some knew that she has plainly purposed to wrack and
undo the Religion within this Realm; That to that Roman Antichrist she has
made her promise; And that from him she has taken money to uphold his pomp
within this Realm, yet will they let the people understand, That the Queen
will establish Religion, and provide all things orderly, if she were once
delivered.

If such dealing, which is too common amongst Protestants, be not to prefer
flesh and blood, to God, to his Truth, to Religion, and to the oppressed
Liberty of the Realm, let the world judge. The plagues have been, and in some
places are present, that were before threatened; the rest approaches: And yet
who from the heart cries, I have offended, Now thou Lord knows, in thee only
is the trust of the oppr^ssed* for vain is the help of man. But now to return
we to our History.

The 19 day of August, The Queens Arriva^l from France 156^
1561. betwixt seven and eight hours before noon, arrived Mary Queen of
Scotland, then widow, with two Galleys out of France: In her company (besides
her Gentlewomen called the Mary's) were her Uncles, the Duke Aumale the grand
Prior; the Marquess d'Albuff. There accompanied her also, d'Anville son to the
Constable of France, with other Gentlemen of inferior Condition, besides
servants and Officers. The very face of the Heaven, at the time of her
Arrival, did manifestly speak what comfort was brought into this Country with
her (to wit) Sorrow, T^^^le and lugubre Coelum.
Dolor, Darkness, and all Impiety; For in the memory of man, that day of the
year was never seen a more dolorous face of the Heaven, then was at her
Arrival, which two days after did so continue: For besides the Surface Wet
and Corruption of the Air, the Mist was so thick and dark, that scarce might
any man epsy another the length of two pair of Butts: the Sun was not seen to
shine two days before, nor two days after. That forewarning gave God unto us;
but alas the most part were blind.

At the sound of the Cannons, which the Galleyes shot, the multitude being
advertised, happy was he or she that first must have the presence of the Queen;
the Protestants were not the slowest: And therein they were not to be blamed.
Because the Palace of Halyrud-house was not thoroughly put in order (for her
coming was more sudden then many looked for) she remained in Leith, till
toward the evening, and then repaired thither. In the way betwixt Leith and
the Abbey, met her the Rebels the Crafts-men, of whom we spoke before; to wit,
Those that had violated the Acts of the Magistrates, and had besieged the
Proveist. The Queens first ^^ace in despite of Religion.
But because she was sufficiently instructed that all they did was done in
spite of their Religion, they were easily pardoned.

Fi^es of joy were set forth at night, and a Company of most honest men with
Instruments of Music, and with Musi^ians, gave their Salutations at her
Chamber Window; The M^lody (as she alleged) liked her well; and she willed
the same to be continued some nights after with great diligence. The Lords
repaired to her from all Quarters: and so was nothing understood but mirth and
quietness, till the next Sunday, which was the 24 of August: When that
preparations began to be made for that Idol of the Mass to be said in the
Chapel: The Queens. first Mass.
Which perceived, the hearts of all the godly began to be emboldened; and men
began openly to speak, Shall that Idol be suffered again to take place within
this Realm? It shall not. The Lord Lindsay (then but Master) with the
Gentlemen of Fyfe, and others, plainly cried in the Close or Yard, The
Idolatrous Priests should die the death, according to Gods Law. One that
carried in the Candle was evil affrayed; but then began flesh and blood fully
to show it self. There durst no Papist, neither yet any that came out of
France, whisper: But the Lord James, the man whom all the godly did most
reverence, Lord James, notwithstanding his sonner zeal to the Truth, complying
with Court, favors Idolatry.
took upon him to keep the Chapel door: his best excuse was, That he would
stop all Scotish-men to enter in to the Mass; But it was and is sufficiently
known, That the door was kept that none should have entry to trouble the
Priest; who after the M^sse was ended, was committed to the protection of the
Lord John of Coldingham, and Lord Robert of Halyrud-house; who then were both
Protestants, and had Communicate at the Table of the Lord: Betwixt them two was
the Priest conveyed to his Chamber. And so the godly departed with grief of
heart, ^ godly reso^^^^on.
and after noon repaired to the Abbey in great companies, and gave plain
signification, That they could not abide that the Land, which God by his power
had purged from Idolatry, should in their eyes be polluted again: Which
understood, there began complaint upon complaint. The old Duntebors, and others
that had long served in the Court, and hoped to have no remission of sins, but
by virtue of the Mass, cried, They would away to France without delay, They
could not live without the Mass: the same affirmed the Queens Uncles. And
would to God that they all, together with the Mass, The end is not yet seen.
had taken goodnight at the Realm for ever: for so had Scotland been rid of an
unprofitable burden of devouring strangers, and of the malediction of God,
that has stricken, and yet will strike for Idolatry.

The Council assembled, disputation was had of the next remedy: Politic
heads were sent unto the Gentlemen, with these and the like persuasions: The
persw^s^ons of the Courtiers.
Why, alas, Will you chase our Sovereign from us? She will incontinently
return to her Galleyes, and what then shall all Realms say of us? May we not
suffer her a little while? I doubt not but she will leave it: If we were not
assured that she might be won, we should be also as great enemies to her Mass,
as ye can be. Her Uncles will depart, and then shall we rule all at our
pleasure: Would not we be also sorry to hurt the Religion, as any of you would
be? With these and the like persuasions (we say) was the fervency of the
Brethren quenched. And an Act was framed, the Tenor whereof follows.

Apud Edinburgh, 25 Aagustii, 1561.
FOrasmuch as the Queens Majesty has understood the great inconveniences
through the divisi^n p^esently standing in this Realm, for the difference in
matt^rs of Religion, which her Majesty is most desirous to see pacified by any
good order, To the Honor of God, and Tranquillity of her Realm, and means to
take the same, by Advice of her States, so soon as conveniently may be, to
their serious Consideration. And lest that her Majesty's godly Resolutions
therein may be greatly hindered, in case any Tumult and Sedition be raised
amongst the Lieges, if any Alteration or Innovation be Pressed or Attempted
before that good Order may be Established; Wherefore, for the eschewing of the
said Inconveniences, her Majesty Ordains Letters to be Directed, to Charge all
and sundry her Lieges, by open Proclamation at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh,
and other Places needful, That they, and every one of them, contain themselves
in all Quietness, keep Peace and Civil Society amongst themselves in the mean
time, while the States of the Realm may be Assembled, and then her Majesty
have taken a final Order by their Advice, and public Consent; which her
Majesty hopes shall be to the Contentment of all, the Law bidding, That none
of them should take in hand privately or openly, any Alteration or Innovation
of the state of Religion, or attempt any thing against the same, which her
Majesty found Publicly and Universally standing at her Majesty's Arrival in
this her Realm, under Pain of Death. With Certification, That if any Subject
of the Realm shall come in the contrary Thereof, ^e shall be esteemed and
holden a Seditious Person, and Raiser of Tumult, and the same Pain shall be
executed upon him with all Rigor, To the Example of others. And her Majesty,
with the Advice of the Lords of the Secret Council, Commands and Charges all
her Li^ges, That none of them take in hand to Mol^st or Trouble any of her
Majesty's Domesticke Servants, or Persons whatsoever come forth of France in
her Company at this time, in Word, Deed, or Countenance, for any Cause
whatsoever, either within her Palace, or without, or make any assault or
invasion upon any of them, under whatsoever Color or Pretense, under the said
Pain of Death. Albeit that her Majesty be sufficiently persuaded, That her
Good and Loving Subjects would do the same, for the Reverence they bear to her
Person and Acts, notwithstanding no such Commandment were published.

This Act and Proclamation Penned, and put in Form by such as before professed
Christ Jesus (for in the Council then had Papists neither power nor voice) It
was publicly Proclaimed at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh upon Monday the day
aforesaid. No man reclaimed, nor made repugnance to it, except the Earl of
Arrane only; who in open audience of the Herald, protested, That he
disassented that any Protection or Defense should be made to the Queens
Domestics, The Lord Arrans stout and godly Protestati^n against the Qu^ens
Mass.
or to any that came from France, to offend Gods Majesty, and to violate the
Laws of the Realm, more then any other Subjects: For Gods Law had pronounced
death to the Idolater; and the Laws of the Realm had appointed punishment for
sayers and hearers of the Mass; which, said he, I here protest, be Universally
observed; and that none be exempted, until such time as a Law also publicly
made, and also consonant to the Law of God, have disannulled the former.
Hereupon he took Documents and Acts, as the Tenor of this his Protestation
witnesses.

IN so far as by this Proclamation it is made understood to the Church of God,
and Members thereof, That the Queen is minded that the true Religion and
Worship of God already established, proceed forward, that it may daily
increase: Unto the Parliament, that order may be then for extirpation of all
Idolatry out of this Realm. We render most hearty thanks to the Lord our God
for her Majesty's good mind, earnestly praying that it may be increased in her
Majesty, To the Honor and Glory of his Name, and Weal of his Church within
this Realm. And as touching the molestation of her Highness Servants, we
suppose that none dare be so bold as once to move their finger at them, in
doing of their lawful business: And as for us, we have learned at our Master
Christ's Shoole, To keep Peace with all men. And therefore for our part we will
promise that obedience unto her Majesty (as is our duty) That none of her
servants* shall be troubled, molested, or once touched, by the Church, or any
member thereof, in doing their lawful business. But since that God has said,
That the Idolater shall die the death; We Protest solemnly, Good resolution,
if followed.
in the presence of God, and in the ears of all the people that hears this
Proclamation, and especially in the presence of you, Lion Herald, and the rest
of your Colleagues, maker of this Proclamation, That if any of her servants
shall commit Idolatry, especially say Mass, participate therewith, or take the
defense thereof (which we are loath should be in her Highness company) in that
case, That this Proclamation is not extended to them in that behalf, nor be not
a safeguard nor girth to them in that behalf, no more then if they commit
slaughter or murder, seeing the one is much more abominable and odious in the
sight of God, then is the other. But that it may be lawful to inflict upon
them the pains contained in Gods Word against Idolaters, where ever they may
be apprehended, without favor. And this our Protestation we desire you to
notify unto her, and give her the Copy hereof, lest her Highness should
suspect an uproare if we should all come and present the same.

At Edinburgh, the day and year aforesaid.

This boldness did somewhat exasperate the Queen, and such as favored her in
that point. As the Lords (then called of the Congregation) repaired to the
Town, at the first coming they show themselves wonderfully offended, That the
Mass was permitted: So that every man as he came, accused them that were
before him, but after they had remained a certain space, they were as quiet,
as were the former* Which thing perceived, a zealous and godly man, Robert
Campbell of Kingzieclench, Robert Campbell to the Lord Vchiltrie,
said unto the Lord Uchiltrie; (My Lord) now you are come, and almost the last
of all the rest; and I perceive by your anger, that the fire edge is not off
you yet: but I fear, that after that the Holy Water of the Court be sprinkled
upon you, that you shall become as temperate as the rest: For I have been here
now five days, and at the first I heard every man say, Let us hang the Priest:
But after that they had been twice or thrice in the Abbey, all that fervencie
past. I think there be some enchantment, whereby men are bewitched. And in very
deed so it came to pass: For the Queens fair words upon the one part, The
Queens practice at the first.
ever still crying, Conscience, Conscience, It is a sore thing to constrain
the Conscience: And the subtle persuasions of her supposts (we mean, even of
those who were judged most fervent amongst us) upon the other part; blinded all
men, and put them in opinion, She will be content to hear the Preaching; and
so no doubt but she may be won. And this of all, it was concluded, To suffer
her for a time.

The next Sunday, John Knox inveighing against Idolatry, showed what terrible
plagues God had taken upon Realms and Nations for the same; and added, That
one Mass (there were no more suffered at first) was more fearful unto him,
The judgment of John Knox upon the suffering of the Mass.
then if ten thousand armed enemies were landed in any part of the Realm, of
purpose to suppress the whole Religion; for (said he) in our God there is
strength to resist and confound multitudes, if we unfainedly depend upon him;
whereof heretofore we have had experience: But when we join hands with
Idolatry, it is no doubt but both Gods amiable presence, and comfortable
defense, will leave us; and what shall then become of us? Alas, I fear that
experience will teach us, to the grief of many. At these words the guiders of
the Court mocked, and plainly spoke, That such fear was no point of their
faith; The Courtier making.
it was besides his Text, and was a very untimely Admonition. But we heard the
same John Knox, in the audience of these same men, recite the same words again
in the midst of troubles; and in the audience of many, asked God mercy that he
was not more vehement and upright in the suppressing of that Idol in the
beginning: For (said he) albeit I spoke that which offended some (which this
day they see and feel to be true) yet did I not that which I might have done;
Note diligently how wise and godly m^n are so mistaken often, as to play after
games: And this M. Knox does acknowledge here.
for God has not only given unto me knowledge and tongue to make the impiety
of that Idol known unto the Realm, but he had given me credit with many who
would have put in execution Gods Judgments, if I would only have consented
thereto: But so careful was I (said he) of that common Tranquillity, and so
loath was I to have offended those of whom I had conceived a good opinion, that
in secret conference with dearest and zealous men, I traveled rather to
mitigate, yea to slacken that fervency that God had kindled in others, then to
animate or encourage them to put their hands to the Lords Work; wherein I
unfainedly acknowledged my self to have done most wickedly, and from the
bottom of my heart do ask of my God grace and pardone, for that I did not
what in me lay, to have suppressed that Idol in the beginning. These and many
other words did many hear him speak in public in the month of December,
1565. when such as at the Queens Arrival only maintained the Mass, were
exiled the Realm, summoned upon Treason, and decreit of forfeiture intended
against them. But to return from whence we have digressed.

The first reasoning betwixt the Queen and John Knox.
Whether it was by counsel of others, or of the Queens own desire, we know
not, but the Queen spoke with John Knox, and had long reasoned with him, none
being present, except the Lord James, two Gentlemen stood in the one end of the
room. The sum of their reasoning was this: The Queen accused him, That he had
raised a part of her subjects against her Mother and her self; That he had
written a Book against her just Authority; Note how that Princ^s are informed
against God^ servant.
(she meant the Treatise against the Regiment of Women) which she had and would
cause the most learned in Europe to write against it; That he was the cause of
great sedition, and great slaughter in England; And that it was said to her,
That all that he did was by Necromancy. To the which the said John answered;
Madame, it may please your Majesty patiently to hear my simple answers: And
first (said he) my simple Answers: And first, (said he) if to teach the Word of
God in sincerity, if to rebuke Idolatry, and to will a people to worship God,
according to his Word, be to raise Subjects against their Princes, then cannot
I be excused; for it has pleased God of his mercy, to make me one (amongst
many) to disclose unto this Realm the vanity of the Papisticall Religion, and
the deceit, pride, and tyranny of that Roman Antichrist: Let this be noted
diligently.
But Madame, if the true knowledge of God and his right worshipping be the
chief cause which must move men to obey their just Princess from their heart,
(as it is most certain that they are) wherein can I be reprehended? Let the
Prince note this.
I think, and am surely persuaded, that your Majesty has had, and presently
has as unfeigned obedience of such as profess Christ Jesus within this Realm,
as ever your Father or Progenitors had of those that were called Bishops: And
touching that Book that seems so highly to offend your Majesty, it is most
certain, that if I wrote it, I am content that all the learned of the world
judge of it: I hear that an Englishman has written against it, but I have not
read him; if he has sufficiently confuted my reasons, and established his
contrary Propositions, with as evident testimonies, as I have done mine; I
shall not be obstinate but shall confess mine error and ignorance. But to
this hour I have thought, and yet thinks my self alone more able to sustain
the things affirmed in that my Work, than any ten in Europe shall be able to
confute it.

You think (said she) that I have no just Authority: Please your Majesty,
(said he) that learned men in all ages have had their judgments free, and most
commonly disagreeing from the Common judgment of the world; Let this wi^e
reply be noted.
Such also have they published, both with Pen and tongue, notwithstanding they
themselves have lined in the common Society with others, and have borne
patiently with the error and imperfections which they could not amend. Plato
the Philosopher wrote his Book of the Common wealth, in the which he
condemns many things that were maintained in the world, and required many
things to have been reformed: And yet notwithstanding he lived under such
Politics, as then were universally received without farther troubling any
State: Even so Madame am I content to do, in uprightness of heart, and with a
testimony of good Conscience, I have communicate my judgment to the world; if
the Realm finds no inconveniences in the Regiment of a woman, that which
they approve, shall I not further disallow, then within my own breast, but
shall be all well content, and shall live under your Majesty, as Paul was to
live under the Roman Emperor: And my hope is, that so long as ye defile not
your hands with the Blood of the Saints of God, that neither I nor that Book
shall either hurt you or your Authority; for in very deed Madame, that Book
was written most especially against that wicked Mary of England.

But (said she) you speak of women in general; most true it is Madame, (said
the other;) and yet plainly appears to me, that wisdom should persuade your
Majesty never to raise trouble for that which this day has not troubled your
Majesty, neither in person, nor in anxietie. For of late years many things
which before were holden Stable have been called in doubt; yea, they have been
plainly impugned. But yet, Madame, I am assured, That neither Protestant nor
Papist, shall be able to prove, That any such Question was at any time moved,
in public or in private. Now, Madame, said he, if I had intended to trouble
your State, because you are a woman; I might have chosen a time more convenient
for that purpose then I can do now, when your own presence is within the Realm.

But now, Madame, shortly to answer to the other two accusations, I heartily
praise my God, through Jesus Christ, that Satan, the enemy of mankind, and the
wicked of the World, have no other crimes to lay to my charge, then such as the
very World it self knows to be most false and vain. For in England I was
resident only the space of five years. The places were Barwick, where I abode
two years; So long in New Castle; And a year in London. Now, Note this
undertaking.
Madame, if in any of these places, during the time that I was there, any man
shall be able to prove, That there was either Battle, Sedition, or Mutiny, I
shall confess, That I my self was the Malefactor, and shedder of the blood.
I am not ashamed further to affirm, That God so blessed my weak labors then
in Barwick (wherein then commonly used to be slaughter, by reason of quarrels
that used to arise amongst Soldiers) there was also great quietness, all the
time that I remained there, as there is this day in Edinburgh.

And where they slander me of Magic, Necromancie, or of any other Art
forbidden of God, I have witness (besides mine own conscience) all the
Congregations that ever heard me, what I speak, both against such acts, and
against those that use such impiety: But seeing the wicked of the world said,
That my Master the Lord Jesus was possessed with Beelzebub, I must patiently
bear; Albeit that I, wretched sinner, be unjustly accused, of those that never
delighted in the Verity.

The Queens second Objection.
But yet (said she) you have taught the people to receive another Religion then
their Princes can allow: And how can that Doctrine be of God? Seeing that God
commands Subjects to obey their Princes. Madame (said he) as right Religion
took neither Original nor Antiquity, Answer.
from worldly Princes, but from the eternal God alone: So are not Subjects
bound to frame their Religion according to the appetite of their Princes; For
often it is that Princes are the most ignorant of all others, in Gods true
Religion, as we may read in the Histories, as well before the death of CHRIST
JESUS, as after: If all the seed of Abraham should have been of the Religion
of Pharaoh, to whom they had been a long time Subjects, I pray you (Madame)
what Religion should there have been in the world? Or if all men in the days
of the Apostles, should have been of the Religion of the Roman Emperors,
What Religion should have been upon the face of the earth? Daniel and his
fellows were subjects to Nebuchad-nezzar, and unto Darius, and yet (Madame)
they would not be of their Religion, neither of the one, nor of the other; For
the three Children said, We make it known to thee, O King, That we will not
worship thy Gods. And Daniel did pray publicly unto his God, against the
express Commandment of the King: And so, Madame, ye may perceive that Subjects
are not bound to the Religion of their Princes, albeit they are commanded to
give them obedience. Yea, (quoth she) none of these men raised their Sword
against their Princes. Yet Madame (quoth he) ye cannot deny but they resisted:
For those that obey not the Commandments given, in some sort resist. But yet
(said she) they resisted not by the Sword. God (said she) Madame) had not given
them the power and the means. Think you (said she) That Subjects, having
power, may resist their Princes? If Princes do exceed their Bounds (quoth he)
Madame, and do against that wherefore they should be obeyed, there is no doubt
but they may be resisted, even by Power: For there is neither greater Honor,
nor greater Obedience to be given to Kings and Princes, then God has commadned
to be given to Father and Mother: But so it is, That the Father may be stricken
with a Phrenzie, in the which he would slay his own Children; Note this
comparison.
Now, Madame, if the children arise, join themselves together, apprehend the
Father, take the Sword or other Weapon from him, and finally, bind his hands,
and keep him in Prison till that his Frenzy be over-past, Think ye (Madame)
that the children do any wrong? Or think ye, Madame, that God will be offended
with them that have stayed their Father from committing wickedness. It is even
so (said he) Madame, with Princes that would murder the children of God, that
are subject unto them. Blind zeal, what it is.
Their blind zeal is nothing but a very mad phrenzie; and therefore to take
the sword from them, to bind their hands, When this was written there was no
appearance of Mary's imprisonment.
and to cast them into prison, till that they be brought to a more sober mind,
is no disobedience against Princes, but just obedience, because that it agrees
with the Word of God.

At these words the Queen stood, as it were amazed, more then a quarter of an
hour; her countenance altered, so that the Lord James began to entreat her,
and to demand, What has offended you, Madame? At length she said, Well, then I
perceive that my Subjects shall not only obey you, and not me; And shall do
what they list, and not what I command, and so must I be subject unto them, and
not they to me. God forbid (answered he) that ever I take upon me to command
any to obey me, or yet to set Subjects at liberty, to do whatsoever please
them; but my travel is, That both Princes and Subjects obey GOD. And think
not (said he) Madame, that wrong was done unto you, when you are willed to be
subject unto GOD, for it is he that subjects the people under Princes, and
causes obedience to be given unto them; yea, God craves of Kings, That they be,
as it were, Foster-Fathers to the Church, and commands Queens to be Nourishers
unto his People. And this subjection (Madame) unto God, and to his troubled
Church, is the greatest dignity that flesh can get upon the face of the earth,
for it shall carry them to everlasting glory.

The Queens Church.
Yea (quoth she) but ye are not the Church that I will nourish; I will defend
the Church of Rome, for I think it is the true Church of God.

Your will (quoth he) Madame, is no reason, neither does your thought make that
Roman Harlot to be the Immaculate Spouse of Jesus Christ. And wonder not,
Madame, that I call Rome an Harlot; for that Church is altogether polluted with
all kind of Spiritual Fornication, as well in Doctrine, as in Manners: yea,
Madam, I offer my self further to prove, That the Church of the Jews, who
crucified Jesus Christ, when that they manifestly denied the Son of God, was
not so far degenerated from the Ordinances and Statutes which God gave by
Moses and Aaron unto his People, as the Church of Rome is declined, and more
then five hundred years has declined from the Purity of Religion which the
Apostles taught and planted. Strong Imagination, called conscience.
My conscience (said she) is not so. Conscience, Madame (said he) requires
knowledge; and I fear that of right knowledge you have but little. But (said
she) I have both heard and read. So, Madame (said he) did the Jews that
crucified Christ Jesus, read both the Law and the Prophets, and heard the same
interpreted, after their manner. Have ye heard (said he) any teach, but such as
the Pope and his Cardinals have allowed? And you may be assured, Question.
That such will speak nothing to offend their own state. Ye interpret the
Scriptures (said she) in one manner, and they in another; Whom shall I believe,
and who shall be Judge? Believe (said he) God, that plainly speaks in his
Word: And further then the Word teaches you, ye shall neither believe the one
nor the other. The Word of God is plain in it self; And if there appear any
obscurity in one place, the holy Ghost, which is never contrarious to himself,
explains the same more clearly in other places: So that there can remain no
doubt, but unto such as obstinately will remain ignorant. And now, Madame,
(said he) to take one of the chief Points which this day is in controversy
betwixt the Papists and us, for example. The Papists allege, and boldly have
affirmed, That the Mass is the Ordinance of God, and the Institution of Jesus
Christ, and a Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. We deny both the one and
the other, and affirm, That the Mass, as it is now used, is nothing but the
Invention of man; and therefore it is an Abomination before God, and no
Sacrifice that ever God commanded. Now (Madame) who shall judge betwixt us, two
thus contending? It is not reason that either of the persons be further
believed, then they are able to prove by insuspect witnessing: Let them lay
down the Book of God, and by the plain words prove their affirmatives, and we
shall give unto them the play granted. But so long as they are bold to affirm,
and yet do prove nothing, we must say, That albeit all the world believe them,
yet believe they not God, but do receive the lies of men for the Truth of God.
What our Master Christ Jesus did, we know by his Evangelists: What the Priests
do at the Mass, the world sees. Now does not the Word of God plainly assure
us, That Christ Jesus neither said, nor yet commanded Mass to be said at his
last Supper, seeing that no such thing as the Mass is made mention of within
the whole Scriptures. You are over-hard for me (said the Queen) but if they
were here whom I have heard, they would answer you. Madame, (said the other)
would to God that the learnedest Papist in Europe, and he that you would best
believe were present with your Majesty to sustain the argument; and that ye
would abide patiently to hear the matter reasoned to the end; for then I doubt
not, Madame, but that you should hear the vanity of the Papisticall Religion,
and what small ground it has within the Word of God. Well (said she) ye may
perchance get that sooner then you believe. Assuredly (said the other) if ever
I get that in my self, I get it sooner then I believe; for the ignorant Papist
cannot patiently reason, and the learned and crafty Papist will never come in
your audience (Madame) to have the ground of their Religion searched out; for
they know they are not able to maintain any argument, except by fire and sword,
and their own Laws be judges. So say you (quoth the Queen) and I believe it
has been to this day. (Quoth he) for how often have the Papists in this and in
other Realms, been required to come to conference, and yet could it never be
obtained, unless themselves were admitted for Judges: and therefore I must yet
say again, That they dare never dispute, but where themselves are both judges
and party. And when you shall let me see the contrary, I shall grant my self to
be deceived in that Point. And with this the Queen was called unto dinner; for
it was afternoon. Note this.
At departing, John Knox said unto her, I pray God, Madame, that you may be
also blessed within the Commonwealth of Scotland (if it be the pleasure of
God) as ever Deborah was in the Commonwealth of Israel. Of this long
conference, whereof we only touch a part, were diverse opinions: The Papists
grudged, and feared that which they needed not; the godly thinking at least,
That she would have heard the preaching, rejoyceed; but they were utterly
deceived, for she continued in her Massing, and despised, and quickly mocked
all exhortation.

John Knox his own judgment, John Knox his judgment of the Queen at the
first, and ever since.
being by some of his familiars demanded what he thought of the Queen, said, If
there be not in her a proud mind, a crafty wit, and an indurate heart against
God and his Truth, my judgment fails me: and this I say with a grieved
heart, for the good I wish unto her, and by her, to the Church and State.

When the whole Nobility were convened, The Queens first Progress.
the Lords of Privy Council were chosen, where were appointed the Duke, the
Earls of Huntley, Argyle, Atholl, Mortoun, Glencarne, Mershell, Bothwell;
Lords Arskeme, and Lord James, after Earl Murray; and these were appointed as
certain to wait upon the Court by course: But that Order continued not long;
Duke d'Anville returned with the Galleyes to France. The Queen entered in her
Progress, and in the Month of September traveled from Edinburgh, Linlithgow,
Sterlin, S. Iohnston, Dundie, S. Androes; all these parts she polluted with the
Idolatrous Mass: Fire followed the Court very commonly in that Journey, the
Towns propined the Queen liberally, thereof were the French enriched.

About the beginning of October they returned to Edinburgh; and at the day
appointed the Q. was received in the Castle: whereat preparations were made for
her entry into the Town, in Farces, in Masking, and other Prodigalities: fain
would our fools have counterfeited France: Whatsoever might set forth her
glory, that she heard, and gladly beheld. The Keys were delivered unto her by
a pretty Boy, descending, as it were from a Cloud: The Verses of her own Praise
she heard, and smiled; But when the Bible was presented, Note the disposition
of a misled soul.
and the Praise thereof declared, she began to frown; for shame she could not
refuse it, but she did no better, for she gave it to the most pestilent Papist
within the Realm, to wit, To Arthur Arskeme. Edinburgh since that day have
reaped as they sowed: Bo^fours doctrine.
They gave her some taste of their Prodigality: And because the Liquor was
sweet, she has licked often of that Bust or Box, oftener then twice since. All
men know what we mean; The Queen cannot lack, and the Subjects have.

In Edinburgh it has been an ancient and laudable Custom, That the Provests,
Bailiffs, and Council, after their Election, which used to be at Michaelmas,
caused publicly proclaim the Statutes and Ordinances of the Town; Note this
diligently.
And therefore Archbald Douglas Provest, Ed. Hope, Adam Fullartoun, etc.
Bailiffs, caused proclaim according to the former Statutes of the Town, That no
Adulterer nor Fornicator, no noted Drunkard, no Masse-monger, no obstinate
Papist that corrupted the people, such as Priests, Friars, and others of that
sort, should be found within 41 hours thereafter, under the Pains contained in
the Statutes: Which blown in the Queens ears, there began pride and
maliciousness to show it self; for without further cogitation of the cause,
was the Provest and Bayliffes charged to Ward in the Castle, and immediately
was Commandment given, That other Provests and Bailiffs should be elected.

Some gainstood for a while: The new Election alleged, That the Provest and
Bailiffs whom they had chosen, and to whom they had given their Oath, had
committed no offense; therefore that justly they might be deprived. But while
Charge was doubled upon Charge, and no man found to oppose himself to impiety,
the misled Queens Letter and wicked will is obeyed, as just Law. And so was M.
Thomas Makalan chosen Provest for the other. The man, no doubt, was both
discreet, and sufficient for that Charge; but the deposition of the other was
against all Law. God be merciful to some of our own, for they were not all
blameless, that the Queens unreasonable will was so far obeyed.

A contrary Proclamation was publicly made, That the Town should be patent to
all the Queens Lieges: And so Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves (Whores, Yet in
the Parliament holden 1563. there is an express Act for punishing of Adultery
by death. It is the Act 74.
Drunkards, Idolaters, and all Malefactors, got protection under the Queens
wings, under color that they were of her Religion: And so got the devil
freedom again, where that before he durst not have been seen in day light
upon the common streets. Lord deliver us from this Bondage of sin.

The Devil finding his raines loose, ran forward in his course, and the Queen
(evil men abusing her name and authority) took upon her greater boldness, The
devil getting entry to his little finger will screw in his whole arm.
then she, and Balaams bleating Priests durst have attempted before; for upon
All-Hallow day they bended up their Mass with all mischievous solemnity. The
Ministers thereat offended, in plain and public place, declared the
inconvenience that thereupon would ensue. The Nobility were sufficiently
admonished of their duties; Note this.
but affection caused men to call that in doubt, wherein often before they seemed
most resolute; to wit, Where that the Subjects might have hand to suppress the
Idolatry of their Prince? And upon this Question conveaned in the house of
Master James Mackgill, the Lord James, Earl of Morton, the Earl of Marshall,
Secretary Lethington, the Justice Clarke, and the foresaid Master James Clarke
of the Register; who all reasoned for the part of the Queen, affirming, That
the Subjects might not take her Mass lawfully from her: In the contrary
judgment were the principal Ministers, Master John Row, Master George Hay,
Master Robert Hamilton, and John Knox. The reasons of both parties we will
omit, because they will be explained after, where the said Question and others,
Concerning the Obedience due to Princes, were long reasoned in open assembly:
The conclusion of that first reasoning was; That the Question should be formed;
Letters directed to Geneva for the resolution of that Church; Wherein John Knox
offered his labor. But Secretary Lethington, alleging, That there stood much
in the information, said, That he should write: But that was only to drive
time, as the truth declared it self. The Queens party urged, That the Queen
should have her Religion free in her own Chapel, to do, she and her household,
what they list. The Ministers affirmed, and Voted the contrary; adding, That
her liberty should be their thraldom, ere it be long. But neither could reason
nor threatening move the affections of such as were creeping in Credit, and so
did the Votes of the Lords prevail against the Ministers.

For the punishment of Theft and Reafe, which had increased upon the border:
and in the South from the Queens arrival, was the Lord James made Lieutenant,
some suspected that such honor and charge proceeded from the same heart and
counsel that Saul made David Captain against the Philistines; but God assisted
and bowed the hearts of men, both to fear and obey him; yea, the Lord Bothwell
himself at that time assisted him, but he had remission for Liddisdall, except
that execution was there made in Edinburgh, for her twenty eight of one clan,
and other, were hanged at that Justice Court, bribes, budds, or solicitation,
saved not the guilty, if he might be apprehended. And therefore God prospered
him in that his integrity that same time the Lord James spoke with the Lord
Gray of England at Kelsoe, for good rule to be kept on both the borders, and
agreed in all things.

Before his returning, The Queens first fray in Hallyrud-house.
the Queen upon a night took a fright in her bed, as if horsemen had been in
the Close, and as if the Palace had been enclosed about; whether it proceeded
of her own womanly fantasy, or if men put her in fear, for displeasure of the
Earl of Arrane: And for other purposes, as for the electing of the Guard, we
know not; but the fear was so great, that the Town was called to the Watch;
Lord Robert of Hallyrud-house, and John of Coldingham kept the Watch by course;
Skouts were set forth, and Sentinels, upon pain of death, were commanded to
keep their Stations. And yet they feared where there was no fear, neither yet
could ever any appearance or suspicion of such things be tried. Shortly after
the returning of the Lord James, there came from the Queen of England, Sir
Peter Mewtes, with Commission to require the Ratification of the Peace made at
Leith. Her answer was, even such as we have heard before; That she behoved to
advise, and then she should answer. In presence of her Council she kept her
self grave; for under the mourning weed and apparel she could dissemble in
full perfection: but how soon that ever the French people had her alone, they
told her, That since she came to Scotland, she saw nothing there but gravity,
which repugned altogether to her breeding, for she was brought up in joviality,
so termed she her Dancing, and other things thereto belonging.

The general Assembly of the Church approached, holden in December, after the
Queens arrival, in the which began the rulers of the Court to draw themselves
apart from the Society of their brethren, and began to strive and grudge, That
any thing should be consulted upon, without their advices, Master John Wood,
who before had showed himself very fervent in the Cause of God, and forward in
giving of his council in all doubtful matters, refused to assist the Assembly
again, whereof many did wonder; Division between the Lords and the Ministers.
The Courtiers drew unto them some of the Lords, and would not conveane with
their Brethren, as before they were accustomed, but kept themselves in the
Abbey; The principal Commissioners of the Church, the Superintendents, and
some Ministers, past unto them, where they were assembled in the Abbots Lodging
within Hallyrud-house, both the parties began to open their griefs; The Lords
complained, That the Ministers drew the Gentlemen into secret, and held
Council without their knowledge: The Ministers denied, That they had done any
thing in secret, otherwise then the common Order commanded them; And accused
the Lords (the flatterers of the Queen we mean) that they kept not the
Convention with their Brethren; considering, That they knew the Order, and that
the same was appointed by their own advice, as the Book of Discipline
subscribed with the most part of their own hands would witness; some began to
deny, That ever they knew such a thing as the Book of Discipline: And called
also in doubt, Whether it was expedient, that such Assemblies should be or not:
for gladly would the Queen and her secret Council have had all Assemblies of
the godly discharged; The Queen fain would have had all Assemblies discharged.
The reasoning was sharp and quick on either side: The Queens faction
alleged, That it was suspicious to Princes, that Subjects should assemble
themselves, and keep Conventions without their knowledge. It was answered, That
without knowledge of the Princes, the Church did nothing, for the Princes
perfectly understood, That within this Realm was a Reformed Church; and that
they had their Orders and appointed times of Convention. And so without
knowledge of the Princes, they did nothing: Yea (said Lethington) the Queen
knew, and knows well enough; But the Question is, Whether that the Queen
allows such Conventions: It was answered, If the Liberty of the Church
should stand upon the Queens allowance or disallowance, we are assured, not
only to lack Assemblies, but also to lack the public Preaching of the
Evangell, that affirmative was mocked, Note this dili^gently.
and the contrary affirmed, Well (said the other) time will try the truth; But
to my former words, this I will add; Take from us the freedoms of assemblies,
and take from us the Evangell; for without assemblies, how shall good order and
unity in Doctrine be kept? It is not to be supposed, That all Ministers shall
be so perfect, but that they shall need admonition, as well concerning Manners
as Doctrine: As it may be, that some be so stiff-necked, that they will not
admit the admonition of the simple; As also, it may be that fault may be found
with Ministers without just offense committed: And if order be not taken both
with the Complainer, and with the persons complained upon: It cannot be avoided
but that many grievous offenses shall arise; For remedy whereof, of necessity
it is, That general Assemblies must be. In the which, the judgments and
gravitie of many may occur, to correct or repress the follies or errors of
a few. Hereunto consented the most part, as well of the Nobility as of the
Barrons, and willed the reasoners for the Queen to be sent to her Majesty, if
that she stood in suspicion of any thing that was to be handled in their
assemblies, that it would please her Majesty to send such as he would appoint,
to hear whatsoever was propounded or reasoned.

Hereafter was the Book of Discipline proposed, and desired to have been
ratified by the Queens Majesty, but it was stopped, and the Question demanded,
How many of those that subscribed to that Book would be subject unto it? Note
this dil^gently.
It was answered, All the godly: Will the Duke, said Lethington? If he will
not, answered the Lord Uchiltrie, I would that he were scraped out, not only
of that Book, but also out of our number and company; for what purpose shall
labor be taken to put the Church in order, and to what end shall men
subscribe, and then never mean to keep a word of that which they promise?
Lethington answered, Many subscribe there in fide Parentum, as Children are
baptized. One, to wit John Knox, answered, Albeit ye think that scoff proper,
yet as it is most untrue, so it is most improper: Note this passage.
That Book was read in public audience; and by the space of diverse days, the
hearers thereof were resolved, as all that here sit know well enough, and you
your selves cannot deny; So that no man was required to subscribe that which he
understood not: Stand content, said one, that Book will not be obtained: Let
God (said the other) require the lack and want which this poor Commonwealth
shall have of the things therein contained, from the hands of such as stop the
same.

Thomas Borrows perceiving that the Book of discipline was refused, presented
unto the Council certain Articles, requiring Idolatry to be suppressed, their
Churches to be planted with true Ministers, and some certain propositions to be
made for them, according to equity and Conscience, for unto that time the most
part of the Ministers, had lived upon the benevolence of men; for many had into
their own hands the profits that the Bishops, and others of that Sect had
before abused, and so some part was bestowed upon the Ministers.

But when the Bishops began to gripe again to that, which most unjustly they
called their own: for the Earl of Arrane was discharged of Saint Andrews and
Dumfermling, wherewith before by virtue of a Factory and Commission, he had
intromitted and meddled: And so were many others. Therefore the Barons required,
That order might be taken for the Ministers, or else they would no more cause
Rents to be paid unto any, that formerly belonged to the Churchmen, nor suffer
any thing to be collected for the use of any whosoever, after the Queens
arrival, then that they did before; for they verily supposed, that the Queens
Majesty would keep promise made to them, which was, Not to alter their
Religion, which could not remain without Ministers; and Ministers could not
live without provision: And therefore they heartily desired the Council to
provide some convenient order in that behalf. This somewhat moved the Queens
flatterers, for the Rod of impiety was not then strengthened in her and their
hands. And so began they to practice how they might please the Queen, and yet
seem somewhat to satisfy the faithful; And so devised they, That the
Churchmen should have intromission and meddling with the two parts of their
Benefices; and that the third part should be gathered by such men as thereto
should be appointed for such uses; As in these subsequent Acts are more fully
expressed.

Apud Edinburgh vicesimo December. Anno 1561.
THe which day; Forasmuch as the Queens Majesty, by the advice of the Lords of
her secret Council, foreseeing the imminent troubles, which apparently
threaten to arise amongst the Lieges of this Realm for matters of Religion, to
stay the same, and shun all incommodities that might thereupon ensue, having
intercommuned and spoken with a part of the Clergy, or State Ecclesiastical,
with whom then, reasoning being had, It was thought good and expedient by her
Highness, That a general Assembly should be appointed, the 15 day of December
instant, whereto the rest of the States might have appeared: and by the advice
of Lawyers, one reasonable overture be made, and order taken for staying of the
approaching trouble, and quieting of all the Country; which Assembly, being by
her Majesty appointed, and sundry days of Counsel kept; and the said
Ecclesiastical State oft-times required, That the said Order might be taken,
and overture made for staying of the trouble, and quieting of the Country.
Last of all, in presence of the Queens Majesty, and Lords of the Council
aforesaid, and others of the Nobility of this Realm, compeired, John
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, Patrick Bishop of Murray, Henry Bishop of Rosse,
and Robert Bishop of Dunkeld: And for themselves respectively offered unto the
Queens Majesty, to be content with the two parts of the Rents of their
Benefices; and the third part to be employed as her Majesty thought expedient.
And because the certainty thereof was not known, not yet what sums of Money
would sustain the Ministry, and Ministers of Gods Word within this Realm,
neither yet how much was necessary to support the Queens Majesty above her own
Rents, for the common affairs of the Country, Therefore it is Ordained,
Concluded, and Determined by the Queens Majesty, and the Lords of the Council
aforesaid, and others of the Nobility present, That if the fourth part of the
whole Benefices within this Realm, may be sufficient to sustain the Ministers
thorowout this whole Realm, and support the Queens Majesty to maintain and set
forwards the common affairs of the Country failing thereof, the third part of
the said Profits, and more, if it be found sufficient for the effect afore^aid,
to be taken up yearly in time coming, that a general order may be taken
therewith, and so much thereof to be employed to the Queens Majesty's use, for
entertaining and setting forward of the common affairs of the Country; and so
much thereof to the Ministers, and sustentation of the Ministry, as may
reasonably sustain the same, at the sight and discretion of the Queens Majesty,
and Council aforesaid, and the excrescens and superplus to be assigned to the
old Possessors. And to the effect that the Rents and yearly Profits of the
whole Benefices within this Realm may be clearly known to the Queens Majesty
and Council aforesaid, It is Statuted and Ordained, That the whole Rentals of
the Benefices of this Realm be produced before her Majesty and Lords aforesaid,
at the time underwritten: that is to say, The Rentalls of the Benefices on
this side of the Water, before the 24 of January next coming: And those beyond
the water, the 10 of February next thereafter; and ordains Letters to be
directed to the Sheriffs in that part, to pass charge, and require all and
sundry Archbishops, Bishops, Commendators, Abbots, Priors, on this side of the
Water, personally to be apprehended, and failing thereof, at their dwelling
places, or at the Parish Churches where they should remain, Cathedral Churches
or Abbeyes: And all Archdeacons, Deans, Chanters, sub-Chanters, Provests,
Parsons and Vicars, and other Beneficed men whatsoever, their Chamberlains and
Factors, personally, or at their dwelling places, or at the Parish Churches
where they should remain, To exhibit and produce before the Queens Majesty and
Lords aforesaid, before the said 24 day of January next coming, the just and
true Rentals of the values and rents of their Benefices, to the effect
aforesaid: And to chare the Prelates, and the other Beneficed men on the other
side of the Water in manner aforesaid, to exhibit and produce the just and
true Rentals of their Benefices before the Queens Majesty and Lords aforesaid,
the said 10 of February, to the effect aforesaid; with certification to them,
That if any fails to appear, the Queens Majesty's and Councels wills are, That
they should be proceeded against here, as the matter requires: And likewise to
charge the whole Superintendents, Ministers, Elders and Deacons of the
principal Towns and Shires of this Realm, to give in before the Queens Majesty
and Lords of the Council aforesaid, before the said 24 of January next coming,
a formal and sufficient Roll and Memorial, what may be sufficient and
reasonable to sustain Ministry, and whole Ministers of this Realm, that her
Majesty, and Lords of the Council aforesaid, may rightly and diligently weigh
and consider what necessary support is required to be taken yearly of the
fruits of the said Benefices (by her Majesty's own yearly Rent) to entertain
and set forward the common affairs of this Realm, against the said 24 day of
January next coming, that it may be proceeded in the said matter, all parties
satisfied, and the whole Country, and Lieges thereof set in quietness.

Apud Linlithgow, 24 Ianuarii, etc.
FOrasmuch as the Queens Majesty, with the advice of the Lords of her Secret
Council, directed her Letters, commanding all and sundry Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, etc. and all other Beneficed men, their Factors, Farmors,
Takesmen, to appear before her Highness and Lords aforesaid at Edinburgh, or
where it should happen them to be for the time, so many as dwells upon this
side of the water, before the 24 day of January instant; and them that dwells
beyond the water, the 10 of February next coming, that the just value of their
Benefices might be known; so that hereafter her Highness may take order for
the Sustentation of the Ministry of the Church, and the public business of
the Realm. And because the Queens Majesty is presently busied with other
affairs, and may not her self attend upon the receipt of the said Rent,
therefore her Highness has given and granted, and by these Presents gives and
grants full power and Commission to Master James Mackgill of Rankellor nether,
Clerk of the Register, Sir John Ballenden of Archnenell, Knight, Justice Clerk
to the Treasurer, Secretary of State, Advocate of the Crown, and Lord of
Pittarrow, to call before them within the City of Edinburgh, all and sundry
Prelates, and Beneficed men, which are charged by virtue of the said Letters,
now presently being in Edinburgh, or shall happen hereafter to repair thereto,
their Factors or Farmers, and there enquire of them the Rentalls of their
Benefices, and receive the same from them to the effect aforesaid. And likewise
that the said Commissioners cause warn all Seperintendents, Overseers,
Ministers. Elders and Deacons, to give unto them the names of all the Ministers
of this Realm, that the just Calculation being made and considered by the said
Commissioners of the value of the said Benefices, they may report the same unto
the Queens Majesty, that her Highness may take order herein, according to the
just Tenor of the first Ordinance made thereupon.

Apud Edinburgh, 12 February, 1561.
FOrasmuch as by Statute and Ordinance made by the Queens Majesty, and Lords of
the Secret Council, and her Highness Letters directed thereupon, all and
sundry Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc. and other Beneficed men, were charged
to produce the Rentalls of their Benefices before her Majesty and Lords
aforesaid, in manner following (that is to say) The said Beneficed men dwelling
on this side of the Water, before the four and twentieth of January last past:
And on the other side of the Water, before the tenth of February instant; to
the effect that order might be taken therein to conform to the Ordinance; With
certification to them, that if they failed, the Queens Majesty, and Counsel
aforesaid, would take order therein, as the same Ordinance bears.
Notwithstanding of the which the Queens Majesty, and Counsel, and others
appointed, for receiving of the said Rentalls, have continually since the said
24 of January aforesaid, waited upon the receiving of them; yet a very small
number of them have produced their Rentalls, thereby not only contemning her
Majesty's Ordinance and Proclamation aforesaid, but also her self and her
Authority, as they were Princes and not Subjects, express against Equity,
Reason, and Justice; For remedy whereof the Queen Majesty ordains, with
advice of the Lords of her secret Council, That Factors, Chamerlains or
Stewards be appointed to intromett, gather, uplist and receive, to our
Sovereign Ladies use, all and sundry mailles, tithes or tiends, farms, rents,
provents, emoluments, fruits, profits, and due ties of whatsoever benefices,
whereof the Rentalls are not produced conform to the said Ordinance. And if
any Retalls already produced bears not the just value, but is Fraudulently
made, to intromet and uptake as much of the profits and fruits of the said
benefices, as are omitted forth of the said Rentalls, and the In-givers of the
Rentalls, and Professors of the Benefices thereof, shall never have action to
claim, crave or receive from the Tenants and Occupiers further then is
contained in the same Rentals, already produced by them; and the Tenants and
Possessors shall be holden to pay no more than is contained in the same
Rentalls, already produced, as aforesaid: And the said Chamerlains and Factors
to be appointed by the Queens Majesty, shall have sufficient power to
intromitt and uptake the fruits and profits aforesaid, in such fullness as if
special Letters of Factory and Chamerlancie were granted to them thereupon;
and ordains the Lords of the Session to direct forth Letters at the said
Factors and Chamerlaines instancies either of horning or poynding, as shall be
thought expedient, for causing of them to be answered of fruits of the said
Benefices to be forth-commanded to the Queens Majesty's behalf and use, while
further order be taken therein.

Apud Edinburge, 15. February 1561.
FOr as much as the Queens Majesty by the advice of the Lords of her secret
Council, and others, diverse of the Nobility had of before the two and
twentieth day of December last past, ordained, that if the fourth part of the
fruits, and Rents of all the Benefices within this Realm were not sufficient
for the Supporting of her Majesty's present wants, and the particular Charges
underwritten, necessary to be borne for the weal of the Country, than the
third of the said fruits more or less should be taken up to the effects
aforesaid; and ordained Letters to be directed, charging all and sundry
Beneficed men on this side of the Water, to produce their Rentalls before the
four and twentieth day of January last past. And the tenth of February
instant, were prefixed by the said Letters, for the bringing in all Rentalls of
the Benefices beyond the water; with certification* That who produced not the
said Rentalls at the days aforesaid respectively, the Queens Majesty and her
Council would provide remedy: according to the which Certification, her
Highness, with advice of her Council aforesaid, has Ordained, That they who
have not produced their Rentalls whole and full, intromission shall be had of
their fruits, by them whom her Majesty shall direct thereto: And who have not
given their just Rentalls, whatsoever part omitted forth of their said Rentall,
shall be intromitted in like manner. And further, having consulted rightly, and
diligently advised upon the common affairs, and necessities concerning the
Queens Majesty, and charges to be borne for the Commonweal of the Realm, and
sustentation and maintenance of the Preachers and Readers, conform to the said
Ordinance made thereupon of before, has Ordained and Declared the whole third
part of all Benefices, of the which Rentalls are produced, to be taken up by
the person or persons to be nominated by her Majesty, and to begin upon this
last Crop of the year of God 1561. the same to be employed to the effect
aforesaid: Together with the whole Profits of the Benefices whereof the
Rentalls are not produced; And also, all that is omitted out of the Rentalls
produced: And that order be directed by the Queens Majesty to the Lords of the
Session, That the old Possessors may be answered of the remnant fruits of the
said Benefices; providing, That the third part aforesaid, be full and whole
taken up by the persons to be deputed to the taking thereof; And this Order to
continue and stand, while further order be taken by the Queens Majesty, with
the advice of the States. Moreover, her Highness, with the advice of the
Council aforesaid, has Statuted and Ordained, That Annuells, Marles, and
Duties within free Buroughs, or other Towns of this Realm, as well
pertaining to Chaplanries, Prebendaries, as to Friars, together with the Rents
of the Friars Lands, wherever they be, setting and disposing thereupon, be
intermedled with, and taken by such as her Majesty shall depute thereto, for
employing of the same by her Highness to Hospitalls, Schools, and other godly
uses, as shall seem best to her Highness, with advice of her Council. And
knowing that nothing is more commodious for the foresaid Hospitality, then the
places of Friars that are yet undemolished; and also to the entertainment of
Schools, Colleges, and other uses aforesaid, ordains the Provests and Bailiffs
of Aberdeine, Elgmen, Murray, Inneresk, Glasgow, and other Buroughs of this
Realm, where the same are not demolished, to entertain and uphold the said
Friars places standing in the said Towns, upon the Common goods thereof, and
to use the same to the Common weal and service of the said Towns, until the
Queens Majesty be further advised, and take final order in such things,
notwithstanding of any Gift, Title, or Entryes, given to whatsoever persons of
the said places, with their Yards and Orchards, and other Pertinents, by our
Sovereign Lady of before.

The Lords of secret Council that were present at the Voting and making of the
aforesaid Acts, were James Duke of Chattellarault, George Earl of Huntley,
Archibald Earl of Argyle, William Earl Mershall, John Earl Atholl, William
Earl of Montrosse, James Earl Morton, Alexander Earl of Glencarne, James
Commendator of Saint Andrews, John Lord Erskin, The Treasurer, The Justice
Clerk, The Steward and Controller.

For the first Acts, the Earl of Huntley said jestingly, Good morrow, my Lords
of the two parts. The whole Rentals being gathered, the sum of the third,
according to their own calculation, was found to extend to, etc. The Ministers
even in the beginning of public Sermons opposed themselves to such corruption,
for they foresaw the purposes of the Devil, and clearly understood the Butt
whereat the Queen and her flatterers Shot. John Knox his judgment of the
thirds.
And so in the chair of Edinburgh John Knox said, Well, if the end of this
Order, pretended to be taken for sustentation of the Ministers, be happy, my
judgment fails me; for I am assured, That the Spirit of God is not the
Author of it, for first I see two parts freely given to the Devil, and the
third must be divided between God and the Devil.

Well, said he, bear witness to me, that this day I said it, Ere it be long
the Devil shall have three parts of the third; and judge you then, what Gods
portion will be. This was an unsavory saying in the ears of many; Some were
not ashamed to affirm, That the Ministers being sustained, the Queen will not
get at the years end, to buy her a pair of new shoes. And this was Secretary
Lethington.

There were appointed to modifie the Ministers stipends, The Earl of Argyle,
Murray, and Morton, Lethington, Justice Clarke, and Clerk of the Register. The
Lord of Pittaro, was appointed to pay the Ministers Stipends, according to
their Modification: Let this be noted.
Who would have thought that when Joseph ruled Egypt, that his brethren should
have traveled for Victuals, and have returned with empty Sacks unto their
families; men would rather have thought that Pharaohs Pose, Treasure, and
Gilnells should rather have been diminished then that the household of Jacob
should stand in danger to starve for hunger.

But so busy and circumspect were the Modificators (because it was a new
Office the term must also be new) that the Ministers should not be
over-wanton; That a hundred That is, five old pieces.
Marks was sufficient to a single man, being a common Minister: Three hundred
Marks was the highest that was appointed to any, except the Superintendents,
and a few others; shortly, Whether it was the ingratitude of their own hearts,
or the care that they had to enrich the Queen, we know not: But the poor
Ministers, Readers and Exhorters, cried out to the heaven (as their complaints
in all assemblies do witness) That neither were they able to live upon the
Stipends appointed, neither could they get payment of that small thing that was
appointed, so feign would the Controllers have played the good Vallet, A
proverb upon Pittaro, Controller.
and have satisfied the Queen, or else their own profit: The good Lord of
Pittaro was an earnest Professor of Christ, but the great Devil receive the
Controller, for he and his Collectours are become greedy factors. To put an end
to this unpleasing matter; When the brethren complained of their poverty; it
was disdainfully answered of some, There are many Lairds that have not so much
to spend, when men did reason, that the Vocation of Ministers craved of them,
books, quietness, study, and travel to edify the Church of Christ Jesus,
when many Lairds were waiting upon their worldly business; and therefore that
the stipends of Ministers, who had no other industry, but to live upon that
which was appointed, ought not to be mollified according to the living of other
common men, who might and did daily augment their Rents by some other industry.
When such reasons were laid before them, they got none other answer, but, The
Queen can spare no greater Sums; Often was it cried out in their ears, O happy
servants of the Devil, and miserable servants of Jesus Christ, if after this
life there were nor Hell nor Heaven: For to the servants of the Devil, these
dumb Dogs, and horrid Bishops; To one of those idle bellies, I say, ten
thousand was not enough, but to the servants of Christ, that painfully preach
his Evangell, a hundredth will suffice; how can that be sustained?

One day in reasoning of this matter, the Secretary burst out in a piece of his
collor, and said, The Ministers have thus much paid unto them by year, who
ever yet said to the Queen, Grand mercies for it? was there ever a Minister
that gave thanks to God for her Majesty's liberality toward them? One
singled, and answered, Assuredly, I think, that such as receive any thing
gratis of the Queen, are unthankful if they acknowledge it not, both in heart
and mind: But whether the Ministers be of that rank, or not, I greatly doubt*
gratis I am sure they receive nothing, and whether they receive any at all from
the Queen, The right that Princes have to the Patrimony of the Church.
wise men may reason; I am assured, that neither third nor two parts ever
appertained to any of her Predecessors within this Realm these thousand years
last past, neither yet has the Queens Flatterers better title to that which
she usurpes, be it in-giving to others, or taken it to her self, then the
soldiers who crucified Jesus Christ had to divide his Garments amongst them.
And if the truth may be spoken, she has not so good Title as they had, for
such spoil ought to be the reward of such men. And in that point the Soldiers
were more gentle than the Queens Flatterers, for they parted not the Garments
of our Savior, till that he himself was hung upon the Cross; but her
Flatterers do part the spoil whilst that poor Christ is yet preaching amongst
you. But the wisdom of our God takes trial of us by this means, knowing
well enough what the Court faction have purposed to do: Let the Papists, who
have the two parts, some that have their thirds free, and some that have gotten
Abbeys, and few Lands, thank the Queen, and King, Placebo Domine, the poor
Preachers will not yet flatter, for feeding of their bellies. These words were
judged proud and intolerable, and engendered no small displeasure to the
Speaker.

Note.
This we put in memory, that the posterity to come may know that God once made
his truth to triumph, but because some of our selves delighted more in
darkness, than in light, God has restrained our freedom, and put the whole
body in bondage, yea, the greatest Flatterers have not escaped so free as they
supposed, yea, the latter plagues appear yet to be worse than the first. Be
merciful unto us, (O Lord) and deal with us not according to our deservings,
but look thou to the equity of the cause which thou has put in our hands, and
suffer not iniquity to oppress thy Truth, for thy own names sake, O Lord.

In this mean while, The marriage of the Earl of Murray.
to wit, in February, 1561. was Lord James, first made Earl of Murray, and then
married one Agnes Keith, daughter to the Earl Marshall. The marriage was
public in the Church of Edinburgh; at the blessing of the marriage they both
got one admonition to behave themselves moderately in all things: For said the
Preacher to him, The Church of God has received comfort by you, and by your
labors unto this day. In the which, if hereafter you shall be found fainter
then you have been formerly, it will be said, That your Wife has changed your
nature. The greatness of the Bankquet, and the vanity used thereat, offended
many Godly; There began the Masking, which from year to year, has continued
since. Master Randolph, Agent for the Queen of England was then, and sometime
after in no small esteem with our Queen: For his Mistress sake, she did drink to
him in a Cup of Gold, which he possessed with great joy, more for the favor of
the giver, then of the gift, and value thereof, and yet it was honorable. The
things that then were in handling betwixt the two Queens, whereof Lethington,
Secretary Cecill, and Master Randolph, were Ministers, were of great weight, as
we will after hear.

This Winter the Earl of Bothwell, the Marquis D'albuff, and Lord John of
Coldingham committed riot in Edinburgh, and disordered the whole Town, brake
Cuthbert Ramseyes Gates and Doors, searched his House for his Daughter in law,
Alison Craige. And this was done in despite of the Earl of Arrane, who was
suspected to have been in love with the said Alison, the horrors of this fact,
and the verity of it highly commoved all godly hearts. The Assembly, and also
the Nobility, for the most part were in the Town; and so they concluded to
crave justice, and so they did, as by this subsequent supplication does appear.

To the Queens Majesty, Her secret Council, Her Highness faithful and
obedient Subjects, The professors of Christ Jesus, his holy Evangell, wish the
Spirit of righteous judgment.
THe fear of God conceived of his holy Word; the natural and unfeigned love we
bear unto your Majesty; the duty which we owe to the quietness of our
Country; and the terrible threatenings which our God pronounces against every
Realm, and City; in the which horrible Crimes are openly committed, and then
by the Committers obstinately defended, compells us, a great part of our
Subjects, humbly to crave of your Majesty's, upright and true judgment against
such persons as have done, what in them lie, to kindle Gods wrath against this
whole Realm. The impiety by them committed, is so heinous, and so horrible,
That as it is a fact most vile and rare to be heard of within the Realm, and
principally within the Bowels of this City; So should we think our selves
guilty of the same, if negligently, or yet for worldy fear we put it over with
silence; and therefore your Majesty may not think that we crave any thing,
while that we crave open Malefactors condignly to be punished; But that God
has commanded us to crave, Note this diligently.
and also has commanded your Majesty to give to every one of your Subjects;
for by this Lynk has God knit together the Prince and people, that as he
commands honor, fear and obedience to be given to the powers established by
him; so does he in express words command and declare what the Prince owes
unto the Subjects, to wit, That as he is the Minister of God, bearing the sword
for vengeance to be taken on evil doers, and for the denfence of peaceable and
quiet men; so ought he to draw the sword without partiality, so often as in Gods
Name he is required thereto. Seeing so it is (Madame) that this crime so
recently committed, and that in the eyes of the whole Realm now publicly
assembled, is so heinous; for who heretofore has heard within the bowels of
Edinburgh, Gates and Doors under silence of night broken, Houses ripped or
searched, and that with hostillity, seeking a woman, as appears to oppress
her. Seeing (we say) that this crime is so heinous, that all godly men fear not
only Gods dispeasure to fall upon you and your whole Realm; but also that such
licentiousness breed contempt, and in the end sedition, if remedy in time be
not provided, which in our judgment is possible, if severe punishment be not
executed for the crime committed. Therefore we most humbly beseech your
Majesty, that all affection set aside, Note this diligently.
you declare your self so upright in this case, that ye may give evident
demonstration to all your Subjects, that the fear of God, joined with the love
of common tranquillity, has principal seat in your Majesty's Heart. This,
further Madame, in conscience we speak, That as your Majesty in Gods Name does
crave of us obedience, which to render in all things lawful we are most
willing; so in the same name do we the whole Professors of Christ's Evangell
within this your Majesty's Realm, crave of you and of your Council sharp
punishment of this crime. And for performance thereof, that without delay the
most principal Actors of this heinous crime, and the perswaders of this
public Villainy, may be called before the Chief Justice of this Realm, to
suffer an Assise, and to be punished according to the Laws of the same; and
your Majesty's Answer most humbly we beseech.


These Supplications was presented by diverse Gentlemen; the Flatterers of the
Court at first stormed, and asked who durst avow it? To whom the Master, after
Lord Lyndesay, answered, A thousand Gentlemen within Edinburgh: others were
ashamed to oppose themselves thereto in public; but they suborned the Queen to
give a gentle answer, until such time as the Convention was dissolved; and so
she did: and then after in fair words, she alleged, That her Uncle was a
Stranger, and that he had a young Company with him; but she should put such
order unto him, and unto all others, that hereafter they should have no
occasion to complain: And so deluded she the just Petition of her Subjects: And
no wonder, for how shall she punish in Scotland that vice, which in France she
did see so free without punishment, and which Kings and Cardinals commonly
use, as the Mask and Dancing of Orleans can witness; wherein virgins and men's
wives were made common to King Harry, Charles the Cardinal, and to their
Courtiers and Pages, as common women in Bordells are unto their Companions. The
manner was thus: At the entry of King Henry of France in the Town of Orleans,
the Matrons, Virgins, The Mask of Orleance.
and men's wives were commanded to present themselves in the Kings Palace to
dance: And they obeyed; for commonly the French Nation is not very hard to be
entreated to vanity. After Fidling and Flinging, and when the Cardinal of
Loraine had espied his prey, he said to the King, Sire le premiere est a vous,
and fault queje soy le second: that is, Sir, the first choice is yours, and I
must be the second. And so the King got the preeminence, that he had his first
Election. But because Cardinals are companions to Kings, the Cardinal had the
next. And thereafter the Torches were put out, and every man commanded to
provide for himself the best he might. What cry there was of husbands for their
wives, and wives for their husbands, of ancient matrons for their daughters, of
virgins for their friends, for some honest men to defend their pudicity,
Orleance will remember more Kings days then one. This horrible villainy, a
fruit of the Cardinals good Catholic Religion, we shortly touch, to let the
world understand, what subjects may look for of such Magistrates; for such
Pastime to them is Jollity. It had been good for our Queen, that she had been
brought up in better company, both for her credit, and for the course of her
life: And it may be, that her excellent natural enduements had been better
employed for her reputation and happiness, then they were to her great
misfortune, and to the grief of those that wished her truly well. But
punishment of that enormity, and fearful attempt, we could get none. Yea, more
and more they presumed to do violence, and frequented nightly Masking, and
began to bear the matter very heavily. At length the Dukes friends began to
assemble in the night time on the calsay or street. The Abbot of Kylwinning,
who then was joined to the Church, and so, as we understand, yet abides, was
principal man at the beginning. To him repaired many faithful, and amongst
others, came Andrew Stewart, Lord Uchiltrie, a man rather borne to make peace,
then to brag upon the calsey, he demanded the quarrel: And being informed of
the former enormity, said, Nay, such impiety shall not be suffered, so long as
God shall assist us: The Victory that God has in his own mercy given us, we
will by his grace maintain. And so he commanded his son Andrew Stewart, then
Master, and his servants, to put themselves in order, The Hamiltons against
Bothwell and the Marquess.
and to bring forth their spears and long weapons; and so did others. The word
came to the Earl Bothwell and his son, that the Hamiltons were upon the
street: vows was made, that the Hamiltons should be driven, not only out of
the Town, but also out of the Country. Lord John of Coldingham married the E.
Bothwels sister (a sufficient woman for such a man) Alliance drew Lord Robert,
and so they joined with the E. Bothwell. But the stoutnes of the Marq. le Beuf
( d'Albuff they call him, is most to be commended; for in his Chalmer in the
Abbey, he start to an Halbert, and ten men were scarce able to hold him that
night, and the danger was betwixt the Cross and Tron; and so he was a long
quarter of a mile from the shot and sklenting of Bolts. The M. of Maxw. (after
L. Herreis gave declaration to the Earl Bothwell, That if he stirred forth of
his Lodging, he, and all that assist him, should resist him in the face. Whose
words did somewhat beat down that blast. The Earls of Murray and Huntley being
in the Abbey, where the Marquess was, came with their company sent from the
Queen, to stay that tumult; as they did, for Bothwell and his were commanded
under pain of Treason, to keep their lodgings.

It was whispered by many, That the Earl of Murray's displeasure was as much
sought, as any hatred that the Hamiltons did bear against the Earl of
Bothwell, or yet he against them. And in very deed, either had the Duke very
false servants, or else by Huntley and the Hamiltons the Earl of Murray's
death was oftener conspired then once; the suspicion whereof burst forth so
far, that upon a day the said Earl being upon horse to have come to the
Sermon, was charged by one of the Dukes own servants, to turn and abide with
the Queen. The fame whereof spread over all: What ground it had, we cannot say;
but shortly after, the Duke, and some of the Lords, remained at Glasgow; their
conclusion was not known. The Earl of Arrane came to Edinburgh, where the
Earl Bothwell lay. The Queen and the Court were departed to Fyfe, and remained
sometimes in S. Androes, and sometimes in Falkland.

The Earl Bothwell, by means of James Barron Burgess, and then Merchant of
Edinburgh, desired to speak with John Knox secretly; which the said John gladly
granted, and spoke with him upon a night, first in the said James his lodging,
The Earl of Bothwells communication with John Knox 1562.
and after in his own Study: The sum of all their conference and communication
was; The said Lord lamented his inordinate life; and especially, That he was
provoked by the enticements of the Queen Regent, to do that which he sore
repented, as well against the Lord of Ormestoun, whose blood was spilt, albeit
not by his faults: But his chief grief was, That he had misbehaved himself
toward the Earl of Arrane, whose favor he was most willing to redeem, if
possible it were that so he might: For (said he) if I might have my Lord
Arranes favor, I would aye wait upon the Court with a Page and a few servants,
to spare my expense; where now I am compelled to keep for my own safety a
number of wicked and unprofitable men, to the utter destruction of my state
that is left. To which the said John answered, My Lord, would to God that in me
were Counsel and Judgment, that might comfort and relieve you; for albeit
that to this hour it has not happened to me to speak with your Lordship face
to face, yet have I born a good mind to your house; and have been sorry at my
heart of the trouble that I have heard you to be involved in; for (my Lord) my
great Grandfather, Grandfather, and Father, have served your Lordships
Predecessors, and some of them have died under their standers; and this is a
part of the Obligation of our Scottish kindness: Note the complement.
but this is not the chief; But as God has made me his public Messenger of
glad Tidings, so it is my earnest desire that all men may embrace it, which
perfectly they cannot, so long as there remains in them rankor, malice, or
envy: I am sorry that you have given occasion unto men to be offended with
you: But more sorrowful, That you have offended the Majesty of God; wherefore
he often punishes the other sins of man: And therefore my counsel is, That
you begin at God, with whom if you enter into perfect reconciliation, I doubt
not but he shall bow the hearts of men to forget all offenses. Note diligently.
And as for me, if you will continue in godliness, your Lordship shall command
me as boldly, as any that serves your Lordship. The said Lord desired him that
he would try the Earl of Arrans mind, If he would be content to accept him
in his favor: Which he promised to do. And so earnestly he traveled in the
matter; and it was once brought to such an end, as all the faithful praised
God for such agreement: The greatest stay stood upon the satisfaction of the
Lord of Ormestoune, (who beside his former hurt, as is before declared, was
even at that time of the coming, pursued by the said Earl Bothwell, and his
son Master Alexander Cockburne was taken by him, and carried by him to
Berwicke, but courteously enough sent back again. The new trouble so greatly
displeased John Knox, that he almost gave over further traveling for amity:
But yet upon excuse of the said Earl, and upon declaration of his mind, he
re-entred into labor, and so brought it to pass, that the Lord of Ormestoun
referred his satisfaction in all things to the Judgment of the Earls of
Arrane and Murray, to whom the said Earl submitted himself in that Head: And
thereupon delivered his hand writing; and so was conveyed by virtue of his
friends, to the Lodging of the Church of Field, Reconciliation betwixt the
Earl of Arrane, and Earl of Bothwell.
where the Earl of Arrane was with his friends, and the said John Knox with
him, to bear witness and testification of the end of the Agreement. As the
Earl of Bothwell entered the Chamber, and would have done those Honors that
friends had appointed, Master Gabriel Hamilton, Abbot of Kilwinning, and the
Lord of Richardton, were the chief friends that communed, the said Earl of
Arrane gently past unto him, embraced him, and said, If the hearts be upright,
few Ceremonies will serve, and content me. The said John Knox, in audience of
them both, and of their friends, said, Now, my Lords, God has brought you
together by the labor of simple men, in respect of such as would have
traveled therein: I know my labors are already taken in evil part; but
because I have the testimony of a good conscience before God, That whatsoever I
have done, it is in his fear, for the profit of you both, for the hurt of none,
and for the tranquillity of this Realm: Seeing therefore that my conscience
bears witness to me what I have sought, and do continually seek, I the more
patiently bear the misreports, and wrongful judgments of men. And now I leave
you in Peace, and desire you who are the friends, to study that Amity may
increase, all former hatred forget. The friends on either party embraced other;
and the two Earls departed to a window, and talked by themselves a reasonable
space. And thereafter the Earl of Bothwell departed for that night, and upon
the next day in the morning returned with some of his honest friends, and came
to the Sermon with the said Earl, whereat many rejoiced. But God had another
work to work, then the eyes of men could epsy. The Thursday next they dined
together; and thereafter the said Earl Bothwell, and Master Gabriel Hamilton,
rode to the Duke, who then was in Enmell: what communication was betwixt them,
it is not certainly known; but by the report which the said Earl of Arrane
made to the Queen, and unto the Earl of Murray, by his writings, for upon the
third day after their Reconciliation, the Sermon being ended, the said Earl of
Arrane came to the house of the said John Knox, and brought with him Master
Richard Strange, and Alexander Guthrie, to whom he opened the grief of his
mind before that John Knox was called; for he was busy, as commonly he used
to be after his Sermon, in directing of writings: Which ended, the said Earl
called the three together, and said, I am reasonably betrayed, and with these
words began to weep. John Knox demanded, My Lord, Who has betrayed you? One
Judas or other (said he) I know it is but my life that is sought; I regard it
not. The other said, My Lord, I understand no such dark manner of speech; if I
shall give you any answer, you must speak more plainly. Well (said he) I take
you three to witness, That I open this unto you, and I write it unto the
Queen: An act of Treason is laid to my Charge. The Earl Bothwell has shown
to me in Council, That he shall take the Queen and put her in my hands, in the
Castle of Dumbartane; And that he shall slay the Earl of Murray, Lethinton,
and others that now misguide her, and so shall he and I rule all. But I know
this is devised to accuse me of Treason; for I know he will inform the Queen
of it: But I take you to witness, That I open it here unto you: And I will
pass incontinent, and write to the Queens Majesty, and unto my Brother the
Earl of Murray. John Knox demanded, Did you consent (my Lord) to any part of
that Treason? He answered, No. Then (said he) in my judgment his words, Note
diligently.
although they were spoken, can never be Treason to you; for the performance of
the Fact depends upon your will, whereunto ye say ye have disassented; and so
shall that purpose vanish and die of it self, unless that you waken it; For
it is not to be supposed, That he will accuse you of that, which he himself
has devised, and whereunto you would not consent. Oh (said he) you understand
not what craft is used against me: It is Treason to conceal Treason. My Lord
(said he) Treason must import consent and determination, which I hear on
neither of your parts: And therefore (my Lord) in my judgment, it will be more
sure, and more Honorable unto you, to depend upon your your Innocence, and to
abide the unjust accusation of any other (if any follow thereof) as I think
there shall not) then to accuse, especially after so late reconciliation. I
know (said he) That he will offer the Combat unto me, but that would not be
suffered in France: But I will do that which I have purposed. And so he
departed, and took with him to his Lodging the said Master Alexander Guthrie,
and Master Richard Strange, from whence was written and endited a Letter to the
Queens Majesty, according to the former purpose: which Letter was directed
with all diligence unto her Majesty, who then was in Falkland. The Earl
himself rode after to Kinneill to his Father the Duke; but how he was used, we
have but the common bruit. But from thence he wrote a Letter with his own hand
in Ciphers to the Earl of Murry, complaining of his rigorous handling and
entertainment by his own father and friends. And assured further, That he
feared his life, in case he got not sudden rescue. But thereupon he remained
not, but broke the Chamber wherein he was put, and with great pain passed to
Sterling, and from thence was conveyed to the Haly-yards, where he was kept
till that the Earl of Murray came unto him, and conveyed him to the Queen,
then being in Falkland, who then was sufficiently instructed in the whole
matter; and upon suspicion conceived, had caused to apprehend Master Gawan
Hamilton and the Earl Bothwell aforesaid, who knowing nothing of the former
advertisements, came to Falkland, which augmented the former suspicion. But yet
the Letters of John Knox made all things to be used more circumspectly, for he
did plainly forewarne the Earl of Murray, that he espied the Earl of Arran to
be stricken with frenzy, and therefore willed not over great credit to be
given unto his words and inventions. And as he advertised, so it came to pass
forthwith in few days, his sickness increased, he talked of wondrous signs
that he saw in heaven; he alleged that he was bewitched, he would have been in
the Queens Bed, and affirmed that he was her husband; and finally, in all
things he behaved himself so foolishly, that his frenzy could not be hid.

And yet were the Earl Bothwell and Master Gawan Abbot of Kilming kept in the
Castle of Saint Andrews, and convent before the Council with the Earl Arran,
who ever stood firm, that the Earl of Bothwell proposed to him such things as
he advertised the Queens Majesty of; but stiffely denied that his father, the
said Abbot, or his friends knew any thing thereof, either yet that they intended
any violence against him; but alleged that he was enchanted, so to think and
write. Whereat the Queen, highly offended, committed him to prison, with the
other two, first in the Castle of Saint Andrews; and thereafter caused them to
be conveyed to the Castle of Edinburgh; James Stewart of Cardonhall, called
Captain James, was evil bruited for the rigorous entertainment that he showed
to the said Earl in his sickness, being appointed Keeper unto him.

To consult upon these occasions the whole Counsel was assembled at Saint
Andewes, the eighteenth of April 1562. years; in which it was concluded, that
in consideration of the former suspicion, the Duke should render to the Queen
the Castle of Dunbartan the custody thereof was granted unto him by
appointment, till that lawful succession should be seen of the Queens body:
But Will prevailed against Reason and promise, and so was the Castle delivered
to Captain Anstruther, as having power from the Queen and Council to receive
it.

Things ordered in Fyfe, the Queen returned to Edinburgh, and then began mirth
to grow hot, for her friends began to triumph in France: The certainty hereof
came to the ears of John Knox, for there were some that then told him from time
to time the state of things, and amongst others he was assured, That the Queen
had been merry, excessively dancing till after midnight, because that she had
received Letters, that pacification was begun again in France, and that her
Uncles were beginning to stir their tail, and to trouble the whole Realm of
France, upon occasion of this Text, And now understand O ye Kings, and be
learned ye that judge the Earth; he bagan to tax the ignorance, the vanity and
despite of Princes, against all virtue, Psalm. 2.
and against all those in whom hatred of vice and love of virtue appeared; the
report hereof made unto the Queen, the said John Knox was sent for, The second
communing of John Knox with the Queen.
Master Alexander Cokburne, who before had been his Scholar, and was very
familiar with him, was the messenger who gave him some knowledge, both of the
report, and of the reporters. The Queen was in her Bedchamber, and with her
(besides the Ladies and common servants) were the Lord James, the Earl Morton,
Secretary Lethington, and some of the Guard that had made the report; he was
accused as one that had irreverently spoken of the Queen, and that traveled
to bring her into hatred and contempt of the people; and that he had exceeded
the bounds of his Text; and upon these three heads made the Queen a long
Oration; whereto the said John answered as follows, Madame, this is
oftentimes the just recompense which God gives the stubborn of the world; Note
diligently
that because they will not hear God speaking to the comfort of the penitent,
and for amendment of the wicked, they are often compelled to hear the false
report of others, to their great displeasure. I doubt not, but that it came to
the Ears of Herod, that our Master Jesus Christ called him a Fox, but they told
him not how odious a thing it was before God to murder an Innocent, as he had
lately done before, causing to behead John the Baptist to reward the dancing of
an Harlots daughter: Madame, if the reporters of my words had been honest men,
they would have reported my words and the circumstances of the same; but
because they would have credit in Court, and wanting virtue worthy thereof,
they must have somewhat to please your Majesty, Note.
if it were but flatteries and lies: But such pleasure (if any your Majesty
take in such persons) will return to your everlasting displeasure; for
(Madame) if your own Ears had heard the whole matter that I treated, if there
be in you any spark of the Spirit of God, yea, of honesty and wisdom, you
would not justly have been offended with any thing that I spoke. And because
you have heard their report, please your Majesty to hear my self rehearse the
same so near as memory will serve, (it was even upon the next day after that
the Sermon was made;) My Text (said he) Madame, was this, And now, O Kings,
understand, be learned ye Judges of the Earth: After (Madame said he) that I
had declared the dignity of Kings and Rulers, the honor wherein God has
placed them, the obedience that is due unto them, being Gods Lieutenants, I
demanded this question; But oh (alas) what account shall the most part of
Princes make before that Supreme Judge, Note.
whose Throne and Authority so manifestly and shamefully they abuse, the
complaint of Solomon is this day most true, to wit, That violence, and
oppression do occupy the Throne of God here in this Earth; for whilst that
murderers, blood-thirsty men, oppressors and Malefactors dare be bold to
present themselves before Kings and Princes, and that the poor Saints of God
are banished and exiled, what shall we say, but that the Devil has taken
possession in the Throne of God, which ought to be fearful to all wicked
doers, and a refuge to the innocent, oppressed: and how can it otherwise be,
for Princes will not understand, they will not be learned, as God commands
them; but Gods Law they despise, his Statutes and Holy Ordinances they will not
understand, for in fidling and flinging they are more exercised than in reading
or hearing Gods most blessed Word; and Fiddlers and Flatterers (which commonly
corrupt the Youth) are more precious in their eyes then men of wisdom and
gravitie, who by wholesome admonitions may beat down in them some part of that
vanity and pride wherein we all are born, but in Princes take deep root and
strength by evil education. And of dancing (Madame) I said, That albeit in
Scriptures I found no praise of it, and in profane Writers, that it is termed
the gesture rather of those that are Mad, and in frenzy, then of sober men;
yet do I not utterly condemn it, providing that two vices be avoided; the
former, That the principal Vocation of those that use that exercise, be not
neglected for the pleasure of Dancing. Secondly, That they dance not as the
Philistines their Fathers, Note diligently
for the pleasure that they take in the displeasure of Gods people; for if they
do these, or either of them, they shall receive the reward of Dancers, Note.
and that will be to drink in Hell, unless they speedily repent; so shall God
turn their mirth into sudden sorrow: For God will not always afflict his
people, neither will he always wink at the Tyranny of Tyrants. If any (Madame,
said he) will say that I spoke more, let him publicly accuse me, for I think I
have not only touched the sum, but the very words as I spoke them. Many that
stood by did bear witness with him, that he had recited the very words that
publicly he spoke.

The Queen looked about to some of the Reporters, and said, Your words are
sharp enough as you have spoken them, but yet they were told me in another
manner; I know (said she) that my Uncles and you are not of one Religion, and
therefore I cannot blame you to have no good opinion of them; but if you hear
any thing of my self that mislikes you, come to my self and tell me, and I
shall hear you. Madame (quoth he) I am assured, that your Uncles are enemies to
God, and unto his Son Jesus Christ, Let Princes note this.
and for maintenance of their own pomp and worldly glory, that they spare not
to spill the blood of many Innocents; and therefore I am assured, that these
enterprises shall have no better success than others have had, that before
them have done as they do now. But as to your own person, (Madame) I would be
glad to do all that I could to your Majesty's contentment, providing that I
exceed not the bounds of my Vocation: I am called (Madame) to a public
function within the Church of God, and appointed by God to rebuke the vices and
sins of all; I am not appointed to come to every man in particular to show him
his offense, for that labor were infinite; if your Majesty pleases to
frequent the public Sermons, then I doubt not but that you shall fully
understand both what I like and mislike, as well in your Majesty, as in all
others: Or if your Majesty will assign unto me a certain day and hour when
it will please you to hear the form and substance of Doctrine, which is
proposed in public to the Churches of this Realm, I will most gladly wait upon
your Majesty's pleasure, Let Court-Chaplains and unthrifts of the time, note
this.
time and place; but to come to wait upon your chamber door, or elsewhere, and
then to have no further liberty but to whisper my mind in your Majesty's ear,
or to tell you what others think and speak of you, neither will my conscience,
nor the vocation whereto God has called me, suffer it; for albeit at your
Majesty's commandment I am here now, yet I cannot tell what other men will
judge of me, that at this time of the day I am absent from my book, and waiting
at the Court. You will not always (said she) be at your Book, and so turned
her back; And the said John departed, with a reasonable merry countenance;
whereat some Papists offended, said, He is not afraid; which heard by him, he
answered, Why should the pleasant face of a Lady afray me: I have looked in the
faces of many angry men, and yet have not been afraid above measure; and so
left he the Queen, and the Court for that time.

In this mean time the negotiation was great betwixt the Queen of England and
our Sovereign, Letters, Curriours and Posts ran frequent, great bruit there
was of the interviewe and meeting at York, and some preparation was made
therefore in both the Realms; but that failed upon the part of England, and
that by occasion of the troubles moved in France, (as was alleged;) which
caused the Queen of England, and the Council attend upon the South parts of
England, for avoiding of Inconveniences.

This Summer there came an Ambassador from the King of Sweden, requiring
marriage of our Sovereign to his Master the King; His entertainment was
Honorable; but his Petitions liked not our Queen one whit, for as yet she
could not resolve to be Wife to the King of Sweden, having been lately Queen of
France: And yet she refused not one much inferior to a Sovereign King. The
Earl of Lennox, and his Lady imprisoned in the Tower of London, for
traffiquing with Papists.
The Earl of Lennox and his Wife were committed to the Tower of London, for
traffiquing with Papists; the young Lord of Bar was a stickler in that
business, and was apprehended with some Letters, which was the cause of his
and their trouble.

The Earl of Murray made a private journey to Hawicke upon the Fair day
thereof, and apprehended fifty Thieves, of which number were seventeen drowned,
others were executed in I^dburgh, the principal were brought to Edinburgh, and
there suffered, according to their merits upon the Burrow Mure.

The Queen was no whit content of the prosperity and good success that God
gave to the Earl of Murray in all his enterprises, for she hated his upright
dealing, and the Image of God that evidently did appear in him; but at that
time she could not well have been served without him.

The assembly of the Church at Midsommer the four and twentieth day of June,
1562. approached, in the which were many notable heads handled concerning good
Order to be kept in the Church, and for the Papists, Sharp left preaching, and
took him to the Laws.
and for the Idolatry of the Queen which troubles the former good order; Some
Ministers, such as Master John Sharp, had left their charges, and entered into
other Vocations, more profitable for the belly, against whom were Acts made,
although this day they have not put them in execution. The tenor of the
Supplication, read in open audience, and approved by the whole Assembly, to be
presented to the Queens Majesty, was this:

To the Queens Majesty, and her most honorable Privy Council. The
Superintendents and Ministers of the Evangell of Christ Jesus within this
Realm, together with the Commissioners of the whole Churches, desire Grace and
Peace, from the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Spirit of righteous
Judgment.
HAving in mind that the fearful sentence pronounced against the Watchmen
that see the Sword of Gods punishment approach, and do not in plain words
forewarn the people, yea, the Princes and Rulers, that they repent, we cannot
but signify unto your Highness, and to your Council, That the state of this
Realm is such for this present, that unless redress and remedy be shortly
provided, Gods hands cannot long spare in his anger, to strike the Head and the
Tail; the inobedient Prince, Note.
and sinful People: For as God is unchangeable and true, so must he punish, in
these our days the grievous sins which before, we read, he has punished in
all Ages, after that he has long called for repentance, and none is shown.
And that your Majesty and Council may understand what are the things we desire
to be reformed, we will begin at that which we know assuredly to be the
Fountain and Spring of all other evils that now abound in this Realm: To wit:

That Idol and base service of God, the Mass, the fountain, we call, of all
Impiety, not only because many take boldness to sin, by reason of that
opinion which they have conceived of that Idol, to wit, That by virtue of it
they get remission of their sins; But also because that under this color of
the Mass, are Whores, Adulterers, Drunkards, Blasphemers of God, This causes
the Qu^ens Religion to have many ^avourers.
of his holy Sacraments, and such other manifest Malefactors, maintained and
defended: For let any Masse-sayer, or earnest maintainer thereof be deprehended
in any of the forenamed crimes, no execution can be had; for all is done in
hatred of his Religion: And so are wicked men permitted to live wickedly,
cloked and defended by that wicked Idol. But supposing that the Mass was
occasion of no such evils, yet in it self it is so odious in Gods presence,
that we cannot cease with all instance to desire the removing of the same, as
well from your self, as from all others within this Realm; Taking Heaven and
earth, yea, your own Consciences to record, That the obstinate maintenance of
that Idol, shall in the end be to you, destruction of soul and body, if you do
not repent.

If your Majesty demand, Why that now we are more earnest, then we have been
heretofore? We answer (our former silence no ways excused) Because we find
our selves frustrate of our hope and expectation; which was, That in process
of time your Majesty's heart should have been mollified, so far, as ye would
have heard the public Doctrine taught within this Realm; by the which, our
further hope was, That Gods holy Spirit should so have moved your heart, that
you would have suffered your Religion (which before God is nothing but
abomination and vanity) to be tried by the true Touchstone, the written Word
of God; And that your Majesty finding it to have no ground nor foundation in
the same, should have given that glory unto God: that you would have preferred
his Truth to your own preconceived vain opinion, of what antiquity that ever it
has been, whereof we in part now discharged, Note.
can no longer keep silence, unless we would make our selves criminal before
God of your blood, perishing in your own iniquity; for we plainly admonish you
of the danger to come.

The second thing that we require, is, Punishment of horrible vices, such as
are Adultery, Fornication, open Whoredom, Blasphemy, Contempt of God, of his
Word and Sacraments; Which in this Realm do even so abound, that sin is
reputed to be no sin. And therefore, as we see the present signs of Gods wrath
now manifestly appear, so do we forewarn, that he will strike ere it be long,
if his Law without punishment be permitted thus manifestly to be contemned. If
any object, That punishment cannot be commanded to be executed without a
Parliament; we answer, Note.
That the Eternal God in his Parliament, has pronounced death to be the
punishment of Adultery, and for Blaspheming: whose Act if we put not in
execution (seeing that Kings are but his Lievtenants, having no power to give
life, where he commands death) as that he will repute you, and all others that
foster vice, patrons of Impiety, so will he not fail to punish you, for
neglecting the execution of his judgments.

Our third request concerning the poor, who be of three sorts: The poor
laborers of the ground, the poor desolate Beggars, Orphans, Widows and
Strangers, Note d^ligently.
and the poor Ministers of Christ Jesus his holy Evangel; which are so cruelly
used by this last pretended Order taken for sustentation of Ministers, that
their latter misery far surmounteth the former; for now the poor laborers
of the ground are so oppressed by the cruelty of those that pay their hire,
that they for the most part encroach upon the poor, in whatsoever they pay
unto the Queen, or to any other. As for the very indigent and poor, to whom God
commands a sustentation to be provided of the Tenths, they are so despised,
Note.
that it is a wonder that Sun gives heat and light to the earth, where Gods
Name is so frequently called upon, and no mercy (according to his Commandment)
shown to his Creatures. And also for the Ministers, their Livings are so
appointed, that the most part shall live but a Beggars life: And all comes of
that impiety, that the idle bellies of Christ's enemies, must be fed in their
former delicacy. We dare not conceal from your Majesty, and honors our
conscience, which is this, That neither by the Law of God, neither yet by any
just Law of man, is due unto them, who now most cruelly do exact of the poor
and rich, the two parts of their Benefices, as they call them. And therefore we
most humbly require, That some other Order may be taken with them, that they be
not set up again to empire above the people of God; for we fear that such
usurpation of their former state, will be neither in the end pleasant to
themselves, nor profitable to them that would place them in that Tyranny. If
any think that a competent Living is to be assigned to them, we repugne not,
provided that the Laborers of the ground be not oppressed, the poor be not
utterly neglected, and the Ministers of the Word so hardly used, as now they
are. And finally, That those idle bellies, who by Law can crave nothing, shall
confess, that they receive their sustentation and maintenance, not of debt,
but of benevolence. Our humble request is therefore, That in every Parish some
part of the Tithes may be assigned to the sustentation and maintenance of the
poor within the same: And likewise that some public relief may be provided for
the poor within Buroughs, that Collectors may be appointed to gather; And that
strict Accounts may be taken, as well for their Recepts, as of the
disbursements. The further consideration to be had of our Ministers, we in some
part remit to your wisedoms, and to their particular complaints.

Our fourth Petition is for the Mause-Yards and Gleebs justly appertaining to
the Ministers, without the which it is impossible unto them quietly to serve
their Charges; and therefore we desire that order be taken without delay.

Our fifth concerns the disobedience of certain wicked persons, who not only
trouble, and have troubled Ministers in their Functions, but also disobey the
Superintendents in their Visitation: wherefore we humbly crave remedy; which we
doubt, not so much for the fear that we and our Ministers have of the Papists,
but for the love that we bear to the common tranquillity. For this we cannot
hide from your Majesty and Council, That if the Papists think to triumph
where they may, and to do what they list, where there is not a party able to
resist them: that some will think, That the godly must begin where they left,
who heretofore have borne all rhings patiently, in hope that the Laws should
have bridled the wicked; Note this for our times.
whereof if they be frustrate (albeit that nothing is more odious to them then
Tumults, and domestic Discord) yet will men attempt the uttermost, before that
in their own eyes they behold the house of God demolished, which with travel
and danger God has within this Realm erected by them.

Sixthly, we desire, That such as receive release of their Thirds, be compelled
to sustain the Ministers within their Bounds, or else we forewarne your Majesty
and Council, that we fear, That the people shall retain the whole in their
hands, until such time as their Ministers be sufficiently provided.

Seventhly, we desire the Churches to be repaired, according to an Act set
forth by the Lords of the Secret Council, before your Majesty's Arrival into
this Country: That J^dges be appointed to hear the causes of Divorcement; for
the Church can no longer sustain the burden, especially, because there is no
punishment for the offenders: That sayers and hearers of Masses, prophaners of
the Sacraments; such as have entered into Benefices by the Popes Bulls, and such
other transgressors of the Law made at your Majesty's Arrival within this
Realm, may be severely punished; for else men will think there is no truth
meant in making of such Laws.

Eighthly, We most humbly desire of your Majesty and your honorable Council,
a resolute answer to every one of these Heads afore-written, that the same
being known, we may somewhat satisfy such as be grievously offended at
manifest iniquity now maintained at, oppression, under pretext of Law, done
against the poor, and at the rebellious disobedience of many wicked persons,
against Gods Word, and holy Ordinance.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, so rule your hearts, and direct your
Majesty and Councels judgments by the judgment and illumination of his holy
Spirit, that you may answer so, as your offenses may be absolved in the
presence of that righteous Judge, the Lord Jesus; and then we doubt not but
your selves shall find felicity, and this poor Realm, that has long been
oppressed by wicked men, shall enjoy tranquillity and rest, with the true
knowledge of God.


These things read in public Assembly as aforesaid, were approved of all: And
some wished that more sharpness had been used, because that the time so
repuired. But the Minions of the Court, and Secretary Lethington above others,
could not abide such hard spoken words; for whoever shall write (said he) to a
Prince, That God would strike the head and the tail; That if Papists do what
they list, men would begin where they left: Note this for our times.
But above all others, that was most offensive That the Queen was accused, as
that she would raise up Papists and Papistry again; To put that in the people
heads, was no less then Treason: yea, Oaths was made, That she never meaned
such thing. To whom it was answered, An answer to Lethington.
That the Prophet Isaiah used such manner of speaking; And it was no doubt but
that he was acquainted in the Court, for it was supposed that he was of the
Kings Stock: but howsoever it was, his words make manifest that he spoke to the
Court, and to the Courtiers, to Judges, Ladies, Princes and Priests; and yet,
says he, The Lord shall cut away the head and the tail, etc. And so said the
first writer, I find that such phrase was once used before us: And if this
offend you, that we say, Men must begin where they left, in case the Papists do
as they do, we would desire you to teach us, not so much how we shall speak,
but rather what we shall do, when our Ministers are stricken, our
Superintendents disobeyed, and a plain Rebellion decreed against all good
Orders. Complain, said Lethington. To whom? said the other. To the Queen, said
he. How long shall we do so? quoth the other. Till that you get remedy, said
the Justice Clerk: Give me their names, and I shall give you Letters. If the
Sheep, said one, shall complain to the Wolf, That the Wolfs whelps have
devoured their Lambs, the Complainer may stand in danger, but the offender we
fear, Note this diligently.
shall have leave to hunt after his prey. Such Comparisons (said Lethington)
are very unsavory; for I am assured, That the Queen will not erect nor
maintain Papistry. Let your assurance (said the other) serve your self, but
it cannot assure us; for her manifest proceedings speaks the contrary. After
such cautious reasoning on both sides, the plurality concluded, That the
supplication as it was conceived, should be presented, unless that the
Secretary would make one more fit to the present necessity; he promised to
keep the substance of ours, but he would use other terms, and ask things in a
more gentle manner. The first Writer answered, That he served the Churches at
their commandment, and was content, That in his ditement, men should use the
liberty that best pleased them; providing, That he were not compelled to
subscribe to the flattery of such, as more regarded the persons of men, then
the simple truth of God: And so was this former supplication given to be
reformed, as Lethingtons wisdom thought best. And in very deed, he framed it
so, That when it was delivered by the Superintendents of Lothain and Fyfe. And
when the Queen had read somewhat of it, she said, Here are many fair words, I
cannot tell what the hearts are; And so for our painted Oratory we were termed
by the next name, Flatterers and dissemblers; but for that Session, the Church
received no other answer.

Short after the Convention of the Church, chanced that unhappy persuite which
John Gordon, John Gordonne and Ogilvie.
Lord of Finlater, made upon the Lord Ogilvie, who was evil hurt, and was for
a long time mitilate; The occasion was for certain Lands, and Rights, which old
Finlater had resigned to the Lord, which he was pursuing by Law, and was in
appearance to obtain his purpose; whereat, the said John, and his servants were
offended, and therefore made the said pursuit, upon a Saturday, at night,
betwixt nine and ten. The friends of the said Lord, were either not with him,
or else not willing to fight that night, for they took strokes, but gave few
that left marks.

The said John was taken and put in the Tolbuith, where he ramained certain
days, and then broke the Prison: Some judged, at his Fathers commandment; for
he was making preparation for the Queens coming to the North, as we will after
hear.

The enterview and meeting of the two Queens delayed till the next year. Our
Sovereign took purpose to visit the North, and departed from Sterlin in the
month of August; whether there was any paction and confederacy betwixt the
Papists of the South, and the Earl of Huntly and his Papists in the North (or
to speak more plainly) betwixt the Queen her Self, and Huntly: We cannot
certainly affirm, But the suspicions were wondrous vehement, that there was no
good will borne to the Earl of Murray, nor yet to such as depended upon him,
at that time. The History we shall faithfully declare, and so leave the
judgment free to the Readers.

That John Gordon broke the Prison, we have already heard, who immediately
repaired to his Father George, Earl of Huntly; and understanding the Queens
coming, made great provision in Strabogie, and in other parts, as it were to
receive the Queen. At Aberdeine, the Queen and Court, remained certain days
to deliberate upon the Affairs of the Country, where some began to smell,
that the Earl of Huntly was privately gathering men, as hereafter shall be
declared.

Whilst things was so working in the North, the Earl of Bothwell broke his
prison, and came forth of the Castle of Edinburgh the eight and twentieth day
of August; Bothwell brake the ward or prison.
some say he broke the Stancheours of the Window; others whispered, that he got
easy passage by the gates: one thing is certain, to wit, The Queen was little
offended at his escaping. There passed with him a servant of the Captains,
named James Porterfield. The said Earl showed himself not very much afraid,
for his common residence was in Louthain. The Bishop of Saint Andrews and Abbot
of Crosrainell kept secret convention that same time in Paislay, Note another
wavering of the Hamiltons.
to whom resorted diverse Papists; yea, the said Bishop spoke to the Duke, unto
whom also came the Lord Gordon from the Earl of Huntly, requiring him to
stir his hands in the South, as he should do in the North, and so it should
not be Knox crying and preaching that should stay that purpose: The Bishop, be
he never so close, could not altogether hide his mind, but at his own Table
said, The Queen is gone into the North, belike to seek disobedience, she may
perchance find the thing she seeks. It was constantly affirmed, That the Earl
Bothwell and the said Lord Gordon spoke together, but of their purpose we heard
no mention.

That same year, and in that same instant time, were appointed Commissioners by
the General Assembly, to Carrick and Cunningham; Master George Hay, who with
great profit preached the space of a month in all the Churches of Carrick. To
Kyle and to the parts of Galloway was appointed John Knox, who besides the
doctrine of the Evangell, shown to the common people, forewarned some of the
Nobility and Barrows, of the dangers that he feared, and that were appearing
shortly to follow; and exhorted them to put themselves in such order, as that
they might be able to serve the authority, and yet not to suffer the enemies
of Gods truth to have the upper hand: Whereupon a great part of the Barons and
Gentlemen of Kyle, Cunningham and Carrick, professing the true doctrine of the
Evangell, assembled at Air; and after the exhortation made, and conference
had, subscribed this Bond, the Tenor whereof follows:

A new Covenant, 1562.
WE whose Names are underwritten, do promise in the presence of God, and in the
presence of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, that we and every one of us, shall
and will maintain the preaching of his holy Evangell, now of his mercy offered
and granted unto this Realm; and also will maintain the Ministers of the same
against all persons, power and authority that will oppose themselves to the
Doctrine proposed, and by us received: And further, with the same solemnity,
we protest and promise, that every one of us shall assist another, yea, Note.
and the whole Body of the Protestants within this Realm, in all lawful and
just occasions, against all persons; So that whosoever shall hurt, molest or
trouble any of our bodies, shall be reputed enemies to the whole, except that
the offender will be content to submit himself to the Government of the Church
now established amongst us: and this we do, as we desire to be accepted and
favored of the Lord Jesus, and accepted worthy of credit and honesty in the
presence of the godly.

At the Burgh of Air the fourth day of September, in the year of God, 1552.
Subscribed by all these with their hands, as follows: The Earl Glencairne,
Lord Boyde, Lord Uchiltrie and Failfurd, Matthew Cambell of Lowdoune Knight,
Allaine Lord Cathcart, Caprington elder and younger, Cuninghameheid, Rowallan,
Waterston, Craigie, Lefnoreis, Achinharvy, Middleton, Master Michael Wallace
Provest of Air, with forty more of the honestest Burgesses of that Town. The
Master of Boyd, Graitgirth, Bar, Carnell, Dreghorne, Hested, Skeldon, Wolston,
Carsland, Fergnshill, Polquhairne, Stair, Barkskyning, Kinganelech, with a
hundred more Gentle men of worth; John Dumbar of Blantyre, Carleton and his
brother, Halrig Cers, Kirckmichael, Dalyaroich, Crosclayes, Horsclench,
Carbiston, Kelwood, Tarmganoich, etc.

THese things done at Air, the said John passed to Nithsdaill, and Galloway,
where, in conference with the Master of Maxwell, a man of great judgment and
experience; he communicated with him such things as he feared, who by his
motion wrote to the Earl of Bothwell to behave himself as it became a
faithful Subject, and to keep good quietness in the places committed to his
charge, and that his crime of breaking the Ward would be the more easily
pardoned. John Knox wrote unto the Duke, and earnest-exhorted him neither to
give ear to the Bishop his Bastard brother, no^ yet to the persuasions of the
Earl of Huntly; for if he did, he assured him, that he and his house should
come to a sudden ruin. By which means was the South parts kept in reasonable
quietness during the time that the troubles were a brewing in the North; and
yet the Bishop and the Abbot of Cosraynell did what in them lay to have raised
some trouble; for, besides the fearful bruits that they spearced abroad,
sometime that the Queen was taken, sometimes that the Earl of Murray and all
his were slain, and sometimes that the Queen had given her self to the Earl of
Huntly; besides such bruits the Bishop to break the Country of Kyle, where
quietness then was greatest, raised the Crawfords, against the Reides, for the
payment of the Bishops Paschfynes; but that was pacified by the labor of
indifferent men, who favored peace. The Abbot of Cosrainell required
disputation of John Knox for maintenance of the Mass, which was granted unto
him; and the dispute held in Mayboll three days: The Abbot had the advantage
that he required, to wit, he took in hand to prove, That Melchisedec offered
Bread and Wine unto God; which was the ground that the Mass was built upon to
be a Sacrifice, etc. But in the work of three days there could no proof be
produced for Melchizedecks Oblation; as in the disputation, (which was
afterward Printed) clearly may appear. The Papists looked for a revolt, and
therefore they would have some brag of reasoning; the Abbot further presented
himself to the Pulpit, but the voice of Master George Hay so affrayed him, that
after once he was wearied o^ that exercise.

After that the Queen was somewhat satisfied of hunting, and other pastimes,
she came to Aberdein, where the Earl of Huntly met her, and his Ladies, with
no small Train, who remained in Court, and was supposed to have the greatest
credit, departed with the Queen to Buchan, met her again at Rothemay, looking
that she should have passed with him to Strabogy; but in the journey certain
word came to her, that John Gordon had broken promise in not re-entring in
ward; for his Father the Earl had promised, that he should enter again within
the Castle of Sterlin, and there abide the Queens pleasure; but whether with
his Fathers knowledge and consent, or without the same, we know not; but he
refused to enter: which so offended the Queen, that she would not go to
Strabogy, but passed through Straithla to Innernesse, where the Castle thereof
was denied unto her; the Captain was commanded to keep it, and looked for
relief; for so had John Gordon promised; but being thereof frustrate, the
Castle was rendered, and the Captain called; Gordon was executed upon the place,
the rest were condemned, and the hands of some bound, but escaped.

This was the beginning of further trouble, for the Earl of Huntly thereat
offended, began to assemble his Folks, and spared not to speak that he would
be revenged; But always his Wife bare a fair countenance to the Queen; and it
is verily supposed, that no other harm then the Queen her self could easily
have stood content with, was meaned unto her own person. But the whole matter
lay upon the Earl of Murray, Secretary Lethington and the Lord of Pittaro;
yet the Queen began to be afraid, and by Proclamation, caused to warn Sterling
Shire, Fyfe, Anguis, Mernes, and Stratherne, charging all substantial men to
be in Aberdein the fifth day of October, there to remain the space of twenty
days; In her return from Innernesse she required the Castle of Finlater, which
was likewise denied, and so was Anchndowne; which more angered the Queen. The
Earl of Huntly was charged to cause deliver the said house, under the pain of
Treason; to show some obedience, he caused the Keys of both to be presented by
his servant Master Thomas Keir; But before had the Queen sent young Captain
Stewart, son to James, (who to this day has neither been stout, happy, nor
true) with sixscore to lie about the places of Finlater. They lodged in Culan,
not far distant from the said place. But upon a night John Gordon came with a
company of Horsemen, took the Captain, slew certain of the Soldiers, and
disarmed the rest.

This fact done (as the Queen alleged) under trust, so inflamed her, that all
hope of reconciliation was past; and so the Earl of Huntly was charged under
the pain of putting him to the Horn, to present himself, and the said John
before the Queen and Council within six days; which charge he disobeyed, and
so was denounced Rebel: Whether it was Law or not, we dispute little thereof;
but it was a preparative to others, that after were served with the like
measure: So was the Duke. the Earls of Argyle, Murray, and Glencarne, with all
their Company after ter served.

The day of Correthie field. October. 22. 1562


he was sought at his Place of Stragobie, but escaped. The evil increased, for
the Earl assembled his fellows out of all parts of the North: He marched
forwards toward Aberdiene, and upon the two and twentieth of October, 1562.
came to the Lough of Skeine.

His Army was judged to be seven or eight hundred men. The Queens Army, both in
number and manhood, far surmounting his, and yet he took no fear; for he was
assured of the most part of them which were with the Queen; as the issue did
witness: Within the Town they stood in great fear, and therefore it was
concluded, That they would assail the uttermost upon the fields. The
Forbesses, Hayes, and Lesleyes took the Vant-guard, and promised to fight with
the said Earl, without any other help. They passed forth of the Town before
ten hours in the morning; they put themselves in array, but they approached not
the enemy, till that the Earl of Murray and his Company were come to the
fields, and that was after two after noon; for he was appointed with his
Company, only to have beholded the Battle: but all things turned otherwise
then the most part of men supposed.

The Earl of Huntley was the night before determined to have retired himself
and his Company: But that morning he could not be wakened, before it was ten
hours; and when he was upon his feet, his spirits failed him, by reason of his
corpulency, so that rightly, a long time he could do nothing: Some of his
friends fearing the danger, left him. When that he looked upon both the
Companies, he said, This great Company that approaches nearest to us, will do
us no harm, they are our friends: I only fear that small Company that stands
on the hill side, they are our enemies: But we are enough for them, if God be
with us. And when he had thus spoken, he fell upon his knees, and made his
Prayer in this form:

O Lord, The Earl of Huntlies prayer.
I have been a blood-thirstie man, and by my means has much innocent blood
been spilt: But will thou give me Victory this day, and I shall serve thee all
the days of my life.

Note and observe, good Reader, he confesses that he has been a
blood-thirsty man; and that he had been the cause of the shedding of much
innocent blood; but yet would he have had Victory: And what was that else, but
to have had power to have shedded more, and then would he have satisfied God
for altogether; wherein is expressed the nature of hypocrites, Note.
which never fear nor love God further then present danger or profit
persuades. But to our History.

The Lesleyes, Hayes, and Forbisses, espying the Earl of Murray and his to
have lighted upon their feet, and made forward against the Earl of Huntley and
his, who stood in Correthieburne (some call it Farabanke) But ere they
approached nigh, Corriethieburne, or Farabank.
by the space of the shot of an Arrow, they cast from them their Spears and
long Weapons, and fled directly in the face of the Earl of Murray and his
Company: The danger espied, the Lord of Pittarrow (a man both stout, and of a
ready wit) with the Master, after Lord Lyndsey, and Tutor of Pitcur, said, Let
us cast down Spears to the foremost, and let them not come in amongst us; for
there is no doubt but this flying is but Treachery: And so they did, so that
they that fled of Huntley seeing the Vaunt-guard fly, said unto his Company,
Our friends are honest men, they have kept promise; Let us now encounter the
rest. And so he and his, as sure of Victory, marched forward. The Secretary in
few words, made a vehement Oration; and they willed every man to call upon his
God, to remember his duty, and not to fear the multitude: And in the end
concluded thus: O Lord, thou that rulest the heaven and the earth, Secretary
Lethingtons Oration.
look upon thy servants, whose blood this day is most unjustly sought, and to
man's judgment, are sold and betrayed, our refuge is now unto thee, and our
hope is in thee: Judge thou, O Lord, betwixt us and the Earl of Huntlie, and
the rest of our enemies: If ever we have justly sought his or their destruction
and blood, let us fall on the sword. And, O Lord, if thou know our
innocence, maintain thou and preserve us, for thy great mercies sake.

Shortly after the speaking of these and the like words, the former Rank
rejoiced; for Huntlies Company made great haste: They were repulsed by the
Master of Lyndsay; and the Companies of Fyfe and Angus, some of them that had
fled, returned, and followed the Earl of Murray, but gave no stroke, till that
Huntlies Company gave back. In the Front there was slain eighteen or four and
twenty men; and in the flying there fell 100. There were taken 100. and the
rest were spared: The Earl himself was taken alive; his two sons, John
aforesaid, and Adam Gordon, were taken with him. The Earl, immediately after
his taking, departed this life, without any wound, or yet appearance of any
stroke, whereof death might have ensued: And so, because it was late, he was
cast overthwart or upon a pair of Creilles, and so was carried to Aberdeine,
and was laid in the Tolbuith thereof, that that which his wives Witches had
given, might be fulfilled; who all affirmed (as the most part say) That same
night he should be in the Town of Aberdeine, without any wound upon his body.
When his Lady got knowledge thereof, she blamed her principal Witch, called
Iannett; but she stoutly defended her self (as the devil can do) and
affirmed, That she gave a true answer, albeit she spoke not all the truth; for
she knew that he should be there dead, but that could not profit my Lady. She
was angry and sorry for a season: But the devil, the Mass, and Witches, have
all great credit with her this day, the twelfth of June, 1566. as they had
seven years ago.

The Earl of Murray sent a Message unto the Queen, of the mavelous Victory;
and humbly prayed her to show that obedience to God, as publicly to convene
with them, to give thanks unto God for his notable deliverance. She glomed and
frowned both at the Message, and at the Request, and scarcely would give a good
word, or blythe and merry countenance to any that she knew earnest favorers of
the Earl of Murray, whose prosperity was, and yet is a very venom to her
boldned heart: For many days she bare no better countenance; whereby it might
have been easily espied, That she rejoiced not greatly of the success of that
matter; And albeit she caused to execute John Gordon, and diverse others, yet it
was the destruction of others that she sought.

Upon the morrow after the discomfiture, the Lady Forbesse, a woman both wise,
and fearing God, came, amongst many others, to visit the Corpse of the said
Earl; and seeing him lie upon the cold stones, having only upon him a Doublet
of Canvas, a pair of Scotch gray Hose, The Lady Forbesse her words.
and him covered with an Arras work. She said, What stability shall we judge to
be in this world? There lies he that yesterday in the morning was esteemed the
wisest, the richest, and man of greatest power that was within Scotland. And in
very deed she lied not; for in man's opinion, under a Prince, there was not such
a one these three hundred years in this Realm produced: Let others that yet
live mark this.
But felicity and worldly wisdom so blinded him, that in the end he perished
in them, as shall all those that despite God, and trust in themselves.

John Gordon, at his death, confessed many horrible things, devised by his
father, by his brother, and by himself. There were Letters found in the Earls
pocket, that disclosed the Treason of the Earl of Sutherland, and of diverse
others. Master Thomas Keir, who before was the whole Councellor of the said
Earl, disclosed whatsoever he understood might hurt the Gordons and their
friends, and so Treason plainly disclosed; which was, That the Earl of Murray
should have been murdered in Stragobie; the Queen should have been taken, and
kept at the devotion of the said Earl of Huntley. These things, we say,
revealed, the Queen left the North, and came to Dundie, Saint Iohnston,
Sterlin, and then to Edinburgh: The Earl of Huntleys body was carried about in
a Boat, and laid without Burial in the Abbey of Halyrud-house, till the day of
his Forefaltor, as after shall be declared. The Duke apprehended the Lord
Gordon his son in Law, because that the Queen had straightly commanded him so to
do, if that he repaired within his bounds. Before that he delivered him, the
Earl of Murray labored at the Queens hands for the safety of his life, which
hardly was granted; and so was he delivered within the Castle of Edinburgh, the
eight and twentieth day of November. 1562. where he remained till the eighth
day of February; when he was put to an Assise, accused and convinced of
Treason; but was restored again; first, to the Castle aforesaid, and
thereafter was transported to Dumbar, where he remained prisoner till the
month of August, in the year of God 1565. as we will after hear.

In the mean time the troubles were hot in France, and the intelligence and
outward familiarity betwixt the two Queens was great; Lethington was directed
with large Commission, both to the Queen of England, and to the Guisians.

The Marriage of our Queen was in all men's mouths; some would have the Infant
of Spain, Men's judgment of the Queens Marriage.
some the Emperors Brother, some Duke Denemours, and some truly guessed at
the Lord Darley.

What Lethingtons Credit was, we know not; but shortly after there began much
to be talked of the Earl of Lenox, and of his son the Lord Darley. It was said
that Lethington spoke to the Lady Margaret Douglas; And that Robert Melvill
received a horse to the Secretaries use from the Earl of Lenox, or from his
wife. Howsoever it was, Master Fouller servant to the said Earl, came with
Letters to the Queen, by which, License was permitted to the Earl of Lenox to
come to Scotland, to travel in his lawful business. That same day the Queens
License was granted, the Secretary said, This day I have taken upon me the
deadly hatred of all the Hamiltons within Scotland, and have done unto them no
less displeasure, then if I had cut their throats. The Earl Bothwell, who
before had broken Ward, fearing apprehension or taking, prepared to pass to
France; but by storm of Weather was driven into England, where he was stayed,
and was offered to have been rendered by the Queen of England: But our Queens
answer was, That he was no Rebel, and therefore she requested that he should
have liberty to pass whither he pleased. And thereto Lethington helped not a
little, for he traveled to have friends in every faction of the Court. And so
obtained the said Earl Lincense to pass to France.

The Winter after the death of the Earl of Huntley, the Court remained for the
most part at Edinburgh. The Preachers were wondrous vehement in reprehension of
all manner of Vice, which then began to abound; and especially Avarice,
Oppression of the poor, Excess, Ryotous Cheer, Banqueting, immoderate
Dancing, and Whoredom, that thereof ensues. Whereat the Courtiers began to
storm and to pick quarrels against the Preachers, Note this.
alleging that all their Preaching was turned to Railing; The Preachers
railed upon the Courtiers.
whereunto one of them gave answer as follows; It comes to our ears that we
are called Raylers, whereof albeit we wonder, yet we are not ashamed, seeing
that the most worthy servants of God that before us have traveled in this
Vocation, have so been styled: But unto you do I say, That the same God, The
Preachers Admonition after the Earl of Huntlies death.
who from the beginning has punished the Contempt of his Word, and has poured
forth his Vengeance upon such proud mockers, shall not spare you; yea, he shall
not spare you before the eyes of this same wicked Generation, for the pleasure
whereof ye despise all wholesome Admonitions: Have you not seen greater then
any of you sitting where presently ye sit, Meaning of Huntley.
pick his nails, and pull down his Bonnet over his eyes, when Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Murder, Oppression, and such Vices, were rebuked: Was not this his
common talk? When these Knaves have rayled their fill, then will they hold
their peace: Have ye not heard it affirmed to his own face, That God should
revenge that his Blasphemy, even in the eyes of such as were witness to his
iniquity.

Then was the Earl of Huntley accused by you, as the maintainer of Idolatry,
and only hinderer of all good Orders; him has God punished, even according to
the threatenings that his and your ears heard, and by your hands has God
executed his Judgments: But what amendment can be espied in you? Idolatry was
never in greater quiet, Virtue and virtuous men were never in more contempt;
Vice was never more bold, nor punishment less feared. And yet who guides the
Queen and Court; who but the Protestants. O horrible slanderers of God, and of
his holy Evangell; Better it were unto you, plainly to renounce Christ Jesus,
The end declared their words to be true.
then thus to expose his blessed Evangell to Mockage: if God punishes not you,
That this same age shall see and behold your punishment, the spirit of
righteous judgment guides me not.

This vehemence provoked the hatred, not only of the Courtiers, but also of
diverse others against the Speaker, which was John Knox; for such as be in
credit, never lack flatterers. Their Brethren of the Court were irreverendly
handled. What was that, but to raise the hearts of the people against them;
They did what they could. Such speaking would cause them to do less. The
defense of the Courtiers.
And this was the fruit that the Preachers gathered of their just
reprehensions; The general Assembly of the Church held on the 25 of December,
1562. approached. In the which, great complaints were made; That Churches
lacked Ministers; That Ministers lacked their Stipends; That wicked men were
permitted to be Schoolmasters; and so to infect the youth amongst them, whom
one Master Robert Cunning Schoolmasters in Aberbrothoke, was complained upon
by the Lord of Dun, and sentence pronounced against him. It was further
complained, That Idolatry was erected in diverse parts of the Realm: For
redress hereof, some thought best, That a new supplication should be presented
to the Queen; others demanded, what answer was received of the former. The
superintendent of Lowthian confessed the delivery of it; but (said he) I
received no answer. It was answered for the part of the Queen, (for her
supposts were ever there) that it was well known to the whole Realm, what
troubles had occurred since the last Assembly; and therefore, That they should
not wonder, albeit that the Queen had not answered, but betwixt that and the
Parliament, which was appointed to be in May, they doubted not but such order
should be taken, The Queens practice.
as all men should have occasion to stand content. This satisfied for that time
the whole Assembly. And this was the practice of the Queen, and of her
Council, with fair words to drive time, as before we have said.

The Assembly notwithstanding proceeded forward in establishing of such orders,
as whereby vice might be punished, and virtue might be maintained, And because
there was a great slander risen upon Paul Meffane of whom mention is made in
the second Book of the History, Commissions and charge was given unto John
Knox, Minister of Edinburgh, and unto certain of the Elders of the Church of
Edinburgh, to pass to the Town of Iedwart, where the slander was raised, and
to be found there, The trial of Paul's Meffanes fact.
the third of January next, was the trial to be taken of the slander raised,
and to hear the Articles and complaint of the said Paul: and after the trial,
to report the truth to the Session of the Church of Edinburgh; To whom with the
assistance of the superintendent of Lowthian Commission was given to discern
therein. The trial and examination of that crime was difficile, the slander
was universal in that Town and Country; the servant woman of the said Paul,
had betwixt that and Christmas left his House, she had borne a child, no father
to it could she find, but alleged her self to have been suppressed late in an
Evening; the said Paul constantly affirmed himself innocent, and would have
given his public purgation; but because his Accusators had taken on them to
prove there accusation that was denied, many witnesses were produced, of whom
some deposed so clearly, that the Commissioners suspected, that they had been
suborned, and therefore they required to have inspection of the places, where
some said they saw, and some said they heard them in the very act of iniquity.
The sight and consideration of the place augmented greatly the suspicion; but
one thing was most suspicious of all other, for the Wife of the sad Paul (an
ancient Matron) was absent from him the space of eight or nine weeks in Dundie;
which time (or at least a great part thereof) they suspected, and he lay
nightly in one house without other company then a Child of seven or eight
years of age. The Judges, notwithstanding these suspicions, having a good
opinion of the honesty and godliness of the man, traveled what they could
(conscience not hurt) to purge him of the slander: But God, who would not that
such a Villainy should be cloaked and concealed within his Kirk, otherwise had
decreed, for he brought the brother of the guilty woman to the Town, having no
mind of such matters, who being produced by the Accusators, as one that was
privy to the fact; and knew the verity of all circumstances; this witness, we
say, (which could not be suspected) being produced, made the matter so plain
and clear, that all suspicion was removed; for he it was that conveyde the
woman away, he it was that caused the Child to be baptized, alleging it to be
his own; he it was that carried frequent message betwixt them, and from Paul
carried money and clothes diverse times: How soon that ever the said Paul saw
that man produced, as Witness, he withdrew himself and left the Town, by that
means plainly taking upon him the Crime; And so the Commissioners with full
information, returned to Dundie, and notified the same unto the Kirk, who
caused publicly to summon the said Paul to hear the sentence pronounced; who
not appearing in the end, for his odious Crime and contumacy, was publicly
excommunicated, and was deprived of all functions within the Kirk of Scotland,
and so left the Realm. For two causes we insert this horrible fact, and the
order kept in punishing of the same; the former to forewarn such as travel in
that Vocation, that according to the admonition of the Apostle, Such as stand,
take heed lest they fall. No man in the beginning of the Evangell, was judged
more fervent and more upright; and yet we have heard how far Satan has
prevailed against him; God grant that we may hear of his repentance; neither
yet should this fall do any thing to prejudice the Authority of the Doctrine
which he taught, for the Doctrine of God has its authority of no creature, but
has the assurance of God himself, how weak or imperfect soever the
Instruments be by whom it pleases God to publish the same. The treason of
Judas, the Adultery of David, and abnegation of Peter did derogate nothing from
the glory of Christ's Evangell, nor yet the Doctrine which before they had
taught; but declared the one to be a Reprobate, and the other to be Instruments
in whom mercy must surmount judgment. The other cause is, that the World may
see what difference there is betwixt the uprightness of the Kirk of God, and
the corruption that reigns in the Synagogue of Satan, the Papisticall rabble;
for how many of that sort has been, and still remain openly known
Whoremongers, Adulterers, Violators of Virgins, yea, and committers of such
abominations as we will not name; and yet are they called and permitted to be
Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals and Popes themselves: For what sins can
unable the sworn servants of Symonie, and of their Father the Devil? For
bragg what they list of Christ, of Peter, and of Paul, their lives and
conversation bear witness to whom they belong. But we return to our History of
things done in Court.

Amongst the Menizoons of the Court, there was one named Monsieur Chattelet, a
Frenchman, that at that time passed all others in credit with the Queen: In
dancing of the purpose, so term they that dance, in the which man and woman
talks secretly, wise men would judge such fashions not agreeable to the
gravity of honest women. In this dance the Queen choose Chattelet, Chattelet
and the Queen.
and Chattelet took the Queen, for he had the best dress. All this winter
Chattelet was so familiar with the Queen, that the Nobility being by this
means stopped to have so free access as they thought fit and due unto them,
were highly offended; at length Chattelet having conveyed himself privately
under the Queens Bed, but being espied, was commanded away: The Bruit arising,
the Queen called the Earl of Murray, and bursting in a womanly affection, The
Queens desire concerning Chattelet.
charged him, that as he loved her, he should slay Chatelet, and let him never
speak word. The other at the first made promise so to do; but after calling to
mind the judgment of GOD pronounced against the shedders of innocent blood,
and also that none should die without the testimony of two or three witnesses,
returned, and fell upon his knees before the Queen, and said, Madame, I beseech
your Majesty cause not me to take the blood of this man upon me; Your Majesty
has used him so familiarlie before, that you have offended all your Nobility;
and now if he shall be secretly slain at your own commandment, what shall the
world judge of it? I shall bring him to the presence of Justice, and let him
suffer by Law according to his deserving. Oh, said the Queen, you shall not
let him speak. I shall do (said he) Madame, what in me lies, to give your
Majesty content. Poor Chattelet was brought back from Kingorne to Saint
Andrews, examined, put to an Assize, and so beheaded the two and twentieth day
of February, Anno Dom. 1562. He begged license to write to France the cause of
his death; which said he, in his Tongue was Pour estre trouve en lien trop
suspect; that is, Because I was found in a place too much suspected. At the
place of Execution, when he saw that there was no remedy, but death, he made a
godly confession, and granted, that his declining from the truth of God, and
following of vanity and impiety, was justly repayed unto him: But in the end
he concluded, looking unto the Heavens, with these words, O cruelle Dame! What
that complaint imported I leave it to conjecture; and so received Chattelet the
reward of his dancing, for he lost his Head, that his Tongue should not utter
the secrets of our Queen; deliver us, O Lord from the rage of so inordinate a
Court.

The punishment of God for maintaining and erecting of the Mass, death and
famine.
The year of God, 1563. there was a universal death in all Scotland, but in the
North, where (the Harvest before) the Queen had been, there was a great
Famine, of which may died in that Country. the dearth was great over all, but
the Famine in the Wheat, the Bear or Barley, the Meal, the Oats, Beef,
Mutton, etc, were exceeding dear and scant; yea, all things appertaining to the
sustentation of man, in triple, and more exceeded, their accustomed prices. And
so did God according to the threatening of the Law punish the Idolatry of our
wicked Rulers, and our ingratitude that suffered them to defile the Land with
that abomination again, that God so potently had purged by the power of his
Word; for the riotous Feasting and excessive Banqueting used in City and
Country, wheresoever that the profane Court repaired, provoked God to strike
the Staff of Bread, and to give his maledictions upon the fruits of the earth.
But alas, who looked, or yet looks to the true cause of our Calamity?

Lethington was absent (as before we have heard) in the Queens affairs; the
Papists at that Pasch. Ann. 1563. in diverse parts of the Realm, had erected
that Idol the Mass, amongst whom the Bish. of S. Andrews, the Prior of
Quihithorn, with diverse others of that faction would avow it. Besides the first
Proclamation, there had Letters past in the contrary with certification of
death to the contraveiner.

The Brethren universally offended, and espying that the Queen by Proclamation
did but delude them, determined to put to their own hands, and to punish for
example of others; and so some Priests in the West-Land were apprehended;
Intimation made unto others, as to the Abbot of Cosragnell, the Parson of
Sangohar, and such, that they should neither complain to the Queen nor
Counsel, but should execute the punishment that God has appointed to Idolaters
in his Law, by such means as they might, where ever they should be apprehended.

The Queen stormed at such freedom of speaking, but she could not amend it, for
the Spirit of God, of boldness, and of wisdom had not left the most part of
such as God had made Instruments in the beginning, they were of one mind to
maintain the truth, and to suppress Idolatry, particularities had not divided
them; and therefore could not the Devil working in the Court, and in Papists,
do then what they would; and therefore the Court began to invent a new craft;
The Queen advised, to send for John Knox to come to her where she lay, John
Knox sent for by the Queen.
at Lochlevin; She dealt with him earnestly two hours before supper, that he
would be the Instrument to persuade the people, and principally the Gentlemen
of the West, not to put hand to punish any man for the using of themselves in
their religions as pleased them. The other perceiving her craft willed her
Majesty to punish Malefactors according to the Laws, and he durst promise
quietness upon the part of all them that professed the Lord Jesus within
Scotland; But if her Majesty thought to delude the Laws, he said, he feared
some would let the Papists understand, Reasoning between I. Knox and the Queen
that without punishment they should no be suffered so manifestly to offend
Gods Majesty. Will ye (quoth she) allow that they shall take my Sword in their
hand. The Sword of Justice (quoth he) Madame, is Gods, and is given to Princes
and Rulers for one end: which if they transgress, sparing the wicked, and
oppressing the Innocents. They that in the fear of God execute Judgment where
God has commanded, offend not God, although Kings do it not; neither yet sin
they that bridle Kings to strike innocent men in their rage: The examples are
evident; for Samuel spared not to slay Agag, the fat and delicate King of
Amelek, whom King Saul had saved: Neither spared Elias, Iezabels false
Prophets, and Baals Priests, albeit that King Achab was present: Phineas was no
Magistrate, and yet feared he not to strike Zimri and Cozbi, in the very act of
filthy Fornication. And so, Madame, your Majesty may see that others then chief
Magistrates may lawfully punish, and have punished the vice and crimes that God
commands to be punished: For Power by Act of Parliament is given to all Judges
within their own bounds, to search the Masse-mongers, or hearers of the same,
and to punish them according to the Law. Note diligently.
And therefore it shall be profitable to your Majesty to consider what is the
thing your Majesty's subjects look to receive of your Majesty; and what it is
you ought to do unto them by mutual Contract. They are bound to obey you; and
that not, but in God ye are bound to keep Laws unto them: Ye crave of them
service, They crave of you Protection and Defense against wicked doers. Now,
Madame, if ye shall deny your Duty unto them, who especially crave that ye
punish Malefactors; Think ye to receive full Obedience of them? I fear, Madame,
ye shall not. Herewith she being somewhat offended, past to her Supper. The
said John left her, and informed the Earl of Murray of the whole reasoning,
and so departed, of final purpose to have returned to Edinburgh, without any
further communication with the Queen: But before the Sun rising on the morn
were two directed ( Wat Melvill was the one) to him, commanding him not to
depart, whilst he had spoken with the Queens Majesty; which he did, and met her
at the Hawking by West Kinros. Whether it was the nights sleep, or a deep
dissimulation locked in her breast, that made her to forget the former anger,
wise men may doubt; But thereof she never moved word, but began diverse other
purposes, such as the offering of a Ring to her by the Lord Ruthuen, whom (said
she) I cannot love (for I know him to use Enchantment; and yet he is one of my
Privy Council. Whom blames your Majesty (said the other) thereof? Lethington
(said she) was the whole cause. That man is absent for this present (said he)
Madame, and therefore I will speak nothing in that behalf. I understand (said
the Queen) That ye are appointed to go to Dumfreis, for the Election of a
Superintendent to be established in those Countries. Yes (said he) those
Quarters have great need, and some of the Gentlemen so require. But I hear
(said she) That the Bishop of Caithnes would be Superintendent. He is one (said
the other) Madame, that is put in Election. If ye knew him (said she) as well
as I do, ye would never promote him to that Office, nor yet to any other within
your Kirk. What he has been (said he) Madame, I never knew, nor yet will I
enquire; for in time of darkness, What could we do but g^ope and go wrong,
even as darkness carried us; but if he fear not GOD now, he deceives many
more then me: And yet said he, Madame, I am assured, GOD will not suffer his
CHURCH to be so far deceived, As that an unworthy man shall be Elected, where
free Election is, and the Spirit of GOD is earnestly called upon, to decide
betwixt the two: Well said she, do as ye will, But that man is a dangerous man,
The Queens judgment of the Bishop of Cathaes.
and therein was not the Queen deceived; For he had corrupted the most part of
the Gentlemen, not only to nominate him, but also to Elect him, which
perceived by the said John, Commissioner, delayed the Election, and left it
with the Master of Maxwell, Master Robert Pont, who was put in Election (with
the foresaid Bishop) to the end that his Doctrine and Conversation might be the
better tried of these that had not known him before; and so was this Bishop
frustrate of his purpose for that present; and yet was he at that time the man
that was most familiar with the said John in his house, and at Table. But now
to the former conference, When the Queen had long talked with John Knox, and he
being often willing to take his leave, she said, I have one of the greatest
matters that have touched me since I came in this Realm, The Lady Argile was
natural Sister to the Queen, as the Earl Murray was natural Brother.
to open unto you, and I must have your help into it. And she began to make a
long discourse of her Sister, the Lady Argile, how that she was not so
circumspect in all things, as she wished her to be; and yet said she, my Lord,
her husband whom I love, uses her not in many things so honestly, and so
godlily, as I think ye your self would require: Madam said he, I have been
troubled with that matter before, and once I put an end to it (and that was
before your Majesty's arrival) that both she and her friends, seemed fully to
stand content; and she her self promised before her friends, That she would
never complain to any Creature, till that I should first understand the
controversy by her own mouth, or else by one assured Messenger: I now have
heard nothing of her part; and therefore, I think there is nothing but concord:
Well said the Queen, it is worse then ye believe; but do this much for my sake,
as once again to put them at Unity; and if she behave not her self, so as she
ought to do, she shall find no favor of me; but in any wise said she, let my
Lord know, That I have requested you in this matter; For I would be very sorry
to offend him in that, or in any other thing. And now said she, as touching our
reasoning yesternight, I promise to do as ye required. I shall cause to summon
all offenders, and ye shall know that I shall minister Justice. I am assured
then said he, That ye shall please God, and enjoy rest and tranquillity within
your Realm, which to your Majesty is more profitable, then all the Popes power
can be. And thus they departed.

This Conference we have inserted, to let the World see how deeply Mary Queen
of Scotland, can dissemble; and how that she could cause men to think, That
she bare no indignation for any controversy in Religion, which that yet in her
heart was nothing but venom, and destruction, as shortly after did appear.
John Knox departed, and prepared himself for his journey, appointed to
Dunfreis. And from Glasgow, according to the Queens Commandment; he wrote this
Letter to the Earl of Argyle, the Tenor whereof follows.

My Lord,
THe Lord comes, and shall not tarry. After commendation of my service unto
your Lordship: If I had known of your Lordships sudden departing, the last time
it chanced me to see and speak with you, I had opened unto you some of my
grief: But supposing that your Lordship should have remained still with the
Queen, I delayed at that time to utter any part of that which now my conscience
compels me to do. Your behavior toward your wife is very offensive unto
many godly: Her complaint is grievous, That ye altogether withdraw your
conversation from her: If so, ye have great need to look well to your own
state; for albeit that ye within your self felt no more repugnancie then any
flesh this day on the earth, yet by promise made before God, are ye debtour
unto her in all due benevolence. But if that ye burn on the one side, (albeit
ye do no worse) and she in your default on the other, ye are not only men
sworn before God, but also does what in you lies, to kindle against your self
his wrath and heavy displeasure. The words are sharp, and God is witness in
dolor of heart I write them: But because they are true, and pronounced by God
himself, I dare not but admonish you, perceiving you, as it were sleeping in
sin. The proud stubbornness whereof your Lordship often complained, will nothing
excuse you before God; for if ye be not able to convince her of any fault, ye
ought to bear with her imperfections, as that ye would she should bear with you
likewise. In the bowels of Christ Jesus, I exhort you, my Lord, to have
respect of your own salvation, and not to abuse the lenity and long-suffering
of God; for that is a fearful treasure that ye heap up upon your own head,
while that he calls you to repentance, and ye obstinately continue in your
own impiety; for impiety it is, that ye abstract your comfort and company from
your lawful wife. I write nothing in defense of her misbehaviour toward your
Lordship in any sort; but I say, If ye be not able to convince her of any fault
committed since your last reconciliation, which was in my presence, that ye can
never be excused before God, of this rude and strange usage of your wife. And
if by you such impiety be committed as is bruted, then, before God, and unto
your own conscience, I say, That every moment of that filthy pleasure, shall
turn to you, in a years displeasure; yea, it shall be the occasion and cause
of everlasting damnation, unless speedily ye repent: and repent ye cannot,
except ye desist from that impiety. Call to mind, my Lord, That the servant
knowing his masters will, and doing the contrary, shall be plagued with many
plagues. Sin, my Lord, is sweet in drinking; but in digesting, more bitter then
the gall. The Eternal move your heart earnestly to consider how fearful a
thing it is, ever to have God to be enemy. In the end, I pray your Lordship not
to be absent from Edinburgh, the 19 of this instant, for such causes as I will
not write. Thus much only I warn your Lordship, that it will not be
profitable for the common quietness of this Realm, that the Papists brag, and
Justice be mocked that day. And thus I cease further to trouble your Lordship,
whom God assist.

In haste from Glasgow, the 7 of May, 1563. Your Lordships to command in
godliness, Sic subscribitur, JOHN KNOX.


THis Letter was not well accepted of the said Earl, and yet did he utter no
part of his displeasure in public, but contrarily showed himself most familiar
with the said John Knox: He kept the Diet, and sat in Judgment himself, where
the Bishop, and the rest of the Papists, were accused as after follows.

The Summons were directed against the Masse-mongers with expedition, and in
the straitest form: The day was appointed, the 19 of May, a day only before
the Parliament of Popes Knights appeared. The Bishop of Saint Androes, the
Prior of Quinthorne, the Parson of Sanguhair, William Hamilton of Camskeneth,
John Gordon of Barskuch, with diverse others. The Protestants convened whole, to
crave for Justice. The Queen asked counsel of the Bishop of Rosse, and of the
old Lord of Lethington (for the younger was absent, and so the Protestants had
fewer friends) who affirmed, That she must see her Laws kept, or else she would
get no obedience: and so was preparations made for their accusations. The
Bishop, The Clergy did pretend to be free from all Jurisdiction, save the
Popes.
and his band of the exempted sort, made nice to enter before the Earl of
Argyle, who sat in Judgment; but at last he was compelled to enter within the
Bar. A merry man, who now sleeps with the Lord, Robert Horwell, instead of
the Bishops Cross, bore before him a Steel Hammer: Whereat the Bishop and his
Band were not a little offended, because the Bishops privileges were not then
current in Scotland (which day God grant our posterity may see of longer
continuance then we possessed it.) The Bishop and his fellows, after much ado,
and long drift of time, came in the Queens will, and were committed to Ward,
some to one place, and some to another. The Lady Arskine got the Bishops for
her part. All this was done of a most deep craft, to abuse the simplicity of
the Protestants, that they should not press the Queen with any other thing
concerning the matters of Religion.

At that Parliament, which began within two days thereafter, she obtained of
the Protestants whatsoever she desired; for this was the reason of many, The
judgment of some.
We see what the Queen has done, the like of this was never heard within this
Realm; we will bear with the Queen, we doubt not but all shall be well. Others
were of contrary judgment, and forespake things, as after they came to pass;
to wit, That nothing was meant but deceit; and that the Queen, how soon that
ever the Parliament was past, should set the Papists at freedom: And therefore
willed the Nobility not to be abused. But because many had their private
business to be handled at that Parliament, the common Cause was the less
regarded.

The Earl of Huntley, whose Corpse had been unburied till the time it was
brought to the Tolbuith; he was accused his Arms rent off; himself, the Earl
of Sutherland, Huntley forfeited.
and eleven Barons, and Earls, bearing the surname of Gordon, were that day
forfeited; the Lady Huntley craftily protested and asked the support of a man
of Law, or Counselor.

Such stinking pride of women, The pride of Women at that Parliament.
as was seen at that Parliament, was never seen before in Scotland. Three
sundry days the Queen rode to the Tolbuith; The first day she made a painted
Oration, and there might have been heard amongst her flatteries, Vox Dianae,
The voice of a goddess, for it could not be Dei, and not of a Woman: God save
that sweet face; Was there ever Orator spoke so properly and so sweetly, etc.

All things misliked the Preachers; They spoke boldly against the superfluities
of their Clothes, and against the rest of their vanity, which they affirmed
should provoke Gods vengeance, not only against these foolish Women, but
against the whole Realm; and especially against those that maintained them in
that odious abusing of things that might have been better bestowed. Articles
were presented for orders to be taken for Apparel, and for Reformation of
other Enormities, but all was winked at.

The Earldom of Murray, Note diligently.
needed confirmation, and many things were to be ratified that concerned the
help of friends and servants; and therefore they might not urge the Queen,
And so was Religion and the Commonwealth, both neglected.
For if they so did, she would hold no Parliament; and what then should become
of them that had meddled with the slaughter of the Earl of Huntley, let that
Parliament pass over; and when the Queen shall ask any thing of the
Nobility, as she must do before her marriage; then shall Religion be the first
thing that shall be established. It was answered, That the Poets and Painters
erred not altogether, Occasion painted with a bald Hind-head.
that fained and painted Occasion with a bald Hind-head: For the first, when it
is offered, being lost, is hard to be recovered again. Variance betwixt the
Earl of Murray and John Knox.
The matter fell so hot betwixt the Earl of Murray, and some others of the
Court, and John Knox, That familiarly after that time, they spoke not together
more then a year and a half; For the said John by his Letter, gave a discharge
to the said Earl of all further intromission or care with his affairs. He
made unto him a discourse of their first acquaintance, in what estate he was,
when that first they spoke together in London, how God had promoted him, and
that above man's judgment, and in the end made this conclusion: But seeing that
I perceive my self frustrate of my expectation, which was, That ye should ever
have preferred God to your own affection, and the advancement of his Truth, to
your own commodity, I commit you to your wit, and to the conducting of those
which can better please you. I praise my God, I leave you this day victor of
your enemies, promoted to great honor, and in credit and authority with your
Sovereign. If so ye long to continue, none shall be more glad then I shall
be. But that after this, ye decay, John Knox discharge to the Earl of Murray.
(as I fear ye shall) then call to mind, by what means God exalted you; which
was neither by plying with impiety; neither yet by maintaining of pestilent
Papists.

This Letter and discharge was so pleasing to the Flatterers of the said Earl,
that they triumphed of it, and were glad to have gotten their occasion; for
some envyed, that so great familiarity was betwixt them; and therefore from
the time they got once that occasion to separate, they ceased not to cast Oil
in the burning Flame, which ceased not to burn, till that God by water of
affliction began to slacken it, as we shall after hear. But least that they
should altogether have been seen to have forsaken God, God knows if our times
be better.
(as in very deed, both God and his Word was vey far from the hearts of the
most part of the Courtiers of that Age, a few excepted) they began a new
Schift, to wit, To speak of the punishment of Adultery, of Witchcraft, and to
seek the restitution of Gleibes or Manses to the Minister of the Church, and of
the reparation of the Churches; and thereby they thought to have pleased the
Godly that were highly offended at their slacknesse.

The Act of Oblivion passed, because some of the Lords had entresse; but the
Acts against adultery, and for the Manses and Gleibes, were so modified, that
no Law, and such a Law might stand in eodem predicamento; To speak plain, no
Law and such Acts were both alike: The Acts are in Print, let wise men read,
and then accuse us, if without cause we complain.

In the progress of this corruption, and before the Parliament dissolved, John
Knox in his Sermon before the most part of the Nobility, began to enter in a
deep discourse of Gods mercies which that Realm had felt, and of that
ingratitude which he espied in the whole multitude which God had marvellously
delivered from the bondage and tyranny both of body and soul: And now my
Lords, (said he) I praise my God, through Jesus Christ, that in your own
presence I may power forth the sorrows of my heart; yea, your selves shall be
witness if I make any lie in things bypast from the beginning of Gods mighty
Works within this Realm: I have been with you in your most desperate
temptations. Ask your own Consciences, and let them answer you before God, if
that I (not I, but Gods Spirit by me) in your greatest extremity willed you not
ever to depend upon your God, and in his Name promised unto you victory and
preservation from your enemies, so that only ye would depend upon his
protection, and prefer his glory before your lives and worldly commodity; in
your most extreme danger I have been with you; Saint Iohnstou^ Cowper-More, and
the charges of Edinburgh, are yet recent in my heart; yea, that dark and
dolorous night wherein all you my Lords with shame and fear left this Town, is
yet in my mind, and God forbid that ever I forget it: What was (I say) my
Exhortation unto you? and what is fallen in vain of all that ever God promised
unto you by my mouth, ye your selves live and testify. There is not one of you
against whom death and destruction was threatened, perished in that danger; and
how many of your enemies has God plagued before your eyes; shall this be the
thankfulness that ye shall render unto your God? To betray his Cause when ye
have it in your own hands, to establish it as you please? The Queen says you
will not agree with us; ask ye of her that which by Gods Word ye may justly
require, and if she will not agree with you in God, you are not bound to agree
with them in the Devil; Let her plainly understand so far of your minds,
and steal not from your former stoutnesse in God, and he will prosper you in
your enterprises: But I can see nothing but a recalling from Christ Jesus, that
the man that first and most speedily flees from Christ's Ensign, holds
himself most happy; yea, I hear some say, That we have nothing of our Religion
Established, The Speaker was the Dean of Restaruk.
neither by Law nor Parliament; Albeit the malicious words of such can neither
hurt the truth of God, nor yet us that thereupon depend; yet the speaker of
this Treason, committed against God, and against this poor Commonwealth,
deserves the Gallows; for our Religion being commanded, and so established by
God, is received with this Realm in public Parliament. And if they will say,
That it was no Parliament, we must, and will say, and also prove, That that
Parliament was also as lawful as ever any that passed before it within this
Realm. I say, if the King then living was King, and the Queen now in this
Realm be lawful Queen, that Parliament cannot be denied.

And now my Lords to put end to all, I hear of the Queens marriage, Dukes, John
Knox his affirmation
Brethren to Emperors, and Kings strive all for the best gain; But this my
Lords will (I say) note the day, and bear witness after, Whenever the
Nobility of Scotland who profess the Lord Jesus, consents that an Infidel
(and all Papists are Infidels) shall be Head to our Sovereign, ye do, so far
as in you lies, to banish Christ Jesus from this Realm, yea, to bring Gods
vengeance upon the Country, a plague upon your selves, and perchance you shall
do small comfort to your Sovereign.

These words and this manner of speaking was judged intolerable, Papists and
Protestants were both offended; yea, his most familiars disdained him for that
speaking, Placeboes and Flatterers posted to the Court, to give advertisement,
That John Knox had spoken against the Queens Marriage. The Provest of
Glencludan, Douglas by surname, of Drumlangrig, was the man that gave the
charge, That the said John should present himself before the Queen, which he
did immediately after Dinner. The Lord Uchiltrie and diverse of the faithful
bare him company to the Abbey, but none past in to the Queen with him in the
Cabinet, but John Arskin of Dun then super-intendent of Angus and Mernes.

The Queen in a vehement fume began to cry out, That never Prince was used as
she was; I have (said she) born with you in all your rigorous manner of
speaking, both against my self, and against my Uncles; yea, I have sought your
favors by all possible means; I offered unto you presence and audience
whenever it pleased you to admonish me; and yet I cannot be quit of you; I
Vow to God I shall be once revenged: and with these words scarce could
Marnocke, one of her Pages, get Handkirchiefs to hold her Eyes dry, for the
Tears and the howling, besides womanly weeping stayed her Speech. The said John
did patiently abide all this fume, and at opportunity answered; True it is
Madame, your Majesty and I have been at diverse controversies, into the which I
never perceived your Majesty to be offended at me; but when it shall please
God to deliver you from that bondage of darkness and error, wherein ye have
been nourished for the lack of true doctrine; your Majesty will find the
liberty of my tongue nothing offensive; without the preaching-place (Madame) I
think few have occasion to be offended at me; and there (Madame) I am not
Master of my self, but must obey him who commands me to speak plain, and to
flatter no flesh upon the face of the Earth.

But what have you to do (said she) with my marriage?

If it please your Majesty (said he) patiently to hear me, I shall show the
truth in plain words. I grant your Majesty offered unto me more then ever I
required, but my answer was then as it is now, That God has not sent me to
awaite upon the Courts of Princes, or upon the Chamber of Ladies, but I am sent
to preach the Evangell of Jesus Christ, to such as please to hear; it has two
points, Repentance and Faith: Now (Madame) in preaching repentance, of
necessity it is that the sins of men be noted, that they may know wherein
they offend. Let this serve for our times.
But so it is that the most part of your Nobility, are so addicted to your
affections, that neither Gods Word, nor yet their Commonwealth are rightly
regarded; and therefore it becomes me to speak, that they may know their
duty.

What have you to do (said she) with my marriage, or what are you within the
Commonwealth?

A subject, borne within the same, (said he) Madame; and albeit I be neither
Earl, Lord, nor Barron within it, yet has God made me, (how abject that ever
I be in your eyes) a profitable and useful Member within the same; Yea,
Madame, to me it appertains no less to forewarne of such things as may hurt
it, if I foresee them, then it does to any one of the Nobility; for both my
Vocation and Office craveth plainness of me: and therefore (Madame) to your
self I say, that which I spoke in public, Whenever the Nobility of this
Realm shall be content, and consent that you be subject to an unlawful
husband, they do as much as in them lies, to renounce Christ, Let the Papists
judge this day 1567.
to banish the truth, to betray the freedom of this Realm, and perchance
shall in the end do small comfort to your self.

At these words howling was heard, and tears might have been seen in greater
abundance then the matter required: John Arskin of Dun, a man of meek and
gentle spirit, stood beside, and did what he could to mittigate the anger, and
gave unto her many pleasant words, Of her Bounty, of her Excellency, and how
that all the Princes in Europe would be glad to seek her favors; but all that
was to cast Oil into the flaming fire. The said John stood still, without any
alteration of countenance for a long time, while that the Queen gave place to
her in ordinate passions; and in the end he said, Madame, in Gods presence I
speak, I never delighted in the weeping of any of Gods Creatures, yea, I can
scarcely well abide the tears of mine own Boys, when my own hands corrects
them; much less can I rejoice in your Majesty's weeping; but seeing I have
offered unto you no just occasion to be offended, but have spoken the truth, as
my Vocation craves of me: I must sustain your Majesty's tears, rather then I
dare hurt my conscience, or betray the Commonwealth by silence. Herewith was
the Queen more offended, and commanded the said John to pass forth of the
Cabinet, and to abide further of her pleasure in the Chamber.

The Lord of Dun tarried, and Lord John of Coldinghame came into the Cabinet*
and so they remained with her near the space of one hour. The said John stood
in the Chamber, as one whom men had never seen (so were all afraid) except
that the Lord Uchiltrie bare him company; And therefore began he to make
discourse with the Ladies who were there sitting in all their gorgeous
apparel: Which when he espied, Note Women.
he merrily said, Fair Ladies, How pleasant were this life of yours, if it
should ever abide; and then in the end that we might pass to Heaven with this
gear: But fie upon that knave, Death, that will come whether we will or not;
and when he has laid on the Arrest, then foul worms will be busy with this
flesh, be it never so fair and so tender. And the silly soul, I fear, shall
be so feeble, that it can neither carry with it Gold, Garnishing, Targating,
Pearl, nor precious Stones. And by such and the like discourse entertained he
the Ladies, and past the time, till that the Lord of Dun willed him to depart
to his house, till new advertisement.

The Queen would have had the sentiment of the Lords of the Articles, if that
such manner of speaking deserved not punishment. But she was counseled to
desist; And so that storm quieted in appearance, but never in the heart.

Short after the Parliament, Lethington returned from his Negotiation in
England and France. GOD in the February before had stricken that bloody Tyrant
the Duke of Guise; which somewhat brake the heat of our Queen for a season:
But short after the returning of Lethington, Pride and Malice began to show
themselves again. The Queen set at liberty the Bishop of Saint Andrews, and
the rest of the Papists that before were put in prison for violating of the
Laws.

Lethington at his returning, showed himself not a little offended that any
brute should have been raised of the Queens Marriage with the King of Spain;
for he took upon him to affirm, That any such thing had never entered into her
heart: But how true that was, we shall hereafter hear. The end of his
acquaintance and complaint was, To discredit John Knox, who had affirmed, That
such a Marriage was both proposed, and upon the part of the Queen, by the
Cardinal accepted. Lethington in his absence had run into a very evil brute
among the Nobility, for too much serving the Queens affections against the
Commonwealth: And therefore had he, as one that lacked not worldly wisdom,
made provision both in England and Scotland; for in England he traveled for
the Freedom of the Earl Bothwell, and by that means obtained promise of his
favor: He had there also taken order for the home coming of the Earl of
Lenox, as we shall after hear. In Scotland he joined with the Earl of Atholl;
him he promoted, and set forward in Court; and so began the Earl of Murray to
be defaced: And yet to the said Earl, Lethington at all times showed a fair
countenance. Lethingtons practice.
The rest of that Summer, the Queen spent in her Progress through the West
Country, where in all Towns and Gentlemen's places, she had her Mass; which
coming to the ears of John Knox, he began that form of prayer which ordinarily
he says after thanksgiving at his Table: (1.) Deliver us, O Lord, from the
bondage of Idolatry. (2.) Preserve and keep us from the tyranny of strangers.
(3.) Continue us in Peace and Concord amongst our selves, if they good pleasure
be, O Lord, for a season. Whilst that diverse of the familiars of the said John
asked of him, Why he prayed for quietness to continue for a season, and not
rather absolutely, that we should continue in quietness: His answer was, That
he durst not pray, but in faith; and faith in Gods Word assured him, That
constant quietness would not continue in that Realm, wherein Idolatry had
been suppressed, and then was permitted to be erected again.

From the West Country, the Queen past into Argyle to the Hunting, and after
returned to Sterlin. The Earl of Murray, the Lord Robert of Halyrud-house, and
Lord John of Coldingham, past to the Northlands, where Justice Courts were
holden. Note diligently
Thieves and Murderers were punished: Two Witches were burnt; the eldest was
so blinded with the devil, that she affirmed, That no Judge had power over
her. The same time Lord John of Coldingham departed this life in Innernes: It
was affirmed, That he commanded such as were beside him to say to the Queen,
That unless she left her Idolatry, God would not fail to plague her: He asked
God mercy that he had so far born with her in her impiety, and had maintained
her in the same; and that no one thing did him more grief, then that he had
flattered, fostered, and maintained in her fury against God and his servants.
The last commendation of Lord John to the Queen.
And in very deed, great cause had he to have lamented his wickedness: For
besides all his other infirmities, he in the end, for the Queens pleasure,
became enemy to virtue, and all virtuous men, and a patron to impiety, to the
uttermost of his power; yea, his venom was so kindled against God and his
Word, that in his rage he bursted forth these words; Do I see the Queens
Majesty so troubled with the railing of these knaves? I shall leave the best of
them sticked in the Pulpit. What further villainy came forth of his stinking
throat and mouth, modesty will not suffer us to write: whereof if he had grace
unfainedly to repent, it is no small document of Gods mercies: But however God
wrought with him, the Queen regarded his words as wind, or else thought them
to have been forged by others, and not to have proceeded from himself; and
affirmed plainly, They were invented by the Lord of Pittarrow, and Master John
Wood, both whom she hated, because they flattered her not in her dancing, and
other things. One thing in plain words she spoke. That God took always from
her those persons in whom she had greatest pleasure; and that she repented. But
of farther sins no mention.

Whilst the Queen lay at Sterlin, with her Idolatry in her Chapel in the
Palace of Halyrud-house, were left certain Duntiberis, and others of the French
Menzie, who raised up their Mass more publicly then they had done at any time
before: For upon the same Sundays that the Church of Edinburgh had the
Ministration of the Lords Table, the Papists in a great number went to the
Abbey to their Abomination: Which understood, diverse of the Brethren being sore
offended, consulted how to redress that enormity: And so were appointed
certain of the most zealous, and most upright in Religion, to wait upon the
Abbey, that they might note such persons as resorted to the Mass; and
perceiving a great number to enter into the Chapel, some of the Brethren
thrust in also: Whereat the Priest and French Dames being afraid, made the
Showt to be sent to the Town; and Madame Baylie, Mistress to the Queens
Dountibures (for maids that Court would not then well bear) posted on with all
diligence to the Comptroller the Lord of Pittarrow, who then was in Saint
Geills Church at the Sermon, and cried for his assistance, to save her life,
and to save the Queens Palace: Who, with greater haste then need required,
obeyed her desire, and took with him the Provest and Baylies, and a great part
of the faithful; but when they came where the fear was bruted to have been,
they found all things in quiet, except the tumult they brought with themselves,
and peaceable men talking to the Papists, forbidding them to transgress the
Laws. True it is, a zealous brother, named Patrick Cranston, past into the
Chapel, and finding the Altar covered, and the Priest ready to go to his
abominable Mass, said, The Queens Majesty is not here; How dare you then be so
malapert, as openly to do against the Law? No further was done or said, and yet
brute hereof was posted to the Queen (with such information as the Papists
could give: Which found such credit as their hearts could have wished for)
which was so heinous a crime in her eyes, that satisfaction for that sin was
there none, without blood; And therefore without delay were summoned Androe
Armstrong, and Patrick Cranston* to find surety to under-lie the Law; for
forethought Felony, having made violent invasion into the Queens Palace, and
for spoliation of the same. These Letters divulgate, and the extremity feared,
the few Brethren that were within the Town, consulted upon the next remedy,
and in the end concluded, That John Knox (to whom the charge was given to make
advertisements, whensosoever danger should appear) should write to the Brethren
in all quarters, giving information as the matter stood, and requiring their
assistance, which he did, in manner as here ensues.

The Superscription.
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them.
It Is not unknown unto you (dear brethren) what comfort and tranquillity God gave
unto us in times most dangerous, by our Christian Assemblies, and godly
Conference, as often as any danger appeared to any member or members of our own
Body; And how that since we have neglected, or at least not frequented our
Conventions and Assemblies, The adversaries of Christ Jesus his holy Evangell,
have enterprised and boldned themselves, publicly and secretly to do many
things odious in Gods presence, and most hurtful to the true Religion, now of
Gods great favor granted unto us: The holy Sacraments are abused by profane
Papists; Masses have been, and yet are said openly, and maintained: M. Rob.
Font stricken in the head with a weapon by Cap. Lawder.
The blood of some of our dearest Ministers has been shed, without fear of
punishment or correction craved by us. And now last are two of our dear
Brethren; Patrick Cranston, and Androe Armstrong, summoned to under-lie the Law
in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh the four and twentieth of this instant of October,
for a forethought Felony, pretended Murder, and for invading of the Queens
Majesty's Palace of Halyrud-house, with unlawful convocation, etc. These
terrible Summons are directed against our Brethren, because that they, with two
or more, passed to the Abbey, upon Sunday the five and twentieth of August, to
behold and note what persons repaired to the Mass. And because that upon the
Sunday before (the Queen being absent) there resorted to that Idol a rascal
multitude, having openly the least devilish Ceremony (yea, even the conjuring
of their accursed water) that ever they had in the time of greatest
blindness: But because (I say) our said Brethren past, and that in most quiet
manner, to note such abusers, these fearful Summons are directed against them,
to make, no doubt, a preparation upon a few, that a door may be opened to
execute cruelty upon a greater multitude. And if so it come to pass, God, no
doubt, has justly recompensed our former negligence and ingratitude toward
him and his benefits, in our own bosoms. God gave us a most notable Victory
of his and our enemies: he brake their strength, and confounded their
counsels; he left us at freedom, and purged the Realm, for the most part, of
open Idolatry; To the end that we, ever mindful of so wondrous a deliverance,
should have kept this Realm clean from such vile filthiness, and damnable
Idolatry. But we, alas, preferring the pleasure of flesh and blood, to the
Pleasure and Commandment of God, have suffered that Idol the Mass publicly
to be erected again: And therefore justly suffers he us now to fall in that
danger, That to look to an Idolater going to his Idolatry, shall be reputed a
crime little inferior to Treason; God grant that we fall not farther. And now
I, whom God of his mercy, has made one amongst many, to travel in setting
forward his true Religion within this Realm, seeing the same in danger of
ruin, cannot but in conscience crave of you, my brethren of all states, that
have professed the truth, your presence, comfort, and assistance at the said
day in the Town of Edinburgh, even as ye tender the advancement of Gods glory,
the safety of your brethren, and your own assurance; together with the
preservation of the Church, in these appearing dangers: It may be (perchance)
that persuasions be made to the Country, and that ye may be informed, that
either your assembly is not necessary, or else that it will offend the upper
Powers, and my good hope is that neither flattery nor fear shall make you so
far to decline from Christ Jesus, Bond to a mutual defense in the cause of
Religion.
as that against your public promise, and solemn Band, you will leave your
Brethren in so just a cause; and albeit there were no great danger, yet cannot
our Assembly be unprofitable, for many things requiring consultation, which
cannot be had unless the wisest and godliest convene. And thus doubting
nothing of the assistance of our God, if that we uniformly seek his glory, I
cease farther to trouble you, committing you heartily to the protection of the
Eternal.

JOHN KNOX.
From Edinburgh the eighth day of October. 1563.

THe Brethren advertised by this Letter, prepared themselves, so many as was
thought expedient for every Town and Province, to keep the day appointed; but
by the means of some false brethren, the Letter came to the hands of the
Queen, and the manner was this, It was read in the Town of Air, where was
present Master Robert Cunningham, styled Minister of F^itfurd, who then was
holden a professor of the Evangell, (by what means we know not) gat the said
Letter, and sent it with his token to Master Henry Sincleare, then President of
the Seat and College of Justice, styled Bishop of Rosse, a perfect Hypocrite,
and a conjured Enemy to Christ Jesus, whom God after stroke according to his
deservings. The said Master Henry being Enemy to all that unfainedly professed
the Lord Jesus, but chiefly to John Knox, for the liberty of his Tongue, for
he had affirmed, Note Pastors.
as ever still he does affirm, That a Bishop that receives profit and feeds
not the Flock, (even by his own labors) is both a Thief and a Murderer: The
said Master Henry (we say) thinking himself happy that he had found so good
occasion to trouble him, whose life he hated, posted the said Letter, with his
counsel, to the Queen, who then lay in Sterlin. The lettet being read, it was
concluded by the Council of the Cabinet, that is, by the most secret Council.
That it imported Treason; whereof the Queen did not a little rejoice, for she
thought once to be avenged of that her great Enemy. It was concluded, that the
Nobility should be written for; that the condemnation should have the greater
Authority, the day was appointed, about the midst of December* which was kept
of the whole Council, and of diverse others, such as the Master of Maxwell, the
old Lord of Lethington, and the said President.

In the mean time the Earl of Murray returned from the North, to whom
Secretary Lethington opened the matter, as best pleased him. The Master of
Maxwell (after made Lord Heris) gave unto the said John as it were a discharge
of the familiarity which before was great betwixt them, The Master of Maxwells
discharge to John Knox, and their reasoning together.
unless that he would satisfy the Queen at her own will. The answer of John
Knox was, that he knew no offense done by him to the Queens Majesty, and
therefore he knew not what satisfaction to make. No offense, (said he) Have you
not written Letters, desiring the brethren from all parts to convene, to Andro
Armstrong and Patrick Cranstons? That I grant, (said the other) but therein I
acknowledge no offense done by me. No offense (said he) to convocate the Queens
Leidges. Not for a just cause (said the other) for greater things were reputed
no offense within these two years. The time (said he) is now other, for then
our Sovereign was absent, and now she is present. It is neither the absence
nor the presence of the Queen (said he) that rules my conscience, but God
plainly speaking in his Word; what was lawful to me the last year, is yet
lawful, because my God is unchangeable.

Well (said the Master) I have given you my counsel, do as you list, but I
think you shall repent it if you bow not unto the Queen.

I understand not (said he) what you mean; I never made my self an adverse
party unto the Queens Majesty, except in the point of Religion, and thereunto
I think you will not desire me to bow.

Well (said he) you are wise enough, but you will not find that men will bear
with you in times to come, as they have done in times by past.

If God stand my friend, (said the other) as I am assured he of his mercy will,
so long as I depend upon his promise, and prefer his glory to my life and
worldly profit, I little regard how men behave themselves toward me, neither
yet know I wherinto any one man has born with me in times bypast, unless it
be, that of my mouth they have heard the Word of God, which in time to come if
they refuse, my heart will be perfect, and for a season I will lament; but the
incommodity will be their own. And after these words (hereunto the Lord of
Lochinvar was witness) they departed, but unto this day, the seventeenth day
of December, 1571. yea, never in this life met they in such familiarity as
before.

The bruit of the accusation of John Knox being devulgate, Master John Spence
of Condie Advocate, a man of gentle nature, and one that professed the doctrine
of the Evangell, came as it were in secret to John Knox, to enquire the cause
of that great brute; to whom the said John was plain in all things, and showed
unto him the double of the Letter; which heard and considered, he said, I thank
God, I came unto you with a fearful and sorrowful heart, fearing that you had
done such a Crime as Laws might have punished, which would have been no small
trouble to the heart of all such as have received the Word of life which you
have preached; but I depart greatly rejoiced, as well because I see your own
comfort, even in the midst of the troubles, as that I clearly understand, that
you have committed no such Crime as you are bruited with; you will be accused
(said he) but God will assist you; and so he departed.

The Earl of Murray and the Secretary sent for the said John to the Clerk of
the Registers house, and began to lament that he had so highly offended the
Queens Majesty, Before they disdained not to come to his own house.
for the which they feared should come a great inconvenience to him, if the
business were not wisely foreseen; they show what pains and travel they had
taken to mittigate her anger, but they could find nothing but extremity,
unless that he himself would confess his offense, and put him in her
Majesty's will. To which Heads the said John answered, as follows:

I praise my God through Jesus Christ, John Knox his answer.
(said he) I have learned not to cry Conjuration and Treason at every thing
that the godless multitude does condemn, nether yet to fear the things that
they fear; I have the testimony of a good conscience, that I have given no
occasion to the Queens Majesty to be offended with me, for I have done nothing
but my duty, and so whatsoever shall thereof ensue, my good hope is, that my
God will give me patience to bear it; but to confess an offense where my
Conscience witnesses there is none, far be it from me. How can it be defended
(said Lethington) have you not made a Convocation of the Queens Leiges? If I
have not (said he) a just defense for my fact, let me smart for it. Let us hear
(said they) your defenses, for we would be glad that you might be found
innocent. Nay, Note a wise Reply.
(said the other) I am informed by diverse, that even by you my Lord Secretary,
I am already condemned, and my cause prejudged, therefore I might be reputed a
fool, if I would make you privy to my Defenses. At these words they seemed
both offended, and so the Secretary departed, but the said Earl remained
still, and would have entered into further discourse of the state of the Court
with the said John; who answered, My Lord, I understand more then I would of
the state of the Court, and therefore it is not needful that your Lordship
trouble me with the recounting thereof; This was the first time the Earl
Murray spoke with John Knox after the Parliament
if you stand in good case, I am content, and if you do not, as I fear you do
not already, or else you shall not do it ere it be long, blame not me, you have
the Counselors whom you have chosen, my weak judgment both they and you
despised: I can do nothing but behold the end, which I pray God it be other
then my troubled heart fears.

Within four days the said John was called before the Queen and Council, John
Knox called before the Queen and Counsel in December. 156^.
betwixt 6 and seven a Clock at night; the season of the year was the midst of
December; the report rising in the town, That I. Knox was sent for by the
Queen. The Brethren of the Town followed in such number, that the inner Close
was full, and all the Stairs, even to the Chamber door where the Queen and
Counsel sat, who had been reasoning amongst themselves before, but had not
fully satisfied the Secretaries mind. And so was the Queen retired to her
Cabbinet, and the Lords were talking one with another, as occasion served. But
upon the entry of John Knox they were desired to take their places, as they
did, sitting as Counselors one against another.

The Duke, according to his dignity, began the one side, upon the other side
sat the Earl of Argile, and consequently followed the Earl of Murray, the
Earl of Glencarne, the Earl of Mershall, the Lord Ruthven, the common
Officers, Pittaro then Controller, the Justice Clerk, with Master John Spence
of Condie Advocate, and diverse others stood by; removed from the Table, sat
old Lethington father to the Secretary, Master Henry Sinclare then Bishop of
Rosse, and Master James Makgill Clerk of the Register.

Things thus put in Order the Queen came forth, and that with no little worldly
pomp, was placed in a Chair having two faithful Supporters, the Master of
Maxwell upon the one Torre, and Secretary Lethington upon the other Torre of
the Chair, whereon he waited diligently; at the time of the Accusation,
sometime the one was speaking in her Ear, and sometime the other: Her pomp
lacked nothing of an womanly gravitie; for when she saw John Knox standing at
the other end of the Table bare-headed; at the first she smiled, and after gave
a guaf of laughter; whereunto her Placebo^^ gave their Plaudite, assenting with
like countenance.

This is a good beginning (she said) but know you whereat I laugh? Yon man
caused me to cry, and shed never a Tear himself; I will see if I can cause him
to grieve. At that word the Secretary whispered her in the Ear, and she him
again, and with that gave him a Letter; after the inspection whereof, he
directed his visage and speech to John Knox in this manner.

The Queens Majesty is informed, That you have traveled to raise a Tumult of
her Subjects against her; and for Certification thereof, there is presented to
her your own Letter, subscribed in your name: Yet because her Majesty will do
nothing without good advertisement, she has convened you before this part of
the Nobility, that they may witness betwixt you and her.

Let him acknowledge (said she) his own handwriting, and then shall we judge
of the Contents of the Letter; and so was the Lettet sent from hand to hand to
John Knox, who taking inspection of it, said, I acknowledge this to be my
handwriting; and also I remember, that I indicted a Letter in the month of
October, giving signification to the Brethren in diverse Quarters, of such
things as displeased me; and so good opinion have I of the fidelity of the
Scribes, that willingly they would not adulterate my original; albeit that I
left diverse blanks subscribed with them. And so I acknowledge both the
Handwriting, and the Dictatement.

You have done more (said Lethington) then I would have done. Charity (said the
other) is not suspicious. Well, well, (said the Queen) read your own Letter,
and then answer to such things as shall be demanded of you. I shall do the best
I can (said the other) and so with a loud voice he began to read, as before is
expressed. After that the Letter was read, it was presented again to M. John
Spence her Advocate; for the Queen commanded him to accuse, as he did, but very
gently. After (we say) that the Letter was read, the Queen beholding the whole
Table, said, Heard you ever (my Lords) a more dispightfull and Treasonable
Letter? While that no man gave answer, Lethington addressed himself to John
Knox, and said, M. Knox, are you not sorry from your heart, and do you not
repent that such a Letter has passed your Pen, and from you has come to the
knowledge of others? I. Knox answered, My Lord Secretary, before I repent I
must be taught of my offense. Offense, (said Lethington) if there were no more
but the vocation of the Queens Leiges, the offense cannot be denied. Remember
your self (my Lord) said the other, there is a difference betwixt a lawful
Vocation and an unlawful: If I have been guilty in this, I have often offended
since I came last in Scotland; for what Vocation of Brethren has ever been
this day, unto which my Pen has not served? and before this no man laid it to
my charge as a crime. Then was then, and now is now (said Lethington) we have
no need of such Vocation, as sometimes we have had. John Knox answered, The
time that has been, is even now before my eyes; for I see the poor Flock in no
less danger, then it has been at any time before, except that the devil has
gotten a Vizard upon his face: Note this diligently.
Before he came in with his own face, discovered by open Tyranny, seeking the
destruction of all that refused Idolatry; and then, I think, you will confess
the Brethren lawfully assembled themselves for defense of their lives: And now
the devil comes, under the cloak of Justice, to do that which God would not
suffer him to do by strength. What is this (said the Queen) methinks you trifle
with him: Who gave you Authority to make Convocation of my Lieges? Is not that
Treason? No, Madame (said the Lord Rnthuen) for he makes Convocation of the
people, to hear Prayer and Sermon, almost daily: And what ever your Majesty or
others think thereof, we think it no Treason. Hold your peace (said the Queen)
let him answer for himself. I began Madame (said John Knox) to reason with the
Secretary (whom I take to be a better Dialectationer then your Majesty is)
That all Convocation is not lawful: And now my Lord Ruthuen has given the
instance; which if your Majesty will deny, I shall make my self ready for the
proof. I will say nothing (said the Queen) against your Religion, nor against
your convening to your Sermons: But what Authority have you to Convocate my
subjects when you will, without any Commandment? I have no pleasure (said John
Knox) to decline from my former purpose; And yet, Madame, to satisfy your
Majesty's two questions, I answer, That at my will I never convened four
persons in Scotland, but at the Order that the Brethren has appointed, I have
given diverse Advertisements, and great multitudes have assembled thereupon. And
if your Majesty complains, That this was done without your Majesty's
Commandment; I answer, So has all that God has blessed within this Realm,
from the beginning of this action: And therefore, Madame, I must be convinced
by a just Law, that I have done against the Duty of Gods Messenger, in writing
of this Letter, before that I either be sorry, or yet repent for the doing of
it, as my Lord Secretary would persuade me; for what I have done, I have done
at the Commandment of the General Church of this Realm. And therefore I
think I have done no wrong. You shall not escape so (said the Queen) Is it
not Treason, my Lords, to accuse a Prince of cruelty; I think there are Acts
of Parliament to be found, against such Whisperers. This was granted to be true
of many: But wherein (said Master John Knox) can I be accused? Read this part
of your Letter (said the Queen) which began, This fearful Summons is directed
against them (to wit, the Brethren aforesaid) to make, no doubt, a preparation
upon a few, that a door may be opened to execute cruelty upon a greater
multitude. Lord (said the Queen) What say you to that? While many doubted what
the said John should answer, he said unto the Queen, Is it lawful for me,
Madame, to answer for my self? Or shall I be condemned before I be heard? Say
what you can (said she) for I think you have enough ado. I will first then
desire (said he) of your Majesty, Note.
Madame, and of this Honorable audience, Whether if your Majesty knows not
that the obstinate Papists are deadly enemies to all that profess the Evangel
of Jesus Christ; And that they most earnestly desire the extirpation of all
them, and of the true Doctrine that is taught within this Realm? As the Irish
Papists have done to Protestants in Ireland.
The Queen held her peace; but all the Lords with common consent and voice,
said, God forbid that either the life of the faithful, or yet the staying of
the Doctrine, stood in the power of the Papists; for just experience has
taught us what cruelty is in their hearts. I must proceed then (said John Knox)
seeing that I perceive that all will grant, That it were a barbarous cruelty to
destroy such a multitude as professed the Evangell of Jesus Christ within this
Realm, which oftener then once or twice they attempted to do by force, as
things done of late days do testify: Whereof they being (by Gods providence)
disappointed, have invented more crafty and dangerous practices, to wit, To
make the Prince party, Let this be noted for this day.
under color of Law; and so, what they could not do by open force, they shall
perform by crafty deceit: For who thinks (my Lords) That the insatiable
cruelty of the Papists (within this Realm, I mean) shall end in the murdering
of those two, now unjustly summoned, and more unjustly to be accused? I think
no man of judgment can so esteem, but rather the direct contrary; that is, By
this few number, they intend to prepare a way to their bloody enterprise
against the whole. And therefore (Madame) cast up when you list, the Acts of
your Parliaments, I have offended nothing against them; For I accuse not in my
Letter your Majesty, nor yet your nature, of cruelty: But I affirm yet again,
That the pestilent Papists, who have enflamed your Majesty without cause
against these poor men at this present, are the sons of the devil, and
therefore must obey the desires of their father, who has been a Murderer
from the beginning. You forget your self (said one) you are not in the Pulpit.
I am in the place (said the other) where I am commanded in my conscience to
speak the truth; and therefore the truth I speak, impugn it who so lists: And
hereunto I add (Madame) that honest, meek and gentle natures (in appearance)
by wicked and corrupt Counselors, may be changed and altered to the direct
contrary. Example we have of Nero, whom in the beginning of his Empire we
find, Let the world judge what ensued.
having some natural shame; but after that his flatterers had encouraged him
in all impiety, alleging that nothing was either unhonest, or yet unlawful
in his Person, who was Emperor above others: When he had drunken of this Cup
(I say) to what enormies he fell, the Histories bear witness. And now,
Madame, to speak plain, Papists have your Majesty's ear patent at all times;
assure your Majesty, they are dangerous Counselors, and that your Mother
found. As this was said, Lethington singled, and spoke secretly to the Queen
in her ear, What it was, that the Table heard not: But immediately she
addressed her visage and speech to John Knox, and said, Well, you speak fair
enough here, before my Lords, but the last time I spoke with you secretly, you
caused me to weep many tears, and said to me stubbornly, Ye cared not for my
weeping. Madame, (said the other) because now the second time your Majesty has
burdened me with that crime, I must answer, lest for my silence I be holden
guilty: If your Majesty be ripely remembered, the Lord of Dun, yet living to
testify the truth, was present at that time, whereof your Majesty complains.
Your Majesty accused me, That I had irreverently spoken of you in the Pulpit.
That I denied. You said, What had I to do to speak of your Marriage? What was
I, that I should meddle with such matters? I answered, As touching Nature, I
was a worm of this earth; and yet a subject to this Commonwealth: But as
touching the Office wherein it has pleased God to place me, Note Pastors.
I was a Watchmen both over the Realm, and over the Church of God gathered
within the same; by reason whereof, I was bound in conscience to blow the
Trumpet publicly, so often as ever I saw any appearance of danger, either of the
one, or of the other. But so it was, that a certain brute affirmed, That a
Traffic of Marriage was betwixt your Majesty and the Spanish Allia.
Whereunto I said, That if your Nobility and State did agree, unless that both
you and your husband should be straightly bound, that neither of you might hurt
the Commonwealth, nor yet the poor Church of God within the same; in that case
I should pronounce, That the consenters were troublers of the Commonwealth,
and enemies unto God, and unto his Truth planted within the same. At these
words, I grant, your Majesty stormed, and burst forth in an unreasonable
weeping: what mitigation the Lord of Dun would have made, I suppose your
Majesty has not forgot: But while that nothing was able to stay your weeping,
I was compelled to say, I take God to witness, I never took pleasure to see
your Majesty make such regret; But seeing I have offered to your Majesty no
such occasion, I must rather suffer your Majesty to take your own pleasure,
then I dare conceal the truth, and so both betray the Church, and the
Commonwealth. These were the most extreme words I spoke that day. After that
the Secretary had conferred with the Queen, he said, Master Knox, you may
return to your house for this night. I thank God and the Queens Majesty (said
the other.) And (Madame) I pray God to purge your heart from Papistry, and to
preserve you from the counsel of flatterers; for how pleasant that ere they
appear to your ear, and corrupt affections for the time, experience has taught
us in what perplexity they have brought famous Princes. Lethington, and the
Master of Maxwell, were that night the two stoups of her Chair. John Knox
being departed, the Tables of the Lords, and others that were present, were
demanded every one their voice, If John Knox had not offended the Queens
Majesty? The Lords voted uniformly, That they could find no offense (the
Queen was past to her Cabinet.) The flatterers of the Court (and principally
Lethington) raged. The Queen was brought again, and placed in the Chair: And
they commanded to vote over again: Which thing highly offended the whole
Nobility, and began to speak in open audience, What? shall the Lord of
Lethington have power to control us? Or shall the presence of a woman cause us
to offend God, and to condemn an innocent against our consciences, for the
pleasure of any creature? And so the whole Nobility absolved John Knox again,
Note diligently
and praised God for his modesty, and for his plain and sensible answers. Yet
before the end, one thing is to be noted* to wit, That amongst so many
Placeboes (we mean the flatterers of the Court) there was not one that plainly
durst condemn the said poor man, that was accused; God ruling their tongues,
that sometimes ruled the tongue of Balaam, when gladly he would have cursed
Gods people.

This perceived, the Queen began to upbraid Master Henry Sinclare, then Bishop
of Rosse, and said (hearing his vote to agree with the rest) Trouble not the
barn, I pray you, trouble him not, for he is newly wakened out of his sleep;
Why should not the old fool follow them that past before him? The Bishop
answered coldly, Your Majesty may consider, That it is neither affection to the
man, nor love to his Profession, that moved me to absolve him, but the simple
truth (which plainly appears in his defense) draws me hereunto, albeit that
others would have condemned him and it. This being said, the Lords and whole
Assistants arose and departed. That night was neither dancing nor fidling in
the Court, for our Sovereign was disappointed of her purpose; which was, To
have had John Knox in her will, by voice of her Nobility. John Knox absolved by
the greatest part of the Nobility, from the crime intended against him, even in
the presence of the Queen, she raged, and her Placeboes stormed: And so began
new assaults to be made at the hands of the said John Knox, to confess an
offense, and to put him in the Queens will, and she should promise, That his
greatest punishment should be, But to go within the Castle of Edinburgh, and
immediately to return to his own house: He answered, God forbid that my
confession should condemn these Noblemen, who in their conscience, and in
displeasure of the Queen, Note the craft of the Court.
have absolved me; And further I am assured, ye will not in earnest desire me
to confess an offense, unless that therewith you would desire me to cease
from Preaching: For how can I exhort others to Peace, and Christian quietness,
if I confess my self an author and mover of sedition.

The general Assembly of the Church approached, which began the five and
twentieth of December, 1563. But the just Petitions of the Ministers, and
Commissioners of Churches, were despised at the first, and that with these
words; As Ministers will not follow our counsel, so will we suffer Ministers
to labor for themselves, and see what speed they come. But then the whole
Assembly said, If the Queen will not, we must; for both third and two parts are
rigorously taken from us, and from our Tenants. If others (said one) will
follow my counsel, the Guard and the Papists shall complain, as long as our
Ministers have done. At these words, the former sharpness was colored, and
the Speaker alleged, That he meant not of all Ministers: Christopher Goodman
answered, My Lord Secretary, if you can show me what just Title either the
Queen has to the Third, or the Papists to the two parts, then I think I
should resolve you whether she were Debtor to Ministers within Burgh, or not:
But thereto he received this check for answer; Ne sit Peregrinus curiosus in
aliena Republica; that is, Let not a Stranger be curious in a strange
Commonwealth. The man of God answered, Albeit I be a Stranger in your policy,
yet so am I not in the Church of God; and therefore the care does no less
appertain to me in Scotland, then if I were in the midst of England. Note.
Many wondered at the silence of John Knox, for in all these quick reasonings he
opened not his mouth; the cause thereof he himself expressed in these words:

I have traveled (Right Honorable and beloved Brethren) since my last
arrival within this Realm, I. Knox falsely reported of, his answer.
in an upright conscience before my God, seeking nothing more (as he is
witness) than the advancement of his glory, and the stability of his Church
within this Realm; and of late days I have been accused as a seditious man,
and as one that usurpeth to my self power that becomes me not: True it is
that I have given advertisment unto the Brethren in diverse Quarters, of the
extremity intended against diverse faithful, for looking to a Priest going to
Mass, and for observing of those that transgress against just Laws; but that
therein I have usurped further power then is given me, till that by you I be
condemned, I utterly deny; for (I say) that by you, that is, By the charge of
the General Assembly, I have all just power to advertise the Brethren from
time to time of dangers appearing, as I have power to preach the Word of God in
the Pulpit of Edinburgh; for by you was I appointed to the one, and to the
other; and therefore in the Name of God I crave your judgments. The danger
that appeared to me in my Accusation was not so fearful, as the words that
came to my Ears were dolorous to my heart; for these words were plainly spoken,
and that by some Protestants, What can the Pope do more, then to send forth his
Letters, and require them to be obeyed. Let me have your judgments therefore
whether I have usurped any power to my self; or if I have obeyed your
commandment.

The Flatterers of the Court (amongst whom the Justice Clerk then not the
least) began to storm, and said, shall we be compelled to justify the rash
judgments of men; My Lord (said John Knox) you shall speak your pleasure for
the present, of you I crave nothing, but the if Church that is here present, do
not either absolve me, or else condemn me, never shall I in public or in
private, as a public Minister, open my mouth in doctrine or reasoning.

After long contention the said John being removed, the whole Church found,
that a charge was given unto him, To advertise the Brethren in all Quarters, as
often as ever danger appeared; and therefore avowed that fact not to be his
only, Remark false brethren.
but the fact of the whole assembly. Thereat were the Queens Claw-backs more
enraged then ever they were, for some of them had promised the Queen to get the
said John convinced, both by the Council, and by the Church; and being
frustrate of both, she and they thought themselves not a little disappointed.

In the very time of the general Assembly there comes to public knowledge, or
naynous murder committed in the Court, yea not far from the Queens Lap; for a
French-woman that served in the Queens Chamber had played the Whore with the
Queens own Apothecary; Murder and Whoredom in the Court.
the woman conceived and bare a Child, whom with common consent the father and
the mother murdered; yet were the cries of a newborn Child heard, search
was made, the Child and the Mother were both apprehended, and so was both the
man and the woman condemned to be hanged in the public Street of Edinburgh.
The punishment was notable because the Crime was heinous. But yet was not the
Court purged of Whores and Whoredoms, which was the fountain of such
enormities, for it was well known, that shame hasted Marriage, betwixt John
Sempill called the Dancer, and Mary Leringston surnamed the Lusty, Mary's
Regiment.
what bruit the Mary's and the rest of the Dancers of the Court had, the
Ballads of that age did witness, which we for modesties sake omit, but this
was the common complaint of all godly and wise men, That if they thought that
such a Court should long continue, and if they looked for no better life to
come, they would have wished their Sons and Daughters rather to have been
brought up with Fiddlers and Dancers, and to have been exercised in flinging
upon a Floor, and in the rest that thereof follows, then to have been
exercised in the company of the godly, and exercised in virtue, which in that
Court was hated; and filthiness not only maintained, but also rewarded;
witness the Abbacie of Abercone, the Barony of Anchvermuchtie, and diverse
others pertaining to the Patrimony of the Crown given in heritage to Skippers,
and Dancers, and Dalliers with D^mes. This was the beginning of the Regiment of
Mary Queen of Scots, and these were the fruits that she brought forth of
France. Lord lo^k upon our miseries, and deliver us from the wickedness of
this corrupt Court, for thy own Names sake.

God from Heaven, and from the face of the Earth did declare, that he was
offended at the iniquity committed within this Realm; for upon the twentieth
day of January there fell rain in great abundance, Great Wet and Frost in Ian.
1563.
which in the falling freezed so vehemently, that the earth was but a shot of
Ice; the Fowls, both great and small freezed, and might not fly, many dyed,
and some were taken and laid beside the fire, that their feathers might
dissolve; The Sea stood still, neither ebbed ^or flowed for 24 hours.
and that same month the Sea stood still, (as was clearly observed) and never
ebbed nor flowed the space of four and twenty hours: In the month of
February, the fifteenth and eighteenth days thereof, there was seen in the
Firmament battles arrayed, spears, and all other weapons, as it had been the
joining of two Armies: These things were not only observed, but also spoken of
and constantly affirmed by men of judgment, and credit. But the Queen and our
Court made merry, there was banqueting upon banqueting; the Queen would
banquet with the Lords; and that was done only upon policy to remove her
displeasure against them, because they would not at her devotion condemn John
Knox. To remove (we say) that jealousy, she made the Banquet to the whole
Lords, whereat she would have the Duke amongst the rest. It behoved them to
banquet her again; and so did banqueting continue till Lent ever after. But
the poor Ministers were mocked, and reputed as Monsters; the Guard, and the
Affairs of the Kitchen were so gripping, that the Minsters stipends could not
be had; and yet at the Assembly last past, solemn promise was made in the
Queens Name, by the mouth of Secretary Lethington, in the audience of the
Nobility, and of the whole Assembly, who affirmed that he had commandment of
her Highness, to promise full content unto all the Ministers within the
Realm, and of such Order to be kept in all times to come, that the whole body
of the Protestants should have occasion to stand content; The Earl of Murray
affirmed the same, with many other fair promises given by writing, by
Lethington himself; as in the Register of the Acts of the general Assembly may
be seen; but how that or yet any other thing promised in her name, to the
Church of God, was observed, the world can witness.

The Ministers perceiving all things to tend to ruin, discharged their
consciences in public and in private, but they received for their labor
hatred and indignation; and amongst others, that worthy servant of God Master
John Craig, speaking against the manifold corruption that then (without shame
or fear declared it self, said, Sometimes was Hypocrites known by their noted
habits, and we had men to be Monks, and women to be Nuns; but now all things
are so changed, that we cannot discern the Earl from the Abbot, nor the Nun
from him that would be esteemed the Nobleman; so that we have gotten a new
order of Monks and Nuns; But, said he, seeing you are not ashamed of that
unjust profit, Cucullus.
would to God that you had therewith the Kowll, the Veil and the Tail joined
withal, that so you might appear in your own colors. This liberty did so
provoke the choler of Lethington, that in open audience he gave himself to the
Devil, If that after that day he should regard what became of the Ministers,
but he would do what he could, that his companion should have a share with him:
And let them bark and blow (said he) as loud as they list. And so that was the
second time that he had given defiance unto the servants of God.

Whereupon arose whisperings and complaints, although the Flatterers of the
Court, complaining that men were not charitably handled, might not since be
reproved in general, albeit men were not specially taxed, that all the world
might know of whom the Preacher speaks; whereunto was this answer made, Let
men be ashamed publicly to offend, and the Ministers shall abstain from
specialities; but so long as Protestants are not ashamed manifestly to do
against the Evangell of Jesus Christ, so long cannot the Ministers of God cease
to cry, that God would be avenged upon such abusers of his holy Word.

Thus had the servants of God a double battle, fighting upon the one side
against the Idolatry and the rest of the abominations mentioned by the Court;
and upon the other part, against the unthankefulnesse of such as sometimes
would have been esteemed the chief Pillars of the Church within the Realm. The
threatenings of Preachers was fearful, but the Court thought it self in such
security, that it could not miscarry.

The Queen after the Banqueting, kept a diet (Monsieur Luserie a Frenchman,
who had been accustomed with her malady before, being her Physician) and
therefore she for the second time made her progress in the North, and
commanded to Ward in the Castle of Edinburgh, the Earl of Caithnes, Note how
this agrees with our time.
for a Murder committed by his servants upon the Earl Mershals men; he
obeyed, but he was suddenly released; for such blood-thirsty men, and Papists
(such as he is) are good subjects thought at Court. Thy Kingdom come (O Lord)
for in this Realm is nothing amongst such as should punish vice and maintain
virtue, bu^ abomination abounding without Bridle. The Flatterers of the Court
did daily enrage against the poor Preachers; happiest was he that could invent
the most bitter taunts, and disdainful mocking of the Ministers; and at length
they began to jest at the Term of Idolatry, affirming that men knew not what
they spoke when they called the Mass Idolatry; yea, some proceeded further,
and feared not at open Table to affirm, That they would sustain the Argument
that the Mass was no Idolatry. These things coming to the ears of the
preachers, they were proclaimed in public Pulpit of Edinbugh, with this
complaint, directed by the speaker to his God;

O Lord, how long shall the wicked prevail against the just? how long will thou
suffer thy Self and thy blessed Evangell to be despised of men? Of men (we say)
that boast themselves Defenders of the truth; for of thy manifest and known
Enemies we complain not, but of such as unto whom thou have revealed thy light;
for now it comes to our Ears, that men (not Priests we say, but chief
Protestants) will defend the Mass to be no Idolatry; if it so were, miserably
have I been deceived, and miserably (alas, O Lord) have I deceived thy people;
which thou know, (O Lord) I have ever more abhorred then a thousand deaths.
But said he, (turning his face toward the Room where such men as had so
affirmed, sat) If I be not able to prove the Mass to be the most abominable
Idolatry that ever was used from the beginning of the world, I offer my self to
suffer the punishment appointed by God to a false Preacher. And it appears
unto me (says the Preacher) that the Affirmers should be subject to the same
Law; for it is the truth of God, that you persecute as a blasphemy; and it is
the invention of the Devil, that obstinately against his Word you maintain;
Lethingtons counte^^nce at the threatenings of the preacher.
whereat albeit you now flute and flyre, as if so be all that were spoken were
but wind; yet am I all fully assured, as I am assured that my GOD lives, That
some that hear this your defection, and railing against the truth and the
servants of God, Let the world judge whether this has come to pass, or not,
what has fallen since that time.
shall see a part of Gods judgment powered forth upon this Realm, (and
principally upon you that fastest cleave unto the favor of the Court;) for the
abominations that are by you maintained. Albeit that such vehemence provoked
tears from the eyes of some, yet these that knew themselves guilty, in a
mocking manner, said, We must recant, and burn our Bill, for the Preachers are
angry.

The general assembly holden in June, 1564. approached, unto the which a great
part of the Nobility (of those that are called Protestants) convened, some for
assistance of the Ministers, and some to accuse them, as we shall after hear. A
little before these troubles, which Satan raised in the Body of the Church,
began one David an Italian, to be great in the Court; the Queen used him for
Secretary, for things that appertained to her secret affairs, or elsewhere:
great men made suit unto him, and their suits were the better heard: But of his
beginning and progress, we delay now further to speak, and refer it unto
another fitter occasion of time and place, because that his end will require
the description of the whole. The first day of the general Assembly, neither
the Courtiers; nor the Lords that depended upon the Court, presented themselves
in Session with their Brethren; whereat many wondered. One ancient and
honorable man, the Lord of Lundie, said, Nay, I wonder not at their absence;
but I wonder that at our last Assembly they drew themselves apart, and joined
not with us, but drew from us some of our Ministers, and willed them to
conclude such things as were never proposed to the public Assembly, very
prejudicial to the Liberty of the Church; and therefore my judgment is, That
they shall be informed of this offense, which the whole Brethren have conceived
of their former Fact; Humbly requiring, That if they be Brethren, that they
would assist their Brethren with their presence and counsel, for we had never
greater need: And if they be minded to fall back from us, it were better we
knew it now, then afterward. Thereto agreed the whole Assembly, and gave
Commission to certain Brethren, to signify the minds of the Assembly unto
the Lords; which was done that same afternoon. The Courtiers at the first
seemed a little offended, that they should be as it were suspected of
defection; yet nevertheless upon the morning they joined with the Assembly,
and came unto it; but they drew themselves (like as they did before) apart, and
entered into the inner Councell-House. They were the Duke, the Earls of Argyle,
Murray, Mortoune, Glencarne, Mershall, Lord Rosse, the Master of Maxwell,
Secretary Lethington, the Justice Clerk, the Clerk of the Register, and the
Lord of Pittarrow Comptroller.

After a little consultation, they directed a Messenger, M. George Hay, the
Minister of the Court, requiring the Superintendents, and some of the learned
Ministers, to confer with them. The Assembly answered, They convened to
deliberate upon the common affairs of the Church, and therefore that they could
not lack their Superintendents, and chief Ministers, whose judgments were so
necessary, that the rest should sit (as it were) idle, without them; And
therefore willed them, as often before, That if they acknowledged themselves
Members of the Church, that they would join with their Brethren, and propose in
public such things as they pleased, and so they should have the assistance of
the whole, in all things that might stand with Gods Commandment: But to send
from themselves a portion of their company, they understood, That thereof hurt
and slander might arise, rather then any profit or comfort to the Church; for
they feared that all men should not stand content with the conclusion, where
the conference and reasonings were heard but of a few.

This answer was not given without cause; for no small travel was made, to
have drawn some Ministers to the faction of the Courtiers, and to have
sustained their Arguments and Opinions: But when it was conceived by the most
politic amongst them, That they could not travel by that means, they prepared
the matter in other terms, purging themselves, That they never meant to divide
themselves from the Society of their Brethren, but because they had certain
Heads to confer with certain Ministers. But the Assembly did still reply, That
secret Conference would they not admit, in those Heads that should be concluded
by general Voice. The Lords promised, That no Conclusion should be taken,
neither yet Vote required, till that both the Propositions and the Reasons
should be heard and considered by the whole Body; and upon that condition were
directed unto them, with express charge, To conclude nothing, without the
knowledge and advise of the Assembly, The Lord of Dun, Superintendent of
Angus, the Superintendents of Lothain and Fyfe, Master John Row, Master John
Craig, William Christieson, Master David Lyndsay, Ministers; with the Rector of
Saint Androes, and Master George Hay, the Superintendent of Glasgow: Master
John Willock was Moderator, and John Knox waited upon the Scribe; And so were
they appointed to sit with the Brethren: And yet because the principal
complaint touched John Knox, he was also called for.

Lethington his Harangue at the Assembly, Anno 1564.
Secretary Lethington began the Harangue, which contained these Heads; first,
How much we are indebted unto God, by whose providence we have liberty of
Religion, under the Queens Majesty, albeit that she is not persuaded in the
same. Secondly, How necessary a thing it is, That the Queens Majesty by all
good Offices of the part of the Church (so spoke he) and of the Ministers
principally should be retained in that constant opinion, that they unfainedly
favored her advancement, and procured her subjects to have a good opinion of
her. And last, How dangerous a thing it is, That the Ministers should be noted
one to disagree from another in form of Prayer for her Majesty: And in these
two last Heads (said he) we desire you all to be circumspect: But especially,
we most crave of you our Brother John Knox, to moderate your self, as well in
form of praying for the Queens Majesty, as in Doctrine that you propose,
touching her State and Obedience: Neither shall ye take this (said he) as
spoken to your reproach, quia men's pulchra, interdum in corpore pulchro; But
because that others, by your example, may imitate the like liberty, albeit not
with the same discretion and foresight; and what opinion that may engender in
the peoples heads, wise men may foresee.

John Knox his answer.
The said John prepared himself for answer as follows: If such as fear God, have
occasion to praise him, because that Idolatry is maintained, the servants of
God despised, wicked men placed again in Honor and Authority (Master Henry
Sinclare was of short time before, made President, who before durst not have
sitten in Judgment) And finally, if we ought to praise God, because that vice
and impiety over-floweth the whole Realm, without punishment, then we have
occasion to rejoice and praise God: But if these and the like, use to provoke
Gods vengeance against Realms and Nations, then in my judgment, the godly
within Scotland ought to lament and mourn, and so to prevent Gods Judgments,
lest that he finding all in a like security, strike in his hot indignation,
beginning, perchance, at such as think they offend not.

That is one Head (said Lethington) whereunto you and I never agreed; for how
are you able to prove, That God ever struck or plagued any Nation or People for
the iniquity of their Prince, if that they themselves lived godlily? I looked
(said he) my Lord, to have audience till that I had absolved the other two
parts: But seeing it pleases your Lordship to cut me off before the midst, I
will answer to your question. The Scripture of God teaches me, That Jerusalem
and Judah were punished for the sins of Manasses. And if you allege, That they
were punished because they were wicked, and offended with their King, and not
because their King was wicked; I answer, That albeit the Spirit of God makes
for me, saying in express words, For the sins of Manasses, yet will I not be
so obstinate, as to lay the whole sin, and plagues that thereof ensued, upon
the King, and utterly absolve the people; but I will grant withal, That the
whole people offended with their King; but how, and in what fashion, I fear
that ye and I shall not agree: I doubt not but the great multitude accompanied
him in all the abomination that he did; for Idolatry and false Religion, has
ever been, and will be, pleasing to the most part of men: But to affirm, That
all Judah committed really the acts of his impiety, is but to affirm that which
neither has certainty, nor yet appearance of any truth; for who can think it
to be possible, That all those of Jerusalem should so shortly turn to Idolatry,
considering the notable Reformation lately before had, in the days of
Hezekias: But yet (says the Text) Manasses made Judah, and all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem to err. True it is, the one part (as I have said) willingly
followed him in his Idolatry, the other suffered him to defile Jerusalem and
the Temple of God with all abominations, and so were they criminal of his sin;
the one by act and deed, the other by suffering and permission, even as
Scotland is this day guilty of the Queens Idolatry; and ye, my Lords, in
special, above others. Well (said Lethington) that is the chief Head wherein
we never agreed; but of that we shall speak hereafter: What will ye say as
touching the moving of the people to have a good opinion of the Queens Majesty,
and as concerning obedience to be given to her Authority? as also of the form
of Prayer which ye commonly use? My Lord (says he) more earnestly to move the
people, or yet otherwise to pray, then heretofore I have done, Note diligently,
and see how the Bishops did forbid to pray for the conversion of the Queen that
now is in Britain.
a good conscience will not suffer me; for he who knows the secrets of hearts,
knows, That privately and publicly I have called to God for her conversion,
and have willed the people to do the same, showing unto them the dangerous
state wherein not only she her self stands, but also the whole Realm, by
reason of her indurate blindness. That is (said Lethington) wherein we find
the greatest fault, your extremity against her Mass in particular, passes
measure; ye call her a slave to Satan; ye affirm that Gods vengeance hangs
over the Realm, by reason of her impiety: And what is this else, but to raise
up the hearts of the poeple against her Majesty, and against them that serve
her. Then there was heard an acclamation of the rest of the flatterers, that
such extremity could not profit. The Master of Maxwell said in plain words, If
I were in the Queens Majesty's place, I would not suffer such things as I hear.
If the words of Preachers (said John Knox) shall be always wrested in the
worst part, M. Maxwells words in the Assembly.
then will it be hard to speak any thing so circumspectly (providing that the
truth be spoken) which shall not escape the censure of the calumniator. The
most vehement (as ye speak) and most excessive manner of Prayer that I use in
public, is this: O Lord, if thy good pleasure be, purge the heart of the
Queens Majesty from the venom of Idolatry, John Knox his prayer for the Queen.
and deliver her from the bondage and thraldom of Satan, into the which she
has been brought up, and yet remains, for the lack of true Doctrine; and let
her see, by the illumination of thy holy Spirit, That there is no means to
please thee, but by Jesus Christ thy only Son; and that Jesus Christ cannot be
found, but in thy holy Word; nor yet received, but as it prescribes, which is,
To renounce our own wisdom, and preconceived opinion, and worship thee as it
commands; that in so doing, she may avoid the eternal damnation which is
ordained for all obstinate and impenitent to thee; and that this poor Realm may
also escape that plague and vengeance which inevitably follows Idolatry,
maintained against thy manifest Word, and the light thereof. This (said he) is
the form of common Prayer, as your selves can witness: Now what is worthy of
reprehension in it, I would hear. There are three things in it (said
Lethington) that never liked me; and the first is, Ye pray for the Queens
Majesty with a condition, saying, Illuminate her heart, if thy good pleasure
be; Wherein it may appear, That ye doubt of her conversion; Where have ye the
example of such Prayer? Wheresoever the examples are (said the other) I am
assured of the Rule, which is this, If we shall ask any thing according to his
Will, he shall grant us: And our Master Christ Jesus commands us to pray unto
our Father, Thy will be done. But (said Lethington) Where ever find ye any of
the Prophets so to have prayed? It suffices me (said the other) my Lord, that
the Master and Teacher both of Prophets and Apostles, has taught me so to
pray. But in so doing (said Lethington) ye put a doubt in the peoples heads of
her conversion. Not I (said the other) but her own obstinate rebellion, causes
more then me to doubt of her conversion. Wherein (said he) rebels she against
God? In all the actions of her life (said M. Knox) but in these two Heads
especially; The former is, That she will not hear the Preaching of the blessed
Evangel of Jesus Christ. Note.
2. That she maintains that Idol the Mass. She thinks not that rebellion
(said Lethington.) So thought they (said the other) that sometimes offered
their children unto Molech; and yet the Spirit of God affirms, That they
offered them unto devils, and not unto God: And this day the Turks think they
have a better Religion then the Papists have; and yet I think ye will excuse
neither of both from committing rebellion against God; neither yet can ye do
the Queen, unless ye will make God to be partial. But (said Lethington) Why
pray ye not for her, without moving any doubt? Because (said the other) I have
learned to pray in faith; now faith (ye know) depends upon the Word of God; and
so it is that the Word teaches me, That prayer profits the sons and
daughters of Gods Election; of which number if she be one or not, I have just
cause to doubt; and therefore I pray that God would illuminate her heart, if
his good pleasure be so to do: But yet (said Lethington) ye can produce the
example of none that so has prayed before you. Thereto I have already answered
(said John Knox) But yet for further declaration, I will demand a question,
which is this, Whether ye think that the Apostles prayed themselves, as they
commanded others to pray, or not? who doubts of that, said the company that
were present. Well then, said John Knox, I am assured, that Peter said these
words to Simon Magus, Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God,
That if it be possible, the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Here we
may clearly see, That Peter joins a condition with his Commandment, That Simon
should repent and pray; to wit, If it were possible that his sin might be
forgiven, for he was not ignorant, that some sins are unto death, and so
without all hope of repentance, or remission. And think ye not (my Lord
Secretary, said he) but that same doubt may touch my heart; as touching the
Queens conversion, that then touched the heart of the Apostle; I would never
(said Lethington) hear you, or any other call that in doubt: But your will
(said the other) is no assurance to my conscience. And to speak freely, My
Lord, I wonder if ye your self doubt not of the Queens conversion; for more
evident signs of Induration have appeared, and do appear in her, then Peter
outwardly could have espied in Simon Magus; for albeit sometimes, he was a
Sorcerer, yet joined he with the Apostles, believed, and was baptized. And
albeit, That the venom of Avarice remained in his heart, and that he would
have bought the holy Ghost; yet, when he heard the fearful threatenings of God
pronounced against him, he trembled; desired the assistance of the Prayers of
the Apostles; and so humbled himself, so far as the judgment of man could
pierce, like a true penitent; and yet we see that Peter doubts of his
conversion; Why then may not all the godly, justly doubt of the conversion of
the Queen, who has used Idolatry, which is also most odious in the sight of
the most jealous God, and still continues in the same; yet she despises all
threatenings, and refuses all godly admonitions. Why say ye, That she refuses
admonition, (said Lethington) she will gladly hear any man: But what obedience
(said the other) to God or to his word ensues of all that is spoken unto her,
or when shall she be seen to give her presence to the public Preaching; I
think never (said Lethington) so long as she is thus used. And so long (said
the other) ye, and all others must be content, that I pray so, as I may be
assured to be heard of my God; that is, That his good will may be done, either
in making her comfortable to his Church; or if that he has appointed her to be
a scourge to the same, That we may have patience, and she may be bridled. Well,
(said Lethington) Let us come to the second head? Where find ye, that the
Scriptures calls any the bond slaves of Satan, or that the Prophets of God
spoke of Kings and Princes, so irreverently. The Scripture, said John Knox,
says, That by nature we are all the sons of wrath: Our Master Christ
affirms, That such as do sin, are servants to sin, and that it is the
only Son of God that sets men at freedom; now what difference there is
betwixt the sons of wrath, the servants of sin, etc. And the slaves of
Satan, I understand not, except I be taught; And if the sharpness of the term
offend you, I have not invented that phrase of speech, but have learned it out
of Gods Scriptures; for these words I find spoken unto Paul, Behold I send
thee unto the Gentiles, to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness
unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Mark the words, my Lord, and
stir not at the speaking of the holy Ghost. And the same Apostle writing to
his Scholar Timothius, 2 Timothy 2.
says, Instruct with meekness those that are contrary minded, if that God at
any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and come to
amendment out of the snare of the Devil, which are taken of him at his will.
If your Lordship do rightly consider these sentences, you shall not only find
my words to be the words of the holy Ghost, but also the condition which I use
to add, to have the assurance of Gods Scriptures.

But they speak nothing against Kings in Scripture in special (said
Lethington) and your continual crying is, The Queens Idolatry, The Queens
Mass will provoke Gods vengeance.

In the former sentence (said the other) I hear not Kings and Queens excepted,
but all unfaithful are pronounced to stand in one rank, and to be in bondage
to one Tyrant the Devil. But believe me, my Lord, you little regard the state
wherein they stand, when you would have them so flattered, that the danger
thereof should neither be known, neither yet declared to the people.

Where will you find (said Lethington) that any of the Prophets did so use
Kings, Queens, Rulers or Magistrates.

In more places then one, (said the other;) Ahab was a King, and Iezabel a
Queen, and yet what the Prophet Elias said to the one, and to the other I
suppose you are not ignorant.

That was not cried out before the people, (said Lethington) to make them
odious unto their subjects.

That Elias said, Dogs shall lick the blood of Ahab, (said John Knox) and eat
the flesh of Iezabell, the Scriptures assures me; but that it was whispered in
their Ears, or in a Corner, I read not; but the plain contrary appears to me,
which is, that both the people and the Court understood well enough what the
Prophet had promised; for so witnessed Iehu after that Gods vengeance had
stricken Iezabell.

These were singular motions of the Spirit of God (said Lethington) and
appertains nothing to our age.

Then has the Scripture (said the other) deceived me, for Saint Paul teaches
me, that whatsoever is written within the holy Scriptures, the same is written
for our instruction; And my Master says, That every learned Scribe brings
forth of his Treasure, both things old and things new; and the Prophet Jeremy
affirms, That every Realm or City that likewise offends, (as then did
Jerusalem) should likewise be punished.

Why then, that the facts of ancient Prophets, and the fearful judgments of
God, executed before us, upon the disobedient, appertain not unto our age, I
neither see, nor yet can understand.

But now to put an end to this Head, my Lord, (says he) the Prophets of God
have not spared to rebuke Kings, Note.
as well to their faces as before the people and subjects; Elizeus feared not
to say to King Iehoram, What have I to do with thee, get thee to the other
Prophets of thy Mother; for as the Lord of Hosts lives, in whose sight I
stand* if it were not that I regard the presence of Iehosaphat, the King of
Judah, I would not have looked toward thee, nor seen thee? Plain it is, that
the Prophet was a Subject in the Kingdom of Israel, and yet how little
reverence he gives to the King; we hear Jeremy the Prophet was commanded to
Cry to the King and Queen, and to say, Behave your selves lowly, execute
justice, and judgment, etc. or else your Carcasses shall be casten to the
heat of the day, and unto the frost of the night. Unto Conias, Sullim, and
Zedekias, he speaks in special, and shows to them in his public Sermons
their miserable ends; and therefore ye ought not to think strange my Lord
(said he) albeit the servants of God, tax the vices of Kings and Queens, even
as well as of other offenders; and that because their sins be more noisome to
the Commonwealth, then are the sins of inferior persons.

The most part of this reasoning, Secretary Lethington leaned upon the Master
of Maxwells Breast, who said, I am almost weary, I would some other would
reason in the chief head, which is yet untouched.

Then the Earl of Mortoune, Chancellor, commanded Master George Hay to reason
against John Knox in the head of obedience due to Magistrates, who began so to
do; Unto whom John Knox said, Brother, that ye shall reason in my contrary, I
am well content, because I know you to be both a man of learning, and of
modesty; but that you shall oppose your self unto the Truth, whereof I
suppose your own conscience is no less persuaded, Note.
then is mine, I cannot well approve; for I would be sorry, that ye and I
should be reputed to reason, as two Scholars of Pythagoras, to show the
quickenesse of our wit, as it were to reason on both parts: I protest here
before God, That whatsoever I sustain, I do the same in conscience; yea, I
dare no more sustain a proposition, known to my self untrue, then I dare
teach false Doctrine, in the public place; And therefore Brother, if
Conscience move you to oppose your self to that Doctrine which ye have heard
out of my mouth, in that matter, do it boldly, it shall never offend me; But
that ye shall be found to oppose your self unto me, ye being persuaded in
the same Truth; I say yet again, it pleases me not; for therein may be
greater inconveniency, then either ye or I do consider for the public.

The said Master George answered, That I will not oppose my self unto you, as
one willing to impugn or confute that Head of Doctrine, which not only ye,
but many others; yea, and my self have affirmed, far be it from me, for so
should I be found contrarious to my self; for my Lord Secretary knows, my
judgment in that Head.

Marry, said the Secretary, you are (in my opinion) the worst of the two, for I
remember that your Reasoning when the Queen was in Carricke.

Well said John Knox, seeing Brother, God has made you one to fill the chair
of verity; wherein I am assured, we agree in all principal Heads of Doctrine;
Let it never be said, That we agree not in disputation. John Knox was moved
thus to speak, because he understood more of the craft then the other did.
Well (said Lethington) I am somewhat better provided in this last Head, then I
was in the other two: Master Knox, said he, yesterday we heard your Judgment
upon the thirteenth to the Romans; we heard the mind of the Apostle well
opened; we heard the causes why God has established powers upon the earth; we
heard of the necessity that mankind has of the same; and we heard the duty
of Magistrates sufficiently declared; But in two things I was offended, as I
think some other more of my Lords that were present: which was, Ye made
difference betwixt the Ordinance of God, and the persons that were placed in
Authority: And ye affirmed, That men might refuse the persons, and yet not
offend against Gods Ordinance; This is one, the other ye had no time to
explain; but this me thought ye meant, That Subjects were not bound to obey
their Princes, if they command unlawful things, but that they might refuse
their Princes; and that they were not ever bound to suffer.

In very deed, said the other, ye have rightly both marked my words, and
understood my mind; for of that same Judgment I have long been, and yet so
remain.

Let this be no^ed diligently.
How will ye prove your division and difference (said Lethington,) and that the
persons placed in Authority, may be resisted, and the Ordinance of God not
transgressed, seeing that the Apostle says, He that resists, resists the
Ordinance of God.

My Lord said he, The plain words of the Apostle makes the difference, and the
facts of many approved by God, prove my affirmative. First the Apostle
affirms, That the powers are ordained of God, for the preservation of quiet
and peaceable men, and for the punishment of malefactors; whereof it is plain,
That the Ordinance of God and the power given unto man, is one thing, and the
person clad with the Authority, is another; For Gods Ordinance is the
conservation of mankind, The punishment of vice, and the maintenance of
virtue, which in it self, is holy, just, constant, stable, and perpetual; but
men clad with the Authority, are commonly profane and unjust; ye, they are
mutable, transitory, and subject to corruption, as God threateneth by his
Prophet David, Psalm. 82.
saying, I have said ye are gods, and every one of you the sons of the most
high; but ye shall dye as man, and the Princes shall fall like others. Here I
am assured, That the persons, ye soul and body are threatened with death; I
think that so ye will not affirm, is the Authothority, the Ordinance, and the
Power, wherewith God endeued such persons; for (as I have said) it is holy, so
is the permanent will of God. And now, my Lord, that the Prince may be
resisted, and yet the Ordinance of God not violated: It is evident that the
people resisted Saul, when he had sworn by the living God that Jonathan should
die; Note this.
The people (I say) swore in the contrary, and delivered Jonathan, so that a
hair of his head fell not: Now Saul was the Anointed King, and they were his
subjects, and yet they resisted him, that they made him no better then men
sworn. I doubt (said Lethington) That in so doing, the people did well. The
Spirit of God (said the other) accuses them not of any crime, but rather
praises them, and condemns the King, as well for his foolish vow and Law made
without God, as for his cruel mind, that so severely would have punished an
innocent man: But herein will I not stand; this that follows shall confirm
the former. This same Saul commanded Abimelech and the Priests of the Lord to
be slain, because they had committed Treason (as he alleged) for
intercommuning with David: 1 Samuel 22.
His Guard, and principal servants, would not obey his unjust commandment; But
Doeg the flatterer put the Kings cruelty in execution. I will not ask your
judgment, Whether that the servants of the King, in not obeying his
Commandment, resisted the Ordinance of God, or not; or, Whether Doeg, in
murdering the Priests, gave obedience to a just Authority: For I have the
Spirit of God, speaking by the mouth of David, Note this Discourse diligently.
for assurance, as well of the one, as of the other; for he in his 52. Psalm,
condemns that fact, as a most cruel murder; and affirms, That God would
punish, not only the commander, but also the merciless executer: And
therefore I conclude, That they who gainstood his commandment, resisted not the
Ordinance of God. And now (my Lord) to answer to the place of the Apostle, who
affirms, That such as resist the Power, resist the Ordinance of God; I say,
That the power in that place is not to be understood of unjust commandment of
men, but of the just power wherewith God has armed his Magistrates and
Lieutenants, to punish sin, and maintain virtue. And if any man should
enterprise to take from the hands of the faithful Judge a murderer and
adulterer, or any malefactor that deserved death, this same resists Gods
Ordinance, and procures to himself vengeance and damnation, because that he
stayed Gods Sword from striking. But so it is, if men in the fear of God oppose
themselves to the fury and blind rage of Princes; for so they resist not God,
but the devil, who abuses the Sword and Authority of God. I understand
sufficiently (said Lethington) what ye mean; unto the one part I will not
oppose my self, but I doubt of the other; for if the Queen would command me to
slay John Knox, because she is offended at him, I would not obey her: But if
she would command others to do it, or yet by color of Justice take his life
from him, I cannot tell if I be bound to defend him against the Queen and her
Officers. With protestation (said the other) That the auditors think not that I
speak in favor of my self, I say, my Lord, That if ye be persuaded of my
innocence, and if God have given unto you such power and credit as might
deliver me, and yet suffered me to perish, that in so doing, ye should be
criminal and guilty of my blood. Prove that, and win the play (said
Lethington.) Well, my Lord (said the other) remember your promise, and I will
be short in my probation: The Prophet Jeremy was apprehended by the Priests and
Prophets (who were a part of the Authority within Jerusalem) and by the
multitude of the people, and this sentence was pronounced against him, Thou
shall die the death; for thou have said, This house shall be like Siloh, and
this City shall be desolate, without any Inhabitant, etc. The Princes hearing
the uprore, came from the Kings house, and sat down in Judgment in the entry
of the new Gate of the Lords House; And there the Priests and Prophets, before
the Princes, and before all the people, intented their Accusation in these
words; This man is worthy to die; for he has prophesied against this City, and
your ears have heard. Jeremiah answered, That whatsoever he had spoken,
proceeded from God; and therefore said he; As for me, behold, I am in your
hands, do with me as ye think good and right; But know ye for certain, That
if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your souls,
and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof: For of a truth, the Lord
has sent me unto you to speak all these words. Now, my Lord, if the Princes
and the whole people should have been guilty of the Prophets blood, How shall
ye, or others, be judged innocent before God, if ye shall suffer the blood of
such as have not deserved their blood to be shed, when ye may save it. The
causes were nothing alike (said Lethington.) And I would learn (said the other)
wherein the dissimilitude stands. First (said Lethington) the King had not
condemned him to death; And next, The false Prophets, the Priests, and the
People, accused him without a cause, and therefore they could not be guilty of
his blood. Neither of these (said John Knox) fights against my argument; For
albeit the King was neither present, nor yet had condemned him, yet were the
Princes and chief Counselors there sitting in Judgment, who represented the
Kings Authority, hearing the accusation laid unto the charge of the Prophet;
And therefore he forewarns them of the danger, as before is said; to wit, That
in case he should be condemned, and so put to death, That the King, the
Council, and the whole City of Jerusalem, should be guilty of his blood,
because that he had committed no crime worthy of death: And if ye think that
they all should have been criminal, only because that they all accused him,
the plain Text witnesses the contrary; for the Princes defended him, and so
(no doubt) did a great part of the People; and yet he boldly affirmed, That
they should be all guilty of his blood, God craves of us, That we should oppose
our selves to iniquity.
if he should be put to death. And the Prophet Ezekiel gives a reason, Why all
are guilty of common corruption, Because (says he) I sought a man amongst
them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the
Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none; Therefore have I poured
forth my indignation upon them. Hereof, my Lord, (said he) it is plain, That
God craves, not only that man should do no iniquity in his own person; but
also that he oppose himself to all iniquity, so far as in him lies. Then
will ye (said Lethington) make subjects to control their Princes and Rulers.
And what harm (said the other) should the Commonwealth receive, if the
corrupt affections of ignorant Rulers were moderated, and so bridled by the
wisdom and discretion of godly subjects, that they should do no wrong, nor no
violence to any man. All this reasoning (said Lethington) is out of the
purpose; For we reason as if the Queen should become such an enemy to our
Religion, that she should persecute it, and put innocent men to death; while I
am assured, she never thought, nor never will do; For if I should see her begin
at that end, yea, if I should suspect any such thing in her, I should be as
far forward in that argument, as ye, or any other within the Realm: But
there is no such thing; Our Question is, Whether that ye may suppress the
Queens Mass; or, Whether that her Idolatry shall be laid to our charge. What
ye may (said John Knox) by force, I dispute not: But what ye may and ought to
do by Gods express Commandment, that I can tell Idolatry ought not only to be
suppressed, but the Idolater also ought to die the death: But by whom? By the
people of God (said the other) for the Commandment was given to Israel, as ye
may read, Hear Israel,, (says the Lord) the Statutes and the Ordinances of
the Lord thy God, etc. Yea, a Commandment is given, that if it be heard that
Idolatry is committed in any one City, inquisition shall be taken; and if it be
found true, That then the whole Body of the People arise and destroy that City,
sparing in it neither man, woman, nor child. But there is no Commandment (said
the Secretary) given to punish their King. If he be an Idolater, I find no
privilege granted unto Kings (said the other) by God, more then unto the
people, to offend Gods Majesty. I grant (said Lethington) but yet the people
may not be judges to their King to punish him, albeit he be an Idoter. God
(said the other) is the Universal Judge, as well unto the King, as to the
People: So that what his Word commands to be punished in the one, is not to be
absolved in the other. We agree in that (said Lethington) But the people may
not execute Gods Judgments, but mst leave it unto himself, who will either
punish it by Death, by War, by Imprisonment, or by some other kind of his
Plagues.

I know (said John Knox) the last part of the reason to be true: But for the
first, That the people, yea, or a part of the people, may not execute Gods
Judgments against their King, being an offender: I am assured ye have no other
Warrant, except your own imaginations, and the opinion of such as more fear to
offend their Princes then God.

Why say ye so (said Lethington) I have the judgment of the most famous men in
Europe, and of such as ye your self will confess both godly and learned.

And with that he called for his Papers, which produced by Master Maitland, he
bagan to read with great gravity the Judgments of Luther, Melancthon, the
minds of Bucer, Musculus, and Calvin, how Christians should behave themselves
in time of Persecution; yea, the Book of Baruc was not omitted, with this
conclusion, The gathering of those things (said he) has cost me more travel
then I think this seven years in reading Commentaries.

The more pity (said the other) and yet what you have profited your own cause,
let others judge. But as for my argument, I am assured you have infirmed it in
nothing; for your first two witnesses speak against the Anabaptists, who deny
that Christians should be subject to Magistrates; or yet that it is lawful for
a Christian to be a Magistrate: whose opinion, I no less abhor, then ye do, or
any other that lives. The others speak of Christians subject to Tyrants and
Infidels, so dispersed, that they have no other force, but only to sob unto
God for deliverance; that such (indeed) should hazard any further then these
godly men wills them, I cannot hastily be of counsel: But my argument has
another ground; for I speak of a people assembled in one Body of a
Commonwealth, unto whom God has given sufficient force, not only to resist,
but also to suppress all kind of open Idolatry: And such a people yet again I
affirm, are bound to keep their Land clean and unpolluted. And that this my
division shall not appear strange unto you, ye shall understand that God
required one thing of Abraham and of his Seed, when he and they were strangers
and Pilgrims in Egypt and Canaan; and another thing required he of them, when
they were delivered from the Bondage of Egypt, Let this be noted for our times.
and the possession of the Land of Canaan granted unto them: The first, and
during the time of their Bondage, God craved no more, but that Abraham should
not defile himself with their Idolatry; neither was he, nor his Posterity
commanded to destroy the Idols that were in Canaan, or in Egypt: But when God
gave unto them possession of the Land, he gave unto them this strait
Commandment, Beware that thou make not League or Confederacy with the
inhabitants of this Land: give not thy sons unto their daughters, nor yet
give thy daughters unto their sons, etc. But this ye shall do unto them, Cut
down their Groves, destroy their Images, break down their Altars, and leave
thou no kind of remembrance of these Abominations which the Inhabitants of the
Land used before; for thou art a holy People unto the Lord thy God; defile not
thy self therefore with their gods, etc. To this Commandment, I say, are ye,
my Lords, and all such as have professed the Lord within this Realm, bound;
for God has wrought no less miraculously upon you, both Spiritually and
Corporally, then he did unto the Carnal Seed of Abraham: For in what state
your Bodies, and this poor Realm were, within these seven years, your selves
cannot be ignorant; you, and it were both in the Bondage of a strange Nation,
and what Tyrants did reign over your consciences, God perchance may yet again
let you feel, because that ye do not rightly acknowledge and esteem the
benefits received, when our poor Brethren that were before us, gave up their
bodies to the flames of fire, for the Testimony of Gods Truth. And when
scarcely could be found ten in a Country that rightly knew God, it had been
foolishness to have craved, either of the Nobility, or of the mean Subjects,
the suppressing of Idolatry; for that had been nothing, but to have exposed the
simple Sheep in a prey to the Wolves: But since that God has multiplied
knowledge, yea, and has given the victory to his Truth, even in the hands of
his servants, if ye suffer the Land again to be defiled, Whether this* has
come to pass or not, let the world judge.
ye, and your Princes shall both drink the cup of Gods indignation. The
Queen, for her obstinate abiding in manifest Idolatry, in this great light of
the Evangell of Jesus Christ; And ye, for your permission and maintaining her
in the same. ( Lethington said,) In that point we will never agree.

And where find ye (I pray you) that ever any of the Prophets, or of the
Apostles, taught such Doctrine, That the people should be plagued for the
Idolatry of the Prince; or yet, That the Subjects might suppress the Idolatry
of the Rulers, or them for the same. What was the Commission given unto the
Apostles? My Lord, (said he) we know it was to preach, and plant the Evangell
of Jesus Christ where darkness before had Dominion; And therefore it behoved
them to let them see the light, before that they should will them, to put their
hands to suppress Idolatry: What precepts the Apostles gave unto the faithful
in particular, other then that they commanded, all to fly from Idolatry, I will
not affirm: But I find two things which the faithful did; The one was, They
assisted their Preachers, even against the Rulers and Magistrates; The other
was, They suppressed Idolatry, wheresoever God gave unto them force; asking no
leave of the Emperor, nor of his Deputies. Read the Ecclesiastical Histories,
and ye shall find examples sufficient? And as to the Doctrine of the Prophets,
we know they were Interpreters of the Law of God; and we know, They spoke as
well unto the Kings, as unto the People. I read that neither of both would
hear them; and therefore came the plague of God upon both; but that they
flattered the Kings, more then they did the people, I cannot be persuaded. Now
Gods Law pronounces death (as before I have said) to Idolaters without
exception of persons. Note this diligently.
Now, how the Prophets could rightly interpret the Law, and show the cause of
Gods Judgments, which ever they threatened, should fall for Idolatry, and for
the rest of the abominations that did accompany it (for it is never alone, but
still corrupt Religion brings with it, a filthy, and corrupt life.) How (I say)
the Prophets could reprove the Vice, and not show the people their duty, I
understand not; And therefore, I constantly believe, That the Doctrine of the
Prophets was so sensible, That the Kings understood their own abominations;
and the people understood, what they ought to have done in punishing and
repressing them. But because that the most part of the People was no less
Rebellious unto God, then were their Princes; Therefore the one, and the other,
conjured against God, and against his servants. And yet my Lord, The facts of
some Prophets are so evident, That thereby we may collect what Doctrine they
taught; For it were no small absurdity to affirm, that their facts did repugne
to their Doctrine. I think (said Lethington) ye mean of the History of Iehu,
What will ye prove thereby? The chief head (said John Knox) that ye deny, to
wit, That the Prophets never taught, that it appertained to the people to
punish the Idolatry of their Kings: The contrary whereof I affirm; and for the
probation, I am ready to produce the fact of a Prophet. For ye know my Lord
(said he) that Elizeus, sent one of the children of the Prophets to anoint
Iehu, who gave him a commandment to destroy the house of his Master Achab for
the Idolatry committed by him; and for the innocent blood that Iezabell his
wicked Wife had shed. While he obeyed and put in full execution (for the which)
God promised unto him, the stability of the Kingdom, unto the fourth
Generation.

Now (said he) here is the fact of a Prophet, that proves, that Subjects were
commanded to execute Gods judgments upon their King and Prince. There is
enough (said Lethington) to be answered thereto; For Iehu was a King before he
put any thing in execution. And besides, That the fact is extraordinary, and
ought not to be Imitate: My Lord (said the other) he was a mere Subject, and
no King, when the Prophets servant came unto him; yea, and albeit that his
fellow Captains hearing of the Message, blew the Trumpet, and said, Iehu is
King; yet I doubt not, but Iezabel both thought, and said, that he was a
Traitor; and so did many others that were in Israel, and in Samaria.

And as touching, That ye allege, that the fact was extraordinary, and is not
to be imitate: I say, That it had the ground of Gods ordinary judgment, which
commands the Idolater to dye the death. And therefore, I yet again affirm,
That it is to be Imitate of all those that preferres the true Honor of the
true Worship and Glory of God, to the affection of flesh, and wicked Princes.
We are not bound (said Lethington) to follow extraordinary examples, unless we
have the like commandment and assurance. I grant (said the other) if the
example repugne to the Law; As if an avaritious and deceitful man would borrow
Silver, Raiment, or other necessaries from his Neighbor, and withhold the
same; alleging, that so he might do, and not offend God; because the
Israelites at their departure forth of Egypt, did so to the Egyptians. The
example served to no purpose, unless that they could produce the like cause,
No^^.
and the like commandment that the Israelites had; and that because their fact
repugned to this Commandment of God, Thou shall not steal: But where the
example agrees with the Law, and is, as it were the execution of Gods
judgment, expressed within the same; I say, That the example approved of God,
stands to us in place of a Commandment; For as God in his Nature, is constant
and immutable, so can he not condemn in the Ages subsequent, that which he
has approved in his servants before us; but in his servants before us, he by
his own word confounds all such as crave further approbation of Gods will, then
is already expressed within his Scriptures; For Abraham said, They have Moses
and the Prophets, whom if they will not believe, neither will they believe,
albeit that any of the dead should rise. Even so (I say) my Lord, that such as
will not be taught what they ought to do by the Commandment of God once given,
and once put in practice, will not believe nor obey, albeit, that God should
send Angels from Heaven to instruct that Doctrine.

Ye have produced but one example (said Lethington) one suffices (said the
other; ^. Paral 25.
) but yet God be praised we lack not others; for the whole people conspired
against Amasiah King of Judah, after that he had turned away from the Lord, and
followed him to Lachis, and slew him, and took Uzziah and anointed him King in
steed of his father. The people had not altogether forgotten the League and
Covenant, which was made betwixt their Kings and them, at the Inauguration of
Iohas his Father; to wit, That the King and the People should be the People of
the Lord, and then should they be his faithful Subjects. From the which
Covenant when first the Father, and after the son had declined, they were
both punished to death, Ioas by his own servants, and Amasias by the whole
people. When the Prince does serve God sincerely in private and public, and
has a care that the people do the same, then assuredly they are faithful to
him; but if he fail in these or in either of them, he finds disobedience in
his people, because he is not careful to obey God, and to see him obeyed.


I doubt (said Lethington) whether they did well, or not.

It shall be free for you (said the other) to doubt as you please, but where I
find execution according to Gods Law, and God himself not to accuse the
doers, I dare not doubt of the equity of their cause. And farther it appears
to me, that God gave sufficient approbation and allowance of their fact, for he
blessed them with victory, peace and prosperity the space of fifty two years
after.

But prosperity (said Lethington) does not always prove that God approves the
facts of men.

Yes, (said the other) when the facts of men agree with the Law of God, and are
rewarded according to his own promise expressed in his Law; I say, that the
prosperity succeeding the fact, is a most infallible assurance that God has
approved that fact. Now so it is That God has pronounced in his Law, That when
the people shall exterminat and destroy such as decline from him, that he will
bless them and multiply them, Deuteronomy. 13. 2 Paral. 26.
as he has promised unto their Fathers. But so it is that Masiah turned from
God (for so the Text does witness, Let this be applied to the late affairs of
Scotland.
and plain it is the people slew their King; and like plain it is, that God
blessed them: Therefore yet again conclude I, that God himself approved their
fact, and so far as it was done according to his commandment, it was blessed
according to his promise.

Well, (said Lethington) I think not the ground so sure, as I durst build my
Conscience thereupon.

I pray God (said the other) that your Conscience have no worse ground then
this is whenever you shall begin the like work which God in your own eyes
has already blessed. And now, my Lord, (says he) I have but one example to
produce, and then I will put an end to my reasoning, because I am weary longer
to stand. Commandment was given that he should sit down; but he refused, and
said, Melancholy reasons would have some mirth intermixed: My last example, 2
Paral. 26.
(said he) my Lord is this, Uzziah the King not content with his Royal Estate,
malapertly took upon him to enter within the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense
upon the Altar of Incense; and Azariah the Priest, went in after him, and with
him fourscore Priests of the Lord, valiant men, and they withstood Uzziah, and
said unto him, It appertains not unto thee, (Uzziah) to burn Incense unto the
Lord, but to the Priest^ the Sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to offer
Incense; Go forth of the Sanctuary, for thou have transgressed, and thou shall
have none honor of the Lord. Hereof, my Lords, I conclude, Note.
That Subjects not only may, but also ought to withstand and resist their
Princes, whenever they do any thing that expressly repugnes to God, his
Law, or holy Ordinance.

They that withstood the King (said Lethington) were not simple subjects, but
were the Priests of the Lord, and figures of Christ, and such Priests have we
none this day to withstand Kings if they do any wrong.

That the High Priest was the figure of Christ (said the other) I grant, but
that he was not a subject, that I deny; for I am assured, that he in his
Priesthood had no Prerogative above those that passed before him; now so it is,
that Aaron was subject to Moses, and called him his Lord; Samuel being both
P^ophet and Priest, subjected himself unto Saul after he was inaugurated of
the People; Sadoc bowed before David; and Abiathar was deposed from the
Priesthood by Solomon, which all confessed themselves subjects to the Kings,
albeit therewith they ceased not to be the figures of Christ. And whereas you
say, we have no such priests this day, I might answer, That neither have we
such Kings this day as then were anointed by Gods commandment, and sat upon
the seat of David, and were no less the figure of Christ Jesus in their just
administration, then were the Priests in their appointed Office; and such kings
(I am assured) we have not now no more then we have such Priests; for Christ
Jesus being anointed in our nature of God his Father, both King, Priest and
Prophet, has put end to all external unction. And yet I think you will not
say that God has now diminished his graces from those whom he appoints
Ambassadors betwixt him and his people, then he does from Kings and Princes;
and therefore why the servants of Jesus Christ may not also justly withstand
Kings and Princes that this day no less offend Gods Majesty then Uzziah did,
I see not; unless that ye will not say, that we in the brightness of the
Evangell, are not so straightly bound to regard Gods glory, nor his Commandments,
as were the Fathers who lived under the dark shadows of the Law.

Well (said Lethington) I will dip no farther in that Head; but how resisted
the Priests the King, they only spoke unto him, without further violence
intended.

That they withstood him (said the other) the Text assures me, but that they
did nothing but speak, I cannot understand; for the plain Text affirms the
contrary, to wit, That they caused him hastily to depart from the sanctuary,
yea, and that he was compelled to depart; which manner of speaking (I am
assured) in the Hebrew Tongue, imports more then exhorting, or commanding by
word.

They did that (said Lethington) after he was espied to be leprous.

They withstood him before, (said the other) but yet their last fact confirms
my proposition so evidently, that such as will oppose themselves unto it, must
needs oppose themselves unto God; for my assertion is, That Kings have no
privilege more then has the people to offend Gods Majesty, and if so they
do, they are no more exempted from the punishment of the Law, then is any other
subject; yea, and that subjects may not only lawfully oppose themselves to
their Kings, whenever they do any thing that expressly oppugnes Gods
Commandment, but also that they may execute judgment upon them, according to
Gods Law; so that if the King be a Murderer, Adulterer, or an Idolater, he
should suffer according to Gods Law, not as a King, but as an offender: And
that the people may put Gods Law in execution, this History clearly proves;
for how soon that the Leprosy appeared in his forehead, he was not only
compelled to depart out of the Sanctuary, but also he was removed from all
public society and administration of the Kingdom, and was compelled to dwell
in a house apart, even as the Law commanded; and gat no greater privilege in
that case, then any other of the people should have done: And this was executed
by the people; for it was no doubt but more were witnesses of his Leprosy then
the Priests alone; but we find none oppose themselves to the sentence of God
pronounced in his Law against the Leprosy: And therefore yet again I say, That
the people ought to execute Gods Law, even against their Princes, when that
their open crimes by Gods Laws deserve punishment; but especially, when they
are such as may infect the rest of the multitude. And now, my Lords, (said he)
I will reason no longer, for I have spoken longer then I intended.

And yet (said Lethington) I cannot tell what shall be the conclusion.

Albeit ye cannot (said the other) yet I am assured what I have proved; to wit,
1. That subjects have delivered an innocent from the hands of their King, and
therefore offended not God. 2. That subjects have refused to strike innocents,
when a King commanded, and in so doing, denied no just Obedience. 2. That such
as struck at the commandment of the King, were before God reputed mutherers. 4.
That God has not only of a subject made a King, but also he armed subjects
against their natural King, and commanded them to take vengeance upon them,
according to his Law. 5. And lastly, That Gods people has executed Gods Law
against their King, having no further regard to him in that behalf, then if he
had been the most simple subject within the Realm.


And therefore, albeit ye will not understand what should be concluded, yet I
am assured, That not only may Gods people, but also, That they are bound to do
the same, where the like crimes are committed, and when he gives to them the
like power.

Well (said Lethington) I think ye shall not have many learned men of your
opinion.

My Lord, (said the other) the Truth cease not to be Truth, howsoever it be,
That men must either know it, or gainstand it. And yet (said he) I praise God,
I lack not the consent and approbation of Gods servants in that Head. And with
that he presented unto the Secretary the Apology of Magdeburgh, and willed him
to read the names of the Ministers, who had subscribed the defense of the Town
to be a most just defense; and therewith added, That to resist a misled King,
is not to resist God, nor yet his Ordinance, etc. Who when he had read, he
stouped and said, Homines obscuri. The other answered, Dei tamen servi. And
Lethington arose, and said, My Lords, ye have heard the reasons upon both
parts; it becomes you now to decide, and to put an order unto Preachers, that
they be uniform in Doctrine. May we (think ye) take the Queens Mass from her?

While that some began to give, as it were* their Votes (for some were
appointed, as it were, leaders of the rest) John Knox said; My Lords, I suppose
you will not do contrary to your Lordships promise made to the whole Assembly,
which was, That nothing should be voted in secret, till that first all matters
should be debated in public, and that then the Votes of the whole Assembly
should put end to the controversy. Now have I only sustained the argument,
and have rather shown my conscience in most simple manner, then that I have
insisted upon the force and vehemence of any one argument: And therefore I for
my part utterly disassent from all voting, until the whole Assembly have heard
the Propositions and the Reasons of both parties; for I unfainedly acknowledge,
That many in that company are more able to sustain the argument then I am.

Think ye it reasonable (said Lethington) That such a multitude as are now
convened, should reason and vote in such heads and matters that concerns the
Queens Majesty's own Person and Affairs.

I think (said the other) That whatsoever should bind the multitude, the
multitude should hear it; unless they have resigned their power to
Commissioners, which they have not done, so far as I understand; for my Lord
Justice Clerk heard them with one voice say, That in no wise would they consent
that any thing there should be voted or concluded.

I cannot tell (said Lethington) if my Lords that be here present, and that
bear the burden of such matters, should be bound to their will: What say ye,
my Lords, (said he) will ye vote in this matter, or will ye not vote?

After long reasoning, some that were made for the purpose, said, Why may not
the Lords vote, and then show unto the Church whatsoever is done?

That appears to me (said John Knox) not only a backward order, but a tyranny
usurped upon the Church: But for me, do as ye list (said he) for as I reason,
so I wrote; yet protesting as before, That I disassent from all voting, till
that the whole Assembly understand as well the questions as the reasons.

Well (said Lethington) that cannot be done now, for too much time is spent;
And therefore, my Lord Chancellor (said he) ask ye the votes, and take ever,
one of the Ministers, and one of us.

M. John Dowgl^s Rector, his Vote.
And so was the Rector of Saint Androes commanded first to speak his conscience:
Who said, I refer it to the Superintendent of Fyfe, for I think we are both of
one judgment: and yet (said he) if ye will that I speak first, my conscience
is this, That if the Queen oppose her self to our Religion (which is the only
true Religion) that in that case the Nobility and States of this Realm,
professors of the true Doctrine, may justly oppose themselves to her: But as
concerning her Mass, I know it is Idolatry, but I am not yet resolved, Whether
by violence we may take it from her, or not. The Superintendent of Fyfe said,
That same is my conscience: And so affirmed some of the Nobility. But others
voted frankly, and said, That as the Mass is abominable, so it is just and
right that it should be suppressed; And that in so doing, men did no more hurt
to the Queens Majesty, then they that should by force take from her a poisoned
cup, when she were a going to drink in it. Last Master John Craig, Master John
Craig his Vote.
fellow Minister with John Knox in the Church of Edinburgh, was required to
give his judgment and vote; who said, I will gladly show unto your Honors
what I understand; but I greatly doubt, Whether my knowledge and conscience
shall satisfy you, seeing you have heard so many reasons, and are so little
moved by them: But yet I will not conceal from you my judgment, adhering
first to the Protestation of my Brother, to wit, That our voting prejudge not
the Liberty of the General Assembly. I was (said he) in the University of
Bonnonia, in the year of our Lord 1554. where, in the place of the Blackfriars
of the same Town, I saw in the time of their General Assembly this Conclusion
set forth; the same I heard reasoned, determined and concluded, to this sense.

Conclusion.
ALl Rulers, be they Supreme or Inferior, may and ought to be reformed or
bridled (to speak moderately) by them by whom they are chosen, confirmed or
admitted to their Office, so often as they break that promise made by Oath to
their subjects; Because that the Prince is no less bound by Oath to the
subjects, then are the subjects to their Princes; And therefore ought it to be
kept and reformed equally, according to Law, and Condition of the Oath that is
made of either party.

This Conclusion (my Lords) I heard sustained and concluded, as I have said, in
a most notable Auditory. The sustainer was a learned man, Master Thomas de
Finola, Rector of the University, a man famous in that Country: Master
Vincentins de Placentia affirmed the Conclusion to be most true and certain,
agreeable both with the Law of God and man. The occasion of this disputation
and conclusion, was a certain disorder and tyranny that was attempted by the
Popes Governors, who began to make Innovations in the Country against the
Laws that were before established, alleging themselves not to be subject to
such Laws, by reason that they were not instituted by the People, but by the
Pope, who was King of that Country: And therefore they having full Commission
and Authority of the Pope, may alter and change Statutes and Ordinances of the
Country, without any consent of the people. Against this usurped Tyranny, the
learned and the people opposed themselves: And when that all reasons which the
Popes Governors could allege were heard and consulted, the Pope himself was
fain to take up the matter, and to promise, not only to keep the Liberty of
the people, but also that he should neither abrogate any Law nor Statute,
neither yet make any new Law, without their own consent: And therefore, my
Lord, (said he) my Vote and my Conscience is, That Princes are not only bound
to keep Laws and Promises to their subjects; Note dil^gently
But also, That in case they fail, they justly may be bridled: For the Band
betwixt the Prince and the People is reciprocal.

Then start up a claw-back of that corrupt Court, and said, Ye wot not what ye
say; for ye tell us what was done in Bononia; we are a Kingdom, and they are a
Commonwealth.

My Lord, (said he) my judgment is, That every Kingdom is, or at least should
be a Commonwealth, albeit that every Commonwealth be not a Kingdom; And
therefore I think that in a Kingdom no less diligence ought to be taken that
Laws ought not to be violated, then they ought to be in a Commonwealth,
because that the tyranny of Princes who continuing in a Kingdom, is more
hurtful to the subjects, then is the mis-government of those that from year to
year are changed, in free Commonwealths: But yet, my Lord, to assure you, and
all others, that Head was disputed to the uttermost; and then in the end was
concluded, That they spoke not of such things as were done in diverse Kingdoms
and Nations, by Tyranny and negligence of people: But we conclude (said they)
what ought to be done in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, according to the Law
of God, and unto the just Laws of man: And if by the negligence of the people,
by the tyranny of Princes, contrary Laws have been made, yet may that same
people, or their posterity, justly crave all things to be reformed according to
the original institution of Kings and Commonwealths; and such as will not so
do, Note deligently
deserve to eat the fruit of their own foolishness.

M. James Markgow, then Clerk of the Register, perceiving the Votes to be
different, and hearing the bold plainness of the foresaid servant of God,
said, I remember that this same question was long debated on before in my
house; and there, by reason we were not all of one mind, it was concluded,
That M. Knox in all our names, should have written to M. Calvin, for his
jugement in the controversy. Nay, (said M. Knox) my Lord Secretary would not
consent that I should write, alleging, That the greatest weight of the answer
stood in the Narrative; and therefore promised, that he would write, and that I
should see it: But when diverse times I required him to remember his promise, I
found nothing but delay. Whereunto the Secretary answered, True it is, I
promised to write; and true it is, That M. Knox required me so to do; but when
I had ripely advised, and deeply considered the weight of the matter, I found
more doubts then I did before: And this is one, amongst others; How durst I,
being a subject, and the Queens Majesty's Secretary, take upon me to seek
resolution of controversies depending betwixt her Highness and her subjects,
without her own knowledge and consent.

Then was an acclamation of the claw-backs of the Court, as if Apollo had given
his Responce: It was wisely and faithfully done.

Well (said John Knox) let worldly men praise worldly wisdom so highly as they
please, I am assured, that by such shifts Idolatry is maintained, and the truth
of Jesus Christ is betrayed, whereof God one day will be avenged.

At the and at the like sharpness were many offended, the Voting ceased, and
every Faction began to speak as affection moved; then John Knox in the end was
commanded yet to write to Master Calvin, and to the learned in other Churches,
to know their judgment in that Question; which he refused, showing his Reason,
I my self am not only full resolved in conscience, but also I have heard their
judgments, in this and all other things that I have affirmed within this
Realm, of the most godly and most learned that he knew in Europe; I came not
to this Realm without their Resolution; and for my assurance I have the
handwriting of many: And therefore if I should now move the said Questions
again, what should I do other, but either show mine own ignorance and
forgetfulness, or else inconstancy: And therefore it may please you to pardon
me, in that I write not. But I will teach you the surer way, which is, That you
write and complain upon me, That I teach publicly, and affirm constantly such
doctrine which offends you; and so shall you know their plain minds, and
whether that they and I agree in judgment, or not.

Diverse said the offer was good, but no man was found that would be the
Secretary, and so did that Assembly and long reasoning break up; After the
which time the Ministers (that were called precise) were holden as Monsters of
all the Courtiers. In all that time the Earl of Murray was so frame and
strange to John Knox, that neither by word nor writ was there any Communication
betwixt them, etc.

The end of the long reasoning betwixt John Knox and the Secretary, in the
month of June, 1564.
The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK Of the Reformation of the CHURCH Of SCOTLAND.
IN the next Month, which was July, the Queen went into Athole to the Hunting;
and from thence she made her Progress into Murray, and returned to Fyfe in
September. All this while there was appearance of love and tender friendship
betwixt the two Queens; For there was many Letters, full of Civility and
Complements sent from either of them to the other, There be two Epigrams
extant, written by George Buchanan, of a rich Diamond sent from Qu. Mary to
Queen Elizabeth.
in sign of Amity; besides costly Presents for Tokens. And in the mean time
the Earl of Lenox labored to come home forth of England, and in the month of
October he arrived at Halyrud-house, where he was graciously received by the
Queens Majesty; namely, When he had presented the Queen of England her
Letters, written in his favor: And because he could not be restored to his
Lands without Act of Parliament, therefore there was a Parliament procured to
be holden at Edinburgh the 13 day of December: But before the Queen would cause
to Proclaim a Parliament, she desired the Earl of Murray, by whose means
chiefly the said Earl of Lenox came into Scotland, That there should no word
be spoken, or at least concluded, that concerned Religion in the Parliament.
But he answered, That he could not promise it. In the mean time, the Hamiltons
and the Earl of Lenox were agreed.

At the day appointed, the Parliament was held at Edinburgh, where the said
Earl of Lenox was restored, after two and twenty years Exile: He was banished,
and forfeited by the Hamiltons, when they had the rule. There were some
Articles given in by the Church, especially for the abolishing of the Mass
universally, and for punishment of vice; but there was little thing granted,
save that it was Statute, That scandalous livers should be punished first by
prison, and then publicly shown unto the people with ignominy; but the same
was not put in execution. In the end of this month of December, the general
Assembly of the Church was held at Edinburgh, many things were ordained for
settling of the affairs of the Church.

In the end of January the Queen past to Fyfe, and visiting the Gentlemen's
houses, was magnificently banquetted every where, so that such superfluity was
never seen before within this Realm; which caused the wild Fowl to be so
dear, that Partridges were sold for a crown a piece. At this time was granted
by an Act of Parliament, the confirmation of the Fewes of Church Lands, at the
desire of diverse Lords, whereof the Earl of Murray was chief. During the
Queens absence, the Papists of Edinburgh went down to the Chapel to hear
Mass; and seeing there was no punishment, they waxed more bold: some of them
thinking thereby to please the Queen, upon a certain Sunday in February they
made an Evensong of their own, setting two Priests on the one side of the
Quire, and one or two on the other side, with Sandy Stevin, Menstrall
(Baptizing their children, and making Marriages) who within eight days after
convinced of Blasphemy, alleging, That he would give no more credit to the
New Testament, then to a Tale of Robin-Hood, except it were confirmed by the
Doctors of the Church. The said superstitious Evensong was the occasion of a
great slander, for many were offended with it; which being by the Brethren
declared to the Lords of the Privy Council, especially to the Earl of Murray,
who lamented the cause to the Queens Majesty, showing her what inconveniency
should come, if such things were suffered unpunished: And after sharp reasoning
it was promised, That the like should not be done hereafter: The Queen also
alleged, That they were a great number; and that she could not trouble their
conscience.

About the 20 of this month arrived at Edinburgh, Henry Stewart, Lord Darley;
from thence he past to Fyfe: And in the Place of Weemes he was admitted to
kiss the Queens hand; whom she liked so well, that she preferred him before
all others; As shall hereafter, God willing, be declared. Soon after, in the
Month of March, the Earl Bothwell arrived out of France; whereat the Earl of
Murray was highly offended, because of the evil report made to him of the Lord
Bothwell; And passing immediately to the Queens Majesty, demanded of her if it
was her will, or by her advice, that he was come home; and seeing he was his
deadly enemy, either he or the other should leave the Country, and therefore
desired that he might have Justice. Her answer was, That seeing the Earl
Bothwell was a Nobleman, and had done her service, she could not hate him:
Nevertheless she would do nothing that might be prejudicial to the Earl of
Murray, but desired that the matter might be taken away: within few days she
caused summon the Earl Bothwell, to answer to the course of Law the 2 of May,
for the Conspiracy which the Earl of Arrane had alleged two years before, and
for the breaking of the Ward of the Castle. In the mean while there was nothing
in the Court, but Banqueting, Balling, and Dancing, and other such pleasures
as were meet to provoke the disordered appetite; and all for the entertainment
of the Queens Cousin from England, the Lord Darley, to whom she did show all
the expressions imaginable of love and kindness.

Within few days, the Queen being at Sterlin, order was given to Secretary
Lethington to pass to the Queen of England: The chief point of his Message
was, to declare to the Queen of England, That the Queen was minded to marry her
Cousin the Lord Darley; and the rather, because he was so near of Blood to both
Queens: For by his mother, he was Cousin German to the Queen of Scotland, also
of near kindred, and of the same name by his father: His mother was Cousin
German to the Queen of England. Here mark Gods providence; King James the fifth
having lost his two sons, did declare his resolution to make the Earl of Lenox
his Heir of the Crown; but he prevented by sudden death, that design ceased:
Then come the Earl of Lenox from France, with intenion to marry King James his
Widow; but that failed also: He marries Mary Douglas, and his son marries
Mary, King James the fifth his daughter: And so the Kings desire is fulfilled,
to wit, The Crown continues in the Name and in the Family. The Queen of
England, nevertheless, showed her self nothing pleased therewith, but rather
declared, That she would in no wise suffer her subjects to make such Contracts
or Alliance that might be prejudicial to her, and for the same purpose sent a
Post to the Queen with Letters, wherein she complained greatly of the mind of
our Mistress, seeing the great affection she bare to her, intending to declare
her Heretrix of her Realm of England, providing only that she would use her
counsel in Marriage; but she could not approve her Marriage with the Lord
Darley, although he was their near Cousin by Birth, since he was below the Rank
of the Queen by Condition, being but a private subject. At the same time she
wrote to the Earl of Lenox, and to his son, commanding them to repair both
into England. Some write, That all this was but counterfeit by the Queen of
England; and from her heart she was glad of the Marriage; for by that means the
Succession of the Crown of England was secured, the Lord Darley being the right
Heir after the Queen of Scotland: and Queen Elizab. was not angry to see her
married to one of inferior Rank, for by that means she thought the Scots Queen
would be less proud. During this time, there were certain Letters directed to
the Brethren of Edinburgh, to Dundie, Fyfe, Angus and Mernes, and other places,
from the Brethren of Kyle, and other places in the West Country, desiring the
professors of the Evangel in all places, to remember what the Eternal God had
wrought, and how potently he had abolished all kind of Idolatry and
superstition, and placed his Word in this Realm; so that no man could say
otherwise, but it was the Work of God; who also had delivered this Country
from the bondage and tyranny of strangers: Nevertheless by our slothfulness,
we have suffered that Idol the Mass, not only to be planted again, but to
increase so, that the maintainers thereof are like, by all appearance, to get
the upper hand, which would be the occasion of our destruction: And for that
the Papists purposed to set up their Idol at Easter following, in all places;
which was to be imputed to the slothfulness, and want of godly zeal of the
Professors: Therefore they admonished the Brethren to strive to avert the evil
in time, and not to suffer such wickedness to continue and increase, lest that
Gods heavy wrath come upon us unawares like a consuming fire. By these Letters
many Brethren were animated, and their spirits wakened, minding to provide as
God should give them grace: And first of all, by the advice of the most learned
in Edinb. there was a Supplication made, and given to the Queens Majesty by
the Superintendent of Lowthian, containing in effect. That the Church in
general of the Realm had diverse times most humbly craved of her Majesty, That
committers of Adultery should be punished according to the Law of God, At this
time an Italian, named Davie, entered in great familiarity with the Queen, so
that there was nothing done without him.
and the Acts of Parliament, nevertheless they continued in their wickedness;
and the Papists of obstinate malice pretended nothing else, but to erect and
set up their Idolatry and Superstition; and especially at Easter day following
they intended to put the same in practice, which the Brethren and Professors of
the Evangel could not suffer; Therefore wished her Majesty to take heed of the
matter.

This Supplication the Secretary received of the hands of the Superintendents
of Lowthian and Glasgow, and told them, in the Queens Name, That there should
be such provision made, as should serve to their contentment: And for the same
purpose, the Queens Majesty writ to all such places as were suspected,
especially to the Bishop of Saint Andrews and Aberdeine (as was said) not to
use any Mass; And that they should not do any such thing as was feared by the
Protestants, or convene any Council, and thereto commanded them. Now the
Communion was administered in Edinburgh the first day of April, 1565. At which
time, because it was near Easter, the Papists used to meet at their Mass: And
as some of the Brethren were diligent to search such things, they having with
them one of the Bailiffs, took one Sir James Carvet riding hard, as he had now
ended the saying of the Mass, and conveyed him, together with the Master of
the house, and one or two more of the assistants, to the Tolbuith, and
immediately revested him with all his Garments upon him, and so carried him to
the Market-Crosse, where they set him on high, binding the Chalice in his hand,
and himself fast tied to the said Cross, where he tarried the space of one
hour; During which time, the boys served him with his Easter eggs. The next
day following, the said Carvet, with his assistants, were accused and convinced
by an Assize, according to the Act of Parliament: And albeit for the same
offense he deserved death, yet for all punishment, he was set upon the
Market-Crosse for the space of three or four hours, the hangman standing by,
and keeping him, the boys and others were busy with eggs casting; and some
Papists there were, that stopped as far as they could: And as the preasse of
people increased about the Cross, there appeared to have been some tumult.
The Provest, Archibald Douglas, came with some Halberdiers, and carried the
Priest safe again to the Tolbuith. The Queen being advertised, and having
received sinister information that the Priest was dead, suddenly thought to
have used and inflicted some extreme punishment, for she thought that all this
was done in contempt of her, and of her Religion; and it was affirmed, That the
Town should have been sacked, and a great number executed to death; she sent
to such as she pleased, commanding them to come to her at Edinburgh suddenly
with their whole Forces; and in the mean time she sent her Advocate Master
Spence of Condie to Edinburgh, to take a sure trial of the matter. The Provest
and Council wrote to the Queen the truth of the matter as it was, desiring her
Majesty to take the same in good part, and not to give credit to false
reports; and therewith sent to her Majesty the Process and enrolment of the
Court of the Priest Conviet. Thus the Queens Majesty being informed of the
truth by her said Advocate, sent again and stayed the said meeting of men, and
sent to the Town a grave Letter, whereof the Copy follows.

The Queens Letter to the Provest, Bailiffe, and Council of Edinburgh.
PRrovest, Bayliffe and Council of our City of Edinburgh,
We received your Letter from our Advocate, and understand by this report what
diligence you took to stay the Tumult in the late disorder attempted at
Edinburgh; wherein, as you did your duty in suppressing the Tumult, so can we
not take in good part, nor think our self satisfied of so notorious a thing,
without certain seditious persons, who were pleased to do justice perforce and
without the Magistrates Authority, be condignly and really punished for their
rashness and misbehaviour; for if all private Persons should usurp to take
vengeance at their own hands, What lies in ours? And to what purpose has good
Laws and Statutes been established? Since therefore we have never been
obstinate to the due punishment of any offenders, prescribed by the Laws, but
have always maintained Justice in that case without respect of persons. It is
Our will, and We command you, as you will answer to Us upon your obedience and
allegiance, That you will take before you certain of the most responsall
persons which are declared Authors of the said Sedition, and usurpers of our
Authority, and to administer Justice upon them, in such sort as We may know a
sincerity on your parts, and Our Authority no ways slighted. But if you
fail, persuade your selves, (and that shortly) we will not oversee it, but
will account this Contempt not only to be in the Committers thereof, but in
your selves, who ought to punish it, and relieve us on our part, remitting the
rest to your diligence and execution, which we look for so soon as reason will
permit.

Subscribed with Our Hand at STERLIN, this 24 of April, Anno 1565.

BY this manner of writing and high threatening, may be perceived how grievously
the Queens Majesty would have been offended if the said Tarbot and
Masse-monger had been handled according to his demerite, being not only a
Papist Idolater, but a manifest Whoremaster, and a common Fighter and
blasphemer; nevertheless within few days the Queen charged the Provest and
Bailiffs to set him at liberty, commanding them further, That no man should
trouble nor molest him in any sort for whatsoever cause, and soon after
rewarded him with a Benefice, and likewise his Assisters John Low and John
Kennedie set at liberty in the same manner. At this Easter-Tyde in Sterlin the
Queen made her domestic servants use Papisticall Rites and Ceremonies, and
more, she persuaded others by fair means to do the same, and threatened those
that were most constant at the Earl of Cassels House. Upon the second day of
May 1565. conveened at Edinburgh the Earl of Murray with his friends in great
numbers to keep the day of Law against the Earl Bothwell, who being called,
appeared not, only the Lord of Rickerton protested, That the personal
absence of the Earl Bothwell should not be prejudicial to him, by reason that
for just fear, which might happen in the heart of any man, since he had so
potent an enemy as the Lord of Murray, who, next the Queens Majesty was of
greatest estimation and Authority of any man within this Realm, to whom
assisted at this present day of Law, seven or eight hundred men, which Force he
could not resist, and therefore had absented himself; which Protestation being
made, those that had been Sureties for his appearance, were Outlawed. The said
Earl Bothwell a few days after past into France, after he had been in
Liddesdale, where suspecting almost every man, he was not in great assurance of
his life, notwithstanding he was not put to the Horn, for the Queen
continually bore a great favor toward him, and kept him to be a Soldier, as
appeared within less then half a year; for she would not suffer the Lord
Morton, nor my Lord Ariskin, my Lord of Murrayes great friends to keep the day;
There assisted my Lord of Murray, the Earls of Argyle, Glencarne, and
Crawford, with great numbers, and many Lords and Barons, who for the most part
conveened the same Afternoon to Treat and Consult for the maintaining of
Religion; where some Articles were devised, and delivered to the Lord of Murray
to be presented to the Queens Majesty and privy Council, which Articles were
enlarged at the general assembly following, as shall be declared. In the mean
time, as they were informed in Court of this great Assembly of people in
Edinburgh, they were afraid, for naturally the Queen-hated and suspected all
such Conventions as were not in her own presence, and devised by her self. The
chief Counselors in the Court, were the Earls of Lenox and Athole. The Queen
writ incontinent for all the Lords to come to Sterlin, so soon as she was
advertised that they had Treated in Edinburgh of Religion; She Writ likewise
for the superintendants and other learned men who went thither, and being there
they caused to keep the Ports or Gates, and make good Watch about the Town.
The special cause of this Convention was to give to the Lord Darley Title of
Honor openly and solemnly, with consent of the Nobles, before the marriage.
The fourth day of May the Earl of Murray came to Sterlin, where he was well
received by the Queens Majesty, as appeared, and immediately, as he past with
her to my Lord Darleys Chamber, they presented to him a Contract, containing in
effect, That forasmuch, as, or since, the Queen had contracted Marriage with
the Lord Darley, and that therefore sundry Lords of the Nobility had
underwritten, ratified and approved the same, and obliged themselves to grant
unto him in full Parliament the Crown Matrimonial, (by a new Court Solecisme
in Policy, the Crown for the second time is surnamed Matrimonial; (before,
when the Queen was first married, it was so called also) to serve and obey him
and her as their Lawful Sovereigns. The Queen desired my Lord Murray to
subscribe, as many others had done before; which he refused to do, Because
(said he) it is required necessarily that the whole Nobility be present, at
least the principal, and such as he himself was posteriour unto, before that
so grave a matter should be advised and concluded.

The Queens Majesty no ways content with this Answer, insisted still upon him,
saying, The greatest part of the Nobility were there present and content with
the matter, wished him to be so much a Stewart, as to consent to the keeping of
the Crown in the Family, and the surname, according to their Fathers Will and
desire, as was said of him a little before his death: But he still refused for
the causes above written.

Now as the Lords were assembled, an Ambassador from England named sir
Nicholas Throckmorton arrived at Sterlin, and in his company the Lord of
Lethington; the Ambassador was at the Castle Gate or ever they were aware; and
as he stood there in the Entry, he was desired to pass to his Lodgings. The
next day he had audience of the Queen, and was graciously received according to
the dignity of his Message. The whole sum of this his Message was, to show
and declare to the Queen, how highly the Queen his Mistress was offended with
this precipitated Marriage, and wondered what had moved her to take a man of
inferior rank and condition, to her self: And therefore dissuaded her
therefrom. And specially desiring her most earnestly to send home her Subjects
the Earl of Lennox and the Lord Darley: But all in vain for the matter was
well far proceeded. In her heart Queen Elizabeth was not angry at this
marriage; first, because if Q. Mary had married a foreign Prince, it had been
an access to her Greatness, and consequently she had been more redoubted by
the other; next both Harry and Mary were alike and in equal degree of
Consanguinitie unto her, the father of Mary and the mother of Harry being
Children to her fathers sister.

With many fair words the Queen let the Ambassador depart, promising to do all
she could to satisfy the Queen of England; and for the same purpose she would
send an Ambassador to her.

In the mean time the Queens marriage with the Lord Darley, The Earl of Murray
seeing the other Nobles consent, gave his, which before he refused.
was prepared and propounded in Council, and the chief of the Nobility, such
as the Duke, the Earls of Argyle, Murray, Glencarne, with the rest, granted
freely to the same, providing that they might have the Religion established in
Parliament, by the Queen, and the Idolatrous Mass and Superstition abolished,
shortly it was concluded, That they should convene again to Saint Iohnstoun,
where the Queen promised to take a final order for Religion. The day was
appointed, to wit, the last of May at Perth, my Lord of Argile came too late.
The Queens Majesty communed with the Lords, who were very plain with her,
saying, Except the Mass were abolished, there should be no quietness in the
Country. The twelfth day of May the Lord Darley was Belted, (that is, Created)
Earl of Rosse, with great solemnity, a Belt or Girdle being tied about his
waste or middle; and albeit all kind of provision was made to make him Duke of
Rothesay, yet at that time it came not to effect, albeit the Crown and
Robe-Royall were prepared to him for the same. For the entertainment of this
Triumph there were many Knights made, to the number of 14. The next day, which
was the 13 of May, the Queen called for the Super-intendants, by name John
Willock, John Winram, and John Spotswood, whom she cherished with fair words,
assuring them that she desired nothing more earnestly then the glory of God and
satisfying of men's consciences, and the good of the Commonwealth; and albeit
she was not persuaded in any Religion but in that wherein she was brought up,
yet she promised to them that she would hear Conference and Disputation in the
Scriptures: And likewise she would be content to hear public preaching, but
always out of the mouth of such as pleased her Majesty; and above all others
she said she would gladly hear the Superintendant of Angus (for he was a mild
and sweet natured man) with true honesty and uprightness. Sir Ariskin of Dun.
Soon after the Queen past to Saint Iohnstons, after that she had directed
Master John Hay Prior of Monimusk to pass to England, who sped at the Queen of
Englands hand even as sir Nicholas Throckmorton did in Scotland. Before the
day, which was appointed for the meeting at Saint Iohnston, my Lord of Murray
most careful of the maintenance of Religion, sent to all the principal
Churches, advertising them of the matter, and desiring them to advise, and send
the most able men in Learning and Reputation, to keep the day; but their craft
and dissimulation appeared, for the Dean of Restalrigge who lately arrived out
of France, with others, such as Mr. John Lesley Parson of Vure, afterward
Bishop of Rosse, caused the Queen to understand that thing whereof she was
easily persuaded, to wit, That there ought to be given to all men liberty of
conscience, and for this purpose to shun or put off the first day appointed;
The Queen writ to the Nobility, that because she was informed that there was
great meetings out of every Shire and Town in great number; and then the other
party (so termed she the Papists) were minded together to the said Convention,
which should apparently make trouble or sedition, rather then any other thing;
therefore she thought it expedient, and willed them to stay the said meetings,
and to defer the same till such a day that she should appoint with advice of
her Council. At this time there was a Parliament proclaimed to be held at
Edinburgh the twentieth day of July. By this Letter, some of the Protestants
having best judgment, thought themselves sufficiently warned of the
Inconveniences and troubles to come. Now her Council at this time, was only
the Earls of Lenox and Athole, the Lord Ruthen, but chiefly David Rizio the
Italian ruled all; yet the Earl of Rosse already in greatest credit and
familiarity. These Letters were sent out to the Lords about the eight and
twentieth day of May; and within twelve days thereafter, she directed new
Missives to the chief of the Nobility, desiring or, commanding them, to come to
Saint Iohnston the three and twentieth day of June following, to consult upon
such things as concerned Religion, and other things as her Majesty should
propose; Which day, was even the day before that the general Assembly should
have been held in Edinburgh. This last Letter uttered the effect of the former;
so that the Protestants thought themselves sufficiently warned. Always as the
Earl of Murray was passing to Saint Iohnston to have kept the said day, he
chanced to fall sick of the Fluxes in Lochlevin, where he remained till the
Queen came forth of Saint Iohnston to Edinburgh, where the general Assembly of
the whole Church of Scotland was held, the four and twentieth day of July. The
Earls of Argyle and Glencarne assisted the Church with a great company of
Lords, Barons, and others: It was there ordered and concluded, That certain
Gentlemen, as Commissioners from the Church National, should pass to the
Queens Majesty, with certain Articles, to the number of six, desiring her most
humbly to ratify and approve the same in Parliament. And because the said
Articles are of great weight, and worthy of memory, I thought good to insert
the same word by word.

IMprimis, That the Papisticall and Blaspemous Mass, with all Papisticall
Idolatry, and Papal Jurisdiction, be universally suppressed and abolisht
thorowout this Realm, not only in the Subjects, but also in the Queens own
Person, with punishment against all persons that should be deprehended to
transgress and offend in the same: And that the sincere Word of God, and
Christ's true Religion now at this present received, be published, approved, and
ratified, thorowout the whole Realm, as well in the Queens own Person, as in
the subjects: And that the people be to resort upon the Sundays at the least,
to the Prayers, and Preaching of Gods Word, even as they were before to the
Idolatrous Mass: And these Heads to be provided by Act of Parliament, and
ratified by the Queens Majesty.

Secondly, That provision be made for sustentation of the Ministry, as well for
the time present, as the time to come: And that such persons as are presently
admitted to the Ministry, may have their Livings assigned unto them, in places
where they travel in their Calling, or at least next adjacent thereto: And
that the Benefices now vacant, or has been vacant since the Month of March,
1558. or that hereafter shall happen to be vacant, be disposed to qualified and
learned persons, able to preach Gods Word, and discharge the Vocation
concerning the Ministry, by Trial and Admission of the Superintendents and
Overseers: And that no Benefice or Living, having many Churches annexed
thereunto, be disposed altogether in any time to come, to any man, but at the
least the Churches thereof be severally disposed, and that to several persons;
So that every man having Charge, may serve at his own Church, according to his
Vocation: And to that effect, likewise the Gleebs and the Manses, be given to
the Ministers, that they may make residency at their Churches, whereby they may
discharge their consciences according to their Vocation; and also that the
Kirks may be repaired accordingly; And that a Law be made and established
hereupon by Act of Parliament, as said is.

Thirdly, That none be permitted to have charge of Souls, Colleges, or
Universities, neither privately or publicly teach and instruct the youth, but
such as shall be tried by the Superintendents or Visitors of Churches, and
found sound and able in Doctrine, and admitted by them to their Charges.

Fourthly, For the sustentation of the poor; That all Lands founded for
Hospitality of old, be restored again to the same use: And that all Lands,
Annals, Rents, or any other Emoluments pertaining any ways sometimes to the
Friars, of whatsoever Order they had been of* As likewise the Annuities,
Alterages, Obits, and the other Duties pertaining to Priests, to be applied to
the sustentation of the poor, and uphold of the Town-Schools in Towns, and
other places where they be.

Fifthly, That such horrible crimes as now abound within this Realm without
any correction, To the great contempt of God and his Word; such as Idolatry,
Blasphemy of Gods Name, manifest breaking of the Sabbath day, Witchcraft,
Sorcery, Enchantment, Adultery, manifest Whoredom, maintenance of Bordals,
Murder, Slaughter, Oppression, with many other detestable Crimes, may be
severely punished; and Judges appointed in every Province and Diocese, for
execution thereof, with power to do the same; and that by Act of Parliament.

Lastly, That some order be devised and established for ease of the poor
Laborers of the Ground, concerning the reasonable payment of the Tithes, who
are oppressed by the Leasers of the Tithes set over their heads without their
own con-consent and advise.

The persons who were appointed by the Church to carry these Articles and
present them to the Queens Majesty, were the Lairds of ^unningham-Head,
Lundie, Spot and Grange of Angus, and James Baron for the Broughs: These five
past from Edinburgh to Saint Iohnston, where they presented the said Articles
to the Queens Majesty, desiring and requiring her Highness most humbly to
advise therewith, and to give them answer. The next day, ere they were aware,
the Queen departed to Dunkeld, and immediately they followed; And after they
had gotten audience, they desired the Queens Majesty most humbly to give their
dispatch. She answered, That her Council was not there present, but she
intended to be in Edinburgh within eight days, and there they should receive
their answer. At the same time, as the general Assembly was holden in
Edinburgh, the Brethren perceiving the Papists to brag, and trouble like to be,
they assembled themselves at Saint Leonard Cragg, where they concluded they
would defend themselves; and for the same purpose, elected eight persons of the
most able, two of every Quarter, to see that the Brethren should be ready armed.

And when the five Commissioners above named had waited upon the Court four or
five days after her Majesty's coming to Edinburgh, there the matter was
proposed in Council: And after long and earnest reasoning upon these Articles,
at length it was answered to the Commissioners by the Secretary, That the
Queens Majesty's command was, That the matter should be reasoned in her
presence; which for the gravity of the same, there could nothing be concluded
at that time, albeit the Queens Majesty had heard more in that matter, then
ever she did before: But within eight days thereafter, she understood that a
great part of the Nobility should be present in Edinburgh, where they should
have a final answer. At length, the one and twentieth of August, they received
the answer in Writing in her presence, according to the Tenor hereof as
follows.

The Queens Majesty's Answer to the Articles presented to Her Highness, by
certain Gentlemen, in the Name of the whole Assembly of the Church.
TO the first, Desiring the Mass to be suppressed and abolished, as well in
the Head, as in the Members, with punishment against the Contraveners; As also,
the Religion professed to be established by Act of Parliament, it was answered,
first for her Majesty's part, That her Highness is no way yet persuaded in the
said Religion, nor yet that any impiety is in the Mass; and therefore
believes, That her loving subjects will not press her to receive any Religion
against her conscience, which should be unto her a continual trouble by
remorse of conscience, and therewith a perpetual unquietness. And to deal
plainly with her Subjects, her Majesty neither will, nor may leave the Religion
wherein she has been nourished and brought up; and believes the same to be
well grounded; Knowing, besides the grudge of conscience that she should
receive, upon the change of her own Religion, That she should lose the
friendship of the King of France, the married Allia of this Realm, and of
other great Princes her Friends and Confederates, who would take the same in
evil part, and of whom she may look for their great support in all her
necessities; And having no assured consideration that may countervaile the
same, she will be loath to put in hazard all her friends at an instant, praying
all her loving subjects, seeing they have had experience of her goodness, that
she has neither in times past, nor yet intends hereafter, to press the
conscience of any, but that they may worship God in such sort, as they are
persuaded in their conscience to be best, That they will also not press her
conscience. As to the establishing of Religion in the Body of the Realm, they
themselves know, as appears by their Articles, That the same cannot be done
only by consent of her Majesty, but requires necessarily the consent of the
States in Parliament, and therefore so soon as the Parliament holds, those
things which the States agree upon amongst themselves, her Majesty shall
consent unto the same; and in the mean time shall make sure, That no man be
troubled for ^sing Religion according to conscience; So that no man shall have
cause to doubt, That for Religions sake men's Lives and Heritage shall be in any
hazard.

To the second Article, it is answered, That her Majesty thinks it no ways
reasonable, that she should defraud her self of so great a part of the
Patrimony of the Crown, as to put the Patronage of Benefices forth of her own
hands; for her own necessity, in bearing of her Port and common Charges, will
require the retention thereof, and that in a good part, in her own hands:
Nevertheless her Majesty is well pleased, That consideration being had of her
own necessity; And what may be sufficient for the reasonable sustentation of
the Ministers, a special Assignation be made to them in places most commodious
and meet: With which her Majesty shall not meddle, but suffer the same to come
to them.

To the third Article it is answered, That her Majesty shall do therein as
shall be agreed by the States in Parliament.

To the fourth Article, Her Majesty's liberality toward the poor shall
always be so far extended, as can be reasonably required at her hands.

To the fifth and sixth Articles, Her Majesty will refer the taking order
therein, unto the States assembled in Parliament.

As the Queens Majesty came from Saint Iohnston, over Forth to the Callender,
she was conveyed to the Water side of Forth with two hundred Spears: For at
that time it was bruted, That there was some lying in wait at the Path of Dron.
In the mean time the Earl of Murray was in Locklevin, and the Earl of Argyle
with him. Now in the Callender the Lord Levingston had desired the Queens
Majesty to be Witness to the Christning of a child; For his Lady was lately
delivered and brought to Bed: And when the Minister made the Sermon and
Exhortation concerning Baptism, the Queens Majesty came in the end, and said
to the Lord Levingston, That she would show him that favor that she had not
done to any other before; that is, That she would give her presence to the
Protestant Sermon, which was reckoned a great matter.

The Queen being in the Callender, was informed both by word and Letters by
false Brethren, That a great part of the Protestants of Edinburgh had lately
convened upon Saint Leonards Craigs, and there made a Conspiration against her;
And had chosen for the same purpose, certain Captains to govern the rest; And
without any Trial, or perfect notice taken in the Case, she sent to the
Provest and Bailiffs of Edinburgh, commanding them to take and apprehend
Alexander Guthrie, Alexander Clerk, Gilbert Lawder, and Andrew Slater, and put
them in prison in the Castle.

This new and unaccustomed fashion of proceeding seemed to be very strange: And
because the said four persons were not apprehended, she sent the next day a
Charge to the Provest and Bailiffs, and to her own great Treasurer, to pass
to the houses of the said four men, and likewise to their Booths or Shops, and
there to take Inventory of all their Goods and Chattells; And commanded the
said Treasurer to take the Keys of the said Houses and Booths, together with
the said Inventory; which was executed in effect, especially upon the said
Alexander Guthrie his wife, he being then common Clerk, and one of the
greatest in estimation within the Town; his wife and children were shut out of
their house, and compelled to seek some other lodging in the Town.

By this manner of proceeding, the hearts of all men of spirit and judgment
were wonderfully abashed and wounded, seeing and perceiving these things so
furiously handled upon sinister and wrong Information, men never called to
their answer, nor heard, nor any trial taken therein. Immediately thereafter as
she came to Edinburgh, she called to counsel such as pleased her Majesty, and
there complains of the said matter, alleging it to be a Conspiracy and
manifest Treason. And another matter likewise was complained upon, That the
Earl of Argile (as the Queen was surely informed) was riding with a great Army
to invade the Earl of Athole and his Lands. For the first matter it was
concluded by the Council, That diligent inquisition should be made in the
matter, and to that purpose appointed the Queens Advocates M. John Spence of
Condie, and M. Robert Crichton to examine such as they would; and when the said
Advocates had called before them, and examined a sufficient number, and their
depositions subscribed and delivered to the Queen, there was nothing found
worthy of death nor Treason; at length the said four persons were summoned to
answer at Law.

For the matter, That the Queens Majesty should send to the Earls of Argyle
and Athole some of her Council or familiar servants to take order touching it.
And when the Secretary, the Justice Clarke and Lord of Saint Colme had past to
the said Earl of Argyle, they found no such thing; but in Athole there was
great fear come of a sudden fray; for after many Proclamations, the Fire-Crosse
(which they made use of in lieu of Beacons) was raised in Athole.

Now as the day of the Parliament approached, the Lords pretending to consult
before, what should be done, as well in Religion, as for the Commonwealth, the
fifteenth day of July there conveened at Sterlin the Duke, the Earls of Argyle
and Murray, Rothes, and other Lords and Barons, and as they were devising and
consulting, the Queens Majesty taking their meeting in evil part, sent her
Advocates Master John Spence and Master Crichton to them at Sterlin, requiring
the cause of their meeting; they answered, That the special occasion of their
meeting was for the cause of Religion and the assurance thereof, according as
they had lately written to the Queens Majesty in S^aton from the town of
Edinburgh, they desiring then to prorogate the day.

Finally, when the said Advocates could by no means persuade them to come to
Edinburgh, they returned again to Edinburgh and declared to the Queens Majesty
according as they had found.

In the mean time the Parliament was prorogated at the Queens Majesty's command
to the first of September next after following; for it was thought, That the
least part and principal of the chief Nobility being absent, there could no
Parliament be holden: at the same time the Queens Majesty perceiving that the
matter was already come to a maturity and ripeness, so that the minds and
secrecy of men's hearts must needs be disclosed, she wrote to a great number of
Lords, Barons, Gentlmen, and others that were nearest in Fife, Angus Lowthian,
Mers Tevimdale, Perth, Lithgow Clidsdall, and others to resort to her, in this
form of words hereafter following.

The Queens Letter.
TRusty friend, We greet you well; we are grieved indeed by the evil brute
spread amongst our Lieges, as that we should have molested any man in the using
of his Religion and Conscience freely, a thing which never entered into our
mind; yet since we perceive the too easy believing such reports has made
them careless, and so we think it becomes us to be careful for the safety and
preservation of our state; wherefore we pray you most affectionately, That with
all possible have (after the receipt of this our Letter) you with your kindred,
friends and whole Force, well furnished with Arms for War, be provided for,
fifteen days after your coming, address you to come to us, to wait and
attend upon us, according to our expectation and trust in you, as you will
thereby declare the good affection you bear to the maintenance of our
Authority, and will do us therein acceptable service.

Subscribed with Our Hand at Edinburgh, the seventeenth day of July, 1565.

THere was likewise Proclamation made in Edinburgh, That the Queen minded not
the trouble, nor alter the Religion; and also Proclamations made in the Shires
above mentioned, for the same purpose, That all Freeholders and other Gentlemen
should resort (in the aforesaid manner) to Edinbronth, where the Earl of Rosse
was made Duke of Rothesay, with great triumph, the 23 day of July. The same
afternoon the Queen complained grievously upon the Earl of Murray in open
audience of all the Lords and Barons; and the same day the Bans of the Earl of
Rosse, and Duke of Rothesay, and the Queens Marriage were proclaimed. About
this time the Lord Arskin was made Earl of Mar. In the mean time there were
diverse Messages sent from the Queens Majesty to the Lord of Murray, first,
Master Robert Crichton to persuade him by all means possible to come and
resort to the Queens Majesty: his answer was, That he would be glad to come to
her self, according to his bounden duty; yet for as much as such persons as
were most privy in her company, were his capital enemies, who also had
conspired his death, he could no ways come so long as they were in Court.

Soon after my Lord Erskin and the Master Maxwell past to him to S. Andrews,
rather suffered and permitted by the Queen, then sent by her Highness; after
them the Lord of Dun, who was sent by the means of the Earl of Mar, but all
this did not prevail with him; and when all hope of his coming was past, an
Herald was sent to him, charging him to come to the Queens Majesty, and answer
to such things as should be laid to his charge within eight and forty hours
next after the Charge, under pain of Rebellion; and because he appeared not the
next day after the eight and forty hours, he was denounced Rebel, and put to
the Horn. The same order they used against the Earl of Argyle, for the Queen
said she would serve him and the rest with the same measure they had mete to
others, meaning the said Argyle.

In the mean while, as the fire was well kindled, and enflamed, all means and
ways were sought, to stir up enemies against the chief Protestants that had
been lately at Sterlin; for the Earl of Athole was ready bent against the
Earl of Argyle: the Lord Lindsay against the Earl Rothesse in Fyfe, they
being both Protestants; for they had contended now a long time for the
Heir-ship of Fyfe: And that no such thing should be left undone, the Lord
Gordon, who now had remained near three years in prison in Dumbar, was, after
some little travel of his friends, received by the Queen; and being thus
received into favor, was restored first to the Lordship of Gordon, and soon
after to the Earldom of Huntley, and to all his Lands, Honors and Dignities,
that he might be a bar and a party in the North to the Earl of Murray.

The 18 of July, The Dispensation being come from Rome for the Marriage: Before
which, according to the Romish Law, it was unlawful to marry, being Cousin
Germans, brother and sisters children, and so the degree of Consanguinity
forbidden.
late in the evening, near an hour after the Suns going down, there was a
Proclamation made at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh, containing in effect: THat
forasmuch as at the will and pleasure of Almighty God, the Queen had taken to
her husband a right excellent and illustrious Prince, Harry Duke of Rothesay,
Earl of Rosse, Lord Darley, Therefore it was her Will, That he should be
holden and obeyed, and reverenced as King: Commanding all Letters and
Proclamations to be made in the Names of Henry and Mary in times coming.

The next day following, at six hours in the morning, they were married in the
Chapel Royal of Halyrud-house, by the Dean of Lestarrig; the Queen being all
clothed in Mourning: But immediately, as the Queen went to Mass, the King went
not with her, but to his Pastime. During the space of three or four days,
there was nothing but Balling and Dancing, and Banqueting.

In the mean time, the Earl Rothesse, the Lord of Grange, the Tutor Pitcur,
with some Gentlemen of Fyfe, were put to the Horn, for none appearance; And
immediately the Swash, Tabron, and Drums, were stricken or beaten, for men of
War to serve the King and Queens Majesty, and to take their Pay. This sudden
alteration, and hasty creation of Kings, moved the hearts of a great number.

Now amongst the people there were diverse brutes; for some alleged, That the
cause of this alteration was not for Religion, but rather for hatred, envy of
sudden promotion or dignity, or such worldly causes: But they that considered
the progress of the matter, according as is heretofore declared, thought the
principal cause to be only for Religion.

In this mean time, the Lords past to Argyle, taking apparently little care of
the trouble that was to come: Howbeit they sent into England M. Nicolas
Elphinston for support, who brought some Moneys in this Country, to the sum of
ten thousand pounds sterlin. There came one forth of England to the Queen, who
got Presence the seventh of August in Halyrud-house. He was not well, etc.

About the fifteenth of August, the Lords met at Air, to wit, the Duke
Hamilton, the Earls Argile, Murray, Glencarne, Rothesse, the Lord Boyd, and
Ochiltrie, with diverse Barons and Gentlemen of Fife and Kyle, where they
concluded to be in readiness with their whole Forces the four and twentieth
day of August. But the King and Queen with great cerity prevented them, for
their Majesty's sent through Lowthian, Fife, Angus, Stratherne, Tividaile and
Chiddisdaile and other Shires, making their Proclamations in this manner, That
forasmuch as certain Rebels, who (under color of Religion) intended nothing
but the trouble and subversion of the Commonwealth, Note this for our time.
were to convene with such, as they might persuade to assist them; therefore
they charged all manner of men under pain of Life, Lands, and Goods, to resort
and meet their Majesty's at Linlithgow the 24 day of August.

This Proclamation was made in Lowthian the third pay of the said month. Upon
Sunday the ninteenth of August, the King came to the high Kirk of Edinburgh,
where John Knox made the Sermon; his Text was taken out of the six and
twentieth Chapter of Esayas his Prophecy, about the thirteenth Verse, where in
the words of the Prophet, he said, O Lord our God, The King, to make himself
more popular, and to take from the Lords of the Congregation the prete^t of
Religion, he went to the Kirk to hear John Knox preach.
other Lords then thou have ruled over us. Whereupon he took occasion to
speak of the government of wicked Princes, who for the sins of the people
are sent as Tyrants and scourges to plague them: And amongst other things he
said, That God sets in that room (for the offenses and ingratitude of the
people) Boys and women. And so other words which appeared bitter in the Kings
ears, as, That God justly punished Ahab and his Posterity, because he would not
take order with that Harlot Iezabel. And because he had tarried an hour and
more, longer then the time appointed, the King (sitting in a Throne made for
that purpose) was so moved at this Sermon, that he would not Dine; and being
troubled, with great fury he past in the afternoon to the Hawking.

Immediately John Knox was commanded to come to the Council, where in the
Secretaries Chamber were convened the Earl of Athole, the Lord Ruthven, the
Secretary, the Justice Clarke, with the Advocate. There passed along with the
Minister a great number of the most apparent men of the Town. When he was
called, the Secretary declared, That the Kings Majesty was offended with some
words spoken in the Sermon, (especially such as are above rehearsed) desiring
him to abstain from preaching for fifteen or twenty days, and let Master
Craig supply the place.

In answering he said more then he had preached, for he added, That as the King
had (to pleasure the Queen) gone to Mass, and dishonored the Lord God, so
should God in his justice make her an Instrument of his ruin; and so it fell
out in a very short time: but the Queen being incensed with these words, fell
out in Tears, and to please her John Knox must abstain from preaching for a
time.
He answered, That he had spoken nothing but according to his Text, and if the
Church would command him either to speak or abstain, he would obey so far as
the Word of God would permit him.

Within four days after, the King and Queen sent to the Council of Edinburgh,
commanding them to depose Archibald Douglas, and to receive the Lord
Craigmiller for their Provest, which was presently obeyed.

The five and twentieth of August the King and Queens Majesty's past from
Edinburgh to Linlithgow, and from thence to Sterlin, and from Sterlin to
Glasgow. At their first arrival, their whole people were not come. The next
day after their arrival to Glasgow, the Lords came to Paisley, where they
remained that night, being in company about one thousand horses. On the morrow
they came to Hamilton, keeping the high passage from Paisley hard by Glasgow,
where the King and Queen easily might behold them. The night following, which
was the penult of August, they remained in Hamilton with their Company; but for
diverse respects moving them, they thought it not expedient to tarry;
especially, because the Earl of Argyle was not come; for his Diet was not
before the second of September following, to have been at Hamilton. Finally,
they took purpose to come to Edinburgh, the which they did the next day. And
albeit Alexander Areskin, Captain under the Lord his brother, caused to shoot
forth of the Castle two Shot of Cannon, they being near the Town; And likewise
that the Lord Craigmiller Provest, did his endeavor to hold the Lords forth
of the Town, in causing the common Bells to be rung, for the convening of the
Town, to the effect aforesaid, yet they entered easily at the West Port or
Gate, without any molestation or impediment, being in number, as they esteemed
themselves, one thousand three hundred Horses. Immediately they dispatched
Messengers Southward and Northward to assist them; but all in vain: And
immediately after they were in their Lodgings, they caused to strike or beat
the Drum, desiring all such men as would receive Wages for the defense of the
Glory of God, That they should resort the day following to the Church, where
they should receive good Pay: But they profited little that way; neither could
they in Edinburgh get any comfort or support, for none or few resorted unto
them; yet they got more rest and sleep when they were at Edinburgh, then they
had done in five or six nights before.

The Noblemen of this Company were, The Duke, The Earls Murray, Glencarne,
and Rothesse; The Lords Boyd and Uchiltrie; The Lairds of Grange,
Cunningham-head, Balcomie, and Lavers; The T^tor of Pitcur; The Lairds of Bar,
Carmell, and Dreghorn; And the Lord of Pittarow Comptroller, went with them:
Some said merrily, That they were come to keep the Parliament, for the
Parliament was continued till the first day of September: Upon the which day
they wrote to the King and Queens Majesty's a Letter, containing in effect,
That albeit they were persecuted most unjustly, which they understood proceeded
not of the King and Queens Majesty's own Nature, but only by evil Counsel,
yet notwithstanding they were willing and content to suffer according to the
Laws of the Realm, providing that the true Religion of God might be
established, and the dependants thereupon be likewise reformed: Beseeching
their Majesty's most humbly to grant these things: But otherwise, if their
enemies would seek their blood, they should understand, It should be dear
bought. They had written twice, almost to the same effect, to the King and
Queens Majesty's, after their passing from Edinburgh; for the Lord of Preston
presented a Letter to the King and Queens Majesty, and was therefore
imprisoned, but soon after released; nevertheless they got no answer. The same
day that they departed out of Hamilton, the King and Queens Majesty's issued
out of Glasgow in the morning betimes: And passing toward Hamilton, the Army
met their Majesty's near the Bridge of Cadder: As they mustered, the Master of
Maxwell sat down upon his knees, and made a long Oration to the Queen,
declaring what pleasure she had done to them, and ever laid the whole burden
upon the Earl Murray. Soon after, they marched forward in Battle array: The
Earl of Lenox took the Vanguard, the Earl of Mortoun the middle Battle, and
the King and Queen the Reere: The whole number were about five thousand men,
whereof the greatest part were in the Vanguard.

As the King and Queens Majesty's were within three miles of Hamilton, they
were advertised that the Lords were departed in the morning; but where they
pretended to be that night, it was uncertain: Always soon after their return
to Glasgow, the King and Queen were certainly advertised, That they were past
to Edinburgh; and therefore caused immediately to warn the whole Army to pass
with them to Edinburgh the next day; who early in the morning, long before the
Sun was risen, began to march: But there arose such a vehement Tempest of wind
and rain from the West, as the like had not been seen before in a long time;
so that a little brook, turned incontinent into a great River; and the raging
storm being in their face, with great difficulty went they forward: And albeit
the most part waxed weary, yet the Queens courage increased man-like so much,
that she was ever with the foremost. There was diverse persons drowned that day
in the water of Carren; and amongst others, the Kings Master, a notable Papist,
who for the zeal he bare to the Mass, carried about his neck a round god of
bread, well closed in a Case, which always could not serve him.

Before the end of August, there came a post to the Queens Majesty, sent by
Alexander Areskin, who declared, That the Lords were in the Town of Edinburgh,
where there was a multitude of innocent persons, and therefore desired to know
if he should shoot. She commanded incontinent that he should return again to
the said Alexander, and command him, in her name, That he should shoot so long
as he had either Powder or Bullet, and not spare for any body.

At night, the King and Queen came well wet to the Callender, where they
remained that night, and about eight hours at night, the first of September,
the Post came again to the Castle, and reported the Queens Command to
Alexander Areskin, who incontinently caused to shoot six or seven shot of
Cannon, whereof the marks appeared, having respect to no reason, but only to
the Queens Command.

The Lords perceiving that they could get no support in Edinburgh, nor
Soldiers for money, albeit they had traveled all that they could; and being
advertised of the Queens returning with her whole Company, they took purpose to
depart: And so the next day betimes, long before day, they departed with their
whole Company, and came to Lanrik, and from thence to Hamilton, where the
Master of Maxwell came to them, with his Uncle the La^rd of Dumlanrick. And
after consultation, the said Master wrote to the Queens Majesty, That being
required by the Lords as he was passing homeward, he could not refuse to come
to them; and after that he had given them counsel to disperse their Army, they
thought it expedient to pass to Dumfreis to repose them, where they would
consult and make their Officers, and send to their Majesty's: And thus
beseeching their Majesty's to take this in good part. The Town of Edinburgh
sent two of the Council of the Town to make their excuse.

The next day the King and Queen past to Sterlin, and sent to Edinburgh, and
caused a Proclamation to be made, commanding all men to return to Glasgow,
where having remained three or four days: And understanding that the Lords
were past to Dumfreis, they returned to Sterlin, and from thence to Fyfe; And
in their passage, caused to take in Castle Campbell, which was delivered
without impediment to the Lord of Sanquhar.

Before the King and Queen went out of Sterlin, there came from Edinburgh two
Ensigns of Footmen, to convey them into Fyfe. In the mean time the Buroughs
were taxed in great Sums unaccustomed, for the payment of these Soldiers:
Farther, there was raised diverse Troops of Horsemen, to the number of five or
six hundred Horse. The Soldiers had taken two poor men that had received the
Lords wages; which two men being accused and convinced of, at the Queens
Command, were hanged at Edinburgh, the third day after the Lords departing.

At this time, M. James Balfour, Parson of Flesk, had gotten all the guiding in
the Court. The third day after the Queens coming to Fyfe, the whole Barons and
Lairds of Fyfe, convoyed her Majesty, till she came to S. Andrews, where the
said Lairds and Barons, especially the Protestants, were commanded to subscribe
to a Band, containing in effect, That they obliged themselves to defend the
King and Queens Persons, against Englishmen and Rebels: And in case they
should come to Fyfe, they should resist them to their utmost power; Which
Charge every man obeyed.

The second night after the Queens coming to S. Andrews, she sent a Band or
Troop of Horsemen, and another of Foot, to Lundie, and at midnight took out
the Lord, being a man of 80 years old: Then they past to Fawside, and took
likewise Thomas Scot, and brought him to Saint Andrews, where they, with the
Lord of Bavard, and some others, were commanded to prison. This manner of
handling and usage being o^kend and strange, were heavily spoken of, and a
great terror to others, who thought themselves warned of greater severity to
come.

In the mean time the houses of the Earls of Murray, Rothesse, and the houses
of diverse Gentlemen, were given in keeping to such as the Queen pleased, after
that their children and servants had been cast out.

At the same time the Duke, the Earls of Glencarne and Argyle, the Lords Boyd
and Uchiltrie, with the Lord of Cunningham-head, and the rest, were charged to
come and present themselves in S. Andrews, before the King and Queens
Majesty's, to answer to such things as should be laid to their charge, within
six days, under the pain of Rebellion: And the day being expired, and they not
appearing, were denounced Rebels, and put to the Horn.

As the Queen remained in Saint Andrews, the inhabitants of Dundie, being sore
afraid, because of some evil report made of them to the Queen, as if they had
troubled the Queen, in seeking men of War, and suffered some to be raised in
their Town for the Lords; for there was nothing done in Dundie, but it was
revealed to the Queen; especially that the Minister had received a Letter from
the Lords, and delivered the same to the Brethren, persuading them to assist
the Lords; which being granted by the Minister, the Queen remitted it. After
great travel and supplication made by some Noblemen, at length, the King and
Queen being in the Town, they agreed for two thousand marks, five or six of the
principal left out, with some others, that were put to their shift. After the
King and Queen had remained two nights in the Town of Dundie, they came to S.
Andrews; and soon after, they came over Forth, and so to Edinburgh. During this
time, the Master of Maxwell wrote to the King and Queen, making offers for and
in the name of the Lords.

The next day after the King and Queens coming to Edinburgh, there was a
Proclamation made at the Market-Crosse: And because the same is very notable, I
thought good to insert it here word by word, albeit it be somewhat long.

HEnry and Mary, By the Grace of God, King and Queen of Scots;
To all and sundry Our Lieges and Subjects whom it may concern, and to whose
knowledge these Letters shall come, Greeting.
Forasmuch as in this Uprore lately raised up against us, by certain Rebels;
and their assistants, the authors thereof (to blind the eyes of the simple
people) have given them to understand, That the quarrel they have in hand is
only Religion, thinking with that cloak to cover their ungodly designs, and
so, under that plausible argument, to draw after them a large train of ignorant
persons, easy to be seduced. Now for the preservation of our good Subjects,
whose case were to be pitied, if they blindely should suffer themselves to be
induced and trapped in so dangerous a snare, it has pleased the goodness of
God, by the utterance of their own mouths and writings to us, to discover the
poison that before lay hid in their hearts, albeit to all persons of clear
judgment the same was evident enough before: Note how this agrees with our
times.
For what other thing [ is this, but to dissolve the whole Policy, and in a
manner to invert the very order] might move the principal raisers of this
tumult to put themselves in Arms against us so unnaturally, upon whom we had
bestowed so many benefits; But that the great honor we did them, they being
thereof unworthy, made them misknow themselves; and their ambition could not be
satisfied with heaping riches upon riches, and honor upon honor, unless they
retain in their hands us, and our whole Realm to be led, used, and disposed at
their pleasure. But this could not the multitude have perceived, if God (for
disclosing their Hypocrisy) had not compelled them to utter their unreasonable
desire to Govern; for now by Letters sent from themselves to us, which make
plain profession, that the establishing of Religion will not content them, Let
this be conferred with our times.
but we must be forced to govern by Council, such, as it shall please them to
appoint us; a thing so far beyond all measure, that we think the only
mention of so unreasonable a demand is sufficient to make their nearest
Kinsfolks their most mortal enemies, and all men to run on them without
further scruple, that are zealous to have their native Country to remain still
in the state of a Kingdom: For what other thing is this, but to dissolve the
whole policy, and (in a manner) to invert the very order of nature, to make
the Prince obey, and Subjects command. The like was never demanded by any of
our most Noble Progenitors heretofore, yea, not of Governors and Regents; but
the Prince and such as have filled their place chose their Council of such as
they thought most fit for the purpose. When we our selves were of less age,
and at our first returning into this our Realm, we had free choice of our
Council at our pleasure, and now when we are at our full maturity, shall we be
brought back to the state of Pupills, and be put under Tutory? So long as some
of them bore the whole sway with us, this matter was never called in question;
but now when they cannot be longer permitted to do and undo all at their
pleasure, they will put a Bridle into our mouths, and give us a Council
chosen after their fantasy. This is the quarrel of Religion they made you
believe they had in hand, This is the quarrel for which they would have you
hazard your Lands, Note diligenly
Lives and goods, in the company of a certain number of Rebels against your
natural Prince. To speak in good language, they would be Kings themselves, or
at the least leaving to us the bare Name and Title, and take to themselves the
credit and whole administration of the Kingdom.

We have thought good to make publication hereof, to show, that you suffer not
your selves to be deceived under pretense of Religion, to follow them, who
prefering their particular advancement to the public tranquillity; and having
no care of you, in respect of themselves, would (if you would hearken to their
voice) draw you after them, to your utter destruction. Assuring you that you
have heretofore good experience of our clemency, and under our Wings enjoyed in
peace the possession of your Goods, and lived at liberty of your Conscience, so
may you be in full assurance of the like hereafter, and have us always your
good and loving Princes to so many as shall continue your selves in due
obedience, and do the office of faithful and natural Subjects.

Given under our Signet at Saint Andrews the tenth of December, and of our
Reigns the first and twenty three years. 1565.
NOw the Lords desired, next the establishing of Religion, That the Queens
Majesty, in all the Affairs of the Realm and Commonwealth, should use the
counsel and advice of the Nobility, and ancient blood of the same; whereas in
the mean time the Council of David and Francisco the Italians, with Fowler the
Englishman, and Master James Balfour Parson of Flisk, was preferred before all
others, save only the Earl of Athole, who was thought to be a man of gross
judgment, but nevertheless in all things given to please the Queen. It was
now finally come to this point, that in stead of Law, Justice and equity, only
Will ruled in all things; there was through all the County set out a
Proclamation in the King and Queens names, commanding all persons to come and
meet them at Sterlin the first day of October following, with twenty days
provision, under pain of life, lands and goods. It was uncertain whether their
Majesty's intended to pass from Sterlin or not, and I believe the principal
men knew not well at that time; for a report was, That by reason the Castles of
Hamilton and Draffen were kept Fortified and Victualled at the Dukes command,
that they would pass to siege the said houses, and give them some shot of a
Canon; others said, They would pass toward my L. of Argile, who had his
people always armed, whereof his neighbors were afraid, especially the
Inhabitants of Athole and Lenox; but at length it was concluded that they
should pass to Dumfreis, as shall be declared.

During this time there were Propositions made continually to the King and
Queen, by the Lords, desiring always their Majesty's most humbly to receive
them into their hands: Their Articles tended continually to these two Heads,
viz. To abolish the Mass, root out Idolatry, and Establish the true Religion,
And that they and the affairs of the Realm should be governed by the advice
and counsel of the true Nobility of the same; offering themselves and their
cause to be tried by the Laws of the Country. Yet nothing could be accepted
nor taken in good part, albeit the Master of Maxwell labored by all means to
redress the matter, who also entertained the Lords most honorably in
Dumfreis, for he had the government of all that Country. But he himself
incurred the Queens wrath so, that he was summoned to present himself and
appear before the King and Queens Majesty's, after the same form that the rest
of the Lords were charged with, and also commanded to give over the House of
Lochmabben, and the Castle which he had in keeping for the Queen. And albeit he
obeyed not, yet was he not put to the Horn, as the rest. Nevertheless there
was no man that doubted of his good will and partaking with the Lords, who in
the mean time sent Robert Melvin to the Queen of England, and declared their
state to her Majesty, desiring support.

Now the chief care and solicitude that was in the Court, was, By what means
they might come to have money, for notwithstanding this great preparation for
war, and eminent appearance of trouble, yet were they destitute of the
sinews of War; albeit the Treasurers, and now Comptroller, to wit, the Lord
of Tilbardin, had disbursed many thousands; yet there was no appearance of
payment of soldiers, nor scarcely how the King and Queens Houses and pompous
Trains should be upholden; there was about 600. Horsemen, besides the Guard and
3. Ensigns of footmen. The charge of the whole would amount to 1000. l. ster.
every month; a thing surpassing the usual manner of Scotland. At this time
arrived the Earl of Bothwell, who was welcome, and graciously received by the
Queen, and immediately placed in Council, and made Lieutenant of the West and
middle Marches. Now as every one of the Barons compounded to be exempted from
this meeting; the E. of Athole demanded of Edinburgh 200. l. ster. but they
refused to pay it; notwithstanding Octo. 27. there was a certain number of the
principal and rich persons of the Town warned by a Macer to pass to the
Palace of Hallyrudhouse to the King and Queen, who declared to them by their
own mouths, speaking that they had use for money, and therefore knowing them
to be honest men and the inhabitants of the best City in their Country, they
must needs charge them; and for security they should have other men bound for
pledges, or any Hand therefore. The sum that they desired was 1000 l. sterling.
and no less. They being astonished, made no answer; but Parson Flisk standing
by, said, That seeing the King and Queens Majesty's desired them so civilly, in
a thing most lawful in their necessity, they did show themselves not honest
to keep silence and give no answer to their Majesty's, for that must needs be
had of them which was required; and if they would not, they should be
constrained by the Laws, So was the City of London for war against Scotland,
vexed for the leavie of money
which they would not abide; for some of them had deserved hanging (said he)
because they had lent large sums of money to the King and Queens enemies, and
Rebels; and therefore they must shortly suffer great punishment. Soon after
they were called in one by one, and demanded how much they would lend? some
made this excuse, and some that, by reason there were that offered to lend
money; amongst whom there was one offered to lend 20 l. To him the Earl of
Athole said, Thou art worthy to be hanged that speak of 20 l. seeing the
Princes charge thee so easily. Finally, they were all imprisoned, and soldiers
set over them, having their Muskets ready charged, and their Match lighted,
even in the house with them, where they remained all that night, and the next
day till night; and then being changed from one prison to another, there were
six chosen out and sent in the night to the Castle of Edinburgh, convoyed with
Musketteers round about them, as if they had been Murderers or most vile
persons. At length (the third day) by means of the Lord of Craigmiller
Provest, and some others, the sum was made more easy, to wit, a 1000 Marks
sterling, to be paid immediately, and to have the superiority of Leithin in
Pledge (to wit) upon condition of Redemption. And besides the said sum of
1000 Marks sterlin they paid 1000 l. sterling. For the meeting at Dumfreis at the
day appointed, for electing the officers, the Queen sent in a Ticket such as
she would have them to choose for Provest, Bailiffs, and Council, whereof there
was a number of Papists, the rest not worthy. Of the number given in by the
Queen, they named such as should rule for that year; Notwithstanding without
free Election, the Lord Craigmiller, remained Provest, who showed himself most
willing to set forward Religion, to punish vice, and to maintain the
Commonwealth. All this time the Ministers cried out against the Mass and such
Idolatry, for it was more advanced by the Queen then before.

The first day of October met in Edinburgh the Superintendant of Lothian, with
all the Ministers under his charge, according to their ordinary custom; for
every Superintendant used to convene the whole Ministry, and there it was
complained on, That they could get no payment of their stipends, not only about
the City, but through the whole Realm. Therefore after reasoning and
consultation taken, they framed a supplication directed to the King and Queen,
and immediately presented the same to their Majesty's by M. John Spottswood
Superintendant of Lothian, and Master David Lindsey Minister of Leith; it
contained in effect, That forasmuch as it had pleased the King and Queens
Majesty's (with advice of the Privy Council) to grant unto the Ministers of
the Word their stipends to be taken of the Thirds of the Benefices, which
Stipends are now detained from the said Ministers by reason of the troubles and
changing of the Comptroller, whereby they are not able to live; and therefore
most humbly craved the King and Queens Majesty to cause them to be paid. Their
answer was, That they would cause order to be taken therein to their
contentment. Soon after the Lord Gordion came to Edinburgh, and left the most
part of his people at Sterlin with his carriage; the King and Queen for hope of
his good service to be done, restored him to his Fathers place, to the
Earldom of Hintley, the Lands and Heritage thereof. October 8. the King and
Queen marched forth of Edinburgh toward Dumfreis, and as they passed from the
Palace of Hallyrud-house all men were warned with Jack and Spear. The first
night they came to Sterlin, and the next to Craford; the day after the Lairds
of Drunlaurick and Lochinvar, met the Queen, albeit they had been with the
Lords familiar enough. The Lords perceiving, that all hope of reconciliation
was past, they rode to Ednam, where they remained till the Queen came to
Dumfreis, and then they past to Carlisle. Now the Master of Maxwell, who had
entertained the Lords familiarly, and subscribed with them, and had spoken as
highly against their enemies as any of themselves, and had received large money
by that means, to wit, 1000. l. to raise a Band or Troup of Horsemen; and that
the same day the King and Queen came to Dumfreis; the third day after their
coming he came to them, conveyed by the Earl Bothwell, with diverse other
Noblemen. At length the Earls of Athole and Hintley were Sureties for him, and
all things past remitted, upon condition, that he should be a faithful and
obedient subject hereafter. The same day they made Musters, the next day the
Army was dispersed, being about 18000. men; the King and Queen past to
Lothinaben, where the Master of Maxwell gave a Banquet, and then forthwith
marched to Tueddall, so to Peblis, and then to Edinburgh.

The best and chief part of the Nobility of this Realm, who also were the
principal Instruments of the Reformation of Religion, and therefore were
called the Lords of the Congregation, in manner above rehearsed, were banished
and chased into England; they were courteously received and entertained by the
Earl of Bedford Lieutenant, Note diligently
upon the Borders of England. Soon after the Earl of Murray took Post toward
London, leaving the rest of the Lords at Newcastle; every man supposed that the
Earl of Murray should have been graciously received of the Queen of England,
and that he should have gotten support according to his hearts desire; but
far beyond his expectation, he could get no audience of the Queen of England:
But by means of the French Ambassador, called Monsieur de Four, his true
friend, he obtained audience. The Queen, with a fair countenance, demanded, How
he, being a Rebel to her sister of Scotland, durst take the boldness upon him
to come within her Realm? These and the like words got he, instead of the good
and courteous entertainment expected. Finally, after private discourse, the
Ambassador being absent, she refused to give the Lords any support, denying
plainly that ever she had promised any such thing as to support them, Note
diligently Q^ Elizabeth.
saying, She never meant any such thing in that way; albeit her greatest
familiars knew the contrary. In the end, the Earl of Murray said to her,
Madame, whatsoever thing your Majesty meant in your heart, we are thereof
ignorant; but thus much we know assuredly, That we had lately faithful
promises of aid and support by your Ambassador, and familiar servants, in your
name: And further, we have your own handwriting; confirming the said
promises. And afterward he took his leave, and came Northward from London,
toward Newcastle.

After the Earl of Murray his departure from the Court, Here mark either deep
dissimulation, or a great inconstancy.
the Queen sent them some aid, and writ unto the Queen of Scotland in their
favor: Whether she had promised it in private to the Earl of Murray, or
whether she repented her of the harsh reception of the Earl of Murray.

At this time David Rizio Italian, began to be higher exalted, insomuch as
there was no matter or thing of importance done without his advice. And during
this time, the faithful within this Realm were in great fear, looking for
nothing but great trouble and persecution to be shortly. Yet Supplications and
Intercessions were made thorowout all the Congregations, especially for such as
were afficted and banished, That it would please God to give them patience,
comfort, and constancy; and this especially was done at Edinburgh, where John
Knox used to call them that were banished, The best part of the Nobility,
Chief Members of the Congregation: Whereof the Courtiers being advertised,
they took occasion to revile and bewray his sayings, alleging, He prayed for
the Rebels, and desired the people to pray for them likewise. The Lord of
Lethington chief Secretary, in presence of the King and Queens Majesty's and
Council, confessed that he heard the Sermons, and said, There was nothing at
that time spoken by the Minister, whereat any man need to be offended: And
further, declared plainly, That by the Scripture it was lawful to pray for all
men.

In the end of November, the Lords with their accomplices, were summoned to
appear the fourth day of February, for Treason, and laese Majesty: But in the
mean time, such of the Nobility as had professed the Evangell of Christ, and
had communicate with the Brethren at the Lords Table, were ever longer the more
suspected by the Queen, who began to declare her self in the Months of November
and December, to be maintainer of the Papists; for at her pleasure, the Earls
of Lenox, Athole, and Cassels, with diverse others, without any dissimulation
known, went to the Mass openly in her Chapel: Yet nevertheless the Earls
of Huntley and Bothwell went not to Mass, albeit they were in great favor
with the Queen. As for the King, he past his time in Hunting and Hawking, and
such other pleasures as were agreeable to his appetite, having in his company
Gentlemen willing to satisfy his will and affections.

About this time, in the beginning of as the Court remained at Edinburgh, the
banished Lords by all means possible, by writings and their friends, made suit
and means to the King and Queens Majesty's, to be received into favor.

At this time the Abbot of Kylwinning came from Newcastle to Edinburgh, and
after he had gotten audience of the King and Queen, with great difficulty he
got Pardon for the Duke, and his friends and servants, upon this Condition,
That he should pass into France; which he did soon after.

The five and twentieth of December convened in Edinburgh the Commissioners of
the Churches within this Realm for the general assembly, There assisted to
them the Earls of Morton and Mar, the Lord Lindsay, and Secretary
Lethington, with some Barons and Gentlemen. The principal things that were
agreed and concluded, were, That forasmuch as the Mass, with such Idolatry,
and Papisticall Ceremonies, were still maintained, expressly against the Act of
Parliament, and the Proclamations made at the Queens Arrival; And that the
Queen had promised that she would hear Conference and Disputation; That the
Church therefore offered to prove by the Word of God, That the Doctrine
preached within this Realm was according to the Scriptures; and that the
Mass, with all the Papisticall Doctrine, was but the invention of men, and
mere Idolatry.

Secondly, That by reason of the change of the Comptroller, who had put in new
Collectors, forbidding them to deliver any thing to the Ministry, and by these
means the Ministry was like to decay and fail, contrary to the Ordinance made
in the year of God 1562. in favor and support of the Ministry. During this
time, as the Papists flocked to Edinburgh for making Court, some of them that
had been Friars, as black Abercrommy and Roger, presented supplication to the
Queens Majesty, desiring in effect, That they might be permitted to preach;
which was easily granted. The noise was further, That they offered Disputation:
For as the Court stood, they thought they had a great advantage already, by
reason they knew the King to be of their Religion, as well as the Queen, with
some part of the Nobility, who with the King after declared themselves openly:
And especially the Queen was governed by the Earls of Lenox and Athole; but in
matters most weighty, and of greatest importance, by David Rizio the Italian
before mentioned, who went under the name of the French Secretary; by whose
means, all grave matters, of what weight soever, must pass; providing always,
That his hands were anointed. In the mean time he was a manifest enemy to the
Evangell, and therefore a greater enemy to the banished Lords. And at this
time, the principal Lords that waited at Court were divided in opinions; For
the Earl of Morton Chancellor, with the Earl of Mar, and Secretary
Lethington, were on the one part; and the Earls of Huntley and Bothwell on the
other part, so that a certain dryness was amongst them; nevertheless, by
means of the Earl of Athole, they were reconciled. Now as there was
preparation made by the Papists for Christmas, the Queen being then at Mass,
the King came publicly, and bare company; and the Friars Preached the days
following, always using another style then they had done seven years before,
during which time they had not Preached publicly: they were so little
esteemed, that they continued not long in Preaching.

At the same time convened in Edinburgh the general Assembly of the Ministers,
and Commissioners of the Churches Reformed within this Realm: There assisted
them of the Nobility, the Earls of Morton and Mar, the Lord Lindsay, and
Secretary Lethington, with others. The chief things that were concluded in this
Assembly, were, That for the avoiding of the plagues and scourges of God which
appeared to come upon the people for their sins and ingratitude, there should
be proclaimed by the Ministers a public Fast, to be Universally observed
thorowout all the Reformed Churches; which manner of Fasting was soon after
devised by John Knox, at the Command of the Church, and put in Print, wherefore
needs not here to be recited in this place. At the end of this Book you shall
find this.
What followed upon the said Fast, shall be plainly, God willing, declared. The
second thing that was ordained in this Assembly, was, concerning the Ministers,
who for want of payment of their stipends, were like to perish, or else to
leave their Ministry: wherefore it was found necessary, That supplication
should be made to the King and Queens Majesty's; And for the same purpose, a
certain uumber of the most able men were elected to go to their Majesty's
aforesaid, to lament and bemone their case; Which persons had Commission to
propose some other things, as shall be declared. The names of them that past
from the Church to the King and Queens Majesty's, were, M. John Spotswood,
Superintendent of Lowthian; John Winrame, Superintendent of Fyfe; M. John Row,
Minister of Perth; M. David Lyndsay, Minister of Leith, who easily obtained
audience of the King and Queens Majesty's: And after their reverence done, M.
John Row, in name of the rest, opened the matter, lamenting and bewailing the
miserable state of the poor Ministers, who by public command had been
reasonably satisfied three years or more, by virtue of the Act made with advice
of the honorable Privy Council, for the taking up of the Thirds of the
Benefices, which was especially made in their favors: Nevertheless the Lord
of Tillibardin, new Comptroller, would answer them nothing: Wherefore they
besought their Majesty's for relief. Secondly, seeing that in all Supplications
made to the King and Queens Majesty's by the Church at all times, they desired
most earnestly that all Idolatry and superstition, and especially the Mass,
should be rooted out and abolished quite out of this Realm; And that in the
last general Assembly of the Church, by their Commissioners, they had most
earnestly desired the same; And that their answer was then, That they knew no
impediment in the Mass; therefore the Assembly desired, That it might please
their Highnesses to hear Disputation, to the end that such as now pretend to
Preach in the Chapel Royal, and maintain such errors; the Truth being tried
by disputation, that they might be known to be abusers, submitting themselves
always to the Word of God written in the Scriptures. To this it was answered
by the Queen, That she was always minded that the Ministers should be paid
their Stipends; and if there was any fault therein, the same came by some of
their own sort, meaning the Comptroller Pittarow, who had the handling of the
Thirds: Always by the advice of her Council she should cause such order to be
taken therein, that none should have occasion to complain. As to the second,
She would not jeopard her Religion upon such as were there present; for she
knew well enough that the Protestants were more learned.

The Ministers and Commissioners of Churches perceiving nothing but delay, and
driving off time, in the old manner, went home every one to their own Churches,
waiting upon the good providence of God, continually making Supplication unto
Almighty God, that it would please him of his mercy to remove the apparent
plague. And in the mean time the Queen was busied with Banqueting about with
some of the Lords of the Session of Edinburgh, and after with all men of Law,
having continually in her company David Rizio, who sat at Table near to her
self, sometimes more privately then became a man of his Condition, for his
overgreat familiarity was already supected; and it was thought, That by his
advice alone the Queens sharpness and extremity toward the Lords was
maintained.

In the end of January arrived an Ambassador from France, named Monsieur
Rambullet, having with him about forty Horse in Trayn, who came through
England: He brought with him the Order of the Cockle from the King of France,
to the King, who received the same at the Mass, in the Chapel of the Palace
of Halyrud-house. There assisted the Earls of Lenox, Athole, and Eglington,
with diverse such other Papists as would please the Queen, who three days after
caused the Herald to convene in Council, and reasoned what Arms should be
given to the King; some thought he should have the Arms of Scotland; some
others said, Seeing it was not concluded in Parliament that he should have the
Crown Matrimonial, he could have Arms but only as Duke of Rothesay, Earl of
Rosse, etc. The Queen bade give him only his due; whereby it was perceived her
love waxed cold toward him. Finally, his Arms were left blank; and the Queen
caused put her own name before her husbands in all Wrets; and thereafter she
caused to leave out his name wholly: And because formerly he had signed every
thing of any moment, she caused to make a Seal like the Kings, and gave it to
David Rizio, who made use of it by the Queens Command, alleging, That the
King being at his Pastime, could not always be present.

About the same time the Earl of Glencarne came from Barwicke to his own
Country. Soon after, the Earl of Bothwell was married unto the Earl of
Huntley his sister. The Queen desired that the Marriage might be made in the
Chapel at the Mass; which the Earl Bothwell would in no wise grant. Upon
Sunday the third day of March, began the Fasting at Edinburgh. The seventh day
of March, the Queen came from the Palace of Hallirud-house to the Town in
wondrous gorgious apparel, albeit the number of Lords and Train was not very
great. In the mean time the King accompanied with seven or eight horse, went to
the Leith to pass his time there, for he was not like to get the Crown
Matrimonial.

In the Tolbooth was devised and named the Heads of the Articles that were
drawn against the banished Lords; Upon the morrow and Saturday following, there
was great reasoning concerning the Attainder; some alleged, That the Summons
was was not well Libelled or Dressed; others thought the matter of Treason was
not sufficiently proved; and indeed they were still seeking proof, for there
was no other way but the Queen would have them all attainted albeit the time
was very short; the twelfth day of March should have been the day, which was
the Tuesday following.

Now the matter was stayed by a mavelous Tragedy, for by the Lords (upon the
Saturday before, which was the ninth of March, about Supper-time) David Rizio
the Italian, named the French Secretary, was slain in the Gallery below Stairs
(the King staying in the room with the Queen, told her, That the Design was
only to take order with that Villain) after that he had been taken violently
from the Queens presence, who requested most earnestly for the saving of his
life; which act was done by the Earl of Morton, the Lord Ruthven, the Lord
Lindsay the Master of Ruthven, with diverse other Gentlemen. They first purposed
to have hanged him, and had provided Cords for the same purpose; but the great
haste which they had, moved them to dispatch him with Whingers or Daggers,
wherewith they gave him three and fifty strokes. They sent away and put forth
all such persons as they suspected.

The Earls Bothwell and Hnntley hearing the noise and clamor, came suddenly
to the Close, intending to have made work, if they had had a party strong
enough; but the Earl Morton commanded them to pass to their Chamber, or else
they should do worse: At the which words they retired immediately, and so past
forth at a back Window, they two alone, and with great fear came forth of the
Town to Edmistone, on foot, and from thence to Crichton.

This David Rizio was so foolish, that not only he had drawn unto him the
managing of all Affairs, the King set aside, but also his Equipage and Train
did surpass the Kings; and at the Parliament that was to be, he was ordained
to be Chancellor; which made the Lords conspire against him: They made a Bond
to stand to the Religion and Liberties of the Countries, and to free themselves
of the slavery of the Villain David Rizio: The King and his father subscribed
to the Bond, for they durst not trust the Kings word without his Signet.

There was a French Priest (called John Daniot) who advised David Rizio to make
his fortune, and be gone, for the Scots would not suffer him long. His answer
was, That the Scots would bragg but not fight; then he advised him to beware of
the Bastard. To this he answered, That the Bastard should never live in
Scotland, in his time; (he meant the Earl Murray) but it happened, that one
George Dowlas Bastard son to the Earl of Angus gave him the first stroke. The
Queen when she heard he was dead, left weeping, and declared she would study
revenge, which she did.

Immediately it was noised in the Town of Edinburgh, that there was murder
committed within the Kings Palace, wherefore the Provest caused to Ring the
common Bell, or, Sonner le toksain, (as the French speaks) and straightway past
to the Palace, having about four or five hundred men in warlike manner; and as
they stood in the utter Court, the King called to the Provest, commanding him
to pass home with his company, saying, The Queen and he were merry. But the
Provest desired to hear the Queen speak her self; Whereunto it was answered by
the King, Provest, know you not that I am King? I command you to pass home to
your houses; and immediately they retired.

The next day (which was the second Sunday of our Fast in Edinburgh) there was
a Proclamation made in the Kings Name, subscribed with his hand, That all
Bishops, Abbots, and other Papists should avoid and depart the Town; which
Proclamation was indeed observed, for they had a Flea in their Hose.

There were Letters sent forth in the Kings Name, and subscribed with his hand,
to the Provest and Bailiffs of Edinburgh, the Bailiffs of Leith and Cannogate,
commanding them to be ready in Armor to assist the King and his Company, and
likewise other private writings directed to diverse Lords and Gentlemen, to come
with all expedition.

In the mean time the Queen being above measure enraged, offended and troubled,
as the issue of the matter declared, sometime railing upon the King, and
sometime crying out at the Windows, desired her servants to set her at
liberty; for she was highly offended and troubled.

This same tenth of March the Earl of Murray, with the rest of the Lords and
Noblemen that were with him, having received the Kings Letter, (for after the
Bond, above named, was Subscribed, the King Wrote unto the banished Lords, to
return into their Country, being one of the Articles of the said Bond) came at
night to the Abbey, being also convoyed by the Lord Hume and a great company of
the borderers, to the n^mber of 1000 horses. And first, after he had presented
himself to the King, the Queen was informed of his sudden coming, and therefore
sent unto him, commanding him to come to her; and he obeying, went to her, who
with a singular gravitie received him, after that he had made his purgation,
and declared the overgreat affection which he bore continually to her
Majesty. The Earls of Athole, Cathnes and Sutherland departed out of the
Town, with the Bishops, upon the Monday, the third day after the slaughter of
David Rizio. The Earls of Lenox, Murray, Morton, and Rothes, Lords Ruthven,
Lindsay, Boyd, and Ocheltrie, sitting in Council, desired the Queen, That
forasmuch as the thing which was done could not be undone, that she would (for
avoiding of greater inconveniences) forget the same, and take it as good
service, seeing there were so many Noblemen restored. The Queen dissembling her
displeasure and indignation, gave good words, nevertheless she desired, That
all persons armed or otherwise (being within the Palace at that time) should
remove, leaving the Palace void of all, saving only her domestic servants.
The Lords being persuaded by the uxorious King, and and the facile Earl of
Murray, condescended to her desire, who finally the next morning, two hours
before day, past to Seaton, and then to Dumbar, having in her company the
simple King, who was allured by her sugared words; from Dumbar immediately were
sent Pursuivants with Letters thorowout the Country; and especially Letters to
the Noblemen and Barons, commanding them to come to Dumbar, to assist the King
and Queen within five days: In the mean time the Lords being informed of the
sudden departure, they were astonished, and knew not what were best for them to
do: But because it was the self-same day (to wit, the twelfth day of March)
that they were summoned unto; therefore having good opportunity, they past to
the Tolbooth, which was richly hung with Tapistry, and orned (but not for them)
and set themselves, making Protestations, the Earl of Glencarne, and some
others, being present. The Earl of Argyle, who was written for by the King,
came to Lithgow; and being informed of the matter, he remained there.

After this manner above specified, to wit, by the death of David Rizio, the
Noblemen were relieved of their trouble, and restored to their places and
rooms: And likewise the Church Reformed, and all that professed the Evangell
within this Realm, after Fasting and Prayer, was delivered and freed from the
apparent dangers which were like to have fallen upon them; For if the
Parliament had taken effect, and proceeded, it was thought by all men of the
best judgment, That the true Protestant Religion should have been wrackt, and
Popery erected; and for the same purpose, there were certain Wooden Altars
made, to the number of twelve, found ready in the Chapel of the Palace of
Halyrud-house, which should have been erected in Saint Gyles his Church.

The Earls Bothwell and Huntley being informed of the King and Queens sudden
departure forth of Edinburgh, came to Dumbar, where they were most graciously
received by the Queens Majesty; who consulting with them and the Master of
Maxwell, together with Parson Owin, and Parson Fliske, chief Counselors, what
was best to be done, and how she should be revenged upon the murderers. At
first they did intend to go forward, and leaving no manner of cruelty
unpractised, putting to death all such as were suspected: This was the opinion
of such as would obey their Queens rage and fury for their own advantage; But
in the end they concluded, That she should come to Edinburgh with all the force
and power she could make, and there proceed to Justice: And for the same
purpose, she caused to summon, by open Proclamation, all persons of defense,
and all Noblemen and Gentlemen, to come to her in Dumbar incontinent. In the
mean time, the Captains labored by all means to take up and enroll men and
women. The Earls of Morton, Murray, Glencarne, Rothesse, with the rest that
were in Edinburgh, being informed of the Queens fury and anger toward the
committers of the slaughter, and perceiving they were not able to make any
Party, thought it best to give place to her fury for a time; for they were
divided in opinions, and finally, departed out of Edinburgh, upon Sunday the
seventeenth of March, every one a several way; for the Queens Majesty was now
bent only against the slayers of David Rizio; and to the purpose she might be
the better revenged upon them, she intended to give pardon to all such as
before had been attainted, for whatsoever crime.

The eighteenth day of March, the King and Queen came to Edinburgh, having in
their company horse and foot, to the number of 8000 men; whereof there were
four Companies of Footmen of War. The Town of Edinburgh went out to meet them,
for fear of War. And finally, coming within the Town, in most awful manner
they caused to place their men of War within the Town, and likewise certain
Fieldpieces against their Lodging, which was in the middle of the Town, over
against the Salt Trove: Now a little before the Queens entrance into the
Town, all that knew of her cruel pretense and hatred toward them, fled here
and there; And amongst others, Master James Magill the Clerk Register, the
Justice Clerk, and the common Clerk of the Town: The chief Secretary
Lethington was gone before; likewise John Knox past West to Kyle: The men of
War likewise kept the Ports or Gates. Within five days after their entry, there
was a Proclamation made at the Market-Crosse, for the purgation of the King
from the aforesaid slaughter; which made all understanding men laugh at the
passages of things, since the King not only had given his consent, but also
had subscribed the Bond aforementioned; and the business was done in his name,
and for his Honor, if he had had wisdom to know it. After this Proclamation,
the King lost his credit among all men, and so his friends, by this his
inconstancy and weakness.

And in the mean time the men of War committed great outrages in breaking up
doors, thrusting themselves into every house: And albeit the number of them
were not great, yet the whole Town was too little for them. Soon after, the
King and Queen past to the Castle, and caused to warn all such as had absented
themselves, by open Proclamation, to appear before their Majesty's and the
Privy Council within six days, under pain of Rebellion; which practice was
devised in the Earl of Huntleys case, before the Battle of Corrichy: And
because they appeared not, they were denounced Rebels, and put to the Horn,
and immediately thereafter, their Escheats given or taken up by the Treasurer.
There was a certain number of the Townsmen charged to enter themselves
prisoners in the Tolbooth, and with them were put in certain Gentlemen: Where,
after they had remained eight days, they were convoyed down to the Palace by
the men of War, and then kept by them eight days more: And of that number was
Thomas Scot Sheriff deput^ of S. Iohnston, who was condemned to death, and
executed cruelly; to wit, hanged and quartered, for keeping the Queen in
prison, as was alleged, although it was by the Kings command: And two men
likewise were condemned to death, and carried likewise to the Ladder foot; But
the E. Bothwell presented the Queens Ring to the Provest, which then was
Justice, for safety of their life. The names of those two were Io. Mobray
Merchant, and Will. Harlow Sadler. About the same time, notwithstanding all
this hurliburly, the Ministers of the Church, and professors of Religion ceased
not; for the people, they convened to public prayers and preaching with
boldness; yea, a great number of Noblemen assisted likewise. The E. Bothwell
had now, of all men, greatest access and familiarity with the Queen, so that
nothing of any great importance was done without him; for he showed favor to
such as liked him; and amongst others, to the Lairds of Ormeston, Hawton, and
Calder, who was so reconciled unto him, that by his favor they were relieved
of great trouble.

The Earls of Argyle and Murray, at the Queens Command, past to Argyle, where,
after they had remained about a Month, they were sent for by the Queen; and
coming to Edinburgh, they were received by the Queen into the Castle, and
banquetted, the Earls of Huntley and Bothwell being present.

At this time the King grew to be contemned and disesteemed, so that scarcely
any Honor was done to him; and his Father likewise.

About Easter the King past to Sterlin, where he was Shriven, after the Papist
manner: And in the mean time, at the Palace of Halyrud-house, in the Chapel,
there resorted a great number to the Mass, albeit the Queen remained still in
the Castle, with her Priests of the Chapel Royal, where they used Ceremonies
after the Popish manner.

At the same time departed this life Master John Sinclar, Bishop of Rosse, and
Dean of Lestarrig, of whom has been often mention, President of the College of
Justice, called the Session; who also succeeded in the said Office and Dignity
after the decease of his brother Master John Sinclar, Bishop of Rosse, Dean of
Glasgow, who departed this life at Paris, about a year before: They were both
learned in the Laws, and given to maintain the Popish Religion, and therefore
great enemies to the Protestants. A little before died Master Abrabam Crithton,
who had been President likewise now in their rooms.

The Queen placed such as she pleased, and had done her service (always very
unfit) The Patrimony of the Kirk, Bishoprics, Abbeyes, and such other
Benefices, were disposed by the Queen to Courtiers, Dancers, and Flatterers.
The Earl Bothwell, whom the Queen preferred above all others, after the
decease of David Rizio, had for his part Melrosse, Hadington, and New Bottell;
likewise the Castle of Dumbar was given to him, with the principal Lands of
the Earldome of Merche, which were of the Patrimony of the Crown.

At the same time the Superintendents, with the other Ministers of the
Churches, perceiving the Ministry like to decay for lack of payment of
Stipends to Ministers, they gave this Supplication at Edinburgh.

The Supplication of the Ministers to the Queen.
UNto your Majesty, and your most honorable Council, most humbly and
lamentably complains your Highness poor Orators, the Superintendents, and
other Ministers of the Reformed Church of God, traveling thorowout all your
Highness Realm, in teaching and instructing your Lieges in all Quarters, in
the knowledge of God, and Christ Jesus his Son; That where your Majesty, with
the advice of the Council and Nobility aforesaid, moved by godly zeal,
concluded and determined, That the traveling Ministry thorowout this Realm,
should be maintained upon the Rents of the Benefices of this Realm of
Scotland; and for that cause your Majesty, with the advice of the Council and
Nobility aforesaid, upon the 15 day of December 1562. in like manner concluded
and determined, That if the said part of the Rents of the whole Benefices
Ecclesiastical within this Realm would be sufficient to maintain the
Ministers thorowout the whole Realm, and to support your Majesty in the
setting forward of your common affairs, should be employed accordingly: Failing
thereof, the third part of the said fruits, or more, to be taken up yearly in
time coming, until a general Order be taken therein; as the Act made
thereupon at more length bears: Which being afterward considered by your
Majesty, the whole Thirds of the fruits aforesaid were propounded to the uses
aforesaid, by Act of Council. And we your Majesty's poor Orators, put in
peaceable possession of the part assigned by your Majesty to us, by the space
of three years, or thereabouts, which we did enjoy without interruption;
notwithstanding all this, now of late, we your Majesty's poor Orators
aforesaid, are put wrongfully and unjustly from their aforesaid part of the
above specified Thirds, by your Majesty's Officers, and thereby brought to such
extreme penury, and extreme distress, as we are not able any longer to
maintain our selves. And albeit we have given in diverse and sundry complaints
to your Majesty herein, and have received diverse promises of redress; yet
have we found no relief: Therefore we most humbly beseech your Majesty to
consider our most grievous complaint, together with the right above specified,
whereon the same is grounded. And if your Majesty, with the advice of your
Council aforesaid, finds our right sufficient to continue us in possession of
our part assigned to us, while and until a general Order be taken; which
possession was ratified by the yearly allowance of your Majesty's Exchequers
account, That your Majesty would grant us Letters upon the aforesaid Act and
Ordinance past thereupon, against all intromettors and medlers with the
aforesaid Thirds, to answer and obey, according to the aforesaid Act and
Ordinance of our possession proceeding thereupon; And likewise that we may have
Letters, if need be, to arrest and stay the aforesaid Thirds in the possessors
hands, while and until sufficient caution be found to us, for our part
aforesaid. And your answer most humbly we beseech.

This Supplication being presented by the Superintendent of Lowthian, and M.
John Craig, in the Castle of Edinburgh, was graciously received by the Queen,
who promised that she would take sufficient order therein, so soon as the
Nobility and Council might convene.

The 19 of June, the Queen was delivered of a man-child (the Prince in the
aforesaid Castle) and immediately sent into France and England her Posts, to
advertise the neighbor Princes, and to desire them to send Gossips or
Wintesses of the Princes Baptism.

In the mean time there was joy and triumph made in Edinburgh, and such other
places where it was known, after thanks and praises given unto God, with
Supplications for the godly Education of the Prince; and principally, wishing
that he should be Baptized according to the manner and form observed in the
Reformed Churches within this Realm.

About the same time, to wit, the 25 of June, the general Assembly of the
whole Church convened at Edinburgh* The Earls of Argyle and Murray assisted at
the Assembly: Paul Methvin, who before, as we heard, was excommunicate, gave in
his Supplication, and desired to be heard, as he had done diverse times; for the
said Paul had written often times out of England to the Lord of Dun, and to
diverse others, most earnestly desiring to be received again into the Fellowship
of the Church. After reasoning of the matter, it was finally granted, That he
should be heard; And so being before the Assembly, and falling upon his knees,
burst out with tears, and said, He was not worthy to appear in their presence;
always he desired them, for the love of God, to receive him to the open
expression of his repentance. Shortly after, they appointed certain of the
Ministers to prescribe to him the form of his declaration of Repentance, which
was thus in effect, first, That he should present himself barefoot and
bare-head, arrayed in Sackcloth, at the principal entry of Saint Gyles Kirk in
Edinburgh, at seven hours in the morning upon the next Wednesday, and there to
remain the space of an hour, the whole people beholding him, till the Prayer
was made, Psalms sung, and Text of Scripture was read, and then to come into
into the place appointed, for expression of repentance, and tarry the time of
Sermon; and to do so likewise the next Friday following, and also upon the
Sunday; and then, in the face of the whole Church, to declare his repentance
with his own mouth. The same form and manner he should use in Iedwart and
Dundie; And that being done, to present himself again at the next general
Assembly following in Winter, where he should be received to the Communion of
the Church. When the said Paul had received the said Ordinance, he took it very
grievously, alleging, They had used overgreat severity; Nevertheless, being
counseled and persuaded by diverse notable Personages, he began well in
Edinburgh to proceed, whereby a great number were moved with compassion of his
state; and likewise in Iedwart: but he left his duty in Dundie, and passing
again into England, the matter, not without offense to many, ceased.

The Ministers complaining that they could not be paid their Stipends, were
licensed by the Assembly to pass to other Churches to Preach, but in no wise
to leave the Ministry. And because that the Queens Majesty had promised often
before to provide remedy, it was thought expedient that Supplication should be
yet made, as before, That the Queens Majesty should cause such order to be
taken, that the poor Ministers might be paid their Stipends. The Bishop of
Galloway, who was brother to the Earl of Huntley, and now a great man in the
Court, traveled much with the Queens Majesty in that matter, and got of her a
good answer, and fair promises. A few years before, the said Bishop of Galloway
desired of the general Assembly to be made Superintendent of Galloway; but now
being promoted to great Dignity, as to be of the number of the Lords of the
Privy Council, See in what sense proud ambitious men takes the name of Bishop.
and likewise one of the Session, he would no more be called Over-looker, or
Over-seer of Golloway, but Bishop: Always truth it is, That he labored much
for his Nephew the Earl of Huntley, that he might be restored to his Lands and
Honors; for the said Earl was new Chancellor, since the slaughter of David
Rizio, and had for his clawback the Bishop of Rosse, Master John Lesley, one of
the chief Counselors to the Queen: But of all men the Earl Bothwell was most
in the Queens favor, so far, that all things past by him; yea, by his means
the most part of all those that were partakers in the slaughter of David Rizio
got remission and relief. But from that day he was not present at any Sermon,
As is said before.
albeit before he professed the Evangell by outward speaking, yet he never
joined to the Congregation. But this time the Earl of Cassells was contracted
with the Lord of Glanes sister, by whose persuasion he became a Protestant, and
caused, in the Month of August, to re^orm his Churches in Carrick, and
promised to maintain the Doctrine of the Evangell.

The Queen not yet satisfied with the death of her man David, caused in August
to be apprehended a man called Hary, who sometime had been of her Chapel
Royal, but afterward became an exhorter in a Reformed Church; and for want of
stipend, or other necessaries, past in service to my Lord Ruthuen, and chanced
that night to be present when the said David was slain; and so finally, he was
condemned, and hanged, and quartered.

The King being now contemned of all men, because the Queen cared not for him,
he went sometime to the Lenox to his father, and sometime to Sterlin, whither
the Prince was carried a little before: Always he was destitute of such things
as were necessary for him, having scarcely six horses in Trayn. And being thus
desolate, and half desperate, he sought means to go out of the Country: And
about the same time, by the advice of Forlish Cagets, This inconstant yongman
sometimes declared himself for the Protestant; witness his last Band: And now
for the Papist. And as he left God, so he was left by him.
he wrote to the Pope, to the King of Spain, and to the King of France,
complaining of the state of the Country, which was all out of order, all
because that Mass and Popery were not again erected, giving the whole blame
thereof to the Queen, as not managing the Catholic Cause aright: By some knave
this poor Prince was betrayed, and the Queen got a Copy of these Letters into
her hands, and therefore threatened him sore; and there was never after that,
any appearance of love betwixt them.

The Churches of Geneva, Berne and Basil, with other Reformed Churches of
Germany and France, sent to the whole Church of Scotland, the sum of the
Confession of their Faith, desiring to know if they agreed in Uniformity of
Doctrine, alleging, That the Church of Scotland was dissonant in some
Articles from them: Wherefore the Superintendents, with a great part of the
other most qualified Ministers, convened in September in S. Andrews; and
reading the said Letters, made answer, and sent word again, That they agreed in
all points with those Churches, and differed in nothing from them: Albeit in
the keeping of some Festival days our Church assented not; for only the
Sabbath day was kept in Scotland.

In the end of this Month the Earl Bothwell riding in pursuit of the thieves in
Liddisdale, was ill hurt, and worse terrified, by a thief; for he believed
surely to have departed forth of this life, and sent word thereof to the Queens
Majesty, who soon after past forth of Iedwart to the Hermitage, to visit him,
and give him comfort: And within a few days after she took sickness in a most
extreme manner, for she lay two hours long, cold dead, as it were without
breath, or any sign of life, at length she revived, by reason they had bound
small Cords about her shackle bones, her knees and great toes, and speaking
very softly, she desired the Lords to pray for her to God, she said the Creed
in English, and desired my Lord of Murray, if she should chance to depart that
he would not be over extreme such as was of her Religion; the Duke and he
should have been Regents. The bruit went from Iedwart in the month of October,
1565. that the Queen was departed this life, or at least she could not live any
time, wherefore there was continually prayers publicly made at the Church of
Edinburgh, and diverse other places for her conversion toward God, and
amendment. Many were of opinion, That she should come to the Preaching, and
renounce Popery; But all in vain, for God had some other thing to do by her.
The King being advertised, rid Post from Sterlin to Iedburgh, where he found
the Queen somewhat convalesced, but she would scarce speak to him, and hardly
give him presence or a good word; wherefore he returned immediately to Sterlin,
where the Prince was, and after to Glascow to his Father.

There appeared great trouble over the whole Realm, and especially in the
Countries near the borders, if the Queen had departed at that time. as she
began to recover, the Earl Bothwell was brought in a Chariot from the
Hermitage to Iedburgh, where he was cured of his wounds; in whose presence the
Queen took more pleasure then in all the rest of the world; always by his
means most part of all that were outlawed for the slaughter of David Rizio
got relief, for there was no other means, but all things must needs pass by
him; wherefore every man sought to him, where immediately favor was to be had,
as before to David Rizio.

Soon after, the Queen passing along the borders, she came within the bounds of
Barwick, where she viewed the Town at her pleasure a far off, being within half
a Mile and less; all the Ordnance within Barwick were Discharged: The Captain
came forth with fourscore Horses bravely arrayed, to do her honor, and offer
her lawful service. Then she came to Craigmiller, where she remained in
November till she was advertised of the coming of the Ambassadors to the
Baptism of the Prince; and for that purpose there was great preparation made,
not without the trouble of such as were supposed to have money in store,
especially of Edinburgh; for there was borrowed a good round sum of money for
the same business. All her care and solicitude was for that triumph. At the
same time arrived the Count de Briance, Ambassador of the King of France, who
had a great Train. Soon after the Earl of Bedford went forth of England with a
very gorgious company to the number of fourscore Horses, and passing to Sterlin
he was humanly received of the Queens Majesty, and every day banquetted. The
excessive expenses and superfluous apparel, which was prepared at that time,
exceeded far all the preparation that ever had been devised or set forth
before that time in this Country. The 17 of December, 1566. in the great Hall
of the Castle of Sterlin was the Prince baptized by the Bishop of Saint
Andrews, at five a Clock at Even, with great Pomp, albeit with great pain
could they find men to bear the Torches, wherefore they took Boys. The Queen
labored much with the Noblemen to bear the Salt, Grease and Candle, and such
other things, but all refused; she found at last the Earls of Eglington,
Athole, and the Lord Seaton, who assisted at the Baptism, and brought in the
said Trash. The Count de Briance (being the French Ambassador) assisted
likewise. The Earl of Bedford brought for a Present from the Queen of England
a Font of Gold, valued to be worth three thousand Crowns. Soon after the said
Baptism, as the Earl was in communing with the Queen, who entertained him
most reverently, he began to say merrily to her, amongst other talking, Madame,
I rejoice very greatly at this time, seeing your Majesty has here to serve
you so many Noblemen, especially twelve Earls, whereof two only assist at
this Baptism to the Superstition of Popery. At the which saying the Queen kept
good countenance. Soon after they banquetted in the said great Hall, where they
wanted no prodigality. During the time of the Earl of Bedfords remaining at
Sterlin, the Lords for the most part waited upon him, and conveyed him every
day to the Sermon, and after to Banqueting.

The King remained in Sterlin all that time (never being present) kept his
Chamber: his father hearing how he was used, writ to him to repair unto him;
who soon after went (without goodnight) toward Glasgow to his Father; he was
hardly a Mile out of Sterlin when the poison (which had been given him) wroght
so upon him, that he had very great pain and dolor in every part of his body.
At length, being arrived at Glasgow, the Blisters brake out, of a bluish
color, so the Physicians presently knew the Disease to come by poison; he was
brought so low that nothing but death was expected; yet the strength of his
youth at last did surmount the poison.

During the time of this Triumph the Queen was most liberal in all things that
were demanded of her; amongst other things, she subscribed a writing for the
maintenance of the Ministers in a reasonable proportion, which was to be taken
up of the Thirds of Benefices: which writing being purchased by the Bishop of
Galloway, was presented at the general Assembly of the Church at Edinburgh,
the five and twentieth day of December, 1566. where were conveened the
Superintendents and other Ministers* in reasonable number, but very few
Commssioners. The first matter that was there proposed, was concerning the said
Writing lately obtained; and the most part of the Ministers being demanded
their opinions in the matter, after advice, and passing a little aside, they
answered very gravely, That it was their duty to preach to the people the Word
of God truly and and sincerely, and to crave of the Auditors the things that
were necessary for their sustentation, as of duty the Pastor might justly
crave of their Flock; and further it became them not to have any care.
Nevertheless the Assembly taking in consideration, that the said Gifts granted
by the Queens Majesty, was not to be refused; they ordained, That certain
faithful men of every Shire should meet, and do their utmost diligence for
gathering and receiving the said Corn and money, and likewise appointed the
Superintendent of Lowthian, and Master John Row to wait upon the Bishop of
Galloway, and concur and assist him for further expedition in the Court, that
the said Gift mi^t be dispatched through the Seals.

In the same Assembly there was presented a Remonstrance by Writ by some
Gentlemen of Kyle, containing in effect, That in as much as the Tithes ought to
be given only to the Ministers and Schools of the Word, and for maintenance
of the poor, that therefore the Assembly would Statute and Ordain, That all the
Professors of the Evangell should keep the same in their own hands to the
effects aforesaid, and no way permit the Papists to meddle therewith. This
Writing took no effect at that time, for there was none else but the Gentlemen
of Kyle of that opinion. It was Statuted in the said Assembly, That such
public Fornicators, and scandalous livers as would not confess their
offenses, nor come to declare their repentance, should be declared by the
Minister to be out of the Church, and not of the body thereof, and their names
to be declared publicly upon the Sunday. The Queen intending vengeance upon
the poor King, and being in love with the Earl Bothwell, grants to the
Protestants their Petitions, that they may be quiet, and not trouble her Plots.
After this Assembly, the Bishop of Galloway (with the Superintendent of
Lowthian and M. John Row) passing to Sterlin, obtained their Demands in an
ample manner at the Queens Majesty's hand, according to their desire; and
likewise they obtained for every Borough, a Gift or Donation of the Altarages,
Annuals, and Obites, which before were given to the Papists, now to be disposed
for the maintenance of the Ministers and Schools within the Boroughs, and the
rest to the poor or Hospital. Notwithstanding the Domestic troubles that the
Church of God in Scotland suffered in the time of these hurliburlies within the
Kingdom, yet they were not unmindefull of the affliction of Jacob every where
upon the face of the Earth; namely, they had before their Eyes the State and
condition of the Church of God in England, witness this Letter from the
General Assembly to the Rulers of the Church of God in England.

The Superintendents, with other Ministers and Commissioners of the Church of
God in the Kingdom of Scotland,
to their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors of Gods Church in England, who
profess with us in Scotland the Truth of Jesus Christ.
BY Word and Letters it is come to our knowledge (Reverent Brethren, Pastors of
Gods Word in the Church of England) that diverse of our Brethren (of whom some
be of the most learned in England) are deprived from all Ecclesiastical
Function, namely, Are forbidden to Preach, and so by you are stopped to promote
the Kingdom of God, because they have a scruple of Conscience to use at the
command of Authority such Garments as Idolaters in time of greatest darkness,
did use in their Superstitious and Idolatrous Service; which Report cannot but
be very grievous to our hearts, considering the sentence of the Apostle, If ye
bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another. We
intend not at this present to enter into the Question, which we hear i^
agitated and handled with greater vehemence by either party, then well likes
us, to wit, Whether such apparel be accounted amongst things indifferent, or
not; Wherefore (through the Bowels of Jesus Christ) we crave that Christian
Charity may so far prevail with you, who are the Pastors and Guides of
Christ's Flock in England, that ye do one to another as ye desire others to do
to you. You cannot be ignorant what tenderness is in a scrupulous Conscience,
and all that have knowledge are not alike persuaded; the Consciences of some of
you stirs not, with the wearing of such things, on the other side many
thousands (both godly and learned) are otherwise persuaded, whose Consciences
are continually stricken with these sentences, What has Christ to do with
Beliall? What felloship is there betwixt Light and darkness? If Surplice,
Corner-Cap and Tippet have been the Badges of Idolaters in the very act of
their Idolatry, what has the Preachers of Christian liberty, and the Rebukers
of Superstition with the dregs of that Romish Beast? yea, What is he that ought
not to fear, either to take in his hand, or on his forehead the Prints and Mark
of that odious Beast: The Brethren that refuse such unprofitable apparel do
neither condemn nor molest you who use such Trifles. On the other side, if ye
that use these things, will do the like to your Brethren, we doubt nor but
therein you shall please God, and comfort the Hearts of many, which are wounded
to see extremity used against these godly Brethren: Humane arguments or
colored Rhetoric, we use none to persuade you, only in Charity we desire
you to mind the sentence of Peter, Feed the Flock of Christ which is committed
to your charge, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly; not being as
Lords of Gods Heritages, but being examples to the Flock. We further desire you
to meditate upon that sentence of Paul, Give no offense neither, to Jews, nor
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God; in what condition you and we both travel,
at least are bound to travel for the promoting of Christ's Kingdom, you are not
ignorant; therefore we are the more bold to exhort you to deal more wisely,
then to trouble the godly for such vanities, for all things which seem lawful,
edify not; if Authority urge you farther then your Consciences can bear, I
pray you remember, that the Ministers of the Church are called the Light of the
World, and Salt of the Earth; all Civil Authority has not always the Light
of God shining before their eyes, in Statutes and Commands, for their
affections savor too much of the earth and wordly wisdom: therefore we tell
you, That ye ought to oppose your selves boldly, not only to all power that
dare extol it self against God, but also against all such as dare burden the
Consciences of the faithful, farther then God charge them in his own Word.
But we hope you will excuse our freedom in that we have entered in reasoning
farther then we intended in the beginning; now again we return to our former
request, which is, That the Brethren among you who refuse the Romish Rags, may
find of you who use and urge them, such favor as our Head and Master
commands each one of his Members to show to another, which we look to receive
of your courtesy, not only because you will not offend God in troubling your
brethren for such vain Trifles, but also because you will not refuse the
earnest request of us your Brethren and fellow Ministers, in whom although
there appear no worldly pomp; yet we are assured you will esteem us as Gods
servants, traveling to set forth his glory against the Roman Antichrist; the
days are evil, iniquity abounds, and Charity (alas) waxes cold,
wherefore we ought to walk diligently, for the hour is uncertain when the Lord
shall come, before whom we must all give an account of our administration. In
conclusion, yet once more we desire you to be favorable one to another, Lord
Jesus rule your hearts in his fear unto the end, and give to you and us
victory over that conjured Enemy of true Religion, (the Pope) whose wounded
head Satan by all means strives to cure again; but to destruction shall he
go, and all his maintainers, by the power of our Lord Jesus, to whose mighty
protection we commit you.

From our General Assembly, December. 27. 1566.

At the same time the Bishop of Saint Andrews, by means of the Earl Bothwell,
procured a writing from the Queens Majesty, to be obeyed within the Diocese of
his Jurisdiction, As she had lately gratified the Protestants by granting their
Petition, so at this time she yields unto the Papists their demands also, that
she might be stopped by neither of them in her design of vengeance and new
love.
in all such causes as before in time of Popery were used in the Consistory,
and thefore to discharge the new Commissioners; and for the same purpose came
to Edinburgh in January, having a Company of one hundred horses, or more,
intending to take possession, according to his gift lately obtained. The
Provest being advertised thereof, by the Earl of Murray they sent to the
Bishop three or four of the Council, desiring him to desist from the said
matter, for fear of trouble and sedition that might rise thereupon; whereby he
was persuaded to desist at that time. Soon after, the Queen came to Edinburgh,
where she remained a few days. In the month of January she was informed that
the King was recovered of the poison given him at Sterlin, and therefore she
past to Glasgow to visit him, and there tarried with him six days, using him
wonderfully kindly, with many gracious and good words; and likewise his father
the Earl of Lenox; insomuch that all men marvelled whereto it should turn,
considering the great contempt and dryness that had been before so long
together the Queen notwithstanding all the contempt that was given him, with a
known design to take away his life, yet by her sweet words gains so far upon
the uxorious husband, and his facile father, that he went in company with her
to Edinburgh, where she had caused to lodge him at the Church of Field, in a
lodging lately bought by Master James Balfour Clerk Register, truly very
unmeet for a King. The Queen resorted often to visit him, and lay in the house
two nights by him (although her lodging was in the Palace of Halyrud-house.)
Every man marvelled at this reconciliation and sudden change. The ninth of
February the King was murdered, and the house where he lay burned with Powder.
About twelve of the clock in the night; his body was cast forth in a yard
without the Town wall adjoining close by. There was a servant likewise
murdered beside him, who had been also in the chamber with him. The people ran
to behold this spectacle; and wondering thereat, some judged one thing, some
another.

Shortly thereafter, Bothwell came from the Abbey with a company of men of War,
and caused the body of the King to be carried to the next house; where, after a
little, the Chirurgions being convened at the Queens command, to view and
consider the manner of his death; most part gave out, to please the Queen, That
he was blown in the Air, albeit he had no mark of fire; and truly he was
strangled. Soon after, he was carried to the Abbey, and there buried.

This tragical end had Henry Steward, after he had been King eighteen months.
A Prince of great Lineage, both by mother and father: He was of a comely
stature, and none was like unto him within this Island; he died under the age
of one and twenty years; prompt and ready for all Games and Sports much given
to Hawking and Hunting, and running of horses, and likewise to playing on the
Lute, and also to Venus Chamber; he was liberal enough: He could write and
dictate well; but he was somewhat given to wine and much feeding, and likewise
to inconstancy; and proud beyond measure, and therefore contemned all others:
He had learned to dissemble well enough, being from his youth misled up in
Popery. Thus within two years after his arriving in this Realm, he was highly
by the Queen alone extolled; and finally, had this unfortunate end by her
procurement and consent. To lay all other proofs aside, her Marriage with
Bothwell, who was the main executioner of the King, notwithstanding all the
advices and counsels that the King of France and Queen of England did
earnestly and carefully give her, as other friends did likewise, witness anent
their guilt. Those that laid hands on the King to kill him, by Bothwels
direction, was Sir James Balfour, Gilbert Balfour, David Chalmers, black John
Spense, Francis Sebastien, Io. de Bourdean, and Joseph the brother of David
Rizio: These last four were the Queens domestics and strangers. The reason why
the Kings death was so hastened, because the affection or passion of the Earl
Bothwell could not bear so long a delay, as the procurement of a Bill of
Divorce required, although the Romish Clergy offered their service willingly
to the business, namely, Bishop Hamilton, and so he came great again at Court;
and he for the advancement of the business, did good Offices to increase the
hatred betwixt the King and Queen; yea, some that had been the chief
instruments of the Marriage of the King and Queen, offered the service for the
Divorce, seeing how the Queens inclination lay: So unhappy are Princes, that
men, for their own ends, further them in all their inclinations and
undertakings, be they never so bad or destructive to themselves.

The Earl of Lenox in the mean time wrote to the Queen, to cause to punish
Bothwell, with his other accomplices, for murdering the King. The Queen not
daring openly to reject the Earl of Lenox his solicitation, did appoint a day
for the Trial of Bothwell by an Assize; the members whereof, was the Earl of
Cathnes President, the Earl of Cassels, (who at the first refused, but
thereafter, being threatened to be put in prison, and under the pain of Treason,
was present by the Queens command) John Hamilton Commendator of Aberbrothok,
Lord Rosse, Lord Semple, Lord Boyd, Lord Hereis, Lord Olyphant; the Master of
Forbes, the Lairds of Lochinuar, Langton, Cambusidentham, Barnbougel and Boyne:
They, to please the Queen, and for fear, did pronounce Bothwell not guilty,
notwithstanding the manifest evidences of the cruel fact committed by
Bothwell, who before the Trial, did make himself strong by diverse means;
namely, by the possession of the Castle of Edinburgh, so that the accusers
durst not appear, not being strong enough. The Earl of Mar did retire to
Sterlin, and had committed to his charge the young Prince. All this was done in
February.

In April, Bothwell called together sundry of the Lords who had come to
Edinburgh, to a meeting that was there; and having gained some before, made
them all, what by fear, what by fair promises, first of their private State,
and then of advancing the Papists Religion, to consent by their subscriptions
to the Marriage with the Queen. Then the Queen goes to Sterlin to see her son;
Bothwell makes a show as if he were going to the Borders to suppress Robbers,
and so he raises some men of War; which when he had done, he turns toward
the way to Sterlin, where he meets the Queen, according to appointment betwixt
them, and carries her to Dumbar, as it had been by force, although every one
knew it was with the Queens liking. The prime Nobility convened at Sterlin, and
from thence sent to her, to know whether or not she was taken against her will:
She answered, That it was true she was taken against her will, but since her
taking, she had no occasion to complain; yea, the courteous entertainment she
had, made her forget and forgive all former offenses. These expressions were
used by way of preface to the Pardon, which was granted immediately thereafter
to Bothwell; for by Letters Patents he was pardoned by the Queen, for laying
violently hands upon her Majesty, and for all other crimes: So by this, etc.
the murder of the King was pardoned. During the Queens abode in Dumbar, there
was Letters of Divorce demanded and granted unto Bothwell from his Lady (who
afterward was married to the Earl Sutherland) she was sister to the Earl of.
Huntley. The ground of the Divorce was, The parties being within the degrees
prohibited, could not be lawfully joined: Next, because Bothwell was an
Adulterer, the Marriage was void. The Bill of Divorce was granted by the
Papisticall Court of the Archbishop of Saint Androes. And here mark how they
juggle in sacred things; for when it pleases them, they untie the Bond of
Marriage, as now, and as we have seen in the first Book of this History. When
the Queen fell in distaste of the late King her husband, it was proposed unto
her to have Divorce upon the same ground from the King: To which, first ear was
given, but after second thoughts, a Bill of Divorce was too tedious (as we have
now said) and could not be stayed for, therefore the King must be dispatched.

The Queen, when Bothwell had obtained by the Archbishop a Letter of Divorce
from his lawful wife, sent a Letter signed with her own hand, to M. Io. Craig,
Minister of Edinburgh, commanding him to publish the Band of Matrimony betwixt
her and Bothwell. M. Io. Craig, the next Sermon day thereafter, declared in
full Congregation, That he had received such a Command, but in conscience he
could not obey it; the Marriage was altogether unlawful; and of that he would
declare the reasons to the parties, if he had audience of them, otherwise he
would make known his just reasons in the hearing of the people. Immediately
thereafter, Bothwell sends for Master Craig to the Council, where M. Craig
told, first, That by an Act of the Assembly it was forbidden to allow the
Marriage of any divorced for adultery: The Divorce of Bothwell from his lawful
wife, was by collusion, witness the quick dispatch thereof; for it was sought
and had within ten days, and his contracting with the Queen instantly
thereafter; then his rapt of the Queen, and the guilt of the Kings death, which
was confirmed by this Marriage: Withal, he desired the Lords to stop the Queen
from that infamous Marriage. The Sunday after, he told publicly to the people,
what he had said to the Council; and he took heaven and earth to witness,
That he detested that scandalous and infamous Marriage; and that he discharged
his conscience unto the Lords, who seemed unto him, as so many slaves, what by
flattery* what by silence, to give way to that abomination. Upon this, he was
called to the Council again, and was reproved, as if he had exceeded the bounds
of his Calling. Whereunto he answered, That the bounds of his Commission was
the Word of God, right reason, and good Laws, against which he had said
nothing; and by all these offered to prove this Marriage to be scandalous and
infamous. At this he was stopped by Bothwell, and sent from the Council.
Notwithstanding all this done and said by M. Craig, and the opposition of many
that wished well to the Queen, and were jealous of her Honor, the Marriage
went on, and they were married the 15 of May. This makes good the Latin
Proverb, Mala nubunt mense Maio; and a Bishop must bless the Marriage: The
good Prelat was Bishop of Orkney: If there be a good work to be done, a Bishop
must do it. Note.
Here mark the difference betwixt this worthy Minister Master Craig, and this
base Bishop.

The Earl of Athole, immediately after the murder of the King, had tetired
home, waiting for the occasion to revenge the Kings death: But seeing this
abominable Marriage, he went to Sterlin, where other honest Lords with him had
a Meeting, and made a Bond, To defend the young Prince from the murderers of
his father: As already they had had one Plot to cut him off, which God in his
mercy did prevent. The Nobles that entered in this Bond, were the Earls of
Argyle, Athole, Morton, Mar, and Glencarne; the Lords Lindsey and Boyd. Argyle
thereafter, seduced by some fair words, fell off; and Boyd became a great
Factionary for Bothwell in all things.

The Queen, soon after the Marriage, was advised to send abroad an Ambassador
to acquaint her foreign friends and kindred; And this must be a Bishop: It is
pity that any good work should be done without a Bishop: Was not this a worthy
employment for a Pastor in Gods Church?

Bothwell seeing the Bond made at Sterlin, causes the Queen to write to sundry
of the Nobility: Diverse repaired unto her, where they found a Bond tendered unto
them, by which they were to bind themselves to defend the Queen and Bothwell.
Some that were corrupt, did willingly subscribe; others for fear did the same:
And there was not one that went to Court that did refuse, but the Earl of
Murray; who refusing absolutely to enter into a Bond with Bothwell, said, It
was not the part of a good subject; Yet since he had been made friends with him
some time before, he would keep his promise unto the Queen: And to enter into a
Bond with the Queen, it was needless and unfit, since he was to obey her in
all lawful and just things. Upon this, he gat leave, although with great
difficulty, to go into France.

The Queen receives now Hamilton Archbishop of S. Androes, into favor since
these changes; who was no less a faithful Councellor to her, then he was a
good Pastor of Christ's Flock; that is, He betrayed her, and disobeyed God. With
this a Proclamation comes out in favor of the poor Protestants; whereby the
Queen declares, That she will keep and confirm all that she had promised at her
Arrival into Scotland: This was done to stop the peoples mouths; but all in
vain, for the people were universally against the abomination of the Court.

Within few days, Bothwell and the Queen, were raising men, under pretext to
go to the Borders to repress the Robbers there; but in effect, to go to
Sterlin, to have the Prince in their custody, that they might dispose of him
according to their mind. Then a new Proclamation came out, That the Queen
hereafter would rule only by the advice of the Nobles of the Land, as her best
Predecessors had done. The Lords at Sterlin hearing of this plot, strives to
prevent it, and to this purpose they appointed with the Lord Humes to besiege
the Castle of Borthwike, where the Queen and Bothwell was: But because the Earl
of Athole did not come at the hour appointed, they had not men enough to
environ and compass the Castle; so that Bothwel having notice given him of the
business, escaped to Dumbar, and the Queen after him, in man's clothes. The
Lords failing of their design at Borthwike Castle, went to Edinburgh, whereof
they made themselves Masters easily, having the affections of the people,
notwithstanding the Earl Huntley, and the Archbishop of S. Androes persuasion
to the contrary: These two, with their associates, were constrained to retire
to the Castle, where they were received by Sir Iam. Balfour, left there by
Bothwel.

The twelfth of June, which was the next day following, the Lords at Edinburgh
caused to publish a Proclamation, whereby they declared, That the Earl
Bothwell, who had been the principal author, deviser, and actor of the cruel
murder of the late King, had since laid hand upon the Queens person, and had
her for the present in Dumbar in his power; and finding her utterly destitute
of all good counsel, had seduced her to a dishonest and unlawful marriage
with himself; yea, that now he was gathering Forces, and stirring himself to
get the young Prince in his hands, that he might murder the Child, as he had
murdered the Father. This wicked man the Nobles of the Land resolved to
withstand, and deliver the Queen out of his bondage; wherefore they did charge
all Lieges within the Kingdom that could come to them, to be in readiness at 3
hours warning to assist them, the Nobles, for the freeing of the Queen from
captivity, and bringing the said Earl Bothwell to a Legal Trial, and
condign punishment for the aforesaid murder and other Crimes. All such that
would not side with the Lords were by this Proclamation commanded to depart
from Edinburgh within four hours, under the pain of being accounted enemies,
etc.

Notwithstanding this Proclamation, the people did not join unto these Lords as
was expected, for sundry of the Nobles were adversaries to the business, other
stood as Neuters; and withal, those that were convened together were not well
provided of Arms and Munition for exploits of war; so that they were even
thinking to dissolve and leave off their Enterprise till another time, and had
absolutely done so; but God had ordained other ways, as the event did show (if
the Queen and Bothwell could have had patience to stay at Dumbar for three or
four days without any stir) but the Queen and Bothwell having gathered
together about four or five thousand men, trusting in their Force (the Queen
being puffed up by Flatterers) set forth and Marched toward Leith: being come
forward as far as Glaidsmure, she caused public Proclamation against the
aforesaid Lords, calling them a number of Conspirators, and that she now
discerned their inward malice against her and her husband, the Duke of Orkney
(for so now they called Bothwell:) After they had endeavored to apprehend her
and her Husband at Brothwick, and had made a seditious Proclamation, under
pretense of seeking the revenge of the King her late husband; and to free her
from Captivity, giving out, That the Duke her husband had a mind to invade the
Prince her Son; all which was false, for the Duke her Husband had used all
means to clear himself, both by a Legal way, and by the offer of a Combat to
any that did accuse him, as they knew well enough: As touching her captivity,
she was in none, but was in company with her Husband, unto whom she was
publicly married in the view of the world, and many of the Nobles had given
their consent unto this her marriage: As for the Prince her Son, it was but a
specious pretense to the Treason and Rebellion against her their natural
Sovereign, and her Posterity, which they intended to overthrow; wherefore she
declared her self necessitated to take Arms, hoping that all her faithful
Subjects would adhere unto her, and that those who were already assembled with
her, would with good hearts and hands stand to her defense; and for the
recompense of their valor they should have the Lands and goods of these
unnatural Rebels. After this Proclamation the Army went on, and the Queen that
night came to Seaton, where she lay.

About Midnight the Lords of Edinburgh were advertised of the Queens approach,
presently they took Arms, and at the Sun rising they were at Muselburgh, where
they refreshed themselves with meat and rest. The Queens Camp was not yet
stirring. About Midday the Scouts that the Lords had sent out, brought word
that the Enemy was Marching toward them; presently they put themselves in two
Battalia's, the first was conducted by the Earl Morton, and the Lord Hume; the
second by the Earls Athole, Glencarne, the Lords Lindsey, Ruthuen, Semple and
Sancharmar, with the Lairds Drumlanrick, Tullibardin, Cesfoord, and Graunge,
with diverse others, their number was almost as great as the Queens, their men
better, being many of them expert men, that I say nothing of the Cause. The
Queen had gained a Hill, called Carbarry, which the Lords (by reason of the
steepness of the ascent) could not well come at; wherefore they wheeled about
to get a more convenient place to go to the Hill, where the Enemy was, and to
have the Sun behind them in the time of the sight. At the first the Queen
seeing their thus going about, did imagine they were fleeing away to Dalketh,
but when she saw them come directly toward her, she found her self deceived.

The French Ambassador seeing them ready to fight, strived to take up the
business, and having spoken with the Queen, went to the Lords, telling them,
that the Queen was disposed to peace, and to forgive and pardon this
Insurrection; wherefore it was very fit to spare blood, to agree in a peaceable
way. The Earl of Morton (in the name of all rest) answered, That they had
taken up Arms, not against the Queen, but against the murderer of the King;
whom if she would deliver to be punished, or at least put from her company, she
should find a continuation of dutiful obedience by them, and all other good
subjects; otherwise no peace: Besides, we are not to ask pardon for any offense
done by us. The Ambassador seeing their resolution to stand to the right of
their Cause, withdrew, and went to Edinburgh.

While the French Ambassador was thus laboring for Accommodation, Bothwell
came out of the Camp (which was in the Trench that the Englishmen had left at
their last being in these places, as was we have said in the former Books) well
mounted, with a defy to any that would fight with him. James Murray, brother
to the Lord of Tullibardin, who before had accepted of Bothwells challenge,
when he made the Rodomontade at Edinburgh, immediately after the Kings death;
but then James Murray did not make known his name. Bothwell refused to fight
with James Murray, alleging he was not his equal. Upon this the Elder
Brother William Murrey, Lord of Tullibardin, answered, That he would fight
with him, as being his Better in Estate, and in Antiquity of House many
degrees above him; yet Bothwell refused him, saying, That he was not a Peer of
the Kingdom, as he was; then sundry Lords would have gone to fight with
Bothwell; but the Lord Lindsey namely, who said to the rest of the Lords and
Gentlemen, That he would take it as a singular favor of them, and as a
recompense of his service done to the State, if they would suffer him to fight
with the Braggadocio. Bothwell seeing that there was no more subterfuge nor
excuse, underhand made the Queen to forbid him. After this challenge and
answers, Bothwells Accomplices and Followers were very earnest to fight, but
others that had come only for the Queens sake, became little cold, saying, That
Bothwell would do well to fight himself, and spare the blood of diverse
Gentlemen that were there. Some counseled to delay the Battle till the
Hamiltons came, whom they did expect. All this the Queen heard with anger; and
riding up and down, burst out in tears, and said, They were all cowards and
traitors that would not fight. Immediately after, thus vapouring, the Queen
pereceiving sundry to leave her, she advised Bothwell to look unto himself, for
she said to him, She would render her self unto the Noblemen. Upon this she
sent for James Kirkaldie of Grange, Note how God changes things in a moment.
with whom she kept discourse for a while, till that she was assured that
Bothwell was out of danger. Then she went to the Lords, whom she did entertain
with many fair words, telling them, That it was neither fear, nor want of hope
of victory, that made her come unto them, but a mere desire to spare shedding
of innocent blood: Withal she promised to be ruled and advised by them. With
this she was received with all respect: But shortly after, declaring that she
would go to the Hamiltons, with promise to return, they restrained her liberty,
and brought her along with them to Edinburgh at night: She was very slow in
marching, looking to be rescued by the Hamiltons; but in vain: She lay that
night in the Provest his house. The next day, the Lords sent the Queen to the
Castle that is within an Isle of Lochlevin. Sir James Balfour seeing the Queen
committed, and Bothwell consequently defeated, he capitulated with the Lords
for the delivery of the Castle. Bothwell finding himself thus in disorder, sent
a servant to Sir James Balfour, to save a little silver Cabinet, which the
Queen had given him. Sir James Balfour delivers the Cabinet to the messenger,
and underhand gives of it to the Lords. In this Cabinet had Bothwell kept the
Letters of privacy he had from the Queen: Thus he kept her Letters, to be an
awe-bond upon her, in case her affection should change. By the taking of this
Cabinet, many particulars betwixt the Queen and Bothwell were clearly
discovered. These Letters were after printed: They were in French; with some
Sonnets of her own making.

Few days after the commitment of the Queen, the Earl of Glencarne with his
domestics, went to the Chapel of Halyrud-house, where he brake down the
Altars and the Images: Which fact, as it did content the zealous Protestants,
so it did highly offend the popishly affected. The Nobles, who had so proceeded
against Bothwell, and dealt so with the Queen, hearing that the Hamiltons had a
great number of men, and had drawn the Earls of Argyle and Huntley to their
side, sent to Hamilton, desiring those that were there to join with them, for
the redress of the disorders of Church and State: But the Hamiltons thinking
now they had a fair occasion fallen unto them to have all again in their hands,
and to dispose of all according to their own mind, did refuse audience to the
Message sent by the Lords,

Upon this, the Lords moved the general Assembly then met in Edinburgh, in the
month of June, to write to the Lords that either were actually declared for
the Hamiltons, or were neuters: And so several Letters were directed to the
Earls of Argyle, Huntley, Cathnes, Rothesse, Crauford, and Menteth; to the
Lords Boyd, Drummens, Grame, Cathcart, Yester, Fleming, Levinston, Seaton,
Glamnis, Uthiltrie, Gray, Olyphant, Methven, Inderneth, and Somervile; as also
to diverse other men of note. Besides the Letters of the Assembly, Commissioners
were sent from the Assembly, to the Lords abovenamed; to wit, John Knox, John
Douglas, John Row, and John Craig, who had instructions conform to the tenor
of the Letters, to desire these Lords and others, to come to Edinburgh, and
join with the Lords there, for the settling of Gods true Worship in the Church,
and policy reformed according to Gods Word, a maintenance for the Ministers,
and support for the poor: But neither the Commissioners nor the Letters did
prevail with these men; they excused, That they could not repair to Edinburgh
with freedom, where there was so many armed men, and a Garrison so strong: But
for the Church Affairs, they would not be any ways wanting, to do what lay in
them.

The Lords at Edinburgh seeing this, joyneth absolutely with the Assembly
(which had been prorogated to the 20 of July, upon the occasion of these
Letters and Commissioners aforesaid) and promises to make good all the
Articles they thought fit to resolve upon in the Assembly: But how they
performed their promises, God knows always. The Articles they agreed upon were
these:

1. THat the Acts of Parliament holden at Edinburgh the 24 of August 1560.
touching Religion, and abolishing the Popes Authority, should have the force of
a public Law; and consequently this Parliament defended, as a lawful
Parliament, and confirmed by the first Parliament that should be kept next. 2.
That the Thirds of the Tithes, or any more reasonable proportion of Benefices,
should be allowed toward the maintenance of the Ministry; and that there
should be a charitable course taken concerning the exacting of the Tithes of
the poor Laborers. 3. That none should be received in the Universities,
Colleges, or Schools, for instruction of the youth, but after due trial both
of capacity and probitie. 4. That all crimes and offenses against God, should
be punished according to Gods Word; and that there should be a Law made
there-anent, at the first Parliament to be holden. 5. As for the horrible
murder of the late King, husband to the Queen, which was so heinous before God
and man, all true professors, in whatsoever rank or condition, did promise to
strive that all persons should be brought to condign punishment, who are found
guilty of the same crime. 6. They all promised to protect the young Prince
against all violence, lest he should be murdered as his father was; And that
the Prince should be committed to the care of four wise and godly men, that by
a good Education, he might be fitted for that high Calling he was to execute
one day. 7. The Nobles, Barons, and others, does promise to beat down and
abolish Popery, Idolatry and Superstition, with any thing that may contribute
unto it; As also to set up and further the true Worship of God, his Government,
the Church, and all that may concern the purity of Religion and life; And for
this to convene and take Arms, if need require. 8. That all Princes and Kings
hereafter in this Realm, before their Coronation, shall take Oath to maintain
the true Religion now professed in the Church of Scotland, and suppress all
things contrary to it, and that are not agreeing with it.


To these Articles subscribed the Earls of Morton, Glencarne, and Mar, the
Lords Hume, Ruthen, Sanchar, Lindsey, Grame, Inermeth, and Uchiltrie, with many
other Barons, besides the Commissioners of the Buroughs.

This being agreed upon, the Assembly dissolved. Thereafter the Lords Lindsey
and Ruthuen were sent to Lochlevin to the Queen, to present unto her two Writs;
the one contained a Renounciation of the Crown and Royal Dignity, in favor
of the Prince her son; with a Commission to invest him into the Kingdom,
according to the manner accustomed: Which, after some reluctance with tears,
she subscribed, by the advice of the Earl of Athole, who had sent to her; and
of Secretary Lethington, who had sent to her Robert Melvill for that purpose:
So there was a Procuration given to the Lords Lindsay and Ruthuen, by the
Queen, to give up and resign the Rule of the Realm, in presence of the States.

The second Writ was, To ordain the Earl of Murray Regent, during the Princes
minority, if he would accept the Charge: And in case he refused, the Duke
Chattellarault, the Earls of Lenox, Argyle, Athole, Morton, Glencarne and
Mar, should govern conjoyntly.

These Writs were published the 29 of July, 1567. at the Market-Crosse of
Edinburgh: Then at Sterlin was the Prince Crowned King, where John Knox made
the Sermon: The Earl Morton and the Lord Hume, took the Oath for the King, That
he should constantly live in the Profession of the true Religion, and maintain
it; And that he should govern the Kingdom according to Law thereof, and do
Justice equally to all.

In the beginning of August, the Earl Murray being sent for, comes home; in
all haste he visites the Queen at Lochlevin, strives to draw the Lords that had
taken part with the Hamiltons, or were neuters, to join with those that had
bound themselves to stand for the Kings Authority: He was very earnest with
diverse, by reason of their old friendship; but to little purpose. The twentinth
of August, he received the Regencie, after mature and ripe deliberation, at the
desire of the Queen, and Lords that were for the King, and so was publicly
proclaimed Regent, and Obedience showed unto him by all that stood for the
young King.

The end of the History of the Church of Scotland, till the year 1567. and
Month of August.
THE APPELLATION OF JOHN KNOX, From the cruel and most unjust Sentence
pronounced against him, by the false Bishops and Clergy of Scotland: With his
Supplication and Exhortation to the Nobility, States, and Communalty of the
same Realm.
To the Nobility and States of SCOTLAND: JOHN KNOX wishes Grace, Mercy and
Peace, from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Spirit of
righteous Judgment.
IT is not only the love of this Temporal life (Right Honorable) neither yet
the fear of Corporal death, that moves me at this present to expose unto you
the injuries done against me; and to crave of you, as of lawful Powers by God
appointed, redress of the same; But partly it proceeds from that reverence
which every man owes to Gods Eeternall Truth: And partly, from a love which I
bear to your Salvation, and to the Salvation of my Brethren abused in that
Realm, by such as have no fear of God before their eyes. It has pleased God
of his infinite mercy, not only to illuminate the eyes of my mind, and so to
touch my dull heart, that clearly I see, and by his grace unfainedly believe,
That there is no other name given to men under the heaven in which Salvation
consists, save the Name of JESUS alone, Who by that Sacrifice which he did
once offer upon the Cross, has sanctified for ever all those that shall
inherit the Kingdom promised: Heb. 10.
But also it has pleased him of his superaboundant grace, to make and appoint
me, most wretched of many thousands, a Witness, Minister and Preacher of the
same Doctrine; the sum whereof, I did not spare to communicate with my
Brethren, being with them in the Realm of Scotland, 1 Cor. 3. Mat. 25.
in the year 1556, because I know my self to be a Steward, and that accounts of
the Talent committed to my charge, shall be required of me by him, who will
admit no vain excuse which fearful men pretend: I did therefore (as God his
minister) during the time I was conversant with them (God is record and
witness) truly and sincerely, according to the gift granted unto me, divide
the Word of Salvation, teaching all men to hate sin, which before God was and
is so odious, that none other Sacrifice would satisfy his Justice, except the
death of his only Son; and to magnify the mercies of our heavenly Father, who
did not spare the substance of his own glory, but did give him to the world, to
suffer the ignominious and cruel death of the Cross, John 3. Rom 58. 2 Cor. 5.
by that means to reconcile his chosen children to himself: teaching further,
what is the duty of such as do believe themselves purged by such a Price, from
their former filthiness; to wit, Romans 6. Ephesians. 4.5.
That they are bound to walk in the newness of life, fighting against the
lusts of the flesh, and studying at all times to glorify God by such good
works as he has prepared his people to walk in. Ephesians. 2.


In Doctrine I did further affirm (so taught by my Master Christ Jesus) That
whosoever denies him, Matthew. 10.
yea, or is ashamed of him before this wicked Generation, him shall Christ
Jesus deny, and of him shall he be ashamed, when he shall appear in his
Majesty: And therefore I feared not to affirm, That of necessity it is, that
such as hope for life everlasting, avoid all Superstition, Vain Religion, or
Idolatry.
vain Religion and Idolatry: Vain Religion and Idolatry, I call whatsoever is
done in Gods Service or Honor, without the express Commandment of his own
Word.

This Doctrine I did believe to be so conformable to Gods holy Scriptures, that
I thought no creature could have been so impudent, as to have condemned any
Point or Article of the same: Yet nevertheless me, as an heretic, and this
Doctrine, as heretical, have your false Bishops and ungodly Clergy condemned,
A Sentence pronounced.
pronouncing against me a Sentence of death; in testification whereof, they
have burned a Picture. From which false and cruel Sentence, and from all
judgment of that wicked Generation, I make it known unto your Honors,
Appellation from the same.
That I appeal to a Lawful and General Council, to such, I mean, as the most
ancient Laws and Cannons do approve, to be holden by such, as whose manifest
impiety is not to be reformed in the same: The request of John Knox.
Most humbly requiring of your Honors, That as God has appointed you Princes
in that People, and by reason thereof, requires of your hands the defense of
Innocents troubled in your Dominion, in the mean time, and till the
controversies that this day be in Religion, be lawfully decided, ye receive me,
and such others as most unjustly by those cruel Beasts are persecuted, in your
defense and Protection.

Your Honors are not ignorant, That it is not I alone, who does sustain this
Cause against the pestilent Generation of Papists, but that the most part of
Germany, the Country of Helvetia, the King of Denmark, the Nobility of
Polonia, The Petition of Protestants.
together with many other Cities and Churches Reformed, appeal from the
Tyranny of that Antichrist, and most earnestly call for a Lawful and General
Council, wherein may all Controversies in Religion be decided, by the
Authority of Gods most sacred Word.

And unto this same, as said is, do I appeal yet once again, requiring of your
Honors to hold my simple and plain Appellation of no less value nor effect,
then if it had been made with greater circumstance, solemnity, and ceremony;
and that you receive me calling unto you, as to the Powers of God ordained, in
your protection and defense, against the rage of Tyrants; not to maintain me in
any iniquity, error, or false opinion, but to let me have such equity, as God
by his Word, ancient Laws and Determinations of most godly Counsels, grant to
men accused or infamed.

The Word of God wills, That no man shall die, except he be found criminal and
worthy of death for offense committed, of which he must be manifestly convinced
by two or three witnesses. Deuteronomy. 17.
Ancient Law do permit just defenses to snch as be accused (be their crimes
never so horrible.) And godly Counsels wills, That neither Bishop nor person
Ecclesiastical whatsoever, accused of any crime, shall sit in Judgment,
Consultation, or Council, where the cause of such men as do accuse them is to
be tried.

These things require I of your Honors to be granted unto me, to wit; That the
Doctrine which our adversaries condemn for heresy, The P^tition of John Knox.
may be tried by the simple and plain Word of God; That just Defenses be
admitted to us that sustain the Battle against this pestilent Generation of
Antichrist; And that they be removed from judgment in our Cause, seeing that
our accusation is not intended against any one particular person, but against
that whole kingdom, which we doubt not to prove to be a power usurped against
God, Note well.
against his Commandment, and against the Ordinance of Christ Jesus established
in his Church by his chief Apostles; Yea, we doubt not to prove the kingdom of
the Pope, to be the kingdom and power of Antichrist. And therefore, my Lords, I
cannot cease in the Name of Christ Jesus, to require of you, That the matter
may come to examination, and that ye the States of the Realm, by your
Authority, compel such as will be called Bishops, not only to desist from
their cruel murdering of such as do study to promote Gods glory, in detecting
and disclosing the damnable impiety of that Man of Sin the Roman Antichrist;
but also that ye compel them to answer to such crimes as shall be laid to
their charge, for not righteously instructing the Flock committed to their
cares.

But here I know two things shall be doubted: Answer: 1. To Objections.
The former, Whether that my Appellation is lawful, and to be admitted, seeing
that I am condemned as an heretic: And secondly, Whether your Honors are
bound to defend such as call for your support in that case, seeing that your
Bishops (who in matters of Religion claim all Authority to appertain to them)
have by their sentence already condemned me.

The one and the other I nothing doubt most clearly to prove: First, That my
Appellation is most lawful and just: And secondly, That your Honors cannot
refuse to defend me thus calling for your aid; for in refusing, ye declare your
selves rebellious to God, maintainers of murderers, and shedders of innocent
blood. Note.


The Appellation is just and lawful.
How just cause I have by the Civil Law (as for their Canon, it is accursed of
God) to appeal from their unjust sentence, my purpose is not to make long
discourse; Only I will touch the points which all men confess to be the just
causes of Appellation: first, Lawfully could I not be summoned by them, being
for that time absent from their Jurisdiction, charged with the Preaching of
Christ's Evangell in a free City, not subject to their Tyranny.

Secondly, To me was no intimation made of their summons, but so secret was
their surmised malice, that the Copy of summons being required, was denied.

Thirdly, To the Realm of Scotland could I have had no free nor sure access,
being before compelled to quit the same by their unjust Tyranny.

And lastly, To me they neither could nor can be competent and indifferent
Judges, for that, before any summons were raised against me, I had accused them
by Letters published to the Queen Dowager, and had intended against them all
crimes, offering my self, with hazard of life, to prove the same, for the which
they are not only unworthy of Ecclesiastical Authority, but also of any
sufferance within a Commonwealth professing Christ. This my accusation
preceding their summons, neither by the Law of God, neither yet by the law of
man, can they be to me competent Judges, till place be granted unto me openly
to prove my accusation intended against them, and they be compelled to make
answer, as criminalls: For I will plainly prove, That not only Bishops, but
also Popes, have been removed from all Authority, and pronouncing of judgment,
till they have purged themselves of accusations laid against them. Yea, further
I will prove, That Bishops and Popes have most justly been deprived from all
Honors and administration, for smaller crimes then I have to charge the whole
rabble of your Bishops.

Gods Messengers may appeal from unjust sentences, and Civil powers are bound
to admit them.
But because this is not my chief ground, I will stand content for this present
to show, That it is lawful to Gods Prophets, and to Preachers of Christ Jesus,
to appeal from the sentence and judgment of the visible Church, to the
knowledge of the Temporal Magistrate, who by Gods Law is bound to hear their
causes, and to defend them from Tyranny.

The Prophet Jeremy was commanded by God to stand in the court of the House of
the Lord, Jer. 26.
and to preach this Sermon, in effect; That Jerusalem should be destroyed, and
be exposed in opprobrie to all Nations of the earth; And that also that famous
Temple of God should be made desolate, like unto Sylo, because the Priests, the
Prophets, and the people, did not walk in the Law which God has proposed unto
them, neither would they obey the voices of the Prophets whom God sent to call
them to repentance.

For this Sermon, was Jeremy apprehended, and a sentence of death pronounced
against him, and that by the Priests, by the Prophets, and by the People: which
things being bruted in the ears of the Princes of Judah, they passed up from the
Kings House, to the Temple of the Lord, and sat down in Judgment for further
knowledge of the cause: But the Priests and Prophets continued in their cruel
sentence which before they had pronounced, saying, This man is worthy of death;
for he has prophesied against this City, as your ears have heard. But Jeremy,
so moved by the holy Ghost, began his defense against that their tyrannous
sentence, in these words; The Lord (says he) has sent me to prophecy against
this House, and against this City, Advert.
all the words which you have read. Now therefore make good your ways, and
hear the voice of the Lord your God, and then shall he repent of the evil which
he has spoken against you. And as for me, behold, I am in your hands (so does
he speak to the Princes) do to me as you think good and right: Nevertheless,
know you this most assuredly, That if ye murder or slay me, ye shall make your
selves, this City, and the inhabitants of the same, criminal and guilty of
innocent blood; for of a truth the Lord has sent me to speak in your ears all
these words.

Then the Princes and the people (says the Text) said, The Princes did absolve
the Prophet, whom the Priests had condemned.
This man is not worthy of death, for he has spoken to us in the Name of the
Lord our God. And so, after some contention, was the Prophet delivered from
that danger. This fact and history manifestly proves whatsoever before I have
affirmed; to wit, That it is lawful for the servants of God to call for the
help of the Civil Magistrate, against the sentence of death, if it be unjust,
by whomsoever it is pronounced; And also that the Civil Sword has power to
repress the fury of the Priests, and to absolve whom they have condemned: For
the Prophet of God was condemned by those, who then only in earth were known
to be the visible Church; to wit, the Priests and Prophets who were in
Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 17.
the successors of Aaron, to whom was given a charge to speak to the people in
the Name of God, and a Precept given to the people to hear the Law from their
mouths; to the which if any should be rebellious or inobedient, he should die
the death without mercy. These men, I say, thus authorized by God, first did
excommunicate Jeremy, for that he did Preach otherwise then did the common sort
of Prophets in Jerusalem: And last, apprehended him, as you have heard,
pronouncing against him this sentence afore-written; from the which
nevertheless the Prophet appealed, that is, Sought help and defense against
the same, and that most earnestly did he crave of the Princes: For albeit he
says, I am in your hands, do with me as ye think righteous, he does not
contemn or neglect his life, as though he regarded not what should become of
him, but in those his words most vehemently did he admonish the Princes and
Rulers of the people, giving them to understand what God should require of
them; The meaning of these words, I am in your hands, etc.
as if he should say, Ye Princes of Judah, and Rulers of the people, to whom
appertains indifferently to judge betwixt party and party, to justify the
just man, and to condemn the malefactor, Deuteronomy 17. Jerem 1. Deuteronomy 1 10.
you have heard a sentence of death pronounced against me, by those whose lips
ought not to speak deceit, because they are sanctified and appointed by God
himself, to speak his Law, and to pronounce judgment with equity; but as they
have left the living God, and have taught the people vanity, so are they become
mortal enemies to all Gods true servants, of whom I am one, rebuking their
iniquity, apostasy and defection from God, which is the only cause they seek
my life. But a thing most contrary to all equity, law and justice it is, that
I, a man sent of God, to call them, his people, and you again to the true
service of God, from the which you are all declined, shall suffer the death,
because that my enemies do so pronounce sentence. I stand in your presence,
whom God has made Princes, your power is above their Tyranny, before you do I
expose my cause, I am in your hands, and cannot resist to suffer what ye think
just: But lest that my lenity and patience should either make you negligent in
the defense of me in my just cause, appealing to your judgment, either yet
encourage my enemies in seeking my blood, this one thing I dare not conceal,
That if you murder me (which thing ye do, if ye defend me not) ye make not
only my enemies guilty of my blood, but also your selves, and this whole City.
By these words, I say, it is evident, That the Prophet of God, being condemned
by the Priests, and by the Prophets of the visible Church, did seek aid,
support and defense at the Princes and temporal Magistrates, threatening his
blood to be required at their hands, if they, by their Authority, did not
defend him from the fury of his enemies; alleging also just causes of his
Appellation, and why he ought to have been defended; to wit, That he was sent
of God to rebuke their vices and defection from God; That he taught no Doctrine
which God before had not pronounced in his Law; The causes of his Appellation,
and why he ought to have been defended.
That he desired their conversion to God, continually calling upon them to
walk in the ways which God had approved; and therefore does he boldly crave
of the Princes, as of Gods Lievtenants, to be defended from the blind rage and
tyranny of the Priests, notwithstanding that they claimed to themselves
Authority to judge all matters of Religion. And the same did he when he was
cast in prison, and thereafter was brought to the presence of King Zedechias.
After, I say, he had defended his innocence, affirming, That he neither had
offended against the King, against his servants, nor against the people, at
last he made intercession to the King for his life, Jerem. 38.
saying, But now, my Lord the King, take heed, I beseech thee, let my prayer
fall into thy presence, command me not to be carried again into the house of
Jonathan the Scribe, that I die not there.

And the Text witnesses, That the King commanded the place of his imprisonment
to be changed. Whereof it is evident, That the Prophet did ofter then once seek
help at the Civil power; and that first the Princes, and thereafter the King
did acknowledge, That it appertained to their Office to deliver him from the
unjust sentence which was pronounced against him. If any man think that Jeremy
did not appeal, because he only declared the wrong done unto him, and did but
crave defense according to his innocence, let the same man understand, That
none otherwise do I appeal from that false and cruel sentence which your
Bishops pronounced against me; Just cause of Appellation.
Neither yet can there be any just cause of Appellation, but innocence, or
suspicion to be hurt, whether it be by ignorance of a Judge, or by malice and
corruption of those, who under the title of Justice, do exercise Tyranny. If I
were a thief, murderer, blasphemer, open adulterer, or any offender whom Gods
Word commands to suffer for a crime committed, my Appellation were vain, and
to be rejected: But I being innocent, yea, the Doctrine which your Bishops have
condemned in me being Gods Eternal Verity, have no less liberty to crave your
defense against that cruelty, then had the Prophet Jeremy to seek aid of the
Princes and King of Judah. But this shall more plainly appear in the fact of
Saint Paul, who after that he was apprehended in Jerusalem, Act. 22, 23, 24,
and 25.
did first claim the liberty of the Roman Citizens, for avoiding torment, when
the Captain would have examined him by questions: Thereafter in the Council,
where no righteous judgment was to be hoped for, he affirmed that he was a
Pharisee, and that he was accused of the Resurrection of the dead, and last, in
the presence of Festus, he appealed from all knowledge and judgment of the
Priests at Jerusalem, to the Emperor: Of which last Point, because it does
chiefly appertain to this my cause, I will somewhat speak.

After that Paul had diverse times been accused, as in the Acts of the Apostles
is manifest, at the last the chief Priests and their faction came to Cesarea,
with Festus the President, who presented uuto them Paul in Judgment, whom they
accused of horrible crimes, which nevertheless they could not prove, the
Apostle maintaining, That he had offended neither against the Law, neither
against the Temple, neither yet against the Emperor.

But Festus willing to gratify the Jews, said to Paul, Will thou go up to
Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things in my presence? Act. 25.
But Paul said, I stand at the Justice Seat of the Emperor, where it behooves
me to be judged; I have done no wrong to the Jews, as thou better know: If I
have done any thing unjustly, or yet committed crime worthy of death, I refuse
not to die: But if there be nothing of these things true whereof they accuse
me, no man may give me to them: I appeal to Caesar. It may appear at the first
sight, That Paul did great injury to Festus the Judge, and to the whole Order
of the Priesthood, who did hope greater equity in a cruel tyrant, then in all
that Session, and learned company: which thing, no doubt, Festus did understand
pronouncing these words, Have thou appealed to Caesar? Thou shall go to Caesar.
As if he would say, I, as a man willing to understand the truth, before I
pronounce sentence, have required of thee to go to Jerusalem, where the learned
of thine own Nation may hear thy Cause, and discern in the same. The
controversy stands in matters of Religion; thou art accused as an apostate
from the Law, as a violator of the Temple, and a transgressor of the Traditions
of their Fathers; in which matters I am ignorant, and therefore desire
information by those that be learned in the same Religion whereof the question
is* and yet do thou refuse so many godly Fathers to hear thy cause, and do
appeal to the Emperor, preferring him to all our judgments, of no purpose,
belike, but to delay time. Thus, I say, it might have appeared that Paul did
not only injury to the Judge and to the Priests, but also that his cause was
greatly to be suspected, partly for that he did refuse the judgment of those
that had most knowledge (as all men supposed) of Gods Will and Religion; and
partly, because he appealed to the Emperor, who then was at Rome, far absent
from Jerusalem, a man ignorant of God, and enemy to all virtue. But the Apostle
considering the nature of his enemies, and what things they had intended
against him, even from the first day he began freely to speak in the Name of
Christ, did not fear to appeal from them, and from the Judge that would have
gratified them. They had professed themselves plain enemies to Christ Jesus,
Why Paul would admit none of the Leuiticall order to judge in his cause.
and to his blessed Evangell, and sought the death of Paul, yea, even by
factions and treasonable conspiracy, and therefore by no means would he admit
them either as Judges in his cause, or auditors of the same, as Festus
required; But grounding himself upon strong reasons, to wit, That he had not
offended the Jews, neither against the Law, but that he was innocent, therefore
that no Judge ought to give him into the hands of his enemies: grounding, I
say, his Appellation upon these reasons, he neither regarded the displeasure of
Festus, Upon what reasons the Appellation of Paul was grounded.
neither yet the brute of the ignorant multitude, but boldly did appeal from
all cognoscance of them, to the judgment of the Emperor, as said is. By these
two examples, I doubt not but your Honors do understand, That it is lawful to
the servants of God, oppressed by tyrannts, to seek remedy against the same, be
it by appellation from their sentence, or by imploring the help of Civil
Magistrates: For what God has approved in Jeremy and Paul, he can condemn in
none that are so dealt withal. I might allege some History of the primitive
Church serving to the same purpose; as of Ambrose and Athanasius, of whom, the
one would not be judged but at Millan, where that his Doctrine was heard of all
his Church, and received and approved by many: And the other would in no wise
give place to those Counsels, where he knew that men conspiring against the
Truth of God, should sit in Judgment and Consultation: But because the
Scriptures of God are my only foundation and assurance in all matters of
weight and importance, I have thought the two former testimonies sufficient, as
well to approve my Appellation reasonable and just, as to declare to your
Honors, That with safe conscience ye cannot refuse to admit the same. If any
think it arrogance or foolishness in me to compare my self with Jeremy and
Paul, let the same man understand, The cause is to be regarded, and not the
persons.
That as God is immutable, so is the Verity of his glorious Evangell of equal
dignity, whenever it is impugned, be the members suffering never so weak.
What I think touching mine own person, God will reveal, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed: and such as with whom I have been conversant,
can witness what arrogance or pride they epsy in me. But touching the
Doctrine and cause which that adulterous and pestilent Generation of
Antichrists servants (who will be called Bishops amongst you) have condemned
me, I neither fear nor shame to confess and avow before man and Angel, to be
the Eternal Truth of the Eternal God. And in that case I doubt not to compare
my self with any member in whom the Truth has been impugned, since the
beginning: For as it was the Truth which Jeremy did Preach, in these words; The
Priests have not known me (says the Lord) but the Pastors have treacherously
declined and fallen back from me. Jerem. ^.
The Prophets have Prophesied in Baal, Jerem. 1.
and have gone after those things which cannot help. My people have left the
fountain of living Water, and have dug to themselves pits, which can contain
no water.

As it was a truth, That the Pastors and Watchmen in the days of Isaiah,
Isai. 56.
were become dumb dogs, blind, ignorant, proud and avaricious. And finally, as
it was a truth, That the Princes and the Priests were murderers of Christ
Jesus, and cruel persecutors of his Apostles, so likewise it is a truth (and
that most infallible) That those who have condemned me (the whole rabble of the
Papisticall Clergy) have declined from the true Faith, Act. 3 and 4.
have given ear to deceivable spirits, and to doctrine of devils; are the stars
fallen from the heaven to the earth, are fountains without water; and finally,
Jude 1. 2 Pet. 2.
are enemies to Christ Jesus, denyers of his virtue, and horrible blasphemers
of his death and passion. And further, As that visible Church had no crime,
whereof justly they could accuse either Prophets or the Apostles, except their
Doctrine only; so have not such as seek my blood other crime to lay to my
charge, except, That I affirm, as always I offer to prove, That the Religion
which now is maintained by fire and sword, Let the cause be noted.
is no less contrarious to the true Religion taught and established by the
Apostles, then is darkness to light, or the devil to God; And also, That such
as now do claim the title and name of Church, are no more the elect Spouse of
Christ Jesus, then was the Synagogue of the Jews the true Church of God, when
it crucified Christ Jesus, condemned his Doctrine, and persecuted his Apostles.
And therefore seeing that my Battle is against the proud and cruel hypocrites
of this age, as that Battle of those most excellent instruments was against
the false Prophets and malignant Church of their ages: Neither ought any man to
think it strange that I compare my self with them, with whom I sustain a
common cause; Neither ought your Lordships judge your selves less addebted and
bound to me, calling for your support, then did the Princes of Judah think
themselves bound to Jeremy, whom for that time they delivered, notwithstanding
the sentence of death pronounced against him by the visible Church.

And thus much for the right of my Appellation, which in the bowels of Christ
Jesus I require your Honors not to esteem as a thing superfluous and vain, but
that ye admit it, and also accept me in your protection and defense, that by
you assured, I may have access to my native Country, which I never offended;
to the end that freely and openly, in the presence of the whole Realm, I may
give my confession of all such Points as this day be in controversy; And also
that you, by your authority which ye have of God, compel such as of long time
have blinded and deceived both your selves and the people, to answer to such
things as shall be laid to their charge.

But lest that some doubt remain, Answer to an objection or doubt.

The Petition of John Knox.


That I require more of you, then you of conscience are bound to grant; in few
words* I hope my Petition to be such, as without Gods heavy displeasure ye
cannot deny. My Petition is, That ye, whom God has appointed Heads in your
Commonwealth, with single eye do study to promote the glory of God, To provide
that your subjects be rightly instructed in his true Religion, That they be
defended from all oppression and tyranny, That true Preachers may be
maintained, and such as blind and deceive the people, together also with all
idle bellies, which do rob and oppress the Flock, may be removed and punished,
as Gods Law prescribes. And to the performance of every one of these, do your
Offices and Names, the Honors and Benefits which ye receive, the Law of God
universally given to all men and the examples of most godly Princes, bind and
oblige you.

My purpose is not to labor greatly to prove, That your whole study ought to
be, To promote the glory of God; Neither yet will I study to allege all
reasons that justly may be brought to prove, That ye are not exalted to reign
above your brethren as men without care and solicitude; for these be principles
so grafted in Nature, that very Ethnicks have confessed the same: For seeing
that God only has placed you in his Chayr, has appointed you to be his
Lieutenants, The singular honors which Magistrates receive of God, ought to
move them with all diligence to promote his Religion.
and by his own Seal has marked you to be Magistrates, and to rule above your
brethren, to whom Nature nevertheless has made you like in all points (for in
conception, birth, life and death ye differ nothing from the common sort of
men, but God only as said is, has promoted you, and of his special favor
has given you this Prerogative, to be called Gods) How horrible ingratitude
were it then, that you should be found unfaithful to him, that has thus
honored you? And further, What a monster were it that you should be proved
unmercifull to them, above whom ye are appointed to reign, as fathers above
their children? Because, I say, that the very Ethnicks have granted, That the
chief and first care of Princes, and of such as be appointed to rule above
others, ought to be, To promote the glory and honor of their Gods, and to
maintain that Religion which they supposed to have been true; And that their
second care was, To maintain and defend the subjects committed to their charge
in all equity and justice: I will not labor to show unto you what ought to be
your study in maintaining Gods true honor, left that in so doing I should
seem to make you less careful to Gods true Religion, then were the Ethnicks
over their Idolatry.

The duty of Magistrates.
But because other Petitions may appear more hard and difficile to be granted, I
purpose briefly, but yet freely, to speak what God by his Word does assure me
to be true: 1.
to wit, first, That in conscience you are bound to punish malefactors, and to
defend innocents imploring your help. Secondly, That God requires of you to
provide that your subjects be rightly instructed in his true Religion; 2.
and that the same be by you reformed, whenever abuses do creep in by the
malice of Satan and negligence of men. 3.
And lastly, That ye are bonnd to remove from Honor, and to punish with death
(if the crime so require) such as deceive the people, or defraud them of that
food of their souls, I mean, Gods lively Word. The first and second are most
plain by the words of S. Paul, thus speaking of lawful powers.

Let every soul (says he) submit himself unto the higher Powers; for there is
no power but of God: Romans 13.
Whosoever resists therefore the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation: For Rulers are not to
be feared of those that do well, but of those that do evil. Will thou then be
without fear of the Power? Do that which is good, and so shall thou be praised
of the same: For he is the Minister of God for thy weal: But if thou do that
which is evil, fear; for he bears not the Sword for naught; for he is the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil.

As the Apostle in these words most straightly commands Obedience to be given
to lawful powers, pronouncing Gods wrath and vengeance against such as shall
resist the Ordinance of God; so does he assign to the powers their Offices,
which be, To take vengeance upon evil doers, To maintain the well doers, and so
to minister and rule in their Office, that the subjects by them may have a
Benefit, and be praised in well doing. Now if you be powers ordained by God,
(and that I hope all men will grant) then by the plain words of the Apostle is
the Sword given unto you by God, for maintenance of the innocent, and for
punishment of malefactors: But I, and my brethren with me accused, do offer not
only to prove our selves innocents in all things laid to our charge, but also
we offer most evidently to prove your Bishops to be the very pestilence, who
have infected all Christianity: And therefore by the plain Doctrine of the
Apostle, you are bound to maintain us, and punish the other, being evidently
convinced, and proved criminal. Moreover, the former words of the Apostle do
teach, In what Points powers are bound to their subjects.
How far high powers are bound to their subjects; to wit, That because they be
Gods Ministers, by him ordained for the profit and utility of others, most
diligently ought they to attend upon the same. For that cause assigns the
holy Ghost, commanding subjects to obey, Romans 13.
and to pay Tribute, saying, For this do you pay Tribute and Toll; that is,
Because they are Gods Ministers, bearing the Sword for your utility. Whereof it
is plain, That there is no honor, without a charge annexed. And this one point
I wish your wisedoms deeply to consider, That God has not placed you above
your Brethren, to reign as Tyrants, without respect of either profit or
commodity. You hear the holy Ghost witness the contrary, affirming, That all
powers be Gods Ministers, ordained for the weal, profit, and salvation of their
subjects, and not for their destruction. Could it be said (I beseech you) That
Magistrates enclosing their subjects in a City without all victuals, or giving
unto them no other victuals but such as were poisoned, Let the similitude be
noted.
did rule for the profit of their subjects? I trust that none would be so
foolish as so to affirm; but that rather every discreet person would boldly
affirm, That such as so did, were unworthy of Regiment. If we will not deny
that which Christ Jesus affirms to be a truth infallible; to wit, That the
soul is greater and more precious then is the body, then shall we easily epsy
how unworthy of Authority be those that this day debar their subjects from
hearing of Gods Word, and by fire and sword compel them to feed upon the very
poison of their souls, the damnable Doctrine of Antichrist. And therefore in
this point, I say, I cannot cease to admonish your Honors diligently to take
heed over your charge, which is greater then the most part of men suppose. It
is not enough that Rulers do not oppress their subjects.
It is not enough that you abstain from violent wrong and oppression which
ungodly men exercise against their subjects; but ye are further bound, to wit,
That ye rule above them for their weal; which we cannot do, if that ye either
by negligence not providing true Pastors, or yet by your maintenance of such as
be ravening Wolves, suffer their souls to starve and perish for lack of the
true food, which is Christ's Evangell sincerely preached: It will not excuse you
in his presence who will require account of every Talent committed to your
charge, to say, That ye supposed that the charge of the souls had been
committed to your Bishops. No no, my Lords, so ye cannot escape Gods judgment;
for if your Bishops be proved to be no Bishops, but deceivable thieves, The
offer of John Knox, and his accusation intended against the Papisticall Bishops.
and ravening wolves (which I offer my self to prove by Gods Word, by Law and
Counsels, yea, by the judgment of all the godly learned, from the primitive
Church to this day) then shall your permission and defense, be reputed before
God a participation with their theft and murder: For thus accused the Prophet
Isaiah the Princes of Jerusalem: Isaiah 1.
Thy Princes (says he) are apostates, (that is, obstinate refusers of God) and
they are companions of thieves. This grievous accusation was laid against them,
albeit that they ruled in that City, which sometime was called Holy, where then
were the Temple, Rites, and Ordinances of God; because that not only they were
wicked themselves, but chiefly because they maintained wicked men, their
Priests and false Prophets, in honors and authority: If they did not escape
this accusation of the holy Ghost in that age, look ye neither to escape the
accusation nor the judgment of wicked men; Jerem 23. and 27.
to wit, That the one and the other shall drink the Cup of Gods wrath and
vengeance together. And lest ye should deceive your selves, Ezech. 13. Hosa 4.
esteeming your Bishops to be virtuous and godly, this do I affirm, and offer
my self to prove the same, That more wicked men then be the whole rabble of
your Clergy, were never from the beginning universally known in any age; yea,
Sodom and Gomorra may be justified in respect of them; for they permitted just
Lot to dwell amongst them without any violence done to his body, which that
pestilent Generation of your shaven sort does not, but most cruelly persecute
by fire and sword the true members of Christ's Body, for no other cause, but for
the true service and honoring of God. And therefore I fear not to affirm that,
which God will one day justify, That by your Offices ye are bound, not only
to repress their tyranny, but also to punish them as thieves and murderers,
as Idolaters, Note.
and blasphemers of God; and in their rooms ye are bound to place true
Preachers of Christ's Evangell, for the instruction, If Powers provide not for
instruction of their subjects, they do never rule above them for their Profit.
comfort, and salvation of your subjects, above whom else shall never the holy
Ghost acknowledge, That you rule in justice for their profit. If ye pretend to
possess the Kingdom with Christ Jesus, ye may not take example neither by the
ignorant multitude of Princes, neither by the ungodly and cruel Rulers of the
earth, of whom some pass their time in sloth, insolency and riot, without
respect had to Gods honor, or to the salvation of of their brethren; and
others most cruelly oppress, with proud Nimrod, such as be subject to them.
But your pattern and example must be the practice of those whom God has
approved by the testimony of his Word, as after shall be declared.

Of the premises it is evident, That to lawful powers is given the Sword, for
punishment of malefactors, for maintenance of innocents, and for the profit and
utility of their subjects. Now let us consider, Whether the Reformation of
Religion fallen in decay, and punishment of false Teachers, do appertain to the
Civil Magistrate and Nobility of any Realm. What Satan has obtained of the
blind world.
I am not ignorant that Satan of old time, for maintenance of his darkness,
has obtained of the blind world two chief points: The former, He has
persuaded to Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, That the feeding of Christ's
Flock appertains nothing to their charge, but that it is rejected upon the
Bishops, and State Ecclesiastical. And secondly, That the Reformation of
Religion, be it never so corrupt, and the punishment of such as be sworn
Soldiers in their kingdom, are exempted from all Civil power, and are
reserved to themselves, and to their cognizance. But that no offender may
justly be exempted from punishment; and that the ordering and reformation of
Religion, with the instruction of subjects, does especially appertain to the
Civil Magistrate, shall Gods perfect Ordinance, his plain Word, and the facts
and examples of those that of God are highly praised, most evidently declare.

When God did establish his Law, Statutes and Ceremonies in the midst of
Israel, The matters and Reformation of Religion appertain to the care of the
Civil power.
he did not exempt the matters of Religion from the power of Moses, but as he
gave him charge over the Civil policy, so he put in his mouth and his hand;
that is, he first revealed to him, and thereafter commanded to put in practice
whatsoever was to be taught or done in matters of Religion. Nothing did God
reveal particularly to Aaron, but altogether was he commanded to depend from
the mouth of Moses: Exodus 21.24, 25, etc.
Yea, nothing was he permitted to do to himself, or to his children, either in
his or their Inauguration and Sanctification to the Priesthood, Note.
but all was committed to the care of Moses, and therefore were these words so
frequently repeated to Moses, Thou shall separate Aaron and his sons from the
midst of the people of Israel, Exodus 28.
that they may execute the Office of the Priesthood; thou shall make them
Garments, thou shall anoint them, thou shall wash them, thou shall fill their
hands with Sacrifice. And so forth of every Rite and Ceremony that was to be
done unto them, especial commandment was given unto Moses, That he should do
it. Now if Aaron and his sons were subject to Moses, that they did nothing but
at his commandment, Who dare be so bold as to affirm, That the Civil
Magistrate has nothing to do in matters of Religion? For seeing that then God
did so straightly require, That even those who did bear the figure of Christ,
should receive from the Civil power as it were their Sanctification, and
entrance into their Office: And seeing also that Moses was so far preferred to
Aaron, that the one commanded, and the other did obey, Who dare esteem that the
Civil power is now become so profane in Gods eyes, that it is sequestered from
all intromission with the matters of Religion. The holy Ghost in diverse places
declares the contrary. For one of the chief Precepts commanded to the King,
when that he should be placed in his Throne, was to write the example of the
Book of the Lords Law, that it should be with him, that he might read in it
all the days of his life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to
keep all the words of his Law and his Statutes to do them. This Precept he
requires, not only that the King should himself fear God, keep his Law and
Statutes, but that also he, as the chief Ruler, should provide that Gods true
Religion should be kept inviolated of the people and flock which by God was
committed to his charge. The facts of godly Kings are an interpretation of the
Law, and declaration of their power.
And this did not only David and Solomon perfectly understand, but also some
godly Kings in Judah, after the apostasy and idolatry that infected Israel by
the means of Jeroboam, did employ their understanding, and execute their power
in some notable Reformations: For Asa and Iosaphat Kings in Judah, finding the
Religion altogether corrupt, did apply their hearts (says the holy Ghost) to
serve the Lord, and to walk in his ways: And thereafter does witness, That
Asa removed from Honors his mother (some say grandmother) because she had
committed, and labored to maintain Idolatry. And Iosaphat did not only refuse
strange gods himself, 2 Paral. 14. and 17
but also destroying the chief Monuments of Idolatry, did send forth the
Levites to instruct the people. Whereof it is plain, That the one and the other
did understand such Reformations to appertain to their duties. Note.
But the facts of Ezechias and of Josias do more clearly prove the power and
duty of the Civil Magistrate in Reformation of Religion: Before the Reign of
Ezechias Religion was so corrupt, that the doors of the House of the Lord were
shut up, the Lamps were extinguished, no Sacrifice was orderly made: 2 Paralip
19.
But in the first year of his Reign, in the first month of the same, did the
King open the doors of the Temple, bring in the Priests and Levites, and
assembling them together, did speak unto them as follows: Adver^ that the
King takes upon him to command the Priests.
Hear me, O ye Levites, and be ye sanctified now, and sanctify also the House
of the Lord God of your fathers, and carry forth all filthiness (he means,
All monuments and vessels of Idolatry) for our fathers have transgressed, and
have committed wickedness in the eyes of the Eternal our God, they have left
him, and turned their faces from the Tabernacle of the Lord; and therefore is
the wrath of the Lord come upon Juda and Jerusalem: Behold, our fathers have
fallen by the sword, our sons, daughters, and wives are led into Captivity: But
now have I purposed in my heart to make a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel,
that he may turn the wrath of his fury from us. And therefore my sons (he
sweetly exhorts) be not faint, for the Lord has chosen you to stand in his
presence, and to serve him.

Such as be not more then blind, clearly may perceive that the King does
acknowledge, That it appertained to his charge, To reform the Religion. To
appoint the Levites to their charges, and To admonish them of their Duty and
Office: Which thing he most evidently declares, writing his Letters to all
Israel, to Ephraim and Manasses, and sent the same by the hands of Messengers,
having this tenor:

You sons of Israel, return to the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and
he shall turn to the residue that rests from the hands of Assure: 2 Paral. 30.
Be not as your fathers and as your brethren were, who have transgressed
against the Lord God of their fathers, who has made them desolate, as you see.
Hold not your heart therefore, but give your hand unto the Lord, return unto
his Sanctuary, serve him, and he shall show mercy unto you, to your sons and
daughters that be in Bondage; for he is pitiful, and easy to be entreated.

Thus far did Ezechias by Letters and Messengers provoke the people, declined
from God, to repentance; not only in Judah where he reigned lawful King, Note.
but also in Israel, subject then to another King. And albeit that by some
wicked men his Messengers were mocked, yet as they lacked not their just
punishment (for within six days after Samaria was destroyed, and Israel led
captive by Salmanazar) so did not the zealous King Ezechias desist to prosecute
his duty in restoring the Religion to Gods perfect Ordinance, removing all
abominations.

2 Paral 35.
The same is to be read of Josias, who did not only restore the Religion, but
did further destroy all Monuments of Idolatry which of long time had remained:
For it is written of him, That after that the Book of the Law was found, and
that he asked counsel at the Prophetess Hulda, he sent and gathered all the
Elders of Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Reg. 23.
and standing in the Temple of the Lord, he made a Covenant, That all the
people, from the great to the small, should walk after the Lord, should observe
his Law, Statutes, and Testimonies, with all their heart, and with all their
soul; and that they should ratify and confirm whatsoever was written in the
Book of God. He further commanded Hilkias the high Priest, The King commanded
the Priests.
and the Priests of the inferior Order, That they should carry forth of the
Temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made to Baal, which he burnt, and
did carry their powder to Bethel. He did further destroy all Monuments of
Idolatry, yea, even those that had remained from the days of Solomon; he did
burn them, stamp them to Powder, whereof one part he scattered in the brook
Kidron, and the other part upon the Sepulchers and Graves of the Idolaters,
whose bones he did burn upon the Altars where before they made Sacrifice not
only in Judah, but also in Bethel, where Jeroboam had erected his Idolatry:
yea, he further proceeded, and did kill the Priests of the high places, who
were Idolaters, and had deceived the people; he did kill them, I say, and burnt
their bones upon their own Altars, and so returned to Jerusalem. This
Reformation made Josias, and for the same obtained this Testimony of the holy
Ghost, That neither before him nor after him was there any such King, who
returned to God with his whole soul, and with all his strength, according to
all the Law of Moses.

Of which Histories it is evident, That the Reformation of Religion in all
points, together with the punishment of false Teachers, does appertain to the
power of the Civil Magistrate: For what God required of them, his justice must
require of others having the like charge and Authority; what he did approve in
them, he cannot but approve in all others who with like zeal and sincerity do
enterprise to purge the Lords Temple and Sanctuary. What God required of them,
it is before declared; to wit, That most diligently they should observe his
Law, Statutes and Ceremonies. And how acceptable were their facts to God, does
he himself witness; 2 Par. 32.
For to some he gave most notable Victories without the hand of man; and in
their most desperate dangers, did declare his especial favor toward them by
signs supernatural: To other he so established the Kingdom, that their
enemies were compelled to stoup under their feet. And the names of all he has
registered not only in the Book of life, but also in the blessed remembrance of
all posterities since their days, which also shall continue till the coming of
the Lord Jesus, who shall reward with the Crown of Immortality not only them
but also such as unfainedly study to do the will, and to promote the glory of
his heavenly father in the midst of this corrupted Generation. In consideration
whereof ought you, my Lords, all delay set apart, to provide for the
Reformation of Religion in your Dominions and Bounds, which now is so corrupt,
that no part of Christ's Institution remains in the Original purity; and
therefore of necessity it is, That speedily ye provide for Reformation, or else
ye declare your selves not only void of love toward your subjects, but also
to live without care of your own salvation, yea, without all fear and true
reverence of God. Two things perchance may move you to esteem these histories
before briefly touched, to appertain nothing to you: The facts of the godly
Kings in Judah, do appertain to the powers amongst the Gentiles professing
Christ's.
First, Because you are no Jews, but Gentiles. And secondly, Because you are no
Kings, but Nobles in your Realm. But be not deceived; for neither of both can
excuse you in Gods presence from doing his duty, for it is a thing more then
certain, That whatsoever God required of the Civil Magistrate in Israel or
Judah concerning the observation of true Religion during the time of the Law,
the same does he require of lawful Magistrates professing Christ Jesus in the
time of the Gospel, as the holy Ghost has taught us by the mouth of David (
Psalm. 2.) saying, Be learned, you that judge the earth, kiss the Son, lest
that the Lord wax angry, and that ye perish away. This Admonition does not
extend to the Judges under the Law only, but does also include all such as be
promoted to Honors in the time of the Gospel, when Christ Jesus does reign
and fight in his Spiritual Kingdom, whose enemies in that Psalm be first most
sharply taxed, their fury expressed, and vanity mocked; and then are Kings and
Judges, who think themselves free from all Law and Obedience, commanded to
repent their former blind rage; and Judges are charged to be learned; and
last, are commanded to serve the Eternal God in fear, to rejoice before him
in trembling, to kiss the Son, that is, To give him most humble Obedience:
Whereof it is evident, That the Rulers, Magistrates, and Judges now in Christ's
Kingdom, are no less bound to Obedience unto God, then were those under the
Law: And how is it possible that any should be obedient, who despises his
Religion, in which stands the chief glory that man can give to God, and is a
service which God especially requires of Kings and Rulers? Which thing Saint
Augustine plainly did note, writing to one Bonifacius a man of War, Epist. 50.
according to the same argument and purpose which I labor to persuade your
Honors: For after that he has in that his Epistle declared the difference
betwixt the heresy of the Donatists and Arrians, and has somewhat spoken of
their cruelty, he shows the way how their fury should and ought to be
repressed, and that it is lawful for the unjustly afflicted to seek support
and defense at godly Magistrates; for thus he writes, Either must the Verity
be kept close, Advert.
or else must their cruelty be sustained. But if the Verity should be
concealed, not only should none be saved, but also should many be lost through
their deceit. But if by Preaching of the Verity their fury should be provoked
more to rage, and by that means yet some were delivered, and made strong, yet
should fear hinder many weaklings to follow the Verity, if their rage be not
stayed. In these first words Augustine shows three reasons why the afflicted
Church in those days called for the help of the Emperor, and of godly
Magistrates, against the fury of the persecuters. The first, The Verity must be
spoken, or else mankind shall perish in error. Note well.
The second, The Verity being plainly spoken, provokes the adversaries to
rage. And because that some did allege, That rather we ought to suffer all
injury, then to seek support by man, he adds the third reason; to wit, That
many weak ones be not able to suffer persecution and death for the Truths sake,
to whom not the less respect ought to be had, that they may be won from their
error, and so be brought to greater strength.

Oh that the Rulers of this age would ponder and weigh the reasons of this
godly Writer, and provide the remedy, which he requires in these words
following; Now when the Church was thus afflicted, if any think, That rather
they should have sustained all calamity, Augustine^ words.
then that help should have been asked of Christian Emperors by the godly, he
does not well to advert, That of such negligence no good counts nor reason
could be given: For where such as would that no just Laws should be made
against their impiety, allege, That the Apostles sought no such things of the
Kings of the earth, they do not consider, That the time was other then it is
now, and that all things are done in their own time. What Emperor then
believed in Christ, that he should serve him in making Laws for godliness
against impiety? While that saying of the Prophet was complete, Why has
Nations raged, and people have imagined vanity? The Kings of the earth have
stood up, and Princes have convened together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed. That which is after in the same Psalm, was not yet come to pass:
And now understand, O ye Kings, be learned you that judge the earth, serve the
Lord in fear, Advert the mind of Augustine.
and rejoice to him with trembling. How do Kings serve the Lord in fear, but
in punishing, and by a godly severity forbidding those things which are done
against the Commandment of the Lord? For otherwise does he serve the Lord in so
far as he is man, otherwise in so far as he is King. In so far as he is a
man, he serves him by living faithfully; but because he is also King, In two
sorr^ ought Kings to serve God.
he serves establishing Laws that command the things that be just, and that
with a convenient rigor forbid things contrary. As Ezechias served destroying
the Groves, the Temples of Idols, and the places which were builded against
Gods Commandment. So served also Josias, doing the same. So the King of the
Ninivites compelling the whole City to mitigate the fury of the Lord. So served
Darius, giving into the power of Daniel the Idol to be broken, and his enemies
to be cast to the Lions. So served Nebuchad-nezzar, by a terrible Law
forbidding all that were in his Realm to blaspheme God. Herein therefore do
Kings serve the Lord, in so far as they are Kings, Note.
when they do those things to serve him, which none except Kings be able to
do. He further proceeds, and concludes, That as when wicked Kings do
reign, impiety cannot be bridled by Laws, but rather is tyranny exercised
under the title of the same; So is it a thing without all reasons, That Kings
professing the knowledge and honor of God, O that the world would understand!
should not regard nor care who did defend nor who did oppugn the Church of
God in their Dominions.

By these words of this ancient and godly Writer, your Honors may perceive
what I require of you, to wit, To repress the tyranny of your Bishops, and to
defend the innocents professing the Truth. He did require of the Emperor and
Kings in his days professing Christ, and manifestly concludes, That they
cannot serve Christ, except that so they do. Let not your Bishops think that
Augustine speaks for them, because he names the Church: Let them read and
understand, That Augustine writes for that Church which professes the Truth,
and does suffer persecution for the defense of the same, which your Bishops do
not, but rather with the Donatists and Arrians do cruelly persecute all such as
boldly speak Christ's Eternal Verity, to manifest their impiety and
abomination. But thus much we have of Augustine, That it appertains to the
obedience and service which Kings owe to God, as well now in the time of the
Gospel, Note.
as before under the Law, to defend the afflicted for matters of Religion, and
to repress the fury of the persecuters by the rigor and severity of godly
Laws. For which cause, no doubt, Isaiah the Prophet says, Isai. 49.
That Kings should be nourishers of the Church of God, that they should abase
their heads, and lovingly embrace the children of God. And thus, I say, your
Honors may evidently see, That the same Obedience does God require of Rulers
and Princes in the time of the Gospel, that he required in the time of the Law.

An answer to the second Objection.
If you do think that the Reformation of Religion, and defense of the afflicted
does not appertain to you, because you are no Kings, but Nobles and States of a
Realm, in two things you are deceived: First, In that you do not advert, That
David requires as well that the Princes and Judges of the earth to be learned,
and that they serve and fear God, as that he requires that Kings repent. If
you therefore be Judges and Princes (as no man can deny you to be) then by the
plain words of David you are charged to be learned, to serve and fear God;
which ye cannot do, if ye despise the Reformation of his Religion. And this is
your first error.

The second is, That ye neither know your duty which ye owe to God, neither yet
your Authority which of him ye have received, if ye for pleasure or fear of any
earthly man despise Gods true Religion, and contemn your brethren that in his
Name call for your support. Your duty is to hear the voice of the Eternal your
God, and unfainedly to study to follow his Precepts; who, as is before said,
of special mercy has promoted you to Honors and Dignity. Note.
His chief and principal Precept is, That with reverence ye receive and
embrace his only beloved Son Jesus; That ye promote to the uttermost of your
powers his true Religion; and That ye defend your brethren and subjects, whom
he has put under your charge and care. Now if your King be a man ignorant of
God, enemy to his true Religion, blinded by Superstition, and a persecuter of
Christ's members, Shall ye be execused, if with silence ye pass over his
iniquity? Be not deceived, my Lords, ye are placed in Authority for another
purpose then to flatter your King in his folly and blind rage; to wit, That as
with your bodies, strength, riches and wisdom ye are bound to assist and
defend him in all things which by your advice he shall take in hand for Gods
glory, Note diligently
and for the preservation of his Commonwealth and subjects; so by your
authorities, counsel, and admonition, ye are bound to correct and repress
whatsoever ye know him to attempt expressly repugning to Gods Word, Honor and
glory, or what ye shall epsy him to do, be it by ignorance, or be it by
malice, against his subjects, great or small: Of which last part of your
obedience if you defraud your King, ye commit against him no less Treason,
Note.
then if ye did extract from him your due and promised support, when by his
enemies unjustly he were pursued. But this part of their duty, I fear, do a
small number of the Nobility of this age rightly consider; neither yet will
they understand that for that purpose has God promoted them: For now the
common song of all men is, We must obey our Kings, be they good or bad; For God
has commanded it. But horrible shall the vengeance be, that shall be poured
forth upon such blasphemers of God his holy Name and Ordinance; Note diligently
For it is no less blasphemy to say, That God has commanded Kings to be
obeyed, when they command impiety, then to say, That God by his Precept is
author and maintainer of all iniquity. True it is, God has commanded Kings to
be obeyed; but like true it is, That in things which they commit against his
glory, or when cruelly without cause they rage against their brethren the
members of Christ's body, he has commanded no obedience, but rather he has
approved, yea and greatly rewarded such as have opposed themselves to their
ungodly commandments and blind rage; as in the examples of the three Children,
of Daniel and Abdemelech it is evident. The three Children would neither bow
nor stoup before the golden Image at the commandment of the great King
Nebuchadnezar. Daniel did openly pray, his windows being open, against the
established Law of Darius and of his Council. And Abdemelech feared not to
enter in before the presence of Zedechias, and boldly to defend the cause and
innocence of Jeremy the Prophet, Jerem 38.
whom the King and his Council had condemned to death. Every one of these
facts should this day be judged foolish, by such as will not understand what
God does require of his children, when his Verity is oppugned, or his glory
called in doubt: such men, I say, as prefer man to God, and things present, to
the heavenly inheritance, should have judged every one of these stubborn
inobedience, foolish presumption and singularity, or else bold controlling of
the King and his wise Council. But how acceptable in Gods presence was this
resistance to the ungodly commandments and determinations of their King, the
end did witness; for the three children were delivered from the Furnace of
fire, and Daniel from the Den of Lions, To the confusion of their enemies, To
the better instruction of the ignorant Kings, and To the perpetual comfort of
Gods afflicted children. And Abdemelech, in the day of the Lords Visitation,
Jerem. 39.
when the King and his Council did drink the bitter cup of Gods Vengeance, did
find his life for a prey, and did not fall by the edge of the sword, when many
thousands did perish: And this was signified unto them by the Prophet himself,
at the commandment of God, before that Jerusalem was destroyed. This promise
and cause were recited unto him in these words, I will bring my words upon this
City unto evil, and not unto good; but most assuredly I shall deliver thee,
because thou have trusted in me, says the Lord. The trust and hope which
Abdemelech had in God, made himself bold to oppose himself, being but one, to
the King and to his whole Council, who had condemned to death the Prophet,
whom his conscience did acknowledge to be innocent: for thus did he speak in
presence of the King, sitting in the Port of Benjamin; My Lord the King, (says
Abdemelech) these men do wickedly in all things that they have done to Jeremy
the Prophet. Advert and take heed, my Lords, that the men who had condemned the
Prophet, were the King, his Princes and Council, and yet did one man accuse
them all of iniquity, and did boldly speak in the defense of him, of whose
innocence he was persuaded: Note diligently.
And the same, I say, is the duty of every man in his Vocation, but chiefly of
the Nobility, which is joined with their kings, to bridle and repress their
folly and blind rage: Which thing if the Nobility do not, neither yet labor
to do, as they are Traitors to their Kings, so do they provoke the wrath of
God against themselves, and against the Realm, in which they abuse the
Authority which they have received of God, to maintain Virtue, and to
suppress Vice. And hereof I would your Honors were most certainly persuaded,
That God will neither excuse Nobility nor people, but the Nobility least of
all that obey and follow their Kings in manifest iniquity; but with the same
vengeance will God punish the Prince, People, and Nobility conspiring together
against him and his Holy Ordinances; as in the punishment upon Pharaoh, Israel,
Judah, and Babylon, is evidently to be seen; for Pharaoh was not drowned alone,
but his Captains, Charets, and great Army drank the same Cup with him. The
Kings of Israel and Judah were not punished without company, but with them were
murdered the Counselors, their Princes imprisoned, and their people led
Captive: And why? because none was found so faithful to God, that he durst
enterprise to resist, nor gainstand the manifest impiety of their Princes. And
therefore was Gods wrath powered forth upon the one and the other. But the more
ample discourse of this argument I defer to better opportunity; only at this
time I thought expedient to admonish you, That before God it shall not excuse
you to allege, We are no Kings and therefore neither can we reform Religion,
nor yet defend such as be persecuted. Consider, my Lords, that ye are powers
ordained of God (as before is declared) and therefore does the Reformation of
Religion, and the defense of such as unjustly are oppressed, appertain to your
charge and care; which thing shall the Law of God (universally given to be kept
of all men) most evidently declare; which is my last and most assured reason,
why (I say) ye ought to remove from your Honors, and to punish with death such
as God has condemned by his own mouth.

Deuteronomy. 12.
After that Moses had declared what was true Religion, to wit, To honor God as
he commanded, adding nothing to his Word, neither yet diminishing any thing
from it; and after also that vehemently he had exhort-the same Law to be
observed, he denounced the punishment against the Transgressors, Deuteronomy 23. and
27.
in these words, If thy brother, son, daughter, wife or neighbor, whom thou
love as thine own life, solicitate thee secretly, saying, Let us go serve
other gods, whom neither thou, nor thy fathers have known, consent not to him,
hear him not, let not thine eye spare him, show him no indulgency or favor,
hide him not, but utterly kill him, let thy hand be the first upon him, that he
may be slain, and after the hand of the whole people. Of these words of Moses
are two things appertaining to our purpose, to be noted; The first is, Idolatry
ought to be punish^d with out respect of person.
that such as solicitate only to Idolatry, ought to be punished to death,
without favor or respect of person; For he that will not suffer man to spare
his son, his daughter, nor his wife, but straightly commands punishment to be
taken upon the idolatours (have they never so nigh conjunction with us) will
not wink at the Idolatry of others, of what state or condition soever they be.

It is not unknown, If any state might have claimed privilege, it was the
Prophets.
That the Prophets had Revelations of God, which were not common to the people;
as Samuel had the Revelation that Eli and his posterity should be destroyed,
That Saul should first be King, and thereafter, That he should be rejected;
That David should reign for him. Michaiah understood by Vision, 1 Samuel 3: 1 Samuel 9.15. 1 King. 22. 1 Kings 21. 2 Kings 1.
That Achab should be killed in the Battle against the Syrians. Elias saw that
dogs should eat Iezabel in the Forts of Iezreel* Elisha did see hunger come
upon Israel by the space of seven years. Jeremiah did foresee the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the time of their Captivity. And so diverse other Prophets had
diverse Revelations of God, which the people did not otherwise understand, but
by their affirmation; and therefore in those days were the Prophets named
Seers, because that God did open unto them that which was hid from the
multitude. Now if any man might have claimed any privilege from the rigor of
the Law, or might have justified his fact, it should have been the Prophet: For
he might have alleged for himself his singular Prerogative that he had above
other men, to have Gods Will revealed unto him by Vision or by Dream; or, That
God had declared particularly unto him, that his pleasure was, To be honored
in that manner, in such a place, and by such means. But all such excuses does
God remove, commanding, That the Prophet that shall so solicitate the people to
serve strange Gods, shall die the death, notwithstanding that he allege for
himself Dream, Vision, or Revelation; yea, although he promise miracles; and
although that such things as he promised should come to pass, yet I say
commands God that no credit be given to him, but that he die the death,
because he teaches apostasy and defection from God. Hereby your Honors may
easily see, That none provoking the people to Idolatry, ought to be exempted
from the punishment of death: For if neither that inseparable Conjunction which
God himself has sanctified betwixt man and wife, neither that unspeakable love
grafted in nature, which is betwixt the father and the son, neither yet that
reverence which Gods people ought to bear to the Prophets, can excuse any man
to spare the offender, or to conceal his offense: What excuse can man pretend,
which God will accept? Evident it is, That no state, condition, nor honor can
exempt the Idolater from the hands of God, when he shall call him to account,
or shall inflict punishment upon him for his offense: How shall it then excuse
the people, that they, according to Gods Commandment, punish not to death such
as shall solicitate, or violently draw the people to Idolatry?

And this is the first which I would your Honors should note of the former
words, to wit, That no person is exempted from punishment, if he can be
manifestly convinced to have provoked or led the people to Idolatry: And this
is most evidently declared in that solemn Oath and Covenant which Asa made with
the people, To serve God, and to maintain his Religion, adding this penalty to
the transgressors of it; to wit, That whosoever should not seek the God of
Israel should be killed, were he great, 2 Par. 15.
or were he small, were it man, or were it woman. And of this Oath was the Lord
well pleased, he was found of them, and gave them rest on every part, because
they sought him with their whole heart, and did swear to punish the offenders
according to the Precept of his Law, without respect of persons. And this is it
which I say I would your Honors should note for the first, That no Idolater
can be exempted from punishment by Gods Law.

The second is, That the punishment of such crimes as are Idolatry, Blasphemy,
and others that touch the Majesty of God, does not appertain to the Kings and
chief Rulers only, but also to the whole Body of the people, and to every
member of the same, according to the Vocation of every man, and according to
that possibility and occasion which God does minister, to revenge the injury
done against his glory, when that impiety is manifestly known: And that does
Moses more plainly speak, in these words; Deuteronomy. 13.
If in any Cities (says he) which the Lord thy God gives to thee to dwell in
them thou shall hear this brute, There are some men the sons of Belial passed
from thee, and have solicited the Citizens out of their Cities by these words,
Let us go and serve strange gods which you have not known; search and enquire
diligently, and if it be true that such abomination is done in the midst of
thee, thou shall utterly strike the Inhabitants of that City with the Sword,
thou shall destroy it, and whatsoever is within it; thou shall gather the spoil
of it into the midst of the Marketplace, thou shall burn that City with fire,
and the spoil of it to the Lord thy God, that it may be a heap of stones for
ever; neither shall it be any more builded. Let nothing of that execration
cleave to thy hand, that the Lord may turn from thee the fury of his wrath, and
be moved toward thee with inward affection.

Plain it is, That Moses speaks not, nor gives charge to Kings Rulers and
Judges only, but he commands the whole Body of the people, yea, and every
member of the same, according to their possibility; And who dare be so
impudent, Why every man in Israel was bound to obey Gods Commandment.
as to deny this to be most reasonabl^ and just? For seeing that God had
delivered the whole Body from Bondage, and to the whole multitude had given his
Law, and to the twelve Tribes had he so distributed the inheritance of the Land
of Canaan, that no family could complain that it was neglected. Was not the
whole and every member addebted to confess and acknowledge the benefits of
God? yea, had it not been the part of every man to have studied to keep the
possession which he had received? Deuteronomy 28 and 30.
Which thing God did plainly pronounce they should not do, except that in their
hearts they did sanctify the Lord God, That they embraced and inviolably kept
his Religion established, and finally, except they did cut out iniquity from
amongst them, declaring themselves earnest enemies to those abominations, which
God declared himself so vehemently to hate, that first he commanded the whole
inhabitants of that Country to be destroyed, and all Monuments of there
Idolatry to be broken down: Deu^. 7^
And thereafter he also straightly commands, That a City declining to Idolatry,
should fall by the edge of the sword, Gods judgments to the carnal man appear
rigorous.
and that the whole spoil of the ^ame should be burned, no portion of it
reserved. To the carnal man this may appear a rigorous and severe judgment;
yea, it may rather seem to be pronounced in a rage, then in wisdom: For what
City was ever yet, in which to man's judgment were not to be found many
innocent persons, as infants, children, and some simple and ignorant souls, who
neither did nor could consent to such impiety? And yet we find no exception,
but all are appointed to the cruel death. And as concerning the City, and the
spoil of the same, man's reason cannot think, but that it might have been better
bestowed, then to be consumed with fire, and so to profit no man: But in such
cases Gods will is, That all creatures stoup, cover their faces, and desist
from reasoning, when commandment is given to execute his judgment. Albeit I
could adduce diverse causes of such severity, yet will I search none other then
the holy Ghost has assigned: First, That all Israel, hearing the judgment,
should fear to commit the like abomination. And secondly, That the Lord might
turn from the fury of his anger, might be moved toward the people with inward
affection, be merciful unto them, and multiply them, according to his Oath
made unto their fathers. Which reasons, as they are sufficient in Gods children
to correct the murmuring of the grudging flesh, so ought they to provoke every
man, as before I have said, to declare himself enemy to that which so highly
provokes the wrath of God against the whole people: For where Moses says, Let
the City be burned, and let no part of the spoil cleave to thy hand, that the
Lord may return from the fury of his wrath, For the Idolatry of a small number,
is Gods wrath kindle^ against the multitude not punishing the offencers.
etc. he plainly does signify, That by the defection and Idolatry of a few,
Gods wrath is kindled against the whole, which is never quenched, till such
punishment be taken upon the offenders, that whatsoever served them in their
Idolatry, be brought to destruction, because that it is execrable and accursed
before God, and therefore he will not that it be reserved for any use of his
people. I am not ignorant that this Law was not put in execution, as God
commanded; But what did thereof ensue and follow, histories declare; to wit,
Plague after plague, till Israel and Judah were led in Captivity, as the Books
of the Kings do witness. The consideration whereof makes me more bo^d to
affirm, That it is the duty of every man who desires to escape the plague and
punishment of God, To declare himself enemy to Idolatry, not only in heart,
hating the same, but also in external gesture, declaring that he lamenteth, if
he can do no more, for such abominations. Which thing was showed to the Prophet
Ezekiel, Ezekiel 9.
when he gave him to understand why he would destroy Judah with Israel; and that
he would remove his glory from the Temple and place that he had chosen, Ezekiel 8.
and 9.
and so pour forth his wrath and indignation upon the City that was full of
blood and apostasy, which became so impudent, that it durst be bold to say,
The Lord has left the earth, and sees not. And this time, I say, the Lord
revealed in vision to his Prophet, who they were that should find favor in
that miserable destruction; to wit, That those that did mourn and lament for
all the abominations done in the City, in whose foreheads did God command to
Print and Seal Tau, to the end that the destroyer, who was commanded to strike
the rest without mercy, should not hurt them in whom that sign was found. Of
these premises, I suppose it be evident, Note.
That the punishment of Idolatry does not appertain to Kings only, but also to
the whole people; yea, to every member of the same, according to his
possibility: For that is a thing most assured, That no man can mourn, lament,
and bewail, for those things which will not remove to the uttermost of his
power. If this be required of the whole people, and of every man in his
Vocation, Note.
What shall be required of you, my Lords, whom God has raised up to be Princes
and Rulers above your Brethren, whose hands he has armed with the sword of
Justice, yea, whom he has appointed to be as Bridles to repress the rage and
insolency of your Kings, whenever they pretend manifestly to transgress Gods
blessed Ordinance? An answer to an O^jection.
If any think that this my affirmation touching the punishment of Idolaters be
contrary to the practice of the Apostles, who finding the Gentiles in Idolatry,
did call them to repentance* requiring no such punishment; let the same man
understand, That the Gentiles, Why no Law was executed against the Gentiles
being Idolaters.
before the preaching of Christ, lived, as the Apostle speaks, Without God in
the World, drowned in Idolatry, according to the blindness and ignorance, in
which they were holden as a profane Nation, whom God had never openly avowed
to be his people, had never received in his household, neither given unto them
his Laws to be kept in Religion nor Policy, and therefore did not the holy
Ghost, calling them to repentance, require of them any corporal punishment,
according to the rigor of the Law, unto the which they were never subjects, as
they that were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel. But if any think,
That after that the Gentiles were called from their vain conversation, and by
embracing Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.
were received in the number of Abraham's children, and so made one people with
the Jews believing: If any think, I say, That then they were not bound to the
same obedience which God required of his people Israel, when he confirmed his
League and Covenant with them; the same appears to make Christ inferior to
Moses, and contrarious to the Law of his heavenly Father: For if the contempt
or transgression of Moses Law was worthy of death, What should we judge the
contempt of Christ's Ordinance to be? (I mean, after they be once received.) And
if Christ be not come to dissolve, but to fulfill the Law of his heavenly
Father, Shall the liberty of his Gospel be an occasion that the especial glory
of his Father be trodden under foot, and regarded of no man? God forbid. The
especial glory of God is, That such as profess themselves to be his people,
The especial honor which God requires of his people.
should hearken to his voice: And amongst all the voices of God revealed to the
world, touching punishment of vices, is none more evident, neither more severe,
then is that which is pronounced against Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.
the teachers and maintainers of the same: And therefore I fear not to affirm,
That the Gentiles (I mean, every City, Realm, Province, or Nation amongst the
Gentiles, embracing Christ Jesus, and his true Religion) be bound to the same
League and Covenant that God made with his people Israel, when he promised to
root out the Nations before them, in these words, Beware that thou make not any
Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land, Exodus 34.
to the which thou come, lest perchance that this come in ruin, that is, be
destruction to thee; but thou shall destroy their Altars, break their Idols,
and cut down their Groves: Fear no strange Gods, nor worship them, neither yet
make you sacrifice to them: But the Lord, who in his great power, and
outstretched arm has brought you out of the Land of Egypt, shall you fear,
him shall you honor, him shall you worship, to him shall you make Sacrifice,
his Statutes, Judgments, Laws, and Commandments you shall keep and observe.
This is the Covenant which I have made with you, says the Eternal, forget it
not, neither yet fear ye other gods; but fear you the Lord your God, and he
shall deliver you from the hands of all your enemies. To this same Law and
Covenant are the Gentiles no less bound, then sometime were the Jews,
whenever God does illuminate the eyes of any multitude, Province, people, or
City, and puts the sword in their own hand to remove such enormities from
amongst them, as before they knew to be abominable; Note.
then (I say) are they no less bound to purge their Dominions, Cities, and
Countries from Idolatry, then were the Israelites, what time they received the
Possession of the Land of Canaan. And moreover, I say, If any go about to erect
and set up Idolatry, or to teach defection from God, after that the verity has
been received and approved, that then not only the Magistrates, to whom the
sword is committed; but also the people are bound by that Oath, which they have
made to God, to revenge to the utmost of their power, the injury done against
his Majesty.

In universal desections, and in a general revolt, such as was in Israel
after Jeroboam, there is a diverse consideration; for then, because the whole
people were together conspired against God, there could none be found that
would execute the punishment which God had commanded, till God raised up Iehu,
whom he appointed for that purpose. And the same is to be considered in all
other general defections, such as this day be in the Papistry, where all are
blinded, and all are declined from God, and that of long continuance, so that
no ordinary Justice can be executed, but the punishment must be reserved to
God, and unto all such means as he shall appoint: But I speak of such a number
as after they have received Gods perfect Religion, do boldly profess the same,
notwithstanding, Note.
that some, or the most part fall back (as of late days was in England) unto
such a number, I say, it is lawful to punish the Idolators with death, if by
any means God give them power: For so did Joshua and Israel determine to have
done against the children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasses, for their suspected
Apostasy and defection from God. And the whole Tribes did in very deed execute
that sharp judgment against the Tribe of Benjamin for a less offense then for
Idolatry. And the same ought to be one wheresoever Christ Jesus and his
Evangell is so received in any Realm, Province, or City, that the Magistrates
and people have solemnly avowed and promised to defend the same, as under King
Edward of late days was done in England. In such places, it is not only
lawful to punish to the death, such as labor to subvert the true Religion,
but the Magistrates and people are bound so to, unless they will provoke the
wrath of God against themselves. And therefore, I fear not to affirm, That it
had been the duty of the Nobility, Judges, Rulers, and people of England, to
have resisted and gain-standed Mary their Queen, with all the sort of her
Idolatrous Priests, together with all such as should have assisted her, when
that she and they openly began to suppress Christ's Evangell, to shed the blood
of the Saints of God, and to erect that most devilish Idolatry, the
Papisticall abominations, and his usurped tyranny, which once most justly by
common Oath was banished from that Realm. But because I cannot at this present
discuss this argument as it appertains, I am compelled to omit it to better
opportunity; and so returning to your Honors, I say, That if ye confess your
selves baptized in the Lord Jesus, as of necessity ye must confess, That the
care of Religion does appertain to your charge: And if ye know that in your
hands God has put the sword, for the causes above expressed, then can ye not
deny, but that the punishment of obstinate and malapert Idolaters (such as all
your Bishops be) does appertain to your Office, if after admonition they
continue obstinate. I am not ignorant what be the vain defenses of your proud
Prelates; they claim, first, A prerogative and privilege, That they are
exempted, and that by consent of Counsels and Emperouts, from all Jurisdiction
of the Temporalty. And secondly, when they are convinced of manifest impiety,
abuses and enormities, as well in their manners, as in Religion; neither fear
nor shame they to affirm, That things so long established, cannot suddenly be
reformed, although they be corrupted; but with process of time they promise to
take order. But in few words, I answer, Note.
That no privilege granted against the Ordinance and Statutes of God is to be
observed, although all Counsels and men on the earth have appointed the same:
But against Gods Ordinance it is, That Idolaters, murderers, false Teachers,
and Blasphemers, shall be exempted from punishment, as before is declared; and
therefore in vain it is, that they claim for privilege, when God says, The
murderer shall thou drive from my Altar, that he may die the death. And as to
the Order and Reformation which they promise, that is to be looked or hoped
for, when Satan, whose children and slaves they are, can change his nature.
This answer, I doubt not, shall suffice the sober and godly reader: But yet, to
the end that they may further see their own confusion, and that your Honors
may the better understand what ye ought to do in so manifest a corruption and
defection from God, I ask of them, What assurance they have of this their
immunity, exemption or privilege? Who is the author of it? And what fruit it
has produced? God is not author of any privilege granted to the Papisticall
Bishops, that they be exempted from the power of the civil sword.
And first I say, That of God they have no assurance, neither yet can he be
proved to be author of any such privilege. But the contrary is easy to be
seen; for God in establishing his Orders in Israel, did so subject Aaron (in
his Priesthood being the figure of Christ) to Moses, that he feared not to call
him in judgment, and to constrain him to give accounts of his wicked deed in
consenting to Idolatry, as the History does plainly witness; for thus it is
written; Then Moses took the Calfe which they had made, and burned it with
fire, and did grind it to powder; Exodus 32.
and scattering it in the water, gave it to drink to the children of Israel,
declaring thereby the vanity of their Idol, and the abomination of the same:
And thereafter Moses said to Aaron, What has this people done to thee, that
thou should bring upon it so a great sin?

Thus, I say, does Moses call Aaron, and accuse him of the destruction of the
whole people; and yet he perfectly understood that God had appointed him to be
the high Priest, That he should bear upon his shoulders and upon his breast the
names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, for whom he was appointed to make
sacrifice, prayers, and supplications. He knew his dignity was so great, that
only he might enter within the most holy place; The dignity of Aaron did not
exempt him from judgment
but neither could his Office nor dignity exempt him from judgment, when he
had offended. If any object, Aaron at that time was not anointed, and therefore
was he subject to Moses; I have answered, That Moses being taught by the mouth
of God did perfectly understand to what dignity Aaron was appointed, and yet
he feared not to call him in judgment, and to compel him to make answer for
his wicked fact. But if this answer does not suffice, yet shall the Holy Ghost
witness further in the matter. Solomon removed from honor Abiathar being the
High Priest, and commanded him to cease from all function, and to live as a
private man. Now if the Unction did exempt the Priest from Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrate, Solomon did offend and injured Abiathar; for he was
Anointed, and had carried the Arc before David; But God does not reprove the
fact of Solomon, neither yet does Abiathar claim any prerogative by the reason
of his Office, but rather does the Holy Ghost approve the fact of Solomon,
saying, Solomon ejected forth Abiathar, that he should not be the Priest of the
Lord, 1 King. 2. 1 Samuel 3.
that the word of the Lord might be performed which he spoke upon the house of
Eli. And Abiathar did think that he obtained great favor, in that he did
escape the present death, which by his Conspiracy he had deserved. If any yet
reason, That Abiathar was no otherwise subject to the judgment of the King,
but as he was appointed to be the executor of that sentence, which GOD before
had pronounced, as I will not greatly deny that reason, so require I that
every man consider, That the same God who pronounced sentence against Eli and
his house, Notewell.
has pronounced also, That Idolaters, Gal. 4. 1 Timothy 3.
Whore-mongers, Murderers and Blasphemers, shall neither have portion in the
Kingdom of God, neither ought to be permitted to bear any Rule in his Church
and Congregation. Now if the Unction and Office saved not Abiathar, because
that Gods sentence must needs be performed, Can any privilege granted by man
be a Buckler to malefactors, that they shall not be subject to the punishments
pronounced by God? I think no man will be so foolish as so to affirm; for a
thing more then evident it is, That the whole Priesthood in the time of the Law
was bound to give obedience to the Civil Powers; and if any member of the same
was found criminal, the same was subject to the punishment of the Sword which
God had put into the hand of the Magistrate. And this Ordinance of his Father
did not Christ disannull, but rather did confirm the same, Math. 17.
commanding Tribute to be paid for himself and for Peter; who perfectly knowing
the mind of his Master, writes thus in his Epistle; Submit your selves to all
manner of Ordinance of man (he excepteth such as be expressly repugning to
Gods Commandment) for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. Acts 4 and 5.
whether it be to the King, as to the chief Head, or unto Rulers, as unto them
that are sent by him for punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. The same does the Apostle Saint Paul most plainly command in
these words; Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject to the Superior Powers. Which places make evident,
That neither Christ, neither his Apostles, has given any assurance of this
immunity and privilege which men of Church (as they will be termed) do this
day claim: Yea, it was a thing unknown to the Primitive Church many years after
the days of the Apostles: Chrysostom up^on Romans ^3.
For Chrysostom, who served in the Church at Constantinople four hundredth
years after Christ's Ascension, and after that corruption was greatly increased,
does yet thus write upon the foresaid words of the Apostle, Let Papists answer
Chrysostom.
This precept (says he) does not appertain to such as be called seculars
only, but even to those that be Priests and religious men: And after he
adds, Whether thou be Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, or whosoever thou be,
thou can not be excepted from this subjection. Hereof it is plain Chrysostom
did not understand that God had exempted any person from obedience and
subjection of the Civil Power, neither yet that he was Author of such
exemption and privilege, as Papists do this day claim. And the same was the
judgment and uniforme Doctrine of the Primitive Church for many years after
Christ.

Your Honors do wonder, I doubt not, from what Fountain then did this their
immunitie (as they term it) and singular privilege spring; I shall shortly
touch that, which is evident in their own Law and Histories. When the Bishops
of Rome, the very Antichrists had partly by fraud, and partly by violence
usurped the superiortie of some places in Italy, and most unjustly had spoiled
the Emperors of their Rents and possessions, and had also murdered some of
their Officers, Let their own Histories witness.
as Histories do witness, then began Pope after Pope to practice and devise,
how they should be exempted from the judgment of Princes, and from the equity
of Laws; and in this point they were most vigilant, till at length iniquity did
so prevail in their hands, according as Daniel had before prophesied of them,
that this sentence was pronouned, Neither by the Emperor, neither by the
Clergy, neither yet by the people shall the Judge be judged. The mouth of the
beast speaking great things. Distinct. 9. quest. 3.

Their Laws do witness.


God will (says Symmachus) that the causes of others be determined by men, but
without all question he has reserved the Bishop of this Seat (understanding
Rome) to his own judgment. And hereof diverse Popes, and Expositours of their
Laws would seem to give reasons; for says Agatho, All the Precepts of the
Apostolic Seat are assured, Did. 19.
as by the voice of God himself. The Author of the gloss upon this Canon,
affirms, That if all the world would pronounce sentence against the Pope,
Cap. de Translatione Titl. 7.
yet should his sentence prevail; For (says he) the Pope has a Heavenly will,
and therefore he may change the nature of things, he may apply the substance of
one thing to another, and of nothing he may make somewhat; and that sentence,
which was nothing (that is) by his mind false and unjust, he may make somewhat
that is true and just; for (says he) in all things that please him his will is
for reason; neither is there any man that may ask of him, Why do thou so?
for he may dispense above Law, and of injustice he may make justice; for he
has the fullness of all power. And many other blasphemous sentences did they
pronounce every one after other, which for shortness sake I omit, till at the
end they obtained this most horrible Decree; That, Did 40.
albeit in life and conversation they were so wicked, and detestable, that not
only they condemned themselves, but that also they drew to Hell and perdition
many thousands with them, Note the equity of this commandment
yet that none should presume to reprehend or rebuke them. This being
established for the Head (albeit not without some contradiction, for some
Emperors did require due obedience of them, as Gods Word commanded, and
ancient Bishops had given before to Emperors, and to their Laws, but Satan so
prevailed in his suite before the blind world, that the former sentences were
confirmed, which power being granted to the Head) then began provision to be
made for the rest of the members in all Realms and Countries, where they made
residence; the residence whereof we see to be this, that none of that pestilent
generation (I mean the vermin of the Papisticall Order) will be subject to any
Civil Magistrate, how enormous soever his crime be, but will be reserved to
their own Ordinary, as they term it: And what fruits have hereof ensued, be
the word never so blind, it cannot but witness; for how their Head that
Roman Antichrist has been occupied ever since the granting of such
privileges, Histories do witness, and of late the most part of Europa,
subject to the plague of God, to fire and sword, by his procurement has felt,
and this day does feel: The pride, ambition, envy, excess, fraud, spoil,
oppression, murder, filthy life and incest, that is used and maintained
amongst that rabble of Priests, Friars, Monks, Cannons, Bishops, and Cardinals,
cannot be expressed. I fear not to affirm, neither doubt I to prove, that the
Papisticall Church is further degenerate from the purity of Christ's Doctrine,
from the footsteps of the Apostles, The matter is more then evident.
and from the manners of the primitive Church, then was the Church of the Jews
from Gods holy Statutes, what time it did crucify Christ Jesus the only
Messiah, and most cruelly persecute his Apostles: And yet will our Papists
claim their privileges and ancient Liberties, which if you grant unto them, my
Lords, ye shall assuredly drink the cup of Gods vengeance with them, Whosoever
maintains the privileges of Papists, shall drink the Cup of Gods vengeance
with them.
and shall be reputed before his presence, companions of Thieves, and
maintainers of Murderers, as is before declared; for their immunity and
privilege, whereof so greatly they boast, is nothing else, but as if Thieves,
Murderers, or Briggands should conspire amongst themselves, that they would
never answer in judgment before any lawful Magistrate, to the end that their
theft and murder should not be punished; even such (I say) is their wicked
privilege, which neither they have of God the Father, neither of Christ Jesus,
who has revealed his Fathers Will to the world, neither yet of the Apostles
nor primitive Church, as before is declared: But it is a thing conspired among
themselves, to the end that their iniquity, detestable life and Tyranny may
never be repressed, Object.
nor reformed. And if they Object, That godly Emperors did grant and confirm
the same. I answer, Answ.
That the godliness of no man is or can be sufficient Authority to justify a
foolish and ungodly fact, such I mean, as God has not allowed by his Word; for
Abraham was a godly man, but the denial of his Wife was such a fact, as no
godly man ought to imitate: The same might I show of David, Hezekiah, and
Josiah, unto whom I think no man of judgment will prefer any Emperor since
Christ, in holiness and wisdom, and yet are not their facts, no even such as
appeared for good causes, to be approved nor followed. And therefore, I say, as
error and ignorance remain always with the most perfect man in his life, so
must their works be examined by another rule, then by their own holiness, if
they shall be approved.

But if this Answer does not suffice, then will I answer more shortly, That no
godly Emperor since Christ's Ascension has granted any such privilege to any
such Church or person, as they (the whole generation of Papists) be at this day.

I am not ignorant, that some Emperors of a certain zeal, and for some
considerations granted liberties to the true Church, afflicted for their
maintenance against Tyrants; but what serves this for the defense of their
Tyranny? If the Law must be understood according to the mind of the Lawgiver,
then must they prove themselves Christ's true and afflicted Church, before they
can claim any privilege to appertain to them, for only to that Church were
the privileges granted; it will not be their glorious Titles, neither yet the
long possession of the name that can prevail in this so weighty a Cause; for
all those had the Church of Jerusalem, which did crucify Christ, and did
condemn his Doctrine. We offer to prove by their fruits and Tyranny, by the
Prophets, and plain Scriptures of God, what trees and generation they be, to
wit, unfruitful and rotten, apt for nothing, but to be cut and cast into Hell
fire; yea, that they are the very kingdom of Antichrist, of whom we are
commanded to beware.

Therefore, my Lords, to return to you, seeing that God has armed your hands
with the sword of Justice, seeing that his Law most straightly commands
Idolaters and false Prophets to be punished with death, and that you be placed
above your Subjects, to reign as fathers over their Children; and further,
seeing that not only I, but with me many thousand famous, godly and learned
persons, accuse your Bishops, and the whole rabble of the Papisticall Clergy,
of Idolatry, of Murder and Blasphemy against God committed: It appertains
to your Honors to be vigilant and careful in so weighty a matter? The
question is not of earthly substance, but of the glory of God, and of the
Salvation of your selves, and of your brethren subject to your charge; in which
if you (after this plain admonition) be negligent, there rests no excuse by
reason of ignorance; for in the name of God I require of you, That the Cause of
Religion may be tried in your presence by the plain and simple Word of God;
That your Bishops be compelled to desist from their Tyranny, That they be
compelled to make answer for the neglecting of their Office for the substance
of the poor, which unjustly they usurp, and prodigally they do spend; but
principally for the false and deceivable Doctrine which is taught and defended
by their false Prophets, flattering Friars, and other such venomous Locusts:
Which thing if with single eyes ye do, (preferring Gods glory and the
Salvation of your Brethren before all wordly Commodity) then shall the same
God, who solemnly does pronounce to honor those that do honor him, pour his
benedictions plentifully upon you, he shall be your Buckler, protection and
Captain, and shall repress by his strength and wisdom, whatsoever Satan by his
supposts shall imagine against you I am not ignorant, that great troubles shall
ensue your enterprise; for Satan will not be expelled from the possession of
his usurped Kingdom without resistance: But if you (as is said) preferring Gods
glory to your own lives, unfainedly seek and study to obey his blessed will,
then shall your deliverance be such, as evidently it shall be known, That the
Angels of the Eternal do watch, make war and fight for those that unfainedly
fear the Lord. But if you refuse this my most reasonable and just Petition,
what defense that ever you appear to have before men, then shall God (whom in
me you contemn) refuse you; Deuteronomy. 28. Levit. 26.
he shall pour forth contempt upon you, and upon your posterity after you; the
spirit of boldness and wisdom shall be taken from you; your enemies shall
reign, and you shall die in bondage; yea, God shall cut down the unfruitful
trees, when they do appear most beautifully to flourish, Isai. 27. and 30.
and shall so burn the root, that after you shall neither twigge nor branch
again spring to glory. Hereof I need not to adduce unto you examples from the
former ages, and ancient histories: For your brethren the Nobility of England
are a mirror and glass, in the which ye may behold Gods just punishment; Note
this for our time.
For as they have refused him and his Evangell which once in mouth they did
profess, so has he refused them, and has taken from them the spirit of
wisdom, boldness, and of counsel; they see and feel their own misery, and
yet they have no grace to avoid it. They hate the bondage of strangers, the
pride of Priests, and the monstriferous Empire of a wicked woman, and yet are
they compelled to bow their necks to the yoke of the devil, to obey whatsoever
the proud Spaniards and misled Mary list to command; and finally, to stand like
slaves with cap in hand till the servants of Satan, the shaven sort, call them
to Council: This fruit do they reap and gather of their former rebellion and
unfaithfulness toward God; They are left confusen in their own counsels; he,
whom in his members for the pleasure of a wicked woman they have exiled,
persecuted and blasphemed, does now laugh them to scorn, suffers them to be
pined in bondage of most wicked men, and finally, shall judge them to the fire
everlasting, except that speedily and openly they repent their horrible Treason
which against God, against his Son Christ Jesus, and against the Liberty of
their own native Country they have committed. The same plagues shall fall upon
you, Note.
be you assured, if ye refuse the defense of his servants that call for your
support. My words are sharp; but consider, my Lords, that they are not mine,
but that they are the threatenings of the Omnipotent, who assuredly will perform
the voices of his Prophets, how that ever carnal men despise his admonitions.
The Sword of Gods wrath is already drawn, Let England and Scotland both advert.
which of necessity must needs strike, when grace offered is obstinately
refused. You have been long in bondage of the devil, blindness, error and
Idolatry, prevailing against the simple Truth of God in that your Realm, in
which God has made you Princes and Rulers: But now does God of his great mercy
call you to repentance, God calls to repentance before he strike in his hot
displeasure.
before he pour forth the uttermost of his vengeance: He cries to your ears,
That your Religion is nothing but Idolatry; he accuses you of the blood of his
Saints which has been shed by your permission, assistance and powers: For the
tyranny of those raging Beasts should have no force, if by your strength they
were not maintained. Papists had no force, if Princes did not maintain them.
Of those horrible crimes does now God accuse you, not of purpose to condemn
you, but mercifully to absolve and pardon you, Acts 2.
as sometime he did those whom Peter accused to have killed the Son of God, so
that ye be not of mind nor purpose to justify your former iniquity. Iniquity
I call not only the crimes and offenses which have been, and yet remain in
your manners and lives, but that also which appears before men most holy,
with hazard of my life I offer to prove abomination before God; No true servant
of God may communicate with the Papisticall Religion.
that is, your whole Religion to be so corrupt and vain, that no true servant
of God can communicate with it, because that in so doing he should manifestly
deny Christ Jesus and his Eternal Verity. I know that your Bishops,
accompanied with the swarm of the Papisticall vermin, shall cry, A damned
heretic ought not to be heard. But remember, my Lords, what I protested in the
beginning, upon which ground I continually stand; An answer to the Objection,
That an heretic ought not to be heard.
to wit, That I am no heretic, nor deceivable Teacher; but the servant of
Christ Jesus, a Preacher of his infallible Verity, innocent in all that they
can lay to my charge concerning my Doctrine; and therefore by them, being
enemies to Christ, I am unjustly condemned: From which cruel Sentence I have
appealed, and do appeal, as before mention is made; in the mean time most
humbly requiring your Honors to take me in your protection, to be auditors of
my just defenses, granting unto me the same liberty which Achab, a wicked King,
and Israel at that time a blinded people, granted to Elijah in the like case;
That your Bishops, and the whole rabble of your Clergy, 1 Kings 13.
may be called before you, and before that people whom they have deceived; That
I be not condemned by multitude, custom, by Authority or Law devised by man;
but that God himself may be judge betwixt me and my adversaries: Let God, I
say, speak by his Law, by his Prophets, by Christ Jesus, or by his Apostles,
and so let him pronounce what Religion he approves; and then, be my enemies
never so many, and appear they never so strong and so learned, no more do I
fear victory, then did Elijah, being but one man, against the multitude of
Baals Priests. And if they think to have advantage by their Counsels and
Doctors, this I further offer, Touching Councels and Doctors.
To admit the one and the other as witnesses in all matters debatable, three
things (which justly cannot be denied) being granted unto me: First, That the
most ancient Counsels nighest to the Primitive Church, in which the learned
and godly Fathers did examine all matters by Gods Word, may be holden of most
Authority. Secondly, That no determination of Counsels nor man be admitted
against the plain Verity of Gods Word, nor against the determination of those
four chief Counsels, whose Authority has been and is holden by them equal
with the Authority of the four Evangelists. And last, That to no Doctor be
given greater authority, then Augustine requires to be given to his Writings;
In prologo Retract.
to wit, If he plainly prove not his affirmation by Gods infallible Word, that
then his sentence be rejected, and imputed to the error of a man.

These things granted and admitted, I shall no more refuse the testimonies of
Counsels and Doctors, then shall my adversaries. But and if they will justify
those Counsels which maintain their pride and usurped Authority, and will
reject those which plainly have condemned all such tyranny, negligence, and
wicked life as Bishops now do use: And if further they will snatch a doubtful
sentence of a Doctor, and refuse his mind when he speaks plainly; then will
I say, That all men are liars, That credit ought not to be given to an
unconstant witness; and that no Counsels ought to prevail, nor be admitted
against the sentence which God has pronounced.

And thus, my Lords, in few words to conclude, I have offered unto you a trial
of my innocence: I have declared unto you what God requires of you, being
placed above his people as Rulers and Princes: I have offered unto you, and to
the inhabitants of the Realm, the Verity of Christ Jesus: And with the hazard
of my life I presently offer to prove the Religion which amongst you is
maintained by fire and sword to be false, damnabl^, and diabolical. Which
things if ye refuse, defending tyrants in their tyranny, then I dare not
flatter, but as it was commanded to Ezechiel boldly to proclaim; Ezech. 33.
so must I cry to you, That you shall perish in your iniquity, That the Lord
Jesus shall refuse so many of you as maliciously withstand his eternal Verity,
Mat. 24. and 26.
and in the day of his apparition, when all flesh shall appear before him,
that he shall repel you from his company, and shall command you to the fire
which never shall be quenched; Dan. 12. Mat 25.
and then neither shall the multitude be able to resist, neither yet the
counsels of man be able to prevail against that sentence which he shall
pronounce.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of his holy Spirit, so
rule and dispose of your hearts, that of simplicity ye may consider the things
that be offered; and that ye may take such order in the same, as God in you may
be glorified, and Christ's Flock by you may be edified and comforted, to the
praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Omnipotent Spirit rule your
hearts in his true fear to the end. Amen.
The Admonition of John Knox to the Commonalty of Scotland
To his beloved Brethren the Commonalty of SCOTLAND: JOHN KNOX wishes Grace,
Mercy, and Peace; With the Spirit of righteous judgment.
WHat I have required of the Queen Regent, States and Nobility, as of the chief
Heads (for this present) of the Realm, I cannot cease to require of you (dearly
beloved brethren) which be the Communalty and Body of the same; to wit, That it
(notwithstanding that false and cruel Sentence which your disguised Bishops
have pronounced against me) would please you to be so favorable unto me, as to
be indifferent auditors of my just Purgation: Which to do if God earnestly move
your hearts, as I nothing doubt but that your enterprise shall redound to the
praise and glory of his holy Name; so am I assured, That ye and your posterity
shall by that means receive most singular comfort, edification and profit: For
when ye shall hear the matter debated, ye shall easily perceive and understand
upon what ground and foundation is builded that Religion which amongst you is
this day defended by fire and sword. As for mine own conscience, I am most
assuredly persuaded, That whatsoever is used in the Papisticall Church, is
altogether repugning to Christ's blessed Ordinance, and is nothing but mortal
venom; of which whosoever drinks, I am assuredly persuaded that therewith he
drinks death and damnation, except by true conversion unto God he be purged
from the same. But because that long silence of Gods Word has begotten
ignorance almost in all sorts of men; and ignorance joined with long custom,
has confirmed superstition in the hearts of many, I therefore, Note.
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, desire audience, as well of you the
Commonalty, my brethren, as of the States and Nobility of the Realm, that in
public Preaching I may have place amongst you at large to utter my mind in
all matters of controversy this day in Religion. Petition.
And further I desire, That ye, concurring with your Nobility, would competl
your Bishops and Clergy to cease their tyranny: And also, That for the better
assurance and instruction of your conscience, ye would compel your said
Bishops and false Teachers to answer by the Scriptures of God to such
Objections and crimes, as shall be laid against their vain Religion, false
Doctrine, wicked life, and slanderous conversation. Here I know that it shall
be objected, That I require of you a thing most unreasonable; to wit, That ye
should call your Religion in doubt, which has been approved and established by
so long continuance, and by the consent of so many men before you. But I
shortly answer, That neither is the long continuance of time, neither yet the
multitude of men a sufficient approbation, which God will allow for our
Religion; For as some of the ancient Writers do witness, neither can long
process of time justify an error, neither can the multitude of such, as
follow it, change the nature of the same; Answer to an Objection.
But if it was an error in the beginning, so is it in the end, and the longer
that it be followed, and the mo that do receive it, it is more pestilent, and
more to be avoided: For if antiquity or multitude of men could justify any
Religion, Lactant. Firmian. Tertullian. Cyprian.
then was the Idolatry of the Gentiles, and now is the abomination of the
Turks, good Religion; For antiquity approved the one, and a multitude has
received, and does defend the other: But otherwise to answer, godly men may
wonder from what Fountain such a sentence does flow, that no man ought to try
his faith and Religion by Gods Word, but that he safely may believe and follow
every thing, which antiquity and multitude have approved; John 5. and 7.
the Spirit of God does otherwise teach us; for the wisdom of God, Christ
Jesus himself, remitted his adversaries to Moses and the Scriptures, to try by
them whether his Doctrine were of God, or not: The Apostles Paul and Peter
command men to try the Religion which they profess, Acts 17. 2 Pet. 1. 1 John
4.
by Gods plain Scriptures, and do praise men for so doing; Saint John
straightly commands, That we believe not every spirit, but to try the
spirits whether they be of God, or not. Now seeing that these evident
testimonies of the holy Ghost will us to try our faith and Religion by the
plain Word of God; wonder it is that the Papists will not be content that their
Religion and Doctrine come under the trial of the same. If this sentence of
Christ be true (as it is most true, seeing it springs from the verity it
self) Who so does evil hates the Light, neither will he come to the Light,
John 3.
lest that his works be manifested and rebuked, then do our Papists by their
own sentence condemn themselves and their Religion; for in so far as they
refuse examination and trial, they declare that they know some fault which the
Light will utter; which is a cause of their fear, and why they claim that
privilege, that no man dispute of their Religion; Why Papists will not dispute
of the ground of their Religion. Mahomet and the Pope do agree.
the Verity and Truth being of the nature of fine purified Gold, does not fear
the trial of the Furnace; but the stubble and Chafe of man's inventions (such
is their Religion) may not abide the the flame of fire. True it is, that
Mahomet pronounced this sentence, That no man should in pain of death dispute
or reason of the ground of his Religion; which Law to this day (by the art of
Satan) is observed amongst the Turks, to their mortal blindness and
horrible blaspheming of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and of his true Religion;
And from Mahomet or rather from Satan the father of all lies) has the Pope
and his rabble learned this former lesson; to wit, Their Religion should not be
disputed upon, but what the fathers have believed, that ought and must the
Children approve; and in so divising Satan lacked not his foresight, for no one
thing has more established the kingdom of that Roman Antichrist, then this
most wicked decree; to wit, That no man was permitted to reason of his power,
or to call his Laws in doubt: This is most assured, that whenever the
Papisticall Religion shall come to examination, it shall be found to have no
other ground, then has the religion of Mahomet; to wit, man's invention, device
and dreams overshaddowed with some color of Gods Word: And therefore Brethren,
seeing that the Religion is to man, as the stomach to the body, which if it be
corrupted, does infect the whole Members, it is necessary that the same be
examined; and if it be found replenished with pestilent humors, (I mean with
the fantasies of men) then of necessity it is, that those be purged, else
shall your bodies and souls perish for ever: Note.
For of this I would ye were most certainly persuaded, Reformation of Religion
belongs to all that hope for life everlasting.
that a corrupt Religion defiles the whole life of man, appear it never so
holy. Neither would I that ye should esteem the Reformation and care of
Religion less to appertain to you, because ye are no Kings, Rulers, Judges,
Nobles, nor in Authority; beloved Brethren, ye are Gods Creatures, Romans 1.
created and formed to his own Image and similitude, for whose redemption was
shed the most precious blood of the only beloved Son of God, to whom he has
commanded his Gospel and glad-tydings to be preached, and for whom he has
prepared the heavenly Inheritance, so that ye will not obstinatly refuse, and
disdainfully contemn the means which he has appointed to obtain the same; to
wit, his blessed Evangell, which now he offers unto you, to the end that ye
may be saved: For the Gospel and glad Tidings of the Kingdom truly preached,
Romans 1.
is the power of God to the salvation of every Believer, which to credit and
receive your the Communalty are no less addebted, then be your Rulers and
Princes; The subject is no less bound to believe in Christ, then is the King.
for albeit God has put and ordained distinction and difference betwixt the
King and Subjects, betwixt the Rulers and the Common People in the Regiment and
Administration of Civil Policies, yet in the hope of the life to come he has
made all equal; for as in Christ Jesus the Jew has no greater Prerogative
then has the Gentile, Gal 3.
the man then has the woman, the learned then the unlearned, the Lord then the
servant, but all are one in him, so is there but one way and means to attain to
the participation of his benefits and spiritual graces, which is a lively
faith, working by charity; and therefore I say, that it does no less
appertain to you, beloved Brethren, to be assured that your faith and Religion
be grounded and established upon the true and undoubted Word of God, then to
your Princes or Rulers: For as your bodies cannot escape corporal death, if
with your Princes ye eat or drink deadly poison (although it be by ignorance
or negligence;) so shall ye not escape the everlasting, if with them ye
profess a corrupt Religion; yea, except in heart ye believe, and with mouth ye
confess the Lord Jesus to be the only Savior of the world, (which ye cannot
do, Abac. 2. Mark 16. John 3.
except ye embrace his Evangell offered) ye cannot escape death and damnation:
For as the just lives by his own faith, so does the unfaithful perish by his
infidelity: And as true faith is engendered, nourished, and maintained in the
hearts of Gods Elect, by Christ's Evangell truly preached; so is infidelity and
unbelief fostered by concealing and repressing the same. And thus if ye look
for the life everlasting, ye must try if ye stand in faith, and if ye would be
assured of a true and lively faith, ye must needs have Christ Jesus truly
preached unto you. And this is the cause (dear Brethren) that so often I repeat,
and so constantly I affirm, That to you it does not less appertain, then to
you King or Princes, to provide that Christ Jesus be truly preached amongst
you, seeing that without his true knowledge, can neither of you both attain to
Salvation: And this is the point, wherein (I say) all men are equal, That all
are descended from Adam, Wherein all men are equal
by whose sin and inobedience did death enter into the world, so it behoved all
that shall obtain life, to be ingrafted in one, that is, in the Lord Jesus, who
being the just servant, Rom 5. Isa 53. John 3 and 5.
does by his knowledge justify many; to wit, all that unfainedly believe in
him. Of this equality, and that, God requires no less of the subject, be he
never so poor, then of the Prince and rich man in matters of Religion, he has
given an evident declaration in the Law of Moses; for when the Tabernacle was
builded, erected, and set in order, God did provide, how it and the things
pertaining to the same, should be sustained, so that they should not fall in
decay: And this provision (albeit heaven and earth obey his Empire) would he
not take from the secret and hid Treasures which lie dispersed in the veins of
the earth, Exodus 30.
neither yet would he take it from the rich and potent of the people; but he
did command, That every one of the sons of Israel (were he rich or were he
poor) that came in count from 20 years and upward, should yearly pay half a
Sickle for an oblation to the Lord, in the remembrance of their Redemption, and
for an expiation or cleansing of their souls, which money God commanded should
be bestowed upon the Ornaments and necessaries of the Tabernacle of Testimony.
He furthermore added a Precept, That the rich should give no more for that use,
and in that behalf, then should the poor; neither yet that the poor should give
any less then should the rich in that consideration. This law, to man's reason
and judgment, may appear very unreasonable; for some rich man might have given
a thousand sickles with less hurt of his substance, then some poor man might
have paid the half Sickle: And yet God makes all equal, and will that the
one shall pay no more then the other, neither yet the poor less then the rich;
This Law (I say) may appear very unequal: But if the cause which God adds be
observed, we shall find in the same the great mercy and inestimable wisdom of
God to appear, which cause is expressed in these words; Exodus 30.
This money received from the children of Israel, thou shall give in for the
service of the Tabernacle, that it may be to the clildren of Israel for a
remembrance before the Lord, that he may be merciful to your souls. This cause
(I say) does evidently declare, That as the whole multitude was delivered from
the bondage of Egypt by the mighty power of God alone; so was every member of
the same (without respect of persons) sanctified by his grace, the richest (in
that behalf) nothing preferred before the poorest: For by no merit and
worthiness of man was he moved to choose and to establish his habitation and
dwelling amongst them; but their felicity, prerogative and honor which they
had above all other Nations, proceeded only from the fountain of his eternal
goodness, who loved them freely, as he freely had chosen them to be a priestly
kingdom, and holy people from all Nations of the earth: Thus to honor them
that he would dwell in the midst of them, he neither was moved (I say) by the
wisdom of the wise, by the riches of the potent, Exodus 19.
neither yet by the virtue and holiness of any state amongst them, but of mere
goodness did he love them, and with his presence did he honor the whole
people, and therefore to paint out the same his common love to the whole
multitude, and to cut off occasions of contention, and doubts of conscience, he
would receive no more from the rich, then from the poor, for the maintenance of
that his tabernacle, by the which was represented his presence and habitation
amongst them. If the rich had been preferred to the poor, then as the one
should have been puffed up with pride, The presence of God represented in the
Tabernacle.
as that he had been more acceptable to God by reason of his greater gift, so
should the conscience of the other have been troubled and wounded, thinking
that his poverty was an impediment that he could not stand in so perfect favor
with God, as did the other, because he was not able to give so much, as did the
rich, to the maintenance of his Tabernacle: But he, who of mercy (as is said)
did choose his habitation amongst them, and also that best knows what lies
within man, did provide the remedy for the one, and for the other, making them
equal in that behalf, who in other things were most unequal. If the poor
should have found himself grieved by reason of that tax, and that as much was
imposed upon him as upon the Rich, yet had he no small cause of joy, that God
himself would please to compare him, Heb. 9.
and to make him equal (in the maintenance of his Tabernacle) to the most rich
and potent in Israel. If this equality was commanded by God for maintenance of
that transitory tabernacle, which was but a shadow of a better to come; is not
the same required of us, who now have the verity, which is Christ Jesus? who
being clad with our nature, is made Immanuel, that is, God with us; Whose
natural body, Isa 8. Act. 3. Mat. 28.
albeit it be received into the Heavens, where he must abide till all be
complete that is forespoken by the Prophets, yet has he promised to be present
with us to the end of the world. And for that purpose, and for the more
assurance of his Promise, he has erected amongst us here in earth the Signs
of his own presence with us, his spiritual Tabernacle, the true preaching of
his Word, The spiritual Tabernacle and signs of Christ^ pre*
and right administration of his Sacraments; to the maintenance whereof is no
less bound the subject then the Prince, the poor then the rich: For as the
Price, which was given for man's redemption, is one, so God requires of all
that shall be partakers of the benefits of the same, a like duty which is a
plain confession, That by Christ Jesus alone we have received, whatsoever was
lost in Adam. Of the Prince does God require, That he refuse himself, and that
he follow Christ Jesus; of the Subject he requires the same. Of the Kings and
Judges it is required, That they kiss the Son; that is, give honor,
subjection and obedience to him: and from such reverence does not God exempt
the Subject that shall be saved; and this is, That equality which is betwixt
the kings and subjects, the most rich or noble, and betwixt the poorest and men
of lowest state; to wit, That as the one is obliged to believe in heart, and
with mouth to confess the Lord Jesus to be the only Savior of the world, so
also is the other. Neither is there any of Gods children (who has attained to
the years of discretion) so poor, but that he has thus much to bestow upon the
Ornaments and maintenance of their spiritual Tabernacle, when necessity
requires; neither yet is there any so rich, of whose hands God requires any
more: 1 Par. 29. 2 Par. 3.4. and 5. 2 Par. 29.30. and 35.
For albeit that David gathered great substance for the building of the Temple,
that Solomon with earnest diligence and incredible expenses erected and
finished the same, That Hezekiah and Josiah purged the Religion which before
was corrupted: yet to them was God no further debtor in that respect, then he
was to the most simple of the faithful posterity of faithful Abraham; for
their diligence, zeal and works gave rather testimony and confession before
men, 1 Par. 29. 2 Par. 3.4, and 5. 2 Par. 29.30, and 35.
what honor they did bear to God; what love to his Word; what reverence to his
Religion, then that any work proceeding from them did either establish, or yet
increase Gods favor toward them, who freely did love them in Christ his Son,
before the foundation of the world was laid: So that these forenamed, by their
notable works, gave testimony of their unfeigned faith; and the same does the
poorest, that unfainedly and openly professes Christ Jesus, and does embrace
his glad tidings offered, That does abhor Superstition, and fly from Idolatry.
The poorest, I say, and most simple that this day on earth, in the days of
this cruel persecution firmly believes in Christ, and boldly does confess
him before this wicked generation, Note.
is no less acceptable before God, neither is judged in his presence to have
done any less in promoting Christ his Cause, then is the King, that by his
sword and power which he has received of God, rooteth out Idolatry, and so
advances Christ's glory. But to return to our former purpose: It is no less
required, I say, of the subject to believe in Christ, and to profess his true
Religion, then of the Prince and King: And therefore I affirm, That in Gods
presence it shall not excuse you to allege, That ye were no chief Rulers,
and therefore that the care and reformation of Religion did not appertain unto
you.

Ye, dear brethren (as before is said) are the creatures of God created to his
own Image and similitude; Matthew. 17.
to whom it is commanded, To hear the voice of your heavenly Father, To embrace
his Son Christ Jesus, To fly from all doctrine and Religion which he has not
approved by his own Will, revealed to us in his most blessed Word. To which
Precepts and Charges if ye be found inobedient, ye shall perish in your
iniquity as rebels and stubborn servants, that have no pleasure to obey the
good Will of their Sovereign Lord, who most lovingly does call for your
obedience: And therefore, brethren, in this behalf, it is your part to be
careful and diligent: Note.
For the question is not of things temporal, which although they be
endangered, yet by diligence and process of time may after be redressed; but
it is of the damnation of your bodies and souls, and of the loss of life
everlasting; which once lost, can never be recovered. And therefore I say, That
it behooves you to be careful and diligent in this so weighty a matter, lest
that ye, contemning this occasion which God now offers, find not the like,
although that after with groaning and sobs ye languish for the same. And that
ye be not ignorant of what occasion I mean, in few words I shall express it.

Not only I, The offer of John Knox to hi^ native Realm.
but with me also diverse other godly and learned men, do offer unto you our
labors, faithfully to instruct you in the ways of the eternal our God, and
in the sincerity of Christ's Evangell, which this day, by the pestilent
Generation of Antichrist (I mean by the Pope, and by his most ungodly Clergy)
are almost hid from the eyes of men: We offer to jeopard our lives for the
salvation of your souls, and by manifest Scriptures to prove that Religion that
amongst you is maintained by fire and sword, to be false, vain and diabolical.
We require nothing of you, but that patiently ye will hear our Doctrine, which
is not ours, but the Doctrine of salvation revealed to the world by the only
Son of God; And that ye will examine our reasons, What he requires.
by the which we offer to prove the Papisticall Religion to be abominable
before God: And last, we require, That by your power the tyranny of those
cruel beasts (I mean of Priests and Friars) may be bridled till we have
uttered our minds in all matters this day debatable in Religion: If these
things in the fear of God ye grant to me, and unto others that unfainedly for
your salvation, and for Gods glory require the same, I am assured, That of God
ye shall be blessed, whatsoever Satan shall devise against you. But and if ye
contemn or refuse God, who thus lovingly offers unto you salvation and life,
ye shall neither escape plagues Temporal which shortly shall apprehend you,
neither yet the torment prepared for the devil and for his angels, except by
your speedy repentance ye return to the Lord, whom now ye refuse, if that ye
refuse the Messengers of his Word.

An answer to two questions.
But yet I think ye doubt what ye ought and may do in this so weighty a matter.
In few words I will declare my conscience in the one, and in the other: Ye
ought to prefer the glory of God, and the promoting of Christ his Evangell, and
the salvation of your souls, to all things that be in the earth: And ye,
although ye be but subjects, may lawfully require of your Superiors, be it of
your King, be it of your Lords, Rulers and Powers, That they provide for you
true Preachers, Subjects may lawfully require true Preachers of the^r Rulers.
and that they expel such as under the name of Pastors, devour and destroy the
Flock, not feeding the same as Christ Jesus has commanded: And if in this
point your Superiors be negligent, or yet pretend to maintain tyrants in their
tyranny, most justly ye may provide true Teachers for your selves, Pastors
according to the mind and heart of God, by whom you may be fed with that most
comfortable food of your souls, Christ's Evangell truly preached: Ye may
moreover, in a peaceable manner, without sedition, withold the fruits and
profits which your false Bishops and Clergy most unjustly receive of you, unto
such time as they shall faithfully do their charge and duties, which is, To
preach unto you Christ Jesus truly, rightly to minister the Sacraments
according to his own Institution; and so to watch for the salvation of your
souls, John 21. Acts 20.
as is commanded by Christ Jesus himself, and by his Apostles Paul and Peter.
If God shall move your hearts in his true fear to begin to practice these
things, and to demanded and crave the same of your Superiors, which most
lawfully ye may do, then I doubt not but of his great mercy, and free grace, he
will illuminate the eyes of your minds, that his undoubted Verity will be a
Lantern to your feet, to guide and lead you in all the ways which godly
wisdom does approve; he will make your enemies tremble before your faces; he
will establish his Evangell amongst you, to the salvation and perpetual
comfort of your selves, and of your posterity after you. But and if (as God
forbid) the love of friends, the fear of your Princes, Things that may draw men
back from the sincerity of Christ's Evangell.
and the wisdom of the world draw you back from God, and from his Son Christ
Jesus, be ye certainly persuaded, That ye shall drink the cup of his Vengeance;
so many, I mean, as shall contemn and despise this loving calling of your
heavenly Father. It will not excuse you (dear brethren) in the presence of God,
neither yet will it avail you in the day of his visitation, to say, We were but
simple subjects, we could not redress the faults and crimes of our Rulers,
Bishops and Clergy: We called for Reformation, and wished for the same; but
Lords brethren were Bishops, their sons were Abbots, and the friends of great
men had the possession of the Church, and so were we compelled to give
obedience to all that they demanded. These vain excuses, I say, will nothing
avail you in the presence of God, who requires no less of the subjects, then
of their Rulers; That they decline from evil, and that they do good; that they
abstain from Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy, Murder, and other such like
horrible crimes which his Law forbids, and yet nevertheless are openly
committed and maliciously defended in that miserable Realm. And if ye think
that ye are innocent, because ye are not the chief actors of such iniquity, ye
are utterly deceived; for God does not only punish the chief offenders, but
with them does he condemn the consenters to such iniquity; and all are judged
to consent, Romans 2.
that knowing impiety committed, give no testimony that the same displeases
them. Note.
To speak this matter more plain, As your Princes and Rulers are criminal with
your Bishops of all Idolatry committed, and of all the innocent blood that is
shed for the testimony of Christ's Truth; Princes and Bishops are alike
criminal. How subjects offend with their Princes.
and that because they maintain them in their tyranny: so are you (I mean so
many of you as give no plain confession to the contrary) criminal and guilty
with your Princes and Rulers in the same crimes, because ye assist and maintain
your Princes in their blind rage, and give no declaration that their tyranny
displeases you. Genesis 7. and 19.
This Doctrine, I know, is strange to the blind world; but the verity of it
has been declared in all notable punishments from the beginning. When the
original world perished by water; when Sodom and Gomorra were consumed by
fire; and finally, Josephus Egesippus.
when Jerusalem was horribly destroyed; Does any man think that all were alike
wicked before the world? Evident it is that they were not, if they be judged
according to their external facts; for some were young, and could not be
oppressors, neither yet could defile themselves with unnatural and beastly
lusts: Some were pitiful, and gentle of nature, and did not thirst for the
blood of Christ, nor of his Apostles: But did any escape the plagues and
vengeance which did apprehend the multitude? Let the Scriptures witness, and
the Histories be considered, which plainly do testify, That by the waters all
flesh in earth at that time did perish; ( Noah and his family reserved) That
none escaped in Sodom, and in the other Cities adjacent, except Lot and his
two daughters. And evident it is, That in that famous City Jerusalem, in that
last and horrible destruction of the same, none escaped Gods vengeance, except
so many as before were dispersed. And what is the cause of this severity,
seeing that all were not alike offenders, let the flesh cease to dispute with
God, and let all men by these examples learn betimes to fly, and avoid the
society and company of the proud contemners of God, if that they list not to be
partakers of their plagues. The cause is evident, if we can be subject without
grudging to Gods judgments, which in themselves are most holy and just: For in
the original world none was found, that either did resist tyranny and
oppression that universally was used, nor yet that earnestly reprehended the
same. In Sodom was none found that did gain stand that furious and beastly
multitude that did compass about and besiege the house of Lot: None would
believe Lot, that the City should be destroyed. And finally, in Jerusalem was
found none that studied to repress the tyranny of the Priests, who were
conjured against Christ and his Evangell; but all fainted (I except ever such
as gave witness with their blood, or their flying, That such impiety
displeased them) all kept silence; by the which all approved iniquity, and
joined hands with the tyrannts, and so were all arrayed and set, as it had been
in one Battle, against the Omnipotent, and against his Son Christ Jesus: For
whosoever gathers not with Christ in the day of his Harvest, is judged to
scatter; And therefore of one vengeance temporal were they all partakers.
Which thing, as before I have touched, ought to move you to the deep
consideration of your duties in these last and most perilous times. The
iniquity of your Bishops is more then manifest; their filthy lives infect the
air; the innocent blood which they shed, cries vengeance in the ears of our
God; the idolatry and abomination which openly they commit, and without
punishment maintain, does corrupt and defile the whole Land, and none amongst
you do unfainedly study for any redress of such enormities. Will God in this
behalf hold you as innocents? Be not deceived, dear brethren; God has punished
not only the proud tyrants, filthy persons, and cruel murderers, but also
such as with them did draw the yoke of iniquity, was it by flattering their
offenses, What subjects shall God punish with their Princes.
obeying their unjust commandments, or in winking at their manifest iniquity.
All such, I say, God once punished with the chief offenders. Be ye assured,
brethren, that as he is immutable of nature, so will he not pardon you in that
which he has punished in others; and now the less, because he has plainly
admonished you of the dangers to come, and has offered you his mercy before he
pour forth his wrath and displeasure upon the inobedient.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the father of glory, and God
of all consolation, give you the spirit of wisdom, and open unto you the
knowledge of himself, by the means of his dear Son, by the which ye may attain
to the esperance and hope, That after the troubles of this transitory life, ye
may be partakers of the glorious Inheritance which is prepared for such as
refuse themselves, and fight under the Banner of Christ Jesus in the day of
this his Battle: That in deep consideration of the same, ye may learn to
prefer the invisible and eternal joys, to the vain pleasures that are
present. God further grant you his holy Spirit, righteously to consider what I,
in his Name, have required of your Nobility, and of the subjects, and move all
together so to answer, that my Petition be not a testimony of your just
condemnation, when the Lord Jesus shall appear to revenge the blood of his
Saints, and the contempt of his most holy Word. Amen.

Sleep not in sin; for vengeance is prepared against the inobedient.
Fly from Babylon, if ye will not be partakers of her plagues.
Grace be with you.

Your Brother to command in godliness, JOHN KNOX.
Be witness to my Appellation. The 4. of July, 1558.
A faithful ADMONITION made by JOHN KNOX, To the true Professors of the Gospel
of CHRIST within the Kingdom of England. 1554.
John Knox wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace from GOD the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with the perpetual Comfort of the Holy Ghost to be with you for
ever and ever, dear Brethren, the afflicted Members of Christ's Church in
England.
HAving no less desire to comfort such as now be in trouble within the Realm
of England, (and specially you for many causes most dear to me) then has the
natural Father to ease the grief and pain of his dearest Child; I have
considered with my self, what argument or parcel of Gods Scriptures was most
convenient and meet to be handled for your consolation in these most dark and
dolorous days: A note made upon the sending of Christ's Disciples to the Sea,
the miraculous feeding of the people.
And so (as for the same purpose I was turning my Book) I chanced to see a Note
in the Margin written thus in Latin, Videas Anglia, Let England beware; which
Note when I had considered, I found, that the matter written in my Book in
Latin, was this, Seldom it is that God works any notable work to the
comfort of his Church, but that trouble, fear, and labor comes upon such as
God has used for his Servants and Workmen; and also tribulation most commonly
follows that Church were Christ Jesus is most truly preached. This Note was
made upon a place of Scripture written in the fourteenth Chapter of Saint
Matthews Gospel; which place declares, That after Christ Jesus had used the
Apostles as Ministers and Servants to feed (as it had been by their hands) five
thousand men, beside women and children, with five Barley Loaves and two
Fishes; he sent them to the Sea, commanding them to pass over before him to
the other side. Which thing as they attempted to obey, What chanced to Christ's
disciples after the feeding of the people in the desert.
and for the same purpose did travel and row forth in the Sea, the night
approached, the wind was contrary, the vehement and raging storm arose, and
was like to overthrow their poor Boat and them. When I considered (as dolor
and my simplicity would suffer) the circumstances of the Text, I began to
reckon and ask account of my self (and as God knows, not without sorrow and
sobs) whether at any time I had been so plain by my tongue, as God had opened
his holy Will and Wisdom in that matter unto me, as mine own Pen and Note bear
witness to my conscience: And shortly it came to my mind, that the same place
of Scripture I had handled in your presences, when God gave opportunity and
time for you to hear Gods Messenger speak the words of eternal life.
Wherefore I thought nothing more expedient, then shortly to call to mind
again such things as then I trust were touched; albeit peradventure neither of
me so plainly uttered, neither of you so plainly perceived, as these most
dolorous days declare the same to us.

It shall not be necessary to handle the Text word by word, but of the whole
sum to gather certain Notes and Observations, (which shall not far disagree
from the state of these days) it shall be sufficient. And first it is to be
observed, The first Note
That after this great miracle that Christ had wrought, John 6. Matthew. 14.
he neither would retain with himself the multitude of people whom he had fed,
neither yet his disciples; but the one he sent away every man to return to his
place of accustomed residence, and the others he sent to the danger of the
Seas, not as he that was ignorant what should chance unto them, but knowing and
foreseeing the Tempest, yea and appointing the same so to trouble them.

Christ suffers not his sheep and Pastors to be dispersed and troubled, but
for cause reasonable.
It is not to be judged, That the only and true Pastor would remove and send
away from him the wandering and weak sheep; neither yet that the only
provident Governor and Guide would set out his rude Warriors to so great a
jeopardie, without sufficient and most just cause.

Why Christ removed and sent away from him the people, the Evangelist Saint
John declares, saying, When Jesus knew that they were come to take him, John 6.
that they might make him King, he passed secretly (or alone) to the Mountain.
Whereof it is plain what chiefly moved Christ to send away the people from him,
Why Christ sent away the people from him.
because that by him they sought a carnal and worldly liberty, regarding
nothing his Heavenly Doctrine of the Kingdom of God his Father, which before he
had taught and declared unto them plainly, Matthew. 10.
showing them, That such as would follow him must suffer for his Names sake
persecution, must be hated of all men, must deny themselves, must be sent forth
as sheep among Wolves: But no part of this doctrine pleased them, or could
enter into their hearts, but their whole mind was upon their bellies, for
sufficing whereof they devised and imagined, that they would appoint Christ
Jesus to be their worldly King; John 6.
for he had power to multiply bread at his pleasure. Which vain opinion and
imagination perceived by Christ Jesus, he withdrew himself from their company,
to avoid all such suspicion, and to let them understand, Matthew. 20.
That no such honors did agree with his Vocation, who came to serve, and not
to be served: And when this same people sought him again, John. 6.
he sharply rebuked them, because they sought him more to have their Bellies
fed with corruptible meat, then to have their souls nourished with lively Bread
that came down from Heaven. And thus in the people there was just cause why
Christ should withdraw himself from them for a time.

Why the Disciples should suffer that great danger, fear and anguish, Saint
Mark in his Gospel plainly shows, Mark 6.
saying, That their hearts were blinded, and therefore did neither remember nor
consider the miracle of the Loaves: That is, Albeit with their hands they had
touched that bread by which so great a multitude was fed; The disciples did not
rightly consider Christ's work.
and albeit also they had gathered up twelve Baskets full of that which
remained of a few Loaves, which before the Miracle a Boy was able to have
borne; yet did they not rightly consider the infinite power of Christ's Jesus by
this wonderful Miracle: Note.
And therefore of necessity it was, that in their own Bodies they should
suffer trouble for their better instruction.

When I deeply consider (dearly beloved in our Savior Christ) how abundantly,
and how miraculously the poor and small flock of Christ Jesus was fed within
the Realm of England under that elect and chosen Vessel of God to glory and
honor Edward the sixth; and now again behold not only the dispersion and
scattering abroad, but also the appearing destruction of the same, under these
cursed, cruel and abominable Idolaters, me think I see the same causes to
have moved God, not only to withdraw his presence from the multitude, but also
to have sent his welbeloved servants to the travels of the Seas, wherein they
were sore tossed and turmoyled, and apparently most like to perish.

What were the affections of the greatest multitude that followed the Gospel in
this former rest and abundance, is easy to be judged, if the life and
conversation of every man should have been thoroughly examined: For who lived
(in that rest) as that he had refused himself? Note this for our time.
Who lived in that rest, as that he had been crucified with Christ? Who lived
in that rest, as that he had certainly looked for trouble to come upon him?
Yea, who lived not rather in delicacy and joy, and seeking the world and
pleasures thereof, caring for the flesh and carnal appetites, as though death
and sin had clean been devoured? Note.
And what was this else, then to make of Christ an earthly King? John 18.
The Word that we professed daily cried in our ears; that our Kingdom; our
joy, our rest and felicity, neither was, is, nor should be upon the earth,
neither in any transitory thing thereof, but in heaven, into which we must
enter by many tiibulations. Act. 14.
But (alas) we sleeped in such security, that the sound of the Trumpet could
of many never be perfectly understood, but always we persuaded our selves of a
certain tranquillity, as though the troubles whereof mention is made within the
Scriptures of God, appertained nothing at all to this age, but unto such as of
long time are passed before us: and therefore was our heavenly Father compelled
to withdraw from us the presence of his verity (whose voice in those days we
could not believe) to the end that more earnestly we may thirst for the same,
and with more obedience embrace and receive it, if ever it shall please his
infinite goodness, in such abundance to restore the same again.

Hypocrites are made manifest in the day of trouble.
I mean nothing of those that followed Christ only for their bellies, for such
perceiving that they could not obtain their hearts desire of Christ, have
grudged, and left him in body and heart; which thing their blasphemous voices
spoke against his eternal verity, does witness and declare. For such
(brethren) be ye not moved, 1 John 2.
for in the time of their profession they were not of us, but were very
dissemblers and Hypocrites; and therefore God justly permits that they
blaspheme the Truth, which they never loved. I mean not that ever such
dissembling Hypocrites shall embrace the verity, but I mean such as by
infirmity of the flesh, and by natural blindness (which in this life is
never altogether expelled) then could not give the very obedience which Gods
Word required, neither now by weakness of faith dare openly and boldly
confess that which their hearts know to be most true, and yet lamenteth and
mourns, both for the imperfection by passed and present; Note.
from such shall not the amiable presence of Christ for ever be withdrawn; but
yet again shall the eyes of their soretroubled hearts behold and see that light
of Christ's Gospel, wherein they most delight. We the Ministers, who were the
distributers of this bread, (the true Word of God) wherewith the multitude
within England was fed, lacked not our offenses, which also moved God to send
us to the Sea. And because the offenses of no man are so manifest unto me, as
mine own, I will only censure my self.

It is not unknown unto many, that I (the most wretched) was one of that number
whom God appointed to receive that Bread (as it was broken by Christ Jesus) to
distribute and give the same to such as he had called to this banquet, in that
part of his table where he appointed me to serve. It is not in my knowledge nor
judgment to define nor determine what portion or quantity every man received
of this bread, neither yet how that which they received agreed with their
stomachs; but of this I am assured, That the benediction of Christ Jesus so
multiplied the portion which I received of his hands, that during the banquet
(this I write to the praise of his Name, and to the accusation of mine own
unthankfulness) the bread never failed when the hungry soul craved or cried
for food; and at the end of the banquet, mine own conscience bears witness,
that mine hands gathered up the crummes that were left in such abundance, that
the banquet was full among the rest. To be plain, mine own conscience bears
record to my self, To deny or conceal the gifts of God which we have received,
is unthankfulness.
how small was my learning, and how weak I was of judgment when Christ Jesus
called me to be his steward, and how mightily day by day, and time by time he
multiplied his graces with me, if I should conceal, I were most wicked and
unthankful.

But alas, how blinded was my heart, and how little I did consider the dignity
of that Office, and the power of God that then multiplied and blessed the bread
which the people received of my hands, this day mine own conscience bears
witness to my self. Let the Mi^ist^rs n^te this who are put from their
charges by the enemy.
God I take to record in my conscience, That I delivered the same bread that I
received of Christ's hands; and that I mixed no poison with the same; that is, I
teached Christ's Gospel without any mixture of men's dreams, devises, or
fantasies. But alas I did it not with such fervency, with such indifferency,
and with such diligency as this day I know my duty was to have done.

Some complained in those days, That the Preachers were undiscreet persons
(yea, some called them raylers, and worse) because they spoke against the
manifest iniquity of men, and especially of those that then were placed in
Authority, as well in Court, as in other Offices universally thorowout the
Realm, both in Cities, Towns and Villages. And among others peradventure my
rude plainness displeased some, who did complain, That rashly I did speak of
men's faults, so that all men might know and perceive of whom I meant. But alas,
this day my conscience accuses me, That I spoke not so plainly as my duty was
to have done: For I ought to have said to the wicked man expressly by his
name, Thou shall die the death. For I find Jeremiah the Prophet to have done
so to Pashur the high Priest, Ezech 3.33. Jer. 20 34. 3 Reg 18 21, 22.
and to Zedechiah the King. And not only he, but also Elijah, Elisha, Michah,
Amos, Daniel, Christ Jesus himself; and after him his Apostles expressly to
have named the blood-thirsty tyrants, 4 Reg 3. Amos 7. Dan 5 Matthew. 23. Act 13.
abominable Idolaters, and dissembling hypocrites of their days. If that we
the Preachers within the Realm of England were appointed by God to be the Salt
of the earth (as his other Messengers were before us.) Alas, Why withheld we
the Salt, where manifest compunction did appear? The Preachers ^^^named the
Salt of the earth

The Conf^ssion of the Author.


(I accuse none but my self.) The blind love that I did bear to this my
wicked carkase was the chief cause that I was not fervent and faithful enough
in that behalf; For I had no will to provoke the hatred of all men against me:
And therefore so touched I the vices of men in the presence of the greatest,
that they might see themselves to be offenders (I dare not say that I was the
greatest flatterer.) But yet nevertheless I would not be seen to proclaim
manifest War against the manifest wicked: Whereof unfainedly I ask my God
mercy.

As I was not so fervent in rebuking manifest iniquity as it became me to have
been; Preachers oug^t to feed Christ's Flock.
So was I not so indifferent a feeder as is required of Christ's Steward: For in
preaching Christ's Gospel, albeit mine eye (as knows God) was not much upon
worldly promotion, yet the love of friends, and carnal affection of some men
with whom I was most familiar, allured me to make more residence in one place
then in another, having more respect to the pleasure of a few, then to the
necessity of many. That day I thought I had not sinned, if I had not been idle;
But this day I know it was my duty to have had consideration how long I had
remained in one place, and how many hungry souls were in other places, to whom
alas none took pain to break and distribute the bread of Life.

Moreover, remaining in one place I was not so diligent as mine Office
required; but sometime by counsel of carnal friends I spared the body;
sometime I spent in worldly business of particular friends; and sometime in
taking recreation and pastime by exercise of the body.

And albeit men may judge these to be light and small offenses, yet I
acknowledge and confess, That unless pardon should be granted to me in
Christ's blood, that every one of these three offenses aforenamed, that is to
say, Lack of fervency in reproving sin, The lack of indifferency in feeding
those that were hungry, And the lack of diligence in the execution of mine
Office, deserved damation.

The lack of fervency of reproving; of indifferency in seeding, and diligence
in executing, are great sins, Spiritual temptations are soon espied.
And beside these, I was assaulted, yea, infected and corrupted with more gross
sins; that is, My wicked nature desired the favors, the estimation and praise
of men; against which albeit that sometime the Spirit of God did move me to
fight, and earnestly did stir me (God knows I lie not) to sob and lament for
those imperfections; yet never ceased they to trouble me when any occasion was
offered: And so privily and craftily did they enter into my breast, that I could
not perceive my self to be wounded, till vainglory had almost gotten the upper
hand.

The prayer of the author.
O Lord be merciful to my great offense, and deal not with me according to my
great iniquity; but according to the multitude of thy mercies remove from me
the burden of my sin: for of purpose and mind to have avoided the vain
displeasure of man, I spared little to offend thy Majesty.

Think not (beloved in the Lord) That thus I accuse my self without just
cause, as though in so doing I might appear more holy; or that yet I do it of
purpose and intent by occasion thereof to accuse others of my brethren the true
Preachers of Christ of like or greater offenses: No, God is Judge to my
conscience, That I do it even from an unfeigned and sore troubled heart, as I
that know my self grievously to have offended the Majesty of my God, during
the time that Christ's Gospel had free passage in England. The troubles of these
da^es comes to the comfort of Gods elect
And this I do let you understand, That the taking away of the heavenly Bread,
and this great tempest that now blows against the poor disciples of Christ
within the Realm of England (as touching our part) comes from the great mercy
of our heavenly Father, to provoke us to unfeigned repentance, for that neither
Preacher nor Professor did rightly consider the time of our merciful
Visitation: But altogether so we spent the time, as though Gods Word had been
Preached rather to satisfy our fantasies, then to reform our evil manners.
Which thing if we earnestly repent, then shall Jesus Christ appear to our
comfort, be the storm never so great. Haste, O Lord, for thy Names sake.

The second Note.

The great fear of the disciples.


The second thing that I find to be noted, is, The vehemence of the fear which
the disciples endured in that great danger, being of longer continuance then
ever they had at any time before.

Matthew. 8.
In Saint Matthewes Gospel it appears, That another time there arose a great
stormy Tempest, The disciples also before this time were troubled in the Sea.
and sore tossed the Boat wherein Christ's disciples were laboring: But that
was nigh the day light, and then they had Christ with them in the Ship, whom
they awaked, and cried for help unto him (for at that time he slept in the
Boat) and so were shortly delivered from their sudden fear. But now were they
in the midst of the raging Sea, Note.
and it was night, and Christ their Comforter absent from them, and comes not
to them neither in the first, second, nor third Watch; What fear think ye were
they in? And what thoughts arose out of their so troubled hearts, during that
storm? Such as this day be in like danger within the Realm of England, does by
this storm better understand then my pen can express. But of one thing I am
well assured, That Christ's presence would in that great perplexity have been to
them more comfortable then ever it was before; and that patiently they would
have suffered their incredulity to have been rebuked, so that they might have
escaped the present death.

But profitable it shall be, and somewhat to our comfort, to consider every
parcel of their danger: And first, ye shall understand, That when the
disciples passed to the Sea to obey Christ's Commandment, What time the tempest
did arise.
it was fair weather, and no such Tempest seen. But suddenly the storm arose
with a contrarious flaw of wind, when they were in the midst of their Journey.
For if the Tempest had been as great in the beginning of their entrance into
the Sea, as it was after when they were about the midst of their Journey,
neither would they have adventured such a great danger; neither yet had it been
in their power to have attained to the midst of the Sea. And so it may be
evidently gathered, The Sea was calm when the disciples took their Ship.
That the Sea was calm when they entered into their Journey.

Then it is to be remarked, By what means and instruments was this storm
moved: What moved the Sea.
Was the plunging of their Oars, and force of their small Boat such as might
stir the waves of the great Sea? No, doubtless: But the holy Ghost
declares, That the Seas were moved by a vehement and contrary wind, which
blew against their Ship in the time of darkness. But seeing the wind is
neither the commander nor mover of it self, some other cause is to be enquired,
which hereafter we shall touch.

And last, it is to be noted and considered, What the disciples did in all this
vehement Tempest. Truly they turned not to be driven back for land or shore,
by the vehemence of the contrary wind; for so it might be thought that they
could not have escaped shipwreck and death: The tossed Ship is a figure of the
Church of Christ.
but they continually labored in rowing against the wind, abiding the ceasing
of that horrible tempest.

Consider and mark, beloved in the Lord, what we read here to have chanced to
Christ's disciples, and to their poor Boat; and you shall well perceive, That
the same thing has chanced, does and shall chance to the true Church and
Congregation of Christ (which is nothing else in this miserable life but a poor
Ship) traveling in the Seas of this unstable and troublesome world, toward the
heavenly Port, and Haven of eternal felicity, which Christ Jesus has
appointed to his elect.

This I might prove by the posterity of Jacob in Egypt; By the Israelites in
their Captivity; and by the Church during the time that Christ himself did
Preach (and sometime after his Resurrection and Ascension) against whom the
vehement storm did not rage immediately after they entered into the Ship of
their travel and tribulation: Exodus 1.
For the bloody sentence of Pharaoh was not pronounced against the seed of
Jacob when he first did enter into Egypt: Neither was the cruel counsel and
devilish device of proud Haman invented by and by after Israel and Judah were
translated from their possessions: Esth. 3.
Neither yet in the time of Christ Jesus being conversant with his Apostles in
the flesh, was there used any such tyranny against the Saints of God, as
shortly after followed in the persecution of Saint Stephen, Act. 7 and deinceps.
and other disciples. But all these in the beginning of their travel with a
contrary wind, had always some calm; that is, Albeit they had some trouble,
yet had they not extreme persecution.

Even so, most dearly beloved, is happened now to the afflicted Church of God
within the Realm of England: At all times the true Word of God suffered
contradiction and repugnancie; And so the wind blew against us even from the
beginning of the late up rising of the Gospel in England, but yet it could not
stop our course, till now of late days, that the raging wind blows without
bridle upon the unstable Seas, in the midst whereof we are in this hour of
darkness.

The malice of the devil compared to the wind.
To write my mind plainly unto you, beloved brethren: This wind that always
has blown against the Church of God, is the malice and hatred of the devil,
which rightly in this case is compared to the wind: For as the wind is
invisible, and yet the poor disciples feel that it troubles and letreth their
Ship; 1 Simile.
So is the pestilent envy of the devil working always in the hearts of the
reprobate so subtle and crafty, that it cannot be espied by Gods Elect, nor by
his Messengers, till first they feel the blasts thereof to blow their Ship
backward: And as the vehement wind causes the waves of the Sea to rage, The
Sea cannot be quiet when the wind blows outragiously.
and yet the dead water neither knows what it does, neither yet can it cease
nor refrain; so that both it is troubled by the wind, and also it self does
trouble Christ's disciples in their poor Ship: So by the envy and malice of the
devil, are wicked and cruel, as well subjects as Princes (whose hearts are
like the raging Sea) compelled to persecute and trouble the true Church of
Christ; and yet so blinded are they, and so enthralled under the bondage of the
devil, that neither can they see their manifest iniquity, neither yet can they
cease to run to their own destruction. And hereof, England, have thou manifest
experience: For in the time of King Henry the eighth, The wind that blew in
the days of King Hen. 8.
how the wolf, that wicked Winchester, and others, by the vehement wind of six
bloody Articles (by the devil devised) intended to have overthrown the poor
Ship and Christ's disciples, is evidently known already. But then had we Christ
Jesus with us sleeping in the Ship, who did not despise the faithful crying of
such as then were in trouble: But by his mighty power, gracious goodness, and
invincible force of his holy Word, he compelled those wicked winds to cease,
and the raging of those Seas to be stilled and calm: A quiet calm wa under King
Edw 6.
So that all the hearts of Gods Elect within the Realm of England did wonder
at that sudden change, while that under a lamb the fearful edge of that
devouring sword was taken from the necks of the faithful; and the tyranny of
those ravening and blood-thirsty Wolves (I mean of wily Winchester, and of some
other his Brethren, the sons of Belial) was repressed for a time: The first
secret pestilent wind that blew in the time of good K. Edward 6. The Devil
raged when the Mass mischief was disclosed.
But yet ceased not the Devil to blow his wind, by his wicked Instruments,
who found the means, how against nature the one brother should assent to the
death of the other; but that could not hinder the course of the traveling
Boat, but forth she goes in despite of the Devil, who then more cruelly
raged, perceiving his own honor and service; that is, his detestable Mass,
to be disclosed and opened before the people, to be damnable Idolatry, and
assured damnation to such as put their trust in it: And therefore began he more
craftily to work, and finding the same Instruments apt enough, whose labors he
had used before, he blew such mortal hatred between two, which appeared to be
the chief pillars under the King; for that wretched (alas) and miserable
Northumberland could not be satisfied, till such time as simple Somerset most
unjustly was bereft of his life; what the Devil and his Members the pestilent
Papists, meant by his away-taking, God compelled my tongue to speak in more
places then one; and specially before you, and in Newcastle, as sir Robert
Bradling did not forget a long time after; God grant that he may understand all
other matters spoken before him then and at other times, as righly as he did
that mine interpretation of the Vineyard, Esa. 5.
whose Hedges, Ditches, Towers and Winepresse God destroyed, because it would
bring forth no good fruit: And that he may remember, that what ever was spoken
by my mouth that day, is now complete, and come to pass, except that final
destruction and vengeance is not yet fallen upon the greatest offenders, Mark
well.
as assuredly shortly it shall, unless that he and some other of his sort,
that then were enemies to Gods truth, will speedily repent (and that earnestly)
their stubborn disobedience. This was affirmed both before the King, and also
before Northumberland oftener then once.
God compelled my tongue (I say) openly to declare, That the Devil and his
Ministers intended only the subversion of Gods true Religion, by that mortal
hatred among those which ought to have been most assuredly knit together by
Christian charity, and by benefits received; and especially that the wicked and
envious Papists (by that ungodly breach of charity) diligently minded the
overthrow of him, that to his own destruction, procured the death of his
innocent friend: Thus (I say) I was com^elled of conscience oftener then once to
affirm, That such as saw and invented the means how the one should be taken
away, saw and should find the means also to take away the other; and that all
that trouble was devised by the Devil and his Instruments, to stop and let
Christ's Disciples and their poor Boat; but that was not able, because she was
not yet come to the midst of the Sea.

Transubstansiation (the Bird that the Devil hatched by Pope Nicholas and
since that time fostered and nourished by all his Children, Priests, Friars,
Monks, and other his conjured and sworn soldiers, and in these last days
chiefly by Stephen Gardner, and his black brood in England;) Transustantiation
(I say) was then clearly confuted and mightily overthrown; and therefore God
had put wisdom in the tongues of his Ministers and Messengers to utter that
vain vanity; Transubstantiation overthrown by Th. Granmer.
and specially gave such strength to that Reverend Father in God, Thomas
Granmer, to cut the knots of Devilish Sophistry linked and knit by the Devils
Gardener, and his blind Buzzards, to hold the verity of the everliving God
under bondage, that rather I think they shall condemn his works (which
notwithstanding shall continue and remain to their confusion, then they shall
enterprise to answer the same. The tound god was taken away by Act of
Parliament.
And also God gave boldness and knowledge to the Court of Parliament to take
away the round clipped God, wherein stands all the holiness of Papists, and
to command common Bread to be used at the Lords Table, and also to take away
the most part of superstitions, (kneeling at the Lords Supper excepted) which
before profaned Christ's true Religion. When all the Papisticall abomi^ations
were revolted, then was the Boat in the midst of the Sea.
Then (dear Brethren) was the Boat in the midst of the Sea, and suddenly
arises the horrible tempest, most fearful and dolorous; Our King is taken
away from us, and the Devil blows in such Organs as always he had found
obedient to his Precepts, and by them he enflameth the heart of that wretched
and unhappy man, (whom I judge more to be lamented, then hated) to covet the
Imperial Crown of England to be established to his Posterity, and what
thereupon has succeeded, it is not now necessary to be written.

Two special Notes of this discourse.
Of this short discourse (Beloved in the Lord) you may consider and perceive two
special Notes;

The first Note.
1. That the whole malice of the Devil has always this end, To vex and
overthrow Christ's afflicted Church; for what else intended the Devil and his
servants (the pestilent Papists) by all these their crafty policies, during the
time that Christ's Gospel was preached in England, then the subversion of the
same Gospel, and that they might recover power to persecute the Saints of God,
as this day in the hour of darkness they have obtained for a time, to their
own destruction. Let no man wonder though I say, That the crafty policies of
pestilent Papists wrought all the mischief, for who could more easier and
better work greater mischief, then such as bare authority and rule. And who (I
pray you) ruled the roste in the Court all this time, by stout courage and
proudnesse of stomach, but Northumberland? But who (I pray you) under King
Edward, Who ruled all by wit under K. Edward 6
ruled all by counsel and wit? Shall I name the man? I will writ no more
plainly now then my tongue spoke the last Sermon, That it pleased God that I
should make before that Innocent and most godly King Edward the sixth, and
before his Council at Westminster, and even to the faces of such as of whom I
meant. John 13. Psalm. 40.
Handling this place of Scripture, Qui edit mecum panem sustulit adversus me
calcaneum suum; that is, He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel
against me. I made this affirmation, That commonly it was seen, Godly Princes
commonly have most uugodly Counselors.
that the most godly Princes had Officers and chief Counselors most ungodly,
conjured enemies to Gods true Religion, and Traitors to their Princes, not
that their wickedness and ungodliness was speedily perceived and espied out
of the said Princes and godly men, Note well.
but that for time those crafty colourers could so cloak their malice against
God and his truth, and their hollow hearts toward their loving Masters, that by
worldly wisdom and policy at length they attained to high promotions. 2 Reg.
17. Esa. 22. Matthew. 26. John 12.
And for the proof of this mine affirmation, I recited the Histories of
Achitophel, Shebna, and Judas; of whom the two former had high Offices and
promotions with great authority under the most godly Princes, David and
Hezekiah; and Judas was Purse Master with Christ Jesus. And when I had made
some discourse in that matter, I moved this Question;

Why permitted so godly Princes so wicked men to be of their Council, Quest.
and to bear Office and Authority under them?

To the which I answered; Answ.
That either they so abounded in worldly wisdom, The enemies of the verity many
times appear to be most profitable for a Commonwealth.
foresight and experience touching the government of a Commonwealth, that
their counsel appeared to be so necessary, that the Commonwealth could not
lack them, and so by the color to preserve the tranquillity and quietness in
Realms, they were maintained in Authority; or else they kept their malice which
they bare toward their Masters and Gods true Religion, Mischief at the length
will so utter it self, that men may epsy it.
so secret in their breasts, that no man could epsy it, till by Gods
permission they waited for such occasion and opportunity, that they uttered
all their mischief so plainly, that all the world might perceive it: And that
was most evident by Achithophel and Sobna; for of Achithophel it is written,
That he was David's most secret Counselor, and that, because his counsel in
those days was like the Oracle of God; and Sobna was unto good King Hezekiah
sometime Comptroller, sometime Secretary, Esa. 22.36.
and last of all Treasurer; to the which Offices he had never been promoted
under so godly a Prince, if the Treason and malice which he bare against the
King, and against Gods true Religion, had been manifestly known. No (quoth I)
Sobna was a crafty Fox, and could show such a fair countenance to the King,
Esa. 22.
that neithet he nor his Council could epsy his malicious Treason. If David
and Hezekiah were deceived by traitorous Counselors, how much more a young and
innocent King.
But the Prophet Isaiah was commanded by God to go to his presence, and to
declare his traitorous heart and miserable end.

Was David (said I) and Hezekiah Princes of great and godly gifts and
experience, abused by crafty Counselors and dissembling Hypocrites? What
wonder is it then, that a young and innocent King be deceived by crafty, The
Author might fear this indeed.
covetous, wicked and ungodly Counselors? I am greatly afraid that Achitophel
is Counselor, that Judas bears the Purse, and that Sobna is Scribe,
Comptroller and Treasurer.

This and somewhat more I spoke that day, not in a corner (as many yet can
witness) but even before those whom my conscience judged worthy of accusation:
And this day no more do I write (albeit I may justly, because they have
declared themselves most manifestly) but yet do I affirm, That under that
innocent King, pestilent Papists had greatest Authority. Paulet is painted.
Oh! who was judged to be the soul and life to the Counsel in every matter of
weighty importance? who but Sobna, who could best dispatch businesses, that the
rest of the Council might Hawk, and Hunt, The Treasurers words against the
authority of Mary.
and take their pleasure? None like unto Sobna. Who was most frank and ready to
destroy Sommerset, and set up Northumberland? was it not Shebna? Who was most
bold to cry Bastard, Bastard? Incestuous Bastard Mary shall never Reign over
us. And who, I pray you, was most busy to say, Caiaphas prophesied.
Fear not to Subscribe with my Lords of the Kings Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, Agree to his Majesty's last Will and perfect Testament, and
let never that obstinate woman come to Authority, she is an arrant Papist, she
will subvert the true Religion, and will bring in strangers to the destruction
of this Commonwealth: Which of the Council (I say) had these and greater
persuasions against Mary, to whom now he coucheth and kneeleth? Sobna the
Treasurer. And what intended such Traytorous and dissembling Hypocrites by all
these and such like crafty sleights and counterfeit conveyance? Doubtless the
overthrow of Christ's true Religion, which then began to flourish in England;
the liberty whereof fretted the Guts of such pestilent Papists, who now has
gotten the days which they long looked for, but yet to their own destruction
and shame, for in the spite of their hearts the plagues of God shall strike
them; they shall be comprehended in the snare which they prepare for others for
their own counsels shall make themselves slaves to a proud, mischievous,
unfaithful and vile Nation.

Judge at the end.

The second Note.


Now to the second Note of our Discourse, which is this; Albeit the Tyrants of
this earth have learned by long experience, that they are never able to
prevail against Gods Truth, yet because they are bound slaves to their Master
the Devil, they cannot cease to persecute the members of Christ, Tyrants
cannot cease to persecute Christ's Members.
when the Devil blows his wind in the darkness of the night, that is, When
the light of Christ's Gospel is taken away, and the Devil reigns by Idolatry
superstition and Tyranny.

This most evidently may be seen from the beginning of this world to the time
of Christ, Genesis 21. Genesis 28.
and from thence till this day. Ismael might have perceived, that he could not
prevail against Isaac, because God had made his promise unto him, as no doubt
Abraham their father teached to his whole household; Esau likewise understood
the same of Jacob; Pharaoh might plainly have seen by many Miracles, Exodus 5,
6, 7, 8, etc.
that Israel was Gods people, whom he could not utterly destroy; and also the
Scribes, and Pharisees, and Chief Priests were utterly convinced in their
Conscience, John 5. and 12.
that Christ's whole doctrine was of God, and that to the profit and commodity
of man, his Miracles and works were wrought by the power of God, and therefore
that they could never prevail against him: And yet as the Devil stirred them,
none of those could refrain to persecute him, whom they knew most certainly to
be innocent.

The power of Gods Word put the Papists to silence in England, except it had
been to brag in corners
This I write that you shall not wonder, albeit now ye see the poisoned Papists,
wicked Winchester, and dreaming Duresme, with the rest of the Faction (who
sometimes were so confounded, that neither they durst nor could speak nor write
in the defense of their Heresies) now so to rage and triumph against the
eternal Truth of God, as though they had never assayed the power of God
speaking by his true Messengers.

Princes are ready to persecute as malicious Papists will command.
Wonder not hereat (I say) beloved Brethren, that the Tyrants of this world are
so obedient and ready to follow the cruel counsels of such disguised Monsters;
For neither can the one nor the other refrain, because both sorts are as
subject to obey the Devil their Prince and Father, as the unstable Sea is to
lift up the waves when the vehement wind blows upon it.

Job 12. 2 Cor. 4.
It is fearful to be heard, that the Devil has such power over any man, but
yet the Word of God has so instructed us. And therefore albeit it be contrary
to our fantasy, yet we must believe it. For the Devil is called the prince
and god of this world, because he reigns, and is honored by tyranny and
idolatry in it.

He is called the Prince of Darkness that has power in the Air; It is said,
That he works in the children of unbelief, because he stirs them to
trouble Gods Elect; Ephesians. 2. 1 Reg 16 18. John 13. John 8.
as he invaded Saul, and compelled him to persecute David; and likewise he
entered into the heart of Judas, and moved him to betray his Master. He is
called Prince over the sons of Pride; and father of all those that are liars,
and enemies to Gods Truth: Over whom he has no less power this day, then
sometimes he had over Annas and Caiaphas, whom no man denies to have been led
and moved by the devil to persecute Christ Jesus, and his most true Doctrine.
And therefore wonder not (I say) that now the devil rages in his obedient
servants, wily Winchester, dreaming Duresme, and bloody Bonner, Wily Winchester
D^eaming Duresme, Bloody Bonner.
with the rest of their bloody butcherly brood; for this is their hour and
power granted unto them: they cannot cease nor assuage their furious fumes, for
the devil their Sire stirs, moves, and carries them even at his will. But
in this that I declare the power of the devil working in cruel tyrants, This
is the cruse before omitted, why the wind blew to trouble Christ's disciples.
Think you that I attribute or give to him or to them power at their pleasure?
No, not so, brethren, not so; for as the devil has no power to trouble the
Elements, but as God shall suffer, so has worldly tyrants (albeit the devil
has fully possessed their hearts) no power at all to trouble the Saints of
God, but as their bridle shall be loosed by Gods hands.

And herein, dear brethren, stands my singular comfort this day, when I hear
that those bloody tyrants within the Realm of England does kill, murder,
destroy and devour man and woman as ravennous Lions now loosed from bonds. I
lift up therefore the eyes of mine heart (as my iniquity and present dolor
will suffer) and to my heavenly Father will I say:

O Lord, The prayer of the author.
those cruel tyrants are loosed by thy hand, to punish our former ingratitude,
whom, we trust, thou will not suffer to prevail for ever, but when thou have
corrected us a little, and have declared unto the world the tyranny that lurked
in their boldned breasts, then will thou break their jaw-bones, and will shut
them up in their caves again, that the generation and posterity following may
praise thy holy Name before thy Congregation. Amen.

When I feel any taste or motion of these promises, then think I my self most
happy, and that I have received a just compensation, albeit I, and all that to
me in earth belongs, should suffer present death, knowing that God shall yet
show mercy to his afflicted Church within England, and that he shall repress
the pride of these present tyrants, like as he has done of those that were
before our days.

And therefore, Exhortation.
beloved brethren in our Savior Jesus Christ, hold up to God your hands that
are fainted through fear, and let your hearts that have in these dolorous days
sleeped in sorrow, awake, and hear the voice of your God, who swears by
himself, That he will not suffer his Church to be oppressed for ever; Isai. 48
51.54 62.
neither that he will despise our sob^ to the end, The coming of Christ to his
d^s^ipl^s upon the S^^s, is op^ned.
if we will row and strive against this vehement wind; I mean, if that ye will
not run back headlong to Idolatry, then shall this storm be assuaged in
despite of the devil; Christ Jesus shall come with speed to your deliverance,
he shall pierce through the wind, and the raging Seas shall obey, and bear his
feet and body, as the massy, stable and dry land. Be not moved from the sure
foundation of your faith: For albeit that Christ Jesus be absent from you (as
he was from his disciples in that great storm) by his bodily presence, yet is
he present by his mighty power and grace: Christ is suit upon the mountain.
He stands upon the mountain in security and rest; that is, his flesh and
whole humanity is now in heaven, and can suffer no such trouble as sometimes he
did: And yet he is full of pity and compassion, and does consider all our
travel, anguish and labors; wherefore it is not to be doubted, but that he
will suddenly appear to our great comfort. The tyranny of this world cannot
keep back his coming, more then the blustering wind and raging Seas let
Christ to come to his disciples, when they looked for nothing but present
death. And therefore yet again I say, beloved in the Lord, Let your hearts
attend to the promises that God has made unto true repentant sinners, and be
fully persuaded with a constant faith, That God is always true and just in his
performance of his promises. You have heard these days spoken of very plainly,
when your hearts could fear no danger, because you were nigh the land, and the
storm was not yet risen; that is, Ye were young Scholars of Christ when no
persecution was felt or seen: But now ye are come into the midst of the Sea
(for what part of England heard not of your profession?) and the vehement storm
whereof we then almost in every Exhortation spoke of, is now suddenly risen up.
But what? Has God brought you so far forth, God never brought his people into
trouble to the intent that they should perish therein.
that you shall both in souls and bodies every one perish? Nay, my whole trust
in Gods mercy and truth is to the contrary. For God brought not his people into
Egypt, and from thence through the Red Sea to the intent they should perish, but
that he in them should show a most glorious deliverance: Neither sent Christ
his Apostles into the midst of the Sea, and suffering the storm to assault
them and their Ship, to the intent they should there perish, but because he
would the more have his great goodness toward them felt and perceived in so
mightily delivering them out of the fear of perishing, giving us thereby an
example that he would do the like to us, if we abide constant in our profession
and says, withdrawing our selves from superstition and idolatry. We gave you
warning of these days long ago: For the reverence of Christ's Blood let these
words be noted; The same Truth that spoke before of these dolorous days, Mark
these words.
forespake also the everlasting joy prepared for such as should continue to the
end. The trouble is come; O dear brethren look for the comfort, and (after the
example of the Apostle) abide in resisting this vehement storm a little space.

Christ came not to his disciples till the fourth watch.
The third Watch is not yet ended; remember that Christ Jesus came not to his
disciples till it was the fourth Watch: and they were then in no less danger
then you be now; for their faith fainted, and their bodies were in danger. But
Christ Jesus came when they looked not for him; and so shall he do to you, if
you will continue in the profession that you have made. This dare I be bold to
promise, in the Name of him whose Eternal Verity and glorious Gospel ye have
heard and received: who also puts into my heart an earnest thirst (God
knows I lie not) of your salvation, and some care also for your bodies, which
now I will not express.

Thus shortly have I passed through the outrageous tempest wherein the disciples
of Christ were tempted, after that the great multitude were by Christ fed in
the desert, omitting many profitable Notes which might well have been marked in
the Text, because my purpose is at this present not to be tedious nor yet
curious, but only to note such things as be agreeable to these most dolorous
days.

And so let us now speak of the end of this storm and trouble, in which I find
four things chiefly to be noted: First, That the disciples at the presence of
Christ were more afraid then they were before. Secondly, That Christ uses no
other instrument but his Word to pacific their hearts. Thirdly, That Peter in a
fervency first left his Ship, and yet after feared. Fourthly and lastly, That
Christ permitted neither Peter nor the rest of his disciples to perish in that
fear, but gloriously delivered all, and pacified the Tempest.


Their great fear, and the cause thereof, are expressed in the Text, in these
words; When the disciples saw him walking upon the Sea, they were afraid,
saying, It is a Spirit; and they cried through fear.

It is not my purpose in this Treatise to speak of spirits, nor yet to dispute,
Whether spirits good or bad may appear and trouble men: Neither yet to enquire,
Why man's nature is afraid of spirits, and so vehemently abhors their
presence and company. But my purpose is only to speak of things necessary for
this time.

And first, The causes why Christ's disciples misknew him.
let us consider that there was three causes why the disciples knew not Christ,
but judged him to be a spirit.

The first cause was, The darkness of the night.

The second was, The unaccustomed vision that appeared.

And the third was, The danger and the tempest, in which they so earnestly
labored for the safeguard of their selves.

The darkness (I say) of the night let their eyes to see him: And it was
above nature, that a massy, heavy, and weighty body of a man (such as they
understood their Master Christ to have) should walk, go upon, or be born up of
the water of the raging Sea, and not sink. And finally, the horror of the
tempest, and great danger that they were in, persuaded them to look for none
other, but certainly to be drowned.

And so all these three things concurring together, confirmed in them this
imagination, That Christ Jesus, who came to their great comfort and
deliverance, was a fearful and wicked spirit appearing to their destruction.

What here happened to Christ Jesus himself, What chanced to Christ, that also
in all ages chances to his holy Word.
that I might prove to have chanced, and daily to happen to the verity of his
blessed Word in all ages from the beginning.

For as Christ himself in this their trouble, was judged and esteemed by his
disciples at the first sight a spirit, or fantastical body; so is the Truth
and sincere Preaching of his glorious Gospel, sent by God for man's comfort,
deliverance from sin, and quietness of conscience, when it is first offered,
and truly preached, it is (I say) no less but judged to be heresy and
deceivable doctrine, sent by the devil to man's destruction.

The cause hereof is the dark ignorance of God, which in every age since the
beginning so overwhelmed the world, that sometimes Gods very Elect were in like
blindness and error with the reprobate: As Abraham was an Idolater; Moses
was instructed in all the ways of the Egyptians; Paul a proud Pharisee,
conjured against Christ and his Doctrine: And many in this same our age, when
the Truth of God was offered unto them, were sore afraid, and cried against it,
only because the dark clouds of ignorance had troubled them before. But this
matter I omit and let pass, till more opportunity.

The chief Note that I would have you well observe and mark in this
preposterous fear of the disciples, is this;

The fear is greatest, when deliverance is ^ost n^gh.
The more nigh deliverance and salvation approaches, the more strong and
vehement is the temptation of the Church of God. And the more nigh that Gods
vengeance approaches to the wicked, the more proud, cruel and arrogant are
they.

Whereby it commonly comes to pass, That the very messengers of life are
judged and deemed to be the authors of all mischief: And this in many histories
is evident. When God had appointed to deliver the afflicted Israelites by the
hand of Moses from the tyranny of the Egyptians, and Moses was sent to the
presence of Pharaoh for the same purpose, such was their affliction and anguish
by the cruelty which newly was exercised over them, Exodus 5, 6, etc.
that with open mouths they cursed Moses (and no doubt in their hearts they
hated God who sent him) alleging, That Moses and Aaron was the whole cause of
their last extreme trouble.

The like is to be seen in the Book of the Kings, both under Elisha and Isaiah
the Prophets: For in the days of Ioram, son of Achab, was Samaria besieged
by the King of Syria: In which Samaria no doubt (albeit the King and the most
multitude were wicked) there was yet some members of Gods Elect Church, which
were brought to such extreme famine, 5 Reg. 7.
that not only things of small price were sold beyond all measure; but also
women against nature were compelled to eat their own children: In this same
City Elisha the Prophet most commonly was most conversant and dwelt, by whose
counsel and commandment, no doubt, the City was kept: For it appears, the
King, to lay that to his charge, when he, hearing of the piteous complaint of
the woman (who for hunger had eaten her own son) rent his clothes, with a
solemn Oath and vow, That the head of Elisha should not stand upon his
shoulders that day. If Elisha had not been of counsel, That the city should
have been kept, Why should the King have more fumed against him, then against
others? But whether he was the author of the defending the City or not, all is
one to my purpose; for before the deliverance, was the Church in such
extremity, that the chief Pastor of that time was sought to be killed by such
as should have defended him.

The like is read of Hezekiah, who defending his City Jerusalem, and resisting
proud Sennacherib, no doubt obeying the counsel of Isaiah, Isai. 36, 37.
at length was so oppressed with sorrow and shame, by the blasphemous words of
Rabshakeh, that he had no other refuge, but in the Temple of the Lord (as a man
desperate and without comfort) to open the disdainful letters sent unto him by
that hauty and proud tyrant.

By these and many Histories mo, it is most evident, that the more nigh
salvation and deliverance approaches, Note.
the more vehement is the temptation and trouble.

This I writ to admonish you, that albeit yet you shall see tribulation so
abound, that nothing shall appear but extreme misery without all hope of
comfort, that yet you decline not from God. And that albeit sometimes ye be
moved to hate the messengers of life, that therefore ye shall not judge that
God will never show mercy after. No, dear Brethren, as he has dealt with
others before you, so will he deal with you.

God will suffer tribulation and dolor abound, Why God suffers tribulation
to abound and continue.
that no manner of comfort shall be seen in man, to the intent, that when
deliverance comes, the glory may be his, whose only word may pacify the
tempest most vehement.

He drowned Pharaoh and his Army. Exodus 14.
He scattered the great multitude of Benadad. And by his Angel killed the host
of Sennacharib. And so delivered his afflicted when nothing appeared to them
but utter destruction. So shall he do to you beloved Brethren, if patiently ye
will abide his consolation and counsel. God open your eyes that ye may rightly
understand the meaning of my writing. Amen.

But yet peradventure you wonder not a little why God permits such blood
thirsty tyrants to molest and grieve his chosen Church: I have recited some
causes before, and yet more I could recite, but at this time I will hold me
content with one.

The justice of God is such, Note.
that he will not pour forth his extreme vengeance upon the wicked, unto such
time as their iniquity be so manifest, that their very flatterers cannot excuse
it. Exodus 10^
Pharaoh was not destroyed till his own household servants and subjects abhorred
and condemned his stubborn disobedience.

Iesabel and Athalia were not thrust from this life into death, Iezabel,
Athalia, and Judas.
till all Israel and Juda were witnesses of their cruelty and abominations.
Judas was not hanged till the Princes of the Priests bare witness of his
Traitorous Act and iniquity.

To pass over the Tyrants of old time, whom God has plagued, let us come to
the Tyrants which now are within the Realm of England, whom God will not long
spare; If Steven Gardener, Gard^^r, Tunstal, Bucherly Bon^r.
Cuthbert Tunstal, and Butcherly Bonnar, false Bishops of Winchester, Duresme,
and of London, had for their false Doctrine and Traitorous acts suffered death,
when they justly deserved the same, then would arrant Papists have alleged
(as I and others have heard them do) that they were men reformable, That they
were meet Instruments for a Commonwealth; The praise of Winchester, Durysme,
and o^^dy Mary before these days.
That they were not so obstinate and malicious as they were judged, neither
that they thirsted for the blood of any man: And of Lady Mary, who has not
heard, That she was not sober, merciful, and one that loved the Commonwealth
of England? Had she (I say) and such as now be of her pestilent Council, been
dead before these days, then should not their iniquity and cruelty so
manifestly have appeared to the world; for who could have thought, that such
cruelty could have entered into the heart of a woman? and into the heart of her
that is called a Virgin, that she would thirst for the blood of innocents, and
of such as (by just Laws and faithful witnesses) can never be proved to have
offended by themselves.

4. Reg. 11. Matthew. 14.
I find, that Athalia (through appetite to Reign) murdered the Seed of the
Kings of Judah, and that Herodias daughter (at the desire of a whorish Mother)
obtained the head of John the Baptist; but yet that ever a woman suffered her
self to be called the most blessed Virgin, caused so much blood to be spilt for
establishing of the usurped Authority of the Pope, I think the like is rare to
be found in Scripture or other History.

3. Reg. 18 3. Reg. 18.
I find that Iezabel (that cursed Idolatresse) caused the blood of the Prophets
of God to be shed, and Naboth to be murdered unjustly for his own Vineyard;
but yet I think she never erected half so many Gallows in all Israel, as
mischievous Mary has done within London alone: But you Papists will excuse
your Mary the Virgin: A digression to the Papists of Qu. Mary's chaste dealing.
Well, let her be your Virgin, and a Goddess meet to entertain such
Idolaters, yet shall I rightly lay to her charge, that which I think no Papist
within England will justify nor defend: And therefore (O ye Papists) here I
will a little turn my Pen unto you. A lively Picture of Mary the utter mischief
of England
Answer unto this Question, O ye Seed of the Serpent; Would any of you have
confessed two years ago, that Mary (your mirror) had been false, dissembling,
unconstant, proud, and a breaker of promises (except such promises as she made
to your god the Pope, to the great shame and dishonor of her noble Father;) I
am sure you would hardly have thought it of her: And now does she not
manifestly show her self to be an open Traitoresse to the Imperial Crown of
England, contrary to the just Laws of the Realm, to bring in a stranger, and
make a proud Spanyard King, to the shame, dishonor and destruction of the
Nobility; to the spoil of their Honors, Lands, Possessions, chief Offices
and promotions of them and theirs; To the utter decay of the Treasures,
Commodities, Navy and Fortifications of the Realm, What commodities the
Spanish King shall bring to the Realm of England.
to the abasing of the Yeomandry, to the slavery of the Commonalty, to the
overthrow of Christianity and Gods true Religion, and finally to the utter
subversion of the whole public estate and Commonwealth of England? Let
Norfolk and Suffolk, let her own Promise and Proclamation, let her fathers
Testament, let the City of London, let the ancient Laws and Acts of
Parliaments before established in England, be judges betwixt mine accusation
and her most tyrannous iniquity.

First, her Promise and Proclamation did signify and declare, That neither she
would bring in, neither yet Marry any stranger; Northfolk, Suffolk and the
City of London do testify and witness the same. The ancient Laws and Acts of
Parliament pronounces it Treason to transfer the Crown of England into the
hands of a foreign Nation; and the Oath made to observe the said Statutes,
cries out, That all they are perjured that consent to that her traitorous fact.

Speak now (O ye Papists) and defend your monstrous Masters, and deny, if ye
can for shame, that she has not uttered her self to be borne (alas therefore)
to the ruin and destruction of noble England? Oh who would ever have believed
(I write now in bitterness of heart) that such unnatural cruelty should have
had dominion over any reasonable creature? But the saying to be true, That the
usurped Government of an affectionate woman is a rage without reason.

Who would ever have thought, A true saying.
that the love of that Realm, which has brought forth, which has nourished
and so nobly maintained that wicked woman, Under an English name, she b^areth a
Spaniards heart.
should not have moved her heart with pity? Who sees not now, that she in all
her doings declares most manifestly, that under an English name she bears a
Spaniards heart? If God (I say) had not for our scourge, suffered her and her
cruel Council to have come to Authority, then could never these their
abominations, cruelty and treason against God, against his Saints, and against
the Realm, whose liberties they are sworn to defend, so manifestly have been
declared: And who ever could have believed, That proud Gardener, and
treacherous Tunstall (whom all Papists praised, for the love they bare to their
Country) could have become so manifestly Traitorous, not only against their
solemn Oaths, that they should never consent nor agree unto, that a foreign
Stranger should reign over England; but also that they would adjudge the
Imperial Crown of the same to appertain to a Spanyard by inheritance Lineall
descent? O Traitorous Traitors, how can you for shame show your faces.

It comes to my mind, that upon Christmas day, Anno 1552. preaching, in
New Castle upon Tine, and speaking against the obstinacy of the Papists I made
this affirmation, That whosoever in his heart was enemy to Christ's Gospel and
Doctrine, which then was preached within the Realm of England, was enemy also
to God, and secret traitors to the Crown and Commonwealth of England; for as
they thirsted nothing more then the Kings death, which their iniquity could
procure; so they regarded not who should reign over them, so that their
Idolatry might be erected again. How these my words at that time pleased men,
the crimes and action intended against me did declare. But let my very enemies
now say their conscience, if those may words have not proved true?

What is the cause that Winchester and the rest of his pestilent sect,
Spaniards sons of pride and superstition.
so greedily would have a Spanyard to reign over England? The cause is mafest;
for as that Hellish Nation surmounteth all other in pride and Whoredom, so for
Idolatry and vain Papisticall and devilish Ceremonies, they may rightly be
called the very sons of superstition; And therefore are they found and judged
by the Progeny of Antichrist, Why Winchester would have Spaniards to reign
over England.
most apt Instruments to maintain, establish and defend the Kingdom of that
cruel Beast, whose head and wound is lately cured within England, which (alas
for pity) must now be brought into bondage and thraldom, that pestilent
Papists may reign without punishment.

But, To Winchester.
O thou Beast! (I speak to thee Winchester, more cruel then any Tygre) Shall
neither shame, nor fear, nor benefits received, bridle thy Tyrannous cruelty?
Art thou not ashamed (thou bloody Beast) to betray thy native Country, and the
liberties of the same? Fear thou not to open such a door to all iniquity,
that whole England should be made a common Stews to Spaniards? Will thou
recompense the benefits which thou have received of that Noble Realm with that
ingratitude? Remembrest thou not that England has brought thee forth? that
England nourished thee? that England has promoted thee to riches, honor and
high dignity? And will thou now (O wretched Captive) for all these manifold
benefits received, be the cause that England shall not be England? Yea verily;
for so will thou gratify thy Father the Devil, and his Lieutenant the Pope,
whom with all his baggage, thou labourest now (with tooth and nail) to make
flourish again in England; albeit like a dissembling Hypocrite, and double faced
wretch, thou being thereto compelled by the invincible verity of Gods Holy
Word, wrotest (long ago) thy book entitled True Obedience; The Book of true
obedience both in Latin and in English, shall remain to thy perpetual shame
and condemnation of thy cankered Conscience.
against that Monstrous Whore of Babylon, and her falsely usurped power and
authority: but now (to thy pepetuall shame) thou returnest to thy Vomit, and
art become an open Arch-Papist again. Furthermore, why seekedst thou the blood
of Thomas Cranmer, of good father Hugh Latimer, and of that most learned and
discreet man Doctor Ridley? Do thou not consider, that the lenity, sincere
Doctrine, pure life, godly conversation, and discreet counsel of these three
is notably known in more Realms then England? Art thou not ashamed to seek the
destruction of those, who labored for the safeguard of thy life, and obtained
the same when thou justly deservedst death? But, O thou son of Belial, well
declarest thou, that nothing can mollify the cruel malice, nor purge the
deadly venom of him, in whose heart wickedness bears the dominion; thou are
like to Cain, and fellow to Judas the Traitor, and therefore can thou do
nothing but thirst for the blood of Abel, and betray Christ Jesus and his
eternal verity?

The wicked must declare their selves.
Thus (dear brethren) must the sons of the Devil declare their own impiety and
ungodliness, that when Gods vengeance (which shall not sleep) shall be poured
forth upon them, all Tongues shall confess, acknowledge and say, That God is
righteous in all his judgments: And to this end are cruel Tyrants permitted
and suffered for a space and time, not only to live in wealth and prosperity,
Apocalip. 13.
but also to prevail and obtain victory as touching the flesh, over the very
Saints of God, and over such as enterpriseth to resist their fury at Gods
commandment. But now to the subsequent, and that which follows.

The Instrument and means wherewith Christ Jesus used to remove and put away
the horrible fear and anguish of his Disciples, is his only word; for so it is
written, But by and by Jesus spoke unto them, saying, Be of good comfort, it is
I, be not afraid. The natural man (that cannot understand the power of God)
would have desired some other present comfort in so great a danger; as, Either
to have had the heavens to have opened, and to have showed unto them such light
in that darkness, that Christ might have been fully known by his own face; or
else, That the Winds and raging Waves of the Seas suddenly should have ceased:
or some other Miracle that had been subject to all their senses, whereby they
might have perfectly known that they were delivered from all danger. And
truly, equal it had been to Christ Jesus to have done any of these (or any
work greater) as to have said, It is I, be not afraid: But willing to teach us
the dignity and effectual power of his most Holy Word, he uses no other
Instrument to pacify the great and horrible fear of his Disciples, but the
same his comfortable Word, and lively Voice; and this is not done only at one
time, but whenever his Church is in such straight perplexity, that nothing
appears but extreme calamity, desolation and ruin; Note.
then the first comfort that ever it receives, is by the means of his Word
and Promise: As in the troubles and temptations of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Moses, David and Paul may appear.

To Abraham was given no other defense, Abraham.
after that he had discomfited four Kings (whose posterity and lineage, no
doubt, he, being a stranger, greatly feared) but only this promise of God made
to him by his holy Word; Genesis 15.
Fear not, Abraham, I am thy Buckler; that is, Thy protection and defense.

The same we find of Isaac, Isaac.
who flying from the place of his accustomed habitation, Genesis 16.
compelled thereto by hunger, gat no other comfort nor conduct, but this
promise only, I will be with thee.

In all the journeyes and temptations of Jacob, Jacob.
the same is to be espied; As when he fled from his fathers house, Genesis 23
31.32.35.
for fear of his brother Esau, when he returned from Laban; And when he feared
the inhabitants of the Region of the Canaanites and Peresites, for the
slaughter of the Sichemites committed by his sons; he receives none other
defense, but only Gods Word and Promise.

And this in Moses, Moses.
and in the afflicted Church under him, is most evident: For when Moses himself
was in such despair, Exodus 5.
that he was bold to chide with God, saying, Why have thou sent me? for since
that time I have come to Pharaoh, to speak in thy Name, he has oppressed this
people: Neither yet have thou delivered thy people.

This same expostulation of Moses, declares how sore he was tempted; yea, and
what opinion he had conceived of God, that is, That God was either impotent,
and could not deliver his people from such a tyrants hands; or else, That he
was mutable, and unjust of his promises. And this same, and sorer temptations,
assaulted the people; For in anguish of heart, they both refused God and Moses
(as we before have partly touched.) And what means used God to comfort them in
that great extremity? Did he straightway suddenly kill Pharaoh, the great
Tyrant? No. Did he send them a legion of Angels to defend and deliver them? No
such thing: But he only recites and beats into their ears his former
promises to them, which oftentimes they had before; And yet the rehearsal of
the same wrought so mightily in the heart of Moses, that not only was
bitterness and despair removed away, but also he was enflamed with such
boldness, that without fear he went again to the presence of the King, after
he had been threatened and repulsed by him.

This I write, beloved in the Lord, that ye knowing the Word of God not only
to be that, Romans 1. Psalm. 119.
whereby were created heaven and earth, but also to be the power of God to
salvation, The power and eff^ctuall operation of Gods Word.
to all that believe; the bright lantern to the feet of those that by nature
walk in darkness; the life to those that by sin are dead; a comfort to such
as be in tribulation; the tower of defense to such as be most feeble; the
wisdom and great felicity of such as delights in the same; and to be short,
You know Gods Word to be of such efficacy and strength, that thereby is sin
purged, death vanquished, tyrants suppressed, and finally, the devil the
author of all mischief, overthrown and confounded. This (I say) I write, that
ye, knowing this of the holy Word, and most blessed Gospel and voice of God
(which once you have heard, I trust, to your comfort) may now in this hour of
darkness, and most raging tempest, thirst and pray, That ye may hear yet once
again this amiable voice of your Savior Christ, Be of good comfort, it is I,
fear not. And also that ye may receive some consolation by that blessed Gospel
which before you have professed, assuredly knowing, That God shall be no less
merciful unto you, then he has been to other afflicted for his Names sake
before you. And albeit that God speedily removes not this horrible darkness,
neither suddenly pacifieth this tempest, yet shall he not suffer his tossed
Ship to be drowned.

Remember, brethren, That Gods vengeance plagued not Pharaoh the first year of
his tyranny; Exodus 4 Reg 9.
Neither did the dogs devour and consume both the flesh and bones of wicked
Iezabel, when she first erected and set up her Idolatry: And yet, as none of
them escaped due punishment, so did God preserve his afflicted Church, in
despite of Satan, and of his blind and most wretched servants; as he shall
not fail to do in this great tempest and darkness within the Realm of
England. And therefore yet again, beloved in the Lord, let the comfort of Gods
promises somewhat quicken your dulled spirits; exercise your selves now
secretly, in revolving that which sometimes you have heard openly proclaimed in
your ears; and be every man now a faithful Preacher unto his brother: Luke 24
If your communication be of Christ, assuredly he will come before you be
aware: His Word is like unto sweet smelling Ointment, or fragrant flowers,
Simile.
which never can be moved nor handled, but forth goes the odor, to the
comfort of those that stand by; which is nothing so delectable, if the Ointment
remain within the Box, and the flowers stand or lie without touching or motion.

Mark well dear brethren, before that Christ spoke, his disciples judged him to
have been some wicked spirit, which was to them no delectable savor; But when
he speaks, the sweet sound of his voice pierces their hearts; For what
comfort was in the hearts of the disciples, when they heard these words, Be of
good comfort, it is I? that is, Judge not that I am a spirit come to your
destruction; no, even I am come for your deliverance: It is I, your Master;
yea, your Master most familiar: It is I, whose Voice and Doctrine you know, for
ye are my sheep: It is I, whose works you have seen, Math. and John, (...).
although perfectly ye considered not the same: It is I, who commanded you to
enter into this journey, and therefore am I come to you now in the hour of your
trouble; and therefore, be not afraid, this storm shall cease, and you shall be
delivered.

What comfort, I say, dear brethren, was in the hearts of the disciples,
hearing Christ's voice, and knowing him by the same, can neither the tongue or
pen of man express, but only such, as after long conflict and strife (which
is betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit, in the time of extreme troubles, when
Christ appears to be absent) feels at last the consolation of the holy
Ghost, witness and declare.

And Peter gives some external sign, what Christ's words wrought inwardly in
his heart: For immediately after he heard his Masters voice, he says, Lord, if
it be thou, command me to come unto thee upon the waters. Here it may be seen
what Christ's voice had wrought in Peter's heart; truly not only a forgetting
and contempt of the great tempest, but also such boldness and love, that he
could fear no danger following, but assuredly did believe, That his Master
Christ's puissance, power, and might was such, that nothing might resist his
Word and Commandment, and therefore he says, Note that Peter consid^red not
his own weakness.
Command me to come: As though he should say, I desire no more but the
assurance of thy Commandment: If thou will command, I am determined to obey;
For assuredly I know, That the waters cannot prevail against me, if thou speak
the word: So that whatsoever is possible unto thee, by thy Will and Word may be
possible unto me.

Thus Christ, to instruct Peter further, and us by his example, condescended to
his Petition, and commanded him to come; and Peter quickly leaving the Ship,
came down from it, and walked upon the waters, to come to Christ. Thus far of
Peter's fact, in which lies great abundance of Doctrine; but I will pass over
all that especially appertains not to the quality of this time within the
Realm of England.

Before it is said (welbeloved Brethren) That sometimes the messengers of life
are judged to be the very messengers of death; and that not only with the
reprobate, but also with Gods elect; as was Moses with the Israelites; Jeremiah
with the City of Jerusalem, The sherp at length know the voice of their own
Pastor.
and Christ himself with his Apostles: But that is not a sin permanent, and
that abides for ever with Gods elect, but it vanishes away in such sort, that
not only they know the voice of their Pastor, but also they earnestly study to
obey and follow it, with the danger of their own lives: For this is the
special difference betwixt the children of God, and the reprobate:

The one obeys God speaking by his Messengers, The Elect.
whom they embrace with unfeigned love: and that they do, sometimes not only
against all worldly appearance, but also against Civil Statutes and Ordinances
of men: And therefore in their greatest extremity receive they comfort beyond
expectation.

The other always resists Gods Messengers, The Repr^bate.
and hates his Word: And therefore in their great adversity God either takes
from them the presence of his Word, or else they fall into so deadly despair,
that although Gods Messengers be sent unto them, yet neither can they receive
comfort by Gods promises, neither follow the counsel of Gods true Messengers,
be it never so perfect and fruitful. Hereof have we many evident Testimonies
within the Scriptures of God.

Of Saul it is plain, 1 Reg 28.
That God so left him, that neither would he give him answer by Prophet, Saul.
Dream, nor Vision.

To Ahaz King of Judah, 2 Reg. 18.
in his great anguish and fear which he had conceived by the multitude of those
that were conjured against him, Ahaz.
was sent Isaiah the Prophet, to assure him by Gods promise, That his enemies
should not prevail against him: Isai. 7.
and to confirm him in the same, the Prophet required him to desire a sign of
God, either from the heaven, or beneath in the deep: But such was the deadly
despair of him, that always had despised Gods Prophets, and had most
abominably defiled himself with Idolatry, that no consolation could enter into
his heart, but desperately, and with a dissembling and fained excuse, he
refused all the offers of God.

God sometime shows mercy to an hypocrit, for the cause of his Church
And albeit God kept touch with that hypocrite for that time (which was not done
for his cause, but for the safety of his afflicted Church) yet after escaped he
not the vengeance of God.

The like we read of Zedekiah the wretched and last King of Judah, before the
destruction of the City of Jerusalem, who in his great fear, and extreme
anguish, sent for Jeremiah the Prophet, and secretly demanded of him, How he
might escape the great danger that appeared, when the Caldeans besieged the
City. Jerem. 37, 38.
And the Prophet boldly spoke and commanded the King, if he would save his life
and the City, to render and give up himself into the hands of the King of
Babylon. But the miserable King had no grace to follow the Prophets counsel,
because he never delighted in the said Prophets Doctrine, neither yet had
showed unto him any friendly favor; But even as the enemies of God, the chief
Priests and false Prophets required of the King, so was the good Prophet evilly
used; sometimes cast into prison, and sometimes judged and condemned to die.
The most evident testimony of the wilful blinding of wicked Idolaters, is
written and recited in the same Prophet Jeremiah, as follows.

After that the City of Jerusalem was burnt and destroyed, the King led away
prisoner, Jerem. 42.
his sons and chief Nobles slain, and the whole vengeance of God poured out
upon the disobedient; yet there was left a remnant in the Land, to make use of
and possess the same, who called upon the Prophet Jeremiah, to know concerning
them the will and pleasure of God, Whether they should remain still in the Land
of Judea, as was appointed and permitted by the Caldeans, Or if they should
depart and fly into Egypt: To certify them of this their duty, they desire
the Prophet to pray unto God for them: Who condescending and granting their
Petition, promised to keep back nothing from them, which the Lord God should
open unto him. Read the Text, Jer 42.
And they in like manner taking God to record and witness, made a solemn Vow,
To obey whatsoever the Lord should answer unto him. But when the Prophet, by
the inspiration of the Spirit of God, and assured revelation and knowledge of
his Will, commanded them to remain still in the Land that they were in,
promising them, if they so would do, That God would there plant them; and that
he would repent of all the plagues that he had brought upon them; and that he
would be with them, to deliver them from the hands of the King of Babylon. But
contrariwise, if they would not obey the voice of the Lord, but would against
his Commandment go to Egypt, thinking that there they should live in rest and
abundance, without any fear of War, and penury of victual, then the very
plagues which they feared, should come upon them, and take them: For (says the
Prophet) it shall come to pass, That all men that obstinately will go to
Egypt, there to remain, shall die, either by sword, by hunger or pestilence:
But when the Prophet of God had declared unto them this plain sentence and will
of God, I pray you, what was their answer? The text declared it, saying, Thou
speak a lie, neither has the Lord our God sent thee unto us, Jerem. 43.
commanding that we should not go into Egppt, but Baruch the son of Neriah
provokes thee against us, that he may give us into the power of the Caldees,
that they might kill us, and lead us prisoners into Babylon: And thus they
refused the counsel of God, and followed their own fantasies.

Here may be espied in this people great obstinacy and blindness; Great
blindness
for nothing which the Lord had before spoken by this Prophet Jeremy, had
fallen in vain; Their own eyes had seen the plagues and miseries which he had
threatened, take effect in every point, as he had spoken before; yea, they were
yet green and fresh both in mind and presence (for the flame and fire
wherewith Jerusalem was consumed and burnt, was then scantly quenched) and yet
could they not believe his threatenings then spoken, neither yet could they
follow his fruitful counsel, given for their great wealth and safeguard. And
why so? Because they never delighted in Gods Truth, Jer. 44.
neither had they repented their former Idolatry, but still continued and
rejoiced in the same, As Papists would have League with the Emperor.
as manifestly appears in the four and fortieth Chapter of the same Prophet;
and therefore would they and their wives have been in Egypt, where all kind of
Idolatry and Superstition abounded, that they (without reproach or rebuke)
might have their Bellyes full thereof in despite of Gods holy Laws and
Prophets. In writing hereof it came to my mind, that after the death of that
innocent and most godly King Edward the sixth, What was said in Hamme^sham when
uproar was for establishing of Mary in authority.
while that great tumult was in England, for the establishing of that most
unhappy and wicked woman's Authority (I mean of Mary that now reigns in Gods
wrath) entreating the same argument in a Town in Buckingam Shire, named
Hammersham, before a great congregation, with sorrowful heart and weeping
eyes, I fell into this exclamation;

O England, now is Gods wrath kindled against thee, now has he begun to
punish, as he has threatened a long while, by his true Prophets and Messengers;
he has taken from thee the Crown of thy glory, and has left thee without
honor, as a body without a head: And this appears to be only the beginning
of sorrows, which appears to increase; for I perceive that the heart, the
tongue and hand of one English man is bent against another, and devision to be
in the whole Realm, which is an assured sign of desolation to come. O England,
England, do thou not consider, that the Commonwealth is like a Ship sailing
on the Sea, A Commonwealth compared to a Ship sailing on the Sea.
if thy Mariners and Governors shall one consume another, shall thou not
suffer shipwreck in short process of time? O England, England, (alas) these
plagues are powered upon thee, for that thou would not know the most happy
time of thy gentle Visitation: But will thou yet obey the voice of thy God, and
submit thy self to his holy words? Truly, if thou will thou shall find mercy
in his sight, and the estate of thy Commonwealth shall be preserved.

But, O England, England, if thou obstinately wilt return into Egypt, that is,
If thou contract Marriage, Confederacy, or League with such Princes, as do
maintain and advance Idolatry (such as the Emperor, who is no less enemy unto
Christ then ever was Nero;) if for the pleasure and friendship (I say) of such
Princes thou returnest to thine old abominations, before used under the
Papistrie, then assuredly (O England) thou shall be plagued and brought to
desolation by the means of those whose favors thou seek, and by whom thou
art procured to fall from Christ, and to serve Antichrist.

This and much more in the dolor of my heart, that day, in the audience of
such as yet may bear record, (through Gods permission) I then pronounced: The
thing that I then most feared, and which also my Tongue spoke (that is, The
subversion of the true Religion, and bringing in of Strangers to reign over
that Realm) this day I see come to pass in men's councels and determinations;
which if they proceed and take effect, as by men it is concluded, then so
assuredly as my God lives, and as those Israelites that obstinately returned
into Egypt again, The end shall declare.
were plagued to the death; so shall England taste what the Lord has threatened
by his Prophets before. God grant us true and unfeigned repentance of our former
offenses. God for his great mercies sake stir up some Phinies, Elias, or
Iehu, that the blood of abominable Idolaters may pacify Gods wrath, that it
consume not the whole multitude. Amen.

Enemies to the Truth receive no comfort of Gods Messengers.
But to return to our matter; of the premises it is plain, That such as
contemn Gods eternal verity and grace, can neither in their troubles receive
comfort by Gods Messengers, neither yet can they follow the counsel of God, be
it never so profitable, but God gives them over, and suffers them to wander
in their own vanities, to their own perdition; whereas contrariwise, The
godly and chosen of God.
such as bears a reverence to Gods most Holy Word, are drawn by the power and
virtue of the same (as before is said) to believe, follow and obey that which
God commands, be it never so hard, so unapparent or contrary to their
affections: And therefore as God always keeps appointment with them, so are
they wonderously preserved, when Gods vengeances are powered forth upon the
disobedient. Genesis 12.
And this is most evident in Abraham, at Gods commandment, leaving his
Country, and going forth he knew not whither; which was a thing not so easy
to be done, Genesis 15. Genesis 22.
as it is to be spoken or read. It appears also in Abraham, believing Gods
promises, against all appearance, and also in offering his son Isaac, Exodus
5.7.10. 1 Reg. 16. 3 Reg 21.
against all fatherly love and natural affection. The same is said, in Moses,
Samuel, Hezekiah, Michaiah, and other of the Prophets, which at the commandment
of Gods Word, boldly passed to the presence of Tyrants, and there to them did
their message, as charge was given unto them.

Object.
But lest that some should allege, that these examples appertains nothing to
a multitude, because they were done in singular men, I answer, Answer.
We will consider what the power of Gods Word has wrought in many at one
instance. Exodus 32.
After that the Israelites had made the golden Calfe, and so fallen to
Idolatry; Gods Word sometimes moves great multitudes.
Moses coming down from the mountain, and beholding their abominations (the
honor that they gave to an Idol) and the people spoiled of their earrings and
jewels, to their great rebuke and shame, was enflamed with such zeal,
indignation and wrath, that first, he brake the Tables of the Commandments;
then he beat their Calfe to powder, and gave it to them to drink, to cause them
to understand, That their filthy guts should receive that which they worshipped
for God: And finally, Why Moses caused the Israelites do drink the powder of
the golden calf.
he commanded that every man that was of God should approach and come nigh unto
him: And the sons of Levi (says the Text) came to him; to whom he said, Thus
says the Lord God of Israel; Let every man put his sword upon his thigh, and
go in and out from Port to Port in the Tents; and let every man kill his
brother, Exodus 32.
his neighbor, and every man his nigh kinsman: And the sons of Levi did
according to the word of Moses: A sharp sentence against Idolaters.
And there fell the same day of the people nigh three thousand. It is evident
by this history, That the power of Gods Word, pronounced by the mouth of a man,
prevailed at one time in a great number against nature, and compelled them to
be executers of Gods vengeance, regarding nothing the affinity nor nighnesse of
blood: And also that their doing so well pleased Moses the Ambassador of God,
that he said unto them, Consecrate your hands this day every man in his own
son, Genesis 34.
and in his own brother, that a fortunate benediction may be given to you this
day. As though he should say; Your father Levi profaned and defiled his hands,
killing the Sichemites in his blind rage, which moved his father Jacob in his
last Testament, to condemn, execrate and curse that his most vehement and
ungodly zeal: Genesis 49.
But because in this work you have preferred Gods Commandment before blood,
nature and also affection, in place of that rebuke and curse, you have obtained
blessing and praise.

The like puissance and virtue of Gods Word working in a multitude, Jerem.
21.38.
is to be read in the Prophet Jeremiah; who perceiving the time of Gods
vengeance to draw nigh, and the City of Jerusalem to be besieged, boldly cries
out in his open Sermon, saying, He that remains in this City shall die,
Jerem. 21. Jerem. 38,
either by sword, by hunger, or by pestilence. But he that shall go forth to
the Caldeans, shall live, and shall find his soul for a prey. This might have
appeared a deceivable, seditious and ungodly Sermon, to command subjects to
depart from the obedience and defense of their native Prince, rich Citizens and
valiant soldiers from their possessions and strong Holds, and to will them to
render themselves, without all manner of resistance, into the hands of
strangers, being their enemies. What carnal man would not have judged the
persuasions of the Prophet most foolish and false? And yet in the hearts of
such as God had elected and appointed to life, so effectually wrought this
Sermon, that a great number of Jerusalem left their King, their City, riches
and friends, and obeyed the Prophets counsel: for so may be espied by the
answer of Zedechias the King, when Jeremiah counseled him, That he should
render himself into the hands of Nebuchadonoser, Jerem. 38.
he says, I fear these Jews, that are fled to the Caldeans, lest perchance
they give me into their hands.

Hereof it is plain, That many were departed from him, whom he feared more then
he did his enemies.

Many more testimonies might be brought, to declare how mightily Gods Word,
spoken by man, has wrought in the hearts of great multitudes: As in the hearts
of the Ninevites, Jon. 3.
who at Ionahs Preaching condemned their former Religion, conversation and
life: And in the hearts of those three thousand who at Peter's first Sermon
openly made after Christ's Ascension, acknowledged their offenses, repented, and
were soon after baptized. Act. 2.
But these premises are sufficient to prove, as well that Gods Word draws his
Elect after it, against worldly appearance, against natural affections, and
against evil Statutes and Constitutions; as also, That such as obey Gods
speaking by his Ministers, never lacks just reward, and recompense: For only
such as obeyed the voice of the Prophet, Jerem. 32.
found favor and grace, to the praise and glory of Gods Name, when his just
judgments took vengeance upon the disobedient. But now briefly by Notes we
will touch the rest of Peter's act, and Christ's merciful deliverance of him;
which is the end of all troubles sustained by Gods Elect.

And first, That Peter seeing a mighty wind, was afraid, and so, when he began
to sink, he cried, Lord save me, are three things principally to be noted: The
first, From whence comes the fear of Gods Elect. The second, What is the cause
that they faint and fall in adversity. The third, What rests with them in the
time of this fear and downsinking.


And first, it is plain, That so long as Peter had his eyes fixed upon Christ,
and attended upon no other thing but the voice of Christ, he was bold and
without fear: But when he saw a mighty wind (not that the wind was visible,
but the vehement storm and waves of the Sea that were stirred up and carried by
the wind were seen) then began he to fear, and to reason (no doubt) in his
heart, that better it had been for him to have remained in his Ship; for so
might Christ have come to him: But now the storm and rage of wind was so
vehement, that he could never come to Christ, and so he greatly feared. Whereof
it is plain, That the only cause of our fear that have left our Ship, and
through the storms of the Sea would go to Christ with Peter, The cause of fear.
is, That we more consider the dangers and letts that are in our journey, then
we do the Almighty power of him that has commanded us to come to himself. And
this is a sin common to all the elect and chosen children of God, That
whenever they see a vehement trouble appearing to let them, and drive them
back from the obedience of God, then begin they to fear and to doubt of Gods
power and good will.

Genesis 12. Exodus 34. Isa. 36, 37.
With this fear was Abraham stricken, when he denied his wife. This storm saw
Moses, when he refused to be Gods Messenger. And Hezekiahs sore complaint
declares, That more he believed, considered, and looked upon the proud voices,
and great power of Sennacherib, then he did the promises of the Prophet.

This I note for this purpose, That albeit this late and most raging storm
within the Realm of England have taken from you the presence of Christ for a
time, so that you have doubted whether it was Christ which you saw before, or
not. And albeit that the vehemence of this contrary wind that would drive you
from Christ have so employed your ears, that almost you have forgotten what he
was who commanded you to come to himself, Matthew. 11.
when that he cried, Come unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I
shall refresh you. Pass from Babylon, O my people, etc. Albeit (I say) that
this raging tempest have stricken such fear in your heart, Apoc. 18.
that almost all is forgotten; yet (dear brethren) despair not, such offenses
have chanced to Gods Elect before you. Note.
If obstinately ye shall not continue, yet shall you find mercy and grace. It
had been your duty indeed, and agreeable to your profession, to have looked to
Christ alone, and to have contemned all impediments; but such perfection is not
always with man, but happy is he that feels himself to sink.

The cause that Godt elect begin to faint and to sink down in the time of Peter
does appear; for so long as he neither feared danger, neither mistrusted
Christ's word, so long as the waves (above, and contrary to their nature) did
obey and serve his feet, Lively faith makes a man bold.
as they had been the dry, solid and sure ground: But so soon as he began to
despair and fear, so soon began he to sink: To instruct us, That lively faith
makes man bold, and is able to carry us through such perils, as be incapable to
nature; But when faith begins to faint, then begins man to sink down in
every danger; as in the Histories before rehearsed, it may appear, 3. Reg. 18.
and in the Prophets it is plain; for Elias at Gods Commandment passing to the
presence of King Ahab, in the fervency of his faith, obtained the fire to come
from heaven, and to consume his Sacrifice: by which also he was made so bold,
that in the presence of the King he feared nothing to kill his false Prophets.
But the same Elias hearing of the managing and threatenings of cursed Iezabel,
3. Reg. 19.
and considering that the wrath of a wicked woman could by no reasonable means
be appeased, The creature can never dispute with God without sin.
he saw a storm, and feared the same, and so he prepared to fly; which he
does not without some sinking down, for he began to reason and dispute with
God, which never can be done by the Creature, without foolishness and offense.
The same we find in Jeremy, and many more.

But the Question may be asked, Quest.
Seeing Christ knew before what should happen to Peter, why did he not hinder
him from coming from his Boat? or else, Why did he not so confirm him in faith,
that he should not have doubted?

To the which may be answered; Answ.
Albeit that we could render no reason of this work of Christ, yet were the
work it self a sufficient reason; and it were enough to answer, That so it
pleased him, who is not bound to render a reason of all his works: But yet if
we shall mark with deligence to what Office Peter was to be called, Gods works
by them self are a sufficient reason.
and what offenses long rested with him, we shall find most just and necessary
causes of this work of Christ, and down sinking of Peter. It is plain that
Peter had many notable virtues, as a zeal and fervency toward Christ's glory,
Peter's virtue*
and a readiness and forwardness to obey his commandments; but it is like
plain, That of long continuance there rested with Peter a desire of honor and
worldly rest (and that moved him to persuade Christ that he should not die. The
vice that long rested with Peter.
) There rested with him pride, Matthew. 16.
presumption, and a trust in himself; which presumption and vain trust in his
own strength, unless it had been corrected, he had never been fit to have fed
Christ's flock: Note.
And such sins can never be fully corrected or reformed, till they be felt,
known, and confessed. Doubtless so arrogant is our nature, that neither will
it know nor confess the infirmity of it self, until such time as it has a
trial by manifest experience; This is most plain by Peter, long after this
tempest; for when Christ said to his Disciples, This night shall ye all be
slandered in me, Peter boldly bragged and said, Matthew. 26.
Albeit that all should be slandered, and should fly from thee, yet shall not
I be slandered, but I am ready to go to prison, and to die with thee. This was
a bold presumption, and an arrogant promise spoken in contempt of all his
Brethren, from which he could not be reduced by Christ's admonition, but the
more that Christ showed him, that he should deny him, the more bold was he to
affirm the contrary; as though his Master Christ (the Author of all Truth, yea
rather truth it self) should make a loud lie; and therefore of necessity it
was, that he should prove in experience what was the frailty of man's nature,
and what was the imbecility and weakness of faith, even in those, that were
his chief Apostles, which had continually heard his heavenly Doctrine, seen
daily his wonderful Miracles, which had heard themselves so many admonitions
of him, which also had followed and obeyed him in many things. That
imbecillitie and weakness of faith, if Peter had not proved and felt it in
himself, neither could he rightly have praised Gods infinite goodness, and
embraced his free mercy; neither had he been apt and meet to have been a a
Pastor to the weak sheep and tender lambs of Christ, but he should have been as
proud a contemner and dispiser of his weak brethren, as the arrogant Papists,
that contemn and despise all godly and great learned men, though they be a
thousand parts more excellent then they. Why Peter was suffered to sink.
But to correct and inform both presumptuous arrogance and frail imbecilitie
and weakness of faith, Peter was permitted once to sink, and thrice most
shamefully to refuse and deny his Master, to the intent that by the knowledge
of his own weakness, he might be the more able to instruct others of the same;
and also that he might more largely magnify Gods free grace and mighty
deliverance: And that Christ taught him before his falling; saying, Luke 22.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren: As though Christ should have
said, Peter, yet art thou too proud to be a Pastor, thou can not stoop nor
bow thy back down to take up the weak sheep, thou do not yet know thine own
infirmity and weakness, and therefore can thou do nothing but despise the
weak ones; but when thou shall be instructed by experience of thine own self,
what hid iniquity lurketh within the nature of man, then shall thou learn to
be humble, and stoop among other sinners; and also shall be an example to
others which after shall offend, as thou did, so that if they repent as thou
did, they need not despair of mercy, but may trust most assuredly of Christ
to obtain grace, mercy and forgiveness of sins, as thou did.

This fruit have we to gather (dear Brethren) of Peter's down-sinking in the
sea, (which was a secret knowledge and privy admonition, that he after should
deny Christ) that we are assured by the voice of Christ, if in the time of
trouble and extreme danger we cry with Peter, we shall be delivered as he was;
and if we mourn for our denial of Christ, as he did, we shall find the same
grace and favor at Christ's hand, that he found.

But now let us touch the third Note, which is this, That with Gods Elect in
their greatest fear and danger there rests some small spark of faith, which
by one means or other declares it self, albeit the afflicted person in fear
or danger, does not presently perceive the same. As herein Peter is most clear
and manifest. What rests with Gods Elect in their greatest danger.

The nature of faith.


For, perceiving himself to sink down, he cried, saying, Lord save me, which
words were a declaration of a lively and quick faith, which lay hid within his
afflicted and sore perplexed heart, whose nature is (I mean of faith) to hope
against hope, that is: against all appearance or likelihood to look for help
and deliverance, as the words of Peter witnesses that he did. He saw nothing
but the raging Sea ready to swallow him up. He felt nothing but himself sinking
down in body, and sore troubled in heart, and yet he cried: Lord save me. Which
words first delare, Peter knew the power and good will of God.
that he knew the power of Christ able to deliver him. For foolishness it had
been to have called for the help of him whom he had known to be impotent and
unable to help.

The calling for Christ's help by prayer in this extreme danger declared also
that Peter had some hope through his gracious goodness to obtain deliverance.
For in extreme perils impossible it is, that the heart of man can cry for Gods
help without some hope of his mercy.

It is also to be noted, that in his great jeopardy Peter murmureth not against
Christ. Neither does he impute or lay any crime or blame upon Christ, albeit,
at his commandment he had left his Bote. He says not: Why let thou me
sink, seeing that I have obeyed thy Commandment. Moreover, Peter asked help at
Christ alone, of whom he was persuaded both could and would help at a pinch. He
cried not upon Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Samuel, David; Neither upon any other of
the Patriarks, Prophets, or Saints departed: neither yet upon his own fellows
in the Boat, but upon Christ, at whose commandment he had left the Boat.

All these things together considered, declare, that Peter in this his extreme
fear and danger had yet some spark of faith (albeit in that present jeopardy
he had neither consolation nor comfort.) For these premises are undoubted
tokens that he had faith. But now to the end, which is this.

And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto
him: O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt. And when they were
come into the ship, the wind ceased; And they that were in the ship came and
worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God: And immediately
the ship was at the Land whither they went.

Hereof first is to be Noted, Psalm. 144.
That God is always nigh to those that call upon him faithfully; How nigh God is
in extreme peril to deliver his Elect that syithfully call upon him.
and so willing is he to deliver them, that neither can fear nor extreme danger
hinder his godly hand. Peter was sinking down, and looked for no other thing
but present death, and yet the hand of Christ prevented him. That that was
visibly and openly done to Peter in that his great peril, is invisibly and
secretly done to Christ's holy Church, Exodus 14. Hester 7.8 ^.
and to the chosen Members of Christ's mystical Body in all ages.

How nigh and ready was the Hand of God to deliver his people Israel, when they
were almost overwhelmed with despair in the days of Moses and Hester, Daniel
6. John 3. Act 12.
the History does witness: How nigh was God to Daniel amongst the Lions, To
Jonas in the Whales Belly, to Peter in the prison, is likewise most evidently
declared in the holy Scriptures. How suddenly and beyond all expectation was
David many times delivered from Saul's tyrany, his own heart confessed, and
compelled his pen to write, and tongue to sing, Psalm. 18.
saying, He sent from above, and has delivered me, he has drawn me forth of
many waters.

Open your ears (dear brethren) and let your hearts understand, That as our God
is unchangeable, so is not his gracious hand shortened this day. Our fear and
trouble is great, the storm that blows against us is sore and vehement, and
we appear to be drowned in the deep: but if we unfainedly know the danger, and
will call for deliverance, the Lords hand is nigher then the sword of our
enemies.

God flattereth not his Elect.
The sharp rebuke that Christ Jesus gave to Peter, teaches us, That God does
not flatter nor conceal the faults of his Elect, but makes them manifest, to
the end that the Offenders may repent, and that others may avoid the like
offenses.

Peter was not faithless.
That Christ called Peter of little faith, argues and declares (as we before
have noted) That Peter was not altogether faithless, but that he fainted, or
was uncertain in his faith, for so sounds the Greek term (...), whereof we
ought to be admonished, That in passing to Christ through the storms of this
world, is not only required a fervent faith in the beginning, Matthew 10. 2 Timothy
2.
but also a constancy to the end; as Christ says, He that continues to the
end, shall be saved; and Saint Paul, Unless a man shall strive lawfully, Such
as have stood long, may yet fall.
he shall not be crowned. The remembrance of this ought to put us in mind,
That the most fervent man, and such as have long continued in profession of
Christ, is not yet sure to stand at all hours, but that he is subject to many
dangers, and that he ought to fear his own frailty, as the Apostle teaches us,
saying, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall; for if Peter that began
so fervently, yet fainted ere he came to Christ, what ought we to fear, in whom
such fervency was never found? No doubt we ought to tremble and fear the worst;
and by the knowledge of our own weakness, Luke 17.
with the Apostles, incessantly to pray, O Lord increase our faith. Christ's
demand and question, asking Peter, Why doubtest thou? contains in it self a
vehemence; Note.
as if he should have said, Whether doubtest thou of my power, or of my
promises, or of my good will? If my power had not been sufficient to have saved
thee, then could I neither have come to thee through the stormy Sea, neither
have made the waters obey thee, when thou beganst to come to me; and if my good
will had not been to have delivered thee, and thy Brethren, then had I not
appeared unto you, neither had I called upon thee, but had permitted the
Tempest to devour and swallow you up: We have less pretense of excuse then
Peter had.
but considering that your eye saw me present, your ears heard my voice, and
thou Peter especially knew the same, and obeyedst my commandment, why then
doubtest thou? Beloved brethren, If this same demand and question were laid to
our charge, we should have less pretense of excuse then had Peter; for he
might have alleged, That he was not advertised that any great Storm should
have risen betwixt him and Christ, Note.
which justly we cannot allege; for since that time that Christ has appeared
unto us by the brightness of his Word, and called upon us by his lively voice,
he has continually blown in our ears, That persecution and trouble should
follow the Word that we professed, which days are now present. Alas then, why
doubt we through this storm to go to Christ? Support, O Lord, and let us sink
no further.

Albeit that Peter fainted in faith, Consolation
and therefore was worthy most sharply to be rebuked, yet does not Christ leave
him in the Sea, neither long permitted he that fear and tempest to continue,
but first they entered both into the Ship, and thereafter the wind ceased; and
last, their Ship arrived without longer delay, at the place for which they long
had labored.

O blessed and happy are those that patiently abides this deliverance of the
Lord; The raging Sea shall not devour them: Albeit they have fainted, yet shall
not Christ Jesus leave them behind in the stormy Sea, but suddenly he shall
stretch forth his mighty hand, and shall place them in the Ship amongst their
brethren; that is, He shall conduct them to the number of his elect and
afflicted Church, Matthew. 28.
with whom he will continue to the end of the world.

The Majesty of his presence shall put to silence this boisterous wind,
Worldly Princes are conjured against God
the malice and envy of the devil which so blows in the hearts of Princes,
Prelates, Psalm. 2.
Kings, and of earthly men, that altogether they are conjured against the Lord,
and against his Anoyned Christ; in despite of whom, he safely shall conduct,
convey, and carry his sore troubled Flock to the life and rest for which they
travel.

Albeit (I say) that sometimes they have fainted in their journey, The sheep of
Christ cannot be rent from his hand.
albeit that weakness in faith permitted them to sink, yet from the hand of
Christ can they not be rent; he may not suffer them to drown, nor the deep to
devour them: Joh. 10.
But for the glory of his own Name he must deliver, for they are committed to
his charge, Joh. 7.
protection, and keeping; and therefore must he keep and defend such as he has
received at his father, from sin, from death, from devil and hell.

The remembrance of these promises is to mine own heart such occasion of
comfort, as neither can any tongue nor pen express, but yet peradventure some
there is of Gods elect that cannot be comforted in this tempest, by any
meditations of Gods election or defense, but rather beholding such as sometimes
boldly have professed Christ's Verity, The temptations of Gods elect now in
England.
now to be returned to their accustomed abominations; And also themselves to be
overcome with fear, that against their knowledge and conscience they stoup to
an Idol, and with their presence maintains the same; and being at this point,
they begin to reason, Whether it be possible that the members of Christ's body
may be permitted so horribly to fall to the denial of their Head; and in the
same to remain of long continuance: And from this reasoning they enter in
dolor, and from dolor, they begin to sink to the gates of hell; and Ports of
despair.

The dolor and fear of such I grant to be most just: For oh how fearful is
it, for the love of this transitory life, in the presence of man to deny Christ
Jesus, and his known and undoubted Verity?

But yet to such as be not obstinate contemners of God, and of all godliness,
I would give this my weak counsel, That rather they should appeal to mercy,
then by the severe judgments of God to pronounce against themselves the
fearful sentence of condemnation; and to consider that God includes all under
unbelief, that he may have mercy upon all: That the Lord fills and gives
life; he leads down to hell, and yet lifts up again. Good counsel to thee
in faith
But I will not that any man think, That by this my counsel I either justify
such as horribly are returned back to their vomit; Romans 11.
either yet that I flatter such as maintains that abominable Idol with their
daily presence; 1 Reg 2.
God forbid; For then were I but a blind guide leading the blind headlong to
perdition: Note.
Only God knows the dolor and sobs of my heart, for such as I hear daily do
turn back: But the cause of my counsel is, That I know the conscience of some
to be so tender, that whenever they feel themselves troubled with fear,
wounded with anguish, or to have sliden back in any point, that then they judge
their faith to be quenched, and themselves to be unworthy of Gods mercies for
ever; to such direct I my counsel; to those, I mean, that rather offends by
weakness and infirmity, To whom appertains the former counsel.
then of malice and set purpose. And I would that such should understand and
consider, that all Christ's Apostles fled from him, and denied him in their
hearts: And also I would they should consider, Matthew. 28.
That no man from the beginning stood in greater fear, greater danger, nor
greater doubt, then Peter did, when Christ's presence was taken from him; Note.
yea, no man felt less comfort, nor saw less appearance of deliverance; and
yet neither were the disciples rejected for ever, neither was Peter permitted
to drown in that deep.

Objection.
But some shall object, Faith was not utterly quenched in them, and therefore
they got deliverance, and were restored to comfort.

Answer.
Answ. That is it which I would that the afflicted and troubled consciences in
this age should consider, That neither fear, neither danger, neither yet
doubting nor backsliding, can utterly destroy and quench the faith of Gods
elect, but that always there remains with them some root and spark of faith,
The root of faith remains with Gods elect in greatest danger.
howbeit in their anguish, they neither feel nor can discern the same. Yet some
shall demand, How shall it be known in whom the spark and root of faith
remains, and in whom not, seeing that all flees from Christ, and boweth down
to Idolatry? Hard it is, and in a manner impossible, that one man shall
wittingly judge of another (for that could not Elijah do of the Israelites of
his days) but every man may easily judge of himself: 3 Reg. 19.
For the root of faith is of that nature, The root of faith is not idle.
that long it will not be idle, but of necessity, by process of time, it will
send forth some branches that may be seen and felt by the outward man, if it
ramain lively in the heart; as you heard it did in Peter, compelling him to cry
upon Christ, when that he was in greatest necessity. Will thou have a trial
whether the root of faith remains with thee or not? A trial of faith in
trouble
(I speak to such as are weak, and not to proud contemners of God.)

First, Feel thou thy soul fainting in faith, as Peter felt his body sink
down in the waters? Secondly, Art thou as sore afraid that thy soul should
drown in hell, if thou consentest or obeyest Idolatry, as Peter was that his
body should drown in the waters? 3. Desire thou as earnestly the deliverance
of thy soul, as Peter did the deliverance of his body? 4. Believe thou that
Christ is able to deliver thy soul, and that he will do the same, according to
his promise? 5. Do thou call upon him without hypocrisy, now in the day of
thy trouble? 6. Do thou thirst for his presence, and for the liberty of his
Word again? 7. Mournest thou for the great abominations that now over-flowes
the Realm of England?
If these premises (I say) remain in thy heart, then art thou not altogether
destitute of faith, neither shall thou descend to perdition for ever; but
mercifully shall the Lord stretch forth his mighty hand, and shall deliver thee
from the very throat and bottom of hell: It appertains not to man to know not
to enquire how God will deliver.
But by what means that he shall perform that his merciful work, it neither
appertains to thee to demand, nor to me to define: But this is requisite, and
is our bounden duty, that such means as the hand of our God shall offer (to
avoid Idolatry) we refuse not, but that willingly we embrace the same, albeit
it partly disagree to our affections. Note.
Neither yet think I that suddenly, and by one means, Diverse ways of
deliverance.
shall all the faithful in England be delivered from Idolatry: No, it may be
that God so strengthen the hearts of some of those that have fainted before,
that they will resist Idolatry to the death, and that were a glorious and
triumphant deliverance. Of others God may so touch the hearts, that they will
rather choose to walk and go as Pilgrims, from Realm to Realm, suffering
hunger, cold, heat, thirst, weariness, and poverty, then that they will abide
(having all abundance) in subjection of Idolatry. Note.
To some may God offer such occasion, that in despite of Idolaters (be they
Princes or Prelates) they may remain within their own Dominions, and yet neither
bow their knees to Baal, neither yet lack the lively Food of Gods most holy
Word. If God offer unto us any such means, The means offered by God to avoid
Idolatry are not to be refused,
let us assuredly know, That Christ Jesus stretched forth his hand unto us,
willing to deliver us from that danger wherein many are like to perish; and
therefore let us not refuse it, but with gladness let us take hold of it,
knowing that God has a thousand means (very unappearing to man's judgment)
whereby he will deliver, Repetition.
support and comfort his afflicted Church. And therefore, most dearly beloved
in our Savior Jesus Christ, considering that the remembrance of Christ's
Banquet (whereof, I doubt not, some of you have tasted with comfort and joy) is
not yet utterly taken from your mind; And that we have entered in this journey
at Christ's Commandments; considering that we find the Sea winds blow contrary
and against us, as before was prophesied unto us; and that we see the same
tempest rage against us, that ever has raged against Christ's elect Church; And
considering also that we feel our selves ready to faint, and like to be
oppressed by these stormy Seas, Let us prostrate our selves before the Throne
of Grace, in the presence of our heavenly Father, and in the bitterness of our
hearts let us confess our offenses, and for Christ Jesus sake let us ask
deliverance and mercy, saying, with sobs and groanings from our troubled hearts;

Complaint.
Isai. 78.
O God, the heathen are entered into thine Inheritance, they have defiled thy
holy Temple, and have profaned thy blessed Ordinance: In place of thy joyful
signs, Psalm. 74.
they have erected their abominable Idolatry: The deadly cup of all blasphemy
is restored again to their harlots hand: Thy Prophets are persecuted, and none
are permitted to speak thy Word freely: Apocal. 17.
The poor sheep of thy pasture are commanded to drink the venomous waters of
men's Traditions. But, O Lord, thou know how sore they grieve us. But such is
the tyranny of these most cruel beasts, that plainly they say, They shall root
us out at once, so that no remembrance shall remain of us on earth. Psalm 74,
and 87.


O Lord, thou know that we are but flesh, and that we have no power of our
selves to withstand their tyranny; And therefore, O Father, open the eyes of
thy mercy upon us, Prayer and Confession.
and confirm thou in us the Work which thine own mercy has begun. We
acknowledge and confess, O Lord, That we are punished most justly, because we
lightly regarded the tyranny of our merciful Visitation. Thy blessed Gospel
was in our ears like a lovers song; it pleased us for a time, but alas, our
lives did nothing agree with thy Statutes and holy Commandments: And thus we
acknowledge that our iniquity has compelled thy justice to take the light of
thy Word from the whole Realm of England. Appealing to mercy.
But be thou mindful O Lord, that it is thy Truth which we have professed,
and that thy enemies blasphemeth thy holy Name, and our Profession, without
Cause: Thy holy Gospel is called heresy, and we are accused as traitors, for
professing the same. Be merciful therefore, Isai. 33.
O Lord, and be salvation unto us in this time of our anguish: Albeit our sins
accuse and condemn us, yet do thou according to thine own Name. We have
offended against thee; Our sins and iniquities are without number, and yet art
thou in the midst of us, O Lord, albeit that tyrants bear rule over our bodies,
Jerem. 4.
yet thirsts our souls for the comfort of thy Word: Correct us therefore, but
not in thy hot displeasure; spare thy people, and permit not thine inheritance
to b^ in rebuke for ever. Let such, O Lord, as now are most afflicted, yet once
again praise thy holy Name before thy Congregation: Psalm. 74.
Repress the pride of those blood-thirsty Tyrants; consume them in thine
anger, according to the reproach which they have laid against thy holy Name.
Psalm. 59.
Pour forth thy vengeance upon them, Psalm. 79.
and let our eyes behold the blood of thy Saints required of their hands: Delay
not thy vengeance, Jerem. 10, 11, 12.
O Lord, but let death devour them in haste: Let the earth swallow them up, and
let them go down quick to the hells: For there is no hope of their amendment;
Psalm. 95.
the fear and reverence of thy holy Name is quite banished from their hearts,
Against the enemies of God.
and therefore yet again, O Lord, consume them; consume them in thine anger,
and let them never bring their wicked counsels to effect; but according to the
godly powers, let them be taken in the snare which they have prepared for thine
elect: Look upon us, O Lord, with the eyes of thy mercy, and show pity upon us
thy weak and sore oppressed Flock: Gather us yet once again to the wholesome
treasures of thy most holy Word, that openly we may confess thy blessed Name
within the Realm of England. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Christ Jesus
thy sons sake. Amen.

If on this manner or otherwise (as God shall put in our hearts) without
hypocrisy in the presence of our God (respecting more his glory then our
private wealth) continually we pour forth our complaint, confession and
prayers. Then so assuredly as our God lives, and as we feel these present
troubles, shall our God himself rise to our defense, he shall confound the
counsels of our enemies, and trouble the wits of such as most wrongfully
troubles us. He shall send Jesu to execute his just judgments against
Idolators, and against such as obstinately defends them. Yea, the chief men
of our times shall not escape the vengeance and plagues that are prepared for
their portion. The flatterers and maintainers of her abominations shall drink
the cup of Gods wrath. And in despite of the Devil shall yet the glory of
Christ Jesus, and the brightness of his countenance so shine in our hearts by
the presence of his grace, and before our eyes by the true preaching of his
Gospel, that altogether we shall fall before him and say: O Lord thou art our
God, we shall extol thee, Esaias 25.
and shall confess thy Name, for thou ^ast brought wondrous things to pass
according to thy counsels, which albeit appear to be far off, yet are they
true and most assured. Thou have brought to ruin the palaces of tyrants, and
therefore shall the afflicted magnify thee, and the City of tyrannical
Nations shall fear thee. Thou have been, O Lord, a strong defense to the poor,
a sure place of refuge to the afflicted in the time of his anguish.

This no doubt, Of Gods Elect
dear Brethren, shall one day be the song of Gods Elect within the Realm of
England, after that God has poured forth his vengeance upon these disobedient,
and blood-thirsty tyrants: which now triumphs in all abominations, and
therefore yet again beloved in the Lord, Exhortation.
Abide patiently the Lords deliverance, avoiding and flying such offenses as
may separate and divide you from the blessed fello^ship of the Lord Jesus at
his second coming. Watch and pray, resist the ^ivell, and row against this
vehement tempest, and shortly shall the Lord come, to the comfort of your
hearts, which now are oppressed with anguish and care, but then shall ye so
rejoice, that through gladness you shall say: Behold this our God, Esa 26.
we have waited upon him, and he has saved us. This is our Lord, we have long
thirsted for his coming, now shall we rejoice and be glad in his salvation,
Amen. The great Bishop of our souls* Jesus our Lord so strengthen and assist
your troubled hearts with the mighty comfort of his Holy Ghost, that earthly
tyrants, nor worldly torments have no power to drive you from the hope and
expectation of that Kingdom, which for the Elect was prepared from the
beginning by our heavenly Father, to whom be all praise and honor, now and
ever, Amen.

Remember me (dear Brethren) in your daily prayers. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.

Yours with sorrowful heart, JOHN KNOX.

The Copy of A LETTER Delivered To Queen Mary, Regent OF SCOTLAND, FROM JOHN
KNOX Minister of Gods Word, in the year of our Lord, 1556. and thereafter
augmented and explained by the Author, in the year of our Lord, 1558.
To the most Excellent Princess MARY, DOVVAGER Regent of Scotland. MADAME,
THE cause which moved me to present this my Supplication unto your Majesty,
enlarged, and in some places explained (being in the Realm of Scotland in the
Month of May, 1556. I caused to be presented to your Majesty) is the
incredible rage of such as bear the Title of Bishops, who, against all justice
and equity, have pronounced against me a most cruel sentence, condemning my
Body to Fire, my Soul to Damnation, and all Doctrine taught by me, to be
false, deceivable, and Heretical: If this injury did tend to me alone, having
the testimony of a good conscience, with silence I could pass the matter,
being assured, that such as they curse and expel their Synagogues for such
causes, shall God bless, and Christ Jesus receive in his eternal society:
But considering that this their blasphemy is vomited forth against the eternal
Truth of Christ's Evangell, (whereof it has pleased the great mercy of God to
make me a Minister) I cannot cease to notify, as well to your Majesty, as to
them, That so little am I afraid of their Tyrannical and surmised sentence,
that in place of the Picture (if God impede not my purpose) they shall have the
Body to justice that Doctrine, which they (Members of Satan) blasphemously do
condemn. Advertising your Majesty in the mean time, That from them, their
sentence and tyranny, and from all those that lift to maintain them in the
same, I do appeal to a lawful and general Council; beseeching your Majesty to
take in good part, that I call you for witness, that I have required the
liberty of tongue, and my Cause to be heard before your Majesty and the Body
of the Realm, before that any such Process was laid against me; as this my
Letter directed to your Majesty does testify.

The beginning of the Letter.
THE Eternal Providence of the same God, Genesis 3. Matt^. 10. Act. 4.
who has appointed his chosen Children to fight in this transistory and
wretched life, a battle strong and difficile, has also appointed their final
victory by a mavelous fashion, and the manner of their preservation in their
battle more mavelous; their victory stands not in resisting, Matthew. 5.
Joh. 14 16. Esaias. 9.
but in suffering; as our Sovereign Master pronounces to his Disciples, that
in patience they should possess their souls: And the same foresaw the
Prophet, Esaias, when that he painteth forth all other battle to be with
violence, tumult, and bloodshedding, but the victory of Gods people to be in
quietness, silence and hope; meaning that all others that obtain victory, do
enforce themselves to resist their adversaries, to shed bloood, and to murder:
But so do not the Elect of God, but all things they sustain at the commandment
of him who has appointed them to suffer; being most assuredly persuaded, that
then only they triumph, In the Cross of Christ i^ victory hid.
when all wen judge them oppressed: For in the Cross of Christ always is
included a secret and hid victory, never well known till the sufferer appear
all together to be (as it were) exterminate; for then only did the blood of
Abel cry to God, when proud Cain judged all memory of his brother to have been
extinguished; and so (I say) their victory is mavelous, and how that they can
be preserved and not brought to utter confusion, the eye of man perceives not:
Esaias 40.41.51.
But he, whose power is infinite, by secret and hid motions, touches the
hearts of such as to man's judgment has power to destroy them, with very piety
and compassion to save his people, as (in times past) he did the hearts of the
Egyptian Midwives, to preserve the men-children of the Israelites, when command
was given of Pharaoh for their destruction. Exodus 2.
The heart of Pharaohs daughter likewise, to pity Moses in his young infancy,
exposed to the danger of the waters. The heart of Nabuchadnezzar to preserve
the Captives alive, 4 Reg. 25. Jerem 52. Esd. 1.
and liberally to nourish the Children that were found apt to Letters: And
finally, The heart of Cyrus, to set at liberty the people of God, after long
bondage and thraldom. And thus does the invisible power and love of God,
manifest it self toward his Elect from time to time, for two causes specially.
Note.
First, to comfort his weak warriers in their manifold temptations, letting
them understand, That he is able to compel such as sometimes were enemies to
his people, to fight their Cause, and to promote their deliverance. And
secondarily, to give a testimony of his favor to them, that by all appearance
did l^ve before (as Saint Paul speaks) wanting God in the world, ^phes 2.
as strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and without the league of his
merciful promise and free grace m^de to his Church: For who would have
affirmed, That any of these persons aforenamed, had been of that nature and
clemency, before occasions were offered unto them? But the works of mercy
showed to the afflicted, have left to as assurance, That God used them as
vessels of his honor. For pity and mercy showed to Christ's afflicted flock,
as they never lacked reward temporal, so if they be continued, and be not
changed into cruelty, are assured signs and seals of everlasting mercy to be
received from God, who by his Holy Spirit moves their heats to show mercy to
the people of God oppressed and afflicted.

Addition.
THis Preface I used to give your Majesty occasion more deeply to consider
what has been the condition of Christ's Members from the beginning, that in so
doing, ye might see* That it is no new thing that the Saints of God be
oppressed in the word; that ye, moved by earnest contemplation of the same,
might also study rather to save them from murder, (although by the wicked
councels of many ye were provoked to the contrary) then to engage your self to
the corrupt Clergy, who are servants to sin and Satan; whose fury is bent
against God and his verity: But this after follows in our Let-which thus
proceeds.

Letter.
YOur Majesty perchance does wonder to what purpose these things be recited,
and I in very deed cannot wonder enough, that occasion is offered to me (a
worm most wretched) to recite the same at this present, for I have looked
rather for the sentence of death, then to have written to your Majesty in
these last and most wicked days, in which Satan so blinds the hearts of
many, that innocents are condemned, their Cause never tried.

Addition.
HEreof ye cannot be ignorant: For besides these whom ye hear from time to time
most cruelly to be murdered in France, The causes why the Saints of God b^
this day persecuted
Italy, Spain, Flanders, and now of late years besides you in England, for no
other cause, but that they profess Christ Jesus to be the only Savior of the
world, 1 John 1.2. Heb. 6. and 10. Ephesians. 5.
The only Mediator betwixt God and man, The only Sacrifice acceptable for the
sins of all faithful; and finally, The only Head to his Church. Besides
these, I say (of whom ye hear the brute) ye have been witness, That some
within the Realm of Scotland, for the same cause, most cruelly have been
murdered, whose cause was never heard with indifferency; But murderers
sitting in the Seat of Justice, have shed the blood of Christ's true Witnesses;
which albeit did then appear to be consumed away with fire, yet it is resent in
the presence of him for whose cause they did suffer, and cease not to call
for vengeance, with the blood of Abel, to fall upon, not only such as were
immediate and next authors of that murder, but also upon all those that
maintain those tyrants in their tyranny, or that do consent to their beastly
cruelty, or that do not stop, having the power in hand. Take not this as the
affirmation of any man, but hear and consider the voice of the Son of God;
Fulfill (says he) the measure of your fathers, Matthew. 23.
that all the blood which has been shed since the blood of Abel the just, till
the blood of Zachariah, etc. may come upon this generation. Hereby it is
evident, That the murderers of our time, as well as in the time of Christ, are
guilty of all the blood that has been shed from the beginning. Fearful, I
grant, is the sentence; yet it is most equal and just: For whosoever sheddeth
the blood of any one of Christ Jesus his members, Whosoever sheddeth the Blood
of one of Christ's members, for his Names sake, consents to the blood of all
that have suffered since the beginning.
for professing of his Truth, consents to all the murder which has been
made since the beginning for that cause. So that as there is one communion of
all Gods Elect, of whom every member is participant of the holy Justice of
Christ; so is there a communion among the reprobate, by which every one of the
Serpents seed are criminal and guilty of all iniquity which the whole Body
commits, because they are altogether against Christ Jesus, and against his
eternal Verity; every one serving Satan the Prince of this world in their
rank, age, degree and estate. The murderers of their brethren which this day
live, Note.
are guilty with Cain of the blood of Abel: Genesis 4.
The Kings and Princes which by power oppress the people of God, and will not
suffer that the people truly worship God as he has commanded, but will retain
them in Egypt, are brethren and companions to Pharaoh: The Prelates and Priests,
whose horrible iniquities and insolent life have infected all Realms where
they reign, have with their fathers the old Pharisces, taken away the key of
knowledge, and have shut up the Kingdom of heaven before men; so that neither
they themselves will enter, neither yet will they suffer others to enter into
the same: And the multitude blinded, some by ignorance, some by fear, and by
insatiable appetite of their part of the spoil (for Christ being crucified, the
soldiers parted amongst them his garments) are conjured to defend those
murderers, proud pestilent Prelates, against Christ Jesus, and against his poor
Flock: And therefore, because of one crime, they are all guilty (which is, of
treason and rebellion against Christ) of one torment they shall all taste,
which is, Of the fire that never shall be quenched. And herein ought you,
Madame, be circumspect and careful, if that ye hope for the life to come: For
if the consent which proceeds of ignorance and blindness brings
destruction and death (as Christ our Master does witness, Matthew. 15.
saying, If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch)
What shall become of the proud and malicious contemners of Gods Verity offered?
But our Doctrine, perchance, shall be denied to be the Verity: Whereunto I
answer, Answer to an Objection.
That so was the Doctrine of Noah, of Moses, of the Prophets, of Christ Jesus,
and of his Apostles; and yet the original world perished by water, Genesis 19.
Exodus 14.
Sodom and Gomorra by fire descending from heaven; Josephus.
Pharaoh and his adherents in the Red Sea; the City of Jerusalem, and the whole
Nation of the Jews, by punishments and plagues, notwithstanding that the whole
multitude cried, This is a new doctrine, this is heresy, and tends to
sedition. Our Petition is, That our Doctrine may be tried by the plain Word of
God; The Petition of such as be persecuted.
That liberty be granted to utter and declare our minds at large in every
Article and Point which now are in controversy: Which if ye deny, giving ear
to Christ's enemies (who condemn his doctrine for heresy) ye shall drink the
Cup of Gods wrath with them. But now to the former Letter.

Letter.
I doubt not but the rumors which have come to your Majesty's ears, of me, have
been such, that if all reports were true, I were unworthy to live upon the
earth: And wonder it is, That the voices of the multitude should not so have
enflamed your Majesty's heart with just hatred of such a one as I am accused to
be, that all access to pity should have been shut up. I am traduced as an
heretic, accused as a false teacher and seducer of the people, besides other
opprobries, which (affirmed by men of worldly honor and estimation) may easily
kindle the wrath of Magistrates, where innonocence is not known. But blessed be
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by the dew of his heavenly grace,
has so quenched the fire of displeasure, as yet, in your Majesty's heart
(which of late days I have understood) that Satan is frustrate of his
enterprise and purpose; which is to my heart no small comfort; Not so much (God
is my witness) for any benefit that I can receive in this miserable life, by
protection of any earthly creature (for the cup which it behooves me to drink,
is appointed by the wisdom of him whose counsels are not changeable) as that I
am for that benefit which I am assured your Majesty shall receive, if that ye
continue in like moderation and clemency toward others that most unjustly are
and shall be accused, as that your Majesty has begun toward me, and my most
desperate Cause: that is, If that by godly wisdom ye shall study to bridle
the fury and rage of them, who, for the maintenance of their worldly pomp,
regard nothing the cruel murdering of simple innocents. Matthew. 5. Matthew. 10.
Then shall he who does pronounce mercy to appertain to the merciful, and
promises that a cup of cold water given for his Names sake shall not lack
reward, first cause your happy Government to be praised in this present age,
and in posterities to come; and last recompense your godly pains and study with
that joy and glory, ^ Cor. 2.
which eye has not seen, nor yet can enter into the heart of mortal creature.

Addition.
IF Christ's words were esteemed true, Matthew 10.
That of every idle word an account shall be given; and that nothing is so
secretly done, which shall not come to knowledge and light; I suppose that the
tongues of men should be better bridled, then impudently to speak their
pleasure in matters unknown. For albeit that the true fear of God should not
move them to speak truth; yet would I think (if any spark of humanity remained)
that worldly shame should impede them to lie. When reasoning was, before your
Majesty, what man it was that preached in Air, and diverse men were of diverse
opinions; some affirming, that it was an Englishman, and some supposing the
contrary; a Prelate, not of the least pride, said, Nay, no Englishman, but it
is Knox that Knave. It was my Lords pleasure so to Baptize a poor man. The
reason whereof, if it should be required, his Rochet and Miter must stand for
Authority. What further liberty he used in defining things like uncertain to
him, to wit, of my learning and doctrine, at this present I omit, Lamenting
more that such pestilent tongues have liberty to speak in the presence of
Princes, then that I am sorry for any hurt that their venom can do to me in
body or fame: For what has my life and conversation been, since it has
pleased God to call me from the puddle of Papistry, let my very enemies speak;
And what learning I have, they may prove when they please. The report of your
Majesty's moderation, as well at that time, as after, when suite was made for
my taking, moved me to write this my other Letter; in which, albeit, I have not
played the Orator, trimming and decking the matter for the pleasure of itching,
and delicate ears; yet does my conscience bear me record, That with simplicity
I have advertised you of a mortal danger; As this portion subsequent shall
prove.

Letter.
SUperfluous and foolish it shall appear to many, That I, a man of low estate
and condition, dare enterprise to admonish a Princess so honorable, endued
with wisdom, Exodus 20. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.
and graces singular. But when I consider the honor which God commands to be
given to Magistrates, which no doubt (if it be true honor) contains in it
self, in lawful things, obedience, and in all things, love and reverence. When
further I consider the troublesome state of Christ's true Religion, this day
oppressed by blindness of men; and lastly, The great multitude of flatterers,
and the rare number of them that boldly and plainly, dare speak the naked
verity in presence of their Princess, and principally in the cause of Christ
Jesus: These things I say, considered, whatsoever any man shall judge of my
enterprise, I am compelled to say, That

Unless in your Regiment, The first proportion.
and in using of Power, your Majesty be found different from the multitude of
Princes, and head Rulers, That this pre-eminence wherein ye are placed, shall
be your dejection to torment, and pain everlasting. This proposition is sore,
but alas it is so true, That if I should conceal and hide it from your Majesty,
I committed no less treason against your Majesty, then if I did see you by
imprudency take a Cup which I knew to be poisoned, or invenomed, and yet would
not admonish you to abstain from drinking of the same.

The second proposition.
The Religion which this day men defend by fire and sword, is a Cup invenomed,
of which whosoever drinks, (except that by true repentance, he after drink of
the water of life) drinks therewith damnation and death. John 4. Apo. 14. and
17.


How, and by whom it has been invenomed, if it were no more tedious to your
Majesty to read or hear, then it is painful to me to write or rehearse, I
would not spare the labor. But for this present, I have thought it some
discharge of one part of my duty, if I, of very love, admonish your Majesty of
the danger; which I do, as God one day shall declare, preferring your Majesty's
salvation, and the salvation of the People (now committed to your charge)
before any corporal benefit that can redound to my self.

Addition.
AS Satan by craft has corrupted the most holy Ordinances of Gods precepts, I
mean of the first Table, in the place of the spiritual honoring of God,
introducing men's dreams, inventions, and fantasies. So has he, abusing the
weakness of man, corrupted the precepts of the second Table, Touching the
honor which is due to Parents, under whom are comprehended Princes and
Teachers. For now the devil has so blinded the senses of many, that they
cannot, or at least, will not learn what appertains to God, Note.
and what to Caesar. But because the spirit of God has said, Honor the King;
therefore, whatsoever they command, be it right or wrong, must be obeyed. But
heavy shall the judgment be, which shall apprehend such blasphemers of Gods
Majesty, who dare be so bold as to affirm, That God has commanded any creature
to be obeyed against himself. Take heed of unlawful obedience.
Against God it is, That for the commandment of any Prince, be he never so
potent, men shall commit Idolatry, embrace a Religion which God has not
approved by his Word, or confirm, by their silence, wicked and blasphemous
Laws, made against the honor of his Majesty. Men I say, that so do, give no
true obedience, but as they are Apostates from God, so are they Traitors to
their Princes, whom by flattery they confirm in rebelling against God; only,
they which to the death resist such wicked laws and decrees, are acceptable to
God, and faithful to their Princes; Dan. 3. Dan. 6.
As were the three children in the presence of Nabuchadnezzar, and Daniel in
the days of Darius (the Persian Emperor) whose constant and free confession,
as it glorified God, so did it notify as well to those tyrants, as to all ages
following, the great blasphemy which in their rage and fury they committed
against God, from the which (by all appearance) neither of both so suddenly
should have been called, if the three children had bowed among the rest, and
Daniel had not declared the confession of his faith; Which was, with Windows
open to pray toward Jerusalem, manifestly thereby declaring, That he did not
consent to the blasphemous law, and decree, which was established by the King
and his Counsel. Experience has taught us what surmises and blasphemies the
adversaries of Christ Jesus, of his eternal verity, do invent and devise
against such as begin to detect their impiety. They are accused to be Authors
of sedition, raisers of tumults, violators of common orders, etc.

I answer with the Prophet Esaias, That all is not reputed before God sedition
and conjuration, which the foolish multitude so esteems; neither yet is every
tumult and breach of public order, contrary to Gods commandment; Answ.
for Christ Jesus himself coming to take the spoil from the strong armed,
Matthew. 10.
who before did keep his house in quietness, is not come to send Peace, but a
Sword, and to make a man disassent from his Father, etc. His Prophets before
him, and Apostles after him, feared not to break public Orders, established
against God, and in so doing, to move (as it were) the one half of peoples,
nations, and cities against the other; and yet I trust that none, except the
hired servant of Satan, will accuse Christ of sedition, Act. 14.
nor the Apostles of the troubling of Common wealths. True it is, that the most
wholesome Medicine most troubles (for a time) the body replenished with wicked
and corrupted humors, but the cause hereof is known to be, not in the
Medicine, but in the Body subject to Malady; Note.
even so the true Word of God, when it enters to fight where Satan has born
dominion, (as he still does in the whole Papistrie) cannot but appear to be
occasion of great trouble. But Madame, more profitable it is, that the
pestilent humors be expelled with pain, The Papisticall Religion a mortal
Pestilence.
then that they be nourished, to the destruction of the body. The Papisticall
Religion is a mortal pestilence, which shall assuredly bring to death eternal
the bodies and souls, from the which it is not purged in this life; and
therefore take heed betimes, God calls upon you, beware that ye shut not up
your ears: Judge not the matter after the vileness of my body, whom God has
appointed Ambassador and Messenger unto you, but with reverence and fear
consider him whose Message I bear. I come to you in the name of the Eternal
God, and of Christ Jesus his Son, to whom the Father has committed all power,
whom he has established Sovereign Judge over all flesh, before whose Throne
you must make account with what reverence you hear such as he sends. It shall
not excuse you to say or think, The Admonition.
That you doubt whether I be sent of God or no; I cry unto you, That the
Religion which the Princes and blinded Papists maintain with fire and sword, is
not the Religion of Christ; That your proud Prelates are none of Christ's
Bishops; I admonish you, That Christ's Flock is oppressed by them, and therefore
I require, and that yet again in the name of the Lord Jesus, That with
indifferency I may be heard to preach, to reason, and to dispute in that Cause;
which if you deny, you declare your self to bear no reverence to Christ, nor
love to his true Religion.

Letter.
BUt you think (peradventure) That the care of Religion is not committed to
Magistrates, Answer to an Objection.
but to the Bishops and state Ecclesiastical, as they term it; but deceive not
your self, for the negligence of Bishops shall no less be required of the
hands of the Magistrates, then shall the oppession of false Judges; for they
injustly promote, foster and maintain the one and the other: The false and
corrupt Judge to spoil the Goods, and to oppress the bodies of the simple, but
the proud Prelates do Kings maintain to murder the souls, for the which the
blood of Christ Jesus was shed; and that they do either by withholding from
them the true Word of life, or else by causing a pestilent Doctrine to be
taught unto them, such as now is taught in the Papisticall Churches. I know
that you wonder, how that the Religion which is universally received, Genesis 6.
can be so damnable, and corrupted: But if you consider, That ever from the
beginning, the multitude has declined from God (yea, even in the people, Psalm.
14.
to whom he spoke by his Law and Prophets) if ye shall consider the complaint
of the Holy Ghost, Psalm 2. Act. 4.
complaining, that Nations, People, Princes and Kings of the earth have raged,
made Conspiracies, and holden Councels against the Lord, and against his
Anointed Christ Jesus; further, if ye shall consider the question which Jesus
himself does move in these words, Luke 18.
When the Son of Man shall come, shall he find faith on the earth? And
lastly, if your Majesty shall consider the manifest contempt of God, and of
all his holy Precepts, which this day reign without punishment, Hosea 4.
upon the face of the whole earth; for as Hosea complains, There is no
verity, There is no mercy, There is no truth this day among men, but lies,
perjury, and oppression overflow all, and blood touches blood; that is, Every
iniquity is joined to another: If deeply (I say) your Majesty will
contemplate the universal corruption that this day reigns in all states,
then shall your Majesty cease to wonder, That many are called, Matthew 20 Matthew.
7. 2 Thessalonians 2.
and few chosen; and you shall begin to tremble and fear to follow the
multitude to perdition: The universal defection, whereof Saint Paul does
prophecy, is easy to be espied, as well in religion as in manners. The
corruption of life is evident, Note.
and Religion is not judged, nor measured by the plain Word of God, but by
custom, consuetude, will, consent, and determinations of men. But shall he who
has pronounced all cogitations of man's heart to be vain at all times, accept
the counsels and consents of men, for a Religion pleasing and acceptable before
him? Let not your Majesty be deceived, God cannot lie, God cannot deny
himself, he has witnessed from the beginning, Deu 4 and 12
That no religion pleases him, except that which he by his own Word has
commanded and established: The verity it self pronounces this sentence;
Matthew. 15.
In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines the precepts of men. And also,
All plantation, which my Heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted out.
Before the coming of his welbeloved Son in the flesh, severely he punished
all such, as durst enterprise to alter or change his Ceremonies and Statutes, 1
Reg. 13 and 15 2 Par. 26. Levit. 10. Matt. 17 Act. 1 2, and 3. 1 Cor. 11. Col.
2.
as in Saul, Uzziah, Nadab, Abihu, is to be read: And will he now, after that
he has opened his counsel to the world by his only Son, whom he commands
to be heard, and after that by his Holy Spirit, speaking in his Apostles, he
has established the Religion, in which he would have his true worshippers to
abide unto the end, will ^e, now (I say) admit men's inventions in the matter of
Religion which he reputed for damnable Idolatry? If men and Angels would
affirm, That he will or may do it, his own verity shall convince them of a lie;
De^^ 4. and 12.
for this sentence he pronounces, Not that which seems good in thy eyes,
shall thou do to the Lord thy God, but that which the Lord thy God has
commands thee, that do thou; add nothing unto it, deminish nothing from it.
Which, sealing up his New Testament, he repeateth in these words, Apoc. 2.
That which ye have, hold till I come, etc. And therefore yet again, it
repents me not to say, That in this point, which is chief and principal,
your Majesty must disassent from the multitude of Rulers, or else you can
possess no portion with Christ Jesus in his Kingdom and glory.

Addition.
KNowing by what craft Satan labors continually to keep the world in
blindness, I added these two former points, to wit, That ye should not think
your self free from the Reformation of Religion, because ye have Bishops within
your Realm, neither yet that ye should judge that Religion most perfect, which
the multitude by wrong custom have embraced. The craft of Satan.
In these two points does Satan busily labor; First, That no civil
Magistrate presume to take cognizance in the cause of Religion, for that must
be deferred to the determinations of the Church. Secondly, That impossible it
is, that that Religion should be false, which so long time (so many Councels,
The ground of ^^^^^ticall Religion.
and so great a multitude of men, so diverse Nations have allowed, authorized
and confirmed. What is the duty of Magistrates, and what power the people has
in such cases granted by God, my purpose is to write in a several Letter to
the Nobility and States of the Realm; and therefore to avoid tediousness and
repetition of one thing, I now supersede. And as touching the second, if ye
rightly consider the testimonies of Scriptures, which I have before alleged,
I trust ye shall find that Objection sufficiently answered; for, if the
opinion of the multitude ought always to be preferred, then did God injury to
the original World, for they were all of one mind, to wit, conjured against
God (except Noah and his family.) And if antiquity of time shall be considered
in such cases, Note.
then shall not only the Idolatry of the Gentiles, but also the false
Religion of Mahomet be preferred to the Papistrie; for both the one and the
other is more ancient then is the Papisticall religion; yea, Mahomet had
established his Alcoram, before any Pope in Rome was crowned with a Triple
Crown. But as touching antiquity, I am content with Tertullian to say, Tertul.
in Apol.
Let that be the most pure and perfect Religion, which shall be proved most
ancient; for this is a chief point, wherein I will join with all the Papists on
the earth, That their Religion (such as it is this day) is not of such
antiquity, as is that which we contend to be the true and only Religion,
acceptable before God; neither yet that their Church is the Catholic Church,
but that it is of late days in respect of Christ's Institution, crept in and
devised by man, and therefore am bold to affirm it odious and abominable; The
chief Preposition.
for this is our chief Proposition, That in the Religion of God, his own Word
ought only to be considered; That no Authority of man or Angel ought in that
case to be respected. And as for their Councels, when the matter shall come to
trial, it shall be easily seen for whom the most godly and most ancient
Councels shall most plainly speak. N^cen. 1.
I will prove by a Council, That of more authority is the sentence of one man
(founded upon the simple Truth of God) then is the determination of the whole
Council without the assurance of the Word; But that all their determinations,
which we oppugn, are not only maintained without an assurance of Scriptures,
but also are established against the truth of the same; yea, and for the most
part against the Decrees of the former Councels, I offer my self evidently to
prove. But now to the rest of the former Letter.

Letter.
AN Orator and Gods Messenger also might justly require of you now (by Gods
hand promoted to high dignity) A motherly pity upon your subjects, A justice
inflexible to be used against murderers and common oppressors, A heart void
of avarice and partiality, A mind studious and careful for maintenance of
that Realm and Commonwealth (above whom God has placed you) and by it has
made you honorable, The duty of Magistrates.
with the rest of virtues, which not only Gods Scriptures, but also Writers
(illuminated only with the light of Nature) require in Gods Rulers. But vain
it is to crave reformation of manners, where Religion is corrupted; for like as
a man cannot do the office of a man, till first he have a being and life, The
Spirit of God abides not with Idolaters.
so to work works pleasant in the sight of God the Father, can no man do
without the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which does not abide in the hearts of
Idolaters: And therefore the most godly Princes J^siah, Hezekiah, and
Jehosaphat, seeking Gods favor to rest upon them and upon their people, 3.
Reg. ^ 5. 2 ^ar. 17. 4 Reg 22. 2 Pa^. 34. 4 Reg 18. 2 Par. 29, 30, etc. 31.
before all things, began to reform the Religion; for it is as the stomach
within the body, which, if it be corrupted, of necessity it infecteth the
whole body: And therefore (often I repeat that, which to be done is most
necessary) if your Majesty pretend to reign with Christ Jesus, Then it
behooves you to take care of his true Religion, which this day within your
Realm is so deformed, The second proposition.
that no part of Christ's Ordinances remain in their first strength, and
original purity; which (I praise God) to me is less difficile to prove then
dangerous to speak: And yet neither the one nor the other I fear, partly
because the love of eternal life quenches the terror of temporal death, and
partly because I would with Saint Paul, wish my self accursed from Christ (as
touching earthly pleasure) for the salvation of my brethren, and illumination
of your Majesty; which thing, Work, and very deed, and not bare writing, shall
witness and declare, if I may purchase the liberty of tongue, but forty days
only.

Additon.
THe wise and facund Democritus had sometimes a familiar sentence, that, Stob.
ser. 12.
Honest it was to commend such works as were worthy of praise, but to praise
things that were wicked, could not proceed but from a deceivable mind; Niceph.
Calist. Histor. Eccl^s. Lib 10. cap. 42.
and Themistius a Philosopher of great fame, seeing the Hall of Iovinian the
Roman Emperor replenished with flatterers, said, Of their manners it may be
espied, that more they worship the Scepter and the purple, Note.
then God; signifying that they little regarded whether the Emperor were godly
or ungodly, so that they might retain themselves in favor with him. Albeit
that those were Ethnicks, and neither had the knowledge of God, as we pretend,
neither had given so plain a confession to declare themselves enemies to all
iniquity (as we have done by Baptism, and by our whole profession of
Christianity) yet do their words condemn no small number of us, and chiefly
such as be conversant with Princes; for who in these miserable days judges
himself to have offended, albeit he praise, allow and maintain, whatsoever the
Princes and upper powers devise: yea, although it be to oppress, and to spoil
the poor, to pull from them their very skins, and as the Prophet says, To
break their bones, and to cut them in pieces, as flesh for the Caldron or Pot.
Mich. 3.
Yet I say, That the Princes shall not lack Judges to cry, Note.
It is right, It is for the Commonwealth, for the defense of the Realm, and
ease of the Subjects; so that the state of times is even now such, as when the
Prophet complained, saying: The Princes ask, and the Judge is ready to give,
not his own, but the life and blood of the poor. How soon a great man has
spoken the corruption of his mind, he has his flatterers ready to applaud and
confirm whatsoever he speaks. And let the Princes be of what Religion they
please, that is all one to the most part of men; so that with abnegation of
God, of his honor, and Religion, they may retain the friendship of the Court.
Flatterers* contagious stilence.
But alas, how miserable be Princes that so are abused, and how contageous a
pestilence be such flatterers to Commonwealths, Empires, and Realms, God has
declared even from the beginning, to paint out the mischief, which from them
proceeds to such as give ear unto them. The ancient Writers compare them to
Harlots, to Ravens, and to most ravenous Beasts, and not without cause. For as
Harlots can never abide, that their lovers should return to repentance and
soberness of mind, so cannot flatterers sustain, that such as they deceive,
shall come to right judgment. And as Ravens pike out the eyes of dead carions,
and as ravenous Beasts devour the same, so do flatterers (being more cruel)
pike at the eyes of living men, and blinding the eyes of their understanding,
and judgment, do expose them to be devoured in body and soul, to Satan. This
we have by profane Writers only, but the holy Spirit teaches us this
infallible Truth, That where iniquity reigns in a Commonwealth, and none
is found boldly and openly to reprehend the same, that there shall sudden
vengeance and destruction follow. For thus it is written and pronounced by the
Prophet Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 22.
Shall thou not judge the City of blood, which has made Idols? Whose Rulers
shed blood to the uttermost of their power? They have despised my holy things,
they have devised iniquity, and have performed the same. The conjuration of
Prophets, has gathered up the riches, and whatsoever is precious within the
same. The Priests violently have torn and rent my Law. The people of the Land
has wrought deceitfully. They have oppressed the poor, and have done violence
to the stranger without judgment, Note.
and I have sought of them a man to repair the hedge, and to stand in the gap
before me, but I have found none. Therefore have I poured forth my wrath upon
them, and in the fire of my hot displeasure, I have consumed them. Advert
Madam, for these are not the words of mortal man, but of the eternal God, and
were not spoken against Jerusalem only, but against every Realm and Nation,
that so offends. The sins that here be named, are Idolatry in all, avarice
and cruelty in the Princes and Rulers, conjuration of the Prophets to defend
the wicked, deceit, fraud, and violence in the common people; and finally, an
universal silence of all men, none being found to reprehend these enormities.
Would to God that I might with safety of conscience excuse you, your Counsel,
and the Idolaters of that Realm from any of these crimes aforenamed. The
Idolatry which is committed, is more evident then that it can be denied, the
avarice and cruelty as well of your self, as of such as be in authority, may
be known by the facts; For fame carries the voices of the poor (oppressed by
intolerable taxes) not only to us here, in a strange Country; but I am
assured, to the ears of the God of hosts. The conspiracy and conjuration of
your false Prophets is known to the world, and yet is none found so faithful
to God, nor merciful to your Majesty, that freely will and dare admonish you
to repent before that God rise himself in judgment. When I name repentance, I
mean no outward show of holiness, which commonly is found in Hypocrites, but I
mean a true conversion to the Lord God from your whole heart, with a damning of
all superstition and idolatry. In which ye have been nourished, which with your
presence ye have decored, and to your power maintained and defended. Unless I
say, that this poison be purged from your heart, (be your outward life never so
glistering before the world) yet in the presence of God, it is but abominable.
Yea further, I say, that where this venom of the Serpent (idolatry I mean)
lurketh in the heart, Idolatry is mother to all ^ice.
it is impossible, but that at one time or other, it shall produce pestilent
fruits; albeit peradventure not openly before men, yet before God no less
odious, then the facts of Murderers, Publicanes, and Harlots; and therefore in
my former Letter, I said, that superfluous it was to require Reformation of
manners, where the Religion is corrupted. Which yet again I repeat to the end,
that your Majesty more deeply may weigh the matter. But now to the rest of the
same my former Letter.

Letter.
I Am not ignorant how dangerous a thing it appears to the natural man, to
innovate any thing in matters of Religion; and partly I consider, That your
power Madam is not so free, as a public Reformation perchance would require.
But if your Majesty shall consider the danger and damnation perpetual, which
inevitable hangs upon all maintainers of a false Religion, Matthew 6. Romans 8. ^
Reg. 18.
then shall the greatest danger easily devour and swallow up the smaller. If
you shall consider, That either ye must serve God to life everlasting, or else
serve the World to death and damnation, then albeit, John 17.
that man and angel should dissuade you, ye will chose life and refuse death.
And if further ye shall consider, that the very life consists in the
knowledge of the only true God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, and that true
knowledge has annexed with it, Gods true worship and honor, which requires a
testimony of his own Will, expressed by his Word, That such honor does please
him, if you do earnestly meditate these things aforesaid; then albeit ye cannot
do saddenly what ye would, yet shall ye not cease to do what ye may. Your
Majesty cannot hastily abolish Superstition, Ezekiel. 34.
and remove from offices unprofitable Pastors, of whom speaks Ezekiel the
Prophet, which to a public Reformation, is requisite and necessary. But if the
zeal of Gods glory be fervent in your Majesty's heart* ye will not by wicked
Laws maintain Idolatry, neither will ye suffer the fury of Bishops to murder
and devour the poor Members of Christ's body, as in times past they have been
accustomed; which thing, if either by blind ignorance ye do, or yet for
pleasure of others within this Realm, permit to be done, then except you
speedily repent, ye and your posterity shall suddenly feel the depressing hand
of him, who has exalted you. Note this for our time.
Ye shall be compelled, will ye or not, to know that he is eternal, against
whom ye address the Battle, and that it is he, that moderateth the times,
Daniel 2.
and disposes Kingdoms, ejecting from authority such as be inobedient, and
placing others according to his good pleasure: 1 Reg. 2. Job 12. Psalm. 107.
Daniel 2.
That it is he that glorifieth them, that do glorify him, and powers forth
contempt upon Princes that rebel against his graces offered.

Addition.
IN writing of this parcel, as I remembered the impediments which might call
you back from God, and from his true obedience; so did I consider what occasion
you had to tremble and to fear before his Majesty, and to undergo the loss of
all the worldly glory, for the promoting of the glory of God. I do consider,
that your power is but borrowed, extraordinary, and unstable, for you have it
but by permission of others. Note.
And seldom it is, that women do long reign with felicity and joy. Your most
especial friends moreover, blinded by the vanity of this World; yea, being
drunken with the Cup of that Roman Harlot, are mortal enemies to Christ Jesus,
and to his true Religion. These things may easily abash the mind of a Woman
not confirmed by grace; But yet, if you will a little consider with me the
causes why, that ye ought to hazard all for the glory of God in this behalf,
the former terrors shall suddenly vanish. I do not esteem that thing greatest,
which peradventure some others do: to wit, That if ye shall enterprise to
innovate any thing in matters of Religion, that then ye shall lose your
Authority, and also the favors of your carnal friends.

I look further, to wit, To the judgments of God, who has begun already to
declare himself angry with you, with your Seed, and Posterity; yea, with the
whole Realm, above which it should have ruled. Impute not to fortune, that
first your two sons were suddenly taken from you, within the space of six
hours, and after your Husband, raft as it were, by violence, from life and
honor; the memorial of his name, Note.
succession, and royal dignity, perishing with himself. For albeit, the
usurped abuse, or rather tyranny of some REALMS, have permitted Women to
succeed to the honor of their Fathers; yet must their glory be transferred to
the house of a stranger. And so I say, That with himself was buried, his name,
succession, and royal dignity, as he himself did apprehend in dying; And in
this, If ye espy not the anger and hot displeasure of GOD (threatening you and
the rest of your Posterity with the same plague) ye are more obstinate, then I
would wish you to be. Note.
I would ye should ponder and consider, deeply with your self, That God uses
not to punish Realms and Nations with such rare plagues without great cause;
neither uses he to restore to honors and glory, the house which he begins
once to deject, till repentance of the former crimes be found; you may
perchance, doubt what crimes should have been in your Husband, you, or the
Realm, for the which God should so grievously have punished you.

I answer, The maintenance, and defense of most horrible Idolatry, with the
shedding of the blood of the Saints of God, who labored to notify and rebuke
the same. This I say, (other iniquities omitted) is such a crime before the
eyes of his Majesty, That for the same, he has poured forth his extreme
vengenance upon Kings, and upon their Posterity, depriving them from honors
and dignity for ever; As by the Histories of the Books of the Kings is most
evident. To Jeroboam it is said, Because I have exalted thee from the midst of
the people, and have made thee Prince over my people* Israel, I have rent the
Kingdom from the house of David, for Idolatry also, and have given it unto
thee, 1 Reg. 14.
but thou have not been as David my servant, etc. But thou have done wickedly
above all that have gone before thee; For thou have made to thee, other gods,
and molten images, to provoke me, and have cast me behind thy back; Therefore
shall I bring affliction upon the house of Jeroboam, and I shall destroy to
Jeroboam, all that pisseth against the Wall (signifying thereby the Male
children) and shall cast forth the Posterity of Jeroboam, as dung is cast
forth, till it be consumed.

This sentence was not only executed against this Idolater, but also against
the rest of Idolaters in that Realm, as they succeeded one after another, for
to Baasa, whom God used as an Instrument to root out the seed of Jeroboam, it
is said: Because thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam, and have caused my
people to sin, that thou should provoke me in their sins; therefore shall I
cut down the posterity of Baasa, and the posterity of his house, and shall
make thy house as the house of Jeroboam. He that shall die to Baasa in the
City, him shall dogs eat; and be that shall die in the field, him shall the
fowls devour: 1 Reg. 16. 2 Reg. 10. 2 Reg. 17.
Of the same Cup, and for the same cause, drank Ela and Achab, yea, and the
Posterity of Iehu, following the footsteps of their forefathers.

By these examples, you may evidently espy, That Idolatry is the cause, why God
destroys the posterity of Princes; not only of those that first invent
abominations, but also of such as follow and defend the same. Consider Madame,
That God has begun very sharply with you, taking from you, as it were
together, two children and a husband; He has begun I say, to declare himself
angry, beware that you provoke not the eyes of his Majesty; It will not be the
haughty looks of the proud, the strength of your friends, nor multitude of men
that can justify your cause in his presence; If you presume to rebel against
him (and against him you rebel) if you deny my most humble request which I
make in his Name, and it is this: With the hazard of mine own life, The offer
of John Knox.
I offer to prove, That Religion which now you maintain, to be false,
deceiveable, and abomination before God; And that I shall do by most evident
testimonies of his blessed, holy, and infallible Word: If this, I say, you
deny, (rebelling against God) The favor of your friends, shall little avail
you, when he shall declare himself enemy to you. Which assure your self, he
will shortly do, if you begin to display the banner of your malice against him.
Advert.
Let not the prosperity of others, Prosperity for a time proves not Religion
good.
be they Princes, Queens, Kings, or Emperors, bolden you to contemn God, and
his loving Admonition. They shall drink the Cup of his wrath, every one in
their rank, as he has appointed them. No Realm in these quarters (except it,
No Realm, England except, so grievously plagued at Scotland.
that next lies to you) has he so manifestly stricken with his terrible rod,
as he has done you, and your Realm; And therefore, it becomes you first to
stoup, except that you will have the threatenings pronounced by Isaiah the
Prophet, ratified unto you. To wit, That your sudden destruction be as the
rotten Wall, and your breaking, as the breaking of a Potsherd, which is broken
without pity; Isai. 30.
so that no portion of it can be found able either to carry fire or water.
Whereby the Prophet does signify, That the proud contemners of God, and of his
Admonitions, shall so perish from all honors; That they shall have nothing
worthy of memorial behind them in the Earth. Yea, Isai. 14.
If they do leave any thing, as it shall be unprofitable, so shall it be in
execration and hatred to the elect of God; Isai 6.
and therefore, Thus proceeds my former Letter.

Letter.
HOw dangerous soever, it shall appear to the flesh, to obey God and to make
war against the devil, the prince of darkness, pride, and superstition; yet
if your Majesty look to have your self, and seed to continue in honor,
worldly, and everlasting, subject your self betimes, under the hand of him,
that is omnipotent. Embrace his Will, Exhortation.
despise not his Testament, refuse not his Graces offered. When he calls upon
you, withdraw not your ear; Be not led away with the vain opinion, that your
Church cannot err. Be ye most assuredly persuaded, That so far as in life,
ye see them degenerate from Christ's true Apostles, so in Religion are they
further corrupted. Josh. 1.
Lay the Book of God before your eyes, and let it be judge to that, 2 Par 34. 2
Par. 1.
which I say. Which if ye, with fear, and reverence, obey, as did Josias the
admonitions of the Prophetess, then shall he (by whom Kings do reign) crown
your Battle with double benediction, and reward you with wisdom, riches,
glory, honor, and long life in this Regiment temporal, and with life
everlasting, when the King of kings (whose Members now do cry for your help)
the Lord Jesus shall appear in judgment, accompanied with his Angels, before
whom ye shall make account of your present Regiment, when the proud and
disobedient shall cry: Mountains fall upon us, and hide us from the face of the
Lord. But then it shall be too late, because they contemned his voice, when he
lovingly called.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of his holy Spirit, move
your heart so to consider, and accept the things that be said, That they be not
a Testimony of your just condemnation in that great day of the Lord Jesus, to
whose omnipotent Spirit, I unfainedly commit your Majesty's.

Addition.
WHen Jeremiah the Prophet, at the Commandment of God, had written the Sermons,
threatenings, and plagues, which he had spoken against Israel and Judah, Jerem.
36.
and had commanded them to be read by Baruch his Scribe, because himself was
excommunicated, and forbidden to enter into the Temple; by the providence of
God it came to pass, That Michaiah the son of Gemariah, hearing the said
Sermons, passed to the Kings House, and did communicate the matter with the
rest of the Princes; who also, after they had read the same Volume of Jeremiah
his Preachings, did not conceal the truth from Iehoiakim, who then did reign
in Jerusalem. But the proud and desperate Prince commanding the Book to be read
in his presence, before he had heard three or four leaves of the same, did cut
it, and cast it into the fire, notwithstanding that some of the Princes (I
think not all) made request in the contrary. But the Prophet was charged by God
to write again, and to say to Iehoiakim, Thus says the Lord, Thou have burnt
this Book, saying, Why have thou written in it according to this sentence?
Assuredly the King of Babylon shall come, and shall destroy this land, and
shall make it void of men and beasts. Therefore thus says the Lord, of
Jehoiakim the King, There shall not be one left alive to sit in the Seat of
David: Their carkases shall be cast to the heat of the day, and to the frost of
the night (whereby the Prophet did signify, the most vile death, and most
cruel torment) and I shall visit the iniquity of himself, and of his seed and
servants: And I shall bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and upon all Judah, all the calamities which I have spoken against them: Albeit
they would not hear. This is not written, Madame, for that time only, but to
assure us, That the like punishment abides the like contemners, of what state,
condition, or degree that ever they be. I did write unto you before, having
testimony of a good conscience, That I did it in the fear of my God, and by the
motion of his holy Spirit (for the request of the faithful brethren, in things
lawful, and appertaining to Gods glory, I cannot but judge to be the voice of
the holy Ghost.) But how ye did accept the same my former writing, I do not
otherwise then by conjectures understand: whether ye did read it to the end,
or not, I am uncertain: One thing I know, That ye did deliver it to one of your
Prelates, saying, My Lord, Will ye read a Pasquill? As charity persuades me to
interpret things (doubtfully spoken) in the best sense; so my duty to God (who
has commanded me to flatter no Prince on the earth) compels me to say, That
if no more ye esteem the Admonition of God, then the Cardinals do the scoffing
of Pasquills, that then he shall shortly send you messengers with whom ye shall
not be able on that manner to jest. If my person be considered, I grant my
th^eatnings are no more to be feared, then be the merry sports which fearful
men do father upon Pisquillus in Rome. But, Madame, if ye shall deeply
consider, That GOD uses men (yea, and most commonly, those that be of lowest
degree, and most abject before the world) to be his Messengers and
Ambassadors, not only to notify his will to the simple ^ but also to rebuke
the most proud Tyrants and potent Princes, then will ye not judge the liquor by
the outward appearance and nature of the vessel. For ye are not ignorant, That
the most noble Wine is enclosed within the Tun made of Frail wood, Amos 2.
and that the precious ointment is often kept within the pot made of Clay. If
further ye shall consider, that God will do nothing touching the punishment of
Realms and Nations, which he will not reveal to his servants the Prophets,
whose tongues he will compel to speak sometimes contrary to the appetites and
desires of their own hearts, Zach 15
and whose words he will perform, be they never so unapparent to the judgment
of men, James 5. 1 Reg 17. 1 Reg. 18.
If these ye do deeply weigh, then will ye fear the thing, which presently is
not seen. Elias was but a man, as Saint James does witness, like to his
Brethren, and yet at his prayer was Achab the Idolater, 1 Reg. 19.
and all Israel with him punished three years and six months, God shutting up
the heaven, that neither rain nor dew fell upon the earth the space before
written. And in the end, God so wrought by him, 2 Reg 9.
that Baals Priests were first confounded, and after justly punished. And
albeit that Iesabel sought his blood, and by oath had determined his death, 1
Reg 19.
yet as she was frustrate of her intent, so could she not keep her own bones
from the dogs, which punishment, the Prophet (God so ruling his tongue) had
before appointed to that wicked woman. Albeit Madam, that the Messengers of God
are not sent this day with visible miracles, because they teach none other
doctrine then that which is confirmed with miracles from the beginning of the
world: yet will not he (who has promised to take charge over his poor and
little flock, to the end) suffer the contempt of their Embassage, escape
punishment and vengeance. For the truth it self has said: He that hears you,
Mat 10.
hears me, and he that contemns you, contemns me. I did not speak unto
you, Madam, by my former letter, neither yet do I now as Pasquillus does to the
Pope, and his carnal Cardinals in the behalf of such as dare not utter their
names, but I come in the name of Christ Jesus, affirming, that the Religion,
which ye maintain, is damnable Idolatry: the which I offer my self to prove by
the most evident testimony of Gods Scriptures. And in this quarrel I present
my self against all the Papists in the Realm, desiring none other Armor but
Gods holy Word, and the liberty of my tongue. God move your heart to understand
my Petition, to know the truth, and unfeinedly to follow the same, Amen.

REVEL. JOH. 21. I am the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is a
thirst, of the well of the water of life freely. He that overcommeth, shall
inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But the
fearful and unbelceving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
JOHN KNOX, THE SERVANT OF JESUS CHRIST, In preaching of his Holy Evangell,
To the benevolent Reader, desires grace and peace, with the spirit of
righteous judgment.
WOnder not, Christian Reader, that all my study and travel within the
Scriptures of God, these twenty years, I have set forth nothing in expounding
any portion of Scripture, except this only rude and indigested Sermon,
preached by me in the public audience of the Church of Edinburgh, the
nineteenth day of August, Anno 1565. That I did not in writing communicate my
judgment upon the Scriptures, I have ever thought my self to have most just
reason; for, considering my self rather called of my God to instruct the
ignorant, comfort the sorrowful, confirm the weak, and rebuke the proud, by
tongue and lively voice, in these most corrupt days, then to compose Books for
the age to come, seeing that so much is written (and by men of most singular
erudition) and yet so little well observed; I decreed to contain my self within
the bounds of that Vocation, whereunto I found my self especially called. I
dare not deny (lest that in so doing I should be injurious to the Giver) but
that God has revealed unto me, secrets unknown to the world, and also that he
has made my tongue a Trumpet to forewarn Realms and Nations, yea, certain
great revelations of mutations and changes, when no such things were feared,
nor yet was appearing; a portion whereof cannot the world deny, (be it never so
blind) to be fulfilled; and the rest (alas) I fear shall follow with greater
haste, and in more full perfection then my sorrowful heart desires:
Nothwithstanding these revelations and assurances, I did ever abstain to commit
any thing to writing, contented only to have obeyed the charge of him, who
commanded me to cry. If any then will ask to what purpose this only Sermon is
set forth, and greater matters omitted; I answer, to let such as Satan has
not altogether blinded so, upon how small occasions, great offense is now
conceived, This Sermon is it, for the which (from my Bed) I was called before
the Council, and after long reasoning, I was by some forbidden to Preach in
Edinburgh so long as the King and Queen were in Town; This Sermon is it that so
offends such as would please Court, and will not appear to be enemies to the
Truth, yet they dare affirm, That I exceeded the bounds of Gods Messenger: I
have therefore faithfully committed unto writing whatsoever I could remember
might have been offensive in that Sermon, to the end, That as well the enemies
of Gods truth, as the professors of the same, may either note unto me wherein I
have offended, or at the least cease to condemn me before they have convinced
me by Gods manifest Word. If any man think it easy unto me to mitigate by my
pen the inconsiderate sharpness of my Tongue, and so cannot men freely judge
of that my Sermon; I answer, That I am neither so impudent, that I will study
to abuse the world in this great light, neither yet so void of the fear of my
God, that I will avow a lie in his own presence; and no less do I esteem it to
be a lie, To deny or conceal that which in his Name I have once pronounced,
then to affirm, That God has spoken, when his Word assures me not of the same;
for in the public place I consult not with flesh and blood wha^ I shall
propose to the people, but as the Spirit of my God, who has sent me, and unto
whom I must answer, moves me, so I speak; and when I have once pronounced
threatenings in his Name (how unpleasant soever they be to the World) I dare no
more deny them, then I dare deny that God has made me his Messenger to
forewarn the inobedient of their assured destruction. At that Sermon were
auditors unto me, not only professors of the truth, and such as favor me, but
rank Papists, dissembling Hypocrites, and no small number of covetous Clawbacks
of the new Court; now I will appeal to the conscience of them all, as they will
answer in the presence of the Eternal God, that either they bear me record,
now writing the truth, or else note unto me the sentences offensive then by me
pronounced, and now omitted in writing; for in Gods presence I protest, That so
far as memory would serve me, I have written more vehemently then in the action
I spoke and pronounced; but of purpose I have omitted persuasions and
exhortations which then were made Quaedam hic desunt.

A SERMON Preached By John Knox.
Esaias 26.13, 14, 15, 16, etc. O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had
dominion over us; but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name.

They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise;
therefore have thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to
perish.

Thou have increased the Nation, O Lord, thou have increased the Nation, thou
art glorified, thou have removed it far unto the ends of the earth.

Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them. etc.


AS the cunning Mariner (being Master) having his Ship tossed with a vehement
tempest, and contrary winds, is compelled often to traverse, lest that either by
too much resisting to the violence of the Waves, his Vessel might be over
whelmed; or by too much liberty granted, to be carried whither the fury of the
tempest would, his Ship should be driven upon the shore, and so make shipwreck;
even so does our Prophet Isaiah in this Text, which now you have heard read;
for he foreseeing the great desolation that was decreed in the Council of the
Eternal, against Jerusalem and Judah, to wit, That the whole people that bare
the Name of God should be dispersed; that the holy City should be destroyed,
the Temple wherein was the Ark of the Covenant, and where God had promised to
give his own presence, should be burnt with fire, the King taken, his sons in
his own presence murdered, his own eyes immediately after to be put out, the
Nobility, some cruelly murdered, some shamefully led away captives; and
finally, the whose seed of Abraham razed, as it were, from the face of the
earth: The Prophet (I say) fearing these horrible calamities, does, The
disposition.
as it were, sometimes suffer himself, and the people committed to his Charge,
to be carried away with the violence of the tempest, without further
resistance; then by pouring forth his and their dolorous complaints before the
Majesty of God; as in the 13, 17, and 18 verse of this present Text we may
read. At other times he valiantly resists the desperate tempest, and
pronounces the fearful destruction of all such as trouble the Church of God;
which he pronounces, that God will multiply, Note.
even in such time as when it appears utterly to be exterminate. But because
there is no small rest to the whole Body, till that the Head return to
judgment, he calls the afflicted to patience, and promises such a
Visitation, as whereby the wickedness of the wicked shall be disclosed, and
finally recompensed in their own bosoms.

These are the chiefest Points of which by the grace of God we intend more
largely at this present to speak:

First, Verse 23.
the Prophet says, O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have ruled us.

This, no doubt, is the beginning of the dolorous complaint in the which he
complains of the unjust tyranny that the poor afflicted Israelites sustained,
during the time of their Captivity. True it is, That the Prophet was gathered
to his fathers in peace, before that this apprehended the people: For a hundred
years after his decease, was not the people led away captive: Yet he
foreseeing the assurance of the calamity, did beforehand endite and dictate
unto them the complaint that after they should make. But at the first sight it
appears, That the complaint has but small weight: For what new thing was it,
that other lords then God in his own person ruled them, seeing that such had
been their Regiment from the beginning? For who knows not that Moses, Aaron,
and Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, David, and other godly Rulers, were men, and
not God; And so other lords then God, ruled them in their greatest prosperity.

For the better understanding of this complaint, From whenc^ all Authority
flows.
and of the mind of the Prophet, we must first observe from whence all
Authority flows; and secondly, To what end Powers are appointed by God: The
which two points being discussed, we shall the better understand, what lords,
and what authority rules beside God; and who they are in whom God and his
merciful presence rules.

The first is resolved to us by the words of the Apostle, saying, There is no
Power but of God. David brings in the Eternal God, speaking to Judges and
Rulers, Psalm. 82.
saying, I have said, Ye are gods, and Sons of the Most High. And Solomon, in
the person of God, affirms the same, saying, By me Kings reign, and Princes
discern the things that are just. Of which place it is evident, That it is
neither Birth, influence of Stars, election of people, force of Arms; nor
finally, whatsoever can be comprehended under the power of nature, that makes
the distinction betwixt the superior power and the inferior, or that does
establish the Royal Throne of Kings, but it is the only and perfect Ordinance
of God, who wills his Terror, Power, and Majesty in a part to shine in the
Thrones of Kings, and in the faces of Judges, and that for the profit and
comfort of man; So that whosoever would study to deface that order of Regiment
that God has established, and by his holy Word allowed, and bring in such a
confusion, as no difference should be betwixt the upper Powers and the
subjects, does nothing but evert and turn upside down the very Throne of God,
which he will to be fixed here upon earth; as in the end and cause of this
Ordinance more plainly shall appear: which is the second Point we have to
observe, for the better understanding of the Prophets words and mind.

2. Point.
The end and cause then, why God printeth in the weak and feeble flesh of man
this Image of his own Power and Majesty, is not to puff up flesh in opinion of
it self; neither yet that the heart of him that is exalted above others, shall
be lifted up by presumption and pride, and so despise others, but that he shall
consider, that he is appointed Lieutenant to one, whose eyes continually watch
upon him, to see and examine how he behaveth himself in his Office. Romans 13.
Saint Paul in few words declares the end, wherefore the sword is committed to
the powers, saying, It is to the punishment of the wicked doers, and unto the
praise of such as do well.

Of which words, it is evident, That the sword of God is not committed to the
hand of man, Note.
to use as it pleases him, but only to punish vice, and maintain virtue, that
men may live in such society, as before God is acceptable. And this is the very
and only cause, why God has appointed powers in this Earth.

For such is the furious rage of man's corrupt nature, That unless severe
punishment were appointed, and put in execution upon malefactors; Better it
were, that man should live among brute and wild Beasts, then among men. But at
this present, I dare not enter into the description of this common place; for
so should I not satisfy the Text, which by Gods grace I purpose to absolve.
This only by the way, I would that such as are placed in Authority, should
consider, Whether they reign and rule by God, so that God rules them or if
they rule without, besides, and against God, of whom our Prophet here does
complain.

If any list to take trial of this point, it is not hard: For Moses in the
election of Judges, Note.
and of a King, describes, not only, what persons shall be chosen to that
honor, but does also give to him that is elected and chosen, the rule by the
which he shall try himself, whether God reign in him or not, saying: When he
shall sit upon the throne of his Kingdom, he shall write to himself an examplar
of this Law, in a Book by the Priests and Levites; it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein, all the days of his life, That he may learn to fear the
Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes, that
he may do them, that his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, and that he
turn not from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left.

Josh. 1.
The same is repeated to Ioshuah in his inanguration to the Regiment of the
people by God himself, saying; Let not the Book of this Law depart from thy
mouth, but meditate in it day and night, that thou may keep it, and do
according to all that which is written in it. For then shall thy way be
prosperous, and thou shall do prudently.

The first thing then that God craveth of him that is called to the Honor of a
King, is, The knowledge of his Will revealed in his Word.

The second is, What is required of a King or Prince.
An upright and willing mind to put in execution such things as God commands
in his Law, without declining to the right, or to the left hand.

Kings then have not an absolute Power to do in their Regiment what pleases
them; The Authority and Power of Kings is limited.
but their Power is limited by Gods Word: So that if they strike where GOD has
not commanded, they are but murderers; and if they spare where GOD has
commanded to strike, they and their Throne are criminal and guilty of the
wickedness that abounds upon the face of the earth, for lack of punishment.

O that Kings and Princes would consider what account shall be craved of them,
Note.
as well of their ignorance and misknowledge of Gods Will, as for the
neglecting of their Office. But now to return to the words of the Prophet. In
the person of the whole people he does complain unto God, That the Babilonians
(whom he calls, Other lords besides God, both because of their ignorance of
God, and by reason of their cruelty and inhumanity) had long ruled over them in
great rigor, without pity or compassion had upon the ancient men, and famous
matrons: For they being mortal enemies to the people of God, fought by all
means to aggravate their yoke, yea, utterly to have exterminate the memory of
them, and of their Religion; from the face of the earth.

After the first part of this dolorous complaint, the Prophet declares the
Protestation of the people, saying, Nevertheless in thee shall we remember thy
Name: (others read it, But we will remember thee only, and thy Name:) But in
the Hebrew there is no Conjunction Copulative in that sentence. The mind of
the Prophet is plain, to wit, That notwithstanding the long sustained
affliction, the people of God declined not to a false and vain Religion, but
remembered God, that sometime appeared to them in his merciful presence; which
albeit then they saw not, yet would they still remember his Name, that is, They
would call to mind the Doctrine and Promise which at sometimes they heard,
albeit in their prosperity they did not sufficiently glorify God, who so
mercifully ruled in the midst of them. The temptation, no doubt, of the
Israelites, was great in those days: They were carried captives from the Land
of Canaan, which was to them the gage and pledge of Gods favor toward them;
for it was the inheritance that God promised to Abraham, and to his seed for
ever. The League and Covenant of Gods Protection, appeared to have been broken:
They lamentably complain, That they saw not their accustomed signs of Gods
merciful presence; The true Prophets were few, and the abominations used in
Babylon were exceeding many: And so it might have appeared to them, That in
vain it was, that they were called the Posterity of Abraham, or that ever they
had received the Law, or Form of right Religion from God. That we may the
better feel it in our selves, the temptation, I say, was even such, as if God
should utterly destroy all Order and Policy that this day is within his
Church, that the true preaching of the Word should be suppressed, The right use
of Sacraments abolished, Idolatry and Papisticall abomination erected up again;
And therewith, That our bodies should be taken prisoners by Turks or other
manifest enemies of God, and of all godliness. Such, I say, was their
temptation; How notable, then is this their confession, that in bondage they
make, to wit, That they will remember God only, albeit, he has appeared to
turn his face from them, They will remember his name, and will call to mind
the deliverance promised.

Usc.
Hereof have we to consider, what is our duty, If God bring us (as for our
offenses and unthankfulness justly he may) to the like extremity. This
confession is not the fair flattering words of hypocrites, lying and bathing in
their pleasures, but it is the mighty operation of the Spirit of God, The duty
of Gods people.
who leaves not his own destitute of some comfort, in their most desperate
calamities. This is then our duty, not only to confess our God in time of
peace and quietness, but he chiefly craveth, that we avow him in the midst of
his, and our enemies. And this is not in us to do, but it behooves, That the
Spirit of God work in us, above all power of nature. And thus we ought
earnestly, to meditate before the battle rise more vehement, which appears
not to be far off. But now must we enter in somewhat more deeply to consider
these judgments of God.

This people dealt with all, as we have heard, was the only people upon the
face of the Earth, to whom God was rightly known; among them only were his
Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Sacrifices used, and put in practice; They
only invocated his Name, and to them alone had he promised his protection and
assistance: What then should be the cause, that he should give them over into
this great reproach, and bring them into such extremity, as his own name, in
them, should be blasphemed. The Prophet Ezekiel, that saw this horrible
destruction forespoken by Isaiah, put in just execution, gives an answer in
these words, I gave unto them Laws that were good, Ezekiel 20.
in the which, Whosoever should walk, should live in them; But they would not
walk in my ways, but rebelled against me; And therefore, I have given unto
them Laws that are not good, and Judgments, in the which they shall not live.
The Writers of the Books of Kings, and Chronicles, declare this in more plain
words, saying: The Lord sent unto them his Prophets, rising early, desiring of
them to return unto the Lord, and to amend their wicked ways (for he would
have spared his people, and his Tabernacle) but they mocked his servants, and
would not return unto the Lord their God to walk in his ways. 2 Reg. 17.
Yea, Judah it self kept not the precepts of the Lord God, but walked in the
Manners and Ordinances of Israel; That is, Of such as then had declined to
Idolatry from the days of Jeroboam. And therefore, the Lord God abhorred the
whole seed of Israel, that is, The whole body of the people, he promised them,
and gave them into the hands of those that spoiled them, and so he cast them
out from his presence.

Hereof it is evident, That their disobedience unto God, and unto the voices of
his Prophets, was the cause of their destruction. Now, have we to take heed how
we should use the good Laws of God, that is, his Will revealed unto us in his
Word, and that Order of Justice, that by him, for the comfort of man is
established amongst men. It is no doubt, but that obedience is the most
acceptable sacrifice unto God, and that which above all things he requires;
That when he manifests himself by his word, that men follow according to
their vocation and commandment. Now so it is, that God by that great Pastor,
our Lord Jesus, now manifestly in his word calls us from all impiety, as well
of body, as of mind, to holiness of life, and to his spiritual service: And
for this purpose, he has erected the throne of his mercy among us, the true
preaching of his word, together with the right administration of his
Sacraments: But what is our obedience, let every man examine his own
conscience, and consider what statutes and laws we would have to be given unto
us.

Would thou, O Scotland, have a King to reign over thee in justice, equity,
and mercy? subject thou thy self to the Lord thy God, obey his commandments,
and magnify thou that word that calls unto thee, This is the way, Isai.
walk into it, and if thou will not, flatter not thy self, the same justice
remains this day in God to punish thee Scotland, and thee Edinburgh in
especial, that before punished the land of Judah, and the City of Jerusalem.
Every Realm or Nation (says the Prophet Jeremy) that likewise offends, Jere.
9.
shall be likewise punished. But if thou shall see impiety placed in the seat
of justice above thee, so that in the Throne of God (as Solomon does complain)
reigns nothing but fraud, Eccles 3.
and violence, accuse thy own ingratitude and rebellion against God, for that
is the only cause, Isa. 3.
why God takes away (as the same Prophet in another place does speak) the
strong man and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, the prudent and the
aged, the Captain and the honorable, the Counselor and the cunning Artificer.
And I will appoint, says the Lord, children to be their Princes, and babes
shall rule over them. Children are extortioners of my people, and women have
rule over them.

If these calamities, I say, apprehend us, so that we see nothing but the
oppression of good men, and of all godliness, and wicked men without God, to
reign above us; Let us accuse and condemn our selves, as the only cause of
our own miseries. For if we had heard the voice of the Lord our God, and given
upright obedience unto the same, God should have multiplied our peace, and
should have rewarded our obedience before the eyes of the world. But now let us
hear what the Prophet says further.

The dead shall not live, Verse 14.
says he, neither shall the tyrants, or the dead arise, because thou have
visited and scattered them, and destroyed all their memory.

From this 14 verse, unto the end of the 19, it appears, That the Prophet
observes no order; yea, that he speaks things directly repugning one to
another: For first he says, The dead shall not live: After, he affirms,
Verse 15.
Thy dead men shall live. Secondly, he says, Thou have visited and scattered
them, and destroyed all their memory: Immediately after he says, Thou have
increased thy Nation, O Lord, thou have increased thy Nation. They have visited
thee, and have poured forth a prayer before thee.

Who, I say, would not think, that these are things not only spoken forth of
good order and purpose, but also manifestly repugning one to another. For, to
live, and not to live, to be so destroyed that no memorial remains; and to
be so increased, that the coasts of the earth shall be replenished, seem to
import plain contradiction. For removing of this doubt, and for better
understanding of the Prophets mind, we must understand, that the Prophet had
to do with diverse sorts of men; he had to do with the conjured and manifest
enemies of Gods people, the Caldees or Babylonians; even so such as profess
CHRIST JESUS, have to do with the Turk and Sarazens. He had to do with the
Seed of Abraham, whereof there were three sorts. The ten Tribes all degenerate
from the true worshipping of GOD, and corrupted with Idolatry, as this day are
our pestilent Papists in all Realms and Nations, there rested only the Tribe
of Judah at Jerusalem, where the form of true Religion was observed, the Law
taught, and Ordinances of God outwardly kept; but yet there were in that body
(I mean, in the body of the visible Church) a great number that were
Hypocrites, as this day yet are among us that do profess the Lord Jesus, and
have refused Papistrie; not a few that were licentious livers, some that turned
their back to God; that is, Had for^aken all true Religion, and some that lived
a most abominable life, as Ezekiel says in his vision; Ezel. 8.
and yet there were some godly, as a few Wheat Corns oppressed and hid among
the multitude of Chafe: Now according to this diversity, the Prophet keeps
diverse purposes, and yet in most perfect order.

And first (after the first part of the complaint of the afflicted, as we have
heard in vehemence of spirit) he bursteth forth against all the proud enemies
of Gods people, against all such as trouble them, and against all such as mock
and forsake God, and says, The dead shall not live, the proud Giants shall not
rise, thou have scattered them, and destroyed their memorial. In which words
he fights against the present temptation and dolorous state of Gods people,
and against the insolent pride of such as oppressed them; as if the prophet
should say, O ye troublers of Gods people, howsoever it appears to you in
this your bloody rage, Note.
that God regards not your cruelty, nor considers not what vio^ence you do
to his poor afflicted, yet shall ye be visited, yea, your Carcases shall fall
and lie as stinking Carrions upon the face of the earth, ye shall fall without
hope of life or of a blessed resurrection; yea, howsoever ye gather your
substance, and augment your families, ye shall be so scattered, that ye shall
leave no memorial of you to the posterities to come, but that which shall be
execrable and odious.

Hereof have the Tyrants their admonition, and the afflicted Church inestimable
comfort; The Tyrants that do oppress, shall receive the same end that they did
which have passed before; that is, They shall die and fall with shame, without
hope of resurrection, as is foresaid, not, That they shall not arise to their
own confusion and just condemnation; but, that they shall not recover power to
trouble the servants of God, neither yet shall the wicked arise (as David
says) in the Council of the Just: Now have the wicked their Counsels, their
Thrones, and finally handling (for the most part) of all things that are upon
the face of the earth; but the poor servants of God are reputed unworthy of
men's presence, envyed, mocked; yea, they are more vile before these proud
Tyrants, then is the very dirt and mire that is trodden under foot: But in that
glorious resurrection this state shall be changed; for then shall such as now
by their abominable living and cruelty, destroy the earth and molest Gods
children, see him whom they have pierced; Apoc.
they shall see the glory of such as now they persecute, to their terror and
everlasting confusion. The remembrance hereof ought to make us patient in the
days of affliction, and so to comfort us, that when we see Tyrants in their
blind rage, tread under foot the Saints of God, that utterly we despair not,
as if there were neither Wisdom, Justice nor Power above in the Heavens to
repress such Tyrants, and to redress the dolours of the unjustly afflicted;
No brethren, let us be assured that the right hand of the Lord will change the
state of things that be most desperate: In our God there is Wisdom and Power
in a moment, to change the joy and mirth of our enemies, into everlasting
mourning, and our sorrows into joy and gladness that shall have no end.

Let us therefore in these apparent calamities (and marvel not that I say
calamities apparent, for he that sees not a fire begun, that shall burn more
then we look for, unless God of his mercy quench it, is more then blind,) not
be discouraged, but with unfeigned repentance, let us return to the Lord our
God, let us accuse and condemn our former negligence, and steadfastly depend
upon his promised deliverance, so shall our temporal sorrows be converted into
everlasting joy. The doubt that might be moved concerning the destruction of
those whom God exalts, shall be discussed, if time will suffer, after that we
have passed thorowout the Text; now proceeds the Prophet, and says; Thou
have increased the Nations, Verse. 15.
O Lord, thou have increased the Nations, thou art made glorious, thou have
enlarged all the coasts of the earth.

Lord in trouble, Verse. 16.
etc.



In these words the Prophet gives consolation to the afflicted, assuring them,
That how horrible soever that desolation should be, yet should the Seed of
Abraham be so multiplied, that it should replenish the coasts of the earth;
yea, that God should be more glorified in their affliction, then he was during
the time of their prosperity: This promise (no doubt) was incredible when it
was made, for who could have been persuaded, That the destruction of Jerusalem
should have been the means whereby the Nation of the Jews should have been
increased, seeing that much rather it appeared, That the overthrow of Jerusalem
should have been the very abolishing of the seed of Abraham: But we must
consider, to what end it was that God revealed himself to Abraham, and what is
contained in the promise of the multiplication of his Seed, and the benediction
promised thereto.

First, God revealed himself to Abraham, and that by the means of his Word; to
let all flesh after understand, That God first called man, and revealed himself
unto him, Josh 24.
that flesh can do nothing but rebel against God; for Abraham (no doubt) was
an Idolater before that God called him from Ur of the Caldees; The Promise was
made, That the Seed of Abraham should be multiplied as the Stars of heaven, Rom
9.
and as the sand of the sea; which is not simply to be understood of his
natural Seed, as though it was sometimes greatly increased; but rather of such
as should become the spiritual Seed of Abraham, as the Apostle speaks; Now
if we be able to prove, That the right knowledge of God, his Wisdom, Justice,
Mercy and Power, was more amply declared in their captivity, then ever it was
at any time before, then can we not deny, but that God (even when to man's
judgment he had utterly rased them from the face of the earth) did increase
the Nation of the Jews, so that he was glorified in them, and did extend the
Coasts of the earth for their habitation. And for the better undestanding
hereof, let us shortly try the Histories, from their Captivity to their
deliverance, and after the same, to the coming of the Messiah.

It is no doubt, but that Satan intended by the dispersion of the Jews, so to
have profaned the whole Seed of Abraham, that among them should neither have
remained the true knowledge of God, nor yet the Spirit of Sanctification; but
that all should have come to a like contempt of God: Dan. 1.
For I pray you, for what purpose was it, that Daniel and his fellows were
taken into the Kings Court, were commanded to be fed at the Kings Table, and
were put to the Schools of their Divines, Southsayers and Astrologians? It may
be thought that it proceeded of the Kings humanity, and of a zeal that he had,
that they should be brought up in virtue and good learning; and I doubt not but
it was so understood of a great number of the Jews; but the secret practice of
the Devil was understood of Daniel, when he refused to defile himself with the
Kings meat, which was forbidden to the Seed of Abraham in the Law of their GOD.
Well, God begins shortly after to show himself mindful of his promise made
by his Prophet, and to trouble Nebuchadnezzar himself, by showing to him a
vision in his dream, which did the more trouble him, because he could not
forget the terror of it; neither yet could he remember what the Vision and the
parcels thereof were: Whereupon were called all Divines, Interpreters of
dreams, and Southsayers, of whom the King demanded, If they could let him
understand what he had dreamed; But while that they answer, That such a
question used not to be demanded of any Southsayer or Magician, for the
resolution thereof only appertained to the gods, whose habitation was not with
men; the charge was given* That they all should be slain; Dan. 2.
and amongst the rest Daniel was sought (whose innocence the Devil envyed) to
have suffered the same judgment: He reclaimeth, and asks time to disclose
that secret; (I only touch the History, to let you see by what means God
increases his knowledge) which being granted, the vision is revealed unto him,
he shows the same unto the King, with the true interpretation of it; adding,
That the knowledge thereof came not from the Stars, but only from the God of
Abraham, who only was, and is, the true God: which thing understood, the King
burst forth in his confession, saying, Of a truth your God is the most
excellent of all gods, and he is Lord of Kings, and only he that reveals the
secrets, seeing that thou could open this secret. And when Nebuchadnezzar,
after that, puffed up in pride by the counsel of his wicked Nobility, would
make an Image, before the which he would that all Tongues and Nations, subject
to him, should make adoration, and that Sydrack, Meshack and Abednago; would
not obey his unjust commandment, and so were cast in the flaming furnace of
fire; and yet by Gods Angels, were so preserved, that no smell of fire remained
in their persons nor garments: This same King gives a more notable confession,
saying, The Lord God of Sydrack, Misack and Abednago, is to be praised, who
has sent his Angels, and delivered his worshippers, that put trust in him, who
have done against the Kings commandment, who have rather given their own bodies
to torment, then that they would worship another God, Dan. 3.
except their own God. By me therefore, is there made a decree, That whosoever
shall blaspheme the God of Sydrack* Misack and Abednago, that he shall be cut
in pieces, and his house shall be made detestable.

Thus we see how God began, even almost in the beginning of their Captivity, to
notify his name, to multiply his knowledge, and set forth as well his power,
as his wisdom, and true worshipping, by those that were taken prisoners; yea,
that were despised, and of all men contemned, So that the name and fear of the
God of Abraham, was never before notified to so many Realms and Nations. This
wondrous work of God proceeded from one Empire to another: For Daniel, being
promoted to great honor by Darius King of Persians and Medes, falls into a
desperate danger; Dan. 6.
For he was committed to prison among Lions, because that he was deprehended,
breaking the Kings Injunction; not that the King desired the destruction of
Gods servants, but because the corrupt Idolaters, that in hatred of Daniel had
procured that Law to be made, urged the King against his Nature; but God by his
Angel, did stop the Lions mouths, and so preserved his servant: Which
considered with the sudden destruction of Daniels enemies, by the same Lions,
King Darius, besides his own confession, wrote to all people, tongues, and
nations after this form; It is decreed by me, That in all the dominions of my
Kingdom, men shall fear and reverence the God of Daniel, because he is the
living God, abiding for ever; whose Kingdom shall not be destroyed, and his
dominion remains, who saves and delivers, and shows signs and wonders
in Heaven and in Earth, who has delivered Daniel from the Lions.

This knowledge was yet further increased, in the days of Cyrus, who giving
freedom to the Captives* to return to their own Native Country, gives this
confession; Thus says Cyrus, the King of Persians, All the Kingdoms of the
Earth, 1 Esd 2.
has the Lord God of Heaven given unto me, and has commanded me, that a house
be built to him in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whosoever therefore of you,
that are of his people, Let the Lord his God be with him, and let him pass up
to Jerusalem, and let him build the house of the Lord God of Israel; for he
only is God, that is in Jerusalem. Time will not suffer me to entreat the
points of this confession, neither yet did I for that purpose adduce the
History; But only, to let us see how constantly God kept his promise in
increasing of his people, and in augmenting of his true knowledge, when that
both they that were the seed of Abraham, and that Religion which they
professed, appeared utterly to have been extinguished, above men's expectation;
I say, he brought freedom out of bondage, light out of darkness, and life out
of death. I am not ignorant, that the building of the Temple, and reparation of
the Walls of Jerusalem, were long stayed, so that the work had many enemies;
But so did the hand of God prevail in the end, That a decree was made by Darius
(by him I suppose, that succeeded to Cambises) not only that all things
necessary for the building of the Temple, and for the Sacrifices that were to
be there brent, 1 Esd 6.
should be ministered upon the Kings charges; but also, That whosoever should
hinder that work, or change that decree, that a balk should be taken out of his
house, and that he should be hanged thereupon; yea, that his house should be
made a dunghill; and thereto, he adds a Prayer, A Prayer.
saying, The God of Heaven, who has placed his Name there, root out every
King, and People (O that Kings and Nations should understand) that shall put
his hand, either to change, or to hurt this house of God, that is in Jerusalem.
And so, in despite of Satan, was the Temple builded, the walls repaired, and
the City inhabited, and in the most desperate dangers it was preserved, till
that the Messiah promised, the glory of the second Temple, came, manifested
himself to the world, suffered and rose again, according to the Scriptures:
And so, by sending forth his Gospel from Jerusalem, did replenish the earth
with the true knowledge of God; and so did God in perfection increase the
Nation, and the spiritual Seed of Abraham.

Wherefore, dear brethren, we have no small consolation, if the state of all
things be this day rightly considered; we see in what fury and rage the world,
for the most part, is now raised, against the poor Church of Jesus Christ, unto
the which he has proclaimed liberty, after the fearful bondage of that
Spiritual Babylon, in the which we have been holden captives longer space,
then Israel was prisoner in Babylon it self: For if we shall consider, upon the
one part, the multitude of those that live wholly without Christ; and upon the
other part, the blind rage of the pestilent Papists, What shall we think of
the small number of them that do profess Christ Jesus, but that they are as a
poor sheep, already seized in the claws of the Lion? yea, that they, and the
true Religion which they profess, shall in a moment utterly be consumed?

But against this fearful temptation, let us be armed with the Promise of God,
to wit, That he will be the Protector of his Church; yea, That he will multiply
it, even when to man's judgment it appears utterly to be exterminate. This
Promise has our God performed, in the multiplication of Abraham's Seed, in
preservation of it, when Satan labored utterly to have destroyed it, in
deliverance of the same, as we have heard, from Babylon. He has sent his son
Christ Jesus, clad in our flesh, who has tasted of all our infirmities (sin
except) who has promised to be with us to the end of the world. He has
further kept Promise, in publication, yea, in the restitution of his glorious
Gospel; Shall we then think that he will leave his Church destitute in this
most dangerous age? Only let us stick to his Truth, and study to conform our
lives to the same, and he shall multiply his knowledge, and increase his
people. But now let us hear what the Prophet says more.

Lord in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer when thy
chastning was upon them. Verse. 16.
The Prophet means, that such as in the time of quietness, did not rightly
regard God, nor his judgments, were compelled by sharp corrections to seek
God, yea, by cries and dolorous complaints, to visit him. True it is, That
such obedience deserves small praise before men, for who can praise, or accept
that in good part, which comes as it were of mere compulsion; and yet rare it
is, that any of Gods children do give unfeigned obedience, until the hand of
God turn them; For if quietness and prosperity, make them not utterly to
forget their duty, both toward God and man, as David for a season, yet it
makes them careless, insolent, and in many things unmindefull of those things
that God chiefly craveth of them; which imperfection espied, and the danger
that thereof might ensue, our heavenly Father visits the sins of his
children, but in the rod of his mercy, by the which they are moved to return to
their God, to accuse their former negligence, and to promise better obedience
in all times hereafter; as David confesses, saying, Before I fell in
affliction, I went astray, but now will I keep thy Statutes.

But yet for the better understanding of the Prophets mind, we may consider
how God does visit man, and how man does visit God, and what difference there
is, betwixt the visitation of God upon the reprobate, and his visitation upon
the chosen.

God sometimes visits the reprobate in his hot displeasure, pouring upon them
his plagues for their long rebellion; as we have heard before, that he visited
the proud, and destroyed their memory. Other times, God is said to visit his
people being in affliction, to whom he sends comfort, or promise of
deliverance, as he did visit the seed of Abraham, being oppressed in Egypt:
and Zachary says, That God had visited his people, and sent unto them hope of
deliverance, when John the Baptist was borne. But of none of these visitations
speaks our Prophet here, but of that only which we have already touched, to
wit, when that God lays his correction upon his own children, to call them
from the venomous Breasts of this corrupt world, that they suck not in
overgreat abundance the poison thereof; and does, as it were, wean them from
their mothers Paps, that they may learn to receive other nourishment. True it
is, That this weaning (or spaning, as we term it) from worldly pleasure, is a
thing strange to the flesh, and yet it is a thing so necessary to Gods
children, that unless they be weaned from the pleasures of the world, they can
never feed upon that delectable Milk of Gods eternal verity; For the
corruption of the one, does either hinder the other to be received, or else so
troubles the whole powers of man, that the soul can never so digest the truth
of God, as that he ought to do.

Albeit this appears hard, yet it is most evident; For what liquor can we
receive from the Breasts of the world, but that which is in the world, what
that is, the Apostle John teaches, 1 John 2.
saying; Whatsoever is in the world, is either the lusts of the eyes, the lusts
of the flesh, or the pride of life. Now seeing that these are not of the
Father, but of the world, how can it be, that our souls can feed upon
chastity, temperance, and humility, so long, as that our stomachs are
replenished with the corruption of these vices?

Now so it is, that willingly, flesh can never refuse these forenamed, but
rather still delights it self in every one of them; yea, in them all, as the
examples are but too evident.

It behooves therefore, that God himself shall violently pull his children from
these venomous breasts, that when they lack the liquor and poison of the one,
they may visit him, and learn to be nourished of him. Oh if the eyes of
worldly Princes should be opened, that they might see with what humor and
liquor their souls are fed, while that their whole delight consists in pride,
ambition, and lusts of the stinking flesh. We understand then how God does
visit men, as well by his severe judgments, as by his merciful visitation of
deliverance from trouble, or by bringing trouble upon his chosen for their
humiliation: And now it rests to understand how man visits God: Man does
visit God, when he appears in his presence; be it to the hearing of his
Word, or to the participation of his Sacraments; as the people of Israel,
besides the observation of their Sabbaths and daily oblations, were commanded
thrice a year to present themselves before the presence of the Tabernacle, and
as we do, and as often as we present our selves to the hearing of the Word; for
there is the footstool, yea, there is the face and throne of God himself,
wheresoever the Gospel of Jesus Christ is truly Preached, and his Sacraments
rightly ministered.

But men may on this sort visit God hypocritically, for they may come for the
fashion, they may hear with deaf ears; yea, they may understand, and yet never
determine with themselves to obey that, which God requires: And let such men
be assured, That he (who searches the secrets of hearts) will be avenged of
all such. For nothing can be to God more odious, then to mock him in his own
presence. Let every man therefore examine himself, with what mind, and what
purpose, he comes to hear the Word of God; yea, with what ear he hears it,
and what testimony his heart gives unto him, when that God commands virtue,
and forbids impiety.

Repinest thou when God requires obedience? Thou hear to thine own
condemnation. Mockest thou at Gods threatenings? Thou shall feel the weight and
truth of them, albeit too late, when flesh and blood cannot deliver thee from
his hand. But the visitation (whereof our Prophet speaks,) is only proper to
the sons of God, who in the time when God takes from them the pleasures of the
world, or shows his angry countenance unto them, have their recourse unto
him, and confessing their former negligence with troubled hearts, cry for his
mercy. This visitation is not proper to all afflicted, but appertains only
to Gods children: For the reprobates can never have access to Gods mercy in
time of their tribulation, and that because they abuse as well his long
patience, as the manifold benefits they receive from his hands; For as the same
Prophet heretofore says, Let the wicked obtain mercy, yet shall he never learn
wisdom, but in the land of righteousness, that is, Where the very knowledge
of God abounds, he will do wickedly, which is a crime above all others
abominable; for to what end is it that God erecteth his Throne among us, but
that we should fear him? Why does he reaveal his holy will unto us, but that we
should obey it? Why does he deliver us from trouble, but that we should be
witnesses unto the world, that he is gracious and merciful?

Now when that men, hearing their duty, and knowing what God requires of them,
do malapertly fight against all equity and justice, what, I pray you, do they
else, but make manifest war against God? yea, when they have received from
God such deliverance, that they cannot deny, but that God himself has in his
great mercy visited them, and yet that they continue wicked as before; what
deserve they, but effectually to be given over unto a reprobate sense, that
headlong they may run to ruin, both of body and soul? It is almost
incredible that a man should be so enraged against God, that neither his
plagues, nor yet his mercy showed, should move them to repentance; but because
the Scriptures bears witness of the one, and the other, let us cease to
marvel, and let us firmly believe, that such things as have been, are even
presently before our eyes, albeit many, blinded by affection, cannot see them.

Ahab (as in the book of the Kings it is written) received many notable
benefits of the hand of God, who did visit him in diverse sorts; sometimes by
his plagues, sometimes by his word, and sometimes by his merciful deliverance;
He made him king, and for the Idolatry used by him and his wife, he plagued
whole Israel by Famine; He revealed to him his Will and true Religion by the
Prophet Elijah; he gave unto him sundry deliverances, but one most special,
when proud Benhadad came to besiege Samaria, and was not content to receive
Ahabs gold, silver, sons, daughters and wives, but also required, that his
servants should have at their pleasure whatsoever was delectable in Samaria:
True it is, that his Elders and people willed him not to hear the proud Tyrant,
But who made unto him the promise of deliverance? and who appointed and put his
Army in order? who assured him of victory? The Prophet of God only, who
assured him, That by the servants of the Princes of the Provinces, who in
number were only two hundred thirty and two, he should deface that great
Army, in the which there were two and thirty Kings, with all their Forces; and
as the Prophet of God promised, so it came to pass, victory was obtained, not
once only, but twice, and that by the merciful visitation of the Lord.

But how did Ahab visit God again for his great benefit received? Did he
remove his Idolatry? did he correct his Idolatrous wife Iezabel? No, we find
no such thing, but the one and the other, we find to have continued and
increased in former impiety: But what was the end hereof? The last visitation
of God was, That dogs licked the blood of the one, and did eat the flesh of
the other. In few words then we understand, what difference there is betwixt
the visitation of God upon the Reprobate, 1 Reg. 22.
and his visitation upon his Chosen; the Reprobate are visited, but never truly
humbled, 2 Reg. 9.
nor yet amended; the Chosen being visited, they sob, and they cry unto God for
mercy (which obtained) they magnify Gods Name, and after declare the fruits of
repentance. Let us therefore that hear these judgments of our God, call for
the assistance of his holy Spirit, that howsoever it pleases him to visit us,
that we may stoop under his merciful hands, and unfainedly cry to him when he
corrects us; And so shall we know in experience, that our cries and
complaints were not in vain. But let us hear what the Prophet says further.

Verse 17.
Like as a woman (says he) with child that draws near the travel, is in
sorrow, and cries in her pains, so have we been in thy sight, O Lord, we have
conceiv^d, we have born in vain, as though we should have brought forth the
wind.

Verse 18.
Salvations were not made to the earth, neither did the inhabitants of the earth
fall.

This is the second part of the Prophets complaint in the which he in the
person of Gods people complains, that of their great affliction there
appeared not end. This same similitude is used by our Master Jesus Christ; for
when he speaks of the troubles of his Church, John 16.
he compares them to the pains of a woman traveling in her childbirth. But
it is to another end. For there he promises exceeding and permanent joy, after
a sort, though it appear trouble. But here is the trouble long and vehement,
albeit the fruit of it was not suddenly espied. He speaks no doubt of that
long and dolorous time of their captivity, in the which they continually
traveled for deliverance, but obtained it not before the complete end of 70
years; during the which time, the earth, that is, the land of Judah, which
sometimes was sanctified unto God, but was then given to be profaned by wicked
people, got no help, nor perceiving any deliverance: For the Inhabitants of the
world fell not, that is, the tyrants and oppressors of Gods people, were not
taken away, but still remained and continued blasphemers of God and troublers of
his Church. But because I perceive the hours to pass more swiftly then they
have done at other times, I mind to contract that which rests of this Text
into certain points.

Verse. 19.20.
The Prophet first fights against the present despair. After he introduces
God himself calling upon his people. And last of all, he assures his
afflicted, that God will come, and require account of all the blood thirsty
Tyrants of the earth.

First fighting against the present despair, he says, Thy dead shall live,
even my Body (or with my body shall they arise,) awake and sing ye that dwell
in the dust; For thy dew is as the dew of herbs. Verse 19.


The Prophet here pierces through all impediments that nature could object;
And by the victory of faith, he overcommeth, not only the common enemies, but
the great and last enemy of all, to wit, death it self: For this would he say,
Lord, I see nothing to thy chosen, but misery to follow misery, and one
affliction to succeed another, yea, in the end I see, that death shall devour
thy dearest children. But yet, O Lord, I see thy promise to be true, and thy
love to remain toward thy chosen, even when death appeared to have devoured
them: For thy dead shall live, yea not only shall they live, but my very dead
Carcass shall arise; And so I see honor and glory to succeed this temporal
shame, I see joy permanent to come after trouble, order to spring out of this
terrible confusion; and finally, I see that life shall devour death, so that
death shall be destroyed, and so thy servants shall have life. This (I say) is
the victory of faith, when in the midst of death, through the light of Gods
Word, the afflicted see life. Hypocrites, in the time of quietness and
prosperity, can generally confess, That God is true in his promises; but
bring them to the extremity, and there cease the Hypocrite further to trust
in God then he sees natural means whereby God uses to work: But the true
faithful, when all hope of natural means fails, then fly they to God
himself, and to the truth of his Promise, who is above nature, yea, whose works
are not so subject to the ordinary course of nature, that when Nature fails,
his Power and Promise fail also therewith.

Let us further observe, That the Prophet here speaks not of all dead in
general, but says, Thy dead, O Lord, shall live: In which words he makes
difference betwixt those that die in the Lord, and those that die in their
natural corruption, and in the old Adam. Dye in the Lord can none, except
those that live in him (I mean those that attain to the years of discretion)
and none live in him, but those that with the Apostle can say, I live, and yet
not I, but Christ Jesus that dwells in me; The life that I now live, Gal. 2.
I have by the faith of the Son of God. Not that I mean, That the faithful
have at all hours such sense of the life everlasting, that they fear not the
death, and the troubles of this life; no, not so, for the faith of Gods
Children is weak, yea, and in many things imperfect: But I mean, That such as
in death and after death shall live, must communicate in this life with Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.
and must be regenerate by the seed of life; that is, by the Word of the
everliving God, which whosoever despises, refuses life and joy everlasting.

The Prophet transferreth all the promises of God to himself, saying, Even my
dead body shall arise; and immediately after, gives commandment and charge to
the dwellers in the dust, that is, To the dead Carcases of those that were
departed (for the spirit and soul of man dwells not in the dust) That they
should awake, that they should sing and rejoice; for they should arise and
spring up from the earth, even as the Herbs do, after they have received the
dew from above.

Time will not suffer that these particulars be so largely treated as they
ought to be, and as I gladly would; therefore let us consider, That the Prophet
in transferring the Power and Promise of God to himself, does not vindicate to
himself any particular prerogative above the people of God, as that he alone
should live and arise, and not they also; But he does it, to let them
understand, That he taught a Doctrine whereof he was certain, yea, and whereof
they should have experience after his death: As if he should say, My words
appear to you now to be incredible, but the day shall come, that I shall be
taken from you, my Carcass shall be enclosed in the bosom of the earth, and
therefore shall ye be led away Captives to Babylon, where ye shall remain many
days and years, as it were buried in your Sepulchers.

But then call to mind, that I said unto you before hand, that my body shall
arise: Even so shall ye rise from your graves out of Babylon, and be restored
to your own Country, and City of Jerusalem. This, I doubt not, is the true
meaning of the Prophets. The charge that he gives to the dwellers in the dust,
is to express the power of Gods Word; whereby, he not only gives life, where
death apparently had prevailed; but also by it, he calls things that are not,
even as if they were. True it is, that the Prophet Isaiah saw not the
destruction of Jerusalem, much less could he see the restitution of it with
his corporal eyes; but he leaves this, as it were, in testament with them,
That when they were in the extremity of all bondage, they should call to mind,
what the Prophet of God had before spoken.

And lest that his doctrine, and this promise of God made unto them by his
mouth, should have been forgotten (as we are ever prone and ready to forget
Gods promises when we are pressed with any sorrow) God raised up unto them, in
the midst of their calamity, his Prophet Ezekiel, unto whom, Ezekiel. 37
among many other visions, he gave this; The hand of the Lord first led him in
a place, which was full of dry and dispersed bones. The question was demanded
of the Prophet, if these bones, being wondrous dry, should live. The Prophet
answered, The knowledge thereof appertained unto God. Charge was given unto
him, that he should speak unto the dry bones, and say, Thus says the Lord God
to these bones, Behold, I shall give you breath, and you shall live; I shall
give unto you sinews, flesh, and skin, and you shall live. And while the
Prophet spoke (as he was commanded) he heard a voice, and he saw every bone
join in his Marrow; he saw them covered with flesh and skin, albeit, there was
no spirit of life in them. He was commanded again, to speak, and to say, Thus
says the Lord God, Come O spirit from the four quarters, and blow in these
that are slain, that they may live. And as he prophesied, the spirit of life
came; They lived and stood, upon their feet. Now does the Lord interpret what
this vision meant, saying, O Son of man, these bones are the whole house of
Israel. Behold, they say, our bones are dried, our hope is perished, we are
plainly cut off; But behold, says the Lord, I will open your graves, I will
bring you forth of them, ye shall live, and come unto the Land of Israel, and
ye shall know that I am the Lord.

This vision I say, given to the Prophet, and by the Prophet preached to the
people, when they thought that God had utterly forgotten them, compelled them
more diligently to advert, what the former Prophets had spoken. It is no doubt,
but they carried with them, both the prophecy of Isaiah and Jeremy, so that
the Prophet Ezekiel is a Commentary to these words of Isaiah, where he says.
Thy dead, O Lord, shall live, with my body they shall arise. The Prophet
brings in this similitude of the dew, to answer unto that part of their
fidelity, who can believe no further of Gods promises, then they are able to
apprehend by natural judgment; As he would say, Think ye this impossible,
that God shall give life unto you, and bring you to an estate of a
Commonwealth again, after that ye be dead, and as it were raced from the face
of the earth. But why do ye not consider, what God works from year to year in
the order of nature, sometimes ye see the face of the earth decked and
beautified with herbs, flowers, grass, and fruits. Again, ye see the same
utterly taken away by storms, and vehemence of the Winter. What does God to
replenish the earth again, and to restore the beauty thereof. He sends down
his small and soft dew, the drops whereof, in their descending, are neither
great nor visible, and yet thereby are the pores and secret veins of the earth,
which before by vehemence of frost and cold were shut up, opened again; and so
does the earth produce again the like herbs, flowers, and fruits. Shall ye then
think, that the dew of Gods heavenly grace shall not be as effectual in you to
whom he has made his promise, as that it is in the herbs and fruits that from
year to year buddeth forth and decays? If ye do so, the Prophet would say
your incredibility is inexcusable, because ye do neither rightly weigh the
power, nor the promise of your God.

The like similitude uses the Apostle Paul against such as called the
resurrection in doubt, because that by natural judgment they could not
apprehend that flesh once putrified, and resolved, as it were, in other
substance, should arise again, and return again to the same substance and
nature. O fool (says he) that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
dye, and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but
bare corn, as it falls, of wheat, or some other, but God gives it a body as
it pleases him, even to every seed his own body. In which words and sentence,
the Apostle sharply rebukes the gross ignorance of the Corinthians, who began
to call in doubt the chief article of our faith, the resurrection of the flesh
after that it was once resolved, because that natural judgment (as said he)
reclaimed thereto. He reproves (I say) their gross ignorance, because they
might have seen and considered some proof and document thereof in the very
order of nature: For albeit the wheat, or other corn cast in the earth,
appears to die or putrify, and so to be lost, yet we see that it is not
perished, but that it fructifieth according to Gods will and ordinance.

Now if the power of God be so manifest in raising up of the fruits of the
earth, unto the which no particular promise is made by God, what shall be his
power and virtue in raising up of our bodies, seeing that thereto he is bound
by the solemn promise of Jesus Christ his eternal wisdom? And the verity it
self that can not lie: yea, seeing that the members must once communicate with
the glory of the head, How shall our bodies, which are flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bones, lie still for ever in corruption, seeing that our head Jesus
Christ is now exalted in his glory. Neither yet is this power and good will of
God to be restrained unto the last and general resurrection only, but we
ought to consider it in the mavelous preservation of his Church, and in the
raising up of the same from the very bottom of death, when by Tyrants it has
been oppressed from age to age.

Now of the former words of the Prophet, we have to gather this comfort, That
if at any time we see the face of the Church within this Realm so defaced (as I
think it shall be sooner then we look for) when we shall see, I say, virtue to
be despised, vice to be maintained, the verity of God to be impugned, lies and
men's inventions holden in authority; and finally, when we shall see the true
Religion of our God, and the zealous observers of the same, to be trodden under
the feet of such as in their heart say, Psalm. 14.
That there is no God. Let us then call to mind what have been the wondrous
works of our God from the beginning, that it is his proper Office to bring
forth light out of darkness, order out of confusion, life out of death; and
finally, that it is he, that calls things that are not, even as if they were,
as before we have heard: And if in the day of our temptation (which in my
judgment approaches fast) we be thus armed, if our incredulity cannot
utterly be removed, yet shall it so be corrected, that damnable despair
oppress us not. But now let us hear how the Prophet proceeds: Come (says
he) thou my people, enter within thy chamber, shut thy door after thee, hide
thy self a very little while, until the indignation pass over.

Here the Prophet brings in God amiably calling upon his people to come to
himself, and to rest with him, until such time as the fury and sharp plagues
should be executed upon the wicked and inobedient. It may appear at the first
sight, That all these words of the Prophet in the person of God calling the
people unto rest, are spoken in vain; for we neither find chambers nor rest
more prepared for the dearest children of God (so far as man's judgment can
discern) then there was for the rebellious and disobedient; for such as fell
not in the edge of the sword, or dyed not of pestilence, or by hunger, were
either carried captives unto Babylon, or else departed after into Egypt, so
that none of Abraham's Seed, had either chamber or quiet place to remain within
the Land of Canaan. For the resolution hereof, we must understand, That albeit
the Chambers whereunto God called his Chosen, be not visible, yet
notwithstanding they are certain, and offer unto Gods Children quiet habitation
in spirit, howsoever the flesh be traveled and tormented.

The chambers are then Gods sure promises, unto the which Gods people are
commanded to resort, yea, within the which they are commanded to close
themselves in the time of greatest adversity. The manner of speaking is
borrowed from that judgment and foresight, which God has printed in this our
Nature; for when that men epsy great tempests appearing to come, willingly
they will not remain uncovered upon the fields, but straightway they will draw
them to their houses or holds, that they may escape the vehemence of the same;
and if they fear any enemy to pursue them, they will shut their doors, to the
end that suddenly the enemy should not have entry.

After this manner God speaks to his people; as if he should say, The Tempest
that shall come upon this whole Nation, shall be so terrible, that nothing
shall appear but extermination to come upon the whole body: But thou my people
(I say) that hear my word, beleevest the same, and tremblest at the
threatenings of my Prophets, now when the world does insolently resist, let such
(I say) enter within the secret Chamber of my promises, let them contain
themselves quietly there, yea let them shut the door upon them, and suffer not
infidelity, the mortal enemy of my truth, and of my people that depend
thereupon, to have free entry to trouble them (yea, farther to murder) in my
promise; and so shall they perceive that my indignation shall pass, and that
such as depend upon me, shall be saved.

Thus we may perceive the meaning of the Prophet; Whereof, we have first to
observe, That God acknowledges them for his people, that are in greatest
affliction; yea, such as are reputed unworthy of men's presence, are yet
admitted within the secret Chamber of God. Let no man think that flesh and
blood, can suddenly attain to that comfort; and therefore most expedient it is,
That we be frequently exercised in meditation of the same. Easy it is I grant,
in time of prosperity, to say, and to think, That God is our God, and that we
are his people; But when he has given us over in the hands of our enemies, and
turned (as it were) his back unto us, then I say, still to reclaim him to be
our God, and to have this assurance, That we are his people, proceeds wholly
from the holy spirit of God, 1 John 5.
as is the greatest victory of faith, which over-cometh the world; for increase
whereof, we ought continually to pray.

This doctrine we shall not think strange, if we shall consider how suddenly
our spirits are carried away from our God, and from believing his promise, so
soon as any great temptation does apprehend us, then begin we to doubt, If ever
we believed Gods promises, if God will fulfill them to us, if we abide in his
favor, if he regards and looks upon the violence and injury that is done
unto us, and a multitude of such cogitations, which before lurked quietly in
our corrupted hearts, burst violently forth when we are oppressed with any
desperate calamity. Against the which, this is the remedy, once to apprehend
and still to retain, God to be our God, and firmly to believe, that we are his
people whom he loves, and will defend, not only in affliction, but even in
the midst of death it self.

Secondly, let us observe, That the judgments of our God, never were, nor yet
shall be so vehement upon the face of the earth, but that there has been, and
shall be, some secret habitation prepared in the sanctuary of God, for some of
his chosen, where they shall be preserved until the indignation pass by, and
that God prepares a time, that they may glorify him again, before the face of
the world, that sometimes despised them; And this ought to be unto us no small
comfort in these appearing dangers, to wit, that we be surely persuaded, That
how vehement soever the tempest shall be, that it yet shall pass over, and
some of us shall be preserved to glorify the name of our God, as is aforesaid.

Two vices lurk in this our nature; the one is, That we cannot tremble at Gods
threatenings, before that the plagues apprehend us, albeit, that we see cause
most just, why that his fierce wrath should burn as a devouring fire. The other
is, That when calamities before pronounced, fall upon us, then begin we to
sink down in despair, so that we never look for any comfortable end of the
same.

To correct this our mortal infirmity in time of quietness, We ought to
consider what is the justice of our God, and how odious sin is. And above all
other, how odious Idolatry is in his presence, who has forbidden it, and who
has so severely punished it in all ages, from the beginning; And in the time
of our affliction we ought to consider, what have been the wondrous Works of
our God, in preservation of his Church, when it has been in uttermost
extremity: For never shall we find the Church humbled under the hands of
Traitors, and cruelly tormented by them; but therewith, we shall find Gods
just vengeance to fall upon the cruel persecuters, and his merciful
deliverance to be showed to the afflicted: And in taking of this trial, we
should not only call to mind the Histories of ancient times, but also we
should diligently mark what notable Works God has wrought even in this our
age, as well upon the one, as upon the other. We ought not to think that our
God bears less love to his Church this day, then that he has done from the
beginning: For as our God in his own nature is immutable, so remains his love
toward his elect, always unchangeable; For as in CHRIST JESUS he has chosen
his Church, before the beginning of all ages, so by him will he maintain and
preserve the same unto the end. Yea, he will quiet the storms, and cause the
earth to open her mouth, and receive those raging floods of violent waters,
cast out by the Dragon, to drown and carry away the woman which is the spouse
of Jesus Christ, unto whom, God for his own Names ^ake, Eccles. histor.
Sozomoni. lib. 5. cap. 5.
will be the perpetual Protector.

This saw that notable servant of Jesus Christ, Athanasius, who (being exiled
from Alexandria by that blasphemous Apostata Julian the Emperor) said unto his
flock, who bitterly wept for his envious banishment; Weep not, but be of good
comfort, said he, For this little cloud will suddenly vanish. A little cloud,
he called both the Emperor himself, and his cruel tyranny; And albeit, That
small appearance there, was of any deliverance to the Church of God, or yet, of
any punishment, to have apprehended the proud tyrants, when the man of God
pronounced these words, Yet shortly after, God did give witness, That those
words did not proceed from flesh, nor blood, but from Gods very spirit. For not
long after, being in warfare, he received a deadly wound, whether by his own
hand, or by one of his own soldiers, the Writers clearly conclude not, But
casting his own blood against the Heaven, he said, Vicisti tandem Galilee, That
is, At last thou have overcome thou Galilean; So in despite, he termed the Lord
Jesus, and so perished that tyrant in his own iniquity; The storm ceased, and
the Church of God received now comfort.

Such shall be the end of all cruel persecuters, Their reign shall be short,
their end miserable, and their name shall be left in execrations to Gods
people; and yet shall the Church of God remain to Gods glory, after all storms.
But now shortly, let us come to the last point.

For behold (says the Prophet) the Lord will come out of his place to visit
the iniquity of the Inhabitants of the earth upon them, and the earth shall
disclose her blood and shall no more hide her slain; because that the final
end of the troubles of Gods Chosen shall not be before that the Lord Jesus
shall return to restore all things to their full perfection. The Prophet
brings forth the Etenall God, as it were from his own place and habitation,
and therewith shows the cause of his coming, to be, That he might take
account of all such as have wrought wickedly; for that he means, where he
says, He will visit the iniquity of the inhabitants of the earth upon them.
And lest that any should think, That the wrong doers are so many that they
cannot be called to an account, he gives unto the earth (as it were) an
Office and charge to bear witness against all those that have wrought
wickedly, and chiefly against those that have shed innocent blood from the
beginning; and says, That the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no
more hide her slain men.

If Tyrants of the earth, and such as delight in the shedding of blood should
be persuaded that this sentence is true, they would not so furiously come to
their own destruction; for what man can be so enraged, that he would willingly
do even before the eyes of God, that which might provoke his Majesty to anger,
yea, provoke him to become his enemy for ever, if that he understood how
fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God?

The cause then of this blind fury of the world, is the ignorance of God, and
that men think that God is but an Idol, and that there is no knowledge above,
that beholds their Tyranny; neither yet Justice that will, nor power that can
repress their impiety; but yet the Spirit of truth does witness the contrary,
affirming, That as the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and as his ears are
ready to receive their sobbing and prayers, so is his angry visage against such
as work iniquity, he hates and holds in abomination every deceitful and
blood-thirsty man, whereof he has given sufficient document from age to age,
in preserving the one, or at least in revenging of their cause, and in
punishing of the other. Where it is said, That the Lord will come from his
place, and that he will visit the iniquity of the inhabitants of the earth upon
them, and that the earth shall disclose her blood, we have to consider, what
most commonly has been, and what shall be the condition of the Church of God,
to wit, That it is not only hated, mocked, and despised, but that it is
exposed as it were, in a prey, unto the fury of the wicked; so that the blood
of the Children of God, is spilt like unto water upon the face of the earth.

The understanding whereof, albeit it be unpleasant to the flesh, yet to us it
is most profitable, lest that we seeing the cruel entreatings of Gods
servants, begin to forsake the Spouse of Jesus Christ, because that she is not
so dealt withal in this unthankful world, as the just and upright dealing of
Gods Children do deserve: But contrariwise, for mercy they receive cruelty;
for doing good to many, of all the reprobate they receive evil: And this is
decreed in Gods eternal Council, that the members may follow the trace of the
head, to the end that God in his just judgment should finally condemn the
wicked; for how should he punish the inhabitants of the earth, if their
iniquity deserved it not? How should the earth disclose our blood, if it
should not be unjustly spilt? We must then commit our selves into the hands
of our God, and lay down our necks, yea, and patiently suffer our blood to
be shed, that the righteous Judge may require account, as most assuredly he
shall, of all the blood that has been shed, from the blood of Abel the just,
till the day that the earth shall disclose the same; I say, every one that
sheddeth, or consents to shed the blood of Gods Children, shall be guilty of
the whole: A terrible, but must true sentence.
So that all the blood of Gods children shall cry vengeance, not only in
general, but also in particular, upon every one that has shed the blood of
any that unjustly suffered.

And if any think it strange, that such as live this day, can be guilty of the
blood that was shed in the days of the Apostles, let them consider, that the
verity it self pronounced, That all the blood that was shed from the days of
Abel, unto the days of Zachary; should come upon that unthankful generation,
that heard his Doctrine, and refused it.

The reason is evident, for as there is two heads and captains that rule over
the whole world, to wit, Jesus Christ, the Prince of Justice and Peace; and
Satan, called the Prince of the world; so are they but two Armies that has
continued battle from the beginning, and shall fight unto the end: The
quarrel is one which the Army of Jesus Christ do sustain, and which the
reprobate do persecute, to wit, The eternal truth of the Eternal God, and the
Image of Jesus Christ printed in his Elect, so that whosoever in any age
persecuteth any one Member of JESUS CHRIST, for his Truths sake, subscribeth as
it were, with his hand, the persecution of all that have passed before him.

And this ought the Tyrants of this age deeply to consider, for they shall be
guilty, not only of the blood shed by themselves, but of all (as is said) that
has been shed for the Cause of Jesus Christ from the beginning of the world.

Let the faithful not be discouraged, although they be appointed as Sheep
to the Slaughterhouse, for he, for whose sake they suffer, shall not forget
to revenge their cause. I am not ignorant, That flesh and blood will think
that kind of support too too late, for we had rather be preserved still
alive, then to have our blood revenged after our death; and truly if our
felicity stood in this life, or if death temporal should bring unto us any
damage, our desire in that behalf were not to be disallowed or condemned; But
seeing that death is common to all, and that this temporal life, is nothing
but misery, and that death does fully join us with our God, and gives unto
us the possession of our Inheritance, why should we think it strange to leave
this world, and go to our Head and Sovereign Captain Jesus Christ?

Lastly, we have to observe this manner of speaking, where the Prophet says,
that The earth shall disclose her blood: In which words the Prophet would
accuse the cruelty of those that dare so unmercifully and violently force from
the Breasts of the Earth, the dearest Children of God, and cruelly cut their
Throats in her bosom, who is by God appointed the common mother of mankind,
so that she unwillingly is compelled to open her mouth and receive their blood.

If such Tyranny were used against any natural woman, as violently to pull
her infant from her Breasts, cut the Throat of it in her own bosom, and
compel her to receive the blood of her dear Child in her own mouth, all
Nations would hold the fact so abominable, that the like had never been done in
the course of nature; no less wickedness commit they that shed the Blood of
Gods Children upon the face of their common mother the earth (as I said
before:) But be of good courage (O little and despised Flock of Christ Jesus)
for he that sees your grief has power to revenge it, He will not suffer one
tear of yours to fall, but it shall be kept and reserved in his Bottell, till
the fullness thereof be poured down from Heaven upon those that caused you to
weep and mourn; this your merciful God (I say) will not suffer your blood for
ever to be covered with the earth, nay, the flaming fires that have licked up
the blood of any of our Brethren, the earth that has been defiled with it, I
say, with the blood of Gods Children; for otherwise, to shed the blood of the
cruel blood-shedders, is to purge the land from blood, and as it were to
sanctify it; The earth (I say) shall purge her self of it, and show it before
the face of God; yea, the Beasts, Fowls, and other Creatures whatsoever, shall
be compelled to render that which they have received, be it Flesh, Blood or
Bones that appertained to thy Children, O Lord, which altogether thou shall
glorify, according to thy promise made to us in our Lord and Savior JESUS
CHRIST thy welbeloved Son, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be honor,
praise, and glory for ever and ever. Amen

Let us now humble our selves in the presence of our God, and from the bottom
of our hearts, let us desire him to assist us with the power of his Holy
Spirit, that albeit for our former negligences God gives us over into the
hands of other then such as rule in his fear, that yet he lets us not forget
his mercy, and that glorious Name, that has been proclaimed amongst us; but
that we may look through the dolorous storm of his present displeasure, and see
as well what punishment he has appointed for the cruel Tyrants, as what
reward he has laid in store for such as continue in his fear to the end; That
it would further please him to assist. That albeit we see his Church so
diminished, that it appear to be brought (as it were) to utter extermination,
that we may be assured, that in our God there is great power and will, to
increase the number of his Chosen, until they be enlarged to the uttermost
parts of the earth: Give us (O Lord) hearts to visit thee in time of
affliction, and albeit we see no end of our dolours, yet our faith and hope may
conduct us to the assured hope of that joyful resurrection, in the which we
shall possess the fruit of that for which now we labor: In the mean time,
grant unto us (O Lord) to repose our selves in the sanctuary of thy promise,
that in thee we may find comfort, till that this thy great indignation (begun
amongst us) may pass over, and thou thy self appear to the comfort of thy
afflicted, and to the terror of thine and our enemies.

Let us pray with heart and mouth.

Almighty God and merciful Father, etc. Lord into thy Hands I commend my
spirit, for the terrible roaring of Gunnes and the noise of Armor do so pierce
my heart, that my soul thirsts to depart.

The last day of August 1565. at four of the Clock in the Afternoon, written
indigestly, but yet truly so far as memomory would serve, of those things
that in public I spoke on Sunday, August 19. for the which I was discharged to
preach for a time. The Castle of Edinburgh was shooting against the exiled for
Christ Jesus sake.
Be merciful to thy Flock, O Lord, and at thy good pleasure put end to my
misery. JOHN KNOX.

FINIS.

