The Great Assizes OR General Day of Judgment, BEING The laying forth the
state of Man in Righteousness, and the Cursed Condition of the Wicked.

And the accounts that every Man must give at the General Resurrection.

I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live, John 11.25.

Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God and Christ, and
reign with him a thousand years, Revelation 20.6.

By William Knowles the Unworthiest of God's people, yet servant to Christ, and
B. of P.

London, Printed for Fr. Coals at the Sign of the Half-Bowle in the Old Bailey,
1662.

portrait

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Here present to your view a most excellent work, of the general day of
Judgment. I desire you to read it over, and lay to heart what is here
inserted, it will show you the joys of Heaven, and the pains of Hell; and also
the state of the Righteous, and of the wicked, showing the carefulness you
ought to have of your souls while you live in this transitory life, and seek so
to God as you may know him, and reign with him for evermore, Amen. And so
hoping the same may work spiritually in you, I for the same shall pray and rest,

Your friend in Christ, W. K. B. of P.

Give ear unto this, call for doom,
And light your Lamps of Oil;
It is not long ever God will come
Unawares and take the spoil.
Then watch and pray good Christians all,
For know you God is just;
The Righteous unto Heaven he will call,
To Hell the Wicked thrust.

Revel. 20.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 7. And when the thousand years are
expired, Satan shall be loosed out of prison.

8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations which are in the four quarters of
the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle; the number of whom
is as the sand of the sea.

9. And they went upon the breadth of the Earth and compassed the Camps of the
saints about, and the beloved City, and fire came down from Heaven and devoured
them.

10. And the Devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimston, where the beasts and false Priests are, and shall be tormented day
and night for ever and ever.

11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face
the Earth and Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them.

12. And I saw the dead great and small stand before God, and the Books were
opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the dead
were judged out of those things which were wriiten in the books according to
their works

13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and Hell
delivered up the dead which were in them and they were judged every man
according to his works.

14. And death and hell was cast into this lake of fire.

15. And whosoever was not found in the Book of Life was cast into the lake of
Fire.


CHristian Friends, of what degree soever, I beg at all of you for Christ's
sake, and the good of your own souls, to spend one half hour in reading over
this small Book, or tend to hear the reading of it: let me entreat you not to
neglect so great salvation, and lay by all your busied affairs to hear of the
coming of Christ, of the great day of Judgment, which is now even at the door;
throw by all to prepare your lamps of Oil against his coming; for his
appearance is a glory to them that fear him; but it will be a terrible day to
the wicked, according to my Text of Scripture before laid down. Satan is now
loose in the world, he deceives four parts of the Earth: yea, Gog and Magog he
gathers together, whose number is as the sands of the Sea; yea, he compasses
the camps of the Saints, and the beloved City: so he, like a flying Locust,
does corrupt Gods people against the great Assizes to condemn them, when fire
shall fall from Heaven and devour the wicked, and the Devil that deceived the
false Prophets of the world, shall be cast into the lake of this fire and
brimston with them; then shall Christ sit in judgment and power, and his
Saints with him, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, and the dead small and
great shall rise and receive according to their works, and whosoever be not
found in the Book of Life shall be cast in the lake of fire and brimstone for
ever, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; but the righteous shall
never see this, he shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked, so that a man shall say, There is a reward to
the Righteous, verily he is God that judges the Earth, Psalm. 58.10, 11.

Oh kearken I beseech you and repent you of your former sins, in what condition
will that man be in whose works are not good, a fearful thing it is to lose
Heaven to obtain Hell, to lose the favor of God, to be cursed with the Devil
to lie in torments for ever. Rent your hearts and not your garments turn to the
Lord all you that are heavy laden of your sins; are as red as scarlet he will
make them as white as snow says the Lord of Hosts, I do not desire the death
of a sinner, but rather would have you repent and live. Dearly beloved Friends,
the Lord does not desire you to go astray, but to obey his Call while its open
unto you; for after death comes judgment; it is no referring your sin of
repentance: to day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts; to morrow
is another day, and who knows what a day brings forth: Lie not wallowing in
your corruptednesse like to beasts; for the day of slaughter is nigh, a just
reward is prepared for the wicked; the punishment of Hell might afright you but
only you are a people of very hard mettle, misbelieving of the Scriptures, like
to the Scribes and Pharisees; but if like to them you do evil, you might
partake of their punishments: also I say, how gloomy a sight is the coming of
Christ to the Righteous: for at the Resurrection God will wipe away all tears
from your eyes, and there shall be no more death, whether sorrow nor crying;
neither shall there be any pain to thee, for the former things are past away;
but the fearful, and unbeliever, and the abominable, and unbelievers and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, ans Idolaters, and all liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death
and terriblest, Rev. 21.4, 8. it makes a reasonable Christian go out of his
wits to think of the terrible punishment of Hell; strive therefore I beseech
you to enter in at the strait gate; For many I say unto you will strive to
enter in and cannot be able, Matthew. 7.13. For when once the Master is risen up
and shut the door, and you begin to stand at the door knocking, without saying,
Lord, Lord, open to us; but the Lord will answer, I know you not whence you
are, depart from me all you workers of iniquity, Luke 13.25, 27. Oh what a
dismal Sentence is this to be deprived of the joys of Heaven, and the
presence of Christ, wherein is all fullness of joy, lacking nothing, and rest
and peace for evermore. Consider the Lillies how they grow; the toil not, the
spin not, and yet I say unto you Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
to one of these: if God so then cloth the grass which is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into an Oven, and how much more will he cloth you, O you
of little faith, Luke 12.17, 18. O consider my dear Friends, and he better
grounded toward God in true faith, through Jesus Christ. You see and know that
God is able to let you want for nothing so you will but serve him. Mark what
God says in Ezekiel 33.4, 5. Whosoever hears the sound of a Trumpet and
takes not warning, if the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon
his own head: but he that takes warning delivers his own soul. I beseech you
Friends, now you hear this day the sound of God in your ears, take warning
hereby, prepare for the coming of Christ in the courts of Heaven to judgment;
for assuredly that man that is found unprepared at that day will be in a most
damnable condition, they shall burn as an oven; yea, and all the proud and all
that do wickedly shall be stub^le, and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord; that is, shall not leave neither root nor branch; but unto them
that fear my name says God* shall the Son of righteousness rise with healing
in his wings, and you shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be as ashes
under the soles of your feet, Malac. 4.1, 2, 3. We have great cause to work out
our salvation with fear and trembling: what man would run himself in danger
when he may escape it. Be not idle dear Friends, but spare of your ordinary
sleep to muse of the word of GOD, for great is the reward of the righteous in
Heaven; yea, love you your Enemies, and do good, and lend unto the needy,
hoping for none again, and your reward shall be great, and you shall be
Children of the highest, Luke 5.35. see also the manner of Christ's coming to
Judgment: the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
noise of the Arch-angell, with Trump of God, and those which died in Christ
shall rise first: then we that are alive and remain, shall be caught up with
them together in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever
be with the Lord, These. 4.16, 17, 18. but the day and hour knows no Man,
therefore watch and pray for the coming of Christ, for it will over-take you as
a thief in the night: therefore sleep not as do others, but watch and be sober,
for they that sleep, sleep in the night, they that be drunken, be drunk in the
night; but let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breast plate of
Faith and Love, and for a Helmet put on the hope of salvation, And I beseech
you brethren to know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord;
abstain from all appearance of evil, do good and not hurt, for he that
diligently seeks good procures favor, but he that seeks hurt provokes
shame, Pro. 11.27. so it must needs be with the wicked a perpetual shameful
thing for a Christian to be so simple as to lose the presence of God, and his
glorious kingdom, to gain the intolerable flashing of Hell Fire; and to be
accompanied with divelish companions, to foreshew the glorious light of Heaven,
where is light for evermore, to obtain Hells obscured darkness, to be bereft
of everlasting Joys, to suffer perpetual Torments; this is true, that these
torments are prepared for the Damned, which shall be known to all those which
is reserved for those torments, by the most wretchfull and indignation of God,
a just reward for the wicked: for says Job, Chap. 21.30. The wicked is
reserved to the day of Destruction, they shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath. How often is the Candle of the wicked put out, and how often comes her
Destruction upon them, they are stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the
storm carries away, his eyes shall see his Destruction, and she shall drink
the wrath of the Almighty, Job 17.18, 20. strive to escape this wrath of God,
else will your own eyes see your sudden destruction come upon you; is it not
better to serve God and be in safety, then to serve the Devil and be in utter
destruction: it is time Christian Friends to prepare your selves for the day of
doom, for it is even at the door, the signs of Christ's coming does signify the
same; for in the latter days there shall be Wars and Rumors of Wars with great
slaughters, blood touches blood, the Father against the Son, and the Son
against the Father, one Neighbor against the one, not knowing his Friend from
his Foe, and the day is not yet, great signs will be in Heaven and in Earth,
before the notable day of the Lord comes, the Moon shall be turned into blood,
and the Sun shall be darkened and forbear her shineing: Young men shall see
Visions, Old men shall dream dreams, and diverse notable signs will be before
the day of the Lord comes, Acts 2.19, 20. these are the signs of the coming
of Christ, and the general Resurrection: when the Lord shall appear in the
Clouds with magnificent glory coming in the Air, with his Saints judging the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, but when this is accomplished there will be peace and
safety, but then comes sudden destruction as a Thief in the night; therefore
Christian Friends, watch and pray, for you know not at what hour the Son of Man
comes: you see and have heard, and do know that most of these things are
accomplished, and we are now in peace and safety, and you know not how suddenly
destruction may come upon you: pray, pray for the Lords coming, it is even at
the door, it cannot be far off: for our ancient Fathers have wrought that the
world should last Six Ages: that is to say not six thousand years, for the
longest liver was Methusaleh, who lived nine hundred sixty and nine years, and
then dyed, Genesis 5.27. his age six times doubled makes it appear that the
last day is not far of us, but will be accomplished in the year from the
Creation, to the year of the Lords resurrection 5886. but then the Apostles
testify, write in the book of the Acts, if the days be not shortened, there
shall be no flesh saved, this beloved is to put you off from knowing the day of
the Lords coming: be careful good people to prepare your selves, do not think
with the scoffers of the world that God will not come; or like to Seduces and
false Prophets, bringing in damnable doctrine of Heresy, but behold many shall
follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil
spoken of, Pet. 2.2. if God therefore spared not the Angels that sinned, but
cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be
reserved unto judgment, much more will he reserve the fire of hell for the
extortionall sinners of this world: he spared not the whole world, but drowned
it, saving eight persons: bringing the floods upon the world of the ungodly, so
also shall fire and brimstone burn up the wicked, and leave them neither root
nor branch, the Lord also turned the city of Sodom and Gomorrah unto ashes,
condemned them with an overthrow, making an example to all those that ever
after should live ungodly, and delivered just Lot, who was vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked: so will GOD do at the Judgment day, he
will sever the wicked from the righteous, and shower upon them everlasting
Torments; we in England do as justly deserve sudden destruction, as did these
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, for there was not any one sin reigned there, but
it is as frequently here, the sin of pride never reigned more, then it does at
this hour, both in City and Country, and that is cloaked over with a badg of
Galantry: to what profit is it to be as Dives was in the Gospel, to dwell in a
sumptuous Building, to wear rare apparel, to fair delicately every day, to have
all the delights that the world could afford him, to be in damnable torments
for ever: be content and strive not dear Friends to gain this to loose heaven,
for the glory of the world is as nothing to the glory of God: besides sin so
abounds in number, it is more then the sands of Sea, Sodom had not the sins
as we have, why therefore O God are we not destroyed! O thou God art infinite
in mercy and truth, sparing thy people, willing them to amendment of life; but
I will present to your view what sins are now in groth at this present time
first raigns pride, covetousness, malice, envy, hatred, in all abundance,
besides the most damnable sins of cursing and swearing, lying, drunkenness,
whoredom, and diverse other sins which are weights to weigh a sinner down to
Hell.

Oh dear Friends, put from you sin, which is the main thing that keeps you from
Heaven; yea, you take delight in sinning to fulfill the lusts thereof: you
think when you roar it in Taverns you do a good work when you hurt both soul
and body; you vapor and exalt your selves when you should be meek and lowly,
you drink Beer and Wine to excess when you should be sober; besides, running
to carnal lusts when you should be chaste, using most damnable Oaths and
profane actions, letting your mouths speak guile, acting all evil abominably
to the face of God, and thus in the practice of sin you run continually, never
thinking of the terrible day of Judgment; yea, mighty terrible will it be to
the wicked: and who will be able to stand before the righteous Judge, who
judges in truth and righteousness, according to the work of every man's doings?
In what a sad condition my friends are you in to he judged according to your
doings: does it not behoove you all to have a care of your actions, if your
works be bad, you must receive its just reward of punishment; if your works be
just, your case will be happy at this general seat of Judgment; after life
there is no pleading your case; for your case is before known: you are either
recorded in the Book of Life or Death, there is no Lawyers to plead for fees,
there is none of your earthly friends can pay the ransom of your souls, in
what a veil of misery are you plunged in at this hour, the Devil is on one
side of you, against the word of Sentence is past to bring you to eternal
damnation, your own conscience on the other side witnessing against you of all
the hidden secret sins, which you in your life time have committed, the wrath
of Gods fury hangs over you, his scourging Rod which will torment you, Hell
lies under you ready to swallow ye up, where the most damnable torments of Hell
fire is prepared for the wicked, then all calamities, sorrows and hellish
torments presses you at once and compasses you about on every side: the loss
of Heaven and the presence of God is a hellish torment, without any other
torment, with the loss of the profitable love of God, and the glory thereof,
besides to be punished in the flames of Hell for evermore, where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 24.30. When the Son of Man shall come in
his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, and before shall be gathered all
Nations together, and he shall separate them one from another as a shepherd
divides his Sheep from his Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on the right
hand, and the Goats on the left; and to the righteous shall say, Come ye
blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom of God, prepared for you from the
beginning: but to the wicked he says, Go you cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 24.31, 32, 34, 41. Lo. these
shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the Righteous into life Eternal.

Dear Brethren the way to escape these punishments depends only on things,
that is to fear God, and keep the Commands of GOD; these are also lost in your
self, redeemed by Christ. What Christians in the world would endanger
themselves of death, for the gaining of a trifled matter run into Hell, and
forsake Heaven, falling into eternal misery* and might obtain eternal Glory.

A word to you worldly men that makes a God of your Riches, pinching and
grinding the poor for gain, It will be easier for a Camel to go through the eye
of a needle, then for such a rich man to enter into life eternal. But trust not
unto uncertain riches; now lay upno earthly riches in store for the morrow, but
lay up riches in Heaven, where moth nor rust cannot corrupt. And a place where
is all fidelity, bliss and joy, and eternal happiness, relieve the poor and
needy, and turn not from them: for know you what is given to the poor with
charitable friends is lent to the Lord, and your reward will be great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. But such covetous worldly men that will not relieve the
oppressed, but lay up their gold in store for many years, are counted like the
fool in the Gospel that was suddenly tain from his riches and endangered
himself of everlasting damnation. Lay up no treasures on earth, take care
neither for any thing; for to morrow thou may go to thy grave. Then happy is
he that has laid up treasures in Heaven to all eternity, where moth nor rust
cannot corrupt, nor Thieves break through nor steal; For Heaven and Earth must
pass away, and fly from the presence of God, and not one tittle of the Gospel
of Christ shall pass away.

O England, beware of Gods heavy wrath and severe judgments against thee for
thy rebellious sinning against him: the Lords wrath will consume thee except
speedy repentance, he has stretched out his hand of affliction on the Land, as
a toll to the day of Doom, And it shall come pass says the Lord, at that day
I will search with Candles, and punish the men that are settled in their lees,
that says in their heart the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil;
therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation, they
shall also build houses, but not inhabit them, they shall plant Vineyards, but
not drink the Wine thereof; the great day of the Lord is near, and hastes
greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty men shall cry then
bitterly, that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
wastnesse and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of CLOVDS
and thick darkness, a day of tumpeting and alarm against the fenced Cities,
and against the high Towers: and distress I will bring upon wicked men, that
they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and
their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung: neither
their Silver nor their Gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the
Lords wrath; give good regard to this you rich men, who like the great fishes
of the sea eats up the poor and small fishes, but those the Lord speaks in
Micah 6.12, 15. the rich men are full of violence, shall I account them pure
that uses false balance with baggs of deceitful weights, no, I rather account
him a deceiver of the poor; and at this general day he cannot be able to stand
before the Judgment seat of Christ, but will be by his own Conscience pressed
from the presence of God, wishing the Hills to cover him and hide him from the
presence of the Almighty; but when that the word of sentence is past, he must
depart to that lake of Fire that burns for ever, where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth, from which place O mighty God deliver us; but if a man will
be willing to loose his life to save it, he shall arive to his desired Haven,
which is a Heavenly Jerusalem and glorious throne of Christ, as mystically it
was put for those prophesies to John in the Rev. 21.9, 10, 27. and there came
unto me one of the seven Angels, and talked with me, saying, come hither, and
he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high Mountain, and showed me
that great City descending out of Heaven from God, having the Glory of God, and
his light was like unto stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone clear as
Crystal, and had a Wall great and high, and had twelve Gates, and at the
Gates twelve Angels, which are the manner of the twelve Tribes of the Children
of Israel; there was three Gates on the North, three on the South, three on
the West, three on the East, and the Walls of the City has twelve foundations,
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles, of the Lamb, and the City lies
four square, the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal, the
building of the walls of it was of Jasper, and the City was pure Gold, like
unto clear Glass, the Foundation thereof was grounded with precious stones, and
the twelve Gates were twelve Pearls, and the Gates of this City were pure Gold,
as it were transparent Glass; and no temple is therein, for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. This City of Heaven has no need of
the light of the Sun or of the Moon, for the glory of God and the Lamb is the
light thereof, and also there proceeds out of the Throne of God, and the Lamb
a pure river of water of Life, as clear as Crystal, and in the midst of the
street was the Tree of life* which bears twelve manner of fruits, and yields
her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree was for the healing of
Nations, there is no night there, and they need no Candle, neither light of the
Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever; these sayings my Friends are faithful and true: for the Lord God has
showed unto his Servants the thing which must shortly be done.

Oh beloved consider the Glory of this Heavenly Jerusalem, no man is able to
imagine or conceive the wisdom of God, and the Honor and Glory of the Lamb,
and his amarous Throne which is the Portion of the Righteous and their greatest
reward: For behold says God I come quickly and my reward is with me, to give
to every man according to his works, what are our works by which we must be
Judged? Oh Base and Filthy, more worse then the Beast of the Field, we work
nothing that is good, we act mischief continually to the Face of God, by our
most Debauched Swearing, and Cursing, Whordome, and Drunkenness, Pride, and
Covetousness, Extortionall Idolatry, and Deceitful Living and Murmuring at
the handy works of God; but lo, the portion of those wicked men is to be burned
in a lake of Fire, which burns for ever and ever: they will be Tormented with
the memory of things past, present, and to come: the Rich man will think of his
Fidelity that is past his punishment at present, and his intolerable Torments
to come. You Rich Men be convinced and make not a god of your Riches, but make
such uses of your Tallents that GOD has lent you; be'st thou a King, Rule in
Peace, Execute Judgment upon Mercies, spread forth the Gospel of Christ
throughout the whole Dominions: and you Judges and Magistrates in chiefest,
Judge equity and right, give Justice to the Poor as well as to the Rich: let
not the Balance of Wickedness outweigh the Book of Life; nor hide nothing
from God, for his all-seeing eye does bring secret things to a clear light, for
what is done in your secret Courts, will be proclaimed on the house Top, to you
Lawyers recall your selves to remembrance what Law is, let not handfuls of Gold
and Silver carry you from a rightful Case, be you a pleader for the poor, and
redeem them from an earthly bondage, and your Savior will plead for you, and
Judge you according at the great Assizes, and redeem you; Next you Ministers of
God, measure out the Fruits of Righteousness to the People, sound forth the
Gospel with boldness, rehearse nothing but sound Doctrine, which prodeeds
from the spirit of truth, and he as a shining light by your zeal and
conversation; and lay aside all Superstition, Popery, Schism, or Heresy,
which has bred Destruction in the Land: And lastly to you People in General,
of what degree soever, or opinion, Take these few Rules and Administrations
before I end, or quite conclude my Book: to you Learned, search you the
Scriptures, and you will find me not to diminish the word of God, the Law of the
Lord, then practice and follow what you find Writ in the Old and New Testament;
and to the Ignorant People, I advise you to hearken to the Learned, and to
those that Preaches the Gospel, and what they commend unto you, and lay it to
heart, and search out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling,

First seek to find God in your hearts, then learn to know him, and he
acquainted with him: for if you never seek to know him, how should you ever
think to live with him; you think in your hearts how should we know him, that
we nere beheld with our mortal Eyes: no my Friends, you must see him
spiritually and not mortally; for no mortal eyes is able to behold his
exceeding magnificent Glory: he sent Christ in the Flesh because we should
believe, but for all this, yea for all the means he can use, we will not
believe him: yet you say you believe there is a God, but wherein do you
believe? for if you believe aright, how dare you to offend so great a God? no
my Friends, if you believe aright, you will seek to please him, and not offend
him, but fear his Judgments, and trust in his Mercy; for he is slow to anger
and of great kindness. Therefore beloved Conclude with me, with these sayings,
fear God and keep his Commandments, and then you may hope to believe aright:
prepare your selves against this great day of the Lord, for unto you that fear
my name, it will be a day of joy and rejoicing, a day of fidelity, mirth and
gladness with eternal Bliss, when the Wicked man shall lie and be Cursed with
Curses, the Plagues of Hell Tormanting him, the Memory of things past
oppressing him, the howl of fearful Devils affrighting him, the heavy wrath
and curse of God hang over him, and worst of all, the Everlasting Torments to
come, which does strike him in everlasting despair: our wordly pains are
wonderful to be endured, were we but to sit still a month and never to move,
to ly in Prison seven years, to hold our hands in Fire for an hour, to be
stormed to Death, is nothing to this unknownable Torment, of our earthly
torment: the Tormented or the Tormentor dies and has an end, but the Pains of
Hell has never end. For the Grace of our magnificent God the Father, and the
Glory of his Son our Savior, accompanied with the holy Ghost, defend us from
Hell, and bring us to Heaven to reign with him from everlasting to everlasting,
Amen.

All Christian men where ere you dwell,
Prepare both great and small,
Seek to avoid the pains of Hell,
And find this heavenly Hall.
FINIS.

