THE WORLD that Now is; AND THE WORLD that is to Come: Or the First and
Second Coming of Jesus Christ. Wherein several Prophecies not yet fulfilled are
Expounded.

By HAN. KNOLLYS, A Servant of Jesus Christ. Rev. 1.19.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden, An. 1681.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
SO needful is the true Knowledge of God and Jesus Christ; so absolutely
conducing unto Man's Eternal Well-being, John 17.3. as whereby alone true
Happiness is to be attained. To that End, in the former Part of this little
Treatise is set forth,

First, What the LORD Jesus Christ has done and suffered for the Salvation of
Sinners.

Secondly, What HE does work in them by his holy Spirit and Word, in Order unto
their Everlasting Salvation.

Thirdly, What kind of Worship, Churches, Ministers and Ordinances the LORD
Jesus Christ has instituted and appointed under the Gospel. And in the latter
Part of it is briefly and plainly declared, That there is a WORLD to Come; That
the LORD Jesus Christ will come personally, visibly, and suddenly; That he will
set up his Kingdom, and will Reign, Raise the Dead, and Judge both the Quick
and the Dead, 2 Timothy 4.1. At his Appearing, and his Kingdom. It may be some of
all sorts of Readers will judge and Censure me for one thing or another, but
with me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged by Man's Judgment. I
only entreat the Judicious Reader to search the Scriptures, and thereby to
prove all things, and hold fast that which is sound. I pretend not to
Infallibility; I know but in part; yet I am willing to impart that which I do
know, unto others, that are searching after Knowledge and Understanding.

And I pray that God will fill you that Read what I have written, with the
Knowledge of his Will Revealed in his written WORD, That you may prove what is
the perfect Will of God. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
Custom, neither the Churches of God. Nor will I contend with any one otherwise
than the Apostle Jude exhorts in the third verse of his Epistle, That we should
earnestly contend for the Faith that was once delivered unto the Saints; not by
vain Disputings and Janglings, but by sober Assertions, and clear Proofs of
Scripture, Isa. 8.20. Show me, friendly Reader, wherein I have erred from the
Truth, and it will be as precious Balm, and I shall esteem thee my friend
indeed, that will endeavor to convert me from the Error of my Way, if i^ be
done in a Spirit of Love Nay, if any one shall do it in another frame of
spirit, I shall thankfully acknowledge his kindness that will endeavor to
Convince me, to Reprove me; (yea, although he should Reproach me) and I would
bear it patiently, and humbly acknowledge my mistake. And I will not
obstinately hold fast any Error after Conviction, through the Grace of God;
for I love the Truth as it is in Jesus (if my heart does not deceive me) more
than my self, or my esteem in the World.

Thy Souls Friend, Han. Knollys.
From my Study in Bartholomew-Lane, August. 3. 1681.
THE WORLD That now is.
THE holy Scripture of Truth speaks of three Worlds; viz. The WORLD that was,
2 Pet. 3.6. The WORLD that now is, called this WORLD; Mat. 12.32. and the WORLD
to come, Heb. 2.5. The WORLD that now is, is the Subject of the first Part of
this Treatise: And the WORLD to come, shall be the subject of the latter Part
thereof. The principal matter of which we intend to treat touching the WORLD
that now is, does concern the first Coming of Christ into this WORLD, when the
WORD was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. The chief matter of the
latter Part of this Treatise does concern the Second Coming of Christ in the
WORLD to come. Wherein there will be New Heavens, a New Earth, and a New
Jerusalem, and all things will be new-created, Rev. 21.1-5.

CHAP. 1. Wherein our general Position is propounded, proved and explained.
1. The Position propounded.
THat the Chief WORK of Jesus Christ in his first Coming into the WORLD was to
save sinners; to build up his own House, the Church of the Living God; and to
institute all Gospel Ordinances necessary for his Disciples to worship God in
Spirit and in Truth.

2. The Position proved.
1. That our LORD Jesus Christ came into the WORLD to save sinners, Luke 5.32.
I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Matthew. 18.11. For
the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost. And 1 Timothy 1.15. -- Christ
Jesus came into the WORLD to save Sinners.

2. That our LORD Jesus Christ being come in the Flesh, did build up his own
House, the Church of God, Heb. 3 -- 6. For this Man [Christ Jesus] was counted
worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as He who builded the House, has
more honor than the House. Moses was faithful in all his House, as a Servant,
but Christ as a Son over his own House, the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.15.

3. That our Lord Jesus Christ has instituted all Gospel Ordinances necessary
for his Disciples, to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. Be ye
followers of me, even as I am of Christ -- And keep the Ordinances as I
delivered them unto you, Joh. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. -- The true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

3. The Position explained.
The first part of our general Position to be explained, is, That our LORD
Jesus Christ came into the WORLD to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Now the Method I
shall observe in the Explanation of this part of our Position, shall be to show,

1. What kind of Savior Christ is.

2. What Salvation Sinners may have by Jesus Christ. And

3. How Sinners are saved by Jesus Christ. And of these in order.

First, What kind of Savior is Jesus Christ? I answer, 1. The LORD Jesus
Christ is an Almighty Savior. As there is none other, Act. 4.12. so there
needs none other Savior. None can pull a Soul out of Christ's hand, Joh. 10.27
-- 30. Christ is [(...)] God-Man, Emmanuel, God with us, Matthew. 1.23. Jehovah
our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. The Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. The Almighty, Rev. 1.8.
The true God, and Eternal Life, 1 John 5.20. There is no Savior, but God, Isa.
43.3, 11. I even I am Jehovah, and beside me there is no Savior. And Jude v.
25. To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion and
Power, both now and ever. Amen. It is absolutely necessary unto Salvation to
know and believe, That the LORD Jesus Christ is very God, as well as very Man.
So the Virgin Mary believed, when she said, My Spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior, Luke 1.46, 47. And so did all the holy Apostles and Saints believe and
confess, Romans 9.5. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Timothy 2.3. Tit. 1.3. Tit. 2.10. Tit. 3.4. and
1 John 5.20. Who is the true God and eternal Life. They that do not believe,
but deny Jesus Christ to be God, do deny the LORD that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift damnation, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. They undervalue his most
precious Blood, Heb. 10.29. compared with Acts 20.28 -- To feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And they in effect deny the
Alsufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction for the sins of Mankind, whose Nature he
took, namely, the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. [(...), that is] But he takes
hold of the Seed of Abraham.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ is a gracious Savior, Ephesians. 2.5. By Grace ye are
saved. And verse. 8. For by Grace are ye saved. This Free Grace is the kindness
and Love of God our Savior toward sinful sinners, Tit. 3.3-7. whom he
justifies freely by his Grace, Romans 3.24. and 2 Timothy 1.9. And saves them with
an everlasting Salvation. And also sanctifies them by Faith in him, Acts 26.18.
where Faith is put synecdochically for all the Graces of Sanctification, which
our LORD Jesus Christ's imparts unto, and implants in the Souls of Justified
Believers, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Joh. 1.16. And of his Fullness have all we
received, and grace for grace, Ephesians. 4.7. To every one of us is given grace. And
James 4.6. He gives more grace. Such is the unsearchable [and the exceeding
Riches of his grace, Ephesians. 2.7.] Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. that he will be
gracious to whom he will be gracious, etc. Read Exodus 33.19. and Romans 9.15.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ is an Alsufficient Savior, Heb. 7.25. He is able to
save to the utmost, etc. Christ has made full satisfaction for the sins of all
them whom the Father gave him to Redeem, Isa. 53.10. His Soul was made an
Offering for Sin; And he gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. There Is
enough in Christ; there is all in Christ, Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father,
that in him should all Fullness dwell. And in him dwells all the Fullness of
the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. He is a full Christ, and has an infinite
Alsufficency in himself, to supply all the wants of his Saints, 2 Cor. 12.9. My
Grace is sufficient for thee, etc.

Secondly, What Salvation may sinners have by Jesus Christ? I answer, 1.
Sinners may be saved from their sins by Jesus Christ, Matthew. 1.21. For HE shall
save his People from their sins. It is a very great mercy to be saved from our
sins. This Salvation is not by any other, Act. 4.12. There are three things in
sin, from which Christ saves sinners, viz. First, the dominion of sin. It was
David's prayer, Psalm. 19.13. Psalm. 119.133. Let not any iniquity have dominion
over me; and Christ's promise, Rom 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you;
because ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. There is a Reigning power in
sin, Romans 6.12. Let not sin therefore Reign in your mortal body, etc. Also Romans
5.21. which Christ subdueth, Mich. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and
destroys, Romans 6.6. Secondly, The captivating power of sin. This the Apostle
sadly experienced, Romans 7.23, 24. I see another law in my members, warring
against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin,
which is in my members. But yet he blessed God for Jesus Christ, verse. 25.
through whom he had deliverance, Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. Thirdly, The
guilt, curse and condemnation of sin, Jam. 2.10. -- And offend in one point, is
guilty of all. Gal. 3.18. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. Tit. 3.11 -- And
sins being condemned in himself. But there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. for Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of
the Law, Gal. 3.13. and saved us from the Wrath of God, Romans 5.9. and 1 These.
1.10. And gives us eternal Life and Salvation.

Thirdly, How are sinners saved by Jesus Christ? In Answer to this Query, two
things in general must be considered, 1. What Jesus Christ has done for
sinners? 2. What he does in them in order unto their everlasting Salvation?

First, Jesus Christ has made full satisfaction unto the Divine Justice of God
for all the Transgressions of sinners, Isa. 53.5, 6, 8, 9, 11. He was wounded
for our Transgressions, verse. 5. When thou shall make his soul an offering for
sin, verse. 10. He shall see the travel of his soul and be satisfied, v. 11.
Christ through the eternal Spirit, offered himself to God, Heb. 9.14. and 1
Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree. Now once
in the End of the WORLD has he appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9.26. And 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be
testified in due time.

Secondly, Jesus Christ has purchased and obtained for sinners eternal
Redemption, and everlasting Salvation by his own precious Blood, Heb. 9.12. --
By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
Redemption for us: Therefore eternal Life and Glory is called the purchased
Possession, Ephesians. 1.14. and an Inheritance reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet.
1.3-5.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ has instituted and ordained the Ministry of the Gospel,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and all Gospel Ordinances for the salvation of sinners, to
the Glory of God the Father. And after he was crucified, he rose from the Dead,
ascended into Heaven, and is set down on the Right hand of God, where he ever
lives to make Intercession for sinners, that they may be saved, Heb. 7.25. The
LORD Jesus Christ having done all these things for the salvation of sinners; he
does by his holy Spirit and Word work all his Works of Grace and Salvation in
them. Isa. 26.12. LORD, thou have wrought all our works in us. And Phil. 2.12,
13. It is God that works in you to will and to do according to his good
pleasure. Therefore sinners are said to be God's workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. that thereby it may yet more
plainly appear, that they are his Workmanship.

The first Work that God does ordinarily by his holy Spirit and Word upon a
sinful sinner in the Ministry and Administration of the Gospel of his Grace, is
a work of Conviction, John 8.9. Being convicted in their own conscience. Tit.
1.9. To convince gainsayers, Jam. 2.9. They are convinced of the Law as
Transgressors. And Joh. 16.8, 9. He shall reprove the world of sin. The World,
that is to say, those sinners that are without Christ, and without God in the
World, Ephesians. 2.12.

Now God Reproves the sinner, and sets his sins in order before him, Psalm.
50.21. and makes him possess the sins of his youth, Job 13.26. God does by the
Scripture (as in a Glass) give the sinner a sight of his sinful Nature; shows
him the sinfulness of his sins, Romans 7.13. God does by his Spirit and Word
convince the sinners conscience of his Transgressions against his holy Law, and
against the Gospel of his Grace. The holy Spirit, ordinarily, by the Ministry
of the Word, convinces the sinner of his Original corruption; tells him, that
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed; Then
when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished,
brings forth death, Jam. 1.14, 15. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. The
soul that sins shall dye; and also convinces him of his Actual Transgressions;
to wit, his sins of Omission, and his sins of Commission, both in doing that
which God has forbidden in his holy Word, and in not doing that which he has
commanded, or not as he commands it to be done. God convinces the sinners
conscience of his sinning against Light, against Checks of Conscience, and many
good Motions of the holy Spirit; and shows him how he has sinned against the
mercies, patience and long-sufferings of God, and how he has sinned under
God's chastisements, corrections and righteous Judgments; and that neither the
Word of God, nor his Rod, has wrought Repentance in him, nor caused him to
turn from his sinful courses.

The sinful sinner being under this great work of Conviction of Conscience,
begins to see and apprehend the vileness of his Nature, and the sinfulness of
his sins to be such, so many, and so great, that he trembles, and is afraid of
Death and Damnation; he begins to have some sense and feeling in his conscience
of the wrath of God, and fears he shall dye in his sins, and go to Hell, and be
damned to eternity.

Now the terrors of the Almighty are in his conscience; his heart is filled
with horror; the sting of sin has wounded his Spirit; and a wounded Spirit
who can bear? Prove. 18.14. and being pricked in the heart, cries out, What
shall I do? Acts 2.37. I am a sinful sinner, a vile sinner, a lost undone
perishing sinner. Woe's me, that ever I was born! I am a damnable wicked
wretch; my heart is deceitful and desperately wicked. Ah my vain thoughts, my
vile affections, my evil concupiscence, my sinful lusts! Alas! alas! my idle
words and blasphemies, and my ungodly life and sinful conversation! Woe and
alas! the deceitfulness of sin has so hardened my heart, that I cannot Repent;
and I have been so accustomed to do evil, that I know not how to Reform and
amend my life, and forsake my sins; and if I go on in my former sinful courses,
I shall certainly be damned.

Hereupon the sinful sinner sets upon Reformation; says to his sinful
companions, as David did, Psalm. 6.8. Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity:
And says to his Lusts, as Ephraim did to his Idols, Hos. 14.8. What have I to
do any more with sinful lusts and pleasures? Now the convinced sinner resolves
to leave his sins, that he fears else will damn his soul; and now he begins to
perform some holy Duties; he will hear Sermons, and read the holy Scriptures,
and good Books, and pray. And it may be the convinced sinner will mourn for his
sins, and humble himself, (as Ahab did) and Reform some of his evil courses.

And by this Reformation, Humiliation, mourning for his sins, and performing
some holy duties, the sinner may have some calm, and feel some quiet in his
conscience for a season, and begin to hope all will be well with him, until the
Reigning power of sin, that has yet the dominion over him, prevail against
him; and he being yet a servant of sin, and free from Righteousness ( as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 6. v. 20.) yields willing and ready obedience to his own
lusts, that inticeth him to sin, and when his lust has conceived and brought
forth sin, then his conscience accuses him, and Satan now begins to suggest,
that there is no hope of pardon, nor salvation for him; Now his latter end is
worse than his beginning; and therefore the Devil tells him, It is in vain for
him to pray any more, or to hear any more, or to perform any holy duties.

And now the convinced sinful sinner judges his Soul's state and condition to
be worse than ever it was; he has so many dreadful Temptations, he is so
filled with blasphemous Thoughts, that he begins to be a terror to himself,
and is tempted to choose strangling rather than life, he is so tormented in his
conscience, and so tempted by Satan, and terrified with fears of Hell. He sees
now the Law curses him, Gal. 3.10. and the Gospel judges him, 2 These. 1.9.
And he is made to receive the sentence of Condemnation in himself, and is made
to read it in the written Word of God, Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already.

Now God goes on with his work of Conviction, which he had before begun in the
sinful sinners Conscience, and sends his holy Spirit to convince and reprove
him of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, Joh. 16.8, 9, 10. And the Spirit
by that Scripture, Joh. 3.18. or some other Scripture to that purpose does
thoroughly convince the sinner, that although his pride, passion, worldliness,
uncleanness, profaneness, his lying, stealing, swearing, drinking, whoring, or
any one or other of his sins deserves eternal Death, Romans 6.23. Yet that sin
for which the wrath of God abides on him, and for which he is by the written
Word of God condemned already, is his great sin of unbelief, Joh. 3.18.36. and
Heb. 3.11, 18. God has sworn, that those who do not believe, shall not enter
into his Rest; that is, into Heaven, Heb. 3.18, 19.

Take notice, Reader, that in Conviction of sin, because we believe not, the
holy Spirit does by the Word convince the Sinner; First, That he is an
unbeliever, and has not obtained the precious Faith of God's Elect, whereby
the Soul is united unto Christ, Ephesians. 4. v 13. adopted the Child of God, Gal.
3.26. justified, and all its sins pardoned, and at peace with God, Romans 5.1.
and now the convinced sinner sees he is without God, without Christ, and
without Faith. Secondly, That he must believe, or he cannot be saved, Mar.
16.15, 16. He that believes not, shall be damned. His praying, mourning,
reforming, though they are good in themselves, and are his duty, yet the doing
these, or any other; yea all other holy duties, without this precious Faith in
Christ, will not, cannot save him; and now the sinner is convinced, that there
is an indispensible necessity of his believing in Christ for salvation.
Thirdly, That he cannot believe. Faith is not of our selves, it is not of
Works, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. They err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the holy Will of
God revealed therein; who say, that men may believe, if they will; and they
have power in themselves to believe. Ask now the sinner that has been
convinced of sin, by the holy Spirit and Word of God, because he believes not
(and is commanded to believe, 1 John 3.23.) I say, ask that convinced sinner, if
it has power of himself to believe; or if Faith in Christ be of our selves, or
of our good works, or of holy duties; and he will tell you, No; Nay, Nay, Faith
in Christ is not of our selves; Jesus Christ himself is the Author and Finisher
of Faith, Heb. 12.2. It is not of our works; but it is the Faith of the
Operation of God, Col. 2.12. It is the exceeding greatness of God's mighty
Power, that does make the soul of a sinful sinner (convinced of sin because he
believes not) willing and able to believe in Christ, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.

Now says this convinced Sinner, I know and am persuaded, that whosoever
believes in Christ, shall be saved; and I know and am convinced, that I ought
to believe in Christ, and it is my sin, that I do not believe in him: Yea, I am
also persuaded (upon Scripture grounds) that if I did believe in Christ, I
should not perish, but have everlasting Life: But this is my impotency, and
here is my misery, I cannot believe in Christ of my self; I know not which way
to begin to believe; I could do something materially about the works of the
Law, though but weakly and insufficiently; but I can do nothing about obedience
of Faith according to the Gospel: It is such a Mystery as I am very ignorant
of; Faith is the Gift of God, and unless he give it me, I perish. Now is the
sinner convinced of his sin of unbelief, This is God's workmanship upon a
sinful sinner's conscience; but this is not the whole work of Conviction;
therefore God proceeds in this work, and convinces the sinner by his Spirit
and Word of Righteousness, Joh. 16.10. showing the sinner whilst he goes about
to establish his own Righteousness by the works of the Law, and by performing
those duties, that the Law requires, he makes void (as much as in him lies)
the Righteousness of God by Faith in the Gospel, Romans 10.3.4, 5, 6. and thereby
convinces the sinner,

1. That all his own Righteousnesses are as menstruous Rags, Isa. 64.6. our
most holy duties and performances are polluted and defiled with sin, and God
might abhor to accept an Offering at our hand, did not Christ offer up his
Incense with our Sacrifices, they could not come up to God, Rev. 8.3, 4 both
our prayers and our persons are accepted only and alone in and through Jesus
Christ.

2. That Sinners must be covered with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, and
the Garments of his Salvation Isa. 61.10. He is the LORD our Righteousness,
Jer. 23.6. And Christ is made of God unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. 1 Cor.
1.30. This Righteousness of Christ, is that skirt, which God casts over the
Sinners Soul (when he lies in his Blood) to cover his nakedness, Ezekiel. 16.6, 8.

3. That Christ's Righteousness is the Righteousness of God by Faith, Romans
3.21, 22. which Righteousness the Apostle Paul did so much prize and desire to
be found in, Phil. 3.8, 9. And now the convinced Sinner will say with holy Job,
chap. 9. v. 21. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me, --
though I were perfect, yet would I not know my Soul.

This is also God's workmanship upon a sinful Sinners Conscience: But yet this
is not the whole work of Conviction; for when God has by his holy Spirit and
Word convinced the Sinner of his state of unbelief, and reproved him for sin,
because he believes not: And when God has also convinced him, that his own
Righteousness is as filthy Rags, and that he must submit to the Righteousness
of God, and take Christ's Righteousness by Faith unto Justification of life:
Then God proceeds on in the work of Conviction, and reproves or convinces the
Sinner of Judgment, Joh. 16.11. And this God does by causing the Sinner to know,

1. That there is a Day of Judgment, called the Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.2. and
the Judgment of the great DAY of God, Jude verse. 6.

2. That All shall appear and stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans
14.10. and 1 Cor. 5.10. And every one shall then give account of himself unto
God, and shall receive a just Reward of all that he has done in the Flesh,
Romans 2.5-13. and Rev. 22.12. and Matthew. 16.27.

3. That the Prince of this world is judged, and therefore none of the Children
of Disobedience, in whom the God of this World now works, shall escape the
Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.3, 5, 6. for the Lord Jesus Christ, ( who
shall judge both the quick and the dead at his Appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1.) shall come from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction, etc. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. And the
Spirit and Word of God does witness and testify to the Sinner's Conscience,
that he must come to Judgment, as Solomon told the young man, Eccles. 11.9.
Know thou, that for all these things, or sins, God will bring thee to Judgment.
And now the sinful Sinner is thoroughly convinced; and this is the first part of
God's workmanship upon him, in order unto his Conversion and everlasting
Salvation.

And I desire the Reader to take notice, that the want of a through work of
Conviction, is the cause of the want of a sound and saving work of Conversion.
One Reason why there are so few true Converts in this our Day and Generation,
is because the Ministers of the Gospel do not labor in the Word and Doctrine
of a through Gospel-Conviction. The Reason why so few Hearers do believe in
Christ, is because they were never thoroughly convinced of the sin of unbelief.
How many Herod-like Hearers are there in and about London? Mark 6.20. How many
stony-hearted Hearers follow and flock after the Preachers of the Gospel, who
hear the Word with Joy, and believe for a time, Luke 8.13. But when the time of
the Trial of their Faith comes, by sufferings and persecutions, then they fall
away, Matthew. 13.20, 21. And you have the Reason of their falling away expressed
by both the Evangelists, They had no Root in themselves; that is to say, They
had not Christ in their Souls to be the Root of their Faith, Col. 2.6, 7. As ye
have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and
built up in him, and stablished in the Faith. Faith rooted in Christ will stand
out all Storms of Temptation and Persecution; it will endure all fiery Trials;
but Faith without Christ will fall away. And the Spirit tells us expressly, that
some (who made a great and glorious profession of Faith) will depart from the
Faith in the latter days, 1 Timothy 4.1. because they have not possession of
Christ, and their Faith is not Rooted in him. Do but diligently observe and
enquire into this matter, and you shall find, That those Ministers of Christ
are most instrumental in converting Souls unto God, who labor most in the Word
and Doctrine of Gospel-Conviction of Sinners. Those Ministers that Preach
Christ and the Gospel of Free Grace, most convincingly, and labor in the
Application of every Doctrine to convince the Conscience of Sinners, that they
are in danger of the Wrath of God, and of eternal Death for their sins;
especially because they believe not in Christ, exhorting them to Repent of
their sin and Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, that they may be pardoned and
saved by him: I say, those Ministers have most Converts; those are workers
together with God, and their convinced, humbled, converted and sanctified
Hearers, have not received the Grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.

Some poor Souls may happily object, or rather query, Is there not a sound work
of Conversion, where there has not been so great a work of Conviction and
Humiliation, nor so great horrors, fears, terrors, and so clear and distinct
a work of the Spirit's Reproof of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, as God works
upon some Sinners? I answer; Though this be God's workmanship upon some; yea
many, if not upon most notorious sinful sinners, yet we may not limit the Holy
One of Israel; God is a free Agent: And because I would not break the bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, I know and acknowledge, That some sinful
sinners have lesser terrors, fewer temptations, fears and horrors than others
have; and some are longer under the work of Conviction and Bondage than others
are, though they have been as great and notorious sinners, as they that were
more and longer exercised with fears and terrors. Yea and I know both by
Experience and by Scripture, that some sinners, who have had Religious
Education under godly Parents or Governors; and have lived (from their youth
up) under a godly Soul-saving Ministry, and have thereby been restrained (by
the Common Grace of God) from all gross sins, that have not experienced the
said terrors and temptations; nor have they had such horrors of Conscience,
and fears of Hell. Yet this I know, that they have been thoroughly convinced of
their sinful natural state, and of their lost and undone condition, being (and
seeing themselves to be) without Christ, and without Grace; and they have been
thoroughly convinced that their own Righteousnesses are filthy Rags, and that
they must have Christ's Righteousness to justify them, and his Holiness to
sanctify them, and his precious Blood to redeem them from their iniquity: But
as for Time, whether longer or shorter; and as for Measure, whether greater or
lesser, whereby God did this work of Conviction upon them, who can limit God?

God having wrought a through Conviction upon a sinful sinner, the next part and
piece of his workmanship upon his Soul, is Spiritual Illumination, in the
Saving Knowledge of the LORD Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.17, 18^ whereby the Eyes of
his Understanding is enlightened, that the sinner may know, that there is hope
of pardon and salvation in Christ for him through Faith and Holiness.

In the work of Spiritual Illumination, God does by his holy Spirit and Word,
discover to him, and enlighten the Eyes of his Understanding first, to see the
Divine Beauty, and glorious Excellency of Jesus Christ above all other persons
and things in the world. A poor sinful sinner sees no beauty nor comeliness in
Christ, why he should desire him, Isa. 53.1, 2, 3. The Daughters of Jerusalem
said, What Is thy Beloved (Lord Jesus Christ) more than another Beloved? Cant.
5.9. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God-neither can
he know them, for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. until it please
God to make an inward discovery thereof by his holy Spirit and Word in the
Soul, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit.
So 1 John 5.20. We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding that we may know him, etc. The Psalmist tells the sinner, That
Christ is fairer than the Sons of Men, full of Grace is his Lips, Psalm. 45.2.
The Spouse told the Daughters of Jerusalem, That her Beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand. He is altogether lovely, Cant. 5.10-6. And
the Apostle counted all things loss and dung for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus his LORD, Phil. 3.7, 8.

Secondly, God inlightens the Eyes of Sinners Understanding, to see the worth
of Christ, in some measure and degree: As poor lost Sinners discern not the
Beauty and Excellency of Christ; so they understand not the worth of Christ,
until God discover it unto them, and reveal it in them by his holy Spirit and
Word, Gal. 1.15, 16. Now God makes known to the Sinner the worth of Christ, by
showing him in the Glass of the Gospel.

1. The unvaluable preciousness of the Blood of Christ, that cleanses Sinners
from all sin and unrighteousness, 1 John 1.8, 9. The precious Blood of Christ
purges the Consciences of Sinners from dead works, Heb. 9.14. And Christ both
justifies and sanctifies Sinners by his precious Blood, Rom 5.9. Heb. 13.12.
and 1 Cor. 6.11. This speaks forth the worth of Christ.

2. God shows the Sinner in the Glass of the Gospel, the unsearchable Riches of
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. the exceeding Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 2.7. And though
Christ has freely, richly, and abundantly given forth of his fullness so much
Grace to so many poor Sinners from the day of Adam's transgression, even to
this day; yet in this Vision of Christ's Riches, the poor sinful Sinner sees
him still as full of Grace and Truth, as the Disciples did, Joh. 1.14.

3. God shows the Sinner in the Glass of the Gospel, the glorious Liberties of
the Spirit of Christ, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor.
3.17. And the Saints are commanded to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made them free, Gal. 5.1. called the glorious Liberties of the Sons
of God, Romans 8.21.

This Gospel-Liberty is not a Liberty to sin; nor may this Liberty be used for
an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13. but it is a freedom from sin, Romans 6.18,
22. in respect of the condemnation due thereunto, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; and in respect of the dominion
thereof, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under
the Law, but under Grace.

Thirdly, God shows the Convinced Sinner in the Glass of the Gospel, his need
of Christ, and acquaints him with an indispensible Necessity of accepting
Christ upon Gospel-terms of Free Grace, Without money, and without price, Isa.
55.1, 2, 3. and Rev. 22.17. God does by his Spirit and Word inform the Sinner,
that the Lord Jesus Christ alone is the only Savior of Sinners, Act. 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other. And hereby the poor lost sinful Sinner
sees his need of Christ to justify him, and pardon all his sins; also to
sanctify him, and save him from his sins, and the wrath of God due unto him
for his sins; and to save him with an everlasting salvation.

God having thoroughly convinced, and savingly enlightened the Sinner, the third
and next part of God's workmanship upon his Soul, is the work of Conversion.
Sinners are often called upon to turn unto God, and to turn from their sins,
Ezekiel. 14.6, 18, 30, 32.33.11. that they may know it is their duty so to do; and
that finding by experience it is not in their power, being fallen in Adam, they
should pray to God to turn them from their sins unto himself by his Spirit and
Grace, Jer. 31.18, 19. Turn thou me and I shall be turned, etc.

Conversion is that part of God's workmanship upon a Sinner's Soul, wherein God
does first change the whole Man from the sinful similitude of Adam, into the
Image of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18. We are changed into his Image, etc. I say,
in the work of true Conversion, the whole Man is changed; the heart is made a
new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will
I put within you. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes. The Man is made a New-man, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. And that ye put on the
New-man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. And his
Life, a New-Life, Romans 6.4. Even so we also should walk ill newness of Life.

Secondly, God does in the work of Conversion, sanctify the converted person
wholly and throughout in Spirit, Soul and Body, 1 These. 5.23. The very God of
Peace sanctify you wholly, etc. Upon ( or at the time of) the Sinner's
Conversion God imparts unto him, and implants in him of every Grace, (that is
in Christ) a measure, Joh. 1.14.16. And from his fullness have all we received,
and grace for grace. Also Ephesians. 4.7. To every one of us is given grace,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ; which grace is called the
incorruptible seed of the New Birth, 1 Pet. 1.23. which seed abides in
sanctified Believers, 1 John 3.9. It is implanted, and it is inherent grace,
which grows like the grain of Mustard Seed, Matthew. 13.31, 32. unto which
Spiritual Growth every sanctified Believer is exhorted, 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow
in grace, etc.

Thirdly, God does in the work of Conversion actually and really turn the
converted person from darkness to light, from the power of Satan and Sin unto
God, Act. 26.18. Before Conversion the Sinner was under the Vassalage of Satan,
who had dominion over him, and ruled and worked in him, Ephesians. 2.2. And he was
then the servant of sin, which had also dominion over him, and reigned in him,
Romans 5.21. And though the Sinner was convinced of his sins, and troubled in his
mind for his sins; yea, and saw the danger that his Soul was in by reason of
his sins (whereupon the Sinner resolved to forsake his sinful courses, and to
commit his sins no more) yet until he was truly converted, he had no power nor
strength to overcome them, nor could he pray and perform holy duties with
delight and comfort, but as a task and work, that was hard and burdensome, Isa.
43.22, 24, 25. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, and thou have been weary
of me, O Israel; But thou have made me to serve with thy sins; thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities; I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins. Now that
the Sinner is converted, he is by the Spirit and Grace of God called to Repent,
and to Turn from his sins to God, with his whole heart, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.
Surely after that I was turned, I repented -- I was ashamed, etc.

Thus we may see, what work God does upon sinful sinners, in respect whereof
they are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus. Let us in the next place
consider, what Work God does upon sanctified Believers, in respect whereof they
also are God's workmanship.

God having called and converted sinful Sinners unto himself by his holy Spirit
and Word, formed Christ in them, and changed them into the Image of Christ,
given them his holy Spirit, and imparted grace unto them, and implanted it in
them; and having of his free Grace adopted, and justified them through Faith in
Christ, Gal. 3.26. Gal. 2.16. God is pleased out of the exceeding Riches of his
free Grace, to go on with his workmanship gradually, until he have made them
complete in Christ, Col. 2.10. whom he has created in Christ Jesus. And in
order thereunto, there are diverse other works of God, which he does by his holy
Spirit and Word in and upon the Souls of those Converts, in respect whereof
they are his workmanship.

And the first is the work of Faith with Power, 2 These. 1.11. called the Faith
of the Operation of God, Col. 2.12. wherein God demonstrates what is the
exceeding greatness of his Power toward us, who believe, according to the
working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And this God does in raising Souls from the death of
sin, to the life of Righteousness by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.5, 6.

This Faith Jesus Christ is the Author of, and will be the finisher of it, Heb.
12.2. and therefore called the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. by which
Faith the Soul in its Conversion is united unto Christ, and kept through it by
the Power of God unto salvation. Compare Ephesians. 4.13. with 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. it is
called the precious Faith of God's Elect, 3 Pet. 1.1. even the same Spirit of
Faith, that Abraham had, and that all the Sons and Daughters of Ahraham have
and do receive, 2 Cor. 4.13. This Faith is the Substance of things hoped for,
and the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

This Faith God works in us ordinarily, by his holy Spirit and Word in the
Ministry, and administrations of the Gospel of his Grace, Romans 10.8. That is
the Word of Faith, which we preach. And verse 17. So then, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; By which Faith we receive Jesus Christ
our Lord, John 1.12. Adhere and cleave to him with purpose of heart, never to
forsake him or deny him, Act. 11.23. but to own him for our Head, Lord and
Lawgiver, our King, Priest and Prophet: And trust and rest upon him alone, and
on him only for Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, Isa.
26.3. with Isa. 50.10. And by this precious Faith Believers are justified, Romans
3.28. adopted, Gal. 3.26. and sanctified, Act. 26.18. through our Lord Jesus
Christ. But the converted Believer is not yet fully assured that Christ will
save him; he is fully persuaded that there is not Salvation in any other; and
believing that Christ is able to save to the utmost all that come to God
through him. And being drawn to Christ by God the Father, he does by a lively
Act of Faith go to him, and adventure his Soul upon him, resolving, If I
perish, I will perish here.

This Faith is God's workmanship, Ephesians. 28. By grace are ye saved, through
Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. Faith is not of our
selves, for when the poor lost Soul sees a necessity of believing, and is
willing to believe, he experienceth, that it is not in his own power to
believe; he cannot believe; Faith is the gift of God: and the Convert lies
under doubting, until God give him to believe. Though to believe be our duty,
yet it is God's Grace, Gift, and Work, 1 These. 1.11. Called the Work of Faith
with power, and the Faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. As before.

Another part of God's Workmanship upon Converted Believers is Mortification of
Sin; Romans 6.6. Our Old Man is Crucified with him, that the Body of Sin might be
destroyed, this is also our duty, Romans 8.13. But if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body (to wit, of sin,) ye shall live. And it is the
Effect of true Faith in Christ, Acts 15.9. Having purified, or purged their
hearts by Faith. The Spirit of God by Faith works out sin and corruption, both
out of the heart, and out of the life gradually, killing and crucifying our Old
Man, Gal. 5.24. that the body of sin might be destroyed. That henceforth we
should not serve sin, Romans 6.6. nor fulfill the lusts of our flesh, and of our
carnal mind; for to be carnally minded is death.

This part of God's Workmanship called Mortification, is begun in Evangelical
Repentance, and godly sorrow for sin; whereby a sanctified Believer is made to
loath, abhor and hate his sins, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. and by the Grace of God to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts: And to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this evil world, Tit. 2.11, 12. Now his heart being out of love with sin, the
Young Convert does by the Assistance of the holy Spirit, and Grace of God,
labor and endeavor the mortification of every corruption; and the power of
the indwelling Spirit in every sanctified Believer opposes and subdueth the
power of indwelling sin, that remains in him after Regeneration, Gal. 5.17. And
the Spirit and Grace of God in him gets the Victory, whereby Grace Reigns, Romans
5.20, 21. And the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus makes him free from
the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2.

Free, first, from the Reigning power of sin, Romans 6.11, 14. Sin has not
dominion over a sanctified Believer; nor will Christ suffer sin to reign in
him, nor suffer him to obey it in the lusts thereof. Secondly, From the
captivating power of sin, which Paul so sadly complained of, Romans 7.23, 24, 25.
and was freed from by the power of the indwelling Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.2.
Thirdly, From the Motions of sin in the flesh, Romans 7.5, 6. So that no lust
shall conceive and bring forth sin, Jam. 1.14, 15. And at last Christ will free
sanctified Believers from the indwelling presence of sin. Death will make a
total and final separation between their sins, and their souls for Eternity.

Another part of God's Workmanship upon converted Believers in order to their
Salvation, is sanctification of heart and life. God has chosen you to
Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. And Jesus Christ
sanctifies his People, Heb. 2.11. As the End of our Faith is the salvation of
our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. so the way to Salvation, is Sanctification and Holiness,
Isa. 35.8. And without Holiness no Man shall see the LORD to his comfort and
salvation, Heb. 12.14. Sanctification consists in the Truth of Grace, in the
Growth of Grace, and in the Perfection of Grace. The Truth of Grace produces
the Spiritual Fruit of the Gospel, Col. 1.5, 6. -- The Word of the Truth of the
Gospel -- brings forth fruit since the day ye heard it, and knew the Grace of
God in Truth. The Growth of Grace has a threefold gradation; some sanctified
Believers grow like little Children in the grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 2.2, 3. As newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby. Those St. John calls little Children, whose sins are
forgiven, 1 John 2.12, 13. And St. Paul calls them Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1.
and Heb. 5.13. For he is a Babe; one that is weak in Faith, Romans 14.1. and
15.1. Though such have but a little grace, yet it is true grace, and does grow.
Grace is of a growing nature, like a grain of Mustardseed, Matthew. 13.31. Other
sanctified Believers grow like young men; they are strong in Faith, and
overcome the wicked One, 1 John 2.13, 14. Their Faith is great, their Love is
fervent, and their Patience has its perfect work, that they may be entire
lacking nothing, 1 These. 1.3. And some sanctified Believers are compared to
Fathers, that is to say, gracious, grave, grown and experienced Christians, 1 John 2.13, 14. Such were some of the Saints in the Church at Thessalonica, 2
These. 1.3, 4. Your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of every one of you
all to each other abounds. The Perfection of Grace is the state of sanctified
Believers in Heaven; there are the spirits (that is the souls) of just men made
perfect* Heb. 12.23. Sanctified Believers ought to go on to perfection, Heb.
6.1. And they that have received the Promises ought to cleanse themselves from
all filthiness of flesh, and filthiness of spirit, perfecting Holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1, 2. And God has ordained the Ministry of the Gospel
for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Until we all come in the
unity of Faith unto a perfect man. And though the Apostle was not perfect (as
he confessed) yet he pressed toward the mark, for the prize of the High Calling
of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.12, 14. So ought all the Saints to do, until
they be translated from Earth to Heaven, and from Grace to Glory, and shall be
set down in the Father's house among the Spirits of just men made perfect. Thus
Jesus Christ (who came into the WORLD to save sinners) brings them to salvation.

The next particular in our general Position to be explained is, that Jesus
Christ came into this WORLD to build up his own House, the Church of God. As
Moses was faithful in the House of God, as a servant, who did all things about
the Tabernacle according to the Pattern showed unto him by God in the Mount,
Exodus 25.40. Acts 7.44. and Heb. 8.5. So Jesus Christ was faithful unto God,
that appointed him, as a Son over his own House, the true Tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, and not Man, Heb. 3.2, 3, 5, 6. and Heb. 8.2. called The Church
of the Living God, 1 Timothy 3.15.

The LORD Jesus Christ, in order unto the building up his House, the Church of
God, did ordain a Gospel Ministry, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, etc.
And set them in his Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. And God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc.

The Apostles, as wise Master Builders, did prepare fit Materials for to build
the House of God, and to that purpose they having received Commission and
Command from the LORD Jesus Christ, Mark 16.15. went out into the WORLD, and
Preached the Gospel, beginning at Jerusalem. And when they had made and
baptized many Disciples, they planted those Churches that we read of in the
holy Scriptures, which were built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief Corner Stone, in whom all the
building fitly framed together, was builded together an Habitation of God
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.19-22. The Church at Jerusalem was the first of all
those Gospel-Churches, Act. 2.47. And the Lord added to the Church daily such
as should be saved. Which Church was at its first Constitution a particular
Congregation of sanctified Believers baptized with Water in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit, Matthew. 28.19. and separated
from the Synagogues of the unbelieving Jews, to worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, Joh. 4.21, 23, 24. according to the sacred Institutions of Christ and
his Apostles, even the Ordinances of God delivered unto his Churches of Saints,
1 Cor. 11.1, 2. And although the number of the Disciples were multiplied from
one hundred and twenty, Act. 1.15. to three thousand, Act. 2.41. yea to five
thousand, Act. 4 4. and Act. 5.14. And Believers were the more added to the
Lord, multitudes both of men and women. So that the Apostles had their own
distinct Companies, Societies, or Congregations in Jerusalem [Act. 4.13, 19,
23. And Peter and John being let go, they went to their own Company.] Yet they
all being of one heart, and of one soul, were but one Church, and are so
denominated, Act. 15.4. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were
received of the Church, etc. Act. 15.22. The whole Church. And so were all the
particular Congregations in every City denominated and called, viz. The Church
of God at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. And so our Lord and Savior denominated all the
Churches of God in Asia, by the particular Cities wherein they were first
planted, and assembled to worship God, Rev. 2.1, 8, 12, 18. and Rev. 3.1, 7,
14. Read those verses.

I entreat the Reader to consider, 1. That our Lord Jesus Christ in building up
his own House, the Church of God, ordained and appointed a preceding Ministry,
to be workers together with him in building his House, Heb. 3.4. 1 Cor. 3.9,
10, 11. We are laborers together with God -- Ye are God's Building, etc. 2.
That the Churches of God under the Gospel, are not National, but Political, and
Congregational. 3. That a particular visible true Constituted Gospel Church of
God does consist of fit Matter, and due Form. Jesus Christ the Chief Corner
Stone, is a lively Stone, and the Materials of the Church ought to be living
Stones, Mat. 3.16.
1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Sanctified Believers, 1 Cor. 1.2, 6. And Christ himself was
Baptized with Water, Act. 10.44, 47, 48.
and with the holy Spirit; every one in his Visible Churches of Saints, ought
to be Baptized with Water, and with the holy Spirit. Joh. 5. v. 5.
2. Those sanctified Believers ought to he fitly framed together, and orderly
compacted, joined and built together, an habitation of God through the Spirit,
Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. and chap. 4.15, 16. which is the Form of the House of
God, the Church of the Living God, 1 Timothy 3. v. 15.

God commanded his Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 43. v. 10, 11. saying, Thou Son of
Man, show the House to the House of Israel (...) [ex (...)] in conjugatione
hiph. Annunciavit, exposuit, narravit, indicavit.
-- And let them measure the Pattern -- Show them the Form of the House -- And
write it in their sight. A wise Master Builder will take care to prepare fit
Materials in every respect answerable and suitable unto the House he is about
to build; and so ought the Ministers of Christ, who are Co-workers with God in
building his House, (which is his Church) to take heed both what, and how they
build, 1 Cor. 3.9-14. Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the Day shall
declare it: And the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is, etc.
Young Converts, new-born-Babes in Christ may be added to the Church of God,
Act. 2.41, 47. But they are not fit Materials to be laid next unto the Corner
Stone of that Spiritual building I say again, they are not fit for the
Foundation-work of God's building; nor are they fit for Pillars in the House of
God. Consider what St. Paul, that wise Master Builder, says of such young
Converts, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. and Heb. 5.12, 13. Read the words. These, and such
as these are not fit Matter for the Foundation, nor for Pillars, nor for Beams
in the House of God, at the first Beginning, Planting, and Building, or
Gathering of a Church of God. But rather Fathers, that is, grave, gracious,
holy, wise, and experienced Believers* Also some young Men, that is, such
Christians that are strong in Faith, and have in some measure overcome the
World, the Devil, and their own Corruptions, who are full of the holy Spirit,
rich in Grace, and zealous for the House of God, and the Purity of his Worship;
I say, a competent number of such Christians, being sound in the Faith, holy in
their Life, and fitly qualified with diversity of spiritual gifts, knowledge
and grace, are (in my Opinion) most meet to be (by their own mutual free
consent and agreement) joined tegether to become a particular Church of Saints
by the help of some wise Master Builders, and faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3, 9-11.

The Gospel-Form of a particular Church of God consists (as we said) in the
fitly framing, compacting and joining those sanctified Believers together into*
ONE Fellowship, Society and Gospel Brotherhood in a solemn Day of Prayer, with
Fasting, wherein some Able Minister of the Gospel, having by Preaching the Word
unto them, showed them their Respective Duties in a Church Relation, the Elders
and Chief Brethren of some particular Churches of Saints being present, and
assisting in the work of the Day (if they may be obtained) may in the Name and
Authority of the LORD Jesus Christ (by virtue of this Commission given to him)
constitute and make them a particular Visible Church of God; they giving up
themselves professedly first to the LORD, and then one to another, mutually and
solemnly with one accord engaging themselves to come together in ONE
Congregation, and to Assemble themselves together in some one Place every first
Day of the week, to worship God publicly in all his holy Ordinances, with
their mutual professed Subjection unto the Laws of God's House, and with a
Professed Resolution to Continue in the Apostles Doctrine, and in Fellowship,
and in Breaking of Bread, and Prayer, through the Help of God. All which being
done, the same Minister ought to declare them to be a Church of Saints, and the
Ministers and Brethren of other Churches being also present, ought to own and
acknowledge them to be a Sister-Church, by giving them the Right hand of
Fellowship; and so to commend them by Prayer unto God, and to the Word of his
Grace, who is able to build them up, and to give them an Inheritance among all
them which are sanctified.

The Well-Being of a particular Church of Saints, does principally consist in
three things, viz. Oneness, Order, and Government. That Gospel-Oneness which
makes very much for the Well-Being of a particular Church, is threefold:
First, That there be but ONE Church in one City; 1 Cor. 14.19, 34.
and that all the Congregations of Saints in that City (called Churches) bear
but one Name, to wit, the Church of God in that City, as in the Apostles days,
Act. 15.4.22. 1 Cor. 1.2. Rev. 2. and 3. chap.
That so there may be no Schism, Divisions, nor sinful Separations from the
Church of God; but that the whole Church may be perfectly joined together in
ONE, As a City that is compact together, Psalm. 122.3. as an House or Building
fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. and as a Body fitly joined and
compacted by every joint of supply, Ephesians. 4.16.

Secondly, That this Church be of one Heart, and of one Soul, Act. 4.32. being
perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment, 1 Cor.
1.2, 9, 10. that so they may all with one Mind, and one Mouth, glorify God,
even the Father of our LORD Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6. having the same Love one
to another, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. and the same Care one for another, 1 Cor. 12.25,
26, 27. each one endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace, Ephesians. 4.3-6. This Oneness will make the Communion of Saints very
comfortable, Col. 2.2-5. And hereby they will enjoy Fellowship with the Father,
Son and Spirit, in all God's holy Gospel Ordinances, to the Glory of God, and
their own Edification.

Thirdly, That this one Church, and all the Congregations of Saints, that are
Members thereof, walk by one and the same Rule of the written Word of God,
Phil. 3.16
being Ordered and Guided by their Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Presbyters, or
Elders, according to the Royal Laws of God's House ( called the perfect Law of
Liberty, Jam. 1.25.) submitting themselves unto those Guides, Act. 20.28
whom God has made their Overseers, who watch for their Souls, as they that
must give an Account, Heb. 13.7, 17.

Cant. 6.4.10.
Gospel Order is a great Beauty and Ornament to the Church, Col. 2.5. and Order
makes very much for the Well-Being of the Church. And Gospel Order consists
in these things; Psalm. 48.2. and Ezekiel. 16.12, 14.
First, That the Bishop and Presbyters set in Order the things which are
wanting in the Church, Titus 1.5. and 1 Cor. 11.34. Secondly, That all things
in the Church be done decently, and in Order, which Christ has commanded to be
done: 1 Cor. 14.40.
And for which his Apostles and Disciples have given us Example. Phil. 3.17
Thirdly, That the Order of the Gospel be carefully observed, and kept in the
Administration of God's Sacred Ordinances, in the Admission of Members, in the
Ordination of Church Officers, and in withdrawing from every Brother that
walks Disorderly. God was offended with his Church under the Law, because
they sought him not in due Order, 2 Chronicles. 15.11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 14.33.
And God has committed the Government of his Gospel Church and Kingdom unto
Christ, to Order it, etc. Isa. 9.6, 7. and God is not the Author of Confusion.

Gospel-Government is ordained and appointed of God for the Well-Being of his
Church: The Church of God cannot have a Well-Being without Christ's Instituted
Gospel-Government. And to that end God the Father has laid the Government of
his Church upon his Son Jesus Christ, Isa. 9.6, 7. To whom he gave all Power in
Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. And he has made Christ Lord of his House, and
King of his Church, Heb. 3.1-6. and Psalm. 149.2. The Lord Jesus Christ
deligated this his Ecclesiastical Government of the Church unto his holy
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, called Bishops,
Presbyters or Elders, who where allowed of God to be put in Trust with the
Gospel, 1 These. 2.4. And the Apostles and Evangelists did commit the same unto
faithful men, 2 Timothy 2.12. whom they Ordained Bishops, Presbyters or Elders in
the Churches of Saints, Titus 1.5, 7. Act. 14.23. which Gospel-Government (as
we said before) is not a Coercive-Power over Men's Consciences; nor is it a
Dominion over their Faith; neither is it a Lordship over God's Clergy or
Heritage; but it is a Stewardship of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
Let a Man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God. And Titus 1.7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward
of God. Unto this Gospel-Government appertains Church Censures of Admonition, 2
These. 3.15. and Titus 3.10. Suspension (or withdrawing from a Brother or
Member, that has, and does walk disorderly,) 2 These. 3.6. and Excommunication
of those Members that live in gross and scandalous sins, 1 Cor. 5.1, 4, 5, 13.

CHAP. II. Of Gospel Ministry.
1.
THE LORD Jesus Christ is the Chief Minister of God's Sanctuary, and of the
true Tabernacle, (...) Heb. 8.1, 2.
which the Lord pitched, and not Man; He is the Chief Pastor of God's little
Flock, (...) Pastorum Princeps, 1 Pet. 5.4. (...), etc.
and the Bishop of our Souls, (...), 1 Pet. 2.25. and Heb. 13.20. -- (...).
Heb. 13.20. The great Shepherd of of the Sheep, who in all things has the
Pre-eminence, -- (...) in omnibus Ipse Primatum tenens.
or Supremacy.

2.
HE gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, for the work of
the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and 1 Cor. 12.28. The Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists, were appointed by Christ to Preach the Gospel to the World, Mark
16.15. and for the Gathering of the Saints, framing, and perfectly joining them
together, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. (...), etc. (...), etc.
The Pastors and Teachers were Set by Christ in the Churches, as fixed
Officers, for the Edifying of the Body, until we all meet together in the Unity
of Faith, etc.

3.
Those Pastors and Teachers are called Elders, 1 Pet. 5.1. Elder is a name of
Office in the Church of God: Elders are indeed fixed Officers for Rule and
Government, who are to be counted worthy of double Honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. They
are also called Bishops, Phil. 1.1. And the Elders of the Church of Ephesus,
Act. 20.17. were called Bishops, Act. 20.28. Act. 20.17, 28. -- (...) -- 28.
(...).
over which the holy Spirit has made you Overseers, or Bishops. The Office of
a Pastor, Bishop, and Presbyter, or Elder in the Church of God, is to take the
Charge, Oversight, and Care of those Souls which the Lord Jesus Christ has
committed to them, to feed the Flock of God; to watch for their Souls, Act.
20.28. Heb. 13.17 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 3.15. Isa. 33.22.
to Rule, Guide and Govern them ( by virtue, of their Commission, and Authority
received from Christ, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. and Titus 2.15.) according to the
Laws, Constitutions and Ordinances of the Gospel.

4.
The Office of Episcopacy and Presbytery, or Eldership in the Church of God, is
Divine and Sacred, but not Lordly, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. -- (...) -- (...),
prospicientes, neque ut dominantes Cleris, etc.
neither overruling the Clergy: No Bishop, Pastor, or Presbyter, is [(...)]
the Master of the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, but
[(...)] a Steward (or Dispensor) of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. The
Apostles, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers, were Fellow-Elders, 1 Pet. 5.1. The
Elders which are among you I exhort, who am a Fellow-Elder: (...), etc.
But they were not all of equal Dignity and Authority.

5
It does appear, (at least I think so, and indeed it is my Opinion) that there
was (even from the Beginning of the Gospel of the Grace of God) a Priority and
Pre-eminence among the Ministers of Christ, approved of God; yea, and appointed
by himself in the Church, (...), etc.
1 Cor. 12.28, 29. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of
healings, helps, governments, diversities of Tongues. Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? are all workers of miracles? Christ gave Priority,
and Pre-eminence unto his Apostles above the Ordinary Prophets and Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, and all other Ministers, Ephesians. 4.11. 2 Cor. 2.9. and
11.28. 2 These. 3.6.
The Evangelists Timothy and Titus (called Bishops in the subscriptions of St.
Paul's Epistles to them, both in our English Bibles, and in the Greek
Testament) had Authority and Pre-eminence above other Pastors, Teachers and
Elders in the Ephesian Church, and in Crete, 1 Timothy 1.3. As I besought thee to
abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou might charge
some that they teach no other Doctrine. Titus 1.5, 10, 11, 13. and 2.15. and
3.10, 11. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,
especially they of the Circumcision; whose mouths must be stopped; who subvert
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake.
This witness is true; wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in
the Faith. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority. Let no
man despise thee. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
Admonition, reject; Knowing, that he that is such, is subverted, and sins,
being condemned of himself.

6.
And the consonant Testimonies of the Ancients, with the general consent of
Modern Divines, and Protesta^^ Writers of good esteem and approbation do assent
and acknowledge, That Timothy and Titus were not only Evangelists, but Bishops
set and fixed by some of the Apostles to Oversee, Order, and Govern Churches,
Ordain Bishops and Presbyters, and to exercise Authority over them, according
to the Laws, Canons and Constitutions of Christ and his Apostles given unto
them. Walo, Walo, alias Salmas. lib. de Episc. page 229. Titum Cretae Insulae
praefecit Paulus, qui non singulari in aliqua Civitate Episcopus fuit, sed
totam illam Provinciam ad tempus procuraret, etc.
called Salmasius, who professedly pleaded for the Identity of Bishops and
Presbyters, confessed concerning the Ancients that Chrysostom, Epiphanius,
Theophylact, Theodoret, and other Greek Commentators have collected out of the
words of St. Paul, That Titus was verily the Bishop of Crete. Hierom. de
Eccles. script. Ephesiorum Episcop. a Paulo ordinatus, etc.
Hierom has recorded both Timothy and Titus Bishops, the one of Ephesus, and
the other of Crete, to whom Ambros. in Praefat. ad Timoth. c. 3. hunc creatum
Episcopum, etc.
Ambrose, Primasius and Gregor. Pap. de Curat. Past. part. 2. c. 11. Prima^ in
Trin.
Gregory the Great, do consent; so do Reverend Beza, Beza, de Minist. gra. cap.
22. Habuit jam tum Presbyterium suum aliquem (...) Presbyterum, etiam
Presbyterorum manente communi appellatione.
Learned Scultetus, Luther, Master Moulin, Tossanus, Zuinglius, Calvin, Dr.
Gerard, Dr. Reynolds, and several others assert and acknowledge, That the
Presbytery had their Presbyter (or President) over them, in the Apostolical
Age, when the community of Names of Presbyters and Bishops remained among them.
Such were Timothy and Titus, whom the Apostles ordained Bishops, 1 Timothy 4.14.
and 2 Timothy 1.6. and Titus 1.5. Scultetus in Titum, cap. 8. p. 10. At Paulus
Ephesi, and in Creta aliquandiu docuerat, ideo Titum and Timotheum in Creta
jubet manner, non utique ut Evangelistas, sed Ecclesiae Gubernatores, etc.
Luther. tom. 1. fol. 309. conclus. 13. Probo quamlibet civitatem habere debere
Episcopum proprium jure divino, quod ex Paulo ad Titum ostendo dicente, v. 5,
7. (...), As I have ordained thee, Calvinus in Titum, 1.5: Discimus (says he)
ex hoc loco non eam fuisse aequalitatem inter Ministros, quia unus aliquis
Authoritate praeesset.

7.
Jesus Christ commanded his Servant John the Apostle, to write a Book, and send
it to the seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 1.11. He directed his seven several
Epistles to the seven several Angels of the seven Churches beginning thus, Unto
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, and so the rest, Chap. 2.1.8.12.18. and
Chap. 3, 1, 7, 14. And those seven Epistles were by those seven Angels to be
communicated to all the Asian Churches, and every one was called upon (in that
Epiphonema, at the End of every several Epistle) He that has an Ear, let him
hear, etc. Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, 29. and chap. 3.6, 13, 22. that is, to hearken,
attend, and observe what the Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit says utno the
Churches, not to this or that particular Church only, Rev. 2.1, 7. nor to these
seven Churches exclusively, but unto all the Churches of Saints in all other
Countries, Cities and Places in all the future Ages of the World. Dr. Scultetus
says, Scult. observat. in Titum. Doctissimi quique interpretes per septem
Ecclesiarum Angelos interpretantur septem Ecclesiarum Episcopos; neque enim
aliter possunt, vim nisi facere Textui velint.
All the most Learned Interpreters by Angels expound the Bishops of the
Churches, nor can it be otherwise interpreted without Violence to the Text. As
punctually and pertinently speaks Marlorat, Marlorat. in Apoc. 1.12. Quamvis
quaedam tam in Clero, quam in Populo corrigenda essent, non tamen Populum, sed
Clerum aggreditur: nec quemlibet de Clero, nominatim Principem Cleri, utique
Episcopum.
Some things (says he) were to be corrected, as well in the People, as in the
Clergy; yet, does not Saint John write unto the People, nor yet to the Clergy,
but to the Chief of them, which is the Bishop. Dr. Reynolds in his Conference
with Heart. cap. 2. divisio 3. says, Although in the Church of Ephesus, there
were sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it; yet among these sundry Pastors was
there one Chief, whom our Savior calls the Angel of that Church, Apoc. 2.1.
And the said Doctor telling us of that very Time, when St. Paul assembled the
Elders of Ephesus at Miletum, Act. 20. 17, 28. chap. 8. distinct. 3. says, One
was chosen as Chief -- called Bishop.

9.
Smectym. etc. assert, that the word Angel, Rev. 2.1, etc. does signify only
the Presbytery, or the College of Elders, Pastors, and not the Church.
Smectym. Vindication, page 146, 148.
And they draw argument from the Epistle of Christ, to the Church in Thyatira,
Rev. 2.18.20, 24. Upon which place Beza thus paraphrased, Unto you, that is
(says he) unto the Angel as President; and unto the rest (of the Elders, viz.
the College of Presbyters) in Thyatira: And as many as have not this Doctrine,
that is have not received this Doctrine of Jezebel. But why would Christ have
the Angel or Chief Bishop of the Church of Thyatira blamed for suffering false
Teachers in that Church to Teach and Seduce his Servants, if he was not their
President, or Superintendent, who had Priority, Preeminency and Authority above
other Pastors, Teachers, Presbyters, or Elders (called Bishops) in that Church?
Beza in Apoc. 2.1. Angelus (...), quem oportet admoneri, and per eum Collegas,
totamque adeo Ecclesiam. Gualther. Hom. 9. in Apoc. 2.8. Angelo, id est,
Episcopo Smyrnensi atque toti Ecclesiae, constat ex Historiis Polycarpum fuisse
hunc Angelum.
Consult Beza, Gualter, especially Ignatius that holy Martyr, ( who is said to
live in the days of the Apostles, who writ an Epistle to the Ephesians,
wherein he has plainly and fully distinguished between Bishops and Presbyters,
and toward the end of that Epistle he does exhort them to obey both the Bishop
and the Presbytery with an undivided mind. IgnaEpist. ad Ephesians. p. 17-29. etc.
(...). Ibid. (...).


10.
Polycarpus was Bishop of Smyrna, when St. John wrote that Epistle, Revel. 2.8.
Unto the Angel of the Church of the Smyrnians, says Irenaeus. And who can
better inform us than they that lived in the days of the Apostles. Polycarpus
(says Irenaeus) Iren. advers. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. (...), etc.
was not only taught by the Apostles, and conversed with many that had seen
Christ; but also was by the Apostles Constituted in Asia Bishop of the Church,
which is in Smyrna; Whom we our selves also did see in our younger Age; for he
continued long: And being very aged, he most gloriously and nobly suffering
Martyrdom, departed this Life. To this let me add the Testimony, which those
Brethren of the Church of Smyrna, who were present at the Martyrdom of their
Bishop Polycarpus gave him, Smyrnens. Eccles. epist. de Martyrio Policarpi.
Eusebius. lib. 4. hist. (...). 15. (...). Vide Eusebius. l. 2. (...). and lib. 4.
(...).
as Eusebius, l. 4. Hist. (...) 15. He was (said his Brethren) the most
admirable Man in our Times, an Apostolical and Prophetical Doctor, and Bishop
of the whole Church in Smyrna. Famous and certain is the Testimony of
Hegesippus, in his History of the Church, as Eusebius notes to the same
purpose. The next and last I shall cite, is the Testimony of Clement, whom St.
Paul mentions among other his fellow Labourours, Phil. 4.3.

11.
Clement is said by the Ancients, to have written an Epistle to the Church and
Saints at Corinth, which Epistle has the Attestation of Irenaeus, who calls it
[(...)] a most substantial Epistle to the Corinthians, and of Photius, that
styles it [(...)] an eloquent (or a worthy spoken) Epistle. It is also highly
commended by Origin, Cyril, Justin Martyr, St. Jerome, and other godly and
learned men. Which Epistle Mr. Patrick Young says, is extant in the King's
Library at Oxford. His words in that his Epistle are these, (...), etc. Clem.
Epist. ad Corinth. page 57. D. Patrieii Junii.
Our Apostles knew (says he) by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there will be
Contention about the Name of Episcopacy; And therefore for this very same
cause, having received perfect knowledge, thy appointed the foresaid Degrees,
and gave thereupon a Designed Order, and List of Offices, etc. -- And it would
be no small sin in us (says he) if we should refuse or reject them, who have
sacredly, and without Reproof, undergone the Offices of Episcopacy, etc. The
Magd. Cent. 1, 2, 3. do make mention of such Bishops in the Churches of God:
And all Ecclesiastical Historians (that I have Read) do testify the Priority
and Pre-eminence of Bishops.

12.
I would not be misunderstood, therefore I will take liberty to tell the
Reader, That this Priority, Presidence, and Pre-eminence of any one Bishop
above other Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Presbyters, or Elders, and Ministers of
Christ, is not any Lordly Prelacy, with coercive Power over the Conscience, or
Dominion over the Faith of God's Clergy: For the holy Apostles did approve
themselves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. not
having Dominion over their Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. Neither as being Lords over
God's Clergy, or Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. But I mean and intend any one of
the Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Presbyters, or Elders, who are, or shall by the
Consent, Approbation and Choice of the rest be appointed, ordained, and set
over them as Chief Bishop or Presbyter of the Church in any City and Villages
adjacent, who for Order sake in Gospel-Government, has Priority, Pre-eminence,
and Authority above the rest of the Presbyters or Bishops of the same Church,
not alone, nor without them, but when Convened with them, to Act, Rule, Guide,
Order and Govern with their Consent, Suffrage and Assistance, according to the
Laws of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Constitutions and Commandments, the Practice
and Example of his holy Apostles, Act. 15.2, 6, 19, 22. Nor should the
Ministers of Christ strive which of them should be greatest, Luke 22.24, 25,
26. Neither ought any of them to Love (and Affect) to have Pre-eminence among
them, as Diotrephes did 3. Epist. of John v. 9. (...). 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. Titus 1.7, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
But a Bishop must be blameless, an Ensample to the Flock, vigilant, patient,
apt to teach, not covetous, not greedy of filthy lucre, and one that Rules
well his own House, that he may take Care of the Church of God; holding fast
the faithful Word, etc.

CHAP. III.
THE Third Work that our Lord Jesus Christ came into this World to do, was to
institute those Gospel Ordinances, in which his Churches of Saints must worship
God in Spirit, and in Truth. When the Church is Assembled on the first Day of
the week, in some convenient place to worship God, Christ has appointed, that
first of all Prayers, Supplications, and Thanksgivings be made, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2,
3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Men having
their Heads uncovered, and Women having their Faces veiled or covered, 1 Cor.
11.4, 5, 7, 10, 13. reverently kneeling, Psalm. 95.6. and Acts 21.5. or decently
standing, Luke 18.11, 13. They ought not to sit in Prayer-time, unless some
weakness of body, or some bodily infirmity does constrain them. This part of
the Worship of God ought to be administered by one of the Elders of that Church,
who ought to pray in the Spirit, and to pray with the understanding also, 1
Cor. 14.15. To pray with the Spirit, implies two things:

First, That the Minister have a spiritual Gift to pray, Zech. 12.10.

Secondly, That he have the Spirits Assistance in praying, Romans 8.26. To pray
with the understanding, is to pray with such words as all the Congregation does
hear and understand, that they may say Amen, 1 Cor. 4.16.

After Prayer, the Teacher ought to Read the Written Word of God distinctly,
and give the sense thereof by Expounding and Interpreting the words of that
Scripture, that so the People may understand, and be instructed or taught to
know the Will and Mind of God therein revealed for their Learning and
Edification, as they did, Neh. 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And as Christ himself, and his
Apostles also did, Luke 4.16, 17, 21, 22. and Act. 28.23. Reading the holy
Scripture, is an Ordinance of God, unto which Christ has promised a
Gospel-Blessing, Rev. 1.3. and Col. 4.16.

And then the Pastor ought to Preach the Gospel, and to exhort the People to
Repent, and Believe the Gospel; to be holy, and to walk in all the Commandments
and Ordinances of the Lord blamelesly; Laboring in the Word and Doctrine to
Convert Sinners, to Edify Believers, to Convince Gainsayers, and to Comfort,
Strengthen and Establish them that Believe in Christ. Also let the Prophets
speak two or three, and let the rest judge, 1 Cor. 14.29, 31. and Romans 12.6, 7,
8. Having then Gifts differing, according to the Grace that is given unto us:
Whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the Analogy of Faith: Or
Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; Or he that Teaches, on Teaching; Or
he that Exhorts, on Exhortation; And he that Rules, with diligence. The
Apostles so Preached, that many believed, Act. 14.1. And it pleased God by the
Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21.

Our LORD Jesus Christ did command his Ministers also to Baptize them that do
believe in him, with Water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit,
Mat. 28.19, 20. and Mark 16.15, 16. and Joh. 1.33. Our Lord himself was
Baptized by John in the River Jordan, Mat. 3.13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee
to Jordan unto John, to be Baptized of him. Ver. 16. And Jesus, when he was
Baptized, went up straightway out of the Water. [(...), ut immergeretur, ver.
13. and ver. 16. (...), and immersus Jesus,] Mark 1.5, 9. And were all Dipped
of him in the River Jordan, confessing their sins. We read, that both Men and
Women were Baptized (when they Believed) Acts 8.12. (But we read not in the
holy Scripture of Truth, that any Infants were Baptized.) They that had
received the holy Spirit, were commanded to be Baptized with Water, in the Name
of the LORD, Acts 10.47, 48. Those Men and Women are fit Subjects of Baptism,
that have received the Spirit of Christ; do Believe in Christ; Confess their
sins; and Repent, Acts 2.37-41. The Manner of the Administration of this
Gospel-Ordinance of Baptism, was thus practiced in the Days of Christ, and of
his Apostles, to wit, The Person Baptizing, and the Persons Baptized, went into
the Water, Acts 8.38, 39. And they went down both into the Water, both Philip
and the Eunuch; and he Baptized him: That is, Philip Dipped the Eunuch under
the Water; and then they came out of the Water, v. 39. The Spirit of God has
inspired the Apostles in writing the holy Scriptures to use one Greek word [
viz. (...)] for Dipping; Joh. 1.25, 26, 33. Heb. 9.19, 21.
and another, [ viz. (...)] for Sprinkling. So that if to Dip in Water, be to
Baptize, to Sprinkle with Water is to Rantize. And the Manner of Baptizing in
Water is represented in the holy Scripture by Burying in Water, and raising up
out of the Water, Col. 2.12. and Romans 6.4. whereby is also figured forth the
Believer's Fellowship with Jesus Christ in his Death and Resurrection. Col.
2.12.

Jesus Christ also before his Death did Institute his own Supper, Matthew. 26.26,
27, 28. and 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. and commanded his Disciples to do so, and to
do so often in Remembrance of him, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. and as a Memorial of his
Death, until he come again, ver. 26. In Administering this Sacred Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper, according to the Example of Christ and his Disciples, these
particular things ought to be observed;

1. The Time; The Lord's Supper ought to be Administered ordinarily on the
Lord's Day, that is, the first Day of the week, Acts 20.7. (...), etc. On the
only Day of Sabbaths, (It is an Hebraism.) And upon the first Day of the week,
the Disciples came together to break bread, etc. And the time of the day was at
Evening; then Christ administered his Supper, Mark 14.17, 22.

2. The Minister ought to take the Bread, and consecrate it by the Word and
Prayer, with Thanksgiving; and after the Bread is so consecrated, he ought to
break it in pieces, and give it unto the Communicants, expressing the words of
Jesus Christ, saying, Take, eat, This is my Body. And after the Communicants
have eaten the Bread, the Minister ought to take the Cup with Wine in it, and
in like manner consecrate it by Prayer and Thanksgiving, and then give it all
the Communicants, expressing the words of Christ, saying, Drink ye all of this,
for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many,
for the Remission of sins, Luk, 22.20. and Matthew. 26.27, 28. And the Minister
also having received with them; 3. They all ought to praise God together in
singing an Hymn, as Christ and his Disciples did, Matthew. 26.30. Mark 14.26.

Singing is also a Gospel-Ordinance, which ought to be performed by the Church
as a part of God's Public Worship, Isa. 52.8. With the Voice together shall
they sing. The Matter that we are to sing is the Word of God, namely, the
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs contained in the holy Scriptures, the
Written Word of God, Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in
all Wisdom, etc. The Manner of Singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, is
to Sing in Meeter and Measure, with audible Voice, as our English manner is.

The Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs in the Book of Psalms, were Sung in
Meeter and Measure, [As they that understand the Hebrew Tongue know well.]

The End of Singing is to make Melody in your heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.
Singing with a tunable Voice, makes Melody in our Ears, and stirs up our pure
Minds to rejoice in the Lord; but Singing with Grace in our Hearts, does make
melody to the Lord. Though the Voice of the Church (espoused to Christ) was
sweet and pleasant unto him, in the Song of Songs, Cant. 2.14. yet the Spirit
acting Grace, (viz. Faith, Love, and Joy) in the Hearts of the Saints, is much
more sweet, well-pleasing, and acceptable unto God, than their Voice in Singing
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs to the Lord, Col. 3.16. Singing with Grace
in your hearts to the Lord.

Query. Did not some of the Saints in the Church at Corinth, Sing other Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, which they themselves indicted, and sang alone by
the Spirit with Grace in their hearts to the Lord?

Answer. I think some Members of that Church did compose a Psalm upon occasion,
1 Cor. 14.26. And it is my Opinion, That a Minister or Member of the Church (if
he has received a Gift of the Spirit to Sing) may Sing in the Church to
Edification, 1 Cor. 14, 15. yea and ought so to do, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. But this I
say,

First, That those Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, which Ministers, or Members of
the Church do indict and Sing, are not Psalms; and we are commanded to instruct
and exhort one another in Psalms, and to Sing Psalms, as well as Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5.19. and Col. 3.16. And I know that the word Psalms is
interpreted David's Psalms, the Book of Psalms, and the Psalms of David, Asaph,
etc. Search those Scriptures, Acts 1.20. Acts 13.33, 35. Luke 20.42.24.44.

Secondly, That those Ministers and Members of the Church cannot affirm, will
not assert, that their Hymns, or Spiritual Songs, are materially the
Inspiration of the holy Spirit, as the Book of Psalms were; they may Sing with
the Spirit, and with understanding, unto Edification; but the Psalms of David,
and of Asaph; and the Song of Songs, which is Solomon's; and the Hymns of Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, must have the Pre-eminence.

Thirdly, Although I have also, through the riches of Free Grace, received the
holy Spirit, and have learned in some measure, what it is to pray in the
Spirit, and to pray with understanding: Also to Sing in the Spirit, and and to
Sing with Understanding; yet I rather choose to Sing in the Church those Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, which are contained in the holy Scripture, than any
of my own inditing; for these Reasons, because,

First, Although I should be assisted by the holy Spirit of God, to indite an
Hymn, or a Spiritual Song, and Sing it in the Church with Grace in my heart,
and so make melody to the Lord, and edify the Church; yet some matter thereof
may be doubtful to some persons that hear me Sing it; if that matter be
Prophetical, or Mysterious, and they understand it not; or if there should be
any words or sentences therein expressed, which are not sound words, [For I
pretend not to Sing by the Spirit, otherwise than to pray by the Spirit, to
wit, as the Spirit helps mine Infirmities,] which I may be subject to, and so
through my Infirmity, may err, or utter some unsound words.

Secondly, When I Sing a Psalm, Hymn, or Spiritual Song, which is written in
the holy Scripture of Truth, none but an Atheist, or an Atheistical Spirit will
object against the Matter of it; for those Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
were given by Inspiration of God, and Revelation of the holy Spirit; and I do
only translate them into English Meeter and Measure, out of the Hebrew Text,
that the Church may Sing them together, with their Voice making Melody to the
Lord, by Singing praises to the Lord with Grace in their hearts.

Thirdly, The Church cannot practice the Lord's Command given by the Apostle to
those two Churches, and all other Churches of Saints, though they Sing Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs, unless they also Sing Psalms; which are by the same holy
Spirit that inspired David to indite them expounded and interpreted, The Book
of Psalms; and The Psalms of David, etc. as has been proved by those
Scriptures aforecited, which the Reader is humbly desired to search.

CHAP. IV.
Lastly, THE Lord Jesus Christ having finished the work for which he came into
this WORLD, being to leave the WORLD, and return to Heaven, whence he came,
Ephesians. 4.9.10. did at the Request of his Disciples, Matthew. 24.3, 4. foretell them
the Signs of his Second Coming, and of the End of this WORLD. The Ending Time
of this WORLD, and the Second Coming of Christ, have some evident Signs set
upon them. And God has caused those Signs to be Recorded and Written in the
holy Scripture of Truth; First, To strengthen the Faith of his People, that
they might upon Scripture ground believe that this World shall have an End, and
that the LORD Jesus Christ will come again from Heaven in Power and great
Glory; And Secondly, To leave all Unbelievers without excuse.

One Sign of the Ending Time of this World, is the last and greatest Apostasy
of Professors, and the Laodicean Lukewarmness of Ministers and Members in the
Churches of Christ.

The first and great Apostasy, which the Apostle foretold, was a departing
from the Faith of the Gospel, which Christ and his Apostles had preached, and
which the Churches, their Ministers and Members had embraced and professed, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
Devils: Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know
the truth. Which Apostasy happened in the fourth Century, (as Ecclesiastical
Historians tell us) when the Church at Rome, and other Churches, their Bishops,
Presbyters and Members departed from the Faith, and fell away from the sound
Doctrine, pure Worship, and true Discipline of the Gospel. And then the
Apocalyptical Beast, the Pope, and the great Whore, Mystery Babylon the Great,
that Mother of Harlots, and the false Prophets, those Roman croaking Frogs did
begin to Rise, who afterward greatly increased in the ten European Kingdoms.
See my Book entitled Mystery-Babylon unvailed, Printed 1679.

But the last and greatest Apostasy noted in the holy Scripture of Truth, is
both in Faith and Manners, by Men of corrupt Minds, and carnal Principles,
having the Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natura
laffection, Truce Breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof:
from such turn away. The particle (...), v. 1. This, likewise, or besides,
directs us to look back to the former Epistle, chapter 4. v. 1, 2, 3.
beforementioned, to wit, the Time of the first Apostasy; In the latter days,
v. 1. But here the Apostle speaks of the Time of the Last Apostasy, v. 1. That
in the last days, etc. The great Inquiry now will be, What Days the Apostle
meant here? I answer, My Opinion hereof is, That by the Last Days here, we are
to understand those three Prophetical Days and an half of the 1260 Days that
Christ's two Witnesses shall prophecy in sackcloth, Rev. 11.3, 7-12. And I
will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth. And when they shall have
finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit,
shall make War against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them: And their
dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which spiritually is
called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the
people and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies
three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in
graves. And they that dwell upon the Earth, shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the Earth. And after three days and an half, the
Spirit of Life from God entered into them: And they stood upon their feet, and
great fear fell upon them which saw them. Read my Exposition of the Eleventh
chapter of the Revelation, published 1679. These Days of slaying the Witnesses
(are those last Days) and will be perilous Times: For

1. The Roman Beast will make war against the Witnesses, and overcome them, and
kill them, Rev. 11.7.

2. They will be perilous, hard difficult, dangerous, grievous, and
troublesome Times, or Days, because the Rights, Liberties and Freedoms of the
People will be infringed, and taken from them; and such temptations and snares
will be laid, whereby men's Liberties, Lives and Estates shall be in great
hazard and danger, Mat. 24.21. and Luke 21.22, 26, 27.

3. These last Days will be so full of amazing Distractions, Disturbances, and
Tribulations, that wise men shall be at their Wits end, not knowing what to do,
nor what course to take for their own safety: And many eminent Professors of
Religion will fall off from their former Principles and Practice, and be drawn
aside to follow the pernicious ways of ungodly men, and so fall in with the
sins of those last Days here mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4. (...), Lovers of
their own selves. Self-love is the Root of Apostasy, both Political and
Ecclesiastical. When men of Name began to love themselves more than their most
solemn Oaths, Vows, and Covenants, more than Truth and Righteousness, more than
the good Laws of the Nation, and the just Liberties and Rights of the People,
then began the last and greatest Political Apostasy. And when men of Eminency
for Religion, began to love themselves more than the Ways and Worship of God,
more than the Churches and Saints of God, more than Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, then began the Ecclesiastical Apostasy of those last
Days: This is one Sign that Christ gave his Disciples of the Ending Time of
this world, Matthew. 24.3, 4, 12. And as he sat upon the Mount of Olives, the
Disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us when shall these things be,
and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world. And
Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you. And
because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. (...),
Covetous, Danaeus in Loc. says, (...) hic a Paulo dicitur, qui sive aurum,
sive argentum, sive agros -- sive quaslibet alias opes ardenter expetit and
vitiose. (...) is often rendered studium pecuniae, the desire of money. And the
love of money, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.10. is the root of all evil, which
whilst some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, etc. How much
of the spirit of the world, and of the things of this world is crept into the
hearts of many Professors, and Church Members in these last Days, who consider
not the Testimony of the Apostle against them, 1 John 2.15. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. Covetousness is Idolatry, Col.
3.5. Another Character of those Apostates of the last Days is Pride, (...),
Proud; so are those covetous self-loving Professors, and Church Members in
these evil Days, witness the Perriwigs and Petticoats of London Professors,
and Sermon hearers in this City. Does not even Nature it self teach you, that
if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him, 1 Cor. 11.14. Yea it is a
shame indeed for men professing Godliness to wear such long Perriwigs of Women's
hair, as some men do. What an abomination is it unto the Lord, to see an hoary
Head covered with long hair, (that has been cut off from a Whores Head) when
he is praying to God, and worshipping the All-seeing God, Heb. 4.13. All things
are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. And does not
the holy Scripture teach Women professing godliness, when they come to pray and
worship Gods, to adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shamefacedness and
sobriety, not with broidered hair -- or costly Array, 1 Timothy 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. And more especially in days of Humiliation and
Tribulation ( even at such a time as this, which is indeed a perilous time.
Read Exodus 33.4, 5, 6, 7. and Isa. 3.16-24. Another Character of those
Apostates of the last Days, is Truce Breakers, (...), Covenant-breakers; such
as do break their Oaths, Vows, Promises, Engagements. Oh how guilty have some
Courtiers, Counselors, Soldiers, Mareners, Citizens, Professors, and
Church Members been of those heinous sins! Read the Army-Remonstrance 1648. and
that Book entitled, A Looking-glass for the ARMY; in which Book you may find
collected the Vows, Promises and Covenants, that those Sword-bearing Professors
made, and several of them brake: To say nothing of the Scots and English
Covenants so solemnly taken in their Parish-Churches. Many Professors have
broken God's Covenant, as Israel did, Jer. 31.23. Which my Covenant they brake.
Another Character of the Apostates of the last Days, is False-accusers, (...),
Calumniators, Devils incarnate; such are those false witnesses, that rise up
against men; and do falsely accuse them, Psalm. 35.11. And when may false
witnesses do not agree in their Testimony, which men suborned, at last comes
other false witnesses, and then the Sentence of Death is given, and afterward
executed. Thus they dealt with the Lord of Life, and put him to death, Matthew.
26.59, 60. and with Stephen, Act. 6.11, 12, 13. and stoned him to death.
Another Character of the Apostates of the last Days, is this, Lovers of
Pleasures more than Lovers of God. Who more than rich Professors for fine
Clothes, sumptuous Houses, delicate Fare, costly Furniture, and Court-fashions,
wherein they have exceeded since the Burning of the City; besides other vain
Pleasures wherein they have delighted themselves more than in the ways of God
and Godliness? Amos 6.1. Woe to them that are secure in Zion. Ver. 3. Ye that
put far away the evil day. V. 4. That lie upon Beds of Ivory. V. 5. That chant
to the sound of the Viol. V. 6. That drink Wine in Bowls -- But they are not
grieved for the Affliction of Joseph. The last Character of these Apostates in
the last Days, which is a sign of the Ending-Time of this Evil WORLD, is this,
viz. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. To have a Form
of Godliness, is to hold on in Religious duties, and Gospel Ordinances, as
Praying in their Families, often hearing Sermons, attending days of public
Fasting and of Thanksgiving; also frequent Assembling themselves with the
separated Congregations of Saints, and therein partake of all
Gospel-Administrations; such are Sinners in Zion, and Hypocrites, (like them,
Isa. 33.14.) yet are lovers of themselves, and lovers of Pleasures more than
God, Christ, Godliness, and the poor afflicted Children of God:
Proud-Professors, Covetous Church Members, Covenant-breakers, and
false-accusers, denying the Power of Godliness: For, though these Apostates
profess they know God, yet in works they deny him, Tit. 1.16. Read Isa. 1.11,
12, 13, 14, 15. and Isa. 6.2, 3, 4. I am not against the True Form of
Godliness, that is to say, Church Fellowship, and Gospel Order, and the Worship
of God in Spirit and in Truth, according to the Constitutions of Jesus Christ
and his Apostles: But I thus speak and write to open and expound the words of
this Prophecy.

Another Sign of the Ending-Time of this world, is the abounding of Iniquity
among the profane persons of the world, Mat. 24.3, 12. Tell us what shall be
the sign of thy Coming, and of the End of the world; And Jesus answered and
said unto them -- Iniquity shall abound. The Apostle also tells us, 1 John
5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness. Ungodliness was the destruction of
the Old World, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great
in the Earth. V. 5. And the Lord said, I will destroy Man -- from the face of
the Earth. V. 7. The destruction of the Old World was by the Flood, but the
desolation of the world that now is shall be by Fire. 2 Pet. 3.6, 7. The Earth
also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. By Iniquity we are to
understand those Immoralities, and abominable wickednesses that are committed,
and practiced by ungodly men, who declare their sins as Sodom, and boast of
their abominations. Now Reader, consider how does Iniquity abound, to wit,
Adultery, that has gotten a Whores forehead, which is not ashamed of that
abomination: Also profane and false-swearing, which is an abomination to the
Lord, who hates profane and false Oaths: And Drunkenness, which so unmans men,
and so effeminates them, that they are thereby fit for nothing but sinfulness,
wantonness, lasciviousness, and all manner of wickedness. Likewise oppression,
violence, robbery, injustice, bribery, and all sorts of unrighteousness.
Lastly, Persecution, Imprisonment, and Banishment for Preaching the Lord Jesus
Christ, and Practicing the Ordinances of the Gospel. Do not these, Iniquities
abound in our days? I think that the Inhabitants of this Nation do abound in
these Iniquities, much more than in former Ages.

Another Sign of the Ending-Time of this World, is that great Tribulation,
which our blessed Savior spoke of, Mat. 24.21, 29, 30. This is that hour of
Temptation, which Christ said shall come upon all the world, Rev. 3.10, 11.
This day of Tribulation will be a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a Nation, even to that same time, Dan. 12.1-4. Shut up the words, and
seal the Book even to the Time of the End. The Tribulation of the People of
God, will be the War that the Roman Beast will make against Christ's two
Prophetical Witnesses, wherein he shall overcome them, and kill them, Rev.
11.7. See my Exposition of that Chapter and Verse, Printed 1679. And the
Tribulation of the Roman Beast, the great Whore, and the false Prophet will be
the seven Vials of the last Plagues of God Almighty, which shall be poured
forth upon Mystery Babylon the great, Rev. 16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And the
seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air, and there came a great voice
out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, saying, It is done. And there were
voices, and thunders, and lightnings: And there was a great Earthquake, such as
was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great.
And the great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of the Nations
fell, and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the
Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath. And every Island fled away, and
the Mountains were not found. And there fell upon men a great Hail out of
Heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent, and men blasphemed God
because of the Plague of the Hail; for the Plague thereof was exceeding great.
And immediately after the Tribulation of these days, they shall see the Son of
Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great glory, Matthew. 24. v.
29, 30. Then will Christ take unto him his great Power and Reign; he will
create New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, Isa. 65.17.
and 66.22. 2 Pet. 3.13. and Rev. 21.2-5. And he that sat upon the Throne said,
Behold I make all things New. Now this New Creation is the WORLD to come.

CHAP. V. Of Separation.
1.
GOD did separate his Ancient People the Jews from all other People in the
World, to be his peculiar People, to worship him according to his Institutions
and Commandments, Levit. 20.24, 26. And God has commanded the Believing
Gentiles to be separated from Idolaters, and Unbelievers, or Infidels, and to
have no Communion or Fellowship with them in any false Worship, 2 Cor. 6.14-18.

2.
But though Believers may be, and ought to abide separated from the Worship and
Worshippers of Idols in their Temples, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
and from the Worship of the Unbelieving Jews in their Synagogues; Act. 19.8, 9.
And also from the Worship and Worshippers of the Beast, or his Image, Rev.
14.9, 10. and 20.4.
and from the Assemblies of all false Worshippers, and from all false Worship;
yet sanctified Believers ought not to separate themselves from the true
Churches of God, and of his Saints, that Worship him in Spirit and in Truth,
and walk in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, according to the Rule of the
written Word of God, so far as they have attained.

3.
The most pure Churches of Saints on Earth, are subject to mixture; some false
Brethren may creep into a Church of Christ unawares, Gal. 2.4.
and some false Teachers too, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8.
Men of corrupt minds, and corrupt manners also. 2 Cor. 2.17.
And there may be some Errors in Doctrine, and some Evils in Conversation
among them; as there was among some of the Churches of Christ in Asia, in the
Apostles time, Rev. 2.14, 15, 20, 24.
But yet Believers ought not to separate themselves from those Churches of
Saints, whereof they are Members for those Errors in Doctrine, or Evils in
Conversation, until they have first, faithfully and orderly born their
testimony against them; secondly, until they have humbly entreated the Church,
and the Ministers thereof, to Reform those things that are amiss among them;
and thirdly, until the Church, and the Ministers thereof, do utterly Refuse to
Reform those Errors in Doctrine, and those Evils in Conversation among them.

4.
The Ministers and Members of the Churches of God ought to imitate Christ in
this matter, and to follow his steps. Our LORD Jesus Christ did see many things
amiss in some of the Churches in Asia, viz. unsound Doctrines, and corrupt
Manners; to wit, the Doctrine and Deeds of the Nicolaitans, which Christ hated,
etc. But notwithstanding Christ did not presently forsake those Churches, nor
did he command any of the Ministers, or Members thereof to separate themselves
from them; neither did Christ blame any Believers that were sound in their
Judgments, and holy in their Conversations for holding Communion with those
Churches. But Jesus Christ did, first, bear his Testimony against those Errors
in Doctrine, and Corruptions in Conversation. Secondly, Christ called upon the
Church and Angel to Repent, and Reform what was amiss. And Thirdly, Christ gave
them space to Repent, and waited for their Amendment, before he did forsake
them. Read the second and third chapters of the Revelation: And therefore I
conclude, That none of the Ministers nor Members of any true Church of God
ought to separate themselves from the Church; nor ought they to forsake the
Assembling of themselves with the Church, nor absent themselves from any part
of the true Worship of God, nor turn their back of any Gospel-Ordinance of
Christ in the Church, because of Offense against any Member or Minister in the
Church: But they ought to bear, and have patience, and to wait upon Christ and
his Church, until such Offenders be orderly proceeded against, and those
offenses be reformed or removed by the Laws of God's House: Or else until the
Candlestick be removed out of its place, for suffering those Errors in
Doctrine, or Corruptions in Manners and Conversation; and for adding
impenitency unto such impiety and iniquity suffered and indulged in the Church
by the Ministers therein, and by the Members thereof, to the dishonor of God,
the scandal of the Gospel, and the great offense and grief of the godly, who
have walked orderly, and have not defiled their Garments, but have watched and
kept themselves unspotted of the world, and uncorrupted with those Evils in the
Church; which would not be healed, and therefore ought to be forsaken and
separated from, by the faithful Ministers of Christ, and all the holy People of
God. Seeing then that the Ending Time of this evil world will be so perilous,
and a Day of so great Tribulation, I do entreat both unconverted Sinners, and
sanctified Believers, to suffer a word of Exhortation. I do therefore exhort
unconverted Sinners, upon whom the End of this WORLD is coming by Death, or
Dissolution, That you would come to Christ, Believe in Jesus Christ, and Repent
of your sins.

First, I exhort you to come to Christ; for there is not salvation in any
other, Acts 4.12. If you will not come to Christ whilst you live, you will
certainly go to Hell when you dye, Psalm. 9.17.

Some poor sinner happily will say, Alas! I am a vile sinful sinner; I am
unworthy, may I presume to come unto Christ? Yes, Jesus Christ who came into
the world to save the chiefest of sinners, does invite all, that will, to come
unto him, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. and Rev. 22. v. 17. But if I do come unto Christ,
will he not refuse me, and reject me, and cast me off? No! Joh. 6.37. Him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Some poor lost sinner may happily
say, Indeed I see a great need of Christ to justify me, and to sanctify me,
and to save me; but I know not how to come to Christ; I cannot come to Christ;
what shall I do? I answer, It is true, no man can come to Christ, except the
Father draw him, John 6.44. but God the Father does draw sinners unto Christ
with his Cords of Love, Jer. 31.3. Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting
Love; therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. Though thou can not
come to Christ, yet know, that the Lord Jesus Christ can, and will come to
thee, and teach thee to go to him, as he did Ephraim, Hos. 11.3, 4. The danger
is not in thy own Inability, that thou can not come to Christ, accept of
Christ, and take Christ upon Gospel-terms of Free Grace: but thy souls danger
lies in thy own unwillingness, Thou will not come to Christ; this Jesus Christ
complained of, John 5.40. But ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.
Ah! woe's me, says the poor lost sinner; If I were so deeply humbled for my
sins; if I had a soft, broken, penitent heart; if I could get victory over my
corruptions, then I should be willing to come to Christ for pardon, and for
salvation; but these things hinder me, and discourageth me from coming to
Christ; I am ashamed to come; I am afraid to come; I confess I am unwilling to
come; yet know, God and Christ is willing that thou should come, Mat. 11.28.
And ere long, the Day of God's Power will come upon thee; and then thou will be
willing, Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power.

Secondly, I exhort you to believe in Christ. When the Jailer asked Paul and
Silas, and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? They said, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16.30, 31. This is that glad
Tidings of the Gospel, which Christ has commanded and commissioned his
Ministers to Preach unto every creature, Mark 16.15, 16. He that believes shall
be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. There is an absolute
necessity of believing in Jesus Christ unto salvation; for without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Alas! says a poor sinner, I cannot
Believe, I know not how to Believe; what shall I do to Believe? I answer, Faith
is not of our selves, it is not of works, but it is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8,
9, 10. The Faith of the Operation of God, Col. 2.12. It is the exceeding
greatness of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. The same Almighty Power of God,
that raised Jesus Christ from the dead, must raise the soul of a sinner from
the death of sin, unto the life of Righteousness. The soul being dead in
trespasses and sins, must be quickened together with Christ, and raised
together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.5, 6.

Thirdly, I exhort you to Repent of your sins. Repentance is also the Gift of
God, Act. 11.18. Then has God also to the Gentiles, granted Repentance unto
life. Evangelical Repentance is a godly sorrow for sin, or a sorrowing for sin
after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. For godly sorrow works Repentance to
salvation, etc. which Gospel-Repentance consists of confession of sins to God,
contrition, and mourning for sins before God, and turning from sins unto God
with our whole heart, and with our whole man, in Spirit, Soul and Body.

And I do exhort sanctified Believers, to prepare themselves to leave this
world, and to enjoy the world to come. Noah did prepare himself, all the time
he was building the Ark, by being a just and perfect man, and walking with God,
Genesis 6.9. for the Ending Time of this world draws near: And the End of our
natural life is to us the End of this World: And that we may be prepared, we
ought to dye daily to sin, to self, and to this evil world; And we must live to
God, live God in Christ Jesus, Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14. For the Grace of God
that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works.

THE WORLD to Come.
CHAP. I. Wherein the General Position is propounded, proved, and explained.
1. The Position propounded.
THere is a World to come, wherein will be the New Heavens, a New Earth, and
the New Jerusalem; also the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints; the Resurrection
of the Dead, and the Eternal Judgment; which World to come will begin, when the
LORD Jesus Christ shall come again from Heaven.

2. The Position proved.
The holy Scripture of Truth does Testify, 1. That there is a WORLD to come;
Matthew. 12.32. -- But whosoever speaks against the holy Spirit, it shall not
be forgiven him, neither in this World, neither in the World to come. Ephesians.
1.20, 21. -- Not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. And
Heb. 2.5. -- For unto the Angels has he not put in subjection that WORLD, even
that to come. 2. That then the LORD Jesus Christ will come again from Heaven,
Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 9.28. -- And to them that look for him
shall he appear the Second Time, etc. 1 These. 3.13. -- At the coming of our
LORD Jesus Christ with all his Saints. 3. That then there will be the New
Heavens, and a New Earth, and the New Jerusalem; yea, and all things new, Isa.
65.17. I create New Heavens, and a New Earth. 2. Pet. 3.13. We according to his
promise look for New Heavens, and a New Earth, etc. Rev. 21.1, 2. And I saw a
New Heaven, and a New Earth; And I John saw the holy City, the New Jerusalem
coming down from God out of Heaven, etc. And Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. -- The
heavenly Jerusalem. 4. That the LORD Jesus Christ and his Saints shall have a
Kingdom, and shall Reign on Earth. Dan. 7.13, 14. and 27. And there was given
to him a Kingdom. Zech. 14.9. And the LORD shall be King of all the Earth. Dan.
7.27. And the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High, etc.
Rev. 5. 9, 10. And thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we
shall Reign on Earth. Also Rev. 11.15. and 20.4. And they lived and Reigned
with Christ a thousand years. 5. That then there shall be a Resurrection from
the Dead, 1 These. 4.16. And the dead in Christ shall rise first. Rev. 20.5, 6.
And the Rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22, 23-51, 52. And the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, etc. 6. That then shall be the last and Eternal Judgment, Romans
14.10. and 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. And Act. 17.31. Romans 2.16. and 2 Timothy 4.1. Who shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. 1 Pet. 4.5. Ready to judge the
quick and the dead. Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into judgment,
with every secret thing, etc. Romans 2.16. and Matthew. 12.36. called the Eternal
Judgment, Heb. 6.2.

So then without all controversy, or any modest contradiction, we have the
Testimony of Christ, his Apostles and Prophets recorded in the holy Scripture
of Truth, for the full confirmation of our general Position.

3. The Position explained.
In explaining our general Position, I shall begin with the first branch
thereof already proved; viz. That there is a WORLD to come, wherein will be the
New Heavens, and a New Earth, and the New Jerusalem. By the World to come, we
are to understand, that which the Apostle calls That inhabited WORLD, [even]
that to come, Heb. 2.5. (...).
The Apostle Peter tells us, that the old world being overflowed with water,
perished; and the world that now is, (even this present evil world) is reserved
unto fire against the day of Judgment, etc. 2. Pet. 3.6* 7. But there will come
another world after the world that now is, called the WORLD to come, in
contradistinction unto this world, Ephesians. 1.21. This world is distinguished from
that world by Christ himself, Luke 20.34, 35, 36, 37. The WORLD to come, will
be a New Creation; then Christ will make all things new, Rev. 21.5. He will
create New Heavens, and a New Earth, and a New Jerusalem, Isa. 65.17. When St.
John had seen [in his Vision] the New Heaven, and a New Earth, Rev. 21.1, 2. He
saw the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven; and verse. 5. He that
sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things new. This New Creation
will bear some Resemblance unto the first Creation, in respect of Matter,
Manner, Parts and End thereof.

The Matter out of which the Lord Jesus Christ will create the WORLD to come,
whereof we treat, is a mere Chaos, viz. the Confusion and Desolation of this
present evil world. All things will be in a confused and desolate Condition;
toward the End of this world will be perilous Times, 2 Timothy 3.1. In the last
days perilous Times shall come. And great Tribulations, such as never was,
Mat. 24.21. yea and most wicked Abomination; the whole world lying in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and behold then (even then) will the Lord Jesus Christ
appear, Matthew. 24.29, 30. And HE will come, and restore all things. For then
will be the Times of the Restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. and then will
Christ Restore our Judges as at the first, Isa. 1.26, 27. HE will make our
Oppressors Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness. Isa. 60.17. Then the Wolf and
the Lamb shall feed together, -- They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
Mountain, says the Lord, Isa. 65.25.

The Manner of the New Creation will be in an Instant, as the first Creation
was; God spoke the word, and it was done; He commanded, and they were created,
Psalm. 148.5. God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light, Genesis 1.3. and
Isa. 66.8. Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall the
Earth be made to bring forth in one day? (They are created now, and not from
the Beginning, Isa. 48.6, 7.) Or shall a Nation be born at once? far as soon as
Zion traveled, she brought forth her children. And so will the whole
New Creation; there will be a Restitution of all things, and all things will be
on a sudden made new, Rev. 21.5.

The Parts of the New Creation in the World to come, are, first, the
New-Heavens, and the New-Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13.
whereby we are to understand, that New-State, and Frame of Government here on
Earth, which the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, and King of Nations,
will constitute, and command his Saints to execute in all his Dominions and
Kingdoms, under the whole Heaven, Dan. 7.13, 14, 27. and Isa. 9.6, 7. Secondly,
The New- Jerusalem, that heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. called the
General Assembly, and the Church of the first born, written in Heaven, etc.
whereby we are to understand that glorious State of the Church of God on Earth,
which will be in that day, when God will glorify the House of his Glory, Isa.
60.1, 2, 7, 13, 19, 20. which Christ shall present unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, nor any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. but holy
and without blemish; called the Lamb's Wife, Rev. 21.9, 10, 11. prepared as a
Bride adorned for her Husband, v. 2. In this holy City the heavenly New-
Jerusalem, shall the pure Worship of God be celebrated, and his Sacred
Ordinances shall be administered according to his Divine Institutions; and his
Spiritual Gifts shall again be given unto his Saints for the Glory of his holy
Name, and for the Conversion of the Nations, that shall be saved, Isa. 60.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. The Gentiles shall come to thy Light; -- The Abundance of the Sea
shall be converted unto thee. And Rev. 21.10, 23, 24. And the Nations of them
which are saved, shall walk in the light of it, etc. Thirdly, The Renewed
Creatures, whose earnest Expectation waits for the Manifestation of the Sons
of God, Romans 8. -- 23. And not only they, but our selves also, which have the
first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting
for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our body.

The End of the New Creation in the World to come, is, first, To make all
things very good, as God did in the first Creation, Genesis 1.31. And God saw
every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. So the Lord Jesus
Christ will create all things new, and make every thing very good, in the world
to come: Wherein will be the Times of the Restitution of all things, which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began, Act.
3.19, 20, 21. Secondly, To glorify himself, and to make his Church glorious,
Isa. 28.5. and 62.3. In that Day shall the LORD of Hosts be for a Crown of
Glory, and for a Diadem of Beauty unto the Residue of his People. Thou shall
also be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the LORD, and a Royal Diadem in the
hand of thy God. Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 13, 19, 22. I the LORD will hasten it
in his Time.

The second Branch of our general Position, which has also been proved, is
this, That the LORD Jesus Christ shall appear the Second Time; which is now to
be explained. The Second Coming of Christ from Heaven, is often asserted by the
Prophets and Apostles, and confirmed by the Testimony of Christ himself. Rev.
22.7. I come quickly, ver. 12. Behold I come quickly. And ver. 26. Surely I
come quickly, Amen, Even so, Come LORD Jesus. Zech. 14.5. And the Lord my God
shall come, and all the Saints with thee. Also 1 These. 3.13. -- At the coming
of our LORD Jesus Christ, with all his Saints. These Scriptures, and those also
before mentioned for proof of this Branch of our Position, viz. Phil. 3.20. and
Heb. 9.28. do testify, That our LORD Jesus Christ will certainly, suddenly,
and visibly appear the Second Time, and come from Heaven upon the Earth in his
own Person. This Job believed, and therefore did he speak, Job 19.25. For I
know that my Redeemer Lives: And be shall stand [(...)] in the last of Time or
Day upon the Earth. Read ver. 26, 27. Heb. 10.37. Yet a litlte while and HE
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Act. 1.11. This self same
Jesus, which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as
ye have seen him go into Heaven. As Christ ascended into Heaven in his own
Person; so he shall lihewise descend from Heaven in his own Person, Matthew.
24.27. As the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West, so
shall also the Coming of the SON of Man be, so visible, Rev. 1.7. Behold he
comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him. And 1 These. 4.13, 14, -- 18.
The LORD himself shall descend from Heaven, etc. To them that look for him, he
shall appear the Second Time without sin unto Salvation.

Now the principal things to be explained in this Branch or part of our general
Position, are three, viz. 1. The Manner; 2. The Time; 3. The Ends of Christ's
Coming.

First, Touching the Manner of Christ's Second Personal Coming from Heaven, it
is testified, Matthew. 16.27. That the SON of Man shall come in the Glory of his
Father. The Glory of the Father is the highest and most heavenly Glory, called
the Excellent Glory, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. -- When we made known unto you the
Power and Coming of our LORD Jesus Christ -- For he received from God the
Father, honor and glory -- from the Excellent Glory; which was but a glimpse
of that Excellent Glory of the Father, which Christ shall come in, Attended
with all his holy Angels, and glorified Saints from Heaven, and met in the Air
by all the changed Saints then living on Earth. Jude v. 14. Behold, the LORD
comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints; and ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands of Angels, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb (that was slain) to receive power, and honor, and glory, Rev. 5.11, 12.
and 2 These. 1.7-10. When the LORD Jesus Christ shall be Revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels At the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
Saints, 1 These. 3.16. and 1 These. 4.17, 18. Then we which are alive and remain
(unto the Coming of the Lord, ver. 5.) shall be caught up together with them in
the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
Read Luke 21.17. Mark 13.16. and Matthew. 24.30.

Secondly, Touching the Time of Christ's Second Personal Coming from Heaven.
Though of that Day, and that Hour (when Christ shall come) knows no man, no
not the Angels of Heaven, nor the Son of Man, but the Father only, Mark 13.26,
32. Yet there are some signs of Christ's Second Coming recorded in the
Scripture of Truth, whereby we may know, that it is near, even at the door. The
Disciples of Christ asked him, What shall be the sign of his Coming? Matthew.
24.3. to whom Christ gave this for a sign; ver. 37, 38, 39. But as the Days of
Noe were, so shall also the Coming of the Son of Man be. And Luke 17.28, 29,
30. Likewise also as it was in the Days of Lot, even thus shall it be in the
Day, when the Son of Man is revealed.

It will be so with the Men of this World, as it was with the Men of the Old
World, which God destroyed with Water. Then the wicked ones of that Generation,
were very ungodly, Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great
in the Earth, etc. And Christ told his Disciples, Matthew. 24.12. That Iniquity
shall abound, a little before his Second Coming, verse. 30. And it will be so
with the Men and Women of these Cities, as it was with those Citizens of Sodom
and Gomorrah, whose Cities were burned.

Another sign of Christ's Second Coming, is a great Apostasy both in the
Doctrine and Worship of the Gospel. This sign of Christ's Second Coming, the
Apostle Paul foretold, 2 These. 2.1, 2, 3. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the
Coming of our LORD Jesus Christ, -- Let not man deceive you; for that DAY shall
not come, except there come a falling away first: An Apostasy first from the
Doctrine of the Gospel, especially, Faith and Love, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. Now the
Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter days some shall depart from the
Faith, etc. And Christ says, Matthew. 24.3, 12. The Love of many shall wax cold
before his Second Coming from Heaven, verse. 30. Some Teachers make the Law of
the Ten Commandments a Doctrine of Faith in Christ, affirming that those ten
words are a Covenant of Grace. Other Preachers make the Gospel of the Grace of
God a Doctrine and Covenant of works, teaching Justification by works, and
Salvation by works, holding Free Will, and falling away. And many there are, of
whom the Apostle Peter prophesied, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. False Teachers, who privily
shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, etc.
And 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. That there shall come in the last Days, Scoffers, walking
after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the Promise of his Coming, etc?
Insomuch that our Savior said, Luke 18.8. When the Son of Man comes, shall he
find Faith on Earth? And many Professors will fall from their first Love, as
the Ephesians did, Rev. 2.4. The Faith and Love of the Primitive Saints in the
Churches of Christ continued and increased, 2 These. 1.1, 2, 3. Your Faith
grows exceedingly, and the Love of every one of you all toward each other
abounds: But in these last Days many depart from the Faith, and many cool in
their Spiritual Affections to Christ; there are great decaies of Grace, and
many flourishing Professors experience great withering, fading, and decaying in
their spiritual gifts and graces; their backslidings are increased.

As the Apostasy in Doctrine, so in Worship, is a sign of the Last Days, and
of the Second Coming of Christ: The Apostle Paul foretold thereof, 1 These. 2.3,
4. and 2 Timothy 3.1, 5. This know also, that in the Last Days -- Men shall be
Lovers of their own selves, etc. more than Lovers of God, having a form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof. In those last Days, even a little
before the Second Coming of Christ, the Laodicean Churches will be lukewarm,
neither cold nor hot; formal, not fervent in spirit serving the Lord, Rev.
3.15, 16. And then the National Churches will be Papal, Superstitious, and
Will-worshippers. Col. 2.16, 18-22, 23. Which things have indeed a show of
Wisdom in Will Worship, etc. Then Mystery Babylon will say, I sit a Queen, etc.
Revel. 18.7, 8. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, to wit, the seven
Vials of the last Plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God, Rev.
15.1, 7. And then our Lord Jesus Christ will come in power and great glory, and
shall utterly destroy Antichrist, 2 These. 2.8. Whom the Lord shall -- destroy
with the brightness of his Coming.

When those Virgin-Professors, who have highly pretended to be upon their watch
waiting for the Coming of the Bridegroom Christ Jesus, shall grow secure,
careless, invigilant, and all slumber and sleep; it is a Sign that the Second
Coming of Christ is near. Matthew. 25.5, 6. While the Bridegroom (Jesus Christ)
tarried, they all slumbred and slept: And at midnight there was a Cry made,
Behold the Bridegrom comes. And ver. 10 -- The Bridegrom came, called the Son
of Man, ver. 13. See my exposition upon the Parable of the ten Virgins; printed
Anno 1667. David prophesied Psalm. 145.10.11.12.13. that the latter DAY Saints
shall bless the LORD, Saying, They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and
talk of thy Power, To make known to the Sons of Men -- the glorious Majesty of
his Kingdom But when the wise Virgins begin to be Sinfully silent, and dare not
bear their Testimony boldly and publicly for Christ against Antichrist; when
they cease to teach, and preach the Doctrine of Christ's Second Coming, and of
the glorious Majesty of his Davidical Kingdom: then they begin to grow carnal,
worldly, careless, and secure, formal and lukewarm. But there will then come a
Midnight Dispensation that will awaken all virgin Professors, and then Christ
will come.

Another Sign of Christ's Second Coming from Heaven is that great Tribulation,
which our Savior foretold his Disciples would be immediately before his Second
Coming, and Appearance, Matthew. 24.21, 29, 30. For then shall be great
Tribulation -- And immediately after the Tribulation of those days -- they
shall see the Son of Man Coming in the Clouds of Heaven, etc. This great
Tribulation will cause Distress of Nations with great perplexities, Men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming upon
the Earth, Luke 21.25, 26, 27. Read Dan. 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 13, etc. This
great Tribulation will be such as never was since the world began, Mat. 24.21.
WOE, WOE, WOE, to the Inhabitants of the Earth, Rev. 8.13. and of the Sea, Rev,
12.12. And the People of God (especially his two Prophetical Witnesses, to wit,
the separated Churches, and their faithful Ministers) shall not be exempted
from the Tribulation of those Days; for they shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy
3.1, 12. This know also, that in the Last days perilous Times shall come. Yea
and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. And
when the two Prophetical Witnesses of Christ shall have finished their
Testimony (that is to say, have Preached the Gospel of the Kingdom of Christ,
King of Nations, Jer. 7.10. and Matthew. 24.14.) The Beast that ascends out of
the bottomless Pit, shall make War against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them, Rev. 11.7. See my Exposition of the 11th chapter of the Revelation,
where I have proved, That before the Second WOE be past, Rev. 11.14. The
Papal-Beast shall ascend, that is, Rise and Reign; and He shall overcome, that
is, the Papists will prevail against the Protestants, and will kill the Two
Witnesses, that is, they will persecute the separated Churches of Saints, and
their Ministers; scatter their Assemblies, disperse their Congregations, break
their Meeting-places, imprison some, banish others, and condemn some to Death,
and will burn them, kill and slay them. And the Second WOE being past, the
Third WOE will come quickly, Rev. 11.14. to wit, the Seven Vials of the Last
Plagues of God Almighty shall then be poured out upon the Papal-Antichristian
Beast, the great Whore, and the false Prophet, whose Name is Mystery-Babylon,
Rev. 17.5. See my Book entitled Mystical-Babylon unvailed.

Thirdly, Touching the Ends of Christ's Second Coming, to wit, what Christ will
do, when he comes again from Heaven. First, When Christ comes from Heaven with
his holy Angels, HE will send them to gather together his Elect from one end of
Heaven to the other, Matthew. 24.30, 31. Then shall the dispersed of Judah be
gathered, and the Outcasts of Israel with them, as was foretold, Isa. 11.12,
16. And HE shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble the
Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four
Corners of the Earth. In that DAY God will pour upon the House of David, and
upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace, and Supplication; and
they shall look upon Christ whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him, Zech. 12.10. and Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every Eye
shall see him; and they also that pierced him. Then shall come to pass that
wonderful work of the Jews Conversion prophesied, Isa. 66.6, 8. Who has heard
such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall the Earth be made to bring forth
in one day? Shall a Nation be born at once? And so all Israel shall be saved
(as it is written) The Redeemer shall come to Zion, Isa. 59.20. And shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26, 27. For this is my Covenant unto them,
when I shall take away their sins. And all the Tribes of Judah and Israel being
gathered, they shall all be Reunited into one Nation; which the Prophet Ezekiel
showed them by the parable of two sticks made one stick in his hand, Ezekiel.
37.15-22. And I will make them one Nation; And one King shall be King to them,
Verse. 24. And they shall have one Shepherd. Verse. 27. My Tabernacle also shall
be with them: Yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Verse. 28.
My Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore. Then shall also the
fullness of the Gentiles be converted unto them, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 5. And the
Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and the Abundance of the Sea shall be
converted unto thee. Romans 11.25. Until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.
And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the Light of it; and the
Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it, Rev. 21.24. This
will be a glorious day, and a glorious work; and then will the LORD be for a
Crown of Glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto the Residue of his People, Isa.
28.5, 6. Then shall they be also a Crown of Glory in the hand of the LORD, and
a Royal Diadem in the hand of their God, Isa. 62.3. And this is One End of our
Savior's Second Coming from Heaven, Isa. 49.6. To gather his People together
unto himself. Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me, Matthew. 24.27, 28.

Secondly, Another End of Christ's Coming from Heaven, and another Work that he
will do, when he comes again, is this, viz. He will put down all Rule, all
Authority, and all Power, that are his Enemies, who would not have him to
Reign, Luke 19.27. For he must Reign until he has put all his Enemies under
his feet, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. as was prophesied, Psa. 110.1. and Luke 20.42, 43.
The External Enemies of Christ are principally three.

First, Ezekiel's Gog and Magog, who are prophesied of, Ezekiel. 38. and 39.
chapters. Thus says the Lord, I am against thee, O Gog; c. 38. v. 2, 3, 8, 11,
16. And thou shall come up against my People Israel: It shall be in the latter
days. And verse. 23. Thus will I magnify my self, and sanctify my self, etc.
chap. 39.1, 8-13, 21, 25, 29.

Secondly, Mystery Babylon, and the Kings of the Earth, who have given their
Power and Strength unto the Beast, Rev. 19.19, 20, 21.

Thirdly, John's Mystical Gog and Magog, and all their multitude, Rev. 20.8, 9.
Who will compass the Camp of the Saints about, and the Beloved City: And fire
will come down from God out of Heaven, and devour them.

Thirdly, Another End of Christ's Coming from Heaven, and another Work that he
will do when he comes again, is this, viz. He will set up his Davidical Kingdom
on Earth, Dan. 2.44. And in the days of those Kings, shall the God of Heaven
set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, Luke 1.31, 32, 33. And the Lord
shall give unto him, the Throne of his Father David. And Isa. 9.6, 7.

The next particular in our general Position is touching the Kingdom of Christ,
and his Saints. The holy Scriptures of Truth do in several places plainly
affirm, That the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdom of Christ, and
his Saints, Dan. 7.13, 14, 27. Verse. 14. And there was given him Dominion,
Glory, and a Kingdom -- His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall
not pass away. And his Kingdom that, which shall not be destroyed. Verse. 27.
And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the People (even to) the Saints of the most High. And
Rev. 11.15. -- The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdom of our LORD,
and of his Christ, etc. By the Kingdoms of this World, we may understand
universally, All the Kingdoms in the whole world; for Christ shall be King of
all the Earth, Zech. 14.9. In that Day shall there be one Lord, and his Name
one: Particularly, the Kingdom of David, to wit, Judah and Israel, Luke 1.31,
32, 33. And the LORD God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David:
And of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Isa. 9.6, 7. Micah 4.8. And thou O
Tower of the Flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it
come; Even the first Dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of
Jerusalem. And verse. 7. All those Prophesies shall be fulfilled, Dan. 2.37 --
43, 44. When the Stone has broken all those Kingdoms in pieces, verse. 34, 35,
45. (which Stone is Christ, Luke 20, 17, 18. and his Jerusalem, Zech. 12.3.
compared with Matthew. 21.44. and Jerem. 51.19-24. And with thee will I destroy
Kingdoms.) Then that Stone will become a great Mountain, and fill the whole
Earth, Dan. 2.35. that is to say, Christ will be King of all the Earth, Zech.
14.9. And the Kingdom of Christ will be enlarged;

1. By the extraordinary Conversion of Sinners, both Jews and Gentiles, Isa.
60.3, 5, 8, 10-15. and Romans 11 25, 26, 27.

2. By the pouring out of the Spirit upon all Flesh, Joel 2.28. Isa. 44.3, 4,
5. whereby the Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea, Joel 2.29. and Hab. 2.14. Then the Nations shall know,
That the LORD Jesus Christ is King of Nations, Jer. 10.7. The King of Kings,
and the only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. And HE shall put down all Rule, and all
Authority and Power, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. For he must Reign till he has put all
Enemies under his feet. And the Saints shall know, That the Kingdom of Christ
is not of this World, Joh. 18.36. that is to say, Christ's Kingdom is not of a
worldly Constitution, but it is a spiritual and Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18.
and called the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25.1, 2. though it will be a glorious
Kingdom, Psalm. 145.10, 11, 12, 13. yet it is not that Kingdom of Glory, where
Jesus Christ, his holy Angels, and the Spirits of Just men made perfect now
are; for there are no foolish Virgins in that Kingdom of Heaven. See more of
this matter in my Exposition of the Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven Printed
anno Dom. 1674. And also in the third Part of my Apocalyptical Mysteries
Printed Anno 1667. likewise in my Exposition of the 11th Chapter of the
Revelation, Printed Anno 1679. This Kingdom of our LORD Jesus Christ, will
begin in the Days of these Kings, Dan. 2.44. that is to say, the ten Kings of
the fourth Kingdom the Roman Monarchy. Then the Dominion shall be given unto
the Saints, Dan. 7.27. And the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom,
and possess the Kingdom for ever and ever, Dan. 7.18.22. And they shall Reign
on Earth, Rev. 5.9, 10. Then the Saints shall be rarely qualified and spirited
for Government; for They shall be all Righteous, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 20, 21. They
shall do no iniquity, Zeph. 3.13. And They shall be without fault before the
Throne of God, Rev. 14.5. They shall be endued with courage, clad with Zeal,
and girded with strength to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in fetters of
Iron, and execute upon them the Judgment written, ( Luke 19.27.) This Honor
have all his Saints, Psalm. 149.1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9. and Zech. 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
and Isa 60.12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall
perish; yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted. And when the Kingdom of our
LORD Jesus Christ is established on Earth, and all the Kingdoms of this world
are become his; the thousand years of the Reign of Christ and his Saints being
ended, ( Rev. 20.4, 5, 6, 7.) then Christ will Raise the Dead, and he will
judge the Quick and the Dead; which being done, HE will deliver up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father; that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24-28.

The next particular in our general Position to be explained, is the
Resurrection of the Body, at the Second Coming of Jesus Christ: compare 1 Cor.
15.20, 22, 23. with 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven --
And the Dead in Christ shall Rise first. The Dead Bodies of the Saints shall
then be Raised from the Dead, that shall yet remain in their Graves: They that
sleep in Jesus will God raise up; them will Jesus Christ awaken with the Trump
of God, 1 These. 4.14. The Resurrection of the Dead has this Order, and is
described by the Apostle in this manner, to wit, Christ first, 1 Cor. 15.22,
23, 24. afterward they that are Christ's at his Coming. But the rest of the
Dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished, Rev. 20.5, 6. This
is the first Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection. They shall Reign with Christ a thousand years, and that on Earth,
Rev. 5.9, 10. These Kings and Priests are the Children of the Resurrection,
Luke 20.35, 36. being the Children of God. Whose vile Bodies shall be changed
and fashioned like unto Christ's glorious Body. The Saints raised Bodies will
be perfect, no defect, no deformity, but spiritual, and glorious, 1 Cor. 15.42,
43, 44. So is the Resurrection of the Dead; It is sown a natural Body, it is
raised a spiritual Body. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. After
the Saints deceased are raised, and have lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years, shall be the general Resurrection, Rev. 20.12, 13. And I saw
the Dead small and great stand before God.

The last particular in our general Position, to be explained, is the Eternal
Judgment. So it is called, Heb. 6.2. There are several days of Judgment, as
that of the Old World, and that of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. but the Eternal
Judgment is that last Sentence which our LORD Jesus Christ shall pronounce
upon, and unto the Righteous, and the Wicked, Matthew. 25.34. and 41. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. And verse. 41. Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And ver. 46. These shall go away into
everlasting punishment; but the Righteous into eternal Life, which is the
Execution of God's Eternal Judgment.

CHAP. II.
OUR general Position being proved and explained, it ought to be improved and
fitly applied to the Inhabitants of this World, and more especially unto the
Men and Women of this Generation, whether they be unconverted Sinners, or
sanctified Believers. The unconverted Sinners of this World, and of this
Generation, are either Sinners in Zion, Isa. 33.14. that is to say, sinful
Professors, who seem to be Religious ( whose Religion will prove in vain, Jam.
1.26.) and who have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy
3.1-5. Those are foolish Virgins, that having gotten their Lamps lighted, wait
(a while) for the Coming of the Bridegroom; but while the Bridegroom tarries,
they slumber and sleep till their Lamp-light go out, Matthew. 25.1-13. See my
Exposition on that Parable Printed Anno 1674 Or else, those that that are
sinfully profane, which make no Profession of Godliness, called ungodly
Sinners Jude v. 15. unrighteous, 1 Cor. 6.9. and wicked persons, Psalm. 9.17. O
ye unconverted Professors! Consider, I beseech you, there is a world to come,
and Christ will come, and then every one shall give account of himself to God,
Romans 14.10, 11. What account will you give to God for your formality,
lukewarmness, hypocrisy, and unprofitableness under the Means of Grace, you
sinful Professors, that have refused the offer of Christ, and despised the
goodness of God, which should lead you to Repentance; you that have sinned
against Gospel Light, and knowledge, quenched the Spirit, resisted the Spirit,
and grieved the holy Spirit, it will be more tolerable for Tire and Zidon, than
for you in the Day of Judgment, except you repent, and believe in Christ. And
you unconverted ungodly wicked sinners, what account will you give to Christ in
the World to come, for all your unrighteousness, and all the wickedness that
you have done, and still do in this World. Read Jude verse 15. It will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day of Judgment, than for you, Jude
verse 7. which Cities are set forth for an Example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire.

O ye unconverted Sinners, both Professors and Profane! will you now accept
of, and receive a word in season of spiritual Counsel? then I will instruct you
how you that are miserable may become happy; and you that are in a damnable
state, may get into the state of salvation, before Christ come from Heaven to
judge the quick and the dead, and before you dye: That you may obtain eternal
Life, and Glory; my counsel to you is, as follows.

1. Consider, you are dead in sins and trespasses, and you are without Christ,
Ephesians. 2.1.5, 12. you have no saving sanctifying Grace; you are not holy; and
if you dye in this your sinful state and condition, you will be damned to
eternity, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell.

2. Consider your need of Jesus Christ: There is not salvation in any other,
Act. 4.12. no Christ, no Salvation: He is that One thing necessary; without him
you can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. to please God, or to glorify God, Heb. 11.6.
Without Faith in Christ, it is impossible to please God: Without being and
abiding in Christ, you cannot bring forth fruit, nor do any thing, whereby God
is glorified, Joh. 15.5-8. You stand in need of Christ to justify you, to
sanctify you, and to save you from Sin, and from Hell.

3. Consider, God offers Jesus Christ to poor, lost, miserable sinners, Rev.
3.17, 18. yea to the chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.12-15. upon Gospel-terms of
Free Grace, Isa. 55.1-7. without exception of person, and without respect of
price, Revel. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride says come, and let him that
hears say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely; that is to say, Any one, every one that is
willing may come to Christ, and receive Christ, and have Christ freely; for HE
is the free Gift of God to Sinners, who are without Christ in the World, Joh.
3.16. Be but willing to take Christ, and the work is done. Christ complained of
them that would not come to him, that they might have life, Joh. 5.39, 40.

When you have seriously considered those three particulars, then I counsel you
poor, lost, perishing Sinners, first, suffer the LORD Jesus Christ to come by
his Spirit and Word into your hearts, and set up the Kingdom of his Grace in
your souls; that where Sin has abounded, Grace may much more abound; and where
Sin has Reigned unto Death, there Grace might Reign through Righteousness unto
eternal Life by Jesus Christ our LORD, Romans 5.20, 21. Do not resist the Holy
Spirit, as they did, Zech. 7.7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13. and their Children after
them, Act. 7.51.

Secondly, Open your hearts to Christ, when he knocks at the Door of your
Souls, and calls you to come to him, to receive him, and let him come into your
hearts, and dwell in your hearts by his holy Spirit, and sanctifying Grace,
Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and
will open the Door, (...), I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. If the Sinner be willing to open the door of his heart, Christ will
come in by his holy Spirit, and HE will communicate of his Grace to his Soul.

Thirdly, Let the LORD Jesus Christ have the Throne, and be exalted above ALL
in your Souls, Isa. 2.17. And the LORD alone shall be exalted in that Day. Let
your own Imaginations be cast down, and every high thing that exalts it Self
against the knowledge of God, that every Thought may be brought into Captivity
to the Obedience of Christ. Be willing to resign your whole Man, Spirit, Soul
and Body, unto the Government of Christ, as LORD and King, to Reign and Rule,
Guide and Govern you by his holy Spirit, and Written Word.

Not that you can do those things of your selves; I have told you, without
Christ you can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. But it is your duty to do them, and it is
the Free Grace of God, to work in you to will and to do, according to his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. that he so working in you, you may work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling.

I would through the Divine Assistance of the Spirit and Grace of God, make
some Application of this our general Position unto the Churches of Saints, for
their edification.

First, I most humbly beseech all the Churches of Saints, to receive this
Doctrine of Christ's Second Personal Coming from Heaven, And to believe,

1. That when HE comes, he will glorify the House of his Glory, Isa. 60.1, 2,
7. and will make Zion an eternal Excellency, verse. 14.15, 22. God will build up
Zion, and then he shall appear in his Glory, Psalm. 102.13, 16. Then shall Zion
be the Perfection of Beauty, Psalm. 50.2. Out of which God shall shine. In that
DAY God shall be his Churches everlasting Light and Glory, Isa. 60.19. and Rev.
21.23. Then shall Christ and his Church be each others Crown and Glory, Isa.
28.5. In that DAY shall the LORD of Hosts be for a Crown of Glory, and for a
Diadem of Beauty unto the Residue of his People, Isa. 62.3. Thou shall also be
a Crown of Glory in the hand of the LORD, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy
God. Read Zech. 9.16. and Isa. 60.13.

2. That when Christ comes, He will Restore all his holy Ordinances unto their
Primitive Power and Purity; yea unto an higher and greater degree of
Excellency, than in the Apostles Days. God will not only give his Churches of
Saints Pastors according to his own heart, which shall feed them with knowledge
and understanding, Jer. 3.14, 15. but HE will also pour out his Spirit upon
Sons and Daughters; and upon the Servants, and upon the Handmaids also God
will pour out his Spirit, Joel 2.28, 31, 32. Before the great and terrible DAY
of the LORD come. The LORD will vouchsafe unto his Churches such Anointing of
his holy Spirit, as the Apostle John witnesses and recorded, 1 John 2.20, 27.
But ye have an Unction from the holy ONE, and ye know all things, etc. Read v.
27. and Joh. 6.45. and Isa. 54.13. and Jer. 31.34 It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. And not only be instructed and
led by the holy eternal Spirit into the sound and saving Knowledge of all the
Truths in God's written Word, as the Truth is in Jesus; but they shall see with
their Eyes those things fulfilled, which they have read and heard out of the
written Word of God, Matthew. 24.33, 34, 35. That Gospel Ordinance of Praising
God, will then be with greater spiritualness, and with more heavenly mindedness
performed, in the General Assembly and Church of the first Born, where all the
Sons of God shall sing together, even all the Saints and Angels shall celebrate
the high Praises of God together. Read Rev. 5.11, 12, 13. Rev. 11.15, 16, 17.
Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. Rev. 15.2, 3, 4. Rev. 19.1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The whole
Worship of God shall then be performed by the true Worshippers in Spirit and in
Truth, according to Christ's Word, John 4.23, 24. for God will then give all
his People one Heart, and one Way, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40. to worship him with one
Consent, Zeph. 3.9, 14, 16, 17, 18. In that day shall there be ONE LORD, and
his Name ONE, Zech. 14.9. A Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21.

3. That when Christ comes, his glorious personal and spiritual Presence with
his Church, Heb. 12.21, 23, 24. and Rev. 22.2, 3. will occasion a Confluence of
all Comforts, Isa. 51.3, 12. and 66.13. and Zech. 1.13, 17. Then Zion shall be
adorned with spiritual and glorious Beauty, Isa. 52.1, 9, 10. and compassed
about with peace and safety. God will be as a Wall of Fire round about Zion,
Zech. 2.5, 10. Sing and rejoice, O Daughter of Zion; for Lo, I come, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee, says the LORD. Read Ezekiel. 34.23, 24, 25, 28, 29,
30, 31. No Canaanite in the Land of Israel, nor none that shall hurt or destroy
in all God's holy Mountains, Zech. 2.4. Jerusalem shall be inhabited as Towns
without walls; for God's salvation shall be her walls and bulwarks, Isa. 26.1,
2, 3. Then the State of the Church of God will bear some proportional
Resemblance to the Kingdom of Heaven, for it will then be a sinless state, Isa.
60.1, 21. Zeph. 3.13. and Rev. 14.1, 5. and a sorrowless state, Rev. 21.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. and a timeless state, Rev. 10.6. Time shall be no more. For the
thousand years time of the Church's Glory being finished, (and all the time of
Satan and his Instruments ended, who are the Abusers of Time) Time shall pass
into Eternity of Glory, and Beatifical Vision, and eternal Life.

Secondly, I would also humbly entreat my Reverend Brethren, to declare to the
Ministers of Christ, Churches of Saints, what is noted in the holy Scripture of
Truth, concerning the WORLD to come, the New Heavens and a New Earth, and the
New Jerusalem. Also the Second Personal Coming of our LORD Jesus Christ from
Heaven. You are commissioned and commanded to declare unto the people the whole
counsel of God, revealed in his written Word and this Gospel of the Kingdom and
Coming of Christ must be preached in all the Inhabited World toward the latter
End thereof, Matthew. 24.14. as a Witness unto all Nations, and then shall the
End come: This is (...), the Generation Truth, which ought to be Preached and
Testified by the Ministers and Churches of Christ in these latter days, though
they be killed for bearing this Testimony, Rev. 11.3, 4, 7. Be faithful to
Death, and Christ will give you a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. and 12.11.

Lastly, A word of Consolation to those that do believe, pray and wait for the
world to come, and the Spiritual Glory thereof.

1. In general; for then the Ransomed of the LORD shall return and come to Zion
with Songs, and everlasting Joy, etc. Isa. 35.10. Then shall be the confluence
of all spiritual Comforts to the Church and People of God, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 7,
13, 19-22. The LORD shall be thy everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory,
verse. 19. All the promises of Grace and Glory shall then be performed, which
are in Christ Yea, and in Christ Amen, to the praise and glory of God, 2 Cor.
1.20. And then all Prophecies relating to the Churches Spiritual Glory, shall
be fulfilled, Act. 3.19-21. which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy
Prophets. Then will be a superabundant pouring out of the Spirit, Joel 2.28.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all
flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall
dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. And God will graciously prevent
the Prayers of his Saints, Isa. 65.17, 24. It shall come to pass, that before
they call, I will answer; and whilst they are yet speaking, I will hear. All
the Sons and Daughters of God will then be of one Heart, and of one Mind, Jer.
32.39, 40. Then all sanctified Believers will come in the Unity of the Spirit
to a perfect Man, Ephesians. 4.13. And in that Day there shall be ONE LORD, and his
Name One in all the Earth, Zech. 14.9. and Zeph. 3.9. And They shall serve the
LORD with one consent. And then Honor, Dignity and Renown shall be given to
the Church of God, to Religion, to Religious persons, and to all holy things,
Zech. 9.16. The Church shall then be as the Stones of a Crown lifted up. Those
Living Stones, in that spiritual Building, will then be a Crown of Glory, and a
Royal Diadem in the hand of the LORD, Isa. 62.1, 2.3. and. 28.5.

2. In particular, 1. To the seed of Abraham; the Jews, They shall be called,
gathered, united into one Nation, and the Davidical Kingdom of Jesus Christ
shall be given to them, Micah 4.8. which they shall take and possess for ever
and ever, Dan. 7.14.18, 27, 28. They shall be all holy, Isa. 60. and so all
Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.26, 27. 2. To the Offspring of Japhet, the
Gentiles, whom God shall persuade to dwell in the Tents of Shem: Even all the
Nations of them that are saved, who shall then walk in the Light of the New
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.24. and shall also enjoy the spiritual Glory and Blessings
of the WORLD to come, whereof we speak.

A word of Counsel to Virgin Professors in this Generation;

1. Take heed you do not fall asleep whilst the Bridegroom tarryeth, (or rather
only seems to delay his coming) as they did, Matthew. 25.5, 6. They all slumbred
and slept, until a midnight Dispensation, a Cry did awaken them out of their
carnal security, when being at ease in Zion, they became formal, lukewarm, and
worldly, minding earthly things more than heavenly, and seeking their own
things more than the things of Christ.

2. Prepare your selves for that time of Tribulation, which shall come before
Christ come, Matthew. 24.21, 29, 30. It Is called an hour of Temptation, which
shall come upon all the World to try them that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. 3. It
will come upon the Jews, Dan. 12.1, 2, 3. and upon the Gentiles, Rev. 11.7. but
more especially upon the Inhabiters of the Earth, Rev. 8.13. and 12.12. and
Rev. 19.19, 20. viz. upon the Beast, and the false Prophet, and upon the Kings
of the Earth, and their Armies. Prepare for that midnight Dispensation of
Darkness, Distress and Temptation, which is coming upon Nations, Cities and
Churches to try them.

3. Consider what manner of persons you ought to be in all holy conversation
and godliness, that look and wait for the Glory of Christ, his Church and
Saints in the world to come, 2 Pet. 3.11, 13, 14.

Lastly, A word of Instruction to the King, the Nobles, the Judges, and all the
Magistrates in this Island, and in this City: The Kingly Prophet David gave the
Instruction I intend, Psalm. 2. wherein by the Spirit of Prophecy he foretold,

1. That the Kings of the Earth will set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsel together against the LORD, and against his Anointed, verse. 2, 3.

2. That God speaks to them in his wrath, and vexes them in his hot
displeasure, verse. 5.

3. That the LORD Jesus Christ will break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash
them in pieces like a Potters Vessel.

4. That God will set his King (namely King Jesus) opon his holy Hill of Zion,
verse. 6, 7.

5. That God will give the LORD Jesus Christ the Heathen for his Inheritance,
and the utmost part of the Earth for his Possession, and his Dominion shall be
from Sea to Sea, even unto the Ends of the Earth, verse. 8. And then the holy
Prophet exhorts those Kings and Judges, to be wise, and to be instructed, verse.
10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the
Earth; Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish. This phrase of kissing the
Son implies,

1. A Declaration or Testimony of Love and Peace between Christ and them, Cant.
1.2. Christ who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. is the
Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. and it concerns all Kings to be at Peace with Jesus
Christ. And the LORD Jesus Christ is the Judge of the quick and dead, and he
sits among the Judges (called Gods) of the Earth, and they also must stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ; therefore it concerns all Judges to kiss
the Son, that is, to make their Peace with Christ.

2. To kiss the Son implies, to worship Jesus Christ. And if God commanded the
holy Angels to worship him, Heb. 1.6. then Kings and Judges are not exempted
from worshipping Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.9, 11. Every knee shall bow to him, and
confess that he is LORD: Because God has exalted Christ above all, and given
him a name above every name, etc. Ephesians. 1.20, 21. and set him far above all
Principalities and Powers in this World, etc.

3. By kissing the Son is intended the submitting to his Dominion and
Government, Isa. 9.6, 7. God the Father has laid the Government of Saints upon
Christ; for he is King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. and the Government of Zion (his
Church) upon Christ; for he is King of Zion, Psalm. 149.1, 2. and the Government
of the Nations upon Christ; for he is King of Nations, Jer. 10.7, 10. By him
Kings Reign, and Princes decree Judgment: He puts down one, and sets up
another. Jesus Christ is King of Kings, and Judge of Judges; therefore be wise
O Kings, and be instructed ye Judges of the Land.

Now I will conclude with a word of Exhortation to the Magistrates and
Inhabitants of this City, Consider God has visited this City with the
Pestilence, and with a Fire, and yet the Inhabitants thereof have not returned
to the LORD. Now God threatens a Famine of Bread, if He shut up Heaven, that it
Rain not; and a Famine of the Word, if He suffer the Papists to prevail; O
Repent and Amend! Administer Justice and Righteousness; Plead the Cause of the
Widow and Fatherless; Relieve the Oppressed, and Acquit the Innocent. Let the
Grace of God that brings Salvation, teach you Citizens of London, to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present evil world, that in the world to come you may have Life
everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.

