A Medium betwixt two Extremes. Wherein it is proved that the whole First Adam
was condemned, and the whole Second Adam justified. Being a SERMON lately
preached on Romans 8.1. and now published to prevent the further Controversy (in
one main Point) about Justification. To which are added Reflections on some
Passages in Mr. Clark's new Book, called Scripture-Justification.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Romans 5.18. Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
Men to Justification of Life.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Bell, at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhill, School.

To the Reader.
MY preaching upon this Subject was occasioned by what I met with from a
gracious Person's mouth (who is a Member of the Church under my charge) who
seemed very uneasy in her Communion, because in my preaching she said, tho I
hold forth the Doctrine of free Grace, and exalt Christ, yet do positively
maintain that the Elect are under Wrath, or in a lamentable state before
calling, or before they are united to Christ by the Holy Spirit, or are in a
State of Union with him: which might I fear be occasioned through a mistake of
that Doctrine some in this City of late so much insist on, viz. Justification
and Union with Christ before the Spirit (the bond of that Union) is received;
not that any of our Brethren, I hope, that preach that Doctrine do believe that
the Elect are not under the Sentence of Condemnation and Wrath while they abide
in the first Adam: tho I fear they do not so carefully distinguish as they
ought between our Fundamental and Virtual Justification in Christ, as our Head
and Representative, and our actual or Personal Justification when we are united
to him. And finding ill use made of that Doctrine, I have been persuaded to
publish the first Sermon I preached upon this occasion, not knowing how far
this Notion might spread amongst weak and unwary hearers, and having some hope
this may be (through the Blessing of God) a prevention of it. One thing I
cannot but bewail, i.e. that because we may differ perhaps in some respect from
that Doctrine before mentioned, that we must therefore be charged with
Arminianism, which Error we abhor, and any other that tends to becloud or
darken the Doctrine of free Justification by Christ alone, without Works or
inherent Righteousness. None have reason to think that I favor in the least
the Arminian or Baxterian Errors, considering what I have lately published on
the great Doctrine of Justification, in two Sermons on Romans 4.5. which Doctrine
I have farther confirmed in those Sermons preached from the Text this is
grounded upon, viz. Romans 8.1. (this being only the first) in which the Nature
of our mystical Union with Christ is opened, and the sweet Consolation that
flows therefrom to all Believers largly applied.

Reader, just as this Sermon was going into the Press, I met with Mr. Samuel
Clark's new Book, entitled Scripture-Justification, and have made short
Remarks on some things he has said: In a time of common Invasion every Man
should take to his Arms; they need not wait for Orders, as one notes; for by
this Man's Doctrine all is struck at.

Some think the difference between us and others who are unjustly called
Antinomians, consists more in Words or Terms than otherwise; and I hope it is
so: however if I differ from them in any thing, I cannot help it; I have here
asserted what I in my Heart do believe, and I shall leave it to the Censure of
all my Brethren, and others, with my earnest Prayers that Love, Union,
Humility, and Charity may be more pressed after, which certainly is much wanting
among us; and remain thine to serve thee in the Gospel, according to that small
measure of Light and Ability received,

Horsly-down, in Freemans-lane, (...) Benja. Keach.

SERMON I.
ROMANS viii. 1. There is now therefore no Condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


IN this Epistle to the Romans, The Scope of the Epistle to the Romans.
the great Apostle of the Gentiles labors chiefly in the general to do two
things.

First, To establish the Saints to whom he wrote, in the Doctrine of
Justification by Christ alone.

Secondly, To excite or stir up all justified Persons to Sanctification or
Holiness of Life. And

That he might effectually do the first, he in the three first Chapters
discovers the dismal state of all, both Jews and Gentiles, as considered in the
First Adam, or the condition of every Soul by Nature, and the weakness and
insufficiency of the Law by reason of Man's Pravity to obtain Justification and
eternal Life thereby; Romans 8.3.
insomuch that the Jews were in no better state than the Gentiles, all being
gone out of the way, Romans 3.
and the whole World become guilty before God. But to revive their sinking
Hopes, he then displays the white Flag of Peace, through the Free Grace of God
in Jesus Christ, that tho the Law pronounces nothing but Wrath and Condemnation
to every Soul of Man, and also the remainders of Sin, or the Law in our
Members, does distress and sorely afflict Believers themselves; yet he shows us
that through Jesus Christ we have a blessed Victory over the Law of Sin and
Death, so that Sin cannot expose a true Believer to eternal Wrath, and that the
Law of God (which holds all Unbelievers down under Guilt) can no more oblige
Believers to eternal Condemnation, because Jesus Christ in our Nature has
answered all the Demands, and born the Penalty thereof. And from hence he
brings in the Words of our Text, as the profitable Use or Application of that
Doctrine he had so well proved.

There is now therefore no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

In my Text you have three Parts:

I. A Comfortable and Consolatory Proposition; Parts of the Text opened.
There is now no Condemnation, etc.

II. A Description of the state of the Persons to whom this Cordial of Comfort
belongs, viz. To them which are in Christ Jesus.

III. The Character of the Persons, or their Qualification or Property, as to
the frame of their Hearts, and the course of their Lives; viz. They walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Or you may consider the former part of the Text thus, viz.

I. The Subjects spoken of, Them which are in Christ Jesus.

II. The Predicate, or Privilege asserted, viz. There is now no Condemnation.

We will consider the Terms. The Terms explained.


There is no Condemnation; i.e. no Sentence of Divine Wrath, no eternal
Punishment.

1. God pronounces them justified and acquitted, and so for ever free from
Condemnation.

2. The Justice of God acquits them, and has nothing to lay to their charge,
they being in Christ Jesus.

3. The Condemnation of the Law cannot reach them, it cannot hurt them, because
they are delivered from the Curse thereof.

None else have any Power, Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? i.e. such of them that
are called, and are united to Jesus Christ; for before that both Law and
Justice could charge them.

It is God that justifies; who is he that shall condemn? It is Christ that
died. Who can arrest, impeach, accuse, find guilty, and condemn such?

Object. Perhaps some may say, (1.) The Devil may both accuse them and condemn
them.

(2.) Wicked Men may traduce and condemn them.

(3.) And through Satan's Temptations, such that are in Christ Jesus may accuse
and condemn themselves.

Answ. What of this? For although Satan, wicked Men, and their own Hearts may lay
many things to their Charge, and so pass a false Judgment upon them; yet since
God justifies them, neither Law nor Justice can condemn them, and none else can
do it: let all the Devils of Hell condemn them, and all wicked Men on Earth,
nay tho many good Men should ignorantly accuse and condemn them (as Job's three
Friends dealt by him) yet they stand justified Persons before God.

The Apostle does not say, there is no Sin in them which are in Christ Jesus,
nor any thing worthy or deserving Condemnation: Nor does he say, there is no
Affliction, no Correction, no fatherly Chastisements to them which are in
Christ; but there is no Condemnation. It Is one thing to be chastned, and
another to be condemned: tho all Legal Guilt is for ever gone, yet many
Infirmities may attend such as are in Christ Jesus; and tho God punishes them
not as an angry Judge, yet he may correct them as an offended Father: When we
are judged we are chastned of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32
that we should not be condemned with the World. Tho God is not so severe and
unjust to condemn them, yet he is so wise, so holy, and so faithful as to
correct them.

[ Now] This [ Now] refers (as some think) to what precedes, others take it as
an Adverb of Time, i.e. in time past it was otherwise; once they who are now in
Christ Jesus were in the first Adam, dead and condemned Adam; and were under
the Law, Ephesians. 2.3.
and Children of Wrath by nature, as others; and so under the Sentence of
Condemnation. But now being transplanted into Jesus Christ, or into the Second
Adam, they are actually freed, and for ever acquitted and delivered from
Condemnation, (as were all those also under the Law, when they were in Christ)
which walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. These are the happy
Persons, and this is their Character that are in Christ Jesus. Let me note here
three things,

1. Here is an account of their special Vocation; They are in Christ Jesus.

2. Here is implied their Justification; There is now no Condemnation.

3. Here is comprehended also their Sanctification; who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Negatively, They walk not after the Flesh, they are not unsanctified or unholy
Persons, they lead not ungodly Lives; they are not under the Power and Dominion
of Sin, Romans 6.14.
nor carried away whither ever carnal Affections would lead them.

Affirmatively, But after the Spirit; they are influenced by the Holy Spirit,
they follow the Dictates of the Spirit; tho there is Flesh in them, much
Corruption in them, yet they walk not after the Flesh, they resist Sin, mortify
Sin, or have crucified Sin, Romans 13. ult.
with the Affections and Lusts; they walk in a holy course of Life, and not as
they did in times past: they live according to the rule of the new Creature.

Note here by the way, that negative Holiness is not enough; we must not only
forsake Sin, but follow after Holiness, and bring forth the Fruits of
Righteousness; not only cease from doing evil, but learn to do well.

Therefore, Wherefore? look back to the precedent Chapters, particularly to
Chap. 7.25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ: tho I have a Body of Sin in me
that makes me cry out, and tho it be thus also with all Believers, yet Christ
has delivered me and them from the Guilt, the Power and Slavery thereof; There
is now therefore no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not, etc.

And as this therefore may look backward to what precedes, so it may look
forward to what succeeds, ver. 3. But first take notice of the 2d verse, For
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has delivered me from the Law of
Sin and Death.

Brethren, The 2d and 3d Verses of Romans 8. explained.
The Law of Sin and the Law of God are opposites; now the remainders of Sin, or
indwelling Sin, the Apostle calls, in chap. 7. the Law of Sin and Death, or the
Law in the Members, etc. By the Law of Sin therefore is doubtless meant the
Power and Rule of Sin: God's Law is no where called the Law of Sin; no, Romans
7.12.
God forbid, The Law is holy, just and good.

By the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, I understand the Root of all Grace
in the Person of Christ, which is made over to Believers by the Spirit in their
mystical Union; in which Sense Christ is not only made to us Wisdom and
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
but Sanctification (also) and Redemption. Brethren, of that fullness of Grace,
or of the Spirit which is in Christ, we do not only all receive, and Grace for
Grace, Joh. 1.16.
but the Grace and Spirit in him is ours, as he is our Root or Head. It Is
worthy to be noted that the Apostle brings in what he speaks in ver. 2, and 3.
to confirm what he speaks in ver. 1. Yet I conclude what he speaks, ver. 2. For
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, etc. refers to what he speaks in
the close of the 1st verse, Who walk not after the Flesh, etc. And that in the
3d verse, refers to the former part of the 1st verse, For what the Law could
not do, etc. The Law could not justify us, acquit us, discharge us from
Condemnation; but contrariwise, through our inability to keep it, that condemns
us: and so he illustrates and confirms his Consolatory Proposition of our free
Discharge, and Justification by Jesus Christ, in ver. 1. by that in ver. 3. In
the 2d verse, the Spirit is set forth two ways.

1. By the Subject, in whom it is radically; i.e. in Christ Jesus.

2. By the Property; i.e. it is the Spirit of Life, which in our Union flows to
us, as Sap from the Root; that so all the Branches in the True Olive might be
made alive, and bring forth Fruit to God, or lead holy Lives. So much as to the
Parts, Scope, and Explanation of the Terms of our Text.

From hence I shall observe this one Proposition, viz.

Doct. That all those that are in Christ Jesus, or have obtained actual Union
with him, are justified Persons, and for ever delivered from Condemnation.

In speaking to this Doctrine, I shall,

The Method proposed.
I. By way of premise, lay down four Propositions.

II. Show you what it is to be in Christ, or open the Nature of the Soul's
Union with the Lord Jesus.

III. Show you why such who are in Jesus Christ shall not, cannot come into a
state of Condemnation.

IV. Show you what kind of Persons they are which are in Christ Jesus.

V. Apply it.

I. The first Proposition is this, 1st Proposition by way of premise.
viz. That all Mankind, even the Elect as well as others, are under
Condemnation, before their actual Union with Jesus Christ.

1. This I shall prove.

2. Apply.

First, The Elect fell in the first Adam, and were brought under Condemnation.
Because the Elect as (...) as others, fell in the first Adam; and by virtue of
the fall they were brought under Condemnation; Therefore as by the Offense of
one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation; even so etc. not one Soul of
all his Posterity escaped; the Sentence, Judgment, and Condemnation past not
upon Adam for his first Sin as a single Person, but as he was a common Head, a
public Person, or the Representative of all Mankind that proceed from his
loins: that Sentence that past upon Adam unto Condemnation, as he was a public
Person, passed upon all Men in him, even the Elect as well as others; but the
Sentence passed upon Adam unto Condemnation as he was a public Person;
therefore that Sentence passed upon all Men in him, even upon the Elect as well
as others.

Secondly, All Men, All Men by Nature under Guilt of Original Sin.
even the Elect as well as others, before Faith, or their actual Union with
Jesus Christ, are under Sin and horrid Guilt: they are all gone out of the way,
they are together become unprofitable, there is none that does good, Romans 3.12.
no not one. Mind what the Apostle affirms, ver. 9. For we have before proved
both Jews and Gentiles that they are all under Sin; that is, under the Power,
Guilt and Condemnation of Sin. I am, my Brethren, but a doing of that which
Paul labored to do.

But further to prove and demonstrate that this is so.

1st. Evident it is, that all are born in Sin, all come into the World with the
stain and guilt of Original Sin upon them; Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me.
Moreover, how does Paul aggravate this Sin, and bewail himself for it? this is
beloved, the Fountain and Root of all Sin; our corrupt Nature proceeds from
Original Sin, the first transgression: Job 25.4.
Can Man be clean that is born of a Woman? Adam begat a Son in his own
likeness, i.e. a sinful Creature like guilty, and unclean as himself; not in
God's likeness, having his Image, resembling him, no, but contrariwise, was
more like unto Satan, and resembling him than God.

There are three things in this Sin, as it is noted by a worthy Writer.

1. A particular Act which he did, Caryl on ob, chap. 25. p. 706.
namely the breaking the Law of the first Covenant.

2. The legal Guilt that flowed from that Act both upon his own Person, and
upon all his Posterity by Imputation.

3. That Natural pravity and corruption of our whole Nature in Soul and Body;
the whole Man being defiled. And from hence comes Wrath and Condemnation upon
all Men.

Now, Brethren, let me here add one thing to your consideration, viz. tho Adam
fell by this Sin in his own Person under Condemnation (as well as we in him)
yet afterward when he believed and received by Faith the free promise of God,
in the Seed of the Woman, he came into a Justified State: Adam no doubt was an
Elect Person, the promise of Christ being directly made to him ( who was also a
Figure of him that was to come. Romans 5.14.
) But now it would follow that if the Elect were never under the Sentence of
Wrath and Condemnation, then Adam notwithstanding what I have said, was not;
and if Adam was not in his own Person under it for his first Sin, then none of
his Seed or Posterity were. But how absurd and contrary such a Notion is to
Truth, I leave to all Men's Consideration.

All Men naturally under the Guilt of actual Sins.
2ly. As all Men are under Sin and Guilt by Original Transgression, so they are
also by their own actual Sins: the Wages of Sin is Death, yea, eternal Death;
for there is no difference, for all have sinned and come short of the Glory of
God. Romans 6.23.
Originally there is no difference in respect of Sin and Guilt, nor actually
neither between Jews and Gentiles, the Elect and Reprobates, in respect of
their State before Grace.

3ly. This also further appears, All Men by nature Children of Wrath.
because the Elect before they are in Christ are by Nature the Children of
Wrath as well as others. Our sinful Nature is the proper object of God's Wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3.
every one having a natural aversness to God in them, yea an antipathy to him,
and enmity in their Carnal Minds against him: Romans 8.7. Psalm. 7.11.
and hence also* it is said, that God hates and is angry with all the Workers
of Iniquity. Psalm. 5.5.


Thirdly, All Men before Grace and Union with Jesus Christ are in a State of
Condemnation, because they are all under the Covenant of Works; and if all
Unbelievers are under the Covenant of Works, then they are under Guilt and
Wrath. Now we know that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them who are
under Law, Romans 3.19.
that every mouth might be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before
God; that is, obnoxious to God's just Judgment and Condemnation. Christ is the
end of the Law to every one that believes: Not to any other, Romans 10.4.
not to any one that believes not. If Believers only are in the new Covenant
or Covenant of Grace, then all that are in a state of Unbelief are in the
Covenant of Works, and so under the Curse and Condemnation of the Law: For all
must be in one or the other Covenant, and in the first or second Adam.

Brethren, the Sentence of the Law lies upon the Elect before they are in
Christ; tho Christ has received their Discharge for them, yet in their own
Persons they are not acquitted. Sirs, Christ came only to redeem them that were
under the Law, and the Curse thereof: And now if the Elect were not under the
Law, and the Curse, who were they that he came to redeem? it appears they were
not the Elect (by this strange Notion) nor indeed if it be, as some hint, the
Elect had no need of Redemption; for if not under Guilt, Wrath, and
Condemnation, what Redemption did they need? Gal. 4.4.
But when the fullness of time came, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman,
Verse. 5.
made under the Law, Heb. 9.15.
to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons.

The Elect were once under the Curse of the Law.
Fourthly, That the Elect as well as others, before Union, etc. are under the
Curse of the Law, and Condemnation, appears, because Christ bore the Curse of
the Law, and was condemned for them, or in their stead; if they were not under
the Curse of the Law, Why did God lay Jesus Christ our Surety under the Curse
thereof? Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law; being made a Curse for us.
How redeemed from that which we were never under! Now there is a twofold Curse
of the Law.

1. An Original Curse in Adam; this past upon him (as I have proved) and upon
all Men in him.

2. An actual Curse, or a Curse for all actual Sin which remains upon all
whilst they abide under the Law: Gal. 2.10.
for as many as are for the Works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the Book of the Law to do them. Thus by our actual Sins we were brought also
under this Curse, is evident.

Obj. But does not Paul say, Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law?

Ans. 1. It appears such whom he has redeemed, etc. were once under it; and if
they were delivered before they believed, it is necessary that such who assert
that, should assign the time when they were delivered. Paul tells the Saints
when they were delivered from Sin, Guilt, and the Curse; Romans 6.17.
being then made free from Sin: Then, when? why, when they believed, and
received Christ and his holy Doctrine, and obeyed it from the Heart.

2. It is evident that Paul speaks it of Believers, even of such as had
received the Spirit of Adoption; and so could call God Father.

3. The Price may be paid for the Redemption of Captives, and yet they may not
presently be delivered, but may remain in Bondage, in Slavery, and lie in
Chains: A Surety may satisfy the Law for a Criminal, or for a Debtor, yea pay
the utmost Farthing; but he may notwithstanding lie under the Sentence of
Death, or remain in Prison for a time, and not have his personal Discharge.

The Sacrifice may be offered up, and an Atonement may be made, but the Blood
may not be sprinkled; the slaying the Sacrifice is one thing, and the
sprinkling the Blood is another. Heb. 9.19, 20, 21.
So the Atonement made for us by Jesus Christ, which is the Price and
meritorious Cause of our Redemption and Justification, is one thing, and our
receiving the Atonement or the application of his Blood to our personal and
actual discharge from Sin, Guilt and Condemnation, is another thing: For if
when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; Romans
5.10.
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. We grant God was
not only made reconcilable by the death of his Son, but by his Death God was
fully reconciled; that is he received a full Satisfaction by that one Offering:
Heb. 10.14.
Faith adds nothing to the Merits of Christ's Blood, or meritorious Sacrifice,
but it is by his Life, by his Intercession, that it is made effectual or
efficacious unto us, who pleads with God for the Spirit, which he purchased
also for his Elect, that so the saving Benefits and Blessings might be applied
to them: And therefore the Apostle adds in the next verse, Verse. 11.
And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have now received the Atonement. God has, as if Paul should have said,
through Christ's Intercession given us a free and personal Discharge purchased
for us; he has given us Faith to receive the Atonement. The particle Now has
its Emphasis, denoting the Privilege of all such as believe; and hence it is
that we glory in Tribulation: we are now actually acquitted and for ever
delivered from Condemnation. Sirs, since the strict time of the laying down the
Price of our Redemption was not the time when many of the Elect were actually
acquitted and justified, why should it be asserted to be the time when any of
them were? For those Believers that lived and died from Adam till Christ came,
were justified, and went to Heaven before the Sacrifice was offered, and the
Atonement actually made: the Father trusted the Son according to that holy
Compact that was between them, Christ covenanting and engaging that he would
die for them. And now as Adam received the Atonement when he believed, and not
till then; so we when we are in Christ, believe, do receive the Atonement also,
and not before: for at the same time, and upon the same terms, they under the
Law received it, we under the Gospel Dispensation do receive it: by Time I mean
when they had, and we have actual Union with Christ, and believe, or do receive
the Spirit, the Bonds of this Union.

Brethren, tho all in the first Adam were fundamentally and representatively
condemned in him, his Sin being imputed so to all his Offspring; yet none are
actually condemned until they actually exist and partake of his corrupt Nature:
So in the second Adam all the Elect were fundamentally and representatively
justified in him, his Righteousness being imputed so to all his Spiritual Seed,
or Offspring; yet none of them are actually and personally justified until
they are united to him, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and partake of his Divine Nature,

Fifthly, All Men, the Elect as well as others, Sinners that believe not,
condemned already.
are under Condemnation before Grrce, or actual Union with Christ, because it
is positively said, that he that believes not, is condemned; and the Wrath of
God abides upon him. The Law condemns him, let him be who he will, Joh. 3.18.
and 36.
even every Soul that believes not savingly in Jesus Christ; and it remains
upon him because he believes not, or because he continues in the first Adam, in
condemned Adam, and is not transplanted into the second Adam, Jesus Christ:
Nay, and his Unbelief binds all his Sins, and the Sentence upon him; not
believing is not the first Disease, but it is the refusing the Remedy. Those
stung with fiery Serpents were mortally wounded, that was their Disease; and if
any would not, did not look up to the Brazen Serpent, that was the reason they
died, in respect of their refusing the Remedy; but their being stung was that
which killed them. So it is Sin that is the breach of the Law of God, which is
the Disease, and the Cause why Sinners perish; all are condemned already, and
their refusing of Christ offered in the Gospel for their Cure, aggravates their
Sin and Condemnation: and it leaves such that finally persist in Unbelief,
incurable for ever.

Sixthly, All before they are in Christ are under Condemnation, because the
Holy Ghost frequently ascribes our actual or personal Justification to Faith;
and cannot we read those Scriptures without offense? or do any think they
understand this Point better than Paul, or the other Apostles? Romans 5.1.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, Romans 3.28.
etc. Therefore we conclude that a Man is justified by Faith, Gal. 2.16.
etc. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
Faith of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the Faith of Christ, etc. And again he says, That we might be
justified by Faith. Gal. 3.24.
In him all that believe are justified from all things, Act. 13.35. Joh. 3.36.
etc. He that believes has the Son, and he that believes not has not the
Son, but the Wrath of God abides on him.

Brethren, Where is it said in the Scripture that any Person was justified that
believed not, or whilst an Unbeliever, or before he believed? And is it not
good, nay best, to keep to the form of sound Words? For tho it is said that God
justifies the Ungodly, Romans 4.5.
yet they are not ungodly when justified: true, that excludes all previous
Qualifications to Faith; but not that God justifies an Unbeliever that is in
his Sins in the first Adam,

Obj. Is it not Christ and his Righteousness that which justifies us, or is the
matter of our Justification? Will ye make Faith to be a Cause, or the condition
of our Justification before God?

Answ. No, by no means; Faith no procuring cause or condition of Justification.
tho I know some Learned Men, and sound in the Faith, seem to hint as if Faith
was a condition of our Justification. But how that which God himself gives to
us by his free and absolute Promises, can be a condition of the Covenant, or of
our Justification, I see not: that which is part of the Covenant on God's part,
cannot be the Condition of it on our part. Also they call Faith the instrumental
cause of Justification, which we must leave them to explain (they mean, I
think, but as the Hand that applies a Plaster is a cause of the Cure.) We must
say with a late learned Author, Faith is no qualifying Condition, nor any
procuring Cause of our Justification; tho without Faith God declares no Man a
justified Person.

2. Faith does not cause or render the Satisfaction of Christ any ways the more
satisfactory unto God; for God was as much satisfied in Christ for his Elect
before Faith as after, tho the Satisfaction, Merits and Righteousness of
Christ, are not applied so as the Man is pronounced a justified Person until he
is united to Christ by the Spirit, and so is helped to believe on him; Faith
being the Hand that receives, or that apprehends Jesus Christ.

Brethren, The Holy Spirit in our Union with Christ, puts upon us the Robe of
Righteousness, which was not upon us before we obtained that Spiritual Union;
it is offered unto all, Romans 3.22.
but it is upon all them that believe.

All our Orthodox Divines agree with us, that Faith, neither as a Habit, or
Grace, or as an Act, much less in respect of the Fruits thereof, justifies us:
when therefore it is said we are justified by Faith, it intends not any Moral or
Physical Causality in Faith as a Qualification, but only by virtue of the
Object it apprehends. Mr. Bradford that Holy Martyr says, Fox, p. 1659.
Not the Action it self of believing, as it is a quality in Man, does so
deserve, but because it takes that Dignity and Virtue from the Object Jesus
Christ*

We do not mean, The later Helvetian Confession.
that Faith by it self, and of it self does justify us, which is only as an
Instrument whereby we apprehend Christ who is our Justice. Zanchy on Phil. 3.
Faith was accounted to Abraham for Righteousness, not the action by which, but
that which he did believe; or Faith not in respect of it self apprehending, but
in respect of the Object apprehended. Faith justifies a Sinner in the sight of
God, not because of those other Graces that do always accompany it, or of good
Works, Assemblies large Catechism.
which are the Fruits thereof, nor as if the Grace of Faith, or any act thereof
were imputed to him for Justification; but only as an Instrument by which he
receives and applies Christ and his Righteousness. For any to say otherwise,
is to render Faith to be part of our Reconciliation or Satisfaction to God,
which is to lessen the Merits of Christ, and take the Crown from his Head, and
make Justification not to be by Grace alone, or by Christ alone. Faith we know
is the Creatures act, tho given of God, or a Grace bestowed upon us, by which
we are helped so to do; yet with the Heart Man bel^eveth, etc.

The Doctrine of some Men about Faith justifying the Sinner, tends to bring in
a new Covenant of Works, i.e. a mild Law of Faith, and sincere Obedience in the
stead of the severe Law of perfect Obedience, and plainly renders the
Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ defective or insufficient; as if Faith
was part of our justifying Righteousness, or as if we were not fully reconciled
to God by the death of his Son, but that he was only reconcilable; and that it
is Faith and sincere Obedience indeed, which compleats that Reconciliation.

Brethren, Faith, I say again, is said to justify us only in respect of the
Object Jesus Christ, whom it apprehended; and it is no part of the matter which
does justify us (the Righteousness of Christ being alone the material cause of
our Justification) nor does Faith add any thing to Christ's Satisfaction, or to
his Righteousness which alone is imputed to us to our Justification before God.
Tho we say that Righteousness is not imputed to the actual and personal
Justification of any Man till he has actual Union with Christ; yet I deny that
Faith in order of Nature is before Union (or at least before the reception of
the Spirit in order to Union) tho not as to time; for Christ takes hold of us
before we can take hold of him; also Faith is a Fruit of the Spirit; and sure
the Seed must be sown before there can be Fruit. We are passive in
Regeneration, but not in the act of Faith. But when a poor Sinner receives the
Spirit, then it is that he in his own Person is declared and pronounced
righteous; he being in Christ is pardoned, and actually acquitted and
discharged from that Legal Guilt, or from that Obligation he lay under to
Condemnation in the first Adam, the Sentence being then taken off, and he
loosed from those Fetters and Chains by which he was before bound; and this
therefore is more no doubt than simply justified in his own Conscience.

For tho Christ as our Surety when he rose from the dead, received a full
discharge for us; yet until we are united by the Spirit unto him, by which
Faith is wrought in our Souls, and our Eyes are enlightened, we have not this
great Blessing made over to us. Mind that Passage of the Apostle again, Romans
5.11.
By whom now we have received the Atonement.

Now the Case is altered, now we are in Christ Jesus. Brethren, we have not the
Portion until we have the Person; now the Law's Sentence and Condemnation can
no more reach us; now that Husband is dead, that cruel Husband, and we are
married unto another; now we are actually acquitted; or not till now personally
justified.

Some add justified Foro Dei, Before God or in his sight all things were from
Eternity.
or in God's sight: but so expressing it, I fear has clouded the matter,
because known to God, before him, or in his sight were all his Works from
everlasting. Justified before God may be taken two ways. (1.) In distinction
from that before Men, or in a Man's own Conscience: if they mean that, I grant
it. (2.) In respect had to that sight he has of things; who calls things, and
sees things that are not, as if they were. As Abraham is called the Father of
many Nations, when he was not then the Father of one Isaac. God saw us in the
first Adam condemned, and in the second Adam justified, at one and the same
time, even from Eternity: but will it follow from thence that we were both
actually condemned and actually justified from Eternity? yet as our Annotators
note concerning Abraham, he was the Father of many Nations in God's sight, or
before him; who, as Paul adds, quickneth the dead, and that calls things that
are not as if they were. Romans 4.17.
Will any say, as to matter of Fact, that thing is, when God's Word says it is
not? now they affirm this, because it was so to God, or before him; who beholds
things long before they are, or do exist, or have a being.

So then, my Brethren, the Controversy (if there be any) lies not in the case
of Justification, in respect had to what a sight God has of it, or how matters
are before his eyes, before whom or in whose sight all things were done from
Eternity, which were not actually done until things, and persons, in time did,
or do actually exist. An Elect Sinner not pronounced justified before he is in
Christ.
But it lies in this, viz. when, or at what time a Sinner is pronounced a
righteous Person, being actually pardoned, acquitted, and discharged from
Condemnation, or personally justified as to matter of Fact.

3. Brethren, that Righteousness by which we are justified is called a Gift. Do
we receive the Righteousness of Christ, before we received Christ himself?
Moreover, certainly no Man receives Christ till he receives the Spirit of
Christ. Now the Apostle declares expressly, that when we receive Grace (at
leastwise in the Seed) then also we receive the Gift of Righteousness; They
that receive abundance of Grace, and the Gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17.
etc.

When we receive Christ we receive his Righteousness, and not till then.
From the whole it is evident, that until we do receive Christ, and have Union
with him, we receive not his Righteousness, or are not personally justified,
but are under the Condemnation of the Law.

Seventhly, Justification makes a relative Change.
Moreover, this further will appear, because Justification of our Persons makes
a relative Change (tho not a real Change) a relative Change is a Change of the
State of the Person, viz.

He that was dead, dead in Law, is brought into a State of Life; there is, my
Brethren, the Life of Justification, and the Life of Sanctification; I mean the
former, viz. the Life of Justification: This thy Brother was dead, Luke 15.32
and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

He that was a child of Wrath is now become a Child of God: Such who were not
God's People, are now his People. He that was condemned, is now actually
justified. But if we were delivered from Condemnation before we were in Christ
Jesus, and so personally justified, this Act of Justification makes no such
relative change; for then it will follow that the Elect were never dead in Law,
but alive, and in a good State when Unbelievers, and gross Sinners, Swearers,
Drunkards, Whoremongers, Thieves, and what not; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
for such were some of you: And not the Children of Wrath before, but the
Children of God; and not condemned, but justified; not under the Law, but under
Grace.

Or else this Absurdity will follow, viz. that a Man may be dead and alive, a
Child of Wrath and yet a Child of God; be actually condemned, and yet be
actually justified, at one and the same time.

Obj. The Elect we say are not justified in their own Consciences, or have not
the evidence of it until they believe. They were acquitted and justified
before, but they did not know it.

Ans. This will not help, nor alter the case in the least; the purport of this
is, i.e. my state was good, but I did not know it; I was alive, a Child of God
and Justified, but did not know it, or had not the feeling or sensible comfort
and evidence of it in my own Soul; I had a personal Right and Title to the
eternal Inheritance, but the Deeds and Evidence were not in my own sight.

Brethren, it is one thing to have a thing in my own actual Possession, and
another thing to know I have it. I am not a speaking of what a sight God might
have of Men, or how he sees, or how things are before him; before whom, or in
whose sight the World was from eternity; but of things that actually be, or do
actually exist, and take hold of Persons, etc. the Decree and Purpose of God
without the execution of it, brings nothing actually to be or to exist: tho his
Decree does render the thing certain to be in time. I deny not that
fundamental, and representative Justification of the Elect in Christ their
Head, or as a common Person, which is before Faith, which lies in Christ making
full Satisfaction for all their Sins, and meriting Faith for them.

There was a federal Union of the Elect with Christ.
I also grant a federal Union of the Elect with Christ, as our Surety and
blessed Sponsor, from Eternity, who also then received a grant of a discharge
for them from Condemnation, upon his holy Compact and Covenant with the Father,
on the account of what he was to do and suffer, which made Justification and
Salvation sure for them all, see 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. I say, it was sure for
them,

1. By God's eternal and unchangable Decree and Purpose.

2. By virtue of that Covenant made between the Father and the Son, in behalf
of the Elect, from eternity.

3. And also by the Death and Resurrection of Christ, for Christ was actually
justified when he rose from the dead. The Elect virtually justified when Christ
rose from the dead.


Now we grant that he was not justified as a single, but as a public Person,
viz. as the Head and Representative of all the Elect. See what a Reverend
Author says: For this was a legal acquittance given to Christ for all our Sins,
and so to us also considered as in him, Dr. Tho. Goodwin, Christ set forth, p.
76.
his Death was but the Satisfaction and Payment; but this is the first Act of
absolution, yea and it is the Original Act which is upon record between God and
Christ; and our Justification and Atonement (when we are justified by Faith in
Christ) is but a copy fetched from this Roll and Court-Sentence then pronounced.

But notwithstanding this, I say, tho Christ was thus justified, and we
virtually in him, when he arose from the Dead, and he received for us an actual
discharge as our Surety, yet the Elect do not receive an actual discharge, or
are not in their own Persons acquitted or pronounced justified and righteous
Persons, until they have actual Union with Christ: and such as call this a
contradiction, do but betray their own Ignorance. Take the said Doctor again in
what he farther says, viz. says he, Page 77.
Lest there be a mistake, let me add this, that it is necessary that we be
justified in our own Persons, by Faith (notwithstanding this former Act thus
legally passed) whereby we lay hold upon what God did thus before for us in
Christ, to the end that God upon our believing, may, according to his own
Rules, justify his justifying of us unto all the World; which until we do
believe he could not do: for according to the revealed Rules of his Word (which
he professes to proceed by at the latter day) there is a Curse and Sentence of
Condemnation pronounced against us, under which we stand till he shall take it
off by giving us Faith, unto which he has in the same word made the promise of
justifying us in our own Persons as before he had done in Christ. Yet still
notwithstanding, so as although when we first believe, then only Justification is
actually and personally applied to us, etc. Thus the Doctor, which I agree with.

Eighthly, Ministers preach to Sinners as under Wrath and Condemnation.
All Men are in a State of Condemnation before they are in Christ, or have
actual Union with him, does appear, because Ministers in preaching the Gospel
are commanded, and do preach it to lost, undone, and miserable Sinners, or to
such as are in a deplorable State, even under Wrath and Condemnation; and do
declare this to be the State of all out of Christ, without exception.

Not to offer Christ to justified Persons, to such that are d^liver'd from
Condemnation, and so in a good State, but to such who are in a lost state,
condemned to eternal Misery, and under the Curse of the Law (which is God's
Curse) and Children of Wrath.

I am told lately, that some there are who affirm the Elect did not fall in
Adam; but this I cannot tell how to believe, why then did Christ die? Brethren,
must Christ be offered to righteous Persons, to justified Persons, or to
Sinners condemned? or do any of us preach that which we believe not? do any
preach thus, or have they any Authority so to do? viz. Sinners, if you are
elected, you are in a good State, and are actually justified whether you
believe or not, only you do not know it, or have not the evidence of it in your
own Consciences. Or do we not all preach to all out of Christ as unto ungodly
ones, to such that are under Wrath and Condemnation in their own Persons, and
so remain until they believe or have Union with Christ. Our Lord came not to
call the Righteous, as such, neither selfrighteous ones, nor such who in a
Gospel-Sense are righteous Persons, but Sinners to Repentance; to such that
were really lost in the first Adam, and under the Bondage of Sin, and the Law.
True, the Jews said indeed, that they were free, and never were in Bondage,
etc. How say thou, Joh. 8.33,
ye shall be made free? -- but what says our Blessed Lord, he that commits
Sin, 35,
is the Servant of Sin -- If the Son therefore shall make you free, 36.
then are you free indeed. And does Christ make any free until they are united
to him, and so believe in him?

But to put the matter to an issue, I find we are all agreed in this Point who
preach free Grace. See his Book, Christ alone exalted, p. 235.


Dr. Crisp (who I think is abused both by his Friends and Enemies) says, All by
Nature are under the Curse of the Law. Cursed, cursed, cursed, says he, every
Moment, every Hour. But how actual Condemnation can consist with actual
Justification I see not; or how a Man can be under the curse of the Law, and
yet be blessed with the chiefest Gospel-blessing, is strange to me.

Ninthly, The Holy Spirit in Convictions represents to Sinners their state is
bad.
and Lastly, All are under Condemnation, etc. before they are in Christ Jesus,
appears, because the Holy Spirit by its Convictions represents this to be the
state of every elect Soul by nature, namely Children of Wrath, even in a
condemned state; and not only so in their own Consciences, but even as others.
Ephesians. 2.3.
And hence, a Minister when he meets with a Person under Convictions, on whom
God has begun a good work, asks him, what do you judge your State is by
Nature? O Sir, says he, a woeful state and condition, as in the first Adam, and
without Christ, under God's fearful Wrath, being condemned to Eternal Misery,
having originally and actually broken the Law of God, which lays every Man
obnoxious to everlasting Burning. Now sure the Divine Spirit in Convictions,
would never hold forth or represent this to be the state of the Soul before it
is in Jesus Christ, if it was not really so; because he is a faithful and true
Witness, and because he is God, and cannot lie. So much shall suffice to prove
this premised Proposition.

Application.
Caution 1. Shall be a Use of Caution to such, to take heed how they seek to
render the state of the Elect to be good before Grace and actual Union with
Jesus Christ.

1. Because the holy Word of God declares their State to be very bad; Romans 3.22.
and as to the present State of their Persons whilst Unbelievers, there is no
difference.

2. Because such a Notion cannot tend to the Glory of God, nor the profit of
any Person, either before or after they do believe. I challenge any to show
what Glory it can bring to God, or benefit it can be to any Sinner, to hear he
is justified or discharged from Wrath and Condemnation before he is in Christ;
or that it can be of profit to him when he does believe, to be told that his
State was good before he did believe in Christ Jesus, tho he knew it not.

3. But contrariwise it may tend to encourage Unbelievers to conclude that
their State is good, tho Swearers, Drunkards, and what not, and so harden them
in their Sins, and to disbelieve or cast contempt upon what some faithful
Ministers daily declare to the contrary.

4. It also clearly tends to lessen or extenuate the rich Grace of God, in
giving his Spirit to regenerate the Soul, and to work Faith in us, if the
relative and real change were not at one and the same time, which the Scripture
does affirm it is; But you are sanctified, but ye are justified, 1 Cor. 6.11.
etc. Also then Grace received, could not be any sign of our being passed from
a state of Death unto a state of Life, which the Apostle asserts it is, By this
we know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren; 1 John 3.14.
he that loves not his Brother abides in Death. The Apostle no doubt intends
a state of Death.

2ly. It puts also a just rebuke upon such as cause trouble or divisions
amongst Christians on such a Notion. Brethren, were it a Truth that the Elect
were actually delivered from Condemnation, and were personally justified before
they are in Jesus Christ, yet certainly it cannot be judged to be an Essential
of Salvation nor of Church Communion: Are all such Persons not to be
communicated with that cannot believe the Elect are acquitted or delivered from
Condemnation, or personally justified before they are in Christ Jesus?

Secondly, This I hope may tend to clear up the matter, and show the present
difference is but little, and rises rather from mistaking of words than
otherwise: for according to what I have said and proved it appears,

1. That God sees things, even all his works from everlasting; and calls things
that are not as if they were. Things before God or in his sight, is one thing;
and things as to us, or as actually existing, is another thing. That God sees
the Elect justified and glorified too from Eternity, is evident, who are not
actually and personally justified, nor indeed can be said so to be, until they
personally exist and are in Jesus Christ.

2. That to be federally, fundamentally and representatively justified in
Christ is one thing, and to be actually and personally justified is another
thing; or Christ's receiving our Discharge and Justification (as our Head and
Surety) for us, is one thing; and the application thereof, or his giving of it
out unto us, pronouncing us just and righteous before God, in our own
Consciences, and before all the World, is another thing.

Thirdly, We infer from hence that God magnifies his rich Grace exceedingly to
us who believe, or that the work of Grace is a glorious work upon the Soul, and
that Union with Christ is to be esteemed as one of the richest manifestations
of his electing Love.

Fourthly, That all Men out of Christ may see cause from hence to tremble,
considering what a woeful State they are in, and so strive to fly to Christ with
speed.

Fifthly, That such who are in Christ have cause to admire God's Free Grace,
and may from hence also take in a most precious and rich Cordial of the highest
comfort and consolation; for therefore, Now there is no Condemnation to them
who are in Christ Jesus. But no more at this time.

A POSTSCRIPT, containing a few Reflections upon some Passages in Mr. Clark's
new Book, entitled Scripture-Justification.
NEver more need for all that are Orthodox (I mean who are established in the
Doctrine of Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ, or by
his active and passive Obedience alone, according to the Scripture, and as
maintained by most of the Ancient Fathers, and all our worthy modern Protestant
Divines) to cement together in Love and Union, and to pass by small matters of
Difference, considering what a grand design is carrying on by the great Enemies
of the true Christian Religion, for Satan never appeared in his Instruments
more bold and barefaced against this grand Fundamental of Christianity, viz.
that of Justification, since blessed Luther's days, who as an Instrument (with
others) gave him such a Wound, than at this present time.

Reader, we had need bestir our selves, and rouse up with holy Zeal for God;
for all, even the Foundation, Called Scripture-Justification.
is struck at. -- Just as this precedent Sermon was going to the Press, a Book
came to my hand wrote by Mr. Samuel Clark, a Man of great Learning; and who
indeed writes without much seeming Gall or Invectives* against any Man's Person
(the better to vent his Indignation against the Doctrine he opposes) striving
to revive and maintain the Baxterian Error, with such Confidence and
barefacedness, that if some able Pen do not answer him, it may do much harm to
weak and unwary Christians.

He says, In his Introduction, Page 1, 5.
He would not for a World lift up the least thought, much less a Finger, or
Pen, or utter the least word derogatory to the free Grace of God, or cast the
least blemish or speck upon the Reformation, or the worthy Persons that were
Instruments in it.

Yet he has been so unhappy as to attempt the razing and utter overthrowing of
that grand Truth, in which mainly the Reformation consisted, viz. Justification
by the imputation of Christ's active and passive Obedience, through the free
Grace of God, apprehended and received by Faith alone, without any thing
wrought in us, or done by us; not by imputing Faith or any other act of
Evangelical Obedience, but the imputing of Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction
exclusively of all things else whatsoever. And that Faith is only said to
justify us objectively, or in respect had to the Object Jesus Christ, which it
takes hold of.

To this purpose Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Zanchy, Perkins, Ames, Dr. Usher,
Dr. Goodwin, Dr. Owen, Dr. Sibs, Dr. Preston, Norton, Buroughs, Caryl, Pemble,
the Assembly, and indeed all other Ancient and Modern Writers generally.

But contrary to this Doctrine see what Mr. Clark says, Page 62.
viz. That justifying Faith is the same thing in substance with effectual
Calling, Repentance, Regeneration, Conversion, Sanctification, Renovation,
forming of Christ in the Soul, etc.

Ans. What now is the Purport of this Notion? Why that Faith in a large or
comprehensive Sense, i.e. Faith with all other Graces and inherent
Righteousness, God has instituted and ordained to be our justifying
Righteousness in his Sight, as in other places in his Book he does assert
without mincing the matter.

Again, he says, Page 85.
I would avoid many figurative Expositions of Scripture, which others are feign
to make use of to salve their Phenomenon, as when we are said to be justified
by Faith, they take it Metonymically for the Object of Faith, viz. the
Righteousness of Christ; which what is it else than to make the Scripture a
mere Nose of Wax, and a Leaden Rule, and to comply with our Fancies? etc.

Answ. This is much like Bellarmine in another case: it appears the Doctrine we
are established in, and upon which we build all our Hopes of Justification and
eternal Life, is but a Fancy; What is now become of that Doctrine Paul
preached, and all our worthy Reformers? How will this make the Papists and
Quakers Phrasis hac, side justificamur, metonymica est, and aquipollet huic:
merito Christi side apprehensio justificamur. Welleb. Compend. page 163. Can.
viii.
smile. It Is not, according to Mr. Clark, the Object of Faith, not Jesus Christ
that Faith apprehends, and we alone trust in, but it is Faith that justifies
us comprehensively taken; that is, Faith, Love, Charity, good Works, and
sincere Obedience that is imputed to us, to our Justification in the sight of
God: And that so far as you act in Faith, Holiness, and in sincere Obedience,
so far you are justified. For he positively affirms, viz. That our
Justification at present, Page 18.
while we are in this World, is but partial, imperfect, and incomplete. These
are his Words.

Answ. Now if we are not perfectly justified, it follows then we are not
perfectly delivered from Condemnation, nor acquitted from the Guilt of all Sin,
Joh. 8.36. Cant. 4.7.
and so not in a state of Life, nor made free indeed by the Son of God; and
then also Christ's Dove is not without spot, Chap. 5.2.
nor undefiled in respect to Justification: And then also it follows (as the
Papists say) there is no assurance can be had or attained in this Life, or
until Death, nor can we be said to be complete in Christ; besides, it confounds
Justification with Sanctification, nay it makes them but one and the same
thing: Gal. 2.21.
Nay more, that by a Law Righteousness is to be obtained, and so Christ is dead
in vain.

Now I profess, I can see but little difference between this Doctrine and that
of Bellarmin's and other Papists. If famous Luther and other worthy Reformers,
had wrought no better Reformation than this, the Church of God would have
received but little benefit from them, nor would the Papists have been so angry
with them; but the Notion of Mr. Clark and his Abettors certainly tends to raze
and root out that ancient Doctrine which the Apostles preached, and those
worthy Men labored to restore about Justification. Did Bellarmine ever deny,
that their good Works and inherent Holiness, which they made the matter of
their Justification before God, were performed by the Grace of God, and the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit? This Man only excludes legal Works from having
any thing to do in our Justific^^^on, but includes all Gospel-Works and sincere
O^edience: he asserts these kind of Works and free ^^ace are consistent; and
because not derogatory in point of Salvation, therefore not in Justification.
He says that we must allow of Gospel-Works or Holiness to concur to
Justification, and this Doctrine will appear, etc.

Answ. Yet he would feign insinuate that this Doctrine of his is in effect the
same with that of the old received Doctrine of our Divines But certainly all
may see it is in effect the same with the Papists.
: who teach, says he, That the sola fides solum, yet not fides sola, i.e.
solitaria justificat; tho Faith alone, yet not that Faith which is alone does
justify. What Is the Purport of this? Why because the Faith of God's Elect, by
which alone we apprehend or receive the Object, Jesus Christ, by whom we are
justified, is attended with good Fruits, as Sanctification and Holiness, by
which it is known from a false and dead Faith; therefore Faith, good Works, and
Holiness is (the matter, or) that which does justify us before God: or because
Faith in respect of its own excellent Nature does purify and sanctify us;
therefore God has instituted and ordained Faith and inherent Holiness to
justify us; and because inherent Holiness and Sanctification tends to make us
meet for Heaven, therefore it is our only Title for Heaven. Is it not said that
God imputes Righteousness without Works, and justifies him that works not? How
then do Works concur with, or are included, or joined with that Righteousness
that is our Justification before God?

Take a Passage of Reverend Perkins, 2 Vol. on Gal. page 210.
viz. It is objected that true Faith is never alone; I answer, says he, thus
Faith is never alone in the Person justified, nor in Godly Conversation, but is
joined with all other Virtues, yet in the act and office of Justification it is
alone; the Eye in the Body is not alone, being joined with all other Parts,
Hand, Foot, etc. nevertheless the Eye in seeing is alone, for no part of the
Body sees but the Eye. -- He shows that Faith alone is the Eye which sees the
Object Jesus Christ, and apprehends him and his Righteousness, whose
Righteousness only is the material cause of our Justification before God. See
the Assembly's Confession, etc. All whom God effectually calls, he freely
justifies, not by infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their
Sins, and by accounting and accepting their Persons as righteous, not for any
thing wrought in them or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by
imputing Faith it self, the act of believing, nor any other Evangelical
Obedience as their Righteousness, but by imputing the Obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ unto them; they receiving and resting on him, and his
Righteousness by Faith: which Faith they have not of themselves, it is the Gift
of God.

This agrees with that Doctrine Paul preached to the Romans and Galatians, etc.
But from this Doctrine Mr. Clark (and many more) are departed; what says the
Apostle? Gal. 1.8.
If we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than what you
have received, let him be accursed. Paul, as Mr. Perkins notes, saw the
Galatians to be corrupted in the point of Justification; false Teachers being
got among them, who preached Justification by Christ, and by the works of the
Law: they did not exclude Christ's Merits, but brought in the works of the Law
with Christ, in Justification before God; as some now do the works of a new
Law, i.e. Gospel Law: But let them tremble. Where Is Paul's Doctrine? Romans 3.27.
for it is palpable this new Doctrine excludes not boasting, or ground of
boasting. I argue thus, viz. That Law does not exclude boasting that commands
works of Obedience, as the Condition of Acceptance and Justification: But this
new Law these Men speak of, commands works of Obedience, as the Condition of
our Acceptance and Justification. Ergo, It does not exclude boasting. Page 43.
But Mr. Clark intimates, That works of the Law, performed by our own Strength,
or without special assistance only, admit of boasting.

Answ. The Papists say, that all their Works and inherent Righteousness, are
performed by God's Grace or special Assistance; yet how do they boast? Let the
Creature perform good Works, etc. by what Assistance he will, yet the Works are
his Works; and if such by which he is justified, they admit of boasting.

Reader, The Righteousness this Man contends for, by which we are justified, is
not the Righteousness of one, but the Righteousness of many, i.e. every Man's
own Faith and sincere Obedience, contrary to what Paul affirms, Romans 5.17, 18,
19.

Christ did not, says Mr. Clark, Page 100.
obey the Law in Man's stead.

Answ. Then say I, he has not fulfilled all Righteousness for us, nor answered
all the demands of the Law; nor does God's Holy Nature and Justice require a
perfect Righteousness to our Justification in his sight: Was not perfect
Righteousness part of that Debt we owed to God? If so, who pays the Debt for
us? the Penalty was but one part of our Debt. Then also it seems, the Law of
perfect Righteousness does not result from the Purity and Holiness of God, but
only from the Sovereignty of his Will, not from the rectitude of his Nature.
Moreover, why then did not God give this mild Law of Faith and sincere
Obedience at first, and so have saved himself of buying it so dear, i.e. with
the Price of the Blood of his own Son?

Christ's active Obedience, he affirms, Page 96.
is not imputed to us; nay he says, that imputing Christ's Righteousness to us,
is not a Scripture Expression, Page 97.
it is not found in any place of Scripture; tho he says he denies not the thing.

Answ. Righteousness was imputed to Abraham, and he was the Father of all Elect
Gentiles, That Righteousness might be imputed to them also. Romans 4.11.
Now it must be Abraham's own Righteousness, and so our own Righteousness, that
is imputed, or else the Righteousness of Christ.

Again, He may as well say Adam's active Disobedience was not imputed to us;
Romans 5.19.
For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the Obedience
of one shall many be made righteous. As Adam's Disobedience in his first Sin
was imputed to all his Seed, so is the Obedience of Christ imputed to all his,
or to all in him. This Text I find he knows not how to answer, see page 97, 98.
but boggles with it.

Obj. They object, if the Righteousness of Christ be made ours, we may be said
to be the Saviors of the World as he was, or to save others as he did, etc.

Ans. Take Dr. Owen's as to this, Dr. Owen on Justification, p. 307.
viz. The Apostle declares, that as Adam's actual Sin is imputed unto us to
Condemnation, so is the Obedience of Christ imputed unto us to the
Justification of Life; but Adam's Sin is not so imputed unto any Person, as
that he should then and thereby be the cause of Sin and Condemnation unto all
other Persons in the World, but only that he himself should become guilty
before God thereon. And so is it on the other side: and as we are made guilty
of Adam's actual Sin, which is not inherent in us, but only imputed unto us; so
are we made righteous by the Righteousness of Christ, which is not inherent in
us, but only imputed unto us; and with it, not for himself but for us.

Object. The Effects of Christ's Righteousness, etc. are imputed to us.

Answ. Says the Doctor, In this Imputation the thing is first imputed unto us,
and not any of the Effects of it; but they are ours by virtue of that
Imputation. To say that the Righteousness of Christ, that is his Obedience and
Sufferings, are imputed to us only in their Effects, is to say that we have the
benefit of them and no more, but Imputation it self is denied; so say (says
he) the Socinians.

Again he says, The Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us, as unto its
Effects, has this sound Sense in it, viz. that the Effects of it are made
ours, by reason of that Imputation; it is so imputed, so reckoned unto us of
God, as that he readily communicates all the Effects of it unto us; but to say
the Righteousness of Christ is not imputed unto us, but the Effects only, is
really to overthrow all Imputation.

But Mr. Clark says, It Is the Righteousness of God by which we are justified,
Page 105.
not the Righteousness of Christ.

He will not have it be the Righteousness of him that was God, or take it in
that Sense; but that Righteousness that God has ordained and instituted for
our Justification, viz. our Faith and sincere Obedience.

Answ. We do not only say it was the Righteousness of him that was God as well
as Man, but also that Righteousness which God has found out, and approves of,
as agreeing with his Holy Nature and infinite Justice, and Purity of his Law,
That he might be just: not the essential Righteousness of God, but the
Righteousness of Christ as Mediator, Who of God is made to us Wisdom and
Righteousness, etc. Where pray has God made our imperfect Righteousness a
Righteousness to justify us at his Bar? I am persuaded this Man would not
willingly be found in his own Righteousness at Death, let it be never so
sincere. Ay, but we must take the Scripture in the plain literal Sense about
Justification; this he much harps at, tho his Notion by thus doing brings in
Justification by Works, which the Apostle shows is inconsistent, and directly
contrary to Grace, Romans 11.6. Works are Works, whether Law-Works, or
Gospel-Works. He argues much as the Papists in another case, and upon as grand
a Point; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: I will
appeal to all, whether the Words in the Letter do not seem to run smoother for
the Papists, i.e. for the Church to be built upon Peter, than upon Christ that
Peter confessed? Page 85.
And so this is my Body, etc. Mr. Clark cries out against puzling perplexing
Distinctions, and taking Faith Metonymically, i. e. for the Object of Faith,
tho it is clearly implied, and that way only it bears a true Analogy of Faith.

Page 46.
I infer (says he) that we are not justified by the active Righteousness of
Christ, or his Obedience to the Law of Works imputed to us; for then a Man
would be justified by the Law, and by the Deeds and Works thereof, as much to
be reckoned his own, as if they were done personally by himself, (for that is
their Sense of Justification) then we are justified by the Law or Covenant of
Works, in a Legal and in an Evangelical way; for then the Law is fully
satisfied by Christ our Surety, and we stand recti curia, and the Law has
nothing to say to us, or charge us withal; as if a Surety in Bond pay the full
Debt, the Creditor has no Action against the principal Debtor, and there is no
Favor at all showed him in his Discharge.

Answ. In all Places where in the New Testament it is said, a Man is not,
cannot be justified by the Works of the Law, or by the Deeds of the Law, it is
evident that the Apostle speaks of that Obedience to the Law, that frail,
depraved and impotent Man is able to yield thereunto; and the Reason why no Man
can be justified hereby, is,

1. Because he has both originally, and actually broken it; and as it admits
of no pardon for what is past, so also it affords no strength to keep it for
time to come: Hence, Romans 8.3.
what the Law could not do, God sent his own Son: What for? Was it only to make
God amends for our Breach of it, and so to purchase a new, a milder and better
Law of Works, etc? No sure: Where is there the least shadow of proof for this?
See what this Gentleman's Reverend Father says, Mr. Sam. Clark, Pastor of the
Church at Bennetfink, his Medulla Theologiae, or the Marrow of Divinity, Page
280.
speaking of Christ's fulfilling the Law for us; he says,

That it was not merely Obedience, but a meriting Obedience; there was an
intrinsic Worth and Excellency in Christ's Obedience, answering to our
Salvation: Hence, tho we have Justification of mere Grace, yet in respect of
Christ, it was Justice and Debt; so that in Christ the Covenant of Works was
fulfilled, tho in us the Covenant of Grace: This Work Christ finished and
completed;

First, In that he did it wholly and universally; there was not one Tittle of
the Law which he did not fulfill.

Secondly, He finished it universally for Parts, and not only so, but fully for
Degrees: He did not only love God, but loved him as much as the Law requires;
all that he did, was so fully done, that there wanted not the least Degree of
Grace in any Duty.

Thirdly, Because he had not only an Objective Perfection in Parts and Degrees,
but also a Subjective; all within was thoroughly and perfectly holy: So that as
we are originally and actually polluted, he was originally and actually holy;
so that the Law had no fault to find with him.

Fourthly, He finished it in respect of Duration, the Law requiring
continuance, tho there were Perfection of Parts and Degrees, and subjective
Perfection also: Yet cursed is he that continues not therein. Again he says,
For to obey the Law of God, and to suffer all the Wrath that was due to our
Sins, was a bitter Cup to drink.

Thus Christ fulfilled the Law for us as our Surety, and in him it was
fulfilled in us, there being a Legal or Law-Union between him and us.

Now since this perfect, this complete and constant Obedience to the Law, was
our Duty, and that Debt we owed to God, Dare you deny Christ as our Surety,
paid it? Certainly had he not fulfilled the Preceptory part of the Law (as well
as born the Penal part) for us, we could not be justified from the Charge and
Curse thereof: But why must we (because we say Surety has done this) be
justified by the Law or Covenant of Works? Are we Saviors or Mediators,
because we have his Righteousness imputed to us of mere Grace? Is the Debtor
the Surety, because the Surety's Payment is accepted for him? The old
Covenant-Righteousness was an inherent Righteousness, a Righteousness in a
Man's self, i. e. Adam's own Righteousness, not a Righteousness imputed, but
inherent: the Righteousness of your new Law, is a Legal or Law-Righteousness,
and looks more like an old Covenant-Righteousness, because it is inherent, or
infused into you, not put upon you, or imputed to you, as being wrought out for
you without you. And, Sir, is there no favor showed to us, because our Surety
has paid this Debt? Was it not great Love, great Grace and Favor for God to
accept of a Surety? nay, to substitute his own Son in our stead to satisfy all
the Demands of the Law and Justice? True, we are not simply dealt with in a way
of Mercy, (I mean pardoned only) but in a way of Justice and Righteousness
also: Justification has more than Pardon in it (as your Notion allows;) we
found not the Surety, but God found him; therefore all is of God's free Grace,
tho also all is by the Obedience of Christ, i. e. by his keeping Law for us,
and dying in our stead. To plead for a Righteousness by Obedience to any mild
Law, is no other than to plead for a Legal Righteousness in our selves to
justify us; and that is as opposite to the Righteousness of God, as the
trusting in the Moral and Ceremonial Law, it being opposite to Grace: the
Righteousness therefore of the Law, by which no Flesh can be justified, is a
Righteousness rested in, or trusted to, that is inherent in us, whatsoever
Thoughts a Person may have of it, i. e. as perfectly, or only sincerely kept.

But to proceed: Did not God send his Son, Romans 8.3.
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc? that is, in
our Nature, in our Head. Christ and Believers (as I said before) are one in a
Law-sense; and evident it is, that the Righteousness of the Law is not
fulfilled in us in Sanctification, because that is imperfect, that is far from
fulfilling it; and there is no other way it can be said to be fulfilled in us,
but by imputation.

Moreover, by Christ's coming to keep the Law in our Nature, God has magnified
the Law, Romans 3.31.
and made it honorable; and hereby we do not make void the Law through Faith,
but establish the Law, in that the Son of God, in Man's Nature, yielded perfect
Obedience thereto, and died for our breach of it, whose Obedience is ours by
imputation to our Justification at his Bar.

Pray observe that through Faith we attain a perfect Righteousness, i. e. are
interested in the most complete Obedience of Christ to the Moral Law; but now
if Christ only satisfied for our breach of the Law by his Death, and his
perfect active Obedience has no hand in, or is not the material Cause of our
Justification before God, how do we by believing in him establish the Law?

I say the Righteousness of the Law (which is so called) which the Apostle
decries as unable to justify us, is a resting in or trusting to our inperfect
Conformity to it, or to any other Law tho never so sincerely performed; for
this sort of Righteousness is always opposed to the Righteousness of Faith or
of Grace, Romans 11.6.
If it be of Works (of any Works whatsoever) it is not of Grace: all works of
sincere Obedience to any Law of God, are alike materially good. But God has not
ordained any Law of sincere Obedience to justify us, because Grace excludes
all Works done by us in point of Justification in God's Sight. We can no more
be justified by the Law of the Gospel, i.e. the New Law, than by the Old.

Mr. Clark says, Page 71.
The Justification Paul speaks of in the Romans, and that which James speaks of
is the same. And further he says, to be justified by Faith according to Paul,
and by Works according to James, is all one; Justification by Works springing
from Faith, is Justification by Faith in this Sense.

Answ. Now we and the Orthodox say, that Paul speaks of our Justification
before God, or of the Person; James of the Justification of our Faith, good
Works demonstrating our Faith to be of the right kind, or do declare to Men,
and to our own Consciences, that we are justified Persons. Paul speaks of the
Justification of a Sinner, James of the Justification of a Believer (as it is
said, the People justified God, that is, declared he was just); so our
Gospel-Works springing from Faith, declare that our Faith is true, and we
sincere Believers.

Yet he would have his Reader believe he is no Heterodox Person in this Point.

Paul speaks of Justification and Absolution of a Sinner at God's Bar, through
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

James speaks of the Manifestation or Declaration of that Justification to the
Conscience.

Paul speaks of the cause of our Justification before God.

James of the signs of it before Men.

Paul speaks of the Imputation of Righteousness.

James of the Declaration of Righteousness.

Paul speaks of the Office of Faith by God's Ordination, as it apprehends
Christ, etc.

James of the quality of Faith, or of its own excellent Virtue.

Paul speaks of the Justification of a Person.

James of the Justification of the Faith of that Person.

Paul speaks of Abraham how justified.

James of Abraham's good Works, as already justified, and as declaring him so
to be.

Paul speaks of Justification in a proper Sense, as God's gracious act, through
Christ's Righteousness, whereby a Man is imputed or counted Just and Righteous
in God's Sight.

James speaks of Justification whereby we are not made Just before God, but
declared to be justified, being sincere Believers, and free from Hypocrisy.

Paul had to do with Legal and Judaizing Christians, such who either brought in
a Law, or a self-Righteousness, instead of God's Grace in imputing Christ's
Righteousness, or else setting up an inherent Righteousness with it (as these
Men do now.)

And James had to do with such, who might be justly called Antinomians, i.e.
such that abused the Grace of God, or Doctrine of free Grace, to encourage
themselves in Sin, boasting of a false and presumptuous Faith, a dead Faith.
Now James's work is to show the effects and nature of true Faith; therefore he
speaks not of Justification in a proper Sense, when he says Abraham was
justified by Works, but declaratively only. Faith wrought not with Abraham's
Works, See Pool's Annot.
in the Justification of his Person at God's Bar, but in declaring and evincing
that his Faith was true and saving, not a dead Faith; good Works being the
Fruits of saving Faith* If this was not so, how could he say, in verse. 23. that
The Scripture was fulfilled, Jam. 2.23.
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness? (not his Act of Faith, but the Object his Faith believed in, or
took hold of.) The Justification of a Sinner in a proper Sense is one thing,
and the Justification of a Believer, as such a one, is another thing. How then
can Mr. Clark say, the Justification Paul speaks of, and that which James
speaks of, is all one and the same thing?

This Man contends for a mild Law; certainly the Moral Law remains a perpetual
Rule of perfect Obedience: let this Man show us where and how he can prove that
God in the Gospel only commands sincere imperfect Obedience to the Moral Law:
the Law surely loses no part of its sanction by the Gospel; that is as holy,
just and good as ever: Mat. 5.48.
Be ye perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect. We are still to love the
Lord our God with all our Hearts, with all our Souls, and with all our
Strength. Our Faith, Love, Patience, etc. ought to be perfect; the Law or
Commands of the Gospel know no bounds or limits: tho the Law is abrogated as a
Covenant of Works, yet not as a rule of perfect Obedience. See what Reverend
Mr. Cross says, Sermon. on Romans 4.5.
i.e. Either the Gospel Law, or Law of Faith must require perfection in those
Duties, or some other Divine Law, or else God would become an indulger of Sin
by Law; if it be by another Law, viz. the Moral, that requires perfect
Obedience, and this sincere only: then these Laws differ but in degree, not in
Specie or Kind; because both require the same Duties or Works: and so this
Gospel Law would be no distinct Law, but only the measure of sincere Obedience,
would receive a new Use of its giving right, etc. which we own it has, to wit,
to be an index or mark of our Justification, tho we cannot own that use of
giving right, etc. -- a distinct Law they must hold, or quit their Cause, or
this Foundation of it; for the Text sets the Law of Faith down as an opposite
Law to that of Works, and that they hold: then if it be a perfect Law requiring
perfect Obedience, there is no possibility of Justification in this Life -- but
this is not all the difficulty, for it is the adding a load to a burden: Is this
Gospel to a Man that is not able to perform the least part of the Moral Law, to
tell him that God or the Mediator requires perfect Obedience to it for the
future, and another too? Or is this Gospel, to say you shall perish eternally,
and have the Fire of Hell seven times heated, if you obey not the Gospel! it is
indeed a conditional Hell, but it is more dreadful than the Fire of Hell; and
the condition is more impossible, because we have less Power to shun this
difficulty of two perfect Laws: Mr. Bull owns no other perfect Law but the
Gospel, since Man fell; but by shunning one difficulty he falls into as great.
(1) Then the Moral Law is abrogated, besides the falseness of the Doctrine it
self; for it is impossible that should cease to be our duty to love God with
all our Hearts and Souls. What advantage brings in Christ's Death, to abrogate
one perfecting Law, and establish another? here is little Gospel. A second
difficulty, i. e. we must either say Christ has purchased to us pardon for Sins
against the Gospel Law, or none at all but that one Sin of Adam's, if the Moral
Law be abrogated; after the fall we never sinned against any Law but the
Gospel, for we were under no other Law according to him, etc. Thus Mr. Cross*
Is not much of our Obedience under the Gospel, Obedience to the Moral Law? Nay,
is not the Moral Law the Rule of all our Obedience to God in all positive
Gospel-precepts?

Reader, This mild Law of theirs they say requires sincere Obedience as the
condition of Justification; now there is no sincere Obedience without it be
universal, etc. how then may this fill a poor Christian with terror, and
slavish Fear? I do all I hope sincerely, but I may not obey universally, some
Precept through ignorance I may lie short of; I cannot tell when my Obedience is
full: Also according to them I can be but partially justified in this Life, and
therefore I am partially condemned: and thus the Creature hangs till Death,
between Heaven and Hell.

Ah poor England, poor Church of God, where are thy brave old Heroes, that
stood up to maintain the Truths of Christ? What Apostasy is here from the
Orthodox Faith? what decay of doctrinal and practical Christianity? what dark
Clouds spread over our Heavens? How are many fallen from the Faith? But I must
leave Mr. Clark to an abler Pen, I designed no more than to make a few Remarks
to provoke some others to reply to the Argumentative part of his Book, which I
see no great difficulty to answer. Now that the Lord would scatter this Cloud,
and all other dangerous Errors, let it be all our Prayers both Day and Night.
Yet I doubt not but the present opposition against this Fundamental Point of
Faith will cause the Truth in the end to shine more clear and bright, which the
Lord grant in his Infinite Mercy, to the praise of his own Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

