An Abstract of the General Contents.
Chap. I. SEcrets in Physic, communicated by Persons of Quality, and
experimented by the Author. Chap. II. For Diseases incident to Women and
Children. Chap. III. Excellent Embellishments, and how to preserve Beauty. Chapter
IV. Wonderful Cures by a due observation of the Planets. Chap. V. VI. XVI. Of
Jewels, Pearls, Varnishes, Colors, Gilding, Whitening of Metals, Transparent
Sashes, etc. Chap. VII. VIII. Diverse sorts of Curious Perfumes, Essences,
Pastils, Cassolets, the Grounds and Scentings of the best Hair-powders, the
richest Wash-balls, and to take out all sorts of Spots. Chap. IX. X. Variety of
Curious Experiments. Chap. XI. Curious Compositions of Secret Inks. Chapter XII.
Artificial Fireworks, Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing. Chap. XIII. Admirable
Receipts in Cookery. Chap. XIV. Of Sweetmeats, Flowers, and Fruits. Chap. XV.
Of Wines, how to preserve them, and to recover them when decayed. Chap. XVII.
Imitations of Marble, Jasper, etc. and to recover decayed Marble and Alabaster.
Chap. XIX. To restore Tapistry, Turky-work, Gold and Silver Lace to their
former Beauty. Chap. XX. To destroy Bugs, Lice, etc. and other House-Vermin.
Chap. XXI. XXII. Curious Experiments in Housekeeping, Houswifry, Gardening,
Fruits, and Flowers. Chap. XXIII. XXIV. Excellent Receipts in the Diseases of
Horses, Dogs, and other Cattle. Chap. XXV. Secrets Experimented by the Author
since the foregoing.
The Second Part contains,
The whole Art of Moulding and Casting all sorts of large and small Figures,
Medals, Leaves, and other Forms, in Lead, Tin, Silver, Copper, Plaster, Wax,
Sulphur, Pastboard, etc. as well Hollow as Solid. Also the whole Art of
Enriching, Gilding, coloring, Staining, Beautifying, and Varnishing all sorts
of things, either Cast or Wrought by hand, with several Grounds and Sizes for
that purpose; with many other Secrets more particularly mentioned in the Table.
MODERN CURIOSITIES OF Art and Nature. Extracted out of the Cabinets of the
most Eminent Personages of the French Court. Together with the choicest Secrets
in Mechanics: communicated by the most approved Artists of France.

Composed and Experimented by the Sieur Lemery Apothecary to the French King.

Made English from the Original French.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gilliflower, at the Spread Eagle in
Westminster Hall, and James Partridge, at the Post House between Charing Cross
and White Hall. 1685.

To the Reader.
Ingenious Reader,
LOOK not on this as a Rapsody of Impertinent Recipe's caught up by some
Drudge of the Press, who never tried other Experiment than that of Imposing
upon the easy, as well Bookseller as Buyer, but rather (as indeed it is) a
Collection of Approved Experiments, made by the Sieur Lemery, famous for his
Excellent Course of Chemistry, who, as Apothecary to the French King, had great
opportunities of communicating to, and receiving from diverse Personages of the
French-Court and others, many curious Secrets and Experiments, most of which,
upon a bare perusal, will, to a discerning Eye, show a clear face of
probability and faithfulness. I will not say but, inter alia, some things may,
to some seem indifferent, as will ever be in Collections of this kind, but this
I dare affirm, that few will seem so to all, and that the greatest part are so
considerable, as to have been the entire Support, and many times, the Enriching
of whole Families, as well as the Entertainment and Diversion of Persons of
greatest Quality. Here the Sick will find infallible Remedies against the
Diseases and common Accidents incident to Mankind. Masters of Families and good
Housewives, admirable Secrets in Domestic Affairs. The Ingenious Virtuoso, as
well as common Artist, faithful and plain Instructions in the most profitable
Arts and Mysteries of the present Age. Nor are the Ladies themselves forgot,
being here completely furnished with excellent Directions for Preservation of
their Beauty, and Reparation of the Breaches and Disorders which Age, their
grand Enemy, shall have made upon it. In short, there is no Person, of what
degree soever, that may not hereby be entertained either with Profit, or
Pleasure, or both. What though they were French, if true, and free from
Adulteration, they may pass, I hope, as well as their Wines, without nauseating
an English Stomach, as having no other Alteration than Racking into an English
Vessel, in doing which, if a little be spilt, be assured all the rest is good.

Farewell
Si quid novisti rectius! -- Horat. in Epist. If thou of any better Rules can
tell
Than these, impart them to me heartily,
If not, I pray make use of these with me.

G. M.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
HOw to recover Health, and to know which of the four Humors has Dominion
over the sick Person, Page 1. A wonderful Cure for a Fistula, 2. A remarkable
Receipt made of a man's skull, ib. Against the bloody Flux; and how to draw the
Tincture of Coral. ibid. The manner of making the Syrup, 3. Another way to draw
Tincture of Coral, ib. Against the Stone, 4. An excellent Receipt for the
Gravel, ib. Another for the same, 5. For the same, 6. For the same, ib. To cure
all Ruptures; a Remedy much approved by the Cardinal de la Roche foucaut, ib.
For the same, whether Man or Woman, though aged: Experienced by one who was
bursten thirty years, 7. For Ruptures, Probatum, 8. For the Wind in the
Kidneys, Probatum, ib. To stop the Urine of those that piss in bed, 9. A sure
and ready Sudorifick. ib. The Receipt of the Antidote called Orvietan, ib. To
cause one to piss, and to cure the Kings Evil, 10. To cure the Cholick, and
that it shall return no more. ib. For the same, ib. Another for the same, 11.
Another for the same, ib. Another for the same, ib. An admirable Remedy for the
Bloody Flux, ib. For the same, ib. Another for the same, 12. For the same, ib.
To make one piss, though he have not made water in a fortnight, and to cause
one to void the Gravel and Stone, ib. For a Tertian Ague, 13. For the same, ib.
For the same, ib. For the same, ib. An assured Remedy for a Quartan Ague, 14.
For the same, ib. For the same, ib. An Astringent to stop the blood in a wound,
or at Nose, 15. For the same, ib. For all intermitting Fevers, ib. For the
same, 16. To purge gently, and chiefly those troubled with a Dropsy, ib. For
the Dropsy, ib. For the watery Dropsy, 17. For the same, ib. To cure a Bruise
quickly, ib. For Apoplecticks, 18. For the Bowels fallen down, ib. To cure the
Gonorrhea and Carnosity, probatum. ib. Otherwise, ib. An excellent Ptisan for
the French Pox, 19. Pills of Lytharge for the Venereal Disease, 20. An
Emplaister for the Lungs and Stomach, which will keep two years, 21. For the
Wind, and also for the Lungs, ib. An excellent Remedy for the Lungs, and
against a Cough, and shortness of Breath, 22. A wonderful Opiate to refresh the
Liver, and purify the Blood, ib. To temper the heart of the Liver, 23. A
Remedy for all sorts of Fluxes of Blood, upwards or downwards, or for Veins
broken in the Body, 24. For Men or Women that have an extraordinary Flux, ib.
For a Rupture; tried upon a Man of seventy years of Age, ib. For pains of the
Head, Falling Sickness, Vertigo, and Megrim, 25. For the same, ib. Another for
the same, Probatum. ib. For the same, and to cause Sleep. ib. To dissolve all
sorts of Catarrhs and Tumors, 26. To make one sneeze, ib. A Bath for the Feet
and Legs to cause sleep, 27. For Deafness, Probatum, ib. To preserve the eyes
from weeping, and keep them fair and clear. ib. For a pain in the Eyes, ib. An
Emplaister to be applied to an Artery, which the King made use of, 28. For the
pain of the Eyes, ib. For the same, ib. For the same: a Secret of Marshal de
Thorstexson in Swedland, 29. For the same, ib. For the same, ib. Another for
the same, 30. For Deafness and Noise in the Ears, ib. A Water of great virtue
to comfort the Teeth, preserve the Gums from Putrefaction, and cure watery Eyes,
ib. To appease the Toothache, 31. For the same, ib. For the same, ib. Another
for the same. Probatum. ib. An admirable Secret to make a Tooth fall out
without Pain, 32. For the Jaundies, ib. For the Falling Sickness, 33. Another
infallible Receipt for the same, ib. For the Spleen, 34. For a Pain in the
Side, ib. For the Pleurisy, ib. For the beating of the Heart, 35. For those
that are poisoned by some Metal or Mineral, ib. To cure a swelled and inflamed
Knee, ib. Against the Plague, ib. Another against the Plague, 36. To take away
the marks of the Plague, ib. For swelled Gods, 36. For the same, ib. A
Preservative against the Plague, ib. Against the Plague; approved, 37. A Remedy
whereby Madam the Marchioness of Chenoise cured diverse Phrensical People. 38.
For a Noli me tangere, 39. To Cure all sorts of Ulcers and Gangreens, ib. An
admirable Plaster for Wounds, Ulcers, Cancers, King's Evil, Bubo's, Corns in
the feet, and Tumors that come in such Places, approved, ib. For all sorts of
old Ulcers, 40. For the Hemorrhoids, ib. For the same, ib. Another for the
same, 41. For Corns in the feet, ib. Another for the same, ib. To kill great
and small Warts, ib. For a Burn, 42. For the same, ib. For the same, ib. For
all sorts of Pains in the Joints, even for the Gout, ib. A most excellent
Balsam, 43. For the Gout and Pox, 45. For the hot or cold Gout or other pains,
ib. Against the Sciatica, 46. For the Gout in the feet, ib. An Emplaister for a
Rupture, ib. The black Plaster of Catalonia, 47. An Oil for all Plurisies,
Bruises, Palsy of the Nerves, and pain of the Stomach, ib. Arceus his Balsam,
ib. A red Ointment, 48. For a scall'd Head, ib. For a Paraphymosis, 49. A most
Sovereign Remedy for Persons that lose their Blood, from what part soever,
either Man or Woman, ib. For the Ptysick, ib. To bind or stay a Looseness, ib. A
gentle Purge, 50. A Ptysan that purges gently, ib. Foelix his Ptysan, ib. A
Medicine that purges gently, ib. Excellent purging Lozenges, 51. A Syrup for
such as are subject to swooning fits, ib. Madam the Countess of Daillon's
Water; by Monsieur de Forgeray, Med. ib. The same another way, 52. To preserve
Health, ib. Magistery of Pearls, ib. An Aurum Potabile, an inestimable
Treasure, which cures Leprosies, Falling Sickness, the Pox, the Palsy, and all
otherwise incurable Maladies, 54. Another manner of Aurum Potabile, 55. A most
excellent preparation of Antimony, and its virtue, ib. To incite Venery, 58.
Another for the same, 59. To bereave one of his Wits, and restore them again,
ib. For the same, and to amaze a Person, ib. Against the Wind in the Belly, ib.
Dormitive Pills, to be burnt to cause profound sleep, 60. Oil of Butter for a
cold Gout and other pains, ib. To cleanse and incarnate the Teeth and Gums, ib.
To preserve the Gums, and fasten loose Teeth, ib. For the marks of the Small
Pox, 61. To make Antimony purge only downward, ib. To keep one from growing
fat, ib. The singular virtues of the Herb Fluellin, 62. A wonderful Receipt for
the Kings Evil, and other Wounds, 63. To make a Plaster called Manus Dei, ib.
For the Megrim, 66.
For the Diseases of Women and Children: CHAP. II.
TO make a Woman lose her Milk in a day or two, 67. For an Infant dead in the
womb, ib. To deliver a Woman quickly, and make her void the after Birth or dead
Child, and for the Apoplecticks, ib. For the same, 68. For the same, ib. For
pains after Childbirth, ib. For a Fever coming from the Milk, ib. For the
same, 69. To procure the monthly Courses, ib. For the same, ib. To make them
have their Courses that have them not, ib. To know if a Woman be with Child,
70. To provoke the Terms, ib. To make the small Pox come forth, ib. To prevent
the marks of the small Pox, ib. For Worms in little Children, 71. To Cure
Infants of the Convulsion, ib. To cure a sore Throat, ib. For the same, 72. For
the same, ib. To stay Women's fluxes, ib. To stay the blood in Women, ib. An
Opiate for the Green sickness, 73. Imperial Violet-water, ib.
To embellish and preserve Beauty. CHAP. III.
THE true Receipt of the Queen of Hungaries Water, 74. For the Pimples in the
Face, 75. For the Redness of the Face, ib. For the same, ib. For the same, 76.
To take spots out of the Face, ib. Cloths for Masks, ib. A most Excellent
Water for the Face, ib. A Water to whiten the Face, 77. Water of Venice very
good for the Face, ib. Another for the same, 78. To take away spots from the
Face, ib. To prepare Ox-gall for the Face, ib. A Water for a tanned Face, 79. A
Water to beautify the Face, and take away wrinkles, ib. To take away Wrinkles
from the Face, 80. A most Excellent Pomatum for the Face, ib. An Excellent
Pomatum for the Lips, 81. To take away redness of the Face, 82. Handkerchiefs
of Venice, ib. Virgins Milk, 83. Another Lac Virginis more ready and sure ib. A
most Excellent Spanish White, 84. To whiten the Teeth, ib. For the same, 85.
For the same, ib. For the same, ib. To hinder the Hair from falling off, ib. To
make the Hair grow, 86. To color the Hair, ib. A Water to color the Hair
black, ib. A Paste for the Hands, 87. Another Paste for the Hands, ib. Another
for the same, 88. To make the Hair grow quickly, ib. To make one have a good
Voice. ib.
Wonderful Secrets which must be collected and compounded according to the
Influences of the Stars, to cure the Infirmities hereafter specified, in a
short time. CHAP. IV.
THE seven Planets that cause Diseases, 89. The Friendly Planets, 91. Planets
that are Enemies, ib. Planetary friendly Hours of the Night and Day, calculated
exactly to the Ephemerides, 92. For Pains in the Head, 94. For Frenzies and
sharp Fevers, ib. For the falling Sickness, 95. For Weakness and Dimness of
Sight, ib. For Tears and Rheum in the Eyes, ib. For Warts in the Nostrils, 96.
For Bleeding at the Nose, ib. For Pains and Prickings in the Nostrils, ib. For
Deafness and Dizziness in the Ears, 97. For Pustules in the Mouth and Chops in
the Lips, ib. For the Tooth ach, ib. To make a Tooth fall without touching it,
98. To fasten the Teeth, ib. To make a Tooth fall without danger, ib. Against
spitting of Blood, 99. For Weakness of the Stomach, ib. For the Inflammation of
the Liver, ib. For the Dropsy, 100. For the Yellow Jaundies, ib. For the
Obstructions of the Spleen, ib. For the Stone in the Reins, 101. For Difficulty
of Urine, ib. For the Stone in the Bladder, ib. For the Colic, 102. For the
Flux and bloody Flux, ib. For difficulty in Childbirth, ib. To provoke the
Courses and Secondine, ib. For the immoderate Flux of the Courses, 103. For
Ruptures, ib. For Hemorrhoids, ib. For the Pain of the Gout, ib. For a Tertian
Ague, 104. For a Quartan Ague, ib. To take away the Spots of the small Pox,
Meazels, and Purple Fever, ib. For the Kings Evil, 105. For Wounds in any part
of the Body, ib. For Corns or Agnails, ib. For Cancers, 106. For Fistulas, ib.
To preserve one from the Gout in the Feet, ib. To know if one Sick shall live
or die, ib. An admirable Secret to keep one always in Health, which Charles the
Fifth made use of, ib.
A Collection of Diverse Receipts taken out of the Cabinet of a Person of
Quality. CHAP. V.
A Water for inflamed Eyes, 108. For the Colic, ib. An admirable Water against
the Colic, ib. Against the heat of the Sun, 109. For those that Spit or vomit
Blood by a fall, ib. For pain of the Teeth, ib. For Contusions, falls, etc.
110. For Wounds and Pricks, ib. For Headache, ib. For Warts, ib. Oil of
Juniper., ib. For the Toothache, 111. To turn a Defluxion from the Breast, ib.
The Cephalic Powder, ib. An Oil as good as Balm, 112. Hypocras Extempore, ib.
Rosa Solis. ib.
Of Jewels and Pearls. CHAP. VI.
ARtificial Pearls as fair as Natural, 113. To harden them, 114. An admirable
Secret to whiten Pearls, ib. Another more excellent, ib. For the same, ib. To
make excellent Saphyrs, 115. To make Flints white and transparent, ib. To
reduce a Flint into Paste, and form it as you please, ib. To make yellow Amber
white, 117. China Ink, ib. To make Laventurine, ib. To make Horn for Lanthorns
like Tortoishell, 118. To make the Grain of Walnut-tree upon white Wood, ib. An
excellent varnish to lay on Copper Plates for Etching, 119. A very fair Green
for Minature, ib. To make Shashes as clear as Glass, ib. A Varnish bright and
shining as Glass, for Frames, Leather, or what else you think fit, 120. To Gild
Paper, 121. To harden Tin and give it a Silver Color, ib. To Color Straws of
diverse sorts of Colors, ib. To Counterfeit Coral, ib. To Preserve Wine sweet,
ib. An excellent Red of Brasil, ib. To soften or dissolve Horn, 123. To dye
Bones of an excellent black, ib. To take spots out of white or red Silk, and
preserve the Color, ib. To soften Bones, 124. To take away the mustiness of
Wine, ib. To make a Bullet that kills without making a Wound, ib. A Powder to
take out Spots, ib. For the same, 125. For the same, ib. An excellent Violet
Color, ib. A very fair Blew, ib. Excellent Pomander of Cloves, ib. To make
Brass look as well as when new, 126. To make Siver clean, ib. For the same, ib.
To keep Roses fresh all the Year, ib. To take out writing without spoiling the
Paper, 127. To take Spots of Ink out of Silk, ib. To recover the Color of
black Cloth when decayed, ib. An experienced Remedy against the Plague, ib. For
the Toothache 128. To whiten the Teeth, ib. To destroy Bugs, ib. To prevent the
smoking of Lamp-Oyl, ib. Against Lice, Fleas, and Buggs, 129. To whiten a red
Rose, ib. To make very sharp Vinegar, ib. To keep Pease green, ib. To preserve
Fruit to the very Kernel, ib. A most exquisite way of invisible writing, with
three sorts of Ink, 130. A Glue for Fire and Water, 131. Against Buggs, ib. To
give a Luster to Plaster of Paris, ib. To whiten a false piece, ib. To
separate Silver from other Metals, ib. A most excellent Writing Ink, 132. True
Spanish Wax, ib. A counterfeit Ink, which will vanish in five days, ib. Aqua
Fortis for Etching, 133. To know true Quicksilver from Sophisticate, ib. To
soften Ivory, ib. To take out Spots of Pitch or other Gums, ib. To hinder the
fretting of Wine, ib. To purify Gum Lack, 134. To gild Iron, ib. For the same,
ib. To counterfeit Ebony, ib. To calcine Tartar quickly, 135. To make Brass of
a true Gold Color, ib. To make clean Silver Plate, ib. To make Muskadel, 136.
To keep wine from growing eager, ib. To restore the Color of Cloth when lost,
ib. To whiten Pearls, ib. To melt Amber, 137. To preserve Roses, Tulips, and
Pinks, ib. To make a very fair Green, ib. A Walnut-tree Color on white Wood,
ib. To lay Gold and Silver on Copper, ib. Excellent Pastils of Roses, 138 An
Ink which vanishes in twenty four Hours, ib. Another for Pastils but more rich,
ib. Excellent sweet Bags, 139. Violet Powder for Cussinets, and sweet Bags, or
to strew amongst sweet Bags, ib. True Cypress Powder, 140. A most admirable
Perfume, ib. A Varnish of Gold Color, 141. A Varnish for Images, ib. To make
Porcelane of Majorca, ib. To whiten Copper, 142. Writing not to be read but in
Water, ib. A Fire that burns under Water, ib. To make red soft Wax, 143. To dye
a yellow Color, ib. To make Cloth Shasses, ib. Another for Shasses with Glue
and Varnish, 144. To gild, or silver over Metals, 144. To make Copper white
quite through, ib. A fair Blew Color, ib. To take Spots of Ink out of Paper or
Parchment, 145. An excellent Water Perfume, ib. A very good Pomatum, ib.
Diverse Sorts of Perfumes. CHAP. VII.
TO Counterfeit Ambergris, ib. To augment Civet, 146. To make Essence of
Cinnamon in consistence of an Extract, ib. To make Cassolet or perfume Cakes to
burn, ib. Excellent Pastils or Perfume Cakes, 147. Several Grounds for
Hair-powders, 148. For white Powder, ib. A ground for Gray-powder, ib. Another
ground for Powder, ib. Perfume for ordinary Powder, ib. Another way for Cypress
Powder much finer, 149. Excellent Amber Powder, ib. The Queens Perfume Water,
150. To make a curious Compound Water, ib. A curious Extraction of the Perfumes
and Colors of all sorts of Flowers, ib. To make the best Bolonia Wash-balls,
ib. Another sort of Excellent Wash-balls, 152. To Perfume them well, ib.
Several approved ways to take out Stains of Oil, Grease, or other things.
CHAP. VIII.
TO take out a spot of Oil upon Satin or any other Stuff, and even upon Paper,
153. Another way to take out Stains, ib. Another for the same, 154. Another for
Silks, ib. To take off Dirt dashed on Cloths, ib. To take off Iron-moulds from
Linen, ib. To take out all Ink spots upon Linen or Woollen, 155. Another for
the same, ib.
How to soften, whiten, and restore discolored Ivory. CHAP. IX.
HOw to soften Ivory, so that it may be cast in a Mould, ib. An excellent
Receipt to whiten discolored Ivory, ib. Another for the same, 156. To whiten
green Ivory, and restore that which is spotted, ib. To whiten Bones. ib.
Rare and wonderful Curiosities. CHAP. X.
A Representation of the four Elements in a Glass Vial, 157. To make several
colors upon water. ib. To break an Iron as thick as an Arm, 158. Another for
the same, ib. A wonderful Spirit that dissolves all sorts of stones though
never so hard, ib. How to melt any Metal in a Nut-shell, 159. A perpetual
Motion, ib. To make a man's face appear hideous, 160. A waggish way to make
Pease leap out of the Pot, ib. The like to make an Egg move about, ib. To make
all the People in the house sleep without being able to wake, 161. An excellent
way to cleanse silver without boiling, ib. A Cloth that wholly resists a Sword,
ib. To make a Jerkin or Coat Armor proof against a Musket, 162. To hinder the
Pot and Meat from boiling, ib. To make a wind blow out of a River, ib. A Water
that will give light in the dark, 163. A strange way to hold Fire in the hand
without being burnt. ib. To handle Fire without being burnt, ib. To make a
Light in a Chamber at night, ib. To make Glass or Crystal clear, 164. To make
Parchment Shasses as clear as Glass, ib. To whiten Paper glewed upon Shasses to
endure many Years, ib. To make fat Oil, ib. An unlukey way to calcine the Blade
of a Sword without hurting the Scabbard, ib. A secret way to write white and
invisible on a Man's Skin, and after make the Writing appear, ib.
Diverse useful and curious Compositions. CHAP. XI.
TO make black Writing vanish and appear again, 165. A ingenious way to write a
Letter so as it shall, or shall not appear, or the double Letter, 166. The
second Ink, ib. A Water to make the second Ink vanish, and the first appear,
ib. Ink that may be rubbed out when you will, ib. Ink that will vanish in six
days, ib. Ink for Parchment, that will last till you rub it out, 168. Indian
Ink, ib. Portable or dry ink to carry about, ib. An excellent Writing Ink, ib.
A useful way to write on Greasy Paper or Parchment, 169. To write Silver and
Gold Letters, ib. An Ink that may be wiped out in forty days, 170. Ink upon
Glass, ib. To make a Resemblance of Wines of several Colors, ib. Incombustible
Oil, 171. To make Arsenick run like Oil, ib. To slack Lime for several Uses,
ib. To make a Light for a Lamp that shall not smoke or waste, ib. A Candle that
cannot be put out, 172. To hinder Oil from smoking, ib. To make Oil of Eggs
white, ib.
Of Artificial Fireworks, Hunting, and Fishing. CHAP. XII.
AN excellent Composition for Granado's flaming Lances, Pikes, and other
Instruments, 173. Flaming Lances, ib. Fire Pikes, ib. Good Squibs, 174. A
pleasant Invention to kill Game, ib. To make Powder strong, 175. To catch
Partridges, ib. To fetch Rabbits out of their Berries without a Ferret, ib.
Another for the same, ib. To gather together a great number of Hares, ib. To
preserve Arms from Rusting, and take off the Rust, 176. Another for the same,
ib. To make an unextinguishable Wildfire, 177. Another for the same, ib. A
Fire that burns upon Armor, ib. To make a Pistol carry far, ib. A pleasant way
to catch Crows, 178.
Of Fishery.
A sure way to catch Fish, ib. Another way, ib. Another to catch Fish, 179. A
wonderful way to bring Fish to the Place you desire, ib. Another to catch Fish,
ib. Another way, 180. Another way, ib. Otherwise, ib. Another for the same, ib.
To make Worms for Baits come out of the Ground. 181.
Admirable Receipts in Cookery. CHAP. XIII.
THE true way of making Bolonia Sauciges, 182. Milan Sauciges, 183. Mentz
Gammons, ib. Madam de Bis her Gammons, 184. An excellent Hogs-head after the
manner of Piemont, 185. An excellent way to salt Pork, Beef, and other Meats,
as is used in Germany and Flanders, 186. To make Mentz Gammons, 187. To make
Lumbardy Sauciges, ib. A white Pot, ib. Excellent Italian Fritters, by Andrea
Doria, 188. A Pike after the manner of Poland, ib. To make the Bones of a
Shad-fish eatable, and to preserve them boiled from year to year, 189. To make
Cream without Fire, 190. To make a delicate Fool, ib. To make an excellent sort
of boiled Fool, 191. To make an excellent Cake, ib. To pickle and preserve
Cabages, 192. For Cucumbers, ib. For Purslane, ib. For Artichokes, 193. For
Sparagus, ib. For Green-pease, ib. To keep Beans, ib. To keep Mushrooms, 194.
To make Fowl tender presently, ib. To keep Grapes till Easter as red and fresh
as upon the Vine, ib. To freshen salt Pottage, 195. To make live Crafishes red,
ib. To sweeten ill tasted Oil, ib. To preserve all manner of Fowl a Month
without spoiling, ib. A very wholesome and excellent Spice, 196. To preserve
fresh Lard, ib. A most excellent Cake, ib.
Sweetmeats, Flowers, and Fruits. CHAP. XIV.
GEnoa Biskets, 197. The Queens Biscuit, ib. Makaroons, 198. To make a Paste of
any Fruit whatsoever, ib. An admirable Gelly of Quinces and other sorts of
Fruit, 199. Genoa Paste, ib. To keep any fruit a long time, particularly
Grapes, ib. To preserve Apples from Rotting, 200. To keep all stoned Fruits,
and even Figs, ib. To keep all sorts of Flowers, 201. To keep Roses red all the
Year, ib. Another for the same, 202. To make excellent Hypocras immediately,
ib. Another Liquor for the same use, 203. To make Rosa Solis, ib. The same
another way, 204. Another sort of Liquor which the French call Populo, ib. To
make good Spirit of Wine, 205. To make cheap Lemonade, ib. To make Franchpane
Water, ib. To make Jessamine Water, 206. Water of Strawberries, Rasps,
Cherries, and Apricocks, ib. To make Ice in Summer, 207. To cool Water
extremely without Ice, ib.
Of several sorts of Wines, how to preserve them, and how to recover decayed,
Wine. CHAP. XV.
TO recover Wine that is pricked, 208. Another for the same, ib. Another way,
209. For Wine that is decayed by too much vent, or sour, ib. To recover Wine
that tastes of the Cask, ib. To recover Wine that is turned, ib. To take away
the musty smell of Wine, 210. To prevent the turning of Wine, ib. For Wine that
smells sour or bitter, ib. To soften a green Wine, ib. For Wine that is
turned, ib. For green Wine, 211. To preserve Wine from souring, ib. Another
way, ib. To make Wine fine, ib. To make Muskadine Wine, 212. To make Wine
sweet, ib. To make it black, ib. For White Wind turned deep colored, ib. To
make new unsettled Wine very good, ib. To make White Wind Red, and Red White,
213. To make Malmsey, ib. To make Vinegar in an hour, ib. To make Rose Vinegar
immediately ib. Another way in an hour, 214. A sort of Vinegar used by the
deceased Monsieur Gr. Constable of France, ib. Vinegar in three hours, ib.
Admirable Curiosities in Painting, Coloring, Varnishing, etc. CHAP. XVI.
HOw to calcine Azure, 215. To calcine Lamp-black, and make it better, ib. A
finer Lamp-black than usually bought, ib. A black of Sheeps Feet, 216. A fine
white for Water Colors, ib. A very fine white of Eggs, ib. To make
extraordinary fine white Lead, 217. To make Ultra Marine of Lapis Lazuli, 218.
Another way to extract Ultra Marine, 219. Excellent Greens, 220. A Green to be
kept in a Bladder for Limming and Coloring, ib. A very beautiful Green, 221.
To make Green of Berries, ib. Vermilion in Stone, 222. For several Colors, ib.
To make fine Prints look like Oil painting, ib. To wash old Paintings, and give
them a good Gloss. 223. To varnish them, 224. Another way, ib. To cleanse
smooth Painting, ib. To make Flanders Images, ib. To take off any Design
without Pricking or Pointing, which is called Tracing, 225. To write burnished
Gold Letters on Vellum as well as the Ancients, ib. To make excellent Croyons,
invented by Prince Rupert, 226. To preserve Silver on Wood, or Plaster, and
prevent its turning red, 227. To gild Lead, or white Lattin, and any thing
tin'd over, ib. To soften Ivory and Bones, ib.
Diverse Imitations of Marble and Jasper, and how to Repair decayed Marble.
CHAP. XVII.
TO make Marble or Jasper, 228. To make black Jasper, 229. Another for the
same, 230. To counterfeit Marble, ib. To whiten Alabaster and white Marble, ib.
To white-wash Plaister-walls with Lime-Milk. 231. Another way, ib. To Rub and
Color Plaster Cielings or Floors, ib.
CHAP. XVIII.
TO dye white Martins Skins of long Hair of a very good black that never fades,
232. To make Spanish Carnation, ib. To make excellent red Paper, 234. To marble
Paper, ib.
CHAP. XIX.
TO restore Tapistry to its first Beauty when decayed, 235. To restore the
Color to Turkish Carpets, ib. To restore Gold or Silver Lace to its former
beauty, 236.
How to drive away Fleas, Punises, and other Infects. CHAP. XX.
TO destroy Punises, ib. Otherwise, ib. Otherwise, 237. Another way, ib.
Another way, ib. To destroy Fleas, ib. For the same, 238. Another for the same,
also against Punaises, Weezels in Corn, and Worms in Trunks, ib. For Moths in
Clothes, ib. Another for the same, ib. For Punaises, ib. To destroy Fleas, 139.
Another way, ib. To drive Mice from the House, ib.
Of Housekeeping. CHAP. XXI.
TO make Bread more substantial than ordinary, 240. Another sort of Bread,
which besides being much better, keeps above a Month longer than Ordinary, ib.
A sort of Bread of which a mouthful will maintain a man eight days without
eating any thing else, ib. To make a great deal of Cream, 241. An unluckey way
to hinder making of Butter, ib. To bring up Fowl, ib. To fatten all sorts of
Fowl in fifteen days, whether Hens, Geese, Ducks, or others, from All-hollows
till Lent, ib. Another way to fatten Fowl, 242. To fatten Turkey-Cocks and
Pullets, as is used at Laval, ib. To hinder Worms from coming to Corn, ib. An
excellent way to whiten Linen, as is used in Flanders, ib. Another way used at
Laval in Brittany, 243.
Curiosities in Gardening, Fruits, and Flowers. CHAP. XXII.
TO make Herbs grow quickly, 243. How to preserve Grafts, 244. To drive Moles
out of a Garden, ib. For the same, 245. To make Caterpillars fall off Trees,
ib. To kill Ants, ib. To catch Moles, ib. To have Roses in all Seasons, ib. To
make Tulips and other flowers of what color you will, ib. How to produce
double Gilliflowers of any seed of that kind, 246. To make double Gilliflowers
grow extraordinary big, ib. To make Grapes of what color you will, ib. To make
Peaches grow with writing upon them, ib.
Excellent Secrets in the Diseases of Horses, Dogs, and other Cattle. CHAP.
XXIII.
FOR the Staggers in Horses, 247. To bring them down when too fat, ib. For
Gauling in Horses, 248. For the same, ib. For sick Horses, Oxen, and Cows, ib.
To cure Horses of the Vives, 249. To make Horses Hoofs grow, ib. For Horses
that are Pricked, ib. For the same, ib. A Receipt for the same, of the deceased
Marshall de Biron, ib. Another for the same of Monsieur Turenne, 250. For a
prick in a Horses Foot, the Duke of Weimars Receipt, ib. For the same, 251. For
the Farcie in Horses, ib. For the same, 252. For the same, ib. For a swelling
in the hollow of the Pastorn of a Horse, ib. For short Wind, or Pursiness in
Horses, 253. Pills to purge Horses, ib. A Drench for a Horse, 254. A Drench for
a Horse that has caught Cold, ib. For Distempers in Horses Heels, 255. For the
same, ib. To make a Horse Foam, ib. To dye old Saddle spots, ib. To make a
Horse have a good Coat in Winter, ib. For Galled Horses, 256. For the hard
Sores in Horses Fundaments, ib. For Bruises or Sores in Horse Legs, ib. For
Horses Feet, 257. To make a Horses Tail and Main grow, ib. Another for the
same, ib. To hinder Horses from Neighing after a Mare, though you carry her any
where amongst Horses, ib. To keep a Horse from Neighing, ib. For a Horse that
has been overheated, ib. To fatten a Horse, 258.
Of Dogs. CHAP. XXIV.
FOR the Mange in Dogs, ib. For Dogs bitten by mad Beasts, ib. To cure Dogs
when bursten, 259. To destroy Fleas in Dogs, ib. To cure Sheep, ib. To cure
Hogs meazels, ib. For Fowl that are hurt, ib. To make Fowl feed well, 260.
CHAP. XXV. Containing many Secrets tried by the Author, since the foregoing,
and some excellent Remedies not before recited.
TO beautify the Face, and other parts of the Body, ib. To make the Hair
bright and shining, 261. To make the Hair grow long, ib. To make Hair curl, ib.
Another for the same, ib. Another for the same, ib. For sweaty stinking Feet,
ib. A Bath to beautify the Body, ib. A Secret to make artificial Wine, 262. A
secret for Ladies to beautify their Faces, ib. A secret to catch all sorts of
Birds with your Hands, ib. To create a good Memory in Man, or Woman, 263. To
know if a Girl be a Maid or not, ib. For the Whites in Women, ib. Virgins Milk,
ib. For any Burning, 264.
The Contents of the Second Part.
Chap. I.
TO cast the Figures of all sorts of Animals in Tin, Silver, or Copper, very
thin and light, 265. To cast a hollow Figure, 266. How to put the Kernel or
inward Mould into a Figure of Wax, and put on the shell or outward Case to cast
in Metal, 267. To make the Case or Facing to the Figure of Wax, 268.
Chap. II.
To cast Figures of Copper or Tin with Drapery, very light and thin, 270. The
same, another way, 271.
Chap. III.
To cast large or indifferent Figures without Seam or mark, 274
Chap. IV.
To cast the Wax, and enclose the Kernel or inner Mould in the middle, 276.
Chap. V.
To mould off with Plaster, naked Persons in any posture, and in the hollow
Mould to make a Kernel or inner Mould therewith to make the Figure and cast it
in Brass, 277. How to mould off the Face of any Person, without being trouble
some to him, 281. To cast Hands to the Life, 282.
Chap. VI.
To cast Fish to the Life, either in burnt Clay or Plaster, to put into
Fountains, also to cast them in Brass, Tin, or Lead, or Past-board, and to make
them swim, on the top or middle of the Water, 283. To color the Past-board
Fish, 284. To cast Fish which in the Water shall seem natural, viz. One at the
bottom, others on the top, others in the middle of the Water, 285. To paint
Fish that the Water may not deface them, 288. A most incomparable Varnish
against the Water, ib.
Chap. VII.
To cast all sorts of little Animals, as Lizards, etc. And all sorts of Flowers
and Leaves that are not too thin, 289. To cast the same Creatures another way,
290. To cast Flowers, Vine-leaves, Laurel-branches, etc. 291. Otherwise to cast
a Vine-leaf, 292. To cast Adders or Serpents, 293.
Chap. VIII.
To make a Spaud or Sand wherewith to make Moulds to cast wet. ib. A Sand or
Spaud that endures many meltings without breaking, the Work coming out very
fine and neat. 294. A wet spaud to cast Medals, and all sorts of Animals to the
Life, 295.
Chap. IX.
To print Vine-leaves or others, in Tin or Brass, on Copper-Moulds, 296.
Chap. X.
A neat way to mould off Figures in Paste, 297.
Chap. XI.
To counterfeit red Marble, 298. To counterfeit Serpentine Stone, ib. Another
for Marble, 299. To mould off small Figures of a Jasper Color, ib. To mould
off carved Figures in Fashion of Agat, 300. To imitate Coral, ib. For Lapis
Lazuli, ib. To counterfeit Marble with Brimstone, ib. To make Marble of Coral
Color, 301.
Chap. XII.
To cast Medals or carved Figures, in transparent Colors, to embellish
Glasses, Windows, or Sashes, as if they were of Ruby, Amber, or Coral, 302. An
Emrald Color for the same, ib.
Chap. XIII.
To mould off Embossed Figures in Plaster, or colored Paste, tempered with
Gum Tragaganth Water, the Drapery being laced with Mother of Pearl, 304.
Chap. XIV.
To make them of a Jasper Color, 305. The same another way, 306.
Chap. XV.
To make Medals of Fish-glew, ib. To color them, 307.
Chap. XVI.
To mould off the Medals of Fish-glew in Plaster, and to make them of Tin or
Lead, ib.
Chap. XVII.
To make hollow Moulds of Sulphur, in which to cast Medals of Plaster very
neatly, 308. To mould off Medals of Plaster in the hollow moulds of Sulphur,
309. To print Paper on the Sulphur Moulds, ib. To make a Varnish to lay on the
Figures of Plaster, 310. To make a Size to lay Gold, Silver, or Copper upon
Figures of Plaster that will not sink into them, ib.
Chap. XVIII.
A most exquisite way of casting all sorts of Figures, 311.
Chap. XIX.
To inlay any wooden work with Figures, 312.
Chap. XX.
To color Wood of diverse colors, 314. For Red, ib. Another for the same, ib.
For the same, 315. A Violet color on wood, ib. A Purple on Wood, 316. To
imitate Inlaying, or Marble, on Wood, ib. To make all sorts of Woodden-ware to
imitate Porcelane or China ware, ib. Another way of staining or marbling Wood,
317. To counterfeit Ebony, 318. A polished black, 319. Another black Dye for
Wood, ib. To make Wood of a Silver Color, ib. Wood of the Color of Gold,
Silver, Copper, or Brass, 320. To lay on Pencil Gold or Silver on Wood, 321.
For Silver on wood, ib. A red Color for Wood, ib. A yellow for Wood, ib. A
Violet, ib. An excellent Blew for Wood, 322. To make Bronze or Powder of the
Color of Gold, ib.
Chap. XXI. Diverse ways of beautifying things made of Wood, Stone, Plaster,
baked Earth, or Past-board; also to work in Gold or Silver burnished, or in
Oil, with all sorts of Colors, as well Bronze as others; and to stain and
varnish Boards of several sorts.
For burnished Gold or Silver, 323. The Gold Size, 324. How to lay on the Size,
325. Another more easy Size for Gold or Silver, 326. To gild a carved or
embossed Figure, that the finer stroke may not be hid, ib. To silver over any
thing with Tin-Glass, 327. To Bronze with Brass, ib. Another excellent way to
silver over Figures, ib. To grind Gold to lay on Figures, 328. To Bronze a
Figure, ib.
Chap. XXII.
To discover Gold under a black Ground, with an Ivory Point, a great Secret,
and as beautiful as those things gilt in China. 329. For the same a more easy
way, 331. For the same another way, 332.
Chap. XXIII.
An Exquisite way of Enriching and Beautifying all sorts of wooden Work. 333.
For the same, but a more glorious Color, 334.
Chap. XXIV.
To Enrich Picture Frames, and all sorts of carved wooden Work. 335. To
beautify a frame with green Leaves, ib. A curious Wainscot-colour, 337. To lay
black upon white, and make the white appear like inlay'd Work, 338. To lay upon
a white ground, branched Works or Figures on black, 339. Another way
representing Enamel, 340. To draw Figures with Shell-Gold on a black Ground,
342. To lay Gold on black Frames very beautiful and shining, 343. Another way
to beautify Frames, 344. Flowers on burnished Gold, 345.
Chap. XXV.
To lay Gold on glazed Earthen Ware, very beautiful and lasting, ib.
Chap. XXVI.
To color Wood like Marble, as Tables, etc. 346. To color a Frame with a fine
sieckled Red, 347.
Chap. XXVII.
To Beautify Works made of Paste-board or Lead gilt, 348. To make Moulds of
Lead to print Cotton, 349.
Chap. XXVIII.
To make stufft Figures or Anticks, ib.
Chap. XXIX.
To adorn embossed Figures with gilt Tin, 351. Another Mould for gilt Tin or
Paper, 353.
Chap. XXX.
To lay the Leaves of gilt Tin upon your Drapery, 354. To make colored Foliage
on a gold Ground. ib.
MODERN CURIOSITIES OF Art and Nature.
CHAP. I.
How to recover Health, and to know certainly which of the Four Humors has
Dominion over the Sick Person.
TAke of Soder one pound, of the finest Tin half a pound, three ounces of
Mercury, melt them; then take the Amalgama all together, and put it into an
Alembick, and you will have about four ounces of Water, which you shall make
use of as follows.

Pour one or two drops of this Water into the Urine of a sick Person, and, in
an instant, you will see the four Humors separated; and that whereof you see
to be most substance, it is that which prevails in the Body, and will often
change, according as it offends or prejudices Health. The Amalgama is thus
proved: Put it into your hand, and pour thereon two or three drops of Juice of
Citron, and it will instantly become red.

A wonderful Cure for a Fistula.
Take a living Toad, put it into a Crucible, covered that it may not get out,
and reduce it to Ashes with a fierce Fire, the Fire not touching the Toad.
Apply this Powder to the Fistula, washing it first with White Wind, warm, or
the Urine of a male Child. Probatum.

A remarkable Receipt made of a Man's Skull.
Take of the impalpable Powder of a Scull, and apply it to any Wound or Ulcer
whatever, and it will cure it. This was experienced by Monsieur President
Bolanger, in an Ulcer that none could cure in ten years.

Against the Bloody Flux; and how to draw the Tincture of Coral.
Take a Pumice-stone, quench it three or four times in good Vinegar in an
earthen Pot, till it look red; bray the Coral very fine, and make a bed of
Pumice-stone in an earthen pot, then a bed of Coral; do this thrice, so that
the first and last be of Pumice-stone: lute the Pot well, and put it in a Glass
or Potters Furnace for two days; take it out, and pour Vinegar upon the
Powders, so often till they have lost their redness; then evaporate the Vinegar
in a Glass or Earthen-vessel well glazed, in which will remain the tincture or
color of Coral. So you may draw all sorts of Colors of Minerals and Metals
reduced to powder. The Dose is one dram in an Egg.

The Syrup is made after this manner.
Take two ounces of this Tincture, and three ounces of Sugar Candy, which put
in a large varnished earthen Vessel, in Balneo Mariae, continually stirring
your Matter with a wooden Spatula, till it be boiled to the consistence of a
Syrup: for this hinders the precipitating of the tincture of Coral.

Another way to draw the Tincture of Coral.
Take Virgin-wax and scrape it into a new Pot, wherein you have put little
pieces of Coral, so that the Coral be therewith covered, melt and boil them
gently upon live coals, and the Wax will draw all the Tincture of Coral: the
which you shall try by taking out a little piece of the Coral, which you must
do commonly within a Quarter of an hour. Withdraw the Fire, and let the Wax
cool; which you shall take and scrape into an Urinal, and pour thereon good
thrice distilled Vinegar, or strong Spirit of Wine, and put it on hot Embers,
that the Wax may give to the Vinegar the tincture which it took from the Coral;
then take it from the Fire, and, being cold, separate the Vinegar from the Wax,
and evaporate it; being evaporated, you will find your Tincture at the bottom,
red like Cinaber.

Against the Stone.
Take two pounds of Sallet Oil, which you shall distill in an Alembick with
Sand, and take three Spoonfuls every day of the Water or Phlegm that flows, in
the morning, three hours after Dinner, and at night going to bed, for nine
days. This Water dissolves the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder. That which
remains in the Alembic is for the Gout, and Contraction of the Nerves, from a
cold cause.

An excellent Receipt for the Gravel.
Take two pounds of the Roots of male Nettles, and cleanse them, and boil them
in a Gallon of Water, to the diminishing of the third part; then add three
pints of good White Wind, boil them over a gentle Fire for an hour, then let
them cool; being almost cold, take out the Roots and press them, then put the
Juice with the Decoction into a new earthen pot; when it is cleared by seething,
and that you would use it, take three Pills of fresh Butter, having swallowed
them, drink a glass of the Decoction fasting, as early as you can; and two
hours after, a Porringer of clear Broth, for three days together, at each
decrease of the Moon: Laxative Clysters are excellent; you must take them the
night before you take the Decoction.

For the same.
Take Eglantine Berries, dry the Seeds in the Sun, or in an Oven, powder them;
put a dram of them in a small glass of Whitewine, to steep seven or eight
hours; drink it half an hour before you go to bed, stirring it well, that
nothing remain in the bottom; This produces great Effects; for it drives out
all sorts of Gravel, and breaks the Stone, so that you will void it by small
pieces. Probatum. But you must take it but for two days, together, and eight
days after, and at the decrease of the Moon. You may make a Marmalade of the
red Fruit, and cat thereof after meals, and it will hinder any thing from
coagulating in the Body.

For the same.
Take Wild-Parsly seeds, infuse them in White Wind for twelve days, and drink
a glass thereof three mornings fasting.

For the same.
Take the skins within the Gizards of Pullets, and wash them with White Wind,
dry and powder them; the dose is a dram in as much White Wind as you please.

To cure all Ruptures; a Remedy much approved of by the Cardinal de la
Rochefoucault.
Take a pound of black Pitch, yellow Wax and Rosin twelve ounces, Mutton Suet
eight ounces, Cats-tail and Dragons-blood four ounces, Gum dragant, Arabic, and
Gauls, one ounce; Boodstone two ounces, severally prepared and dried with
Vinegar, Pepper beaten two ounces, Wood-lice and Cumin-seed dried and powdered,
two ounces; green Acorns, prepared with Vinegar and powdered, two ounces; they
are mixed by melting the Suet with a pint of thick red Wine; to which add the
Galls bruised, and boil them to a consumption of the Wine: that done, strain
it, and put it on the fire, adding the Wax and Rosin, which you must melt
therein; melt the black Pitch in another Vessel, then pour the first mixtion
into the melted Pitch, stirring it continually with a stick to incorporate
them: then you must take away the Fire, and put it upon hot Embers, then pour
in the Powders by little and little, stirring them very well, that the Plaster
may be well mixed: before you apply it, you must shave away the hair, if there
be any, and foment the place where the Malady is with strong Vinegar, wherein
Alum has been dissolved, and change the Plaster every two days, and renew
the Fomentation every four and twenty hours: Moreover, let the Patient keep his
Bed for about a fortnight, more or less, and lie upon his back, with his head
as low as he can, and drink no Wine unless it be allayed with Water or small
Beer, etc. and eat no salt meats, Pulse, nor Beef.

For the same, whether Man or Woman, though aged, experimented by one that was
bursten thirty years.
Take an ounce and half of white Mastich, Troy weight, an ounce and half of
common Turpentine, an ounce and half of Masticorum, which is a sticking Gum or
Liquor, found in the head of great wild prickly Thistles, which have a head
like Artichoaks; from which having taken the prickly leaves, you will find this
glewish Humor stick to your fingers. Mix all together in a little earthen pot,
new varnished; then take about twenty knots which are found in the sides of the
Firr-Tree, which you shall scrape or rasp very small, put them into a Pot
almost full of Water, and make it boil very leisurely, and the Fat and Scum
that comes uppermost, you shall take dexterously with a Spoon, and put into the
other Pot amongst your Drugs; until you see that it is well mixed for an
Unguent, which you shall spread upon Leather, and apply to the place.

For Ruptures. Probatum.
Take Cypress-Nuts, Acacia, Galls, Pomegranat-Flowers, of each six drachms,
Gum-Draganth, Myrrh, Frankincense, Gum-Arabick, Sarcocol of each three drams;
Sanguis Draconis, fine Bole, red-Lead, Aloes Succotrine, of each two drams;
make a fine Powder of them all, and a paste thereof with Vinegar, whereof you
shall make an Emplaster, and apply it to the Malady.

For the Wind in the Kidneys. Probatum.
Take of the Roots of wild Chichory, Parsley, Sorrel, Sparagus, Scolopendria,
Betony, Dogs-tooth, Liquorice, of each an handful; white Honey, a Citron cut
into four parts; boil them all in a quart of White Wine, to the consumption of
half, or the third part, strain it, and take 3 ounces in the Morning Fasting.

To stop the Urine of those that piss in Bed.
Take of the inward Pill of Pomegranat-Flowers, Provence Roses, Mastich, of
each half a dram, Seeds of Sumach one dram, Dragons Blood two drams; red
Sanders half a dram; roots of Solomon's Seal half an ounce, a Mouse prepared
and flead, throwing away the Head and Feet, washed in White Wind and dried in
an Oven, one ounce, powder all apart, then mix them with two ounces of Sugar of
Roses, in Powder, whereof a dram is to be taken every morning steept in
White Wind, two hours before breakfast.

A sure and ready Sudorific.
Take a dram of Tortoise-shell calcined, in a Glass of Beer.

The Receipt of the Antidote called Orvietan.
Take the Roots of Carline, Gentian, Dyttanie, Anthora, Swallow-wort, of each
two ounces and a half, great and little Centaury, round and long Birth-wort;
Scordium, Bistort, Betony, Tormentil of each half a dram: Diptany of Crete,
Angelica, Rue, Master-wort, Scorzomens, Valerian, leaves of garden and wild
Bugloss, Viper Powder, of each one ounce; make a Powder of all; whereof take
five ounces to a pound of clarified Honey, wherein was first dissolved Venice
Treacle and Mithridate, of each half an ounce, with a little good Wine.

The dose is one dram dissolved in Broth, or Wine, and if you find that gives
not ease, repeat it two hours after, and six hours for the third time, and
twelve hours for the fourth time.

To cause one to piss, and cure the King's Evil.
Burn and reduce Cantharides to a fine Powder, draw off the Salt thereof with
Vinegar; whereof give twelve, fifteen, or sixteen grains.

For the Cholick, and that it shall return no more.
Take the outward pill of a fine Orange and Clove-gilli-flowers, of each one
ounce, boil them in a good Glass of Wine to the third part, give it to drink,
and it shall cure for ever.

For the same.
Take three grains of Laurel, and powde^ them finely, then put them into a
Glass (...) White Wind, and drink it. Probatum.

For the same.
Take of the entire fresh Dung of a black Horse, put it into a Napkin, and pour
thereon a glass of White Wind, and take it.

For the same.
Take half a Glass of Aqua Vitae, wherein put seven or eight drops of Spirit of
Salt.

For the same.
Take the Skin that divides the Kernels of old Walnuts, powder them, and take a
dram thereof in White Wind.

An admirable Remedy for a bloody Flux.
Shut up a Dog for three days, so that he eat nothing but Bones; take his dung,
and dry it, and powder it, then take River flintstones, heat them red hot, then
throw them into a Vessel full of Milk, in which mix a little of the Powder, and
give thereof to the Patient twice a day.

For the same.
Take half a quartern of Rice Flower, then mix it with the Juice of Elder
berrys, and make thereof a Paste, whereof make little cakes, and bake them in
an Oven, after the Bread is taken forth, which you shall beat and moisten again
with the said Juice, and boil it, then beat it afresh, doing thus seven times,
then powder it to serve for use; the dose is one dram in Broth, or White Wind.

For the same.
Take the Skin of an Hare, burn it in a Furnace in an Earthen Pot unglaz'd,
with a cover; of this Powder take a dram in Broth, or White Wind, if you have
not a Fever: the same will serve for bleeding at Nose, drawn up the Nostrils.

For the same.
Take a dram of Langue de boeuf, dried and powdered as aforesaid: The said Herb
stays the Flux, being applied fresh to the Soles of the Feet.

To make one piss, tho he have not made Water in a fort-night, and to cause one
to void the Gravel and Stone.
Take wild Ivy with its root, wash it well and cleanse it, beat it well in a
Mortar, and let it steep about two hours in three or four ounces of White Wind;
there must be about ten or twelve Plants of this Herb, strained through a
Cloth, and given the Patient to drink. Probatum.

For a Tertian Ague.
Take three or four ounces of the Juice of Vervain, in a little White Wind,
before the shivering, and walk: you must not eat a Supper when you take this
Remedy.

For the same.
Take wild Smallage, Rue, male Thistles, of each a little, beat them well with
a little Salt, then add the yolk of one Egg, beaten with a spoonful of Vinegar:
apply it to the Wrist, after well rubbing the Wrist.

For the same.
Take half a Glass of Aqua Vitae, wherein beat one yolk of a new laid Egg,
with the third part of a Nutmeg grated: take it just before the fit: use this
Remedy thrice, if you are not cured the first or second time.

Note it is good to purge before with this Medicine following: Rubarb, Scammony,
Turbith, Hermodactils, Ginger, Senna, Anniseeds, Sugar, of each one dram;
powder all apart and scarce them, then mingle them and scarce them: the dose
for a Child of ten years is half a dram; one of ripe years one dram, in Broth,
taking some Broth an hour after. Note, you need not keep your Bed nor Chamber.

For the same.
Take two ounces of the Syrup of Carduus Benedictus in a Glass of Water, when
the shivering takes you.

An assured Remedy for a Quartan Ague.
Take Wall-Gilliflowers, Leaves and Flowers, beat them well with a little Salt;
and when the fit comes apply it to the suture of the Head, between two linen
Cloths, and there let it rest twenty four hours.

For the same.
Take a Pennyworth of Camphir, sow it in a piece of Scarlet, with right crimson
Silk; and make a Cord of the same Silk, and hang it about the Neck, so that it
reach to the Stomach; and as the Camphire wastes, so will the Fever; the Camphir
being wasted, take more till you be cured.

For the same.
Take oil of Scorpions, Mithridate of Montpelier, of each two ounces, mingle
these in a Mortar till they be well incorporated, and put them into a glazed
earthen Pot. Rub the Backbone therewith, the Temples, and the Groins, and the
Joints, the spaces between the Knees, the Soles of the Feet, the Palms of the
Hands; and always when you use this Ointment, you must wash the Parts you
intend to anoint with Rose Water; The Remedy is admirable.

An Astringent to stop the Blood in a Wound, or at Nose.
Take the tenderest tops of Nettles, crush them between your Fingers or in a
Mortar, and apply them to the Wound, and the Blood will stop, which is very
certain.

For the same.
Take half a Spoonful of the smallest Earthworms, of the inner bark of Elder,
a good Handful, a good spoonful of red Wine, as much Sallet-Oyl; a good handful
of Mouse-ear, a piece of fine Sugar, as much new Wax, three grains of Salt,
boil them all till half be wasted, strain it, and apply it to the Part.

For all Intermitting Fevers.
Take an handful of St. John's-Wort, infuse it in White Wind, strain it twenty
four hours after, and take it before the Fit.

For the same.
Take the Skin that sticks to the Eggs-shell, fold it about the little Finger
of the left hand; and there let it remain for twenty four hours and 'twill Cure
them.

To Purge gently, and chiefly those troubled with a Dropsy.
Take Spurge-seed well beaten, steep it twenty four hours in Aqua Vitae, dry it
in the Sun; steep it again twenty four hours, and dry it again; then steep it
the third time as long in Sallet-Oyl, dry it and keep it. To use it, you must
dry it upon a Plate, to take away the husk, put the white being beaten to
infuse in White Wind all Night, and drink a Glass thereof fasting.

For the Dropsy.
Take the Juice of the inner rind of the Elder, give thereof two ounces to the
Patient to drink in a Glass of Cows Milk an hour before Meals; this will make
you void much Phlegm, and Purges gently.

For the Watery Dropsy.
Take every morning a Glass of two pints of White Wind, and a fourth of
Saller-Oyl; wherein put a dram of Salt of Wormwood; do thus for eight days;
in which time you shall Purge with Rubarb, Turbith and Jalap, powdered and
mingled together; the dose is one dram in White Wind. After Purging you shall
take the aforesaid Oil, for eight days more, and so be cured. Note, you must
rub your Belly every Night before the Fire with Sallet-Oyl, till there comes a
little Sweat on the forehead.

For the same.
Take what quantity you will of Crab's-eyes, wash them with White Wind, dry, and
powder them, whereof give a dram fasting in the morning in half a Glass of
Lilly-Water.

To Cure a Bruise quickly.
Take Burgundy Pitch, dissolved in Aqua Vitae, and spread a Plaster thereof
upon Leather, and apply it to the Malady, and 'twill Cure it.

For Apoplectics.
Take seven or eight drops of the Essence of Rosemary in a Glass of good Wine.
Note, the Patient must be standing, and rub his Stomach to make the Remedy
penetrate the better; if it succeeds not the first time, it will not fail the
second.

For the Bowels fallen down.
Take Ladies mantle in Water, or in Powder, in Broth, or White Wind, it pulls
back and stays up the Bowels; it is likewise proper for Women that cannot
conceive with Child.

To Cure the Gonorrhea, and Carnosity. Probatum.
Take the Juice of the Herb and Root of our Ladies Thistle an ounce, in as much
more White Wind, for eight mornings or more, and you will be cured.

Otherwise.
Take two or three ounces of Mercury well purified, which put into a glazed
Pot, which you must fill with Fountain Water, adding two spoonfuls of crude
Tartar, powdered; and a handful of Salsaparilla, let them boil for half an
hour; set them to cool, and use it for your ordinary Drink; this will cure you
even of a Bubo, or Winchester Goose.

An excellent Ptisan for the French Pox.
Take six drachms of Salsaparilla, as much Antimony in Powder, fold the
Antimony in white Linen, tie it to the middle of a Stick to hang in a Pot, not
touching the bottom; Powder the Salsaparilla, that is, beat it well, or cut it
in small pieces; but it is better in Powder; put in also in powder forty
Walnuts, with the skins that divides the Kernel, the oldest are the best; six
drachms of China Wood, and a little Brazil Wood rasp'd, to give a Color to the
Ptisan; you having put them all in the Pot with two quarts of Water, and the
Antimony hanging in the middle, let it boil open, two or three boilings; then
put in also your powders of Walnuts and China, and boil them over a gentle
Fire, to the wasting of the third part.

You must make this Drink three or four times over, and strain it well every
time, for a perfect Cure.

You must first purge the Patient, with an ordinary Purgation, the day after
you have let him Blood, the third day make him drink a full Glass of the
Ptisan, at five a clock in the morning, eating nothing for three hours after;
at eight a clock let him Eat; and three hours after let him take a Glass of
Ptisan, at twelve a clock let him Eat; at five a clock another Glass of Ptisan;
at nine a clock let him Sup; at midnight, another full Glass of Ptisan; and so
continue this Course for twelve days; he must abstain from Women's company, from
drinking pure Wine; and eating salt or spiced Meats; all other honest exercise
is permitted.

For ten days he must take Clysters morning and evening, if he be bound in his
Body; and eat Prunes at his Meals.

Among his Wine he shall put half of this Water following.

Put in two quarts of Fountain Water upon the dregs that settles at the bottom
of the Pot, without the Antimony, boil it to the Consumption of the third part;
this Water has no bad Taste.

Pills of Lytharge, for the Venereal Disease.
Take Trochisches of Alhandal, Crocus Metallorum, Sal Gemma, of each one
dram; Aloes Succotrine two drachms; Electuary of Roses six drachms, make them
into Pills: the Dose is twelve Grains, which must be taken in the morning
fasting, taking a few Anniseed Comfits after it. They are to be taken for
fifteen or twenty days together, and if you will, you may take at the beginning
a Decoction made of the bark of Guajacum, Salsaparilla six drachms, China three
drachms, Sassaphras and Wood of Cubebs, of each two ounces: infusing them
twenty four hours in ten pints of Fountain or River Water.

An Emplaster for the Lungs and Stomach, which will keep good two years.
Take two drams of Aloes, Rue a little bruised, three or four handfuls, common
Water seven or eight Porringers full, boil all in a glased earthen Pot, to the
consumption that the Liquour may wet a linen Cloth; then strain it through a
linen cloth, and dip linen in the straining, that it may be thoroughly wet,
then fold the Cloth fourfold, and let it dry in the shade

A Pulmonic Person that was abandoned, was cured in three Months by carrying
this Cere-cloth four double upon his Stomach, fastened behind; this Remedy fails
not, and one will find ease in a short time, the Stomach that could not digest
is soon restored, by applying this. If you sweat, and that the Cerecloth be
moist with sweating, you must take it off and dry it, and lay it on again.

For the same distemper of the Lungs, they must use as long as they please,
Lozanges made with the Flower of Brimstone.

For the Wind, and also for the Lungs.
Take eleven Crab-fish alive, the which beat in a Mortar, till they be all to
pap, then strain them through a very white linen Cloth; pouring upon them two
quarts of White Wind, to make them strain the better; put this straining in a
Pot to infuse twenty four hours, then take every morning fasting two ounces,
till you find some ease.

An excellent Remedy for the Lungs; and against a Cough and shortness of Breath.
Take the longest Raisins of the Sun, Jujubes, St. Antonies Prunes, without
Kernels or Stones, of each two ounces, three fat Figs, three Dates, put them
all in an earthen Pot with a cover, with two quarts of Water; boil them all to
the Consumption of half; then put into the said Pot, the four Capillaries and
Flowers of Coltsfoot, of each one handful, let them all boil to a pint; strain
it, and add thereto Sugar Candy, Diaphenicon, and common Sugar, of each four
ounces; make a Syrup, boiled a little: the dose is a spoonful at Night, and as
much in the Morning; and being troubled with the Cough, steep every day a
Liquirice stick therein, and you will find success at last.

A wonderful Opiate to refresh the Liver, and purify the Blood.
Take the roots of Cichory two drams, roots of Polypodie, damask Raisins,
Liquirice and Dogs-teeth, of each one dram; of the four Capillaries, Borrage,
Scariola, Endives, Betony, Agrimony, Hops, Pimpernel, Scabious, of each one
handful; of the four great cold Seeds, Fennel, Endive of each two ounces, make
a decoction, then take six ounces of Senna, boil it in the Decoction; then take
two ounces of white Agaric, two drams of Cinnamon, and a Pugil of the Cordial
Flowers, which put to infuse therein, and boil them with a pound of Sugar, then
add Cassia cleansed four ounces, Conserve of Borage two ounces, Conserve of
Bugloss and Violets, of each one ounce, of all which make an Opiate: the dose
is a dram and a half, two hours before Meals, or twice a Month.

To temper the heat of the Liver.
Take a quantity of Liverwort, which grows in watery Places, beat it in a
Mortar, and draw out the Juice with a Press, which you shall Clarify over the
Fire with the whites of Eggs, and scum it well; then let it cool, and pour it
out by inclination, leaving the dregs at the bottom: in every pound of this
Water dissolve six ounces of sine Sugar: and then it is made: take an ounce
thereof in a Glass of Water, or alone if you will.

A Remedy for all sorts of fluxes of Blood, upwards or downwards: or for Veins
broken in the Body: for Men or Women that have an extraordinary flux.
Take a dram of Bistort-Root finely powdered, put it into two ounces of
White Wind: and if the Patient has a Pever, you put it into Broth: and without
fail the Flux will cease: even if the Patients shall void their Excrements at
the Mouth: and if the Flux of Blood shall be so violent, especially in a Woman,
give her of this power in a Clyster, made of the Broth of a Capon, with two
yolks of Eggs: and if one be but a little disordered, let them them take the
Dose abovesaid, and lay this following Plaster to the Stomach nigh the Heart.

Take a Quince, roast it with hot embers, which you shall beat into a Paste in a
silver Porringer, and strew thereon powder of Cinnamon and Cloves, and apply it.

For a Rupture, tried upon a Man of seventy Years of Age.
Take Watercresses, beat them a little, and boil them in a quart of
White Wind, in a new Pot, till it be wasted to the half, or two thirds: and
take three ounces thereof morning and evening, for nine days, keeping it rolled.

For the Pain in the Head, Falling Sickness, Vertigo, and Megrim.
Take two drops of Oil of Sulphur, thrice in a Week in a Glass of Water,
wherein Vervain, Betony, Oak of Jerusalem, Leaves and Flowers of each two
Handfuls, have been infused twenty four Hours, in two Quarts of River-water,
upon hot Embers.

For the same.
Take the Juice of Pimpernel, and drop it into the Ear, and it will appease the
Pain.

Otherwise.
Take a dram of white Hellebore, and as much black, with an handful of Salt,
which you shall put in a brass Pot that will hold six Quarts of Water, which
you shall boil the space of a quarter of an Hour; then take it off the Fire,
and let it infuse forty hours in a Window; then boil it till it be reduced to
three Quarts; which you shall put into a Bottle close stopped, for your use,
drawing it up your Nose. Probatum.

For the same, and to cause Sleep.
Take common Roses, with the White of an Egg, beaten, and well mingled
together, make a Forehead-cloth. Moreover, to cause Sleep, make a
Forehead-cloth of Poppy. Probatum.

To make one wake or sleep.
You must cut dexterously the Head of a Toad, alive, and at once, and let it
dry, in observing that one Eye be shut, and the other open; that which is found
open makes one wake, and that shut causes Sleep, by carrying it about one.

To dissolve all sorts of Catarrhs and Tumors.
Take a white Onion, and roast it in hot Embers; being enough, cut it in four
quarters, without taking any thing away, and apply it to the Ear, putting in a
little Venice Treacle before, then a hot Napkin upon it; and when the Onion is
cold, lay on another presently, with Treacle, as at first: do this four times,
and you will see all the Matter come out at the Ear: do the same to a Bubo, if
you would have it come to Suppuration.

To make one sneeze.
Take a little white Ellebore, or Euphorbium in Powder, and blow it up the Nose
with a little Tunnel.

A Bath for the Feet and Legs to cause Sleep.
Take eight or ten Lettuces, or more, or six Handfuls of Vine-leaves, and five
or six Heads of Poppyes, boil them in a Kettle with a sufficient quantity of
Water; then pour all out into another Vessel, and therewith wash the Feet and
Legs for the space of a quarter of an Hour; then wrap them in a Linen Cloth.

For Deafness. Probatum.
Take Humane Blood, or Hearts Blood, distill it in an Alembic, cast away the
Phlegm, and change the Recipient when you see Liquor white; put two or three
Drops of the said white Liquor into the deaf Ear, and stop it with Cotton, and
lie on the other side.

To preserve the Eyes from Weeping, and keep them fair and clean.
Distill a great quantity of Leaves of Mallows, in white, or red Wine; and with
the Water thereof wash the Eyes, Night and Morning. Pope Paul the Fifth used it
in his Old Age.

For a Pain in the Eyes.
Take Rose Water in a Glass, boil hard an Egg warm from the Hen, and take away
the Shell, cut it in the middle, and take away the Yolk, and fill it with
Sugar Candy, and re-joyn both Parts, which you must tie with Crimson Silk;
which done, dissolve a little Salt of Saturn in the Rose Water, and put the Egg
therein for twenty four Hours; then wash the Eyes with the same Water: There is
nothing better to take away an Inflammation.

An Emplaister to be applied to an Artery; which the King made use of.
Take half an Ounce of Mastick, Bolearmoniack two drams, Saffron fifteen
Grains, Opium a Scruple; the whole being reduced to a Consistence in an hot
Mortar, make an Emplaister thereof with a little Turpentine, adding, toward
the end, a little Vinegar.

For the Pain of the Eyes.
Apply a Snakes Skin, and burn the said Skin, and receive the Smoke into your
Eyes.

For the same.
Take ripe Sloes, and beat them in a Marble Mortar, then distill them, and put
a drop of this Water into the Eye.

For the same. A Secret of Marshal de Thorstexson in Swedeland.
Take Rose Water and Plantan-water, of each two ounces; Fountain and
Fennel-water, of each one ounce; Aloes Succotrine powdered half an ounce; put
them into a Marble Mortar with the White of an Egg, and incorporate them till
the Aloes be dissolved: when you use it, warm a little in a silver Spoon, and
put a drop in the Eye, Night and Morning.

For the same.
Take a little white Vitriol in powder, one part, Oris of Florence powdered,
another part, Sugar. Candy another part, mingle them together, and put them in
a Glass of Fountain Water, more or less; warm it, and stir it coutinually, and
put a drop warm in the Eye, going to Bed at Night.

For the same.
Take a new-laid Egg, roast or boil it hard, take out the Yolk; which done,
crumble it in a Glass, then cover it with Fountain Water, and infuse it all
night; in the morning strain it, and add of Putty the bigness of a Filberd,
which you shall dissolve therein; put one drop of this into the Eye.

Another for the same.
Take Plantan Leaves that have not been eaten by the Worms, cleanse them well
from Dirt, and warm them a little; then apply the outside long-ways to the
Eye, two to each, and let them lie on all Night: if the Eye be curable, the
Leaves will dry, if not, otherwise.

For Deafness and Noise in the Ears.
Take a white Onion, cut it long-ways to take out the middle Stalks, then join
it together, and tie it with a String, and fill the Vacancy with Oil of
Cammomil, and roast the Onion in hot Cinders; being roasted, press it between
two Trenchers, and put some of the Juice thereof into the Ear with Cotton.

A Water of great Virtue to comfort the Teeth, preserve the Gums from
Putrefaction, and cure the warry Eyes.
Take half a pound of white Vitriol, Bole Armoniack six ounces, Camphir an
ounce and half, make them into a Powder, whereof take an ounce and half, and
put it into water ready to boil, and let it boil a little; and strain it
through a Linen Cloth; then take it from the Fire. This Water cures all sorts
of Ulcers alone, cures all Defluxions, and mundifies, comforts the parts, makes
the Hands fair, and cures all sorts of Itch.

To appease the Toothache.
Take as much Water as Vinegar, and boil it with Cloves, Salt, Pepper, and a
little Aqua Vitae; and make thereof a Gargarism.

For the same.
Take of the inward Bark of Ash, and the inward Bark of Rosemary, of each half
a quarter, burn them in a hot chaffin-dish, and of the Powder thereof make a
Paste with Aqua Vitae, and apply the bigness of a Pease to the Artery.

For the same.
Take of the Juice of Celandine condensed, cut it in two, and apply it to the
Tooth.

For the same. Probatum.
Take the quantity of a Bean of Camphir, dissolve it in as little as may be of
Aqua Vitae, in a small Glass Vial, upon hot Cinders; then touch the Tooth with
a little tent of Cotton, or Linen; and if it be hollow, leave the Cotton or
Linen moistened in the Tooth.

An admirable secret to make a Tooth fall out of the Mouth without Pain.
Take a green Lizard, alive, put it into a new Earthen Pot unglas'd; stop it,
and lute it well, and put it into a Furnace, and when you know it is dead, take
the Pot out; when it is cold, make an hole in the Cover, the bigness of a Pease,
into which pour an ounce of Aqua Fortis, and half an ounce of Aqua Vitae, mixed
together, then stop the hole with fat Earth, and put the Pot to the fire again,
till the Waters be all consumed, and the Lizard reduced to Powder, then beat it
in a wooden Mortar, and keep it in a dry Place, to use as follows.

Rub the Gum of the pained Tooth, and in a moment after, it will make the Gum
to part from the Tooth, and it from the Jaw Bone; and so you may take it away
without pain.

For the Jaundies.
Take fine Steel, make it red hot in a Farriers Forge, when it is very red, take
a quartan of common Sulphur, and put to the Steel, having a wooden Vessel
underneath, in which is three quarts of White Wind, and when the Sulphur
touches the red Steel, it will melt drop by drop, which you shall let fall into
the Wine; this done, strain the Wine through a Linen Cloth, and drink thereof
for four mornings, fasting two hours after; the dose is a Glass at a time.

You may also take the melted Steel in the wooden Vessel, and powder it; which
is excellent for the same Disease; and for the stopping of the Months in Women;
given in the Decoction of Betony, or Lungwort.

For the Falling Sickness.
Take 20 grains of a Ravens Brain dried and powdered, in a Glass of White Wind,
in the decrease of the Moon.

Another infallible Receipt for the same.
Take a man's Scull, if for a Man; and a Woman's if for a Woman; it must be an
entire one, make it into an impalpable Powder, to which add the Root of Peonie
powdered one ounce; with nine grains of its seed; and a dram of Misseltoe of the
Oak, all in Powder, in a pint of White Wind, of the best red Spanish Wine; or
the best red Wine that you can get; drink it all in nine Mornings, the nine
last days of the Moon; and if the Disease returns at the increase, give it for
nine days in the new of the Moon, and continue this for three Moons.

For the Spleen.
Take a Piece of Steel, powder it, and wash it twelve times, changing your
Water every time; then infuse the Powder in a pint of White Wind, in the Sun, a
whole day, and all Night over hot Cinders; then take out the Wine and Powder of
Steel, and put to it half an ounce of Senna, and a little Scolopendria; you
shall take every morning four ounces in a Glass, walking about the Chamber, and
fasting two hours after; unless some Broth wherein a good many Herbs have been
boiled; to which you may add Ceterach. Probatum.

For a Pain in the Side.
Take black Pitch, Capons Grease, new Wax, and Rosin of each one Dram; Oil of
Camomil one ounce; Sulphur, Orris, of each about an half ounce, Turpentine one
ounce; make an Emplaister of them all, and apply it to the Part grieved.

For the Pleurisy.
Take an handful of Perwincle, steep it an hour or two in White Wind; strain
it, and give it the Patient to drink.

For the beating of the Heart.
Take distilled water of Balm; it cures the beating of the Heart, and hinders
vomiting.

For those that are poisoned by some Metal or Mineral.
Take two or three drops of Oil of Tartar, in Broth or Wine, and swallow it
down; and it will precipitate all the Poison.

To cure a swelled and inflamed Knee.
Make a Cataplasm of Milk, white-bread Crumbs, Honey, Butter, Marshmallows, all
well beaten and mixed together, and apply it to the Pain.

Against the Plague.
Take one or two of the biggest Toads you can get; put them into an unvarnish'd
earthen Pot; lute it well, and put it into a Furnace, till the Toads be burnt
and reduced to Ashes; of which give a dram in a Glass of Wine; this is good
before and after the Plague.

For the same.
Take Carduus Benedictus in Powder one Dram in a Glass of Wine; it helps before
and after the Plague.

The Juice of Carduus Benedictus made into a Syrup is excellent for the same.

To take away the Marks of the Plague.
Take Carduus Benedictus, and apply it to the Cicatrizes, and it will take away
the Marks.

For swelled Cods.
Take Salt of Carduus Benedictus, and mingle it with sweet Wine, and lay Linen
Cloth wet therein to the Parts.

For the same.
Take Marigold Flowers, beat them, and press out the Juice, and foment the part
afflicted therewith warm; and lay the Dreggs thereon dipped therein. Probatum,

A Preservative against the Plague.
Take three or four great Toads, seven or eight Spiders, and as many Scorpions,
put them into a Pot well stopped, and let them lie some time; then add Virgin
Wax; make a good Fire, till all become a Liquour; then mingle all with a
Spatula, and make an Ointment, and put it into a Silver Box well stopped, the
which carry about you, being well assured, that while you carry it about you,
you will never be infected with the Plague.

Against the Plague, approved.
Take Rue, Wormwood, Juniper Berries well beaten, Garlic cleansed from its
Pills, Angelica cleansed from its Bark and Wood, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one
ounce, beat them grossly in a Mortar; then mingle them together in a quart of
the best Vinegar, and boil them in a new Pot to the Consumption of the third
part, then strain them and let them cool; being cold, put it into a Glass
Bottle, and use it as follows. Dip a Linen Cloth therein, and smell thereto
from time to time. Or else, take half a Spoonful fasting every morning, being
amongst the infected; and rub your Joints, and Parts of the Body which the
Plague ordinarily seizes on: and if you be infected drink a Glass thereof.

A Remedy wherewith Madam the Marquess of Chenoise cured diverse Phrensical
People.
You must begin with bleeding three days before you use this following Receipt.

Take a glased earthen Pot that holds six quarts, wherein put three handfuls of
Tree-Ivy, with three pints of White Wind; stop the Pot with Paste, for fear the
Air enter; then set it over hot Cinders, with a gentle fire for twenty four
hours together without ceasing, keeping it always after the same fashion: then
take it off, and pour out the Wine that remains therein; and take the Ivy and
beat it in a Marble Mortar, an hour without ceasing, then add six ounces of
Sallet Oil, and mingle them well in the Mortar, reducing them to the form of an
Unguent, which divide into three equal parts, of which take one part and strain
it through a linen Cloth, and with the Juice that comes forth rub the sick
Persons Head, (first cutting off the Hair,) then the Temples; and the Dregs
that remain put between two linen Cloths, and bind them on, which let lie
eight hours without removing; then proceed thus five times, keeping eight hours
of interval, no more nor less without failing.

For a Noli Me tangere.
Take of Crabs Eyes calcined, an ounce a day in White Wind, or Broth in the
Morning fasting; and put some of the same Powder upon the Plasters.

To cure all sorts of Ulcers and Gangrenes.
Take an handful or two of quick Lime, quench it in common Water; take a dram
of Sublimate, which dissolve also in common Water; pour on by inclination, the
Lime Water upon the sublimate Water, which will become red, wash the part with
this Water, and it will make the Escar fall off.

An admirable Plaster for Wounds, Ulcers, Cancers, King's Evil, Bubo's, Corns
in the Feet, and Tumors that come in such like Places. Approved.
Take the best Sallet Oil a pound, put it in an earthen Vessel upon the Fire,
and when it is hot add yellow wax cut in pieces, three ounces, stir it with a
wooden Spatula; when it is melted put in six ounces of Ceruse finely powdered,
always stirring it very well, and the mixture will become white, the which in
boiling will lose its color, and become dark; and before it be so, add
Litharge of Gold very finely powdered and sears'd one ounce; and when it is well
incorporated add half an ounce of Terra Sigillata, and incorporate them very
diligently: then add half an ounce of white Baum, continually stirring them
that they do not stick to the Bottom: and to know when all is well boiled, put
a drop in a Spoonful of Water: if it be black it is a sign it is enough; then
take it from the Fire, and add two drams of Oil of Rosemary, and incorporate it
with the rest; then let it rest about half a quarter of an Hour; and when you
shall hold it to the Light, if it begins to separate, put it into a great Basin
of cold Water, and incorporate it with your hands to mingle it well: then make
it into Rowls, that it may keep the better.

For all sorts of old Ulcers.
Take a dry Walnut-leaf powdered, put it on the Ulcer, and lay a Walnut leaf
thereon, the which leaf alone will cure the Ulcer.

For the Hemorrhoides.
Take a Tobacco-leaf, steep it a Day and Night in Water, and apply it to the
Hemorrhoides, and it will cure them.

For the same.
Take a Sorrel-leaf, put it in a Paper, and roast it under the hot Cinders;
then beat it with Unguent and Oil of Roses, equal Parts, made to the
Consistence of a Pultis, and apply it Evening and Morning, and you will see
Wonders.

Otherwise.
Rub them with the Neopolitan Ointment.

For Corns in the feet.
Take an ounce of Diachylon, Mucilage one dram, Verdigrease one dram; mix them
well together, and apply them to the Corn, being pared before.

For the same.
Take the Root and Herb called Housleek, which is round and as big as a
Filberd, more or less, take away the Earth that sticks about it, and crush it
with your Fingers, and apply it to the Corn; renewing it every three hours, or
four or five times a day; in twenty four Hours it will cure them so that they
shall never return again.

To kill great and small Warts.
Take the Juice of Celandine, that comes from the Plant by cutting; rub the
Wart, and drop some upon it.

The same is done with Milk of a Fig Tree.

For a Burn.
Quench quick Lime, and then filtre the Water, and put the burnt Part thereon,
or moisten it with a Linnen-cloath.

Or else.
Dissolve Camphir in Aqua Vitae, and do as before.

For the same.
Take fresh Horse-dung, and fry it with fresh Grease; then press out the Juice,
through a Cloth, with which you shall anoint the Part afflicted, laying a Paper
thereon.

For the same.
Take little pieces of Cloth, or blue Serge, and dip them in Lamp Oil, then
light and burn them; and all the Oil that falls in burning, take it in a Pewter
Plate, and anoint the Part therewith, and lay a Paper thereon.

For all sorts of Pain in the Joints; even for the Gout.
Take a Spoonful of the Water of Housleek, or Plantan, distilled, two Spoonfuls
of Oil of Worms, three Spoonfuls of Cream, two ounces of old Pork Grease,
mingle them together with a Spatula, and then rub the part afflicted therewith.
Probatum.

A most excellent Balsam.
Take three Handfuls of Wormwood, of Mugwort, Rue, Rosemary, Sage, the Flowers
and Leaves of each two Handfuls, Lawrel-berries, according to the quantity you
will make; but you must have more Rue and Wormwood than other Herbs: boil them
in a Kettle in a sufficient quantity of Oil of Nuts; and when the Herbs are
enough, the which you will know when they look black, then take them out of the
Kettle, and pour out the clear Oil gently: then press the Herbs in a Cloth with
a Press, to draw out all their Virtue; which add to the clear Oil: put thereto,
to the Proportion of the Quantity, Pitch-Rosin beaten one Pound, Beeswax half
a Pound, Venice Turpentine two drams, Oil of Spike two ounces, stirring it
continually with a wooden Spatula. When all is well melted, strain it, and
throw away the Dregs: put this Balm into a glazed Pot, stopped well with
Parchment and varnished Leather thereon; and to do well, it must be put into a
Horse-dunghil for six Weeks, and use it as follows: and if you will have it
liquid, put not in so much Wax-Rosin.

Its Virtues.
1. It cures all fresh Wounds in twenty four Hours, applied warm, having first
washed them with warm Wine. 2. It cures all Pains of the Head, applied warm to
the Temples, and a warm Cloth laid thereon. 3. It cures Deafness when it is not
inveterate, put into the Ear with Cotton, going to Bed, laying a warm Linen
Cloth to the Ear; which you must observe every time you use the Balsam. 4. It
cures the Pain in the Stomach, and stays Vomiting, helps Digestion, rubbing the
Stomach therewith, and laying a warm Linen Cloth thereto. 5. It cures the
Griping of the Guts, all sorts of Colicks, the Suffocation of the Matrix,
applied to the Stomach, Reins, and Belly. 6. It eases the Palsy, and all cold
Pains, applied warm with common Bolsters: but you must cover the Patient well
to make him sweat. 7. Applied moderately warm, it cures the twisting of the
Nerves. 8. It Is a Sovereign Remedy for the difficulty of Urine, applied warm to
the Reins; along the Vertebres with warm Linen, and drink white Wine. 9. It is
excellent for the Sciatica, applied to the Part. 10. It cures venomous Bitings
of mad Dogs, Serpents, or other Beasts: but before you apply the Balsam, you
must make the Wound bleed, and wash it with Wine and Lint, and then apply it.
For the Gout and Pox.
Take prepared Scammony, Liquorice in Powder, Turmeric, Guajacum, Mechoacan,
Jalap, Turbith, of each two drams; Cream of Tartar, Hermodactils, Senna of
Levant, Gutta-gamba, China, black Hellebore, Rubarb, Salsaparilla, of each four
drams, fine Sugar one ounce, powder all apart, and mingle them together: The
Dose is one dram in White Wine or Broth, for four Mornings, abstaining from
four days to four days.

For the hot or cold Gout, or other Pains.
Take Orange-flower Water, or Limons, Rosemary Water, Water of Flowers of
Spike, Venice Turpentine, put altogether and make them boil for half a quarter
of an hour, continually beating them with a wooden Spatula; and when you take
them from the Fire, add two good Spoonfuls of Aqua vitae refined, as much Oil
of Wax, beating it continually while it is vvarm; then spread it upon a white
Kids Skin, and apply it to the putrid Part, and let it lie on three days, and
if it takes not away the Pain renew the Plaster.

For the Sciatica.
Take Glue, and make an Emplaister thereof spread upon Kids Leather, and apply
it to the Part grieved; leaving it on till the Pain be gone; or till the
Plaster become black, and comes off of its own accord; and you see little
drops of Water upon the Part.

For the Gout in the feet.
Take of the oldest Soot, one handful, Canon very finely powdered, two ounces
and an half; two white Onions, both weighing half a pound, beat them well
together, and put them in a Glass Bottle, with two great Glasses of the best
Vinegar, from the full to the new Moon, expose the Bottle to the Air, and rub
that Part with this Composition.

An Emplaister for a Rupture.
Take a pound of Emplastrum ad Herviam, cut in small pieces and melt it over a
gentle fire; then add half an ounce of Diamond Stone in Powder, Bean Meal an
ounce; filings of Steel one ounce; Snails without Shells an ounce; a little
Pellitory of the Wall, or Feverfew, Oil of Mastich four ounces, boil them all
together till the Plaster become black and shining.

The black Plaster of Catalonia.
Take six ounces of Sallet Oil, Litharge of Gold three ounces, red Lead, burnt
Lead, of each two ounces, Gum Elemy, black Soap of each two ounces, Rosin,
black Pitch, yellow Wax of each three ounces. The Oil, Litharge, red Lead, and
burnt Lead, must be put together, then the Pitch and Wax when the other are
melted, the Gum Elemy and Rosin when you have taken it from the fire, and
begins to be cold.

An Oil for all Pleurisies, Bruises, Palsy of the Nerves, and pain of the
Stomach.
Take a pound of Sallet Oil, three quarts of White Wind, and half a pound of
Salt; let them boil together for some time, then add a a pound of Turpentine,
which dissolve in Wine and Oil, and afterward Wax, if you will make a Balsam.

Arceus his Balsam.
Take Sallet Oil, Venice Turpentine, Gum Elemy, Oil of St. John's-wort, of each
three ounces, Oil of Roses two ounces, Rosin half an ounce, boil them all till
it is enough; it is most excellent for Gunshot and all other Wounds.

A red Ointment.
Take Sallet Oil, Litharge washed, white Honey, of each four ounces, new Wax two
ounces, red Lead half an ounce; melt the Wax in the Oil, then add the Honey and
Powders, finely beaten: being well incorporated, take them from the fire, and
your Ointment is made; it is good for the Scurf of Women's Breasts, for Ulcers,
to incarne and dry them both at once.

For a Scaled Head.
Take the Buttons of vvild Cucumbers; for want of them, the Leaves one
handful, Oil of Nuts half a pound, twelve musty Pilchards, beat them together,
and put them into a glazed Pot, with a pint of the blackest Wine you can get;
boil them to the vvasting of the Wines; then shave the Head, and vvash it with
Ox Piss, and anoint it with this Ointment for four days, which will be about
the time of the Cure, and the longest that may be; Probatum.

For a Paraphymosis.
Take what quantity of Snails you please, beat them in a Marble Mortar with
their Shells, and toward the end add a little Pork Grease; beat and mingle all
together, and apply it to the Part, and repeat it Night and Morning, till it be
cured.

A most sovereign Remedy for Persons that lose their Blood, from what Part
soever, either Man or Woman.
Take fresh Asses Dung, beat it in a Mortar, and press out all the Substance,
in a course Linen Cloth; take a Spoonful thereof, with twice as much Syrup of
Plantan.

For the Ptysick.
Take half an ounce of Crab-fish alive, beat them well in a Marble Mortar, and
distill the Water that comes from them; give half a Glass every Morning,
fasting, for eight or ten Days.

To Bind.
Take Cypress-Nuts, bruise, and boil them in Red Wine, and give it to the
Patient.

A gentle Purge.
Take a dram of Jalap, with a little Powder of Liquirice, infuse them all night
in White Wine.

A Ptysan that Purges gently.
Take half a Pint of Verjuice, infuse therein half an ounce of Senna, in a new
Pot, over hot Coals; when the Verjuice is hot, put the quantity of a Nut of
fresh Butter, and as much Salt as is enough for one Egg: boil it a little, and
take it from the Fire, and let it infuse all night: in the Morning strain it
through a clean Linen Cloth, and take a Dose thereof every Morning in fat or
lean Broth.

Foelix's Ptysane.
Take Liquirice, Polipody, red Roses, of each one ounce; Senna half an ounce, a
Pugil of Annise, a dram of Crystal Mineral, a Renet Apple, and a Citron cut in
pieces; infuse all in a quart or three pints of cold Water, and take a Glass
thereof Morning and Night.

A Medicine that Purges gently.
Take an Handful of March Violets, and an Handful of the Herb Mercury, boil
them in a little Earthen Pot, with Mutton or Veal Broth, then strain it, and
take it at Pleasure: if you desire to add a few Mallows, and an Handful of
Sorrel, 'twill not be amiss.

Excellent Purging Lozenges.
Take of the three Sanders, red Roses, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Turbith, Scammony, of
each half a dram; of Senna two Scruples, Melon and Gourge Seeds of each five
Scruples; powder them all with four ounces of Sugar: make them into Lozenges
according to Art.

A Syrup for those that are subject to Swooning Fits, and cannot recover.
Take as much Rose Water as of the Queen of Hungary's Water, and Sugar Candy,
which melt over a gentle Fire, and you will have a Syrup; which, mingled with
Cinnamon Water, works Wonders with those that are subject to Swooning-Fits.

Madam the Countess of Daillon's Water, by Monsieur de Forgeray, M.
Take three Handfuls of Cow Dung, Scabious, Lungwort, Veronica Flowers, of each
an Handful, Plantan, Queen of the Medows, Shepherds Purse, Pimpernel, Bugloss,
Fennel, of each an Handful; two River-Crabs bruised, distill all in an Alembic,
in Balneo Mariae: the Dose four ounces every Morning.

Otherwise.
Take 4 l. of Cow Dung, Flowers of Perwincle, Scabious, of each two little
Handfuls, four Pugils of red Poppy Flowers, Flowers of Coltsfoot, as much of
the Tops of St. John's Wort: distill all as before, and take the same dose.

To preserve Health.
Easter Dwarf, Elder Leaves in the Season, without any Dew, and set them to dry
in the Sun; and take them in about four a Clock in the Afternoon, to serve you
in Winter. Make a Bed of these Leaves, and let the Party lie thereon, whom
cover over with other Leaves, then with a Sheet and Covering, which will make
him sweat; and by this means one may keep himself in perfect Health.

Magistery of Pearls.
Take Oriental Pearls, put them grossly powdered into a Matrice, and pour
distilled Vinegar thereon, or Citron Juice, which is better, as not having so
much Sharpness: let it be three fingers breadth above the Powder; then stop the
Vessel with good Wax, and put it to digest, upon hot Cinders, stirring it two
or three times a day, till you see the Pearls in the bottom of the Vessel,
converted into a Lemony Juice: pour off the Juice of Citron gently by
Inclination, and evaporate the rest over a gentle Fire, till the Pearls remain
in the bottom of a white Powder, which wash five or six times with distilled
Rain water, till they have lost all their Sharpness; and then the Powder being
wholly dried, it is the true Magistery of Pearls.

Note, You must pour on a few drops of Oil of Tartar, which will make the
Magistery precipitate to the bottom of the Vessel.

The Spagiries attribute to it these wonderful Virtues following, nigh to those
of Aurum Potabile: They say, It Is good to preserve the Body in Health, to drive
away all ill Dispositions, and particularly the Frenzy, the Vertigo, the
Apoplexy, the Falling Sickness, and other Diseases of the Brain. They say also,
it is a powerful Cordial, and has very great Effects upon them that are subject
to Swoonings, Palpitation of the Heart, and those that are seized with a
pestilent Fever: Briefly, they accommodate it for the Cure of all the principal
Parts. The Dose is twelve Grains, or one Scruple, in Juleps or other convenient
Liquors.

An Aurum Potabile; and an inestimable Treasure, which cures Leprosies,
Falling Sickness, the Pox, the Palsy, and all incurable Maladies.
Take seven old double Ducats, cement them with half a dram of Sal Gem well
prepared, in an earthen Pot, well boiled over a gentle Fire; then wash them and
dry them, and make them very red in the Fire, keeping them in an earthen Vessel
very clean and new; being very red, quench them in Sallet Oil: doing all this
seven times, then they will be calcined, and may be made into Powder of a
Saffron Dye, if you rub it between your Fingers.

Take a Pound of Sugar Candy finely powdered, and therewith make one Lay upon
another in a Retort of sealed Earth; the which bury in a Pot full of Sand, and
cover the said Pot with another Pot to keep in the Heat, and give it a gentle
Charcoal-fire above and below; let it be such a Heat as that when they bake the
Bread in the Oven, without being excessive, twenty four Hours: then take it
from the fire, and bray all in a Marble-Mortar, and put it into a Vessel, that
the Matrice hold about twice as much as the Alembick, and at the sides, a Neck
for the Matter; which put into the said Vessel with a Pint of pure Aqua vitae,
and let them be sealed well twenty four Hours together over a good Fire that
the Aqua vitae may always boil; and when you see a Whiteness at bottom, which
is the Calx of the Gold, it is done: pour out the said Water by Inclination,
which will be of a Violet Tincture, approaching to red or yellow, the which
will cure the Leprous, giving them one grain a day, and all other forsaken
Maladies, and all incurable Diseases.

Another manner of making Aurum Potabile.
Take three Pints of Leaves of Gold, three of Glass of Antimony, three Pints of
Sugar Candy; the whole well powdered, mingle them together, and put them into a
Glass Alembick; the which being covered with its Head and Recipient, distill
them with a gentle Fire at first, and at last a strong one: the whole will turn
into a Liquor, which will be done in five or six hours. The Dose is four or
five Drops in some specific Water, and purges very gently.

A most excellent Preparation of Antimony, and its Virtue.
Take mineral Antimony, at least fifteen or twenty pounds, bruise it grossly;
that done, take three Pots of Earth of an Alembic; or of another sort, that
will endure the fire well; pierce it at bottom with little holes, and there put
a great Iron Pan full of holes, wherein you shall put your Antimony; then put
it upon another Pot, and cover it with a third, that the Mouth of the one may
just go into the other; lute the Joints well; the Lute being dry and without
clefts; bury the first in the Earth; and make round about that which shall
contain the Antimony, a foursquare Fornance of Brick, within the distance of
four fingers; which you shall fill with burning Char-coals; encompassing all
the said Pot with the Pot above; and there continue a great Fire, for a long
hour; let it be dying a whole Night, that it be all wholly cold; then unlute
it, and you will find all your Antimony in your Pot below; which make into an
impalpable Powder, which you shall put in an earthen Plate, like a pastry
Cooks, which is very large at the bottom; the which place upon a Furnace,
wherein you shall make a gentle Fire, stirring the Powder continually with a
Spatula, till it smoke not, and be of a greenish Color, taking heed that it
melt not through too much Fire, then melt it in a new earthen Vessel with a
great Fire in an open Furnace; when you have put it in Water, plunge in it a
Rod of Iron; and taking it presently out, see at the Light if it be transparent
and of a Citron Color; then pour it out into a clean Copper Basin; being cold,
make it into an impalpable Powder, and put it into a glass Cucurbite, and pour
thereon Vinegar thrice distilled; cover the Cucurbite with a glass Box luted,
with a starched Cloth being very dry; put half the Cucurbite into Horse Dung
for three days; then taking it out of the Dung unlute it; and having rested a
good hour, pour out clear that colored Vinegar by inclination, into an earthen
Vessel without disturbing it; stop the Vessel well, then pour other Vinegar
upon your Powders; digest them as before in the Dung for three Days; then
pouring them gently into the said Vessel, continue this extraction and process,
as long as the Vinegar will color it; this done, take the Dreggs, at the
bottom of that Cucurbit, and wash them well with clear Water; and being well
rubbed with a dry Cloth, pour on the Vinegar colored; then having put on its
top, distill it dry in the Cinders; and there will remain a yellowish Powder in
the bottom, upon which you shall pour the quantity of two ounces of good spirit
of Wine; then having stirred it well, and covered the Cucurbit with its Box,
that is, one of those glass Vessels, where they put the preserved Cherries,
lute it well with starched Bands, and the lute very dry, put it in Horse Dung
half covered, for three days; then, having taken it out of the Dung, unlute
the Cloths, letting it stand an hour; pour out your Tincture into a clean
Vessel, without any Dregs, then stop the Vessel well, and put into the Cucurbit
other Spirit of Wine, high, two Fingers breadth; repeating this operation, as
long as the Spirit of Wine will color it self; then put all the Spirit of Wine
so colored into a clear Cucurbit, and covering it with its top luted, with a
Recipient, distill entirely all the said Spirit of Wine, and keep the Powders
which you find in the bottom of the Alembic, upon which you shall pour
Rainwater distilled thrice, in Sand, with a very gentle Fire; and pour it on
your Powders, and distill it as before; after which your Powders will not be
any ways vomitive; the Virtues and Doses of which are as follow:

Four grains taken in White Wind, drives away the Leprosy, Pox, purifying the
corrupt Blood, Purges the Malancholic, resists Worms, cures the Asthmatics,
Purges without Stool or Vomiting; but by Sweat, Urine and Spittle, removes the
cause of Diseases, and restores what is corrupted.

To incite Venery.
Easter Satyrion at the end of the Month of May, and take the two Kernels that
are within its root, that oth' lest side is the better: and put five or six
whole Kernels, or in pieces into a Bottle of Spanish Wine, and stop it very
close, and put it very deep in Horse-Dung, the space of two or three Months;
then take thereof at your Discretion, fasting in a Morning, and at Night going
to Bed.

For the same.
Take a Quart of Spanish Wine, wherein put half a dram of Salt of Sage, and
stop it well, then bury it in Sand for a fortnight or three weeks, and take
thereof, as before.

To bereave one of their Wits, and make them come again.
Eat of the Root of Faba Inversa in Powder, and to make them come again, take
the Juice of an Onion, and put it into the Ears.

For the same, and amaze a Person.
Infuse the Berry called Strammonium in White Wind, for twenty four hours, and
make him drink it; and immediately he or she that drank shall fall down to the
Ground as if they were dead; to make them come again, put Linen dipped in strong
Vinegar to their Nose.

This Drink works the same effect upon an Horse; and in lieu of Vinegar, put
some Water into his Ears.

Against the Wind in the Belly.
Apply a living Tench to the Patients Navel, the Head being upwards toward the
Stomach; and tie it fast on with a Napkin; and there leave it twenty four
hours, till it be dead; then bury it in the Dung, and you will see the Wind
will vanish.

Dormitive Pills, to be put in a Chaffin-dish between the Thighs, and they will
make one sweat abundantly.
Take an ounce of white Wax, half an ounce of Tobacco, make a mass thereof; and
make pills thereof according to Art.

Oil of Butter for a Cold Gout, and other Pains.
Melt your Butter upon hot Cinders, and when it boils scum it very well; then
add the same weight of Spirit of Wine rectified; and put it over the Fire till
it be evaporated, and the Oil remain at the bottom.

To cleanse and incarnate the Teeth, and Gums.
Take Dragons Blood, and Cinnamon three ounces, burnt Alum two ounces; make all
of them into a fine Powder, and rub the Teeth therewith every other Day.

To preserve the Gums, and the Teeth that are loose.
Take Earthworms calcined, and rub the Teeth therewith; or else a Calves Liver
dried in an Oven and powdered, adding the same quantity of Honey, and boil it to
the Consistence of an Opiate.

For the Marks of the Small Pox.
Wash the Face with Water of White-wine-Vinegar distilled, at night going to
Bed; and the next morning with a Decoction made of Mallows and Bran: do thus
eight days together.

To cause that Antimony shall only purge downwards.
Take Crocus Metallorum, and make it into a very fine Powder, the which mingle
with Aqua Vitae, the which must be three fingers breadth above the Crocus
Metallorum; but it matters not what quantity, for the Aqua Vitae draws what
virtue it can, and leaves the rest; then strain the Aqua vitae, and add thereto
the same weight of good Sugar Candy, and set Fire to the Aqua vitae till it
will burn no longer; so there will remain a Syrup, whereof you may give two or
three Spoonfuls, even to Women with Child, for it works gently.

To keep one from growing fat.
Take Cherry-Kernels, and put them in Sugar confect, and use them night and
morning; you may use white Tartar, in lieu of Salt with your meat. Probatum.

The singular Virtues of the Herb called Fluellin.
This Herb is very common, and yet little known by its Name; it grows
frequently among Corn, and plough'd Lands about Harvest time; the Country
People use it when they cut themselves with Sythes, etc. The Water of its
Leaves and Branches drawn when it is in its full Virtue by an Alembic or Balneo
Mariae is of wonderful use to stay the spreading of a Cancer in the Breasts;
and the spreading Polipus, though one would think they were incurable; and if
you apply the same Herb to the forehead, it will infallibly appease the pains
of the Head; injected, it mundifies and consolidates Wounds; and quickly drys
up Fistula's and Ulcers, which by other Remedies are made worse; instilled into
watery Eyes, it cures them and stays all Defluxions that may happen to them, and
so cause Inflammations and Dimness; also applied with a Linen Cloth upon
Tetters, Itch, Pustules, Scabs, Pimples, Ring-worms, St. Anthonies Fire, etc.
'twill extinguish them in a little time, as also all Inflammations; drank for
one day it stays all Rheums, Vomittings, Flux of the Belly, drys up Hidropick
Waters, appeases pains of the Cholic; cures Tertian and Quartan Fevers; and I
believe may profitably be given in other Fevers.

A wonderful Receipt for the Cure of the King's Evil, and other Wounds.
Take a quart of White Wind, put it in a glazed earthen Pot, and boil it with
two ounces of Sugar, and two ounces of round Birthwort cut in thin Slices, and
let it infuse upon hot Embers for four hours, till the half be wasted.

For the Kings Evil you must add two drams of Zedoary, and two drams of
Rhapontic well beaten, and tied in a Linen Cloth.

When you use it you must foment it as hot as it can be suffered, and if it be
deep you must seringe it, and dress it thrice a day; then take a Colewort Leaf,
dry it a little, and apply it to the Wound, with a Linen Bolster.

To make the Plaster called Manus Dei.
Take an ounce and a quarter of Galbanum, three ounces and three drams of
Ammoniacum, and an ounce of Opoponax, bruise the gums in a Mortar, and infuse
them in two quarts of good White Wind Vinegar, without Mixture, if it be
possible, the space of eight and forty hours; stirring them every day twice or
thrice with a Spatula; then put them over the Fire in a Posnet, and let it boil
to the diminishing of half or thereabout; then strain through a Strainer or
strong Cloth, pressing them so that there remain no Substance: then put them
again in the Fire, and make them boil as before, stirring them always with an
Iron, or wooden Spatula, till the Gums come to a Body of the Consistence of
Honey, which you will know by letting fall a drop or two upon a Plate:

This done, take two Pounds and an half of Sallet Oil, which you shall put into
another Skillet apart, with a Pound and half of Litharge of Gold, and an ounce
of Verdigrease, both first powdered and sears'd, and let them boil over a very
gentle Fire, stirring it continually with an Iron or wooden Spatula (for
otherwise the Litharge will get together) till all be well incorporated
together; then increase your Fire, and boil it till it become of a red-brown
Color, though it will be black before it will become reddish. This being done,
put in a pound of new Wax cut in little Pieces, and melt it therein, stirring
it continually with a Spatula; then put in your Gums, boiled before, and warmed
a little that they may strain the better: but before this, take heed that your
Oil be not too hot; for if so, all will boil in the Fire.

This done, take what follows well powdered and sers'd, four ounces of Diamond
of Levant, two ounces of long Birthwort, Mastick, Myrrh, and Bdellium, of each
one ounce, and two ounces of the purest Frankincense; which you shall put into
the Skillet, and incorporate them very diligently together, the Skillet being
taken from the Fire; and take heed, that when you put in the said Powders your
Oil be not too hot, for all will fly out; and then you shall set all over the
Cinders, or a very gentle Fire, that they may incorporate the better.

And when it is cold, make a Paste thereof with your Hands moistened with
Vinegar, and make it into Rowls upon a Table besprinkled also with Vinegar; and
when they are dry, wrap them in a Paper, and keep them for your Use.

The said Plaster will keep good fifty years; and it is not good to use it till
it has been made two or three Months.

You need not use any Tents, nor Lint, unless the Wound whereon you apply it
close up, or that the Flesh increase too much.

To be cured quickly, you must eat no Garlic or Onions; it is very good for old
or new Wounds, it cleanses, and makes Flesh come without Corruption; it unites
Nerves cut asunder, and strengthens the bruised ones; it cures any Windiness,
even in the Head; it cures Wounds made by Gunshot, allays the Inflammation,
draws out Iron and Bullets out of Wounds, and Splints of Bones, if they be in
the Body.

It cures the Bitings of venomous and mad Beasts, sensibly drawing out the
Venom; it cures all sorts of Apostumes and Kernels, Cancers, King's Evil,
Fistula's, and even the Plague it self.

It is also very good to make rebellious Haemorrhoids flow: it is also very
good to cure the Farces in Horses.

In short, it is daily approved of for curing a multitude of Diseases.

For the Megrim.
In the Month of May, and in a fair Morning, early, before the Sun rise, take
Mallow-leaves, and draw up the Dew thereof into your Nose: This absolutely
cures the Megrim, without Relapse.

For the Diseases of Women and Children. CHAP. II.
To make a Woman lose her Milk within a Day or two.
TAke Rue, and put it between the two Arm-holes night and Day, and she will
quickly lose her Milk. Probatum.

For an Infant dead in the Mothers Womb.
Give the Mother the Juice of Hysop to drink in warm Water, and she will
immediately be delivered, though it were rotten. Probatum.

To deliver a Woman quickly, and make her void the Afterbirth, or dead Child;
and for the Apoplecticks.
Take seven or eight drops of the Essence of Rosemary, in a Glass of good
White Wind.

Note, The Patient must stand upright, and you must rub their Stomachs, to make
the Remedy penetrate the better: and if it succeeds not the first time, 'twill
not fail the second.

For the same.
Take half a quarter of Eeles Livers, wash them in White Wine, and dry them
upon a Tyle, and powder them, and give a dram thereof in white Wine to the
Woman in Labor.

For the same.
Take Mallows, and beat them in a marble Mortar, and apply them in form of a
Cataplasm, or Pultis, to the Reins of the Back.

Note, You must not let them remain there long.

For Pains after Child birth.
Take two new-laid Eggs, and swallow them with the quantity of a small Nut of
Sugar; immediately after she is delivered, then drink a little Water and Wine.

For a Fever coming from Milk.
Take white and green Populeum, melt it upon hot Cinders, then rub the Breasts
therewith, and lay waste-Paper upon the Teat, and lay a Cloth four double
thereon, and let not the Air come to them.

For the same.
Take Potters-Earth, Beans the Husks taken off, Whites of Eggs, Eels boiled in
Vinegar, Oil of Roses; all beaten and well mingled together, make a Pultis and
apply it cold.

To procure the monthly Courses.
Take two Daisies, wash them in clean Water, and dry them, then boil them with
the White of an Egg, in Water, in a glazed Pot, and strain them, then put them
into a Pot again with Wine, wherein put half a dram of Saffron, dried; let it
boil three or four times: and of this take a full Glass Night and Morning for
three days together.

For the same.
Take black Chick Pease, boil them in Water, and strain them when they are
boiled, whereof take a full Glass every other morning, for three mornings.

To make them have their Courses in order, that have them not.
Take a good Handful of Feverfew, boil it in Water, strain it through a course
Cloth, and take thereof a good Glass-full three mornings, every other morning.

To know if a Woman be with Child.
Take her Urine and put it in a Copper-Pot, wherein put a piece of Iron filed
bright, all Night: if she be with Child, you will see red Spots; if not, it
will become black and rusty.

To provoke the Terms.
Take the Leaves, Bark, or Berries of Privet, beat them, and infuse them twenty
four Hours in White Wine, whereof take two or three ounces for three mornings
together.

To make the Small Pox come forth.
Take a Piece of Pork, enterlarded with Fat and Lean; roast it upon a Spit: and
as long as it is roasting, besprinkle it with Rosewater, till it taste no more
of Grease: keep that which remains in the Dripping-Pan, which put in a
Glass-Vessel for your use, and anoint the Face and other Parts therewith, and
it will assuredly and perfectly make them come out. Probatum.

To prevent the Marks of the Small Pox.
Take a Calf's or Oxe's Lungs, put them upon burning Charcoals, and when they
begin to drop, take a Sponge and suck up the Water, and press it out into an
earthen Vessel, adding thereto the same weight of male Pork's Grease, and as
much of the Juice of Wormwood; mingle them well, and incorporate them upon a
good Chafing Dish, then with a Sprig of Wormwood which you shall moisten
therein, sprinkle it upon the Face.

Note, You must not use this Remedy till nine days be past.

For Worms in Little Children.
Melt fine Tinn several times, and every time quench it in Fountain Water,
which give the Children for their common Drink.

To cure Infants of the Convulsion.
Take Hens-dung, Peacocks Dung, dry is yet better, part each piece in two, and
you will find a little white inside, which you must take out dexterously with
the Point of a Knife, and beat it with Loaf-Sugar, and make thereof a Powder,
and give half a dram thereof as you see occasion, or a little more in Broth or
White Wine.

To cure a sore Throat.
Take Roche Alum two ounces, dried Cutle-bone, sandy Sponge, of each one
ounce, calcine them in an unglaz'd Earthen Pot, in an Oven when the Bread's
taken out, night or morning; lay some of this Powder upon the Tongue at your
Discretion, rubbing the Throat well, above and below, and in the morning drink
good and strong Aqua Vitae; so continuing for twelve or fifteen days.

For the same.
Take a Sheeps small Guts, put them about your Neck till they be cold; then
apply others hot, from the Sheep new killed, and so continue this as long as
you please.

For the same.
Take the Powder of a Vipers Head, and sow it in a Ribbon, and hang it about
your Neck.

To stay Women's Fluxes.
Take white Vine-Leaves dried in the Shade: the Dose is half a dram or a little
more in White Wine.

To stay the Blood in Women.
Take a dram of Pomegranate Rinds in Powder, in two ounces of Plantan-Water;
then take a Skain of new Thread, moisten it in strong Vinegar, and apply it to
the part.

An Opiate for the Green Sickness.
Take Crocus Martis, Hartshorn prepared, of each one ounce, Aromaticum
Rosatum, Sugar Candy, of each two ounces; liquid Conserve of Rosemary one
ounce, of the Leaves of Chicory, Baum, and Ceterach a little of each; beat and
mingle them well together, and take thereof the quantity of a Filberd Night and
Morning.

Imperial Violet Water.
Take a quart of Rose Water, half a quartern of March Violet-Flowers, put them
into an open Glass-bottle, that will hold two quarts, the Violets being
stripped, and the white cut away, and set them in the Sun, till the Leaves be
white, then strain them, and put them in the Sun again, for about a fortnight,
or three weeks, taking them in every Night: then add a pound of fine Sugar
powdered, and let it dissolve; then an ounce of good Cinnamon beaten, which leave
therein for about twenty four hours, to draw out all its Virtue: then strain it
and stop it; take a Spoonful thereof when one has the Fits of the Mother, or a
Catarrh, or in Childbirth, or Weakness, or the Colic.

To embellish and preserve Beauty. CHAP. III.
The Receipt of the Queen of Hungaries Water.
IN the City of Buda, in the Kingdom of Hungary, is to be seen the present
Receipt, of the most serene Princess, Donna Isabella, Queen of Hungary.

I Donna Isabella, Queen of Hungary, aged seventy two years, infirm in my
Members, and Gouty, have used this present Receipt a whole Year, which an
Hermit, whom I never saw before, nor since, gave me; which had such effect
upon me, that from that instant I was cured, and recovered my Strength,
insomuch as appearing beautiful to every one, the King of Poland would have
espoused me; whom I refused, for the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, believing
it was given me by an Angel.

Take Aqua Vitae distilled four times, thirty ounces, Rosemary-flowers twenty
ounces, put all into a Vessel close stopped, the space of fifty hours, then
distill them in an Alembick in Balneo Mariae; and take thereof a dram in the
morning once a week, in some other Liquour, or else with your Victuals; and
wash the Face every morning; and rub the infirm Members therewith.

This Remedy renews the Vigor, causes a good Spirit, cleanses the marrow,
fortifies the animal Spirits, renewing their Operations; restores the Sight,
and preserves it to old Age; it is excellent for the Stomach and Breast, rubbing
them therewith: When you use this Remedy, you need not warm it.

For the Pimples in the Face.
Put Saltpeter into a Linen Cloth, and tie it well, then having wet it in
fair Water, wash them therewith.

For the Redness in the Face.
Take Monks-Rubarb, and Mutton, boil them together, and wash the Face with the
Water thereof.

For the same.
Upon a pound of Veal put six new laid Eggs; beat them together, and add half a
pint of White-Wine-Vinegar, and an handful of wild Tansy, distill them in
Balneo Mariae, and wash the Face therewith.

For the same.
Take Plantan-water, with the Essence of Sulphur, put them together, and apply
them night and morning with a Linen Cloth.

To take the Spots out of the Face.
Take the Roots of sharp pointed Docks, and Melons, of each two pounds, ten
Swallows Eggs, Salt of Nitre half an ounce, white Tartar two ounces, beat and
mingle them all together, and distill them in a Glass Alembic, and wash with
this Water, and you will see Wonders.

Cloths for Masks.
Take four ounces of white Wax, Goats Grease, Sperma Coeti, of each two ounces,
Camphir one ounce, melt them all together, and dip your Cloths therein.

A most excellent Water for the Face.
Take a Loaf of Wheat flower, moistened with Goats-milk, put it into the Oven,
and draw it our before it be baked enough, and take out the Crumbs, which you
shall crumble as small as you can, and soak it in new Goats milk; to which add
half a dozen o^ the whites of Eggs, strained through a Sponge, this done, take
an ounce of Powder of burnt Egg-shells, and put them all together, being well
mingled, into a Glass Alembick, and distill them with a gentle Fire; and you
will have an excellent Water to take away the Spots and Redness of the Face;
and will whiten and beautify it wonderfully.

A Water to whiten the Face.
Take of the Root of the wild Vine, and of the Roots of Narcissus, put them
both into an Alembic of Glass, with a pint of Cows milk, and the Crumbs of
white-bread* ^till them* and to use it, mingle it half with the Queen of
Hungaries Water, and you will see it will whiten very well.

Water of Venice, very good for the Face.
Take two quarts of black Cows Milk in the month of May, put it into a Glass
Bottle, with eight Citrons, and four Oranges pill'd and sliced, an ounce of
Sugar Candy, and half an ounce of Borax; put them all in Balneo Mariae, or in
Sand, to distill them in a fire always equal, which is the principal thing, and
stop not the Bottle till the day after it is distilled.

For the same.
Take two Citrons without their Peels, and slice them, twelve new-lay'd Eggs,
six Sheeps-feet cut in pieces, with their Bones, Sugar Candy four ounces; a
good slice of a Melon, as much of a Pompion; two drams of Borax; distill them
all in a Glass Alembic, with a Leaden Cover.

To take away Spots in the Face.
Take Housleek, and Clary, and distill them in Balneo Mariae, and wash them
with this Water.

How to prepare Oxe-Gall.
Take such a quantity of Oxe-gall, as you will, and put it into a glass Vial;
and for one ounce of Gall, add a dram of Roch Alum; half an ounce of Sal
Gemma, or Salt of Glass; an ounce of Sugar Candy, two drachms of Borax, and one
dram of Champhire; beat them apart, then mingle them together, and put them
to the Ox gall, and stir them the space of a quarter of an hour, or
thereabouts; then let them settle; do thus two or three times a day for a
Fortnight, till the Gall become as clear as Water; the which you shall filtre
through a brown Paper, and keep it for your use. It Is used to preserve Persons
from being Sun burnt, in putting it upon the Face, when you would go in the
Country, washing them at night with common Water, and this will take off all
the gross Tan.

A Water for a tan'd Face.
Take half a quarter of Wheat-Bran, sift it well till there remain no meal;
infuse it in good Vinegar for at least three or four hours; then add the yolks
of Eggs: dissolve or distill it in B. M. from this Distillation will come an
admirable Water, which will set a wonderful Luster upon the Face; you will do
well to put it in the Sun for eight or ten days, the Bottle being well stopped.

A Water to Beautify the Face, and to take away the wrinkles.
Take River Water, and strain it through a white Linen Cloth; put it into a
new glazed earthen Pot, with an handful of Barley well washed and cleans'd from
dust, and boil it over a Charcoal fire till the Barley be broken; then take it
from the fire and let it stand, and then strain it through a Linen Cloth, into
a glass Bottle, that it be a quarter empty, to which add three drops of white
Balsam, or Balsam of Peru, the first is the best, to a quart of Water; and then
shake the Bottle for 10 or 12 hours without intermission, till the Balsom be
entirely incorporated into the said Water, and the Water remain a little
troubled, and a little whitish, and then it has arrived to its perfection; It
wonderfully embellishes the Face, and preserves it young and fresh: it takes
away wrinkles also in time, in using it once a day.

Note, you must wash your Face with River, Rain, or Fountain Water, before you
use this Water.

To take away the wrinkles from the Face.
Take a Fire-shovel, and heat it; and cast thereon the Powder of Myrrh; putting
the Face over it, to receive the Fume, having a a course Cloth about the Head,
the better to receive the Fume; do this thrice; then heating the Fire-shovel
again, take some Whitewine in your mouth, and besprinkle the Shovel therewith,
receiving the Fume that rises, doing thus likewise thrice, continuing it
morning and evening, as long as you will, and you will see wonders.

A most excellent Pomatum for the Face.
Take what quantity you please of Sheeps-feet, and having peeled them, take out
the Bones, and break the long Bones to take out the Marrow; do this at full of
the Moon, for there is then much more Marrow; to do this well, you must steep
the Bones a day or two in Water, and set it in a Cellar, changing the Water
three or four times a day; by which means you will break them more easily; to
two dozen of Sheeps-feet, you must add at least half a dozen of Calves feet;
having taken out the Marrow, wash it in several Waters, and in Rose Water till
it be very white; then also wash the Bones well after you have taken out the
Marrow; and boil them in fair water an hour or two; then strain them through a
Linen Cloth, and let the Water stand till the next night; then with a silver
Spoon take off the oil or grease that swims, or is fixed upon it; the which you
shall put to the Marrow, and melt them over a Charcoal Fire, adding to the
weight of about four ounces, a dram of Borax, and as much Roch Alum calcined;
and boiling them a very little, add thereto two ounces of the Oil of the four
cold Seeds drawn without Fire; with a little white Wax, or Mutton Suet; but
that of the Hide or Skin of a Kid is best of all; for some hold that the first
reddens the Face, and the Wax cuts it; when this does neither; then strain it
through a Linen Cloth, and keep it for your use.

An excellent Pomatum for the Lips.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds, one ounce, put it upon the Fire, with about a
dram o^ a little more of Mutton Suet newly killed, and of wild Bugloss
scraped to give it a Color; boil them some time together; and it is made for
your use: you may if you will, in lieu of Oil of sweet Almonds take that of
Jasmin, or other Flowers, if you would give it a good Scent; the Oil of sweet
Almonds must be drawn without Fire.

To take away the redness of the Face.
Take the long Bones of Sheeps-feet, and burn them in the Fire, till they may
be easily powdered: which you shall infuse in White Wind for the space of twenty
four hours; then strain it, and use it, to wash and cleanse the Face; for four
Feet you must have a Glass of White Wind.

Handcherchiefs of Venice.
Take of French Chalk, half a quarter, calcine it in a Glass Furnace, or
otherwise; then moisten it with good Aqua Vitae, or good Spirit of Wine;
letting them incorporate well together for twenty four hours; then wet your
Cloths therewith, and let them dry in the shade, out of the Dust, the Sun, or
Fire, it is good to moisten them thrice, and then use them dried: This manner is
most excellent, and never fails.

Lac Virginis.
Take Storax and Benjoin of each two ounces, Powder them and strain them with
twelve ounces of Spirit of Wine three or four times; put them all in a Glass
Bottle, that is two thirds empty, stop it with Parchments, pricking four or
five holes in it; then put in Balneo Mariae, for a quarter of an hour only,
that is, when you see the Water boil take the Vial off quickly, and wrap it in
a Napkin, that the Bottle break not; then take an ounce of white Balsam, or
that of Peru, into which put the treddle of an Egg, first mingled in your hand,
with as little as may be of Aqua Vitae; then let all settle for forty Days, and
then use it.

Another Lac Virginis, more ready and sure.
Take Housleek, beat it in a Marble Mortar, and take out the Juice with a
Press; strain the Juice, warming first a very little; which helps to Clarify
it; and when you will you may use it; you must put it into a Glass, and put
therein some drops of good Spirit of Wine, and instantly you will have a kind
of curdled Milk of the said Juice, which is most excellent to unite the Skin,
and take out wrinkles.

A most excellent Spanish White.
Take the Seeds of Oriental Pearl, white or pale Coral, of each two ounces,
beat them apart, then put them into a Matras, and add as much Aq. fort. as you
shall think fit, Juice of Citron is better: then you must have another Matras,
wherein you must put Tin-Ice 8 ounces; having first beaten it well, and pour
therein the said Water, till all be dissolved; then mingle the Pearl and Coral
together, and that which you have dissolved to the Tin-Ice, pour upon the said
Pearl and Coral, to cause them to precipitate, and before you mingle them, you
must add twice every day Fountain Water, till you perceive no Taste of the
Aquafortis, and then you shall use it with Peach-Flowers, distilling each
apart; and when you use them, take a little quantity of each, and so Compound
them.

To whiten the Teeth.
Take Rose Water, Syrup of Roses, white Honey, Plantan-Water, of each half an
ounce, Spirit of Vitriol four ounces; mingle them together, and rub your Teeth
with a Linen Cloth, and wash them with equal parts of Rose and Plantan-Water.

For the same.
Take Sage, Flowers of red-Roses, of each a small handful, Orris-root half an
ounce, Guaiacum three drams, Rose-wood a dram; Cuttle-bone, two drams; Mastich
three drams, Myrrh and Cinnamon of each a dram; Pumice-stone prepared six drams;
red Sanders finely powdered half an ounce; red Coral six drams, make them into a
Powder.

For the same.
Take red Coral, Cuttle-bone, both reduced to fine Powder, Pearls, Crabs-claws
calcined, burnt Hartshorn, of each one dram; Salt of Wormwood a Scruple; make
them into a Powder.

For the same.
Take Rosemary-wood, and burn it to a Coal, which you shall put into
Rose-Vinegar, letting it infuse twenty four hours in a clear Shade, then dry it
in the Sun, and powder it, and rub your Teeth therewith.

To hinder the Hair from falling
Take Parcely Seed, and make it into an impalpable Powder, and Powder the Head
therewith, three Nights, every other Night; once a Year only, and there will
never fall one Hair.

To make the Hair Grow.
Take the tops of Hemp, when it begins to appear above Ground, steep it twenty
four hours in Water, wherewith you shall well moisten the Teeth of the Comb you
make use of, only every increase of the Moon: it is certain this Makes the Hair
grow much.

To Color the Hair.
Take Oil of Tartar warm, as much as you think fit; anoint a Sponge or a Comb
therewith, and comb the Head in the Sun, having first washed your Head; do thus
thrice a day, and in seven days at farthest they will become black; and if you
would have them odoriferous, anoint them with Oil of Benjoin.

A Water to Color the Hair black.
Dissolve an ounce of fine Silver in thin Plates, in two ounces of Aqua Fortis,
in a Matras, with a gentle Fire; the Silver being dissolved, add half a pint of
Rose water, and make them boil a quarter of an hour; then add the Juice of two
Citrons; then boil them again another quarter of an hour; and when you use it,
take a spoonful of this Water, which you shall keep in a Bottle, and add four
spoonfuls of Rose Water, and as much of Juice of Citrons, warm them, and wash
the Head or Beard therewith, taking care that you touch not the Skin; but take
a little Stick and tie a Linen Cloth to its end, and therewith touch the Hair
of the Head or Beard, and let it dry.

A Past for the Hands.
Take a pound of blanched Almonds, and an ounce of yellow Sanders sers'd, two
ounces of Calamus sers'd, an ounce of Orris; two Glasses full of Rose Water; a
Rennet Apple cut in little pieces; the Crumbs of a white penny Loaf, well dried
and sers'd; make a Paste of all, with two ounces of Gum Draganth dissolved in
Rose Water, for your Hands or Face.

Another Past for the Hands.
Take Apples and pare them, and beat them in a Marble Mortar, slicing them
first; moisten them with Rose Water, and White Wind: put White-bread Crumbs,
and Almonds well moistened, blanched and brayed with Wine, then add a little
white Soap: and keep it for your use.

Otherwise.
Take two pounds of sweet Almonds, blanch and beat them in a Marble Mortar,
infuse them in two quarts of Goats or Cows Milk, for two or three hours, strain
and press them in a course Linen Cloth: put this strained Liquour in a Basin,
over a Charchoal Fire: adding thereto the Crumbs of a two penny white Loaf:
with about two drams of Borax, and as much burnt roch Alum: and toward the
end an ounce of Sperma Coeti, you must stir it constantly, that it stick not to
the bottom of the Basin, the sign that it is enough, is, that it will not fall
from the Spatula in taking it out: to boil it to purpose, it will take five or
six hours at least, this Past is most excellent.

To make the Hair grow quickly.
Take the Juice of Nettles, that grow in the Sun rising, wherein moisten the
Teeth of your Comb every Morning: and comb the Hairs upward, and they will grow
quickly. Probatum.

To make one have a good Voice.
Take a dram of Elder Flowers powdered, and put into White Wind, fasting in a
Morning.

Wonderful Secrets which must be collected and compounded according to the
Influences of the Stars, to cure the Infirmities hereafter specified in a short
time. CHAP. IV.
The seven Planets that cause Diseases.
SAturn reigning, causes cold Diseases, as the Gout in the Feet, Leprosy,
Palsy, Quartan Agues, Dropsies, Catarrhs, Coughs, etc.

Jupiter causes Cramps, Numness, Inflammations of the Liver, Head aches, pain
in the Shoulders, windiness in the Body: Sanguine Fevers: and all Diseases
caused of Putrefaction; the Apoplexy, Cardiac Passions, Squinsies, etc.

Mar: causes acute Fevers, and tertian Agues, continual and intermittent
Fevers: Apostemes, Erysipelas, Carbuncles, Fistulas, bloody Fluxes, and such
like hot and dry Diseases.

The Sun causes Rheum in the Eyes, coldness in the Stomach and Liver,
Swoonings, Choler, Catarrhs, Pustules in the Matrix, and the like in the lower
Parts.

Venus causes Scabs, the Venereal Disease, Lientery, Suffocations of the Womb,
Sickness in the Stomach, from cold and moist Causes, Infirmities of the Liver
and the Lights.

Mercury causes hoarsness, Distempers in the Senses, impediments in the Speech,
and its Passions, Falling Sickness, Coughs, Jaundies, Vomiting, Catarrhs, and
all Melancholy Diseases.

The Moon causes the Palsy, Cholick, the Whites, Dropsy, Phlegmatic
Apostemes, Lienteries, and all Infirmities that come from the Obstruction of
the Veins.

He that would Cure any Infirmity infallibly, and not as some Physicians
proceed, it is necessary to make use of Astrology, and the Aspects of the
Stars, and their Influences; and this is intended, in jure regulari and non
coacto; wherefore in such case, as Hippocrates tells us, ^. 1. Aph. 4. Medicari
in acutis morbis eadem die si materia turgeat, tardari enim his malum est;
Monardus, in his Epistles says, in such a case, potius lotium inspiciendum quam
astra; and this is intended to be Bleeding and Purging; but in regard to other
local Remedies, it is necessary to observe the Plenetary hours; and for that
end you must be advised by what Planet the Infirmity is caused, yet you may
gather the Herb or Flower, Seed, Root, or such like in what hour the Planet
has Dominion that is an Enemy to that Planet that causes the Disease. For
contraria contrarus curantur; and to know the hour of the Planet, you must see
what hour the Sun rises.

At whatever hour the Sun rises in any Planet, all the days in every Month are
under the same Dominion.

Friendly PLANETS.
Sol is a Friend to Jupiter and Venus. Luna is a Friend to Jupiter, Venus, and
Saturn. Mars is a Friend to Venus. Mercury is a Friend to Jupiter, Venus, and
Saturn. Jupiter is a Friend to Sol, Luna, Mercury, Venus, and Saturn. Venus is
a Friend to Sol, Luna, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter. Saturn is a Friend to Jupiter,
Sol, and Luna.
Planets that are Enemies.
Sol is an Enemy to Mars, Mercury, and Luna. Luna is an Enemy to Mars and
Mercury. Mars is an Enemy to Mercury, Luna, Saturn, Sol, Jupiter. Mercury is an
Enemy to Sol, Luna, and Mars. Jupiter is an Enemy to Mars. Venus is an Enemy to
Saturn. Saturn is an Enemy to Mars, more than to Venus.
Planetary Friendly hours of the Night and Day, Calculated exactly to the
Ephemerides.
Sunday, 1 Sol 2 Venus, 3 Mercury, 4 Luna, 5 Saturn, 6 Jupiter, 7 Mars, 8 Sol,
9 Venus, 10 Mercury, 11 Luna, 12 Saturn.
Monday, 1 Luna, 2 Saturn, 3 Jupiter, 4 Mars, 5 Sol, 6 Venus, 7 Mercury, 8
Luna, 9 Saturn, 10 Jupiter, 11 Mars, 12 Sol.
Tuesday, 1 Mars, 2 Sol, 3 Venus, 4 Mercury, 5 Luna, 6 Saturn, 7 Jupiter, 8
Mars, 9 Sol, 10 Venus, 11 Mercury, 12 Luna.
Wednesday, 1 Mars, 2 Luna, 3 Saturn, 4 Jupiter, 5 Mars, 6 Sol, 7 Venus, 8
Mercury, 9 Luna, 10 Saturn, 11 Jupiter, 12 Mars.
Thursday, 1 Jupiter, 2 Mars, 3 Sol, 4 Venus, 5 Mercury, 6 Luna, 7 Saturn, 8
Jupiter, 9 Mars, 10 Sol, 11 Venus, 12 Mercury.
Friday, 1 Venus, 2 Mercury, 3 Luna, 4 Saturn, 5 Jupiter, 6 Mars, 7 Sol, 8
Venus, 9 Mercury, 10 Luna, 11 Saturn, 12 Jupiter.
Saturday, 1 Saturn, 2 Jupiter, 3 Mars, 4 Sol, 5 Venus, 6 Mercury, 7 Luna, 8
Jupiter, 9 Mars, 10 Sol, 11 Venus, 12 Saturn.

Hours of the Night.
Sunday, 1 Jupiter, 2 Mars, 3 Sol, 4 Venus, 5 Mercury, 6 Luna, 7 Saturn, 8
Jupiter, 9 Mars, 10 Sol, 11 Venus, 12 Mercury,
Monday, 1 Venus, 2 Mercury, 3 Luna, 4 Saturn, 5 Jupiter, 6 Mars, 7 Sol, 8
Venus, 9 Mercury, 10 Luna, 11 Saturn, 12 Jupiter.
Tuesday, 1 Saturn, 2 Jupiter, 3 Mars, 4 Sol, 5 Venus. 6 Mercury, 7 Luna, 8
Saturn, 9 Jupiter, 10 Mars, 11 Sol, 12 Venus,
Wednesday, 1 Sol, 2 Venus, 3 Mercury, 4 Luna, 5 Saturn, 6 Jupiter, 7 Mars, 8
Sol, 9 Venus, 10 Mercury, 11 Luna, 12 Saturn.
Thursd. 1 Luna, 2 Saturn, 3 Jupiter, 4 Mars, 5 Sol, 6 Venus, 7 Mercury, 8
Luna, 9 Saturn, 10 Jupiter, 11 Mars, 12 Sol.
Frid. 1 Mars, 2 Sol, 3 Venus, 4 Mercury, 5 Luna, 6 Saturn, 7 Jupiter, 8 Mars,
9 Sol, 10 Venus, 11 Mercury, 12 Luna.
Saturd. 1 Merc. 2 Lun. 3 Saturn, 4 Jupiter, 5 Mars, 6 Sol, 7 Venus, 8 Merc. 9
Luna, 10 Saturn, 11 Jup. 12 Mars.

For Pains in the Head.
This Pain is caused by Jupiter. Take the little Vervain in the hour of Mars,
his Enemy, bruise it, and mingle it with Vinegar, and apply it to the Forehead.

For Frenzies, with sharp Fevers.
This Infirmity is caused by Mars. Take milk from the Dugs of any Animal
whatever, (except that of a Goat,) in the Hour of Luna, Mercury, Saturn, Sol,
or Jupiter, his Enemies, boil it, and with the Scum that rises upon the milk
bath all the Head, being first shaved.

For the Falling Sickness.
This is caused by Mercury. Take a Wolf, in the Hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars, his
Enemies, kill it, and take the Lights, and boil them in red Wine and Spices,
and give them the Patients to eat, and they shall be perfectly cured.

For Weakness and Dimness of Sight.
This Disease comes from Sol. Take Eyebright in the Hour of Mars, Mercury, or
Luna, his Enemies, powder it, and mingle it with the Yolk of an Egg, and Wine,
and apply it.

For Tears and Rheum in the Eyes.
Sol causes this Disease. Take the slimy Substance of Snails, in the hour of
Mars, Mercury, or Luna, his Enemies, and mingle therewith Myrrh, Aloes. and
Mastich, and apply it to the Temples: Take also Sowbread and Rosemary, beat
them and press out the Juice, adding the Juice of Ivy, in the same Hour,
applied to the Eyes, works wonderful effects.

For Warts in the Nostrils.
This Disease comes from Saturn: Take Dragon-wort in the Hour of Mars, or
Venus, his Enemies, bruise it and press out the Juice, and mingle it with the
milky Juice of wild Fennel, and the Gall of any Animal whatever; powder Nettle
Seeds, and Southernwood, Hellebore and Cypress, put them often up the Nostrils,
and it will cure them infallibly.

For Bleeding at the Nose.
This comes from Saturn. Take Pomegranate-flowers, in the hour of Mars, and
Venus, his Enemies, beat them and powder them, and mingle the Powder with a
sufficient quantity of the White of an Egg, to the fashion of a solid Unguent,
and apply it to the Nostrils.

For Pains and Prickings in the Nostrils.
These are caused by Mercury. Take Ivy-flowers, what quantity you please, in
the Hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars, his Enemies; boil them in Oil, then put it into
the ear, and 'twill presently cure them: or pour in three drops of the Juice of
Ground Ivy hot.

For Deafness, and Dizziness of the Ears.
This is caused of Mercury. Get an Hare, and kill it in the Hour of Sol, Luna,
or Mars, his Enemies; take out the Gall, and mingle therewith black Hellebore
powdered, and put it into the Ear, and it will certainly cure you.

For Pustules in the Mouth, and Chaps in the Lips.
These come from Mercury. You must make this following Remedy in the Hour of
Sol, Luna, or Mars, his Enemies. Take Lytharge of Silver, Myrrh, Ginger, of
each equal parts, powder them very fine, and with Virgins Wax, Honey, and
common Oil, make an Unguent, and with a little piece of fine Linen apply it to
the Cleffs.

For the Toothache:
This is caused by Mercury. Take two grains of the seed of Smallage, in the
Hour of Sol, Luna, or Mars, his Enemies, Opium, Henbane, of each four grains,
mingle them with Wine, to the form of Pills, and apply them to the Tooth.

To make a Tooth fall without touching it.
This comes from Mercury. Take wild Olive Boughs, in the Hour of Sol, Luna, or
Mars, his enemies; boil them in Verjuice, till it come to the likeness of
Honey, and apply it to the Tooth, and it will make it fall of it self.

To fasten the Teeth.
To cure the looseness of the Tooth, which is caused of Mercury; make this
Composition in the Hour of the Sun, Moon, or Mars, his Enemies. Take
Pomegranate rind, Orris, burnt Salt, of each a like quantity, Galls two parts,
Myrrh one part, boil them all in a sufficient quantity of Wine, and wash the
Mouth therewith.

To make the Teeth fall out of the Mouth without Danger.
This Malady is caused by Mercury; Procure an Hare in the Hour of Sol, Luna, or
Mars, his Enemies, and kill it, and take the Brain and boil it, and rub the
Teeth therewith, this will work a wonderful effect.

Item, the Tooth taken out of the Mouth of the same Hare, and tied about
Childrens Necks, will fasten them.

Against spitting of Blood.
This Infirmity is caused by Saturn. Take, in the Hour of Mars, or Venus, his
Enemies, Pomegranate Flowers, Hypocystis, and Mullen, beat them and press out
the Juice, and give a spoonful thereof to drink with a little Sugar.

For the Weakness of the Stomach.
This Infirmity is caused by Sol. Take the Herb Balm, in the Hour of Mars,
Mercury, or of one of his Enemies, and let the Patient eat what quantity
thereof he pleases, fasting.

For Pain in the Stomach.
This comes from Sol. Take a Pullet, in the Hour of Mars, or Mercury, or one of
his Enemies, kill it and take out the Bones, then take the Skin that is found
in its Stomach, and dissolve it, give it to drink, and it will work admirable
Effects.

For the Inflammation of the Liver.
This Disease is caused by Jupiter. Take Carduus, in the Hour of Mars, his
Enemy, press out the Juice, and give half a Glass full thereof to drink, with
Sugar, for some days together, and it will work Wonders.

For the Dropsy.
This Disease is caused by Saturn: Take then a Quail, in the Hour of Mars, or
Venus, his Enemies, kill it, and give the quantity of two Glasses full of its
Blood, and it will infallibly cure.

The same does the Juice of Ivy, mingled with Honey, and the weight of two
drams drank thereof.

For the Yellow Jaundise.
This is caused by Mercury. Take the Flowers or Seed of Rosemary, in the Hour
of Sol, Luna, or Mars, his Enemies, powder them, and mix therewith the Juice of
Cinquefoil, what quantity you please.

For Obstruction of the Spleen.
This Disease is caused of Luna. Take Gum Ammoniacum, in the Hour of Mars or
Mercury, her Enemies; dissolve it in Vinegar, and give thereof the weight of
two drams, to Persons of riper years to drink; it works admirable effects.

For the Stone in the Reins.
This Infirmity is caused by Saturn. Take Pellitory of the Wall, in the Hour of
Mars or Venus, his Enemies, press out the Juice, and give what quantity thereof
you please to drink in White Wind; it purges the Reins, and infallibly breaks
the Stone.

For difficulty of Urine.
This Disease comes from Luna; then take, in the hours of Mars or Mercury, her
enemies, the Leaf and Seed of Trefoil, and Southernwood-seed, boil them in
Water, to which Decoction add a Spanish Fly powdered without its Head, Wings or
Feet; and give a spoonful to drink, and it will quickly cause one to void
Urine.

For the Stone in the Bladder.
This comes from Luna. Take what quantity of Snakes you please, in the hour of
Mars or Mercury, her enemies, and put them into a new earthen Pot, with a
narrow Neck, put it into an Oven that is not too hot, and there let it remain
for six hours space, then take it out, and powder them finely, and give a dram
thereof.

For the Cholick.
This Disease comes from Luna. Take Powder of Bay Berries, and give two drams
thereof to drink in Aromatic Wine.

For the Flux and bloody Flux.
These are caused by the Moon. Take Pomegranate Flowers and Hypocistis, in the
hour of Mars or Mercury, her enemies, powder them, and give two drams thereof
to drink in red Wine, or Cistern Water.

For difficulty in Childbirth.
This is caused by Venus. Take then, in the hour of Saturn her enemy, Basil,
and powder it, and give it to drink in good Wine, and she will suddenly be
delivered.

To provoke the monthly Courses, and the Secondine.
This Disease is caused by Luna. Take Fupaterium in the hour of Mars or Mercury
her enemies; powder it finely; and likewise the Seed of Mountain Smallage; and
give two drams to drink in the Water of Maidenhair, and it will quickly work
the effect.

For the immoderate flux of the Courses, unto the Mouth of the Womb.
This Infirmity comes from Venus. Take the Root of Hysop in the hour of Saturn
her enemy; with the middle rinds of Chestnuts, and the rinds of Pomegranates;
powder them very fine, and give often a dram thereof to drink.

For Ruptures.
These are caused by Sol. Take Cypress Nuts in the hour of Mars, Saturn, or
Luna, powder them, and mingle them with the juice of their lops, when they are
green, apply them in the form of an Emplaister; but you must first put up the
Gut that is fallen.

For the Hemorrhoids.
This Disease is caused by Luna. Take the Juice of Sow-bread, in the hour of
Mars or Mercury, her Enemies; apply it to the Fundament after what manner you
will, and it will perfectly cure the Malady.

For the Pain of the Gout.
This Infirmity comes from Saturn. Take a Hen of four years old, in the hour of
Mars or Venus, his Enemies, kill her, and fill her with Vervain, and Wormwood
in six quarts of Water, and let it boil till it be wasted to the half; and with
the Liquour that remains bath the grieved parts.

For a Tertian Ague.
This Fever is caused by Mars. Take Centaury in the hour of Luna, Mercury,
Saturn, Sol or Jupiter, his enemies; powder it, and give two drams in Wine
fasting.

For the Quartan Fever.
This Fever is caused by Saturn. Take Myrrh and Castor, in the hours of Mars or
Venus, his enemies, of each one dram, powder them, and give it to drink in Wine
fasting; 'twill work Wonders.

To take away the Spots of the small Pox, Meazles, and Purple-fever.
This is caused by Mars. Take, in the hour of Luna or Mercury, Saturn or
Jupiter, his enemies, the Roots of Beans dried, Flower of Chick-Pease, Rice
Meal, and Garlic, powder them all very fine; and mingle them with Oil of sweet
Almonds, and Mutton fat melted, and anoint the Face therewith, and let it
remain on all Night; and in the Morning wash it with warm Water.

For the King's Evil.
This Infirmity is caused by Luna. Take the Boughs and Roots of Castors, in the
hour of Mars or Mercury; beat them, and apply them in form of an Emplaster.
Maidenhair does the same.

For Wounds in any part of the Body.
These are caused by Mars. Take Savine, in the hour of the Moon or Mercury,
Saturn or Jupiter, his enemies, and powder it, and mix it with Honey, and apply
it to the Wounds, and it will cure them.

For Scabs and Leprosy.
These Maladies are caused by Saturn. Take Ivy in the hour of Mars or Venus,
his enemies, what quantity you will, and boil it in Water, and bath the Body
therein hot; it is the last Remedy for this Disease.

For Corns or Agnails.
These come from Saturn. Take the Bark of Willow, and mingle its Powder with
strong Vinegar; and in form of an Emplaster, apply it to the Corns, and it will
work great effects.

For Cancers.
This Disease is caused by Mars. Take the Boughs of white Galingale, the Root
of Dragon-wort, in the hour of Luna, Mercury or Saturn, his Enemies; press out
the Juice, and mix it with Honey, and apply it to the Disease.

For Fistula's.
These are caused by Mars. Take Orris-root, in the hour as abovesaid, powder
it, and mingle it with the powder of burnt Oisters; and apply them to the
Fistulas.

To preserve one from the Gout in the Feet.
This Disease is caused by Luna. Take Iva Arthritica, in the hour of Mars or
Venus, beat it and mingle it with the Yolk of an Egg, dressed after the manner
of a Pancake, and eaten fasting, will certainly preserve one from the Gout in
the Feet.

To know if one sick shall live or dye.
Diverse are the Judgments which pass upon a sick Person, whether he will live
or die; but I shall publish this present infallible sign; which any one may
make use of, and make certain Judgment thereof.

Take a Nettle, and put it into the Urine of the sick Person, presently after
he has voided his Urine; and that it be not corrupted; and leave the Nettle in
the said Urine, the space of twenty four hours; then if the Nettle be found
dry, it is a sign of Death; but if it be found green, it is a sign of Life.

An admirable Secret to keep one always in Health, which Charles the Fifth
made use of.
Take, in the hour of Sol, as the Author of Life, an handful of the tops of
Rue, and a few Aniseeds, a Walnut, a dry Fig, and a little Salt, beat them all
together, and eat thereof fasting, at diverse times.

A Collection of diverse Secrets, taken out of the Cabinet of a Person of
Quality. CHAP. V.
A Water for inflamed Eyes.
TAke the Water of an Infant purified, three pints; Roman, Vitriol, and Tutty
prepared, of each four ounces; mingle them for eight days space, then distill,
and put a drop Morning and Evening into the Eye, and it will quickly be cured.

For the Colic.
Take of green Anise, Cummin, Agarick, Wormwood, Centaury, Gentian, equal
parts, and make thereof a Powder, the Dose is two drams in Broth.

An admirable Water against the Colic.
Take the distilled Water of Nuts and Camomil, of each four pints, infuse
therein the Flowers of Camomil and Elder, of each six Landfuls, for four days
in Balneo Maria, or other hot place; then strain it, and add the Flowers
abovesaid, and Fennel seed, Aniseed, Juniper Berries, of each two ounces,
Bay-berrys five ounces and an half, Cinnamon half an ounce, dried Mint a Pugil;
let them infuse two days in B. M. then distill them; the Dose is two or three
ounces.

Against the heat of the Sun.
Take Rose Water two ounces, Milk one ounce, Verjuice half an ounce, Incense
beaten two drams, the white of an Egg well beaten; rub the Face before you go
to bed.

For them that Spit or Vomit Blood from a Fall.
Take the Powder of the Vine-leaves in three ounces of Broth, one Pugil; then
being settled, you must take half a Glass of the Vulnerary decoction for eight
days.

For Pain of the Teeth.
Take equal parts of Honey of Roses and Aqua-Vitae; boil them together, and
wash the Mouth therewith.

Contusions, Falls, Blows without Wounds.
Take a Cake of Honey; let it boil in the best red Vinegar, till it come to a
Pap; make an Emplaister thereof and apply it.

For Wounds and Pricks.
Take Nightshade Leaves bruised and apply them.

For the Headache.
Take the shavings of Hartshorn, drink it in Wine, and powder the head
therewith.

For Warts.
Take the Juice of Celandine, let it drop upon the Wart first cut, and then
apply the Herb; do this two or three times.

Oil of Juniper.
Take Juniper Berries, gathered from the month of August to the end of
September; bruise them and infuse them in Fountain Water three or four days;
and the Water of the first infusion will serve for the rest, for the first is
the best; take two earthen Alembics, the one full of Berries, and the other
half full of the Infusion; this put into the Earth, and the one fastened upon
the other; after having strained it through a Cloth, put it into a Furnace:
being cold, open it and gather the Oil, letting the water run out: take care
that it take not wind.

The Use.
A Secret for Wounds, Cancers, Reins, Spleen, Leprosy: the Dose is two or
three drops in Broth.

For the Toothache.
Take good Honey two ounces, a glass of the strongest Vinegar, Cloves half an
ounce, let them boil in a new Pot till a quarter be wasted; rub your Teeth
therewith, morning, after dinner, and at night.

To turn a Defluxion from the Breast.
Take Cephalic Powder; put in your Broth a little Anula; abstain from all sharp
things.

The Cephalic Powder.
Take Grape-flowers half an ounce, Violet-flowers, white Nutmegs, half an
ounce, Betony-flowers two ounces, all dried and powdered, besprinkle them with
Rose Water, dry them again; beat them together with a grain of Amber-grease.

An Oil as good as Balm.
Take flowers of St. John's-wort, half an ounce, put to two ounces of
Sallet-Oyl, one spoonful of the Juice of Coronata; put them all in a glass, and
set it in the Sun for three or four hours.

Hyppocras, Extempore.
Take a quart of Aq. Vitae, in which infuse four ounces of Cinnamon, an ounce of
Cloves, and Nutmeg or else Ginger; infuse them all together, and to make
Hyppocras, put two or three spoonfuls in a quart of Wine.

Rosa Solis.
Take two quarts of Aq. Vitae, of Sugar, or powdered Sugar a pound and half,
common Water a pint and half, wherein you shall boil them to the consistence of
Syrup, not quite boiled enough; then put in half an ounce of Cinnamon powdered;
and put it to the Syrup when it is boiled enough; to scent it, pour it through a
Cloth with two grains of Musk, and half an ounce of Sugar Candy.

Of Jewels and Pearls. CHAP. VI.
Artificial Pearls, as fair as the Natural.
TAke the fairest and greatest Seeds of Pearls, bruise them and dissolve them
in Allum-water, which is all the Secret: then make them into a Paste, and wash
it gently with distilled Water; afterward make it into a Paste with
Bean-flower-water; and digest it in Dung, the space of fifteen days; then
having the consistence of Paste, you shall form Pearls thereof with a silver
Mold; and pierce them with Hogs-hair, and hang them in an Alembic stopped close,
to the end the Air alter them not; then you shall after this manner,

Roll each one apart in Leaf Gold, then cleave a Barble in the middle, and put
them therein; make a Paste of the said Barble, with Wheat Flour, and bake it
in an Oven, as you bake Bread.

If they have not luster enough, take the Water of a kind of Herb called
Grastuli, with six ounces of Pearls in Powder, one ounce of Saltpeter, two
ounces of Roch-Allum, and Litharge of silver: the Pearls being made, you shall
heat them a little, and quench them in this Composition, then dry and wash
them, repeating this five or six times.

To harden them.
Take Lapis Calaminaris in powder, and Vitriol, of each one ounce; the whites
of Eggs beaten to a Water, mingle them together and distill them, and there
will come forth a clear Water, with which, and with very fine Barley Meal, you
shall make a Paste, in which you shall put your Pearls to be baked in an Oven.

An admirable Secret to whiten Pearls.
Take Common and Roch-Allum, of each one pound, distill this to a Water, half
an ounce of Camphire, Solomon's Seal two ounces, rectify it, then use it with
a moist Linen Cloth.

Another more Excellent.
Take half an ounce of Bean-flowers, Lime, and Eggs an ounce; white Salt one
pound, Water of Confound, Alcobol of Wine eleven ounces; distill them and use
it.

For the same.
Take an handful of Wheat Bran, boil it in a Posnet with a pint of Water; and
when it is boiled, pour out half of the said Water, and then in an earthen
Porringer varnished, wherein shall be the Pearls strung, which you shall let
steep therein till the Water be almost cold, that you may rub them gently with
your hands, till the Water be wholly cold; then throw away that Water, and put
on new upon the Pearls; do thus often, and then your Water will be clear, which
you shall warm, and put into the said Porringer, wherein you shall clear the
said Pearls without rubing them, and do it so, reiterating it with a second
warm Water: at last you shall put up the said Pearls without fouling or
unstringing them, on white Paper, and carry them into a Cellar upon a Board or
Bench without covering them, and let them remain there only twenty four hours.

Note. For fear the Rats or Cats should enter, and throw them down, you must
put at the bottom some weighty thing.

To make excellent Saphyrs.
Take white River Crabs, and calcine them so that they look red in the fire, and
quenching them in strong Vinegar, repeating this Operation six or seven times
in the same Vinegar, reduce them into powder in an Iron Mortar; then put it
into a Crucible, with the weight of the Crabs, and moss of Tartar, which is
thus to be ordered.

Calcine the Tartar, and put it in a moist Place in an Hippocrates sleeve; and
in the bottom of the said sleeve there will be gathered a moss, which the said
Tartar makes in liquifying and turning it self into Water.

Then cover the Crucible, and set it to dissolve for the space of four hours.

To Dye Crabs white and Transparent.
You must Calcine them after the manner before prescribed, and reduce them to
powder within the space of four hours, and cast thereon very fine Powder of
Salt of Tartar, and of Salt of Alcali, and toward the end throw in of Bay Salt
fixed, a very little; a quarter of an hour after let it cool of it self.

Before you put your Crabs in Infusion, you must take a part of them and beat
them in a Brass Mortar, and you will make an Emerald; the second part you must
beat in an Iron Mortar, with a Pestle of the same, and this will be of a Rubie
Color, and the third part in a Glass Mortar, with a Pestle of the same, and
this will be a Diamond.

To reduce a Crab into Paste, and make it into what form one would.
Take River Crabs, and calcine them, and break them into little pieces; then
let them steep twenty four hours or more in strong Vinegar, till they may be
reduced to a Powder, the which Powder you shall mix with Turpentine, and
Organicum, the whole being well pasted together; make them into what form you
please, and then bake them in an Oven.

To make yellow Amber white.
Take for Example a pound of yellow Amber, and put it into a very strong
Cucurbit of earth, and add thereto two pounds of Sal Gemm, or Bay Salt, and
upon them as much Fountain Water, as will serve to dissolve the Salt; which
being dissolved, pour on a little River Water, and boil them all together in an
Alembick without a Neck, the space of four Hours.

China Ink.
Take an ounce of Lam black, two drams of Indigo, half a dram of Peach, black
Endive burnt one dram, beat them all with a moity of Fig-Leaf Water, and
another part of common Milk, and a very little Gum Arabic; being all well
beaten, form Tablets thereof.

Note, you must clarify your Lam-black in an earthen Pot, to take away all the
filth.

To make Lavanturine.
You must lay one or two lays of Cinaber, beaten with Isinglass; being dry,
moisten them with Gum Arabic, somewhat strong, and then presently searce your
Lavanturine with a little Silken Searce, by beating the Searce with your hand;
and your Powder will equally garnish all that you have moistened with your Gum
Water.

To make Horn for Lanthorns.
Take a dram of Lytharge of Gold, half an ounce of quick Lime, mingle them
together with Wine, in form of Paste, and with this Composition, make diverse
lays, of one side, and the other, of the Horn, having first well cleared it;
being dry, take out all the Powder, and repeat it, as I have said; being dry,
take out your white Powder, unite them, and lute them with Tripolis, and Sallet
Oil, and Linen, rubbing them well.

To make the Grain of Walnut upon white Wood.
You shall spread upon the Wood seven or eight lays of strong Glue, till it
become shining, and then quickly give a good many blows with a wooden Brush
well wet in common Water.

An excellent Varnish to lay on Copper Plates for Etching.
Take two ounces of clear Linseed-Oyl, two ounces of Benjamin, the bigness of a
Nut of Virgins Wax, boil them to the consumption of a third part, always
stirring it with a stick, and it is done; when you would use it, warm a little
the Plate you are to Engrave, and with your Fingers end take up a little of the
Varnish, and spread it as thin and even as you can, the thinner the better,
then smoke it with a Candle, and lay your Plate on burning Coals till it has
done smoking; then draw your Design, and engrave with a Needle or Point.

A very fair Green for Minature.
Grind Verdigreece with Vinegar and a little Talk or Tartar, being well ground,
add a little quick Lime and Sap-green, grind all very well together and keep it
in Shells, if it grow hard make it thin with Vinegar.

To make Shasses as clear as Glass.
Take Parchment, Vellum, or fine Paper, very thin and smooth on both sides,
being wet, stretch it on the Shass, and let it dry, then take two parts of
Nut-Oyl, or Linseed-Oyl, two parts of fair Water, and a little beaten Glass,
make them boil in a Glass, on a Tile, pretty near the fire, till the water be
quite consumed, and it is done; lay it on in the Sun or a little warm.

A Varnish as bright and shining as Glass, for Frames, Leather, or what else
you shall think fit.
Take Amber a quarter of an ounce, Gum-Lac two drams, Oil of Turpentine two
drams, Turpentine one dram, Litharge and Linseed-Oyl as much as is sufficient.

The way of making this Composition is to take a Pot or Glass, in which put a
quantity of Linseed-Oyl, which boil till it burn a Feather being put into it,
and it is enough, then melt the Amber in a clean earthen Pipkin, and put it into
the Linseed-Oyl; the Gum-Lac must be melted by it self in the Turpentine, which
pour into the same Pot, the Gum-Lac will melt if you lightly anoint the Pot
with Linseed-Oyl, then strain all through a Cloth; if you would use it on
Silver or Gold, take the finest yellow Earth, well washed from Gravel and other
foulness; and being well dried, add a little Minium and Cerus, with an equal
quantity of Oil of Nut and Spike Oil, boil them well, and with this Composition
design what you will when it is cold, and with what colors you please, mixed
with Glue water. After all, repeat the Varnish, and 'twill be as bright as a
Looking-glass.

To gild Paper.
Grind Bole-armoniac with Rainwater, and give one laying of it, being dry,
beat the White of an Egg to Water or Glair, adding a little Sugar Candy and
Gum-water; lay it over with this, and lay your Leaf gold or silver upon it.

To harden Tin, and give it a Silver color.
Make a mixture of Tin and Lead with Greek Pitch, then take a piece of Potters
Earth, and with a stick make a hole in it, into which put your mixture; upon
which pour six ounces of Tin melted in a Crucible, before it be cold make also
a hole in that, into which pour half an ounce of Mercury, which will penetrate
the substance of the Tin, and both harden and color it.

To color Straws of diverse sorts of Colors.
Having the largest Barley Straws, which must be gathered in the shade, take
the yellow Bark of Barberry-tree according to Discretion, boil it in clear Lie,
then throw in your Straws, and boil them till you like the color, which you
may make of several degrees, then put them in cold water, take them out and dry
them.

To color them red, use Brasil, as aforesaid.

For a dark color, steep them four or five days with Indian wood, and the
shells of green Nuts. For blue, take Litmos or Logwood, and when blue, boil
them in the yellow Decoction, and they will become green.

Oat-straws are many of them naturally of a flesh-colors.

How to counterfeit Coral.
Take Ox-horn, cut or rasped small, put it in a strong Lie made of the ashes of
Ashwood, for five days, then take it out, and add to it some Vermilion
dissolved in Water, put it over the fire to thicken, and form your figures as
you think fit.

To preserve Wine sweet.
Stop your Vessel very well, and sink it under water for thirty days, and
you will have the desired effect.

To make an Excellent Red of Brasil.
Take a pint of fair Water, into which cast a piece of unslack'd Lime, let it
stand all night, then decant all that is clear of the Water, to which put half
the quantity of Brasil rasped; let it infuse four hours, then boil them to the
Consumption of half, then, whilst it is very hot, cast in the bigness of a Pea
of Roch-allum in Powder and a little Gum Arabic.

To soften or dissolve Horn.
Make a Lie of the ashes of Bean-cods, burnt Tartar, quick Lime, and strong
Vinegar, boil therein pieces of Horn, and they will either soften or dissolve
according to the time you allow.

To Dye Bones of an Excellent Black.
Take Lytharge, quick Lime, of each alike, heat them in fair Water till ready
to boil, always stirring the Bones with a stick till they boil apace, then take
it off the fire, stirring it till it be cold, and the Bones will be very black.

An Excellent way to take Spots of Oil or Grease out of white or red Silk,
without changing the Color.
Take Aquae Vitae, (Spirit of Wine is better) wet the spot well with it, then
take Glaire made of the white of a new Egg; with which rub well the spot, and
dry it in the Sun, then wash it with clean water and press it well.

To soften Bones.
Take equal Parts of Roman and Common Vitriol; distill them in an Alembick, and
with this Water rub the Bones, and they will be soft.

To take away the mustiness of Wine.
Take Medlars, cut them in four pieces, hang them so in the Vessel as they
touch not the Wine.

To make a Bullet that Kills without making a Wound.
Melt some Lead, when it begins to grow cool, make a hole in it, by thrusting
in a stick; fill the hole with Quicksilver, which by that means will be fixed,
and when cold, melt it in an Iron Ladle, and cast it in a Bullet-mold; they
keep not above eight days, nor is any Fowl thus killed fit to be eaten.

A Powder to take out spots.
Burn the Bones of Sheeps-feet till they become white, beat them to fine
Powder, warm some of it, and lay it on the spot or stain till it begins to
change Color, then take that away, and apply more till the Spot be quite gone.

Another for the same.
Take a piece of White-bread, just drawn out of the Oven, lay one piece above
and the other underneath the Silk, and it will draw out the Oil or Grease.

Another for the same.
Take raw Honey, Glaire of Egg, and Sal Armoniack, lay them on the Spot for
some time, and wash it with fair Water.

An excellent Violet Color.
Take Turnsole, the Ashes of Lees of Wine, which is burnt Tartar, of each four
ounces, beat them, tie them in a Linen Cloth, and steep them in Water.

A very fair Blew.
Take quick Lime, and Sal Armoniack, of each half a pound, Verdet two or three
ounces, put all in a Viol, and set it in a Horse-dunghill for forty days.

An Excellent Pomander of Cloves.
Take four ounces of Cloves, Gum Arabic, Coals of burnt Sage, of each four
ounces; beat them all apart, mix them in a metal Mortar with Oil of Roses, make
it into a Past, anoint your Hands with Oil of Cloves, knead it, and form it as
you please.

To make Brass look as well as when 'twas new.
To a pint of strong Lie add an ounce of Roch Alum, boil them, and wash your
Brass to take out all the Spots, dry it well, and rub it with Tripoli, 'twill
be as bright as Gold.

To make Silver clean.
Take the Ashes of Wheat-straw burnt, and rub your Silver with it.

Another for the same.
Make a Lie of Soap Ashes, into which throw some Roch Alum, mix the froath in
with it, wash your Silver, and dry it in the Sun.

To keep Roses fresh all the Year.
Take Rose-buds when almost ready to blow, gather them with a Knife without
touching the bud, lay them so in the Air all Night, as that the Dew fall not
upon them, in the Morning put them in a Glass Vessel upright upon the Stalks,
cover them close, set them in a Vault or Sellar, and bury them in dry Sand.

To take out Writing without spoiling the Paper.
Take Roch Alum, beat it with Juice of bitter Orenges, dry it in the Sun, and
with this Powder rub your Paper.

To take Spots of Ink out of Silk.
Take strong White Wind Vinegar, hot Ashes, rub them well upon the Spot, and
wash it afterward with Soap Water; thus may you take out all sorts of Spots
from colored Silks.

To recover the Color of black Cloth, when decayed.
Take Fig Tree Leaves, boil them well in Water, wash your Cloth in it, dry it
in the Sun, and it will be a much fairer black.

A truly Experienced Remedy against the Plague.
Take Bay Berries, full ripe, take off the skins, beat the remainder of them
into fine powder, put a little Salt to it, mix it with Vinegar, and give it
thus to the Person infected, if he has a hot Fever, but if he has the cold
Fever, which is an Ague, give it in Wine instead of Vinegar, cover him well,
for he will sweat; afterward dry him well, and the day after repeat it again.
Multitudes have been cured by this means.

For the Toothache.
Take a little Honey, a little Pepper, a little powder of Sage, boil them
together, and apply it to the Tooth.

To whiten the Teeth.
Rub them with the Roots of Spurge: also the Ashes of burnt Barley, or burnt
Nettles rubbed about the Teeth, and afterward well washed, are very effectual.

Likewise burnt Nettles, mixed with Cloves, Sugar, and Nutmeg. Probatum.

To destroy Buggs.
Boil the Paunches or Gutts of Rabbits in Water, set it hot under the Bed, and
the Fume will destroy them.

To prevent the smoking of Lamp Oil.
Steep your Match or Cotton in Vinegar, and dry it before you use it.

Against Lice, Fleas, and Buggs.
Stretch out a Bears Skin, and hang it up in the Chamber, and you will soon be rid
of them.

To whiten a red Rose.
This is done by holding it over the smoke of Brimstone.

To make Pinks or Gilliflowers blue.
Take a Root of wild Succory, slit it, and set your Gilliflower in it.

To make very sharp Vinegar.
Put into the Vessel a piece of Barley Bread, and in two days it will be eager.

To keep Pease Green.
Put them in a Pot with one part Water, and as much Vinegar, when you take them
out to use, soak them in fair Water.

To preserve Fruit to the very Kernel.
Incorporate Honey and Water very well, put in your Fruit half ripe, and keep
them in a Cellar.

A most exquisite way of invisible Writing. The first Ink.
Take a pennyworth of Litharge of Gold or Silver unprepared, beat it, then
infuse it in a Viol half full of strong Vinegar, having well shaken them
together, leave them to settle, and being clear, write upon your Paper with a
new Pen, and it will not appear at all.

The second Ink.
Take Cork, burn it till it has done smoking, extinguish it in Aqua Vitae, or
Spirit of Wine, dry it and mix it with Water and a little Gum Arabic, to the
consistence of thin Paste, when you would write with it, make it thinner with
common Water, and write upon what is written with the forementioned Ink.

The third Ink.
Take yellow Orpiment and quick Lime of each an ounce, beat them, and put them
in four ounces of common Water, stir them well, this Water will take away the
second Ink, and make what was written with the first appear.

A Glue both for Fire and Water.
Mix quick Lime and Lynseed Oil together, and whatsoever you shall glue with
it, dry in the shade, and 'twill become as hard as Iron.

Against Buggs.
Take Spriggs of Fearn and lay upon the Boards.

To give a luster to Plaster of Paris.
Take a piece of Soap of the bigness of a Nut, dissolve it in a Glass of Water,
and pass it over the Plaster; being dry, burnish it with a Tooth.

To whiten a false piece.
Take Salt, rub it with a piece of good Silver till it become black, with this
Salt rub the counterfeit piece and 'twill be as white as the other. Probatum.

To separate Silver from other Metals.
Melt the piece in a Crucible, cast in some Sulphur, the Silver will remain,
and the allay will look like Dirt. Probatum.

A most excellent writing Ink.
Take Gum Arabic three ounces, Vitriol two ounces, Galls three ounces,
White Wind two pounds and a half, beat the Gall, put them with the Wine into an
earthen Vessel, set it in the Sun for six days, stirring them every day twice
or thrice, then set it over a moderate heat for half a day, or a day, then
strain it, then having dissolved some Vitriol and Gum in a little Wine, put it
into it, then put it in to the Sun three days more, and it is made. To keep it
from freezing, put into it a little Aqua Vitae.

Excellent Spanish Wax.
Melt in an earthen Dish one ounce of Rosin, to which add as much Vermilion,
and two ounces of Shell-lach, being well melted and mixed, roll it into Sticks.

A Counterfeit Ink which will vanish in five days.
Take Sal Armoniack an ounce, infuse it four or five days in strong Water,
make Ink of it, with a piece of Touchstone beaten fine; what is written with
this will be gone in five days.

Aqua fortis for etching.
Take Verdigreece an ounce, green Copperas an ounce, Salt an handful; these
being put into strong Vinegar, set them in a pot of boiling Water for half an
hour, or more.

To know true Mercury from Sophisticate.
Put some Mercury upon a Plate of Silver or Copper, and evaporate it over some
fresh Coals; if it leaves a white spot behind, it is fine, if black or yellow,
it is not.

To soften Ivory.
Take Vinegar three times distilled with Sage leaves, put in your Ivory, and
boil it a little.

To take out Spots of Pitch or other Gums.
Take common Oil, the oldest you can get, warm it a little, rub the Spots with
it, and so leave it twenty four hours, then rub it well, and wring it well with
your hands, then wash it with warm Water and Soap.

To stop the freeting of Wine.
Cast in a little of Cheese.

To purify Gum-Lack.
Soak it in strong Lie three or four days.

To gild Iron.
Take common Water three pound, Roch Alum two ounces, Roman Vitriol one ounce,
Verdigreece two ounces, Sal Gemma four ounces, Orpiment two ounces, make them
all boil, then throw in some Tartar and Saltpeter, of each a little, then boil
them a little more, and take them off; with this Water rub your Iron, then warm
it well and burnish it.

Another for the same.
Take Roch Alum burnt, Nitre, of each half an ounce, Sal Armoniack an ounce,
beat them fine, and boil them in strong Vinegar in a brass Vessel; and with
this Water rub the Iron.

To counterfeit Ebony.
Take Box, or any other hard Wood, rub it with Allum-water near the Fire, then
take Sallet-Oyl, or Linseed-Oyl, into which cast some Roman Vitriol and
Sulphur, of each about the bigness of a Nut, put all into a Kettle, and boil
your Box for some time, and it will appear to be perfect Ebony; the more you
boil it the fairer it will be, but more brittle.

To calcine Tartar quickly.
Take the best Tartar, the finest Nitre, of each a like quantity, beat them
apart, then mix them, put them in a new Pot on a Charcoal Fire, and the Nitre
will melt, mix them with a stick till they become like Salt, then put some Fire
into the Pot, and they will melt, and the Tartar will be calcined, if it be not
white add a little Saltpeter; to reduce it into Oil of Tartar, put it in a
Cellar upon a Marble and it will run into Oil.

To make Brass of a true Gold color.
Take Sal Ammoniac, mingle it in a Mortar with Spittle till it become like a
liquid Ointment, rub the Brass with it, put it on burning Coals, and when it is
well dried, rub it well with a Linen Cloth, and it will appear like Gold.

To make clean Silver.
Take Wheat-straw, burn it to Ashes, and rub your Silver with it: Or else, take
strong Lie of Soap Ashes, put some Alum into it, wash your Silver with it, and
dry it in the Sun.

To make Muscadel.
Take Flowers of the wild Vine dried one part, Elder Flowers dried two parts,
Coriander three parts, beat the Coriander, put all these into a linen Cloth,
and put it through the hole of the Vessel, so that it may hang in the middle of
the Wine without touching a part of the Vessel, continue it so about ten days,
then draw it forth by the string you tied to it. This secret has been often
experimented, and found true.

To keep wine from growing eager.
Take the Fat of Bacon melted, pour it into the hole of the Vessel, so it may
only touch the Superficies of the Wine, and it will never grow eager.

To restore the color of Cloth when lost.
Take quick Lime two parts, Ashes one part, Lie six parts, put them into a
Copper Vessel, and mingle them well with a stick, let it settle, and when
clear, wash your Cloth in it.

To whiten Pearls.
Wash them with Lie made of the Ashes of burnt Tartar, and boil them upon a
warm Stove.

To melt Amber.
Put it into Vinegar or Juice of Citron, so that it swim above it about an Inch
or two, set it over a slow Fire.

To preserve Roses, Tulips and Pinks.
Take a glazed earthen Pot, fill it with sharp Verjuice, put some Salt into it,
cut the Flowers before they are blown, put them in this Liquor, cover the Pot
with Parchment, set them in a moist place, and when you take them out, hold
them near the Fire to make them blow.

To make a very fair green.
Take Verdigreece, Tartar, and Vinegar, boil them altogether and it is done.

A Walnut-tree color on other Wood.
Take the Pills of Walnuts, dry them in the Sun, boil them in Oil of Nuts, and
rub your Wood with it.

To lay Gold and Silver upon Paper.
Grind Bole-armoniac with Verjuice-water, lay it on the Paper, when dry, glaire
it with the white of an Egg mixed with Sugar-candy-Water, and immediately lay on
the Gold, when dry, burnish.

Excellent Pastills of Roses.
Take four ounces of Rose Buds, cutting only so much of them as shall be red,
beat them, Benjamin beaten four ounces, Musk four grains, as much Amber, mix
them with Essence of Oranges, or Roses, grind them well together, form them
into Pastills, and dry them in the Shade.

An Ink which vanishes in twenty four hours.
Boil Galls in strong-water, put to it some Vitriol, a little Sal Armoniack,
and a little Gum Arabic, and it is done.

Another for Pastills, but more rich.
Take four ounces of Benjamin, Storax two ounces, Lignum Aloes a dram and half,
boil the Storax and Benjamin in a clean Skillet with Rose Water, the space of
half an hour, then put in the Lignum Aloes in very fine Powder, that done, put
all into a warm Mortar, with two drams of Ambergris, and one dram of Civet,
and whilst warm, quickly make up your Grains or little Balls.

Excellent sweet Baggs.
Take Florence Orris one pound and a half, Rose-wood six ounces, Calamus
Aromaticus half a pound, yellow Sanders four ounces, Benjamin five ounces,
Cloves half an ounce, Cinnamon an ounce.

To preserve Rose-buds to make sweet Baggs.
Take Province Rose-buds, pull off the green, cut off the Stalks, thrust into
the Bud a small Clove, with a little Civet at the end of it, dry it in the
shade, between two linen Cloths.

Violet Powder for Cussinets and sweet Baggs, or to strew amongst Linen.
Take Florence Orris one pound, Roses two pound, Rose-wood one pound and half,
yellow Sanders one ounce, Benjamin two ounces, Storax one ounce, Calamus
Aromaticus and Cyperons or Galingale of each an ounce and half, about
half-penny-worth of Coriander, one Nutmegg, a pennyworth of Cinnamon, an ounce
and half of Cloves, a little Citron Pill and Orange Flowers, beat all in a
Mortar, take it out, and being well mingled together in a Silk or Hair Cieve,
according to the fineness you would have it, then put it into your Baggs or
amongst your Linen.

True Cypress Powder.
Take Oak-moss, put it in a Linen bag, and lay it to soak a whole day in
water, then trample it with your feet, two or three times, dashing clear water
often upon it, then set it three or four days to dry, spreading it on a boarded
Floor; being dry, beat it well, and spread it again on a boarded Floor to dry
it, then beat it again and spread it again, and sprinkle it with Rose Water,
dry it again and beat it, then pass it throw a Cieve or fine Searce, and mix it
with the following perfumed Composition, more or less, according to the
goodness you intend it.

A most admirable Composition of Perfume.
Take Musk one dram, four Cloves, four ounces of Lavender-seed, Civet one dram
and half, Ambergreece half a dram, warm the Pestel and Mortar, then take the
Musk, Cloves, Lavender, and about a penny worth of white Sugar, and a glass of
eau d'Ange, or Rose Water, grind them all in the Mortar, take a handful of this
Powder, incorporate them well together, then pass it throw a Searce, with so
much of the Powder as shall abate of the force of the Perfume, till it come to
your liking, whether three, four, or five pound or more; for the Civet, it must
be put at the end of the Pestel, rubbing and grinding the Powder well, then
take six pound of the said Powder, put it by little and little into the Mortar,
incorporate the Powder and the Civet in braying it well with the Pestel, then
pass it again through a hair Cieve, to mix with the other Muskpowder; for the
Ambergreece, it must be well beaten in the Mortar, putting by little and little
about two pound of the white Powder before mentioned, or else of the gray,
until the Amber be all beaten into it, then pass it a hair Sieve, and mix all
three Powders toge^

Take a little bag of white Sheeps Leather, well sewed, with bands in the
seams, wherein put the Powder and Perfume, to preserve it, mingling the Perfume
more or less according as you would have the scent.

A Varnish of a Gold Color.
Take Sandrac two ounces, Lytharge of Gold one ounce, the clearest Linseed-oyl
four ounces, boil them all in a glazed earthen Pot.

A Varnish for Images.
Take Oil of Turpentine and Turpentine mingled together, stir them with your
finger till it become of a convenient thickness to work withal.

To make Porcelane of Majorca.
Take calcined Egg-shels, Gum-Arabick, water and Glaire of Eggs, make all into
a paste, shape it with Moulds, dry it in the Sun, and 'twill be very neat.

To whiten Copper.
Put a piece of Copper in a Crucible with Sublimate, Sal Armoniack, Alum and
Borax, melt it, and quench it twice in Sorrel-water.

Writing not to be Read but in Water.
Write with the Juice of Spurge or Allumwater, dry it, 'twill not be legible
without wetting.

A Fire that burns under the Water.
Take three ounces of Powder, Saltpeter one ounce, Sulphur three ounces, beat,
silt, and mix these together, fill your Moulds, fire them, and throw them in
the Water.

An Excellent transparent Varnish to lay upon any white thing to make it seem
Marble.
Take the clearest Turpentine, put it in an earthen glazed Pot, boil it till it
has quite done smoking, then put in half an ounce of Sandrac, as much Mastick
well beaten, mix them till they are all well incorporated, then take off the
Pot, adding half a pint (or more as you see cause) of oil of Turpentine upon a
slow fire, for a quarter of an hour, and keep it for use; if it be too thick,
it is but adding more Turpentine.

To make Red soft Wax.
Take Vermilion one pound, common Oil one pound, Wax twenty pound, Rosin ten
pound, work them well together.

To Dye a Yellow Color.
Take the inner bark of a Plumb-Tree cut in pieces, put it in Allum-water, boil
what you think fit in it, and it will be of a fair Yellow, the like is done
with Sumach and Allum-water.

A Cloth Shasse.
Take half a pound of Lytharge of Silver well ground, three pound of clear Oil
of Nut, set it over a small fire that it do not boil the next day, pour out the
Oil by Inclination, what remains at the bottom will serve another time, then
take Rosin a pound and a half, beat it and mix it with the Oil, upon a Charcole
fire, always stirring it till it be melted, then take it off, and put in half a
pound of Venice Turpentine; being cold, anoint the Cloth; this will last many
years. Also you may mix Burgundy Pitch with Oil of Nuts, or else Rosin and
Virgins Wax.

Another for Shasses with Glue and Varnish.
Take Glue made of Glove Leather, very clear, (Vellum Glue is better) lay it on
the Cloth, and let it dry at leisure, then give it one laying more, and leave
it again to dry, then take Virgins wax and Turpentine melted together, and lay
that on, letting it dry; to a pound of Wax allow a quarter of a pound of
Turpentine.

To Gild, or Silver over Metals.
Take a little Fish-Glew, dissolve it in Aquae Vitae, lay on the Glue with a
little Cotton, and apply the Gold or Silver in Leaf, or else temper the Leaves
and apply them with Glue; to give them a luster, take a Horse-hoof, put it on a
Chaffindish of burning Coals, and dry the thing gilt over the fume of it.

To make Copper white quite through.
Take Kettle Copper (not that which is cast) add to it some Arsenick well
ground, mix them well in the Crucible, and when they have done smoking, cast it
in the Mould you have ready.

A fair Blew Color.
Take Turnsole, infuse it all night in Urine; the day following, grind, and mix
it with a little quick Lime, according as you intend the Color. If you would have
it a little shining, add a little Gum Arabic.

To take spots of Ink out of Paper or Parchment.
Rub the spot with a little Aquafortis at the end of a Feather, and it will
soon vanish, then wash it with fresh Water with the edge of a Feather. To take
them out of Parchment, scrape it with a Penknife, and rub it with a
Pumice-stone.

An Excellent Water Perfume.
Take Benjamin, Storax-calamita, a few Cloves and Mastick, beat all, put them
in Aqua Vitae, or Spirit of Wine, in a glass Vial: when the Water becomes red,
add a grain of Musk, and strain it.

A very good Pomatum.
Take the fat of unsalted Bacon, stick it full of Oats, roast it by a slow
Fire, take up the Dripping and save it.

Diverse sorts of Perfumes. CHAP. VII.
To counterfeit Ambergris.
TAke Starch, Florence Orris root, of each an ounce, Aspaltum, or Bitumen, half
an ounce, Benjamin one ounce, Sperma Ceti, Ben-nuts an ounce and halt, Musk a
dram, Gum Tragacanth, a sufficient quantity.

Take the Starch, the Benjamin and Sperma Ceti, and make them into a Paste,
which being done, take one part, in which make up half the Aspaltum, the other
part make into a black Paste, and then mix them altogether with your hand.

To augment Civet.
Take the pulp of Raisins of the Sun, very cleanly pulped, one ounce, musk one
dram, mix and incorporate them well together, put them into the same Retort
wherein you put the Civet, and set it in a Horse-dunghill seven or eight days:
upon two drams of Civet put one dram of this Composition.

To make Essence of Cinnamon in consistence of an Extract.
Take Oil of Nutmegs, set it in the Sun in Summer, to make it lose its Scent,
then put in the half part of Oil of Cinnamon, which you may reduce to the
consistence of an Extract.

To make Cassolet, or Perfume Cakes to burn.
Take Storax two ounces, Benjamin four ounces, twelve Cloves, Laudanum a dram,
Calamus Aromaticus a dram, a little Citron Pill, take a new glazed earthen Pot,
in which boil the Storax and Benjamin in half a pint of Rose Water for several
hours, the Pot being well covered, then put the Cloves, Laudanum, Calamus, and
Citron Pill in a little Linen bag, and boil them with the fore-menon'd things;
when boiled enough, take off the Pot, strain all through a Linen Cloth, not
squeezing it too hard, then put the Paste in a Paper.

Excellent Pastills or Perfume Cakes.
Take Benjamin two ounces, Storax half an ounce, Lignum Aloes a dram, Coals of
Sallow or Willow Wood, according to discretion, reduce all to fine Powder,
adding twenty grains of good Civet, and fine Sugar as much as you think fit,
pulverize and mix all the Dru^s, and put them in a Skillet with Rose Water,
which must rise above all the Ingredients, make them boil a little, till the
Paste be well digested, always stirring with a stick, lest it burn; then if you
desire to make the Pastill somewhat better, add twelve grains of Amber, which
you shall before have ground on a Marble with a little Sugar, put it in the
Skillet, when the Paste shall be boiled enough, and not before: all being well
incorporated, form your Pastills.

Several Grounds for Hair-Powders.
To make the Ground for white Powder.
Take one pound of Orris, twelve pound of Cuttle-bone, eight pound of Starch, a
handful of Beef or Mutton Bones burnt white, beat all very well in a Mortar,
and pass them through a fine hair Cieve.

A Ground for gray Powder.
Take what remains in the Cieve of the foresaid Powder, which you must beat
again, and mix with a little Starch, and a little yellow Oker to give it a
color; then coals of White-wood, or for want of that, some of the fresh Coals
out of a Bakers Oven, mix all these well together in a Mortar, you may make it
of what color you will, then pass it through a hair Cieve, what goes not
through keep to beat again as before.

Another ground for powder.
Take worm-eaten, or rotten Wood, beat it well, and pass it through a Cieve,
then mix it with the aforesaid Powder.

Perfume for ordinary Powder.
Take Florence Orris one pound, dried Roses one pound, of Benjamin two ounces,
Storax one ounce, yellow Sanders an ounce and half, Cloves two drams, a little
Citron pill, beat all to fine Powder in a Mortar, put twenty pound of Starch,
or the aforesaid Powder, mix it well together, color it as you please, and
pass it through a Searce.

Another way for Cypress Powder, much finer.
Take Oak Moss, wash it often in fair Water till it has lost its smell, then
lay it on a Hurdle set out in the Air; being dry, sprinkle it with the best
Rose Water and Orange-flower-water, and leave it again to dry; if the scent be
too strong, wash it in fair Water till the smell become more sweet and
pleasant, after this done, the Moss being yet on the Hurdle, put a Cassolet or
Perfume Cake, with Coals of Fire, with which perfume your Moss as long as you
think fit.

In fine, to one pound of Ground thus prepared put two drams of good Musk, and
one dram and half of Civet, if it be very good, if not, the same quantity of
Musk.

Excellent Amber-powder.
Take six ounces of Bean flower, as much worm-eaten Wood, pass them through a
Searce; four ounces of Cypress wood, two ounces of Sanders, two ounces of
Benjamin, half an ounce of Storax, two drams of Calamus Aromaticus, as much
Laudanum, pass all through a silk Sieve, then to two pound of this Composition,
take four grains of Ambergreece, half an ounce of Machaleb or Pomander, Privet
beaten and sifted, which you must mix in a hot Mortar with the Amber, then mix
them all together, and keep it in a Glass bottle well stopped; put a pound and
half of this Powder into each sweet Bagg.

The Queens perfume Water.
Take red Rose Water a quart, Damask-Rose-water, Muskadine and Orange
flower-water of each three pints, Water of Melilot-Flowers, Flowers of Mirtel
and Garden Costmary three Pints, put all the aforesaid distilled Waters into a
Glass-bottle, to which add a pound of Benjamin in Powder, Cloves, Cinnamon and
Orange-pill dried of each half an ounce, all being bruised, stop the Bottle
Close, without opening it in a whole Month.

To make a curious compound Water.
Take Benjamin four ounces, Storax two ounces, yellow Sanders one ounce, Cloves
two drams, two or three pieces of Orris, half a Citron Pill, two Nutmegs,
Cinnamon half an ounce, and about two quarts of Water, put it all into a new
earthen Pipkin, and let it boil till a quart of it be consumed; then take about
six grains of Musk powdered, with about as much Sugar as the bigness of a small
Nut, which dis^olve with a little of the said Water, strain and put it into a
Glass-bottle well stopped, the better to preserve it.

Keep the Dregs dry, and powder them, and use them to perfume the Powder
aforesaid.

A curious Extraction of the Perfumes and Colors of all Flowers.
Extract through a Retort, after the manner of Aqua fortis, the Spirit of
Saltpeter, or common Salt, and keep it close in a Glass. Bottle well stopped;
then take what quantity you will of Rose Leaves, which put into a Limbick with
one ounce of the Spirit of the said Salt, one pint of pure Spring Water, and so
proportionably till your Limbick be full, let it thus infuse, and lie four and
twenty hours, till you see your Water well colored, which pour out by
inclination in another glass Vessel, it will have the color and smell of the
Rose, leaving in the Limbic your Leaves fresh as if they had been new gathered.
You may do the same with all other Flowers, as Violets, Gilliflowers and others.

To make the best Bolonia Wash-balls.
Take one pound of Genoua Soap, cut into small pieces, four ounces of unslacked
Lime, which beat well in a Mortar with two Glasses of Aqua Vitae, and let it
steep eight and forty hours; then take a sheet of Paper, on which spread it a
drying; being dry, beat it in a Mortar with half an ounce of Mahaleb, an ounce
and a half of yellow Saunders, half an ounce of Orris, as much Calamus, all in
Powder, and make it into a Paste with whites of Eggs, and four ounces of
Gum-dragacanth dissolved in Rose Water, then make your Wash-balls.

Another sort of excellent Wash-balls.
Take one pound of Orris, four ounces of Benjamin, two ounces of Storax, as
much yellow Saunders, half an ounce of Cloves, one penny worth of Cinnamon, and
a little Lemon Peel, one ounce of Machaleb, one Nutmeg, beat it all to Powder.

Then take about two pound of white Soap scraped, and put it into almost three
pints of Aqua Vitae, to lie and steep four or five days; then work it well
with about one pint of Orange-Flower, or other sweet Water.

Next, prepare the quantity you shall think fit of white Starch beaten and
sifted, which mix with the Drugs aforesaid, and the Soap, to make a Pass; have
ready a little Gum Dragacanth dissolved in sweet Water, and five of six whites
of Eggs, and make up your Wash-balls of what size you will.

To perfume them well.
Take what quantity of Musk you please, which dissolve in any sweet compound
Water; then take about the quantity of one Wash-ball of the aforesaid
Composition, and mix it together in a Mortar; then mix and incorporate that
with your Paste like Leven, and so make your Wash-balls.

Several approved ways to take out Stains of Oil, Grease, or other things.
CHAP. VIII.
To take out a Spot of Oil upon Satin, or any other Stuff; and even upon Paper.
TAke Sheeps-Feet calcined, of which lay on both sides of the Paper or Stuff,
upon the Spot, and so leave it one Night, this Powder or Ashes will draw out
all the stain: but if it be not clear taken away, do it the second time, but
the stain must not be old.

Another way to take out Stains.
Take half a pound of Soap, four ounces of Fullers earth, and one of unslacked
Lime, mix it all in fa^r Water, and lay it to the Stain.

Another way.
Take Water and Starch, and make it into a Paste, with which cover the Stain,
laying it about as thick as a Shilling, and leave it there, next day rub it off
as you would do dry Dirt, and the Stain will appear no more. Probatum.

Another way for Silk.
Rub the Stain with Spirit of Turpentine, this Spirit evaporates, and carries
away with it the other Oil.

To take off the Dirt that dasheth upon Cloths.
Wet a white Cloth, and lay it upon it, that sucks in all the Dirt, and makes
it appear no more.

To take off Iron-Moulds from Linen.
The Linen being whitened, take boiling Water in a Pewter Pot, and immediately
put in your Linen, and lay it over to receive the Smoke, squeezing and rubbing
it with a little Sorrel, than wash it out in clear Water.

To take out all Ink spots upon Linen or Woollen.
Take some juice of Lemmon, put it upon the stain, which wash immediately in
fair Water, rubbing it well; for want of Lemmon, use Verjuice of Grapes or
Sorrel.

Another way.
Wash the stain with white Soap dissolved in Vinegar.

How to soften, whiten, and restore discolored Ivory. CHAP. IX.
How to soften Ivory, so that it may be cast in a Mould.
BOil the Ivory in common Water, in which must be six ounces of the Root
Mandrake, and it will be as soft as Wax.

An excellent Receipt to whiten discouloured Ivory.
Take a sufficient quantity of Roch-allum, according to the number of pieces
you would whiten, and when the Water is very white, which must be made to boil
up, and put the Ivory into soak for an hour or thereabouts, and rub it with a
little hair Brush, and then put it into a wet Cloth that it may dry leisurely,
or else it will split.

Another way.
Lay black Soap upon Ivory, placed near the fire, so that it may by little and
little bubble up, then clear it.

To whiten green Ivory, and restore that which is spotted.
Take unslacked Lime, and put it with water into an earthen Pot, in which shall
be the Ivory you would whiten, put it upon the fire, and make it boil till such
time you see the Ivory is white; to be polished it must be turned in a Lath;
after having worked it as you desire, take some of the Lime and Pummice stone
in very fine Powder, and with water rub till you see it every where well
colored; to polish, you must first warm it, turning it in the Lath and rubbing
it with a white Linen Cloth and a piece of Sheeps Skin. When it is very hot,
take Cerus with some Sallet-Oyl, and rub it till it is dry with Cerus alone;
and at last only with a white Cloth very dry, and your Ivory will be very white
and smooth.

To whiten Bones.
Take unslacked Lime, and put to it one handful of Bran into a new Pot, letting
them boil till all the grease is out.

Rare and Admirable Curiosities. CHAP. X.
A Representation of the four Elements in a Glass Vial.
FIrst, you must dye some Aqua-Vitae with Turnsole, to represent the Air, then
take some of the Ethereal Oil of Turpentine, which dye of a fire Color with
Saffron; then some Alkanet, and Oil of Tartar, to which add a little Lapis
Lazuli to give it a Sea Color; and to represent the Earth a little bruised
Enamel: it is good to stir and mix them together: each thing after a little
standing will return to its place, for those three Liquors never mix.

To make several Colors upon Water.
If you throw some drops of Nut Oil upon still water, that runs not fast, but
rather lies without motion, there will appear to you as many Colors as are in
the Rainbow.

To break an Iron as thick as an Arm.
Take melted Soap, with which anoint the Iron in the middle, then with a Thread
clear the place where you would have it break; next, take a Sponge dipped in
Aqua Vitae thrice distilled, wrap it round the Iron, and within six hours it
will break.

Another way to do the same.
Take two pound of Aqua fortis, make it dissolve for the space of twenty four
hours, Orpiment, Sulphur, Aconite, Verdigreece, of each an ounce, unslacked
Lime killed in two ounces of Vinegar thrice distilled; put it all into a
Limbick, with one ounce of Salt peter, two ounces of Antimony, and all the
Water shall come from it; pour it again upon the Dregs with two ounces of
Arsenick in Powder, and distill it; when you would use it, dip in it a Napkin
or handkerchief, which wrap about the Iron Bar, and when it has so lain three
hours, you may break it with ease. Take care of the Fumes when you distill it.

A wonderful Spirit that dissolveth all sorts of Stones though never so hard.
Take the Flower of Rye, make it into small Balls, which dry, then put them
into a Retort well closed, with a strong Fire, as is used for Aqua Fortis, and
there will distill a Liquor that will perform as above.

How to melt all manner of Metals in a Nutshell, without burning of it.
Take Saltpeter two ounces, Sulphur half an ounce, sawings of Oak,
Walnut-tree, or other dry Wood half an ounce, the said Saw-dust must be very
small, the Saltpeter and Sulphur powdered to impalpable Dust; mix it
altogether, and fill a Nutshell with this Powder to the Edges, then put a piece
of Gold, Silver, or other Metal upon it, and cover it with the said Powder,
then set fire to the Powder that is under it, that Metal that shall be between
the two Powders will melt, and remain at the bottom of the shell.

How to dissolve Gold upon ones Hand.
You must distill the Blood of a Deer newly killed in Balneo Mariae, and soak
the Gold upon the Lees three times, and at the third it will certainly dissolve.

A perpetual Motion.
Take Aqua fortis, into which cast filings of Iron of the smallest, and leave
them there till the Water has taken the quantity of Iron that is requisite,
which will be in seven or eight hours, take off your Water, and put it into a
Vial an inch wide, with a large Mouth, and put in a stone of Lapis Calaminaris,
stop the Bottle well, and keep it very close.

To make a Man's Face appear hideous.
Take common Salt, and fine Chalk in Powder, with which powder very well some
Hemp or Flax, dipping them in good Aqua Vitae, then set them on fire, first
putting out all other Lights, and you will see wonderful things.

A waggish way to make Pease leap out of a Pot.
Take some of the Herb Clary, and put a sprig of it into a Pot in which Pease
are boiling, so the Water be not very low, nor the Pot too close covered, you
will see it succeed according to your Desire.

The like to make an Egg move about.
You must first empty it through a little hole, then put never so little
Vitriol into it, stop it up presently, and you will see the effect.

The same is done by putting a Leech into it, having some Water spilt in some
part of the Room.

To make all the People in a House to sleep, without being able to wake.
Take half a quarter of an ounce of the herb called Dragon-wort, which put into
a Gourd, or Pumpkin, which cover with another, and put it in a Horses belly for
the space of nine days, after which time you will find it converted into little
red Worms, from which, according to Art extract an Oil, which put into the
Lamps, which being lighted, all that are in the House will be seized with a
profound Sleep, so that they cannot be awaked without putting out the Lamp.

An Excellent way to cleanse Silver without boiling.
Take four ounces of white Soap scraped in a Plate with half a pint of hot
Water, a pennyworth of old dry Lees of Wine in another Plate, with the same
quantity of hot Water as in the other, and in a third Plate one pennyworth of
Ashes of Wine Leesburned, with the same quantity of Water as before, then take
a hair Brush, which first dip in your Liquor of dry Lees, next in the burnt
Lees, then in the Soap, that done, wash it in hot Water, and wipe it with a dry
Cloth.

A Cloth that wholly resuts a Sword.
Take a strong new Linen Cloth, fold it, and rub it with Fish-Glew dissolved
in common Water, then dry it upon a Rail; that done, take yellow Wax, Rosin,
and Mastick, of each two ounces, melt it all with an ounce of Turpentine,
stirring it well, and laying it upon the Cloth till it is all soaked in.

To make a Jerkin or Coat Armor Proof against a Musket.
Take an Oxes Hide, cut off the Hair as it is just taken off, cut out your
Armor, sew, and finish it, then soak it in Vinegar for 24 hours, then take it
out and dry it, not at the Fire nor the Sun, but only in the Air. This steeping
in Vinegar must be repeated six times, changing the Vinegar each time, then
color it.

To hinder the Pot and Meat from boiling.
Put Nettle Seeds into it, and no fire will make it boil.

To make boiled meat bleed.
A Hares blood powdered and strowed upon boiled meat, makes it look as if it
bled.

To make Wind blow out of a River.
Take an Egg and empty what is in it at the ends, fill half with unslack'd
Lime, and the other half with natural Brimstone, then stop the passages with
Wax, put the Egg into water, and you will see Wonders.

A Water that will give light in the dark of the Night.
Take some Glowworms, pound, and put them into a glass Vial, which close up in
hot Horse-dung, and leave it there fifteen days, after which distill it in a
glass Limbick, and put the Water shall come from it into a Crystal Vial, and
it will give so great a light you may see to read by it. Probatum.

A strange way to hold Fire in ones hand without burning.
Put some Vitriol into strong Vinegar, with an equal quantity of juice of
Plantain, anoint your hands. Probatum.

To touch Fire without being burnt.
Take the Juice of Marshmallows, Seeds of Psillium in Powder, mix all together
with the whites of Eggs, and Juice of Radishes, anoint your hands and let it
dry, then anoint them again and you may touch fire without danger: to make it
burn, there must be powder of Brimstone.

To make a Light in a Chamber at Night.
Take unslacked Lime, and mix it in Water, leaving it till it is clear, then
put it into a Chamber in a Vial, and you will see a great Light.

To make Glass or Crystal clear.
Rub the Glass or Crystal with a piece of Lead, that will make it very clear.

To make Parchment Shasses as clear as Glass.
Take a very white and smooth Skin of Parchment, which steep twenty four hours
in whites of Eggs, and Honey well mixed together, then wash your Parchment very
well, and put it upon your Shasses, when dry, varnish it.

To whiten Paper glewed upon Windows, or Shasses to endure for several Years.
Take white Lead ground in water, when dry, grind it again in Oil, and paint
your Paper, you must mix with it some fat Oil, which will make it resist Rain
the better; and to make it the more lasting, cover it twice.

To make fat Oil.
Take a flat piece of Lead and encompass it round, fill it with Nut, or Linseed
Oil, and cover it with a Glass, expose it to the Sun, and it will soon be
thick, or fat.

An unluckey way to melt or calcine the Blade of a Sword, without damaging the
Scabbard.
You must put down to the bottom of the Scabbard some Arsenick in Powder, and
upon it some drops of Lemmon Juice, then put up the Sword again, in a quarter
of an hour or little more you may see the Effects.

A secret way to write white and invisible upon a Man's Flesh, and after make
the Writing appear.
You must write with a new Pen and Urine what you will upon the Palm of your
hand, or where else you please, and let it dry of it self; when you would have
the Writing appear, lay upon it some burned Paper, and rub it a little, and it
will appear perfectly. Probatum.

To write white upon Paper and make it appear black.
Write what you will with Milk, and do as above. Probatum.

Diverse useful and curious Compositions. CHAP. XI.
Several sorts of Inks.
To make black Writing vanish and appear again.
TAke one pound of burnt Tartar, which dissolve in common Water, and filtrate
it, and when you would make use of it strike it over the Writing, and it will
suddenly vanish.

To recall and make the Letters appear again.
Take an ounce of white Vitriol, dissolve it in a pound of Water, which
filtrate, then strike the Paper over with it, and presently the Letters will
appear as before.

An Ingenious way to Write so as it shall or shall not appear, or the double
Letter.
Take a quarter of a pint of distilled Vinegar, which put into a Vial, wherein
must be half an ounce of Gold Litharge in fine Powder, stirring it from time to
time, four or five times an hour, then let it stand twelve, fifteen, or twenty
four hours, then pour off what is clear into another Vial by Inclination, and
throw off the dregs, stopping the bottle close, and keep it against you would
write white, or the double Letter, with the Ink that follows.

The second Ink.
Take Cork, as much as you please, burn it well, and when it flames no longer,
put it into a Dish, with a little Aquae Vitae over it, and cover your dish
close with another, then pound it well, and make it up into a Paste, which keep
to use thus;

Take some of this Cork, burnt and pounded, and dissolve it in water, and with
fine Cotton, till your Ink runs, and will write.

To make a Water that will make this second vanish, and the first appear.
Take Rose Water, and Sorrel water, of each half a pint, which put into a Vial,
and add to it two ounces of unslack'd Lime, and one of Orpine, both well beaten
and mixed, stirring all from time to time as the first, take off the clear by
Inclination, after it has stood fifteen or twenty hours, throw off the Lees,
and when you would make the second Ink vanish, and the first appear, put one or
two drops upon the Line, and with a little Cotton make it run upon the place
where your writing is, and it will appear.

Ink that may be rubbed out when you will.
Take Flax well burnt, and put out in Aqua Vitae, then ground upon a Stone to
Paste, which put into a new earthen Pot, covering it well lest it turn to
Ashes, dissolve it with Gum-Water and write, any Water will wash away that
Writing.

Ink that will vanish within six days.
Take some Coals made of Willow well ground and dissolved in common Water, and
write.

Ink for Parchment that will last till you rub it out.
Take Cannon-Powder, dissolve it in fair Water, and write upon Parchment; when
you would put it out, take a Hancherchief and rub it.

Indian Ink.
Take dry Beans, all black, burn them to Coal, then beat them to Powder,
dissolve it in March Dew, in which Gum Arabic has been dissolved before, make
it up into a Paste, which make in what fashion you will, and let it dry in the
shade.

Portable, or dry Ink to carry about.
Take of the black of Rosin one part, Coal made of Walnut, Peach, or
Apricock-tree, one part, Vitriol and Galls equal parts, Gum Arabic four parts,
all in Powder, or in a Cake, if you will.

An Excellent Ink for writing.
Take half a pound of Log-wood, cut into small slices, boil it in a quart of
Wine, or Vinegar, till half be consumed, then take out the Wood, and put into
the Pot four ounces of good Glass pounded, and put all into a strong Bottle,
which expose to the Sun for three or four days, stirring of it three or four
times a day, then add to it two ounces of good Roman Vitriol, or green
Copperas, and let it steep two days, then two ounces of Gum-Arabick pounded,
next day strain it into another Vessel to keep, the dregs that remain may serve
again with the same Liquor, and you need only add half a pint of Logwood-water;
to make it shine you must put to it a handful of Pomegranate shells, which put
into the bottle with the Galls; being in want of Ink, you may boil it a quarter
of an hour, but it is never so good, but thick and muddy.

A very useful way to write upon greasy Paper, or Parchment, and make the Ink
run.
Take an Oxes gall, which prick, and put into a Pot with a handful of Salt and
a little Vinegar, then stir it all very well, and thus you may keep it a year
without spoiling; when you write, and meet with any Paper, or Parchment, that
in some place is greasy, take one drop of that Gall, which mix with the Ink in
the Ink-horn, and you will write with ease.

Rain, or Nut-water, is excellent, and the Ink made of it is very good.

White Wind is best for shining Ink.

To write Silver and Gold Letters.
Take one ounce of Touchstone, two ounces of Sal Armoniack, half an ounce of
Gum Arabic, beat all to Powder and mix it; then when you would write dissolve
your dregs in Water, or milk of Figs, when your letters are dry, rub them with
the metal you would have them be of.

An Ink that may be wiped out in forty days.
Take Aquafortis, in which boil as many Galls, Roman Vitriol, and Sal
Ammoniac, as the Water can dissolve, at last add Gum Arabic, then write, it is
very black till wiped out.

Ink upon Glass.
Take scales of Iron and Stone, well ground upon a Copper Plate, equal
quantities of each, then dissolve them in Gum Water, and write with a glass Pen.

Several sorts of Colors.
Take Tutty, which incorporate with the juice of Celandine upon a Marble stone,
and write with it.

To make a resemblance of Wines of several Colors.
Shave Brasil-wood, which steep in common Water, so that it remain like a
Paste, and let it dry in a Glass till it soaks up the Water.

Take what you can carry between two Fingers of these shavings, which put into
a Glass of Water, and it will suddenly become red, like Claret.

Pour the said red Water into another glass washed in good Vinegar, it will
turn yellow, put out the greatest part, and retain but about the depth of three
fingers, putting fresh Water to it, it will be of the color of small pale
Wine, to which put a little Vinegar, it will look like a Muscadine, inclined to
yellow, add Water, it will be like White Wind, to this last put two drops of
writing Ink, blow your Water, and it will become of a good pale Greediline.

Incombustible Oil.
Oil of Olives, unslacked Lime, and Salt distilled together, make incombustible
Oil.

To make Arsenick run like Oil.
Take white Soap, which distill, and there will come out an Oil, in which boil
your Arsenick till the said Oil be consumed, and it will melt like Wax.

To slack Lime so that it shall be good for several Uses.
Put it into a Pot and fill it with Water, when it begins to boil it makes a
small Skin on the top, which must be taken off with a Knife, so doing till it
rises no more, and then it will be fit for use,

To make a Light for a Lamp that shall not smoke (by distilling) with an
excellent Week.
Distill a pound or more of common Oil, which use in your Lamp, the Light of it
is very steady and even, the Week may be of Talk, or stone Alum, like other
Weeks, (which is done by steeping them well in Water, and they will spin out)
observe you must make a great many little holes in the Week with an Awl or
great Needle, to make the Oil rise.

Aqua Vitae.
Put into an Earthen Limbec well tinned, a quart of the strongest Vinegar, with
a handful of Allay, and as much Salt, and distill it.

A Candle that cannot be put out.
Fill a Cane with natural live Sulphur, and wrap it about with Lints, then
cover it with Wax, and light it.

To hinder Oil from smoking.
Distill some Juice of Onion, and put it at the bottom of the Lamp, the Oil
upon it, which hinders it from making Soot.

To make Oil of Eggs white.
Put among the Oil of twelve Eggs, extracted after the common way, one spoonful
of Oil of Tartar, mixing them well together, set them out to the Sun, there
remains at bottom a thick settlement, the Oil that remains at top must be
gently poured off into another Vial, leaving it in the Sun, it becomes as white
as a Curd.

Of Artificial Fireworks, Hunting and Fishing. CHAP. XII.
An excellent Composition for Grenades, staming Lances, Pikes, and other
Instruments.
TAke fine Cannon Powder, six parts Saltpeter, Rosin, of each a fifth part,
Greek-Pitch, all being beaten to Powder, sprinkle it with Nut Oil, till it be
made into a hard Paste.

Flaming Lances.
Take two foot in length of the Lance, which fill with the aforesaid
Composition, till within two inches of the top, which fill up with fine Cannon
Powder, over that make a round Ball of the aforesaid matter, covered with fine
Flax, putting in a stick for the touchhole, which leave there after having
dipped the said Ball in melted Pitch, redoubling this Composition when you
please.

Fire Pots.
Take six ounces of fine Powder, powdered Rosin one ounce, Arsenick four
ounces, in fine Powder, mix them together with Yarn, and Hemp a little; fill
your Pot, cast it as you know, and you will see the effect.

Good Squibs.
Take a pound of fine Powder, Saltpeter, two ounces, all well beaten together,
and fifth them through a fine Sieve or Strainer, then sprinkle with Aquae Vitae,
or good White Wind, beat down and ram the said Matter hard in your Cartridge,
which must be washed with white of Egg and Starch, or some other fine Glue.

A pleasant Invention to kill Game.
Make a stopple of Hemp, with melted Grease and fresh Hogs Lard, put the said
stopple into your Gun instead of Paper, and ram it upon the Powder with your
scowring Rod; then take a little Rag, and thrust it never so little into the
muzzle of your Gun with the scowring Rod, and having put in your shot, fold the
four corners of the Rag that hang over the muzzle of your Piece, over one
another, and drive them down with your scowring Rod, then shoot either at
Quelsts, Stockdoves, Ducks, etc. and you will see strange Effects; and you need
not come so near as is usual, because this carries a great way; so when the
Birds run upon the Ground, you must shoot at them as they rise.

To make Powder strong.
To eight ounces of Powder, add one of Borax well pounded, and mix them
together.

To catch Partridges.
Steep Wheat in Aquae Vitae, strew it where the Partridges repair, and they
will fall down drunk.

To make Rabbets come out of their Berries without a Ferret.
Take Powder of Orpiment, Sulphur, and an old shoe, or Parchment, or Cloth,
which burn at the Mouth of the Berrie, upon which the Wind blows, and spread
your Bags under the Wind.

Another way.
Put one or two Cray-fishes into the Mouth of the Berry, and they will
certainly make the Conies come out.

To gather together a great number of Hares.
Take juice of Henbane mixed with the Blood of a young Hare, and sew it in a
Hares Skin, whi4ch bury in the Earth.

An admirable way to preserve Arms from rusting, and take off the rust.
Take a pound and half of Beef Suet, a pound and half of Oil of sweet Almonds
extracted without Fire, one pound of freshned Olive Oil, four ounces of
Camphire, twelve ounces of Lead burnt with Sulphur, make a Composition of them,
and boil it to the substance of an Ointment, with which rub the Arms to
prevent rusting.

Note, that Lead is burnt by melting, and then throwing upon it powdered
Sulphur, always stirring the Lead with an Iron Rod, till it remains in a black
Powder. Olive Oil is freshned with lukewarm Water, beating them together, and
then letting them settle again; lastly, put them into a Funnel to filtrate, the
Water will run out first when you unstop the bottom hole.

Another way.
Take new white Wax, heat the Iron you will rub with the Wax very hot, and when
it is so hot you can hardly hold it, rub it well, and let it soak the said Wax;
letting it afterward dry before the Fire, that it may suck in the said Wax,
rubbing and cleansing it with a piece of Serge, and thus it will never rust.

To make an unextinguishable Wild fire.
Take live quick Sulphur, Tartar, Sarcocolla, Oil of Pitch, boiled, or
decrepitated Salt, Petroleum, and common Oil, and boil them well together: it
cannot be extinguished but by Vinegar.

Another way.
Take Oil of Petilium, Oil of Turpentine, of each an ounce, Camphire six drams
in Powder, hard Rosin half an ounce, melt all together, then take Hemp or Flax,
and dip it in this Composition, then throw it upon the place you design.

A Fire that burns upon Armor.
Take Cannon-powder five parts, Saltpeter three, Sulphur two parts, Rosin and
Turpentine of each one part, white Vitriol half a part, Oil of Acorns the same
quantity, as much Linseed Oil, and one part and half of Aqua Vitae.

To make a Pistol carry far.
Put a good charge of Powder into it, and instead of Paper ramm a Bullet of
Camphire upon your Powder, beating it well down, then you must have a thin skin
dipped in Oil of Petroleum, in which wrap up your Bullet, over that a little
more Camphire, which you must not ramm too much.

A pleasant way to catch Crows.
You must mince some Oxes Liver or Lights with some Nux Vomica, which make up
into little Balls as big as small Nuts, and spread them in any Field; as soon
as the Crows eat of them, they fall down stounded, and you may easily catch
them with your hands.

Of Fishery.
A sure way to catch Fish.
Take fresh Horse-dung, and put it into a Bag, or Net, throw it into the Water,
and the Fish will gather about it.

Another way.
Take Quicksilver, which put into a thick glass Vial, fasten it to a
Pack-thread, and let it down to the bottom of the Water in the Night,
especially when the Moon shines, and you will see a multitude of Fish come
together.

To catch Fish.
Put Oil of Camomil into a Vial, and when you would fish, you must have some
Worms and kill them in the said Vial of Oil, and bait your Hooks with those
Worms.

A wonderful Secret to bring the Fish to the place you desire.
Boil Barley in Water till it bursts, and boil it with Liquorice, a little
Mummy and Honey; beat all together in a Mortar, till it is stiff as Paste,
which put into Boxes close stopped; when you would fish in any place, take
about the quantity of a Walnut of it, and boil in an earthen Pot, with two
handfuls of fresh Barley, and a little Liquorice, leaving it till it is almost
dry; then throw it into the place whither you would have the Fish come, and
they will gather there.

To catch Fish.
Take the Herb Dragon-wort, from which extract the Juice, with it rub your
Hands, and the Fish will come near, and suffer themselves to be taken, holding
them in the Water; the proper hour for fishing is from five till six in the
morning.

Another way.
Take some of a Herons Flesh, and put it into a Bottle close covered with Clay,
or Wax, with some Musk, Amber, and Civet, put the Pot into a Kettle full of
Water, and make it boil till you are sure the said Flesh is converted into Oil,
then take out the Bottle, and pour out the Oil; with which rub your Line, and
all the Fish will come to be taken.

Another way.
Take fat of a Heron, Mummie, Galbanum, of each two drams, Musk one grain, Aqua
Vitae two ounces, mix all together in an Earthen Porringer over a gentle Fire,
and stir till it be as thick as if boiled; keep it in a leaden Porringer, and
with it rub the Hook, or the ends of the Line, or Cork, and all the Fish will
come so that you may take them with your Hands.

Otherwise.
Take the Belly of a Heron, that is, the Bowels or Entrals, cut it in pieces,
and put it into a Glass Vial, which stop close with Wax; then bury it in hot
Horse-dung, and let it turn to Oil, which will be within ten or fifteen days;
then take an ounce of Asa foetida, and mix it with the said Oil, it will all
thicken like Honey, with which noynt a Line, Stick, or Rod, or else the bait
you put upon the Hook.

Another way to do the same
You must kill a Cat by smothering, bleed him, and having flayed and panched,
roast him upon a Spit without larding, and keep the dripping that falls, which
mix with Yolks of Eggs, and an equal quantity of Oil of Spicknard, which mix
well together in a Mortar, to the thickness of an Ointment; and use it as above.

To make Worms for baits come out of the Ground.
Take Verdigreece, and boil it in a little Vinegar, with which sprinkle the
Earth, and the Worms will come out.

Admirable Receipts in Cookery. CHAP. XIII.
The true Method of making Bolonia Saucidges.
TAke fat and lean Pork, which mince very small, and to twenty five pound
weight of it add one of Salt, four ounces of whole Pepper, a pint of
White Wind, and a pound of the Hogs Blood, then stir and beat it all together
for above a quarter of an hour, and put it into the Guts, which wrap round with
a Napkin, lest crushing down the Meat close they burst; make the divisions at
what distances you think fit, which knot with a Packthread, and hang them a
drying in the Air or Smoke; when dry, if you think fit, cut the Skin which
divides the Saucidges, for the Maggots may get into them, and after you have
wiped off the Dust they have gathered, rub them with Sallet Oil, and put them
into an Earthen Pot glazed, covering it with its ordinary Cover; and thus you
may keep them sweet as long as you will.

Milan Saucidges.
Take six pound of good lean Pork, one of good fat, four ounces of Salt, one of
Pepper, all being well minced, mix them together, adding some White Wind, and
the Blood aforesaid, with half an ounce of Cinnamon and Cloves beaten and mixed
together, and some pieces, such as are used for larding made of the Hogs-head,
which must be well sprinkled with that Spice, and then lard the said Saucidges
and sprinkle them as above, these must be boiled to be eaten.

Mentz Gammons.
You must rear up good Gammons of Bacon, keep them a fortnight to grow tender,
then wash them in equal quantities of White Wind and Water, dry them with a
Cloth, rub both sides very well with fine white Salt; then you must have great
Wicker Panniers, and cover the bottom about a Finger thick with very fine Salt,
and over the Salt place a layer of Isop, Sage, Savory, Laurel, and Rosemary,
but not very thick; and it will be better to lay the said Herbs at the bottom
of the Pannier, and the Salt upon them, that the Gammons may take the Salt the
better, upon which always lay the fleshy part of the Gammon, then put the same
quantity of Herbs and Salt upon the Skin, placing your Gammons one upon
another, till you fill the Pannier, and press it down hard, leaving them there
a fortnight to take the Salt.

Then take them out, hang them in a very close place, making under them for
five or six days a fire of green Juniper, that it may smoke the more, leave
them there till your fire be quite out, which you are to put in all together.

Next, hang them up in a dry place, and they will keep three or four years: to
make them Eat the better, if they are too dry, you must beat them with a
Pestel, then keep them in warm Water with a handful of Bran for a day or two,
rubbing them, and the night before they are to be Eaten, wrap them up in good
dry Hay, put them into a Kettle of boiling Water, which fill with cold as fast
as it consumes, till they are boiled enough, before they are served up; the
Skin must be raised whilst hot, and the flesh be powdered with Cinnamon,
Cloves, Pepper, Ginger, and Nutmeg, all beaten together, be kept warm and Eaten.

Madame de Bis Gammons.
You must have a young Hogs Gammon, salted eight days, after wiping off the
Salt that is upon it with your hand, lift up the Skin to the very Hock; then
stick the flesh with Cloves and Cinnamon, sprinkle it with a good quantity of
Sugar, and lay down the Skin: let it be baked in the Oven, basting it at times
with its own Dripping; it is an excellent Dish hot.

An Excellent Hogs-head after the manner of Piemont.
Take a dry Hogs-head and Feet, boil them together till the Bones come out
easily, take them from the fire, and having poured out the Water, cut the Ears
into small pieces, and so the Feet, lay the Head upon a Cloth, and upon it
place the said pieces of the Ears and Feet: powder all with Salt, and Spice to
it, Cinnamon, Clove, Pepper, Ginger, and Nutmeg, a little of each, and some
Orange-peel scraped, then wrap all together in the Cloth, and press it, leaving
it so five or six hours till all be cold; this will keep good three Months. You
must take the Cloth, laying it into a glazed earthen Pot, covering it with its
own cover; when served up, you must cut it in slices upon a Plate with good
Vinegar and Sugar, for those that like it.

An excellent way to salt Pork, Beef, and other Meat well, as is used in
Germany and Flanders.
Your Powdering Tub should be made of some old Cask, which makes it much the
better; then boil two or three handfuls of Juniper Seed, more or less in a
Kettle of Water, which having boiled for some time, soak the Tub in that Water,
leaving the Seed in it, till all the Wood takes the scent; which done, pour it
out, and put in clear Water, which also cast out when the Tub is well washed,
and it will be fit to use. To salt Meat well, it must be first steeped in
Water, then wiped dry with a Cloth, and then make one layer of Salt, and
another of Flesh, till your Tub be full, the last layer must be of Salt, of
which, for fear of mistakes, there must be a pound to twenty five pounds weight
of Flesh; and add if you think fit, some quantity of Cloves a little beaten, no
Pepper, as some through mistake do; because it makes the meat black. The Meat
must lie in the Powdering Tub a Month, to be thoroughly salted; and take care
above all things, that no Woman in her Menstruum come near it, for it would
cause Corruption. The Meat being taken out, and designed to be dried presently,
every piece must immediately be steeped in boiling Water, and hung up with a
Twig of Osier, in some place where the Air may come to it.

To make Mentz Gammons.
Salt your Gammons, and keep them so five days, then take them out, and lay
them for six days in filings of Iron; next wash them in red Wine, and shut
them up in some small place, making in it a Fire of Juniper for ten days or
more, and they will be excellent.

To make Lombardy Saucidges.
Take four pounds of Hogs Flesh, three pound and half of Beef, one pound of
Veal, and four ounces of fresh fat Pork, let the Flesh be minced small, and the
Fat sliced, mix all together, with two ounces of Pepper, two of Ginger, Cloves
and Nutmeg of each half an ounce, Salt by ghess, then put it into Hogs Guts,
and dry them; they must be boiled to be eaten; and do as is spoken of before,
to keep them long.

A White Pot.
Take half a pound of blanched Almonds made into a Paste well beaten, adding
some Milk, that they may the better hold together, and not grow oily, you must
have a Spoonful and half of Rice Flower, mix it together, and strain it with a
great Porringer full of Milk, make it boil gently, always stirring it, and add
as much Sugar as will please your Pallat, and boil it thicker than common
Porridge; if you will add some of the brawn of a Capon; it must be beaten with
the Almonds and Rice, and strained: and the rest done as above.

Excellent Italian Fritters, By Andrea Doria.
Take some Flower, which dissolve in a Mortar of Marble, with hot Milk, or
rather in good strong Chickin Broth: this Paste must be beaten a long while,
then add the yolk of an Egg, and beat it still, at last almost as much Sugar as
there is Paste, continuing still beating: then every time you fry them, put
fresh Hogs-lard into the Pan. They are very delicious; to one glass of Flower,
put a quartern of boiling Milk.

A Pike after the manner of Poland.
Take water of boiled Parsley-roots, Whitewine, Vinegar, and Salt, when this
boyls up, throw in the Pike, then when you think fit, add some Lemon, Pepper,
Sugar, and a little Saffron, and Eat the Pike with this Sauce.

To make the Bones of a Shad-Fish eatable, and preserve them boiled from Year
to Year.
First, you must cut your Shads into pieces about two fingers thick, or any
other sort of Fish, and observe the Head nor Tail must not be in it, then wash
it well in several Waters, and with a little small stick take out all the
marrow that is in the Backbone, clearing it so that nothing remain, for that is
the chief Secret for preserving Fish, and keeping it from all manner of
Putrefaction; then season with Salt, Pepper, and Spice each piece by it self,
and stick some Cloves in them; but they must be wiped before they are seasoned;
then put them into a new well glazed earthen pot one upon another, and add
thereto two parts of Sallet Oil, and one of White Wind, so that it be two
fingers above the Fish; that done, cover the Pot close, laying Salt about the
edges, let it boil gently upon a Coal fire, till the Wine be quite consumed,
which you may certainly know by the Pot making no more noise when it boyls;
then take it from the fire and let it cool. You may keep it thus all the year
round very good, for it is much firmer this way than the common; the bones are
quite consumed: You must take out the Pieces with a Silver or Wooden fork, but
nothing of Iron, lay them upon a Plate with a little Vinegar, and they are
admirable.

To make Cream without a Fire.
Take a dish full of the top of Milk, with the Cream, to which add about four
spoonfuls of scraped Sugar, and at the same time about the bigness of a Pins
head of good Rennet, which dissolve therein, then stir all together, that it
may thicken a little. When you would serve up this Cream, scrape Sugar over it,
and add ten or twelve drops of Orange-flower Water: If the Rennet be good, it
will harden in an hour: they that will put in a very little bit of Musk; the
Orange flower Water is put in when it is served up, lest it should dissolve the
Cream.

To make a delicate Fool.
Take the Yolk of an Egg, and an hundred whole ones, beat them well-in a dish,
putting over them Sugar, as it dissolves, and a little Rose Water, the least
you can, at most a quarter of a Spoonful; there must be at least four ounces of
fine Sugar scraped; then mix with it your Milk, with the Cream, stirring it;
then put the dish upon hot Embers, so that it may not boil, nor be stirred
after it is upon the Fire; when it grows stiff it is enough. Color it with a
red Pan; serve it up cold, and scrape over it some Sugar; it will be an Hour
stiffening, but the longer the better.

To make an excellent sort of boiled Fool.
Take Cream, or fresh Milk, and set it a boiling in a Pan, with the Crumb of
white Bread crumbled small, and well dried, and fresh Butter; let all boil well
together, so long till it bubbles up, stirring it very much with a Spoon, to
the end it stick not to the Skillet; then take Yolks of Eggs, beat and strain
them through a Cieve; add Salt and Sugar proportionable to the Quantity and, if
you will, a little Saffron; then when it has boiled, and you perceive it begin
to rise, put in the Yolks of Eggs, always stirring it, so that it may not burn
to, leaving it so long till the Butter comes up; then take it from the Fire,
and take great care it burn not; lay it by, and when you want it serve it up
with Sugar.

How to make an excellent Cake, after a particular manner.
Take a dozen of Whites of Eggs with the shells well washed, pound them so long
in a stone Mortar till all be dissolved, then add small Sugar and Flower, but
there must be more Sugar than Flower, beat all well together, till it comes to
a hard Dough, which spread upon a Paper like to another Cake, and bake it in an
Oven not over hot.

To Pickle and Preserve Cabbages.
Cut the Cabbages into many pieces, which you must salt very well, sprinkling
them with Cloves not too small beaten, and lay them in an earthen Pot glazed,
placing one layer of Salt and another of Cabbage, to the top of the Pot, the
first and last lavers must be of Salt, then fill it with good Vinegar, and keep
it stopped; when you take any out to Eat, it must be with a silver or wooden
Spoon, nothing of Iron must be put in, nor the Vinegar be touched with your
hand: it can serve for a Sallet with a few Lettice-leaves, which will make them
be taken for Cabbage Lettice, but then there must be no Cloves put to them, but
only Salt.

For Cucumbers.
You must choose the least in the latter season, and proceed as above.

For Purslane.
You must do the same, observing that the sort which is lightcoloured is best,
and not the dark.

For Artichokes.
Do the same thing.

For Sparagus.
The same.

For Green Pease.
Fill an Earthen Pot with half Vinegar, half Water, into which put your green
Pease, cover the Pot, and stop it close; and when you would take them out to
eat, steep them in fresh Water.

To keep Beans.
They must be gathered thorough ripe, that is, when the Cod begins to grow
black, and having taken them out of the Cod, peel off the Skin that covers each
Bean, dry them upon a hurdle, in the Oven, after the Bread is taken out, or if
you will, at the Sun, and of all things take care there be no moisture left in
them; when you would dress them, if it be when they are come again, you may add
a few of the new Leaves and Flowers, to give them a taste, and make them pass
for that years Beans; garnish the Dish round with Bean*flowers; before you stew
them, they must be just boiled in Water.

To keep Mushroomes.
They must be boiled in only the Water that comes from them, with Salt and
Pepper; being pretty well boiled, put to them about one Glass of Wine, and half
a quarter of Butter, put them into an Earthen Pot glazed, and cover it close;
they will keep thus two or three Months: you must observe there must be a
little more Salt and Pepper put to them, than if they were to be eaten
immediately.

To make Fowl tender presently.
You must make them swallow a spoonful of good Vinegar, a quarter or half an
hour before you kill them, and let them run, then kill and put them in the
Chimney, from Night till Morning, and they will be very good and tender; there
are some that draw them, and put a hot Stone into their Bellies, leaving them
in like manner in the Chimney, in the Smoke.

How to keep Grapes till Easter, as red and fresh as if they were upon the Vine.
You must gather your Grapes pretty green, about eight days before the usual
time, and when they are dry, not rotten, moldy, no^ moist, then lay them
^dsomely in a little Barrel, one against another, very softly; when full,
thrust them down again, and fill it at the Bung with old or last years Raisins,
keeping it in a Cellar; when you would use them, knock out the Head of the
Cask, and they will be very good.

To freshen salt Porridge.
Put into the Pot a small quantity of Wheat Flower.

To make live Cray-fishes red.
Only rub them with Aqua Vitae, and mix them in a Dish with boiled Cray-fishes,
which will be very pleasant.

To sweeten ill tasted Oil.
Put into it some Roch-Allum, or boiling Water; you must observe that Oil in
which Aniseed has been steeped will not corrupt; the same will happen if it be
exposed to the Sun, or Fire.

To preserve all manner of Fowl a Month without spoiling.
You must have a large Cask, that has had Wine in it, knock out one board or
two, into which (...).

Very wholesome and excellent Spice.
Take two ounces of dried Orange Peel, sweet Marjerom one ounce, Time and Hysop
one ounce, all being well dried, pounded, and mixed together, makes the
wholesomest Spice that can be used.

To preserve fresh Lard.
When you would melt it, put to it a little good Verjuice, then when it begins
to boil, to six pound put one pint of Verjuice, and let it consume; the same
may be used to preserve Pomatum.

A most excellent and singular way of making a Cake.
Take two whites of new laid Eggs, and cut off the Sperme or String, then beat
them as long as you can, put in a quarter of a pound of fine Flower, and as
much Sugar pounded, work it all well together, then put to it about two
pennyworth of Aqua Vitae, and a little Coriander in Powder, let all be well
mixed, then lay it upon a fine Paper about as big as a Plate, or thereabouts;
sprinkle it with Sugar, and let it be baked.

Sweetmeats, Flowers, and Fruits. CHAP. XIV.
Genoua Biskets.
TAke one pound of Flower, four ounces of Sugar, Coriander and Aniseed what you
think fit, mix it with four Eggs, and as much warm Water as will be requisite,
make a Paste, and that into a Cake, which bake in the Oven; being baked, cut it
into five or six pieces or slices, which bake again.

The Queens Biscuit.
Take twelve ounces of Flower, one pound of fine Sugar, twelve Eggs, whereof
three Yolks must be laid aside, lest it make it too yellow, add what Aniseed
and Coriander you think fit; beat and mix it all very well together, till it
come to a soft Paste; some add a little Leven to make it the wholesomer; let
this Paste be put into Paper, or in tin Cases about two Inches broad, and twice
as long, which put in a Tart-pan into the Oven, which must not be over hot;
when you think them baked enough, take them out, and lay them on a sheet of
Paper to bake again at the heat of the Oven; keep it in a hot Place.

Macaroons.
Take one pound of sweet Almonds, beat them carefully in a stone Mortar,
sprinkling them with Rose Water, add one pound of Sugar; beating all well
together, and make a great round Cake that will fill a Dish or Basin, which put
into a warm Oven, to bake gently; being half baked, cut it into small pieces,
and put them to bake again upon white Paper.

To make a Paste of any Fruit whatsoever.
Take the quantity of Fruit you will, and having pared, boil it well in clear
Water, then strain and let it lie; then take ten pound of the said Fruit, six
pound of fine Sugar in very fine Powder, and put but five pound of the six to
the ten pounds of Fruit, and mix them very well, then boil the Paste a little,
and lay it with a Spoon upon tin Plates, each Spoonful by it self, and sprinkle
each spoonful with the remaining Pound of Sugar; dry them like Macaroons,
turning them every Night and Morning, keeping them in a very warm place, over
an Oven, in the Sun, or the open Air; look upon it often, and turn it,
sprinkling as above, till it be very dry, then put them into deal Boxes to keep
them dry, wrapped up in Papers, and let them not touch one another, lest they
grow soft. You may thus make preserves of Roses, Borrage, Bugloss, and all
others into a Paste, as Gooseberries, etc.

An admirable Gelly of Quinces, and other sorts of Fruit.
Take some of the Decoction of the peel and inside of a Quince, or other Fruit,
that has boiled long in a great deal of water; the Decoction being made, let it
waste in the Sun, or at the Fire, or long standing: of this Decoction make your
Gelly.

Genoua Paste.
Take the insides of Quinces, and sweet Apples, equal quantities of each, with
Rose Water, pound and strain it through a Cieve, then dry it with a wooden
Slice over the fire, then add as much Sugar as there is Paste, and boil it to a
convenient thickness.

To keep any Fruit whatsoever a very long time, and particularly Grapes.
Provide some Sand out of a River, which dry in your Store-room, then gather
your Grapes, or other Fruit, when the Sun shines upon it, for it must be dry,
then spread a layer of Sand about an inch thick in a Box, and lay your Fruit
upon it, presently strew Sand upon it, so that it go quite thorough, and so
continue layer upon layer: your Box or other wooden Vessel being full, shut it
close that no Air may come to it, and put it in a dry place without removing
it: the Grapes must not be over ripe, but somewhat green, about eight days
before their ripening; the Grapes will keep till new ones come, the same may be
done with Pears, Prunes, Cherries, Apples, Gooseberries, Peaches, etc.

Some keep them in Ashes, or Oat-straw, and bury their Vessel in the said
straw, and so they keep two years if you will; others use Millet instead of
Sand.

For the more security, the stalk of the Grape may be dipped in melted Wax: the
same of any other Fruit.

To preserve Apples from Rotting.
You must rub them with Juice of Spearmint.

To keep all Fruit that has Stones, and even Figs.
Take an earthen Pot, put into it equal quantities of Honey and Water, which
must be first well beaten together, into this put your Fruit just gathered, and
cover the Pot close; when you take them out of the Pot, put them into fresh
Water.

To keep all sorts of Flowers.
Fill a Pot with half Water, and half Verjuice, and put as much Salt to it as
will season it well, gather your Flowers into the Liquour, close up the Pot,
and set it in a Sellar; when you take out your Flowers, let it be by the Stalk,
shake, and hold it never so little to the Fire, to recover its Color.

To keep Roses red all the year.
The Roses must be gathered when they are half open, then you must have a hard
earthen Pot well burnt, and let it be burnt over again; then take your Roses,
and place them upright, squeesing them pretty close together, and make of them
one Bed or Layer, over them spread some Cloves, and over that some Nails, about
the bigness of Lathnails all over, and continue your Layers one upon another
till the Pot be full, the last must be of Nails, and close the Pot well that no
Air may pass; these Nails that are to be laid upon the Cloves, serve to
preserve the red of the Roses, which when you would use, you must wash them
very gently, then stop the Pot close again, and thus you may have Roses at any
time as beautiful as in May.

Another way to do the same.
Gather the Roses before they open, when they are just ready to break, they
must be red Province Roses, leave the Stalks long enough, and wrap them up in
Vine Leaves, or in Hemp, in little Parcels, placing twelve Roses in each, which
powder with white Salt, placing them in an earthen Pot, and powder them with
Salt, as you would do Purslain; then fill the Pot with Verjuice, and so cover
it, laying Clay round, that no Air may come to them; at Christmas, or any other
time, when you would take them out, you must do it with a silver or wooden
Fork, and cover the Pot again, for fear they take Air; the Liquour that is in
the Pot is very good to dress Meat with, and the Roses as good in taste, as to
look at, and will keep open six Weeks. The way to open them is, by making some
Water lukewarm, and leaving them full two hours in it, so that after it they
open by only blowing them. Observe that the Pot must be kept in the bottom of
the Cellar.

To make excellent Hypocras immediately.
Take five ounces of Aqua Vitae, Cinnamon two ounces, Pepper two, Ginger two,
Cloves two, Grains of Paradise two ounces, Ambergris three grains, Musk two
grains, let all infuse twenty four hours in a glass Bottle upon warm Ashes, and
when you would use it to make Hypocras, take one pound of Sugar, and a quart of
Wine, and the Sugar being melted therein, add to it three or four drops of this
Liquor, and you will have excellent Hypocras.

Another Liquor for the same use.
Take Cinnamon, a little pounded, two ounces, Mace one ounce, Ginger one ounce,
Ambergreece ten grains, Musk six grains, each being apart, in Powder, mix, and
put into a glass Bottle, with four ounces of Spirit of Wine; and do as above.

To make Rosa Solis.
Take a pound and half of White-bread very hot, just come out of the Oven, put
it into a Limbic, with half an ounce of Clove beaten, green Aniseed, Coriander,
of each an ounce, over that a pint of good Red-wine, and as much Milk; then
close it, and put to it the Recipient; close the Joints with glewed Paper, let
it lie thus twenty four hours; after which time, distill it in Balneo Mariae,
to extract all the Liquor, which keep.

The Syrup must be made apart with Aqua Vitae, or rather Spirit of Wine,
burning it upon very small Sugar in an earthen Dish or Porringer, always
stirring it with a Slice or Spoon, till the flame goes out.

You must also dissolve Ambergris, with the purest Spirit of Wine, first
mixing a dram of Sugar with as much Ambergris, and pounding them well
together, then add to it, in a little Bottle, an ounce of Spirit of Wine, and
let it digest twenty four hours, and evaporate in Balneo, where it will all
dissolve, but will stiffen in the cold.

To make the Composition, you must mix the Syrup of Aqua Vitae with this
Essence of Amber, such a quantity as you shall think fit to add to the
distilled Water; if you would have it stronger, put the greater quantity of
Spirit of Wine.

Another way.
Boil your Syrup to a thickness as is usual; being boiled, add what quantity of
Spirit of Wine you shall think fit, as also of the aforesaid Essence, or such
other as you shall like, and it will be such as comes from Turin.

To make another sort of Liquor, which the French call Populo.
Take one pint of Syrup boiled to a thickness; a pint of the clearest
White Wind, and a pint of Spirit of Wine, warm it a very little that they may
mix, then strain it through a Bag with two or three Almonds blanched and beaten
to warm it, and a little Bag of Perfume, if you have no Essence.

To make good Spirit of Wine.
You must have a Glass Limbick, and distill good Aqua Vitae in Balneo Mariae,
and put a piece of filter well dipped in common Oil, between the Helm and the
Limbick, and over it put in Flower of Rosemary only once, you will extract the
purest Spirit in the World.

A very cheap Lemmonade.
Scrape Lemmon-peel, as much as you think fit, into Water and Sugar, to which
add some drops of Essence of Sulphur, with some slices of Lemmon, it will be
very good and refreshing; there must be half a pound of Sugar to a pint of
Water.

To make Franchipane Water.
Put half a quarter the quantity of Jesmin Flowers upon your Water, sweetened
with Sugar, and let them infuse a while, then smell whether it be sweet enough,
if not, add fresh ones; when the Water is as you would have it, strain it, and
put in a few drops of Essence of Amber.

To make Jessemine Water.
You must do as above, without adding any essence, or mixture, but what the
Flowers give it.

That of Tuberose is made after the same manner.

That of Tonquille, as also all other Flowers is done the same way.

Water of Strawberries, Raspars, Cherries, Heart Cherries, and Apricocks.
Squeeze out the Juice of these sorts of Fruit, and mix that Liquour with Water
well sweetened with Sugar, and do as above.

To freeze them even like the Fruit.
Take a little Tub, and a tin Vessel of what size you please, then put in the
Fruit into the Water you would freeze, a little wider at top then at bottom,
that the buried Ice may come out, with a tin cover; then fill the said tin
Vessel with the said Waters, or else, with the Fruit with clear Water to make
it freeze; at the bottom of the Tub lay a little Straw, and a bed of Ice, with
a quarter of small Salt, then another bed of Ice and Salt over it, and put in
your Vessel into the middle, far enough from the sides of the Tub, that there
may be space enough to put in Ice and Salt as above, and so continue till you
cover your Vessel half a foot above it, and leave it thus in a cool Place for
four or five hours, the Water will be frozen; and because it will stick to the
Vessel, heat a Cloth, with which rub the said Vessel round, and it will loosen.

To make Ice in Summer.
Take a large stone Bottle that will hold three quarts, put into it two ounces
of refined Saltpeter, half an ounce of Florence Orris, and fill it up with
boiling Water, and stop it close, immediately let it down into a Well, leaving
it there two or three hours; take out the Bottle, and break it to get the Ice,
which will be very hard, and as good as the natural.

To cool Wine extremely without Ice.
Dissolve about a pound of Nitre in a Bucket of Water, and put in your Bottles
to cool.

Several sorts of Wines, how to preserve them, and how to restore decayed Wine.
CHAP. XV.
To restore Wine that is pricked.
YOu must rack your wine down to the Lee, into another Cask, in which are fresh
Lees of good Wine; then take one pound of the best strong Aqua Vitae, with half
a pound of yellow Wax scraped into the said Aqua Vitae, which melt in it over a
very gentle fire, then dip a Cloth in this Liquor, and set it on fire with
Sulphur; which put flaming into the Bung, and stop the Cask close.

Another way.
Take a handful of old Walnuts, with the Shells, for half a Teirce, for a
Tieece two handfuls; then put the said Nuts into a hot Oven, and dry them so
that they turn red; then take the same quantity of Willow Chips, of the Wood
next the Bark, and put your Walnuts hot and red into the Cask, and stop the
Bung with those Chips, let it lie so three or four days, and you will see a
strange alteration.

Another way.
Take out a Bucket full, and boil it, or rather a Bucket of good Wine, and pour
it boiling hot into the corrupted Vessel, instead of what you took out, and
stop it close, and in the aforesaid time it will come to it self.

For Wine that is decayed by too much vent, or sour.
Stir the Wine through the bung with a stick, without touching the Lee; then
pour in a pound of good Aqua Vitae; let it lie ten days, and it will come to it
self.

Wine that has taken vent, is also recovered by putting into the Pot before you
drink it, a crust of Bread burning hot.

To recover Wine that tastes of the Cask.
Rack all the Wine off, upon a good Lee; then put down in a linen Bag, four
ounces of Laurel-berries in Powder, with some filings of Steel at bottom; to
make the Bag sink, let it down to the middle of the Cask, and as you draw the
Wine, let it down lower.

To recover Wine that is turned.
The Water of Saturn, or red Litharge, recovers Wine that is turned, that is
Red-wine; and white Litharge for White Wind.

To take away the musty smell of Wine.
You must make a long piece of Dough like a stick, and half bake it in the
Oven, take out it and stick it with Cloves, and put it in the Oven till
thoroughly baked, then hang it within your Cask, so that it touch not the Wine;
you may also throw it into the Cask, and it will take away the ill smell.

To prevent Wine from turning.
Put one pound of Lead melted and thrown into Water into your Cask.

For Wine that smells sour or bitter.
Boil about half a peck of Barley in four pints of Water, till half be
consumed; strain, and put it into the Cask at the Bung, stirring it with a
stick without touching the Lee.

To soften a green Wine.
Put into a pint of such Wine one drop of Vinegar, soaked with Litharge, and it
will lose its greenness.

For Wine that is turned.
Put into the Cask some Spirit of Tartar.

For green Wine.
Boil some Honey to draw out the Wax, and strain it through a Cloth, put two
pints of it to a Teirce; which will make it very good: If it be in Summer, and
you find any danger of it turning, put in a stone of unslack'd Lime.

To preserve Wine from souring.
Take Sand out of a River in March, wash it well, and dry it in the Sun, and
throw two Porringers full of it into a Teirce of Wine, with two pints of Water.

Another way.
Take, about St. Martin's day, a Teirce of Wine, and boil it till but one third
be left, and of this Wine, put four pints or thereabouts into each of your
other Casks, with two bits of Frankincense about as big as Walnuts, and stop
them close.

To make Wine fine.
Put into a Vessel two pints of Milk, well boiled and scummed, that all the
Cream may be off.

To make a Muscadine Wine.
You must infuse the flowers of Clary in the Cask, or else put in a little bag
of Elder-flowers.

To make Wine sweet.
It must be filled upon the Lee, and lay at the bottom of the Cask half a pound
or more, according to the bigness of the Vessel, of Mustardseed in Powder.

To make it black.
Put in a couple of Pewter-pots, when the new Wine boyls up.

For White Wind that is turned deep colored.
You must stir the Wine and Lee together, and take out five pints, in which
dissolve a peck of Wheat Flour, which put in at the Bung; then add half a pint
of Aqua Vitae, and let it settle three days.

To make new unsettled Wine very good.
Take about a pint of Wheat, which boil in a quart of Water till it burst, so
that touching it with your finger all the flower fall out, squeese it in a new
Cloth; put a quart of this Water into the quantity of two Teirces of
White Wind, when it boyls up; at the same time put in a little Bag, somewhat
long, full of dry Elderflowers.

To make White Wind red, and red white.
Take ashes of white Briony, to make Red-wine white; and one the contrary,
ashes of black Briony, to make white red. Probatum.

To make Malmsie.
Take of the best English Galingale, Clove, and Ginger, one dram, beat it all,
not too small, and infuse it twenty four hours in Aqua Vitae, in a wooden
Vessel close stopped, then put all into a Cloth, which hang by a thread in the
Cask, containing a load and half of Claret, leave it there three days, and you
will have as good and strong a Wine as the natural Malmsie.

To make Rose Vinegar in an hour.
Green Bramble-berries put into good Wine, makes Vinegar in an hour.

To make Rose Vinegar immediately.
Take green Black-berries, common Roses, of each four ounces, Barberies one
ounce; dry all in the shade, and beat to fine Powder; when you would use it,
put about a quarter of an ounce to half a glass of Claret, or White Wind, mix,
and let it stand a Moment, then strain it.

Another way in an hour.
Take pure Flower of Rye, and steep it in good Vinegar, make it into a thin
Cake, which bake in the Oven, and beat to Powder, and steep again in strong
Vinegar; do this three times over, then put the said cake into about a quarter
Cask of Wine, which will soon grow sharp.

A sort of Vinegar used by the deceased Monsieur Gr. the Connestable of France.
Take one pound of the best and newest Raisins of the Sun, and take out the
Seeds; then put them into an earthen glazed Pot, with a quart of good
Rose-vinegar, and let it infuse a whole Night upon warm Embers, in the Morning
make it boil a little; after it is taken from the Fire and cold, strain, and
keep it in a Bottle close stopped.

An admirable sort of Vinegar.
Vinegar is made in three hours, if you steep the Root of Beets in Wine, and
comes to it self again if you add Cabbage Root.

Admirable Curiosities in Painting, Varnishing, etc. CHAP. XVI.
How to calcine Azure.
BEat your Azure into fine Powder, and boil it with distilled Vinegar, till the
Vinegar be consumed; then lay your Azure upon the Fire-shovel hot, and dry it
thereon upon a sheet of Paper, then grind it with Nutoyl, and use it.

To calcine Lamp-black, and make it better.
Take a Fire-shovel, which make red hot, and lay the black upon it, and when it
has done smoking it is enough; it may be used with Gum water, and ought not to
be ground when used with Oil.

A finer Lamp black then what is commonly. bought.
It must be made with Lamps of Oil, laying something close over to receive the
Smoke.

A black of Sheeps-feet.
Take what quantity of Sheeps-feet you think fit, calcine them in a Crucible,
and quench them in a wet Cloth; grind them in Water before you add any Gum;
this black will mix with Lake and Umber for Carnation, in Miniature, or Water
painting.

A fine white for Watercolors.
Take an ounce of fine Silver, in small bits like shot, or as it comes from the
Mine, which dissolve in Aqua fortis for twenty four hours; being dissolved, and
that it looks like Crystal at the bottom of the Glass, cast off the Aqua
fortis, and wash the Silver well in fair common Water, five or six times, till
no strength of the Aqua fortis be left in it; to try which, lay it upon your
Tongue, then set it a drying in a little earthen Pot; for Use it must be
dissolved in Gum-water, with a little water of Sugar candy.

A very fine white of Eggs.
Take a great earthen Pot glazed, and a Plate of new Lead, that may reach two
inches over the edges, put into the Pot two pound of Mutton-Suet, of that which
is about the Kidneys, cut into small pieces as big as Nuts; then add to it a
dozen of new laid Eggs, and three pints of the strongest Vinegar, lay the Plate
upon the Pot, and close it round with Paper glewed, that nothing may evaporate;
put it into a temperate place, neither hot nor cold; after fifteen days take
off your Plate, to which you will find a great deal of white sticking, which
scrape off gently with a Knife, and put another pint of strong Vinegar into the
Pot, throw off the Eggs, and put in as many fresh ones, and cover the Pot as
before; after fifteen days take up the Plate, and take off the white that
sticks, do this as long as you think fit; afterward take the white and put it
into a Pot that is not glazed, pour over it a pint of Water, and dissolve all
by stirring it, and the Water will be like Milk; which pour into another Pot,
and filtrate, and there will remain a very good white; upon what remains in the
Pot pour another Water, wash as the first time, and filtrate in the same
manner, you will have another white, which will not be quite so good as the
first.

Note, that in pouring off, and filtrating the Water, you must be careful the
settlement does not go off with it; for that settlement is useless, and
therefore to be thrown away.

To make extraordinary fine white Lead.
Take the best chosen white Lead in Scales, grind them well upon a stone with
Vinegar, and it will turn black; then take a Pot full of Water, wash your white
Lead very well, let it settle, and pour off the Water by inclination; grind it
again with Vinegar, and wash again; doing the same three or four times, and you
will have an excellent white, as well for Watercolors, as painting in Oil.

How to make Vltra Marine of Lapis Lazuli.
Take a pound of Lapis, and calcine it in a Crucible covered with Oil, when it
is well calcined, throw it into Vinegar to make it break, then being dried,
pound it in a Brass Mortar, and grind it upon a shell with Nut or spike Oil
which is better, grind it very fine, and not too thin: Then for one pound of
the said Lapis, take a pound of Linseed Oil, one pound of white Wax, one pound
of Rosin, a pound of Burgundy Pitch, a pound of Turpentine, half a pound of
Colophonium, put all these things into a new Pot, melt them gently over a small
Fire, so that they may not boil, always stirring them with a stick till they
are well mixed, then put in your Paste of Lapis, and with a wooden Slice take
out the Composition, laying it upon a Table, turning it up and down; then you
must have a little Cock running with lukewarm Water upon your Paste, which
will drive out the Ultra Marine, which must be received into an earthen Pot
placed under the Table; then pour off the water by inclination, or filtrate as
you think fit; repeat this often with warm water, and you will have the best
Ultra Marine.

Another way to extract Vltra Marine.
Make your Lapis Lazuli red hot in a Crucible, and quench it in good Vinegar
two or three times, then you may pound it with ease in a Mortar; next grind it
with Linseed Oil upon a stone, and some Spirit of Wine, both which must have
been first upon Embers in a Glass Bottle, and very well stirred together before
they are poured upon the Lapis to grind it, which being reduced to impalpable
Powder, incorporate with the following cement.

Take two ounces of Linseed Oil, Turpentine, Mastick, Assa soetida,
Colophonium, the same quantity, Wax and Rosin of Firr three ounces: boil all
this for a quarter of an hour in a glazed Pot, then strain it through a Cloth,
letting it drop into fair Water; this is a Cement of which you must take one
part, and as much Lapis, which beat and incorporate together in an earthen Pot
glazed; then pour fair water over it, and let it lie a quarter of an hour, then
stir the Composition hard with a wooden Slice, and within a quarter of an hour
you will see a blue water, which pour off into another glazed Pot; pour more
water upon your Composition, continuing stirring and changing Waters, till it
gives no more color

Note, that you must pour no water upon the Ingredients, but what must be hot;
then evaporate all your blue waters, and there will remain the true Ultra
Marine, producing four ounces out of each pound, and almost all the rest in
blue Ashes.

Excellent Greens.
Take as much Verdigreece as you think fit, and grind it with Vinegar, and put
it into Dough of household Bread and bake it, then break open your Loaf, and
take out your Verdigreece, which mix with Water or Oil and grind it, and it
will be very excellent.

A green to be kept in a Bladder, useful for Limning and Coloring.
Take Buck-thorn-berries which must be gathered the latter end of August, when
they are ripe; they must be beaten, and made boil seven or eight days in a hot
place, they will boil of themselves, and become like sweet Wine, add some water
to make it clearer; that done, strain it through a Cloth, squeesing the feces
as much as you can, and sprinkle the expression with powdered Alum, more or
less as you shall see convenient; some add Vinegar, but it is much longer a
drying, and is ruddy; it must be kept in a Bladder in the shade, or Chimney,
and that done, it will keep very well; this Buck-thorn-berry grows along the
Hedges in Avignon.

To make a very beautiful liquid Green.
Take a pound of Verdigreece, and half a pound of white Tartar of Montpelier in
Powder; mix them together, and steep them one Night in a quart of good Vinegar,
which boil till half be consumed; then, having settled two days, pour it off by
inclination into a Glass-bottle, or filtrate; to use it in coloring, and glaze
over Buck-thorn-berry, use Gum Ammonicak and Saffron to stiffen it; being mixed
with juice of Berries, the aforesaid Green and Azure, you may make several
Greens.

To make the green of Berries.
Take four ounces of Buck-thorn-berries, which beat and boil in two or three
pints of water, leaving it till half be consumed; then strain all through a
Cloth, and put into that Liquour as much Ceruse in fine Powder as you think
fit; then make it up into Balls, and dry them upon Tiles, when dry, stiffen
them with Gum. It will be the better for mixing with it some water of Gum
Ammoniack.

Vermilion in Stone.
Cinaber, or Vermilion is made the more beautiful by mixing with it when it is
ground some Water of Gum Ammoniack, with a little Saffron, and it does not grow
black.

For Red and other Colors.
Vermilion prepared as above.

For Orange color, mix a little red Lead.

For Yellow, the best Orpiment well ground in Water, then put in little parcels
upon Paper, as must be done with all other colors to dry them. When it is very
dry, and in small Powder, you may use it.

For a Greediline, boil Lions Sorrel alone in Water, the thickest and deepest
colored you can, which is used to color White-lead already ground and dried;
grind it again with this Tincture; then dry, and grind it again with the same,
and do it over as often as you think fit: being thus ground and powdered, it
must be incorporated with the others to color.

To make fine Prints look like Oil Painting.
Glue the white edges of your Print upon a frame, as when you make Chases for
Windows, before you glue it moisten it well with water, that it may stretch as
it dryes upon the Frame; then take Oil of Turpentine, or any other that is not
yellow, and rub over the Print; when it is dry, lay on your Colors ground in
Oil, and lay them upon the back of your Print, as if you would paint upon a
Cloth; except that they must be laid on plain, without shadowing; because the
strokes of the Graver that shadow the Print, work that effect; that done, on
the printed side, where there is no color, lay on some fine drying Vernish,
which is that of Venice, or the white Vernish, and it will appear like a real
Picture upon Cloth.

Note, that the Flesh-colors must be done the nearest that may be, as if you
painted upon Cloth; because the color lying under, must express the true
color of Flesh.

How to wash old Paintings, and give them a good Gloss.
Take one ounce of Tartar, and as much white Glass wort, which boil in a pint
of water till half be consumed; which strain, and rub the Picture presently
with the Water and a Sponge, the water must be lukewarm, then immediately wash
it with warm fair Water, and wipe it over.

To vernish them.
Take an ounce of clear Venice Turpentine, with an ounce and half of Spirit of
Turpentine, and three or four ounces of drying Vernish, mix all in a Glass
Vial, and dissolve it in Balneo Mariae; when cold, strike it over the Picture
with a Pensil.

Another way.
Take whites of Eggs, beat them to a froth, with a Fig Tree Twig, with the thin
rub the Picture.

To cleanse smooth Painting.
Rub them with a Sponge dipped in Lie made of Vine Branches burnt, or mix equal
parts of it and Urine.

To make Flanders Images.
Take four ounces of Verdigreece in Powder, which put into a glazed Pot with a
quart of Water, and stir it well with a stick, letting it infuse three Days
and three Nights, shaking it now and then; then strain it through a Cloth four
times double; in this water dissolve Fish-glew upon a little Fire, taking care
it grow not too thick; then pour it upon your Moulds with an edging of Wax
about them.

To make them yellow, take Saffron, with a little Roch-allum.

If red, Brazile infused in Water.

For to make Gold, or Silver Images, put into your Glue Shell-Silver or Gold,
and your Glue being dissolved, you must strain the Feces through a Cloth,
before you lay all upon the Mould.

How to take off any Design without pricking or pouncing of it, which is called
Tracing.
Rub the back of your Design, or Print, with red, black, or Chalk, if it were
to be drawn upon black, and strike over all the Lines with a blunt point, and
the Paper underneath will be very well drawn: but if you will not rub the
Print, you may do the sheet of Paper, lay it under the Print, and strike over
the Lines without spoiling it.

To write burnished Gold Letters upon Vellum, as well as the Ancients.
Take an ounce of fine Bole-Armoniack, two drams of fine Vermilion, one dram of
black Lead, and half a dram of Jet, and as much white Lead; all being ground
together, mix with the white of an Egg beaten to a froth, and let it lie till
next day, take that which runs, in which steep four or five Quince-seeds a
whole day; that being somewhat thick, let it dry; when you would use it
dissolve it in fair water, and grind all well together; you must scrape a
little Soap upon it; if you use the bigness of a Nut of Bole Armoniack, put the
bigness of a Pea of Soap, write with a Pen, and let the Writing dry; then
strike it over with a Pensil dipped only in fair water, and lay upon it the
Leaf or Shell-gold, when it is thoroughly dry, polish it with a Tooth: but
observe it must be very dry before you rub it, and the best way is to let it
lie a day. Take a very smooth white Paper, and put the sleekest side upon the
Gold, then polish it over the Paper that it may be well united; take off the
Paper, and rub it without, and it will be very beautiful.

To make excellent Creyons, and as hard as Vermilion, invented by Prince Rupert.
Take some white Clay, as it is prepared to make Tobacco Pipes, which grind
upon a stone with fair water, as thick as Paste, and take what colors you will
each by it self, grind them dry upon the stone the finest you can; then sift
them through a very fine Cloth, and mix each of the Colors with the said
Paste, according as you design to make the Creyons deep or pale in color, and
mix with it a little Honey and Gum Arabick-water at Discretion.

Note, that of each color you must make some deeper then others, that they may
serve for shadowing, then take each Paste by it self, and make it up into
little rouls as thick as your Finger, or Thumb, roll them between two Boards
well joined to bring them to the thickness you desire for use: that done, lay
them a drying upon a clean Board, or upon Paper, without Fire or Sun for two
days; then to dry them thoroughly, lay them in the Sun, or before the Fire,
and when dry, they will be fit for use. This is a very good and rare Receipt
for this purpose.

To preserve Silver upon Wood, or Plaster, and prevent its turning Red.
Wash it every Month with Water-glew made as above, with a Pensil.

Ho to gild Lead, or white Lattin, or any other thing, provided you tin it over
first.
Take black Pitch, Oil of Turpentine two ounces, Rosin a very little; melt all
upon the Fire, and make a Vernish, which strike over your Work.

To soften Ivory and Bones.
Take Roch Alum and melt it in water over the Fire, then put in one part of
Rose Water, and of fine sifted Ashes, and let the Ivory and Bones steep therein
twenty four hours, and they will grow soft; boiling them in fair Water, they
will return to their former hardness.

To draw without Ink or Creyons.
Rub your Paper with Tripoly.

To hinder Beech from cracking upon the Fire.
You must boil it in fair Water.

Diverse sorts and imitations of Marble and Jasper Stone, and how to repair
decayed Marble. CHAP. XVII.
To make very good Marble, or Jasper Stone.
TAke unslacked Lime, which dissolve with Whites of Eggs, and Linseed Oil; of
it make several Balls; into one put Lake to make it red, your Lake must be in
very fine Powder; in another, Azure for blue; in another, Verdigreece for
green; and so of other Colors, keeping one or two white; squeeze all these
Balls flat, and lay them one upon another, the white ones in the middle, then
with a Knife cut slices all the length of the Paste, and having cut it all, mix
all the slices in a Mortar and beat them, when thus mixed you will have a fine
Jasper stone; take it, and with a Masons Trowel or your Hands, spread it upon
the Place you design it for, striking it over till you see it sticks; being
polished, if you have not before put Oil to it, but only the Whites of Eggs,
boil some, and lay it scalding hot upon the Work, running it all over as long
as it drys in, for the Oil will soak in and give it a good Gloss, but if you
put in the Linseed Oil at first to dissolve the Lime, there is no need of
adding any more: that done, dry your Work in the Shade.

Of this Jasper you may make Chaplets, the Work whereof being cast in a Mould,
you must lay them in a Pot full of Linseed Oil, where they will dry and vernish.

For black Jasper.
Take Water of unslacked Lime, and Aqua fortis, and rinds of green Walnuts,
dissolve and mix all together; then taking this black which is very good, lay
it with a Brush upon what you desire to imitate Jasper, that done, set your
Work, black as it is, in the Smoke for eight days, then take it out, and it
will be all marbled.

Another way.
Make your black into a great Ball, and leave it the same time in the Smoke,
and with that rub your Column or other Work as above, and whether you use the
one way or the other, when your Work is marbled you must vernish it to give it
a gloss.

The Vernish of these marbled Jaspers, is set down at large in the Chapter of
Vernishes, in the fifth Paragraph.

To counterfeit Marble.
Take white Plaster well beaten, powdered and sifted, and make Parchment Glue,
when it is melted, dissolve your Plaster in it till it comes to a Paste, in
which mix what Colors you please, and spread it upon a Table with a Trowel,
laying it as smooth as you can, let it dry fifteen days, when dry, polish it
with a Pumice stone, pretty hard at first, afterward more gently, sprinkling
it with fine Tripoly, then rub it with a Hone, and at last with a piece of Oxes
Hide to make it shine, and it is done.

To whiten Alabaster, and white Marble.
Beat some Pumice stone into fine Powder, and infuse it in Verjuice twelve
hours, or thereabouts; then take a Sponge and dip it therein, with which rub
your Alabaster or white Marble; then take fair Water, and with a Cloth wash
them, and lastly wipe them dry with a clean Cloth.

To white-wash Plaster Walls.
It must be supposed the Wall is very well plastered, with very fine Plaster
well laid; after which, you may whiten it with Lime-milk very clear, as shall
hereafter be described. The Wall should be very well wetted with Water, for all
the Secret consists in the White not drying too fast, but rather very slowly,
which gives the Lime time to fasten, drying leisurely; and thus the Walls will
neither whiten your Hands nor your Clothes. If there were any Dirt upon the
Wall, it ought to be scraped off; the same upon Freestone, and strike it over
equally two or three times. Within an hour or two strike it over with the Palm
of your hand, and it will polish like Marble.

The best Lime-milk is made after the Lime has been a long time slack'd, into
which having put a sufficient quantity of Water, it must be stirred till it
make a white Froth on the top, which must be immediately taken off, and kept
for Use. The last passing over it ought to be with Milk of unslack'd Lime, that
the white may be the glossier.

Another way.
It must be done over with Lime and Black, well laid by the Rule and Plummet,
and be rubbed over smooth; then whiten it three or four times together with
Lime-milk: the first white must be very clear, the second somewhat thicker, and
the third more, putting to it more or less Water, as you think fit: This way
may be called cold Whitening, and is the best, most beautiful, and quickest of
all.

To rub and color Plaster-Cielings or Floors.
You must scrape it very well, then take Urine, and Soot of a Chimney, or of an
Oven is better, mix, and dissolve it well, letting it infuse two days, then
with a brush or rubber rub the Floors, and let them dry before you walk over
them; when dry, rub them, go over them again with a rubbing brush, as you do
boarded Floors.

CHAP. XVIII.
To Dye white Martins Skins of long Hair of a very good Black that never fades.
Boil two pound of fresh Galls over a gentle Fire, with two ounces of
Beef-marrow, in an earthen Pot close stopped, often shaking it, lest the Galls
burn; letting it boil till the Pot makes no noise when you stir it; which beat
and strain; then take half a pound of it, and three ounces of green Coperis,
three ounces of Roman Alum, two ounces of Litharge, one ounce of Verdigreece,
one ounce of Sumack, one ounce of Sal Ammoniac, each beaten by it self, then
mix them together, boil, and keep it to Dye.

Note, That before you apply the Dye, you must wash the Skin two or three times
in very clear and clean Limewater, and when you apply the Dye, let it be with
a Pensil against the grain of the Hair, and the other way, if requisite.

These Skins when dry, differ not from Sables.

All the Powders being together, must be put upon the fire without any other
Liquor, for they will melt and boil, the Verdigreece may be left out, but it
does no harm.

To make the Spanish Carnation.
Take bastard Saffron, wash it well, dry it and beat it; being beaten, to one
pound of it add a quarter of Tartar burnt, and grind all together, then put all
into a double course linen bag, and just warm a quarter of a pint of Lemmon
juice, which pour upon the said Saffron; put in that which you would dye, and
it will take the color.

You must first boil the Stuff you would dye in Alum water, then wash and dry
it, and put into the dye.

To make excellent red Paper.
Take half a pound of bastard Saffron, which wash in a bag by the River side,
till it hardly gives any color, put what is left into a Basin, sprinkling it
with the powder of Glass-wort one ounce, and put it into a little bucket of
lukewarm water, always stirring it; after straining it, add a little juice of
Lemmons, which gives it the red color; it must be fine Paper, and dipped in the
said Basin.

To Marble Paper.
Grind your Colors, as Lake, Mastick, Azure, yellow Oker, red Lead, red Oker,
and others with the Gall of an Ox; then fill an earthen Basin full of lukewarm
water, and with a stick turn it round till it work; at the same time let your
Colors be ready, and taking a little of each with a thick Pensil, touch the
middle of the Water, and you will see all the Colors spread; then presently
with another Pensil, or Feather, take another Color, with which touch the
Water in the same place as before, and so presently set in all the Colors
whilst the Water is stirring, and goes round; when it stops, you will see it
all spread with sundry Colors, then lay your Paper upon the water, and without
dipping of it, take up your Sheet, drawing it over the Water to the edge of the
Basin, then lift, dry, and burnish it: The Paper must be good, and the water
prepared with Gum-Dragacanth.

CHAP. XIX.
To restore Tapistry to its first beauty, when the Colors are decayed.
SHake, and cleanse the Tapistry very well, then take a hard Hair Brush to take
off the Fullers-earth, that must be spread all over it, after it has been on
seven or eight hours; that being off, put on more again, and having left it on
the same time, take it off after the same manner: Then shake the said Tapistry,
and beat it very well, with a Switch, to drive out the Dust, next cleanse it
well with a Brush, and it will return to its former beauty.

To restore the Color to Turkish Carpets.
Beat them well with a Stick, till all the dust be out; and if they have any
Ink spots, rub them with Lemmon Juice, and let them soak well, then wash them
well in fair Water, and strike the backside till all the Water be out; when it
is very dry, take the Crum of white-bread hot, and rub the Carpet: then choose
one or two fair Nights, and hang out your Carpets in the dew.

To restore Gold or Silver Lace to its former Beauty.
Take the Gall of an Ox, and the Gall of a Pike, mix them in fair Water, and
rub your Gold or Silver, and you will find it change Color.

How to drive away Fleas, Punaises, and other Insects CHAP. XX.
To destroy the Punaises.
TAke Juice of Worm wood, and common Oil, enough of each, which boil together,
till all the Juice be consumed; then strain the Oil, and cast it into live
Sulphur, and with this Oil, rub the Bed and Craneys.

Otherwise.
Take the Gall of an Ox, and Oil of Hemp Seed, mix them together, and rub the
joints and wood of the Bed, and where you have rubbed, never any Punice will
come.

Item.
Rub the Wood with the Juice of old Cucumbers that are let run to seed.

Another way.
Steep Oxes Liver in strong Vinegar, and wash your Bed-stead, and lay some
great Comfrey under your Boulster. Probatum.

Item.
Take some Cypress Nuts and beat them, then infuse in Oil, which must be two
fingers above them, and leave them in the Sun, and the Evening Air for forty
eight hours, and having strained the Oil, squeezing out the said Nuts very
well, rub your Bed-stead.

To destroy the Fleas.
Upon a pound of white Copperas, pour a Bucket of Water, and when the Copperas
is sunk, sprinkle your Chamber with that Water.

Otherwise.
Sprinkle the Chamber with Decoction of Rue, mixed with Asses Piss. Probatum.

Another way for the same, which is also good against the Punices, the Wezils
in Corn, and Worms in Trunks.
Dry black Hellebore, and strew it in your Chamber as you would do Flowers, or
in your Bed, or among Corn or Cloths, and none of the aforesaid things will
hurt them. Probatum.

For Moths in Cloths.
The Herb called Botris, dried and laid among Cloths, keeps them from Moths
and Worms.

Another way.
Candles made of Mutton Grease wrapped in Paper, and the Rroots of Orris, or
Wormwood are very good.

For Punaises.
Boil Coloquintida with Rue and Water, wash the Bed-sted therewith, and no
Punices will come.

To destroy Flies
Put Leaf Tobacco into a Pot, and infuse it in Water twenty four hours, then
add Honey, and boil it an hour, and strew over it some Flower in the manner of
Sugar; that draws the Flies, and all that taste it certainly die.

Another way.
Take what quantity you think fit of Citrul, or Gourd-leaves, pound them to
extract the Juice, with which wash the Walls, or other thing you desire to
preserve from the Flies, and they will not come there for certain; you may rub
a Horses Thighs and Belly to the same intent.

To drive Mice from the House.
Take Vervain, and steep it in Water, letting it infuse twenty four hours; then
strew it about the House, and the Mice will fly.

Of Housekeeping. CHAP. XXI.
How to make Bread much more substantial than ordinary.
WHen you would make Bread, take the Bran which has been boulted off, put it
into a Kettle of Water, and make it boil; then strain, and make your Bread with
that white Water, and it will be much more substantial, and you will have a
quarter more Bread than the common way.

Another sort of Bread, which, besides being better, keeps above a Month longer
than ordinary.
Take Pompions, and boil them in fair Water till the water grow thick, and with
that water make your Bread, which will be very good, and will increase a
quarter, and keep a Month longer than the common Bread. Probatum.

A sort of Bread, of which a Mouthful can maintain a Man eight days, without
eating any thing else.
Take a quantity of Snails, and make them void their sliminess; then dry and
reduce them to fine Powder, of which make a Loaf, with a Mouthful of which a
Man may be eight days without eating.

To grease any creaking in Wood.
Rub it with Soap, and that is enough.

An unluckey way to hinder making of Butter.
Put powdered Sugar into the Cream whereof the Butter is to be made.

How to make a great deal of Cream.
Take a red Snail, and hang him by a Thread in the middle of the Vessel,
wherein the Milk is, and all that is above the Snail will turn to Cream.

To bring up Fowl.
You must have some of the Lees of Wine that remain in the Fat, after drawing
off the Wine, mix it well with Bran, then make a hole in the Ground, into which
lay the said Lees and Bran in Layers one upon another; over all a Layer of fat
Earth, then one of Lee mixed with Bran, and so continue to the last Layer.

To fatten all sorts of Fowl in fifteen days, whether Hens, Geese, Ducks, or
others; from All-Hallows till Lent.
Take Nettle leaves and Seed, gathered and ^ryed in the proper Season, which
beat to Powder and sift; when you would use it, make it into a Paste with
Wheat-Bran or Flower, making it up with Dish-water; for want of it, with warm
Water; give it to your Fowl once a day, and you will see the effect.

Another way to fatten Fowl.
First put them into a Coop, and three times a day give them to eat a sort of
Paste made of two parts Barley, and one of black Wheat, or Millet, ground
together, the Flower sifted, and the Bran taken off, of which make bits rather
long then round, of a convenient size, and give them seven or eight a day, and
in fifteen days or thereabouts, they will be very fat.

To fatten Turkicocks and Pullets, as is used at Laval.
You must Coop them up, as is said of other Fowl; then feed them with Nettles
mixed with Bran, and hard Eggs; viz. Two Eggs a time; three times a day; you
must make it up for them like Pills, of the bigness of a Nut.

To hinder Worms from coming to Corn.
Lay Lees of Wine in the four corners of your Loft, and Barn.

An excellent way to whiten Linen, as is used in Flanders.
You must first wash the Linen as it comes from the Loom, in hot water, to
cleanse it, then put it into Lie, made of good strong Ashes, with Roots of
Wallwort: the Lie being made, and the Cloth well washed in fair water, and with
black Soap, hang it out in the Air, and the Dew upon the Grass, sprinkling it
in the Sun, and so leave it seven or eight days, and it will be very white; but
if you think it not white enough, put it into the Lie again, and it will be
perfect.

Another way that is used at Laval in Britany.
When the Linen comes from the Weaver, it must be soaked in hot Water; then
wash it very well to take off the stifness of it, then dry, and wash it again
in lukewarm water; then dip it in Cows Dung dissolved in hot water, and leave
it thore twenty four hours; then wash it again in warm water, and leave it four
or five days out in the Dew, sprinkling it in the Sun, them put it into Lie;
and within eight or ten days it will be very white.

Curiosities in Gardening, Fruits, and Flowers. CHAP. XXII.
To make Herbs grow quickly.
TAke Ashes of the Moss of Trees, and Dung, well worked together, which
sprinkle with the moisture comes from a Dunghill several times, and dry it so
often at the Sun, till there comes from it a fat cloggy Earth, which keep in
some earthen glazed Pot, that is very hard Earth; for those of common Earth
suck in the Fat, use it in Summer and Winter.

If it be in Winter, put the Earth into an earthen Pot, stir, and work it well,
sprinkling it with moisture of Dung, till it be so wet that it looks like Earth
that you would sow; being thus prepared, set it upon a Chafindish, giving it a
Heat like that of July: being brought to that Heat, sow your Seeds, to wit,
Purslane, and Lettice, having first moistened it a whole Night in the heat,
with the moisture of rotten Dung; being these Seeds are sowed upon the top of
the Earth, sprinkle as you find the Earth dry, with warm Rainwater; in less
than two hours these Seeds will produce every one in its kind, enough to make a
good Sallade to eat; and by the like industry you may make Plants bud, and bear
Fruit, and Flower without the help of the Sun, even out of Season.

How to preserve Grafts.
They must be laid into Lattin Pipes, and covered with Honey, and thus they
will keep four Months.

To drive Moles out of a Garden.
Make a bundle of green Hemp, which bury in a Hole two or three foot deep, and
cover it over with Earth, and as it rots away it will stink so that all the
Moles will either dye, or run away.

For the same.
Strew about some Hogs-dung.

To make Caterpillars fall off Trees.
Fill a new Pot with burning Coals, and put in some Frankincense and black Gum,
hold the Pot under the Branches where the Caterpillars are; the said Smoke will
make them fall and dye.

To kill Ants.
You need but ease your body upon their Nest. Probatum.

To catch Moles.
Put into their holes Onions, Beets, or Oil, and they will presently come out.

To have Roses in all Seasons.
In Winter uncover the Root of the Rose-tree, and put in very small Horse dung,
mix with the said Dung Powder of Sulphur, then cover it over with Earth.

To make Tulips and other Flowers of what Color you will.
Steep the Tulip-Seeds in Ink to make them black; in Verdigreece to make them
green; in Azure for a true Violet; and they will be of the same color that
they have been steeped in.

How to produce double Gilliflowers of any Seed whatsoever.
Take hollow Beans, in which put Seed of single Gilliflowers, stop them close
with Wax, and sow them; the Gilliflowers that grow will be double and
extraordinary big; which is most certain.

To make double Gilliflowers grow extraordinary big.
Make a Bed of Dung, then one of Bean-flower, sow your Gilliflowers, and so
continue over it Dung and Bean-flower, and you will see a strange product.

To make Grapes of what Color one will.
Make a hole in the stalk that may reach to the Pith, and fill it with the
Color you would have them of, and the Grape will be so.

To make Peaches grow with writing upon them.
Take the Stone of a good Peach, and bury it for seven or eight days till it be
half open, then take the Kernel out of the shell without breaking it, and with
Vermillion write what you please upon it, when the Writing is dry, put it into
the shell again, and bind it well down with a Thread, and the Tree will bear
such Fruit.

Excellent Secrets in the Diseases of Horses, Dogs, and other Cattle. CHAP.
XXIII.
For the Frewcie in Horses.
FIrst rowel him behind, then take half a Gallon of Morel, or Nightshade-water,
which make the Horse drink, making him run two hundred Paces after it, going
and coming a full Gallop, then leave him twenty four hours without stirring
from the Stable, and six hours without eating; then purge him with
Coloquintida, Seen, and Agarick, of each two ounces, which must be infused one
Night in a pint of White Wind: then perfume him with Turbet and Hellebore, and
rub him once a day with Oil of Laurel; next take Rose Oil and fresh Butter,
which melt together, and put into his Ears as hot as he can endure it, stopping
them with Cotton, continuing it till he is cured, which will be in about a
Month.

To bring them down when too fat.
Take Fig Leaves, which dry in the Shade, and beat to Powder, which lay upon
him as you think fit, after having taken off the Hair.

For Gauling in Horses.
Take two pound of fresh Butter, one pennyworth of Quick silver, and about the
quantity of a pound of Butter of Cuttle-fish Bones; mix all together in a Pot,
then rub the Horses with the said Ointment, every two days.

For the same.
You must make them drink Decoction of the Herb Scabious, or half a pint of
White Wind, in which must be dissolved an ounce of Synoper, and a little Crust
of bread toasted, an ounce of Sulphur fixed with the said Decoction, and make
them drink it four days.

For sick Horses, Oxen, and Cows.
When you see a Horse sad and drooping, and that he eats not as he used; take a
Root of Hellebore, and cover the Skin from the Head down the Breast, or fall of
the Neck, along the near, or off Leg, and make two slits to stick the said
Root, which must go through between the Skin of the said two cuts, as you would
lard a Foul; leaving it there a little while, and the Distemper will all gather
to that Place, and grow to a great Impostume; which must be lanced in two or
three Places, and the matter will come out. You must make a Plaster of Bole
Armoniack, Hogs Lard, Nicotian, or other good Plaster, and apply to the Place,
which will soon heal.

To cure Horses of the Vives.
Take Hemlock and beat it, sprinkling course Salt amongst it; then squeeze out
the juice, which let drop into the Horses Ear, and lay the rest over it, and
let him walk some time.

To make Horses Hoofs grow.
Take old Hogs grease, Goats or Mutton Suet, common Oil, of each an ounce; some
of the under Rind of Elder or Wall-wort, with new Wax, of which make an
Ointment.

For Horses that are pricked.
Take Ointment of Villemaigne and put into the hole.

For the same.
Take the juice of Elder-leaves, and lay the leaves over, and let him be shooed.

A Receipt for the same, of the deceased Marshall de Biron.
Take Rosin, jucis navalis, cerae novae, unguent. Basiliconis, of each two
ounces. facii hircini three ounces, Tereb Venet. Hoisici optimi, of each four
ounces, omnibus liquefactis and permixtis, add sacharum pulverisatum ut fiat
Emplastrum.

The Nail or Splinter must be drawn, and a tent of the same length made, then
have a hot Iron to melt and make it drop in, and lay Flocks over it, or Pitch
in the turn, which is, when a Nail is bent and sticks in the Foot, and which is
more dangerous than the common nailing; for sometimes the Matter runs in
between the Hoof and the Hair. It is discovered in galloping.

For the second, you must pour Ointment upon it, and grease about it twice a
day; if you cannot take out the Splinter, it will make it fall in two days.

You need not stop your Journey for the nailing, nor make the Horses Shoe be
taken off.

This Receipt came from the Marshall de Biron, who kept it very secret, and
gave his Friends the Ointment.

Another for the same purpose, of Monsieur de Turenne.
Take Burgundy-pitch, Gum Elemi and Galbanum of each two ounces: melt all
together with Rose Oil; you need apply it but twice to the Horses foot.

How to use it.
You must mix with the said Plaster a little Grease, and when you discover
where the Foot is pricked, apply it scalding, and lay over it a little Hemp;
this cures in a day.

For a prick in a Horses Foot: the deceased Duke of Weimar's Receipt.
Take Archangel and pound it, adding some Salt and a little Pepper, squeeze out
the Juice, and drop it into the hole, and apply the Herb over it, stopping it
with Grease or Wax, and shoe him.

For the same.
Take yellow Wax, Venice Turpentine an ounce and half, Gum Elemi one pound,
Rosin, liquid Storax, Benjamin four ounces, Betony and Plantain eight handfuls,
tops of Hypericum four handfuls, Oil of Hypericum, as much as is requisite; of
all this make an Ointment, which when you would use, melt a little in a silver
Spoon, drop it into the hole, and shoe the Horse at the same time. This
Receipt was given me as very certain.

For the Farcie in Horses.
Take Ash-tree Berries four ounces, Eglantine Apples an ounce and half,
Cummin-seed an ounce and half, of all these things make a Powder, or as follows.

First, you must dry the Ash-tree Berries, after taking off a little Skin that
is upon them, putting it to this end upon a Brick into an Oven not too hot, do
the same with the Cummin-seeds and Eglantine Apples, always taking care none
of them boil in their moisture: all being thus dry, you must pound it either
together, or separately.

How to use it.
Bleed the Horse in the Morning, and at Noon begin to give him the Powder;
three days after bleed him again, and the eighth day repeat Bleeding: if he be
very ill give him the said Powder Morning, Noon, and Night.

The Dose of the said Powder is what you can take up between your Finger and
Thumb.

The way of giving it is in Bread, till he be cured.

For the same.
Take a little handful of ground Ivy, which squeeze in your hand, adding a
little Salt, put it into his Ear on the side the Farcie is, stopping the Ear
close with Cotton, binding it up with a Cord; leave it there about thirty
hours, in which time it will be cured.

For the same.
Take the Roots of round Sorrel, and Leaves of ground Ivy mixed together,
which mix with the Horses Oats, and he will recover, provided the Farrier has
not touched him.

For a swelling in the hollow of the Pastorn of a Horse.
Take the white heads of five or six Leeks, four ounces of old Lard, new Wax,
common Oil of each two ounces, two quarts of Vinegar, put all into a new
earthen Pot, and let it boil up two or three times till the Vinegar be
consumed; it is enough to make four Plasters or more.

For short Wind, or Pursiness in Horses.
After the purging that follows, if they but draw their Wind hard, mix with
their Oats for three days Morning and Evening a pint of warm Milk, a handful
of Hemp Seed beaten; this Seed is excellent for this use; Jockies use it much
to give their Horses.

Pills to purge Horses.
Take Calafin Aloes an ounce and half, Agaricum half an ounce, prepared
Coloquintida a Dram, Treacle an ounce and half; mix all together, and
incorporate it in a pound of Hogs Lard that has been steeped forty eight hours
in fresh Water, which must be changed every three hours: make thereof Pills as
big as a Nut, which cover with Powder of Liquorice, or Bran, and make the Horse
swallow them; the Horse must have stood bridled three hours before.

After taking them, make him swallow half a pound of common Oil, mixed with a
Pint of warm Wine, covering him warm, and walking him three hours; then put him
in the Stable, and give him no Oats in three days.

He must not be watered till next day at Noon, when you shall make him drink
white Water in the Stable, with Flower and a little Bran; at the same time lead
him to water, making him wet all his Belly to his Ribs, the space of half an
hour, but let him not drink, for it would give him the Gripes, carry him back
to the Stable and give him Hay; it is commonly thirty hours before it works;
begins when he comes out of the River, and sometimes lasts two days, they void
and incredible Filth, and sometimes Gravel.

Whilst it works they are sad and drooping; after the three days, you must
cleanse his Mouth with Leek, Salt and Vinegar, and give him a drench; after
which he will have an incredible Stomach, and grow very fat in a little time;
it is the best Receipt in the World to recover Horses that seem to be quite
gone: some purge their Horses once a quarter with these Pills, and that gives
them a good meene.

A Drench for a Horse.
Take Rose-Honey, Cordial Powder, powdered Aniseed, of each an ounce, five
pennyworth of Scammony, Oil two ounces, Saffron one pennyworth, a pint of
White Wind with Coloquintida and Rubarb.

A Drench for a Horse that has caught cold.
Take Cloves, Nutmeg, Pepper of each half an ounce, Cummin-seed, Fromagy, of
each an ounce and half, Ginger one Dram, common Oil and Honey, of each four
ounces, of the strongest White Wind half a pint; mix all together, and make the
Horse drink it.

For Distempers in Horses Heads.
There is under their Tongue a thing like the Pip; to which with a little
Sponge you must lay Treacle dissolved in Rose Vinegar, doing it often, and they
will certainly recover.

For the same.
Take Wheat Flour, Turpentine, Dragons Blood, of each four ounces, Mastick in
Powder one ounce, four yolks of Eggs, mix all well together, and apply it to
the Horses Forehead for three days.

To make a Horse foam that has a moist Mouth.
Wrap up the nether part of his Jaw with Powder of Staphifegria.

A Horse that has a moist Mouth is esteemed, because those that have it dry
want taste, and are almost half an hour in the Stable before they eat.

To dye saddle Horses when they are old.
Take equal parts of unslacked Lime, and prepared Litharge of Gold, mix it like
an Ointment, with which rub the Hair against the grain, and lay over some green
Leaves; at twice it is quite died, and dies Bay, if you put to it a little Ink.

To make a Horse have good Hair in Winter.
Take Myrrh, Aristolochium, Gentian, Angelica, scrapings of Ivory, of each two
ounces, Crocus one ounce, melt them, and give the Horse two or three spoonfuls
of it in a pint of White Wind every Morning for three days together, and keep
him three hours without eating, then give him what is usual, this strengthens
their Stomach and Appetite, and keeps their Hair together.

For gaul'd Horses.
Make them swallow Decoction of Scabious in half a pint of White Wind, in which
must be dissolved an ounce of Synoper, in Powder, with a little crust of
toasted Bread, make them drink three days together fixed Sulphur, with some of
the Decoction: The Dose is an ounce a time, giving them the same Drench the
fourth day.

For the hard sores in Horses Fundaments.
Take Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, of each an ounce, Mercury two ounces,
with it rub the sore, and it will come to a head; when it is broke, cure the
Ulcer with Ointment of Pilosella.

For bruises or sores in Horses Legs.
The head and tall of Vipers when they are well beaten, with the blood that
runs from them when they are killed, and the White Wind they are washed in, all
put together into a Pot, with a little Puppy, covering it with common Oil, and
boiled till the Wine be consumed, putting through it a thick Cloth, is
excellent for the pains, and certainly cures the bruised, or sore Legs of
Horses, rubbing them with it.

For Horses feet.
Take some of the herb Short-foot, and a quantity of Elder-leaves, two ounces
of Coperis, the whites of four Eggs, one pennyworth of Honey, half a glass of
Vinegar, put all into a new Pot, and boil, it till it comes to an Ointment, and
before you rub the Horses foot, cut off the Hair the closest you can, and wash
it with Pork brine.

To make a Horses Tail and Main grow.
Take Cows-piss and White Wind, boil them together three or four hours, then
wash his Tail and Main.

Another way.
Rub the Tail and Main with Lie made of Vine-ashes.

To hinder Horses from Neighing after a Mare, and carry her any where amongst
Horses.
Take Oil of Petroleum, and rub the Mares privities once a week with a Quill,
or once a fortnight, and the Horses will not care for her.

To keep a Horse from Neighing.
Rub the Bitt when you bridle him with common Oil and glass Oil mixed together,
and the Horse will not Neigh in three hours: or else put a stone under his Tail.

For a Horse that has been overheated.
Take half a pint of Milk, which boil with four ounces of fresh Butter,
Laurel-berries, Pepper, Seen, fine Sugar, of each an ounce, all in Powder well
mixed together, must be put into Wine, which make the Horse drink without
covering or walking him, and he will void at the Nostrils, and recover.

To fatten a Horse.
Take good White Wind two pound, juice of Sorrel one pound, common Oil one
pound, mixed together, and warm it, then make the Horse drink it, being bridled
before; after which, cover him warm, walk him an hour, and put him into the
Stable, continuing this fifteen days; and he will certainly grow fat.

Of Dogs. CHAP. XXIV.
For Dogs Mange.
TAke large Millet, and sweet Turnep-roots, which boil in Cows-piss, till it is
all like a Broth, with which rub the Dogs.

For Dogs bitten by mad Beasts.
Take Rue, Comfrey, and Mugwort, more Rue than Comfrey, and of this than
Mugwort, with a head of Garlic, beat all together with a handful of Salt, and
steep the herbs in White Wind and Water, make the sick Dog drink it fasting,
and take care in two hours after he neither eats, drinks, nor sleeps. You must
also make the Sore bleed, and lay over it the remainder of the herbs. This
Receipt is most certain.

To cure Dogs of the burst.
Wash them in water, in which Hemlock has been boiled, then cut the flesh, so
that he may not feel it, and wash the place with juice of Hemlock.

To destroy a Dogs Fleas.
Take a quantity of Wormwood, and boil it in water an hour and half, take it
from the fire, when cold, take the Herb, and rub the Dog against the grain of
the Hair, and wash him with that Water, and the Fleas certainly dye in the
place you have touched.

To cure Sheep.
Burn and powder some of their Wool, and make them drink it.

To cure the Hogs Meazles.
Take a little mineral Antimony in Powder, which wrap up in a Linen Cloth, and
infuse in Lie made of white Briony, twenty four hours, adding two fingers of
Salt of Saturn, make them drink the quantity of a Glass full mixed with Bran,
and within eight or nine days they will be cured.

For Fowl that are hurt.
Pull the place that is hurt gently: or else cut off the Feathers, and take a
Plaster of Villemagne made upon sof^ Leather, lay it upon the sore and it will
heal.

To make Fowl feed well.
Take Rhubarb, Agaricum, Aloes, Saffron, Cinnamon, Aniseed, Sugar Candy, of
each a Dram, beat it to Powder.

At Night give them as much as will lie upon a Shilling: this draws a great
deal of moisture from their Brain, and their Maw in the Morning will be found
full of Water if you squeeze it.

You must give this when the Bird is full, or when you would have it do strange
things.

To purge them.
To purge and give Fowl a Stomach, we use Pills of old Preserve of Province
Roses liquid, about the bigness of a Pea.

The last and XXV Chapter. In which are contained many Secrets, which have been
tried by the Author, since the foregoing: And also some excellent Remedies not
spoken of before.
To make a thick course Dye thin and delicate.
TAke Aloes, Borax, Salt, Bones, Mastick, of each three Drams, pound all and
incorporate it with French Soap and Oxes Gall.

To beautify the Face and other parts of the Body.
Take Oil of Myrrh, or Water of Linden Flowers, rub with it twice a Week when
you go to Bed.

To make the Hair bright or shining.
When you comb your self, dip the Comb in Oil of Lillies, Roses, or Violets.

To make the Hair grow long.
Take Ashes of Venus Hair, Polythricon, and Cane Root, with Hemp seed, of which
make Lie, melt some Myrrh into it, adding one part of White Wind, with which
wash your Head every fortnight.

To make Hair Curl.
First shave it off, and then rub the Skin with Daffodil Roots.

Another way.
Take Roots of Marshmallows, Hemp, and Psillium-Seed, boil them long together,
and with the Decoction wash your Hair.

Another.
Take Daffodil Water mixed with thick Juice of the Roots of white Mallows, as
much of one as of the other.

For swetty, stinking Feet.
Take Roch-allum dissolved in hot Water, and wash your Feet often therein.

A Bath to beautify the Body.
Take sweet Almonds blanched four pound, pure Apple Kernels one pound,
Hemp Seed four handfuls, Marsh-mallow-roots, and Lilly-Seeds, of each an ounce,
Roots of Elicampane a pound and half, all cut and beaten very small, make three
or four Bags of it, and in each put a handful of Bran.

Having well prepared the Water for the Bath, it being taken near the Wheel of
some Mill, take some to boil the Bags in; then sit down in the Bath-Tub upon
one of the Bags, and with the others rub your Body. You may put into the Bath a
pound of Roses, or sweet Waters, or Oil of Spikenard about two ounces, or Musk,
Amber, Civet, Benjamin, Storax, or Orange Flowers; You must stay in the Bath
three hours.

A secret for making artificial Wine.
Take a Loaf as it comes out of the Oven, steep it in strong Vinegar, then lay
it by and keep it; to make Wine immediately, you need only steep a piece of
this Bread in a Glass of Water, and it will give it the color and taste of
Wine.

A good secret for Ladies to beautify their Faces.
Take Parsly-Seed and Nettle-Seed, the Kernels of Peaches, boil them together,
and with that Water wash your Face.

A true secret to catch all sorts of Birds with your Hands, without any other
Instrument.
Take some Oxes Gall, and white Hellebore, then Honey and Corn, boil them in the
said Gall, strew them where there are any Birds you would catch; and when they
have eaten it, they will fall down dead within half an hour; then you may take
them with your Hands.

To get a good Memory, either in Man or Woman.
Take the blood of a Swallow, and Rosemary-flowers, Borrage, Bugloss, of each
two drams, then take Cinnamon beaten small, Nutmeg, Clove, long Pepper, of each
half a dram, fine Musk two grains, Preserve of Violets and Roses, of each an
ounce, powder it all very small, and sift it very fine, mix the said Powder
with an ounce of Syrup of Roses, and make an Electuary, of which take every
Morning the bigness of a small Nut, for a Month together: This will certainly
make you have a good memory: It is an experienced Secret, and necessary for
those that are troubled that way.

To know whether a Girl be a Maid or not.
Take Marble in Powder, and make her drink it in Wine, if she be deflowred, she
will vomit immediately.

For Women's white Flowers.
Take two good handfuls of the roots of Pettiegree, which put into three pints
of water, and boil away to a pint and half, and take two glasses a day.

Virgins Milk.
Take four ounces of Litharge in Powder, which put into a little earthen Pot,
with a pound and half of Vinegar, make it boil a little upon the fire, then
take it off, and pour your Vinegar and Litharge into a Porringer, distill it
with a Filter, and keep the Water.

Take also 3 or 4 ounces of Alum, which infuse in a pound of Water, set a
little upon the fire, take it off as soon as you can perceive the Alum is
melted, then put it into a Porringer, and distill it with a Filter, and keep
this Water by it self.

To use the said Water, you must take a little of each, and when they are mixed
they will become as white as Milk; and with it you must wash where you feel any
itching.

For any burning
Take two pennyworth of Lead-ore, put it into a little Vessel with Vinegar,
leaving it there at least twenty-four hours, then take out the Vinegar, which
becomes white, and put in Sallet-oyl, beating them well together, of which is
made an Ointment very useful for any burning.

The way how to use it, is, taking some of this Ointment, and laying it upon
the burnt place, then lay a very fine Cloth over it, and over the Cloth some of
the same Ointment, it must be left on till it falls off it self, and nothing
will appear upon the burnt place.

Modern Curiosities OF ART and NATURE. Containing the whole Art of Moulding and
Casting all sorts of Figures, Medals and other Forms in Lead, Tin, Silver,
Copper, Plaster of Paris, Wax, Sulphur and otherwise, as well hollow as sollid.
CHAP. I.
To cast the Figures of all sorts of Animals in Tin, Silver and Copper very
thin and light.
HAving the Figure ready to mould, oil it and take off the hollow Mould in
Plaster as follows. Being oiled, lay it upon Potters Earth, then make choice
of such parts of it as you think best to take off, there make a Border or
Edging of the same Earth, that being done, cast your Plaster, being well
tempered, neither too thick nor too thin; that part being well taken, lift it
up in as few pieces as you can, repair the Edges, and make some little notches
with a Knife; grease the Edges with Sallad Oil, and put them exactly together
again; then make an Edging or Border of the same Earth, in the place from
whence you took that part of your Figure; that being done, cast your Plaster
as before, then lift up the Piece to repair it, and put it in its place,
continue thus till the whole be done, being dry, dress the outside of your
Mould with a Knife or piece of Iron, and when thoroughly hardened, mark the
Pieces one after another, dry them at leisure, then join and tie them together
with a Cord; thus have you a hollow Mould of Plaster, which according as
Figures are more or less easy, may be made of three, four, six, ten or twelve
pieces; but this depends upon the Judgment of the Moulder or Caster.

To cast a hollow Figure.
Oil your hollow Mould of Plaster till 'twill receive no more, and dry it with
Cotton, then take all your pieces and tie them together with a Cord, and find
out the fittest place for the Mouth or Casting Place; having then melted your
Wax, so that it be neither hot nor cold, run it into the Mould, if your Figure
be small, fill it, and after a little time take out the Stopple of Earth, with
which you stopped the Mouth of the Mould, and on a sudden turn your Figure upside
down, that the remainder of the Wax may run out; after some time, when you
think it is cold, open it, and you will find a hollow Figure of Wax; if it be too
thin, leave the next longer in the Mould; if too thick, take it out sooner. To
know the weight of your Figures, mould off a Weight of four or five ounces,
more or less, and you will find how much the bigness of a pound Weight in Wax will
weigh in Copper; but the most certain rule is to fill the Mould with Wax.

How to put the Kernel or inward Mould into a Figure of Wax, and put on the
Shell or outward Case to cast it in Metal.
Thus having your Figure, if it be of a living Creature, you may cut it with a
hot Knife in two pieces, either at length or cross, or overthwart, being thus
parted, take Potters Earth, mingled with a little very fine Charcoal Dust,
moistning and beating them with a Rod or little Bar of Iron till it becomes as
soft as Paste; with this Earth fill your waxen Figure, which being dry, cover
the outside of each piece where they are to be joined with the same Earth made
very moist and thin, taking care it run not over upon the edges of the Wax;
being joined, repair it with a Tool of Copper or Iron made warm, to melt the
Wax upon the Joint; this done, make a Git or Casting-hole in the most
convenient place, let it be long enough, with Breath-holes; if you find any
part of the Figure, to which you think the Metal will not easily pass, then
roll little pieces of Wax about the bigness of a Goose Quill, or bigger,
according to the size of the Figure, which with a hot Iron, you may stick to
some part of it, that the end may reach the place where you suspect the Metal
will not easily run, and there fasten it, then take little Points of Tin or
Iron, about the bigness of a Tag, about half a finger long, according to the
thickness of the Wax or the inner Mould, thrust these Points quite through the
Figure, to the end, that the Kernel being in all parts supported by the Points,
it may not touch or join to any part of the outward Mould.

To make the Case or Faceing to the Figure of Wax.
Take good Founders Earth, and steep it in an earthen Vessel in fair Water,
pour it by inclination into another, and the grosser part will remain in the
bottom of the first, having left it to settle, pour off the Water, and add to
it some Bonne, mingle them together, and with a large Pencil give a smooth
laying of this Earth upon your Wax Figure; being dry, a second, continue this
to a sixth laying on; when dry, strengthen it with Potters Clay beaten with
Hair, when perfectly dry, put your Mould over the Fire on Iron Rods, in form of
a Gridiron, and take heed your Wax boil not within the Mould, which will break
it; let it lean on one side, that the Wax may run out at the Mouth or
Casting-place, to the same quantity that the Figure contained, that none be
left behind; this done, heat your Figure at a small Fire, so that it be
thoroughly penetrated, the more the better, for you need not fear the too much
baking it, while this is heating, melt the Metal to a good heat, and to the end
it may be very clean, its necessary to have two Crucibles in the Furnace, to
pour the Metal out of one into the other to clear it of the Scum, your Metal
being very hot, set your Mould fast in Sand, pour in the Metal, and let it
cool, break it, and you will have a Figure without hem or Joint, if your Figure be
somewhat large, bind your Mould with iron Wier well neal'd.

Another way to make both outside and inside Mould.
Make a hole in the top of the Head, or at the Feet, through which, pour into
the Figures of Wax a Composition of equal parts of Plaster and Brick-dust made
very fine, and tempered in water, wherein Plume Alum has been dissolved, let it
be of such consistence as to run through a Tunnel, leave it to dry at leisure,
and stick in the Points.

Or else, when you have cut the Figure of Wax in two pieces, and made the
Kernel or inward Mould, take it out and make it red hot, which is the surest
way to cast clean and without repairing, because the Moulds are strong enough
to endure the baking, and are long a drying in the Figure of Wax.

CHAP. II.
To cast Figures of Copper or Tin, with Drapery or Garment very light and thin.
HAving your Figure of new Wax without Garments, the Kernel or inward Mould of
it being well baked as aforesaid, take a piece of well polisht Glass about six,
eight or more inches square, make it very clean and lay it in water, then
having your Wax melted in a Pot, dip your piece of Glass with a pair of Plyers
or Pinchers in the Wax, take it out and dip in water, and take the Wax off the
Glass in form of a Skin, which you may make of what thickness you please, or if
you mix a little Turpentine with your Wax when well melted, 'twill be more
supple and flexible; which you may stretch out with a Knife or Foulding-Stick
upon a piece of Glass to what thickness you please, and to a size fit to Cloth
the Waxen Figure like a piece of Silk or linen Cloth en volant; carrying it on
the Arm or supporting it with a Stick, as you shall think fit, shaping the
Foulds with a Small, according to Art, and cover it with Earth, as before
directed.

The same another way.
Take a piece of fine Linen, make Paste or Starch tempered with Brandy or
Aquavitae, to the end, that burning the Mould, it may Colly or Blacken it;
moisten this Cloth in the Starch, and Cloth your Figure as you think fit,
supporting the Foulds with little Sticks till they be dry, and supports its
self, and will hold moulding with Earth, but more especially with Plaster.
This Invention is very proper to mould off Figures of Tin, because the outward
Mould may be made with burnt Plaster, and a fourth part of Brick in fine
Powder, mixed with Plume Alum, and tempered with water wherein Sal Ammoniac has
been dissolved; by this means you may cast small and indifferent large Figures
very clear and neat, but take care that in heating the Mould to melt out the
Wax, you make it not boil, and when empty, keep it at a slow Fire till red hot.

If your Figure be of Tin, leave your Mould to cool in the Fire, but warm it
when you cast in the Tin; in all these cases, Experience is the best Master.

To consume and bring forth the Cloth, that it hinder not the running of the
Metal, place your Figure upright, and make a Circle or counter Mould of Earth
about the Figure, to keep in the Plaster; before you cast, take some good Iron
Wier and lay cross or overthwart the Counter-Mould of Earth, upon these Wiers,
lay so many more smeer'd with Grease, then having cast your Plaster, and that
it is set, take out the Wiers, the Wax also being melted out, and the Mould well
baked or burnt, blow out the burnt Cloth through the holes, and stop them with
fat Earth or Clay; if you dip very fine Cloth in melted Wax, you may Cloth
your Figure as you please; in baking your Mould, the Wax will run out and the
Cloth easily consume.

Or else, to get out the Wax, set the Figure in a brass Pan, the Casting-hole
being downwards, and put it into an Oven after the Bread is baked, be sure it
be not too hot, to know the degree of heat, put some Wax in a small Viol, and
set it in the Oven, if neither Bubbles nor Scum rises, it is a convenient heat,
when you use a Wax Cloth, be very careful to get out all the Wax.

All these ways have been sufficiently experimented, and proved to be the best
for casting small Figures, for adorning Cabinets and other pieces of Closetry;
in like manner you may cast Figures of Silver, Copper and Tin very thin and
light; nay, I have known them cast not much thicker than a sheet of Paper, when
the inner Mould has been taken out; in short, lute well your Mould, put in your
Points of Iron, make your Casting-hole long enough, as also your
Breathing-holes, as well to empty out the Wax as to pour in the Metal; bake
your Moulds well, and if for Silver or Copper, let them be very hot; before you
run your Metal, put a little Borax into the Crucible, tie your Moulds well with
iron Wire, and set them in Sand, and the Metal being well scum'd and clean, or
you spoil all, the least Filth destroying your Figure, therefore try all with
patience.

CHAP. III.
To cast large or indifferent Figures without Seam or Mark.
WHen you have made your hollow Mould of Plaster, take a piece of Oak about a
Foot long, half a Foot broad, and two or three Inches thick, being first well
Glew'd, then make a Groove or Channel, such a one as you think fit to give to
your Wax to make the Figure, the Ledges of the Wood being a Fingers breadth
above the said Grove or Channel, then take some sifted Ashes and put them in a
linen Cloth, to powder lightly the bottom of the piece of Wood in the Groove
or Carving that the Earth may not stick, then take Potters Earth very well
beaten and mould it with your hand into pieces of the same size of the Groove;
press them down unto it, and with a Rule cut off the edges, so that the Earth
may lie even with the Wood, then take the Earth out of the Groove and and make
more of 'em; this done, take your Plaister-Mould and make a laying of those
pieces of Earth you took out of the Wood, which you shall press gently with
your Thumb, to make them join among the hollow places of the Mould, as if you
were to make a hollow Figure of Earth, then put your Points of Iron through and
through, from outside to outside, which will serve as supports to bear up the
inner Mould; fill up this Mould with Plaster, do all in such sort, that the
inner Mould of Earth, hinder not the rejoyning of that of Plaster; then
present the Pieces of the Plaister-Mould, and so duly join them that they fit
and stick fast to each other, but forget not to strengthen it with strong iron
Wier where you think it most necessary to hinder its breaking; having thus
joined them, take off one half and lay it to dry, when dry, take out the Figure
out of the Mould, and take the thickness of Earth from the inner Mould, which
keep to weigh, to the end you may know what quantity of Copper will cast your
Figure, which you may also know according to former directions. The Kernel or
inner Mould being well dried, you shall bake or burn it by little and little in
a Charcoal Fire compassed with Bricks, making it red hot quite through, and
leave it to cool by degrees.

CHAP. IV.
To cast the Wax, and enclose the Kernel or inner Mould in the middle.
HAving thus made your inner Mould, anoint the Plaister-Mould with Oil Olive as
before mentioned, put the Kernel in the Plaister-Mould, and tie it that it
disjoyn not, set it up right, then having the Wax all melted, pour it into the
Git-hole, which must be on the top of your Mould, so that being hot enough, it
may run round the Kernel; the Wax being cold, unty the Mould, and take it off,
and you have the Wax Figure with its Kernel; if there be any defect, mend it
and lay on fine Earth, prepared as before, and thin enough, with a soft Brush
upon the Wax, dashing the Brush up and down to make the Earth take the better;
then strengthen it well, and place your iron Rods, and to prevent the joining
and breaking, strengthen them with iron Rods or Hoops, as well as with Iron
Wire, according to the bigness of the Figure; this done, empty the Wax by the
Fire, and bake your Mould.

This is an excellent way to have all sorts of Figures in diverse postures to
the Life, as by experience has been proved by several persons taken from the
Life in Plaster, and cast in Copper as aforesaid.

CHAP. V.
To mould off with Plaster, naked Persons in what Posture you please, and in
the hollow Mould, to make a Kernel or inner Mould, therewith to make the
Figure, and cast it in Brass.
IF the person you make choice of be hairy on the Thighs or Breast, shave it,
but let that under the Arm-holes be well greased with Hog's Grease, or cut it,
the Body of the Person be not constrained to any unnatural Posture, but such as
you think fit, let him be lightly greased all over; having placed him upon a
large Board or Table laid on the Ground and greased, place him in the midst of
it it, then make round about the Person a Counter-Mould of Brick and Clay,
which you must plaster on the inside, so that it be about three Fingers
breadth from the Figure. If the Legs are a little open, put a little Clay
before you make the Counter-Mould, or a thin Board greased between the Legs, so
that it neither touch them nor the Thighs; then take other little pieces of
very thin Board in form of a Knife or thin Wedg, sharp on one side, more thick
on the other, grease them, then view the place where you intend your Mould
shall separate, be it in two, three or four pieces, stick these pieces of Board
upon the Clay, on the inside the Counter-Mould, the sharp Edge to the side of
the person you are to mould; but if you place these Boards from the Soles of
the Feet to the calf Gartering place, knees, or higher, do it according as the
Leg, Thigh, or other part of the Body is situated more or less inward or
outward; the Figure being cast, and these pieces taken away, you have the place
where to open the Mould. Having raised your Counter-Mould as high as the
Shoulders, make a little Trough about two or three foot long, which must rest
on the top of your Mould, one end joining to the Neck of your Figure, at the
other end place a wooden Tunnel as big as a large Pail, then take six or seven
large Staves or Ribs of a large Cask or Barrel, bind them fast about it with a
Cord, for fear it should burst, then take Plaster well burnt, and dash it into
a large Tub of Water, or into several large Brass Pails or Kettles, with which
(being neither too thick nor too thin) fill your Counter-Mould through the
Tunnel, that it may run down the Trough, pour it as fast as you can, to that
purpose, have several hands to assist, being filled, the Plaster will be set
in a little time, which done, pull down the Counter-Mould, then with a large
Knife or such like Instrument, dress the outside of your Mould while the
Plaster continues easy to cut, then take out the thin pieces of Wood, and
have other pieces of about a foot and half long, more or less, in form of a
Wedge, and sharp as a Knife, about a Finger thick on the back, and about half a
foot broad, place these in the Clefts made by the small Boards, and open your
Mould, which must be done with as few pieces as you can; thus have you an
upright Figure in two pieces, except the Arms. But in Figures lying all along,
the Mould must be in more pieces; but if the Figure have one or both Arms
extended, draw a Circle like a Bracelet, with red Ink round about the Arm or
Arms about half a foot from the Shoulder, which Mark being imprinted in the
Mould, the Figure taken off, will also have the same, which will easily direct
where to cut it, and to fit the length of the Arm to the Body of the Figure; if
you desire a Copy of the Figure, dress the Mould, tie the pieces strongly
together, and cast Plaster into it. But if you would cast a Figure of Bronze
or Brass, separate the Mould where you put the small pieces of Wood, or else
with an Iron Wier, saw your Mould as near to the Hollow as possible you can, so
that putting a bigger Wedge into the Cleft, you may open your Mould, being
divided so as that you may cast your Wax Figure, make thick pieces of Earth,
according to the precedent Chapter, dry it, grease it, and make a Kernel or
inner Mould, put in the Iron Points or Broches to support it, take out your
thickness of Earth, pour in the Wax, then melt it out, and bake the Mould as
before mentioned.

In like manner you may take off all sorts of Figures and Postures according to
the Life, be sure to cast all your Plaster at the same instant, for many and
slow Runnings make faulty Moulds; also the person being up to the Neck in
Plaster, the coldness of the Water will so oppress his Stomach, that he will be
apt to shrink or lift up his Shoulders, and so deform the Mould, to prevent
which, let the Water be lukewarm; if you mix a third of fine Brick with
Plaster, and some Plume Alum, you may cast Brass in it, only making a
thickness of Earth for to make the Kernel; but before you bake it, give a
laying or two of Sal Ammoniac Water in all the hollow places of the Mould,
tying it with strong Iron Wier or Hoops, and putting in the Broches. Thus may
you cast very fine Figures also in Lead or Tin, the chief thing is to find out
well shaped persons, and hard Laborers, who have always their Muscles more
strong and better shaped, than such as live a finer Life, who often have their
Bodies forced to their Clothes, nor those whose Toes grow over one another, set
the Person right, that the Posture seems not awkward, especially in upright
Figures.

How to mould off the face of any person, without being troublesome to him.
Take a little Brush or Pencil, lay some warm paste upon the Hairs of the
Eyebrows, the Forehead, all along the Roots of the Hair, and upon the Beard,
lay the person on his Back, and with a Napkin roul'd up, compass the Face about
to hinder the Plaster from falling into the Neck, or upon the Hair, your
Plaster being good, well tempered, neither too thick nor too thin, that you
may soon have done; let there be two to lay on the Plaster with their hands,
beginning at the Forehead, and so all along the Face, except at the Nostrils,
which you must not stop, charging your Mould with as much thickness as 'twill
bear, not stopping the Nose, if the Plaster be good, 'twill set presently,
then take it gently off, and you have the Mould of the Face to the Life.

Now to remedy the defect under the Nose, it is but clapping a Chissel or
repairing Tool to it, and pouring on a little Plaster, which being dry, you
may mould off a Head of Plaster or Potters Earth, then having the Person
before you, open the Eyes of your Mould: some use to put Quills into the
Nostrils, but I prove not of it, this being a more sure way of practice; always
advise the person not to force his Face or frown, to prevent which, temper the
Plaster with lukewarm water, the Hair being well pasted; thus may you cast
all sorts of Faces; Laughing, Crying, Grimaces, that is, crabbed or wry Faces.

To cast Hands to the Life.
Place your Hands in what Posture you think fit, grease them, and proceed as
before, putting little Boards greased to divide the several pieces; thus may
Feet and Legs in all Postures be done, observing to put a Cloth under the Mould
in opening it, so that if any small pieces happen to break off, they may be
gathered and joined with strong Glue, for it cannot be but some pieces will
happen to break on the inside of the Hand, not on the outside, if you desire it
should hold something, make the form of it in Potters Earth, and you may easily
take it off; then having cast the Plaster into the Mould, break off with a
Chiszel the pieces that cannot be taken off; do all with care and patience,
that you break not your work.

CHAP. VI.
To cast Fish to the Life, either in Plaster or burnt Clay, to put into
Fountains, also to cast them in Brass, Tin, Lead or Pastboard, and to make them
swim on the top or middle of the Water.
TAke any sort of Fish, put it in what Posture you think fit, wash it in clean
water to take off the Slime, rub it lightly with Sallad Oil, and mould it in
Plaster in two parts, turning and repairing the frost side of the Mould, and
with red Ocre tempered with Water, cover the Joint and grease it, then Oil the
other half, and cast the Plaster, which being done with a Knife, trim it all
along the Joints, then strengthen it with Clay and let it dry; being ready and
well greased, put in the beaten Paper or Past-board, press it with a Linen
Cloth and a Sponge, to take out the Water, lay the Cloth upon it, and with the
Sponge press it into the Gravings and hollow places, till it be as dry as you
can make it; when dry, take out and join the two pieces with strong Glue, then
lay in size afterward in white, and press it.

How to color the Pastboard Fish.
If it be a Carp, lay on Leaf Gold with Gold Oil Size, where a Carp seems most
of a Golden Color, in other places, as under the Belly, and upon the Back, you
ought to paint with fit Pencil Colors and umber ground very thin with oil, and
with a Pencil draw the scales, and shadow'em to the life; then paint the head
and the eyes, having a natural Carp before you: having painted the Carp, dry it
and varnish it with drying Varnish made of Spike Oil, and give it so many
courses as is usual in Varnishing, when dry, with your Finger give a gentle
touch of the same Varnish upon its Head, which being so dry as that will but
just stick to the Fingers, even as when you are to guild in Oil, then take
shell Gold tempered only with Water, and with a Pencil gild those places that
require it, with the same Pencil heightning some Scales, but those above the
Back, with the washing of your shell, that they appear not so strong as in
other places, then with your Finger varnish it, let it dry, and with the
washing of your Shell of Silver, and with a large Pencil, frost over those
places that seem Silverish, then with a small Pencil draw the Scales with shell
Silver, all being dry, give another course of Varnish, and let it dry, to make
the Eyes perfect, get some hollow Beads blown at the Glass-House, of the size
of the Fishes Eye, divide them in two pieces, and paint in them with the
Colors of Gold and Silver, paint the Eye to the Life; being dry, make a hollow
in the place for the Eye, and place them in fit: more may be added, but the
rest is left to the patience and ingenuity of the industrious Artist; if you
would have them in Brass, do as in other Figures.

How to cast Fish, which in the Water shall seem natural, viz. one at the
bottom of the Tub, the other in the middle, and others on the top.
Take what Fish you will, set it upon the Belly on a Bed of Earth made edging
up, but very even, set the Fins as they carry them when alive in the Water,
make a circle of Earth about it to keep in the Plaster, which must be new, not
stale; but if it be so make it boil in an iron Kettle, or else put it in an
earthen Vessel in a hot Oven, then put to it a third part of new Brick in fine
Powder, choose the finest and tenderest Brick, to these add one third part of
Plum Alum ground on a Marble, temper all in Water to a convenient thickness,
and cast it, as in the Chapter of Fishes, in Plaster, but be sure to run it
but at one place, to prevent its gathering wind, and that it be of a fit
thick-to run, this done, take away the Circle of Earth, turning up your Mould
and Fish together, letting it so lie about a quarter of an hour or more to dry,
or till you think the Plaster is set, when dry, grease the edge of that first
Joint, which must always be uppermost; when you run the second, make the Circle
of Earth, and run the Plaster, the other part of the Fish being lightly oiled
with a piece of Cotton, in an hour or two open the Mould, take out the Fish and
set the Mould to be perfectly dry, when it is so, take a Skin of Wax, Potters
Earth or Paste, rouling it as you do Covers for Tarts, then lay it on the
Mould, and with your Thumb press it into every part of the hollow Mould, making
one hole under the Head, to put the end of an Iron Tunnel into, and another
near it for the breathing place, about the size of a Tag or great Pin, then
take some ends of brass wier tin'd over, somewhat bigger than a Needle, thrust
these Wiers into the most convenient places to support the Kernel or inner
Mould, every Wier going through the Wax, Clay or Paste, till it touch the
Plaster, this done, join the Mould and tie it, put the Tunnel into the Hole,
pour in the prepared Plaster, taking care it be not too thick, being dry, open
the Mould, take off the Plaster or Earth, and and leave the Kernel or middle
Mould to dry at leisure, being dry, bake it in a slow Fire till it be red hot,
then cover it with ashes and let it cool by degrees, then take the two Moulds,
bind them with small iron Wier neal'd, then plaster up the Joints with Potters
Earth, put all in a small Fire to bake slowly, untye it and cover it with
Ashes, and leave it to cool, having first stopped both the holes, that nothing
get in, then make a Git or casting place in form of a Tunnel, more than four
Fingers high above the Head of the Fish, the Mould being hot as you can
possibly handle without burning your Fingers, your Tin mixed with one fourth of
Lead, and melted to a convenient heat, which is known by putting a piece of
Paper into it, if it burn, it is too hot, if only scorch't, it is well, if not
scorch't, it is not hot enough, being thus heated, cast it into the Mould, and
you will have a perfect Fish without repairing, not wanting the thinnest Scale,
then with an Iron Rod, empty the Kernel through a Hole, which you must make in
the most convenient place, afterward stopping it by sodering a piece to it,
that the water get not into it; if you desire to put it in the Water, and that
it should stay at the Bottom, fill it full of Sand before you close it up, if at
the top, fix a piece of Cork so that it be equally poised, then make a
Counterpoise of Lead, which you must stick with Wax and Turpentine melted
together, till you find the Fish right upon the Water, then soder the Lead, mix
a little Tinglass with the Soder to make it run thin, and it is done; if you would
have it in the middle of the Water, stick a small brass Wier colored with
black Oil to the Fish, and the other end of it to the Botton of the Tub or
Cistern, at what degree of height you think fit.

To paint the Fish that the water may not deface them.
In coloring proceed according to former Directions, but use not the drying
Varnish, this following being much stronger, boil Linseed-Oyl over a gentle
Fire, put into it some fine Mastick, till so much be dissolved in it as will
reduce it to the thickness of liquid Varnish, with this you may also mix your
Colors, which will make them wonderfully durable.

A most impenetrable Varnish against the Water.
Take Linseed-Oyl, put it in an earthen Pot well glazed upon a chaffing-Dish of
hot Coals, add about a fourth of Rosin, which boil together very gently, lest
it run over, at first 'twill smoke and bubble, but in continuing the boiling,
'twill all fall, continue boiling till it be so thick as to rope or thread like
Varnish; when you have taken it off, if too thin, add more Rosin, with this
varnish your Fish or any thing else, and dry it in the Sun. Of such strength is
this Varnish, that neither cold nor hot Water can any way hurt it, when dry,
take care the Rosin be very clean, and that it boil enough.

CHAP. VII.
To cast all sorts of little Animals, as Lizards, etc. and all sorts of Flowers
and Leaves that are not too thin.
IF you would cast a Lizard in Silver or Tin, prepare your Plaster with Brick
and Plume Alum, make a Bed of Potters Earth, in which make a hollow place with
your Finger to set the Lizard half way in, and with some Instrument set up the
Earth against the sides of it, not so as to press it, or alter the form, set it
in what manner you will, whether two or three twisted together, or otherwise,
then temper your Plaster with water, in which three or four ounces of Sal
Ammoniac or more, has been dissolved, cast it upon the Lizard, being dry, turn
it upside down, and if you find the Plaster has gone beyond the Belly, so as
to hinder its coming out, or that the Feet or other parts are covered, take it
gently and carefully off with the point of a Penknife, then oil the oynt of
the Mould, make a Circle of Earth and cast again, leaving it a day to dry, then
open it, take out the Lizard, and leave it a day to dry, tie it with iron Wier
and bake it, as in the Chapter of Fishes, pour in the Tin, and you have a
Lizard not at all differing from the Original.

If you would have them of Silver, the Mould must be red hot when you run the
Metal, which ought to be mixed with a little, but very little Copper; if it be a
very large Adder, make an inner Mould, as is taught in the Chapter of Fishes.

To cast the same sort of Animals after another manner.
If you would cast Butter-Flies, Flowers or Lizards, so as no Seam or Joint shall
appear, having placed the thing you intend, cast the Plaster as above, being
dry, without oyling the Joints, cast again, being dry, bake it till it is red
hot, that the Lizard or Flower may be burnt; the Mould being cold, open it at
the Joint, and with the point of a Needle or Feather take out the Bones or
Ashes very gently, then join your Mould, and run the Silver or Tin, having made
the Git or Casting place as long as you well can; if you would not open the
Mould, do after this manner: before you mould off the Lizard or other Animal,
stick two pieces of Wax in form of a Git, place one at the Head, the other at
the Tail of the Lizard, or other Animal, then cast the Plaster; being dry,
take away the Wax and bake it till red hot, that the Lizard may be consumed,
then blow out the Ashes by the holes, and cast your Metal as before directed.

To cast Flowers, Vine Leaves, Laurel Branches, etc.
Make a Circle of Earth like a Box, of the Bigness of the Flower, Branch or
Leaves you intend; if a Violet, Rose-Bud, or any else, that are thick enough
(for if too thin, the Metal cannot run) when you have made your choice, run a
Thread with a Needle in at the end of the Stalk through the middle of the
Flower, then fasten one end of the Thread at the bottom of the Circle, the
other to some Stick that shall be supported over it in a perpendicular Line,
that your Flower touch not the sides of the Circle; but before you fasten the
Flower, fix a little piece of Wax at the end of the Stalk for a Git hole, which
must touch the bottom where the Thread was fastened; this done, cast the
Composition of Plaster, Brick, and Alum Plume as above, with Sal Ammoniac
Water; being perfectly dry, bake it till the Flower be wholly consumed within;
being almost cold, run the Tin or Silver; if Tin, add a third part of Lead; if
Silver, a little Copper, and you will find the Flowers or Leaves very neat, which
take out by breaking your Mould by little and little: in this way of casting,
your Mould will serve but once; if you cast Silver, your Mould ought to be red
hot: thus may you do all sorts of Reptiles or creeping things.

Otherwise to cast a Vine Leaf.
Place it on a flat Bed of Earth very even, make an Edging of Potters Earth
round about it; then cast the mixture of Plaster, etc. as above; being dry,
oil the edges of the Plaster, make a Circle, cast again, and leave it to dry
of it self; bake it in a Furnace, and leave it to dry under the Ashes, and cast
your Silver or Tin; this Mould serves but once, but you may cast Leaves of
several sizes at the same time; thus may you cast Branches or Stalks
accordingly as you shall think fit, and with Silver Sauder and Borax, sander
the Leaves, twisting a Lizards Tail about a Branch with a fine Wier, also you
may fasten Grass-Hoppers, Horn-Beetles, or other little Creatures: these things
have been often done amongst others, a Flower-Pot with a Vine Branch of several
sized Leaves, great and small, with several little Creatures about it.

To cast Adders or Serpents.
Proceed as in the Chapter of Lizards, till you have made the hollow Mould,
then roll a piece of Clay or Paste very thin, put it in the Mould, put in the
brass pins to support the inner Mould; if you cast Silver, the Pins must be
Silver, then join the Mould and run the Plaster, not forgetting to make a
Breathing-hole, else 'twill not be full; being dry, take out the Paste, make a
Git or Casting-hole, run the Plaster, then dry it, bind it, burn it, and cast
in the Metal, you will have a Figure not wanting the least Scale.

CHAP. VIII.
To make a Spaud or Sand wherewith to make Moulds to cast wet.
HAving taken out the Kernel or inner Mould, reduce it into fine Powder,
sprinkle it with Sal Ammoniac Water, put in an earthen Pot, and set it in a
Potters Furnace, being well burnt; reduce to fine Powder again, and sprinkle it
with the same Water, spare not to sprinkle it till it Mould off the Grane of
the Hand, then fill your Iron Flasques, mould off and cast. Alablaster often
burnt and sprinkling as before, four ounces of Sal Ammoniac, to four pound of
the Powder, is a good Spaud Speculum or Talk calcined, and Plaster sprinkled
as before, does the same; also Alum calcined and sprinkled and Sal Ammoniac is
admirable, very hard, and receives all Metals; also Plume Alum well burnt and
ground into fine Powder, receives all sorts of Metal; also the Saffron of Mars
or Iron is very good Spaud.

A Sand or Spaud which endures many meltings without breaking the work, coming
out very fine and neat.
Take German or Dutch Spar, which looks like Sal Ammoniac (not English Spar)
burn it very well, then dissolve about a pound of Sal Ammoniac in two quarts of
water, and sprinkle the Spar till it be cold; then burn it again, keeping it
sometime red hot, take it out and sprinkle it till it be cold, repeat this five
or six times, the more the better, and the better 'twill receive the Metal,
grind it into very fine Powder, being dry, rub it into Powder on a Fish Skin,
keep it in a Flasque of Iron or Copper, not Wood, sprinkle a little water, as
is usually done, warm well your forms before you cast the Metal, and the
impression will be very clear. By heating it red hot and sprinkling, 'twill
serve again for other works; it is an admirable Spaud, and so hard, that no
Plaster is equal to it, provided it be true German Spar. The longer the
Git-hole or Casting-place, the neater the Work, nor must you forget in printing
off your Pattern, to face it with a little Powder of burnt Pumice Stone, that
one side stick not to the other.

A wet Spaud to cast Medals and all sorts of Animals to the Life.
Calcine Speculum or Spaud in a Crucible or Melting-Pot, put it in an earthen
Vessel, and pour water upon it, and stir it well together, then add as much
more water; being settled, make it into little Balls, and calcine it again,
which beat into Powder, sprinkle it with ^inegar, and make it into Paste, and
calcine it again, being cold, beat it into fine Powder, searce it, allowing one
ounce of Sal Ammoniac dissolved in water, to twelve of Speculum, keep it in a
Cellar, and as occasion requires, use it, without more moistning it. Also with
Crocus Martis or Saffron of Iron, may be made another Spaud, in which you may
cast the finest Hair exactly.

CHAP. IX.
To print Vine Leaves, or others, in Tin or Brass, upon Copper Moulds.
TAke thin Leaf Brass, such as they make Tags with, the thinner the better,
make it red to neal it, then cover the Copper Mould with it, lay a Plate of
Lead on it, upon that a thin Plate of Iron, upon which beat with a Hammer, till
the Brass Leaf has taken the Form of the Mould, if any part be not clearly
taken off, lay all on again, and hammer where it wants, if it be hard to print,
neal it again, lay it on, and hammer as before; being well printed, boil Tartar
and Salt together, and clean it with a Scratch Brush, and bend them after what
manner you please, then soder them with Soder made of Silver and Tin, the
Stalks being made of Brass Wier, suitable to the size of the Leaf. To color
and defend them from the Weather, grind Verdigrease with the Varnish made of
Linseed-Oyl and Rosin.

After this manner you may mould off all sorts of little Figures in Plaster,
Paste or Clay; if you would have some guilt Figures, take Leaf-Copper, being well
boiled and cleaned, cover it well with Ground Gold, and print it on the Mould:
thus may you do in any Form whatsoever, with Gold or Silver.

CHAP. X.
A neat way to mould off Figures in Paste.
TAke the Crum of a White-Loaf new drawn, mould it till it become pliable, and
close as Wax, roll it with a Rouling-Pin as far as 'twill go, then print it in
the Moulds, when dry, 'twill be very hard, to preserve it from Vermin; mix some
Aloes with it.

Also you may make a Paste of all sorts of Powder mixed with Mill-dust, as
Chalk, Azur, Ammel, Smalt, Red-Lead, Vermilion, etc. Steep Gum Tragaganth about
eight days in water, till it be very strong; with this temper your Powder, and
mould them in hollow Moulds of Plaster, being first oiled, when dry, they will
seem wood by their excessive hardness, pollish them with a Tooth, or varnish
them, they will be very strong, and serve for many uses; thus may Joyners print
off small Figures, to imboss the Frizes, or to set in the Nicks or hollow
places; the more Gum you allow, the harder they will be.

CHAP. XI.
To counterfeit Porphir or Red Marble.
TAke English Brown, if it seem too redish, put some Umber or Soot, then take a
very smooth Board, a well polisht Marble, or a large piece of Glass a little
oiled, then take some English Brown with some Roset or Lake, and grind them
with Gum Tragaganth, then with a large brush, flurt or sprinkle the Glass
according to the Marks and Veins of that Stone, when it is enough spotted, let
it dry, then temper your English-Brown and Umber with Gum Tragaganth Water into
a Paste, which being laid on the spotted Glass or Marble, let it dry, and
pollish it.

To counterfeit the Serpentine.
Take Orpiment, grind it in water with a little Indico, when dry, reduce it to
fine Powder, and temper it with Gum Tragaganth water into a Paste, then by
adding more Orpiment to the Indico, you will have a brighter Green; according to
the Color of the Spots of Serpentine, take this Color with a Pencil, and lay
the Marks upon the Marble or Glass, then lay on the Paste which you have made
of a deeper Green; many other sorts may be made after the same manner.

Another way to counterfeit Marble.
Take several sorts of Colors, and with a Pencil sprinkle them on a Glass or
Marble very thick, or in what order you please, then lay on the Paste, of what
color you will; if White, take white Lead and Chalk, and a little yellow Ocre,
when dry, varnish it with clear drying Varnish, having first well glew'd it
with clear white Glue.

To mould small Figures of a Jasper Color.
Having oiled your Moulds with a Pencil, diversify them with what Colors you
think fit, tempered with Gum Tragaganth; if the Colors will run or spread, put
in a little Ox Gall, but the thicker it is, the harder they will be, then make
your Paste of what Color you will, fill the Mould, tie it, and leave it to
dry, then Burnish or Varnish; the Iron Wier to tie it must be very small.

To mould carved Figures in Fashion of an Agat.
If it be of a Medal or other Figure, cover the Field of it with Lamp-black
tempered with Gum-Water, cover it pretty thick, temper White-lead with
Gum-water into a Paste Mould; your Medal being dry, pollish it after this
manner; you may have various sorts, very beautiful and easy to make, as with
yellow Ocre, which you may guild with Shell Gold.

To imitate Coral.
Grind Vermilion very fine, make it into Paste (as above) take bits about the
bigness of a Penny made very thin, press these very smooth and closely into the
Mould, then make yellow Ocre and Chalk into a Paste, fill the Mould, dry and
pollish.

For Lapis Lazuli.
Take fine Azure, or blew Amel, ground very fine, made into Paste, mould it,
and Vein it with shell Gold, and burnish.

To counterfeit Marble with Brimstone.
Take a well pollished Marble, oil it, make a Circle of Clay of the bigness you
design your Piece, having ready all sorts of Colors in fine Powder, as Ceruse,
Vermilion, Lake, yellow Orpiment, washed Masticot, Indico and red Orpiment
mixed for a Green, then melt your Sulphur in several Crucibles over a slow
Fire, putting into each a several Color, then nimbly strew drops of each upon
the Marble, turning them up and down by turning the Marble to make them run;
this done, if you would have the Body of the Marble Gray, take Ashes well
sifted, mix them with Sulphur till it looks Gray; if of a Reddish Brown, take
English Brown with a little Black; if White, take White Lead, and so of the
rest; being mixed with the Sulphur in a good heat, cast it on the Marble, but
pour it very gently that it run not into the Eyes or Blisters; if you will, you
may lay upon it a well seasoned Oak Board well warmed, and before the Sulphur
be cold, that it may stick fast and not break the Brimstone which is brittle;
then trim the Edges with a Knife, pollish it with a Cloth, and it will have the
Brightness of Marble.

To make Marble of the Color of Coral.
Mix Vermilion with Sulphur, and cast into Moulds of Plaster well oyled, or
into Moulds made of Paste before they be dry; if you would have the Figures
diversified, pour in a little of every Color one after the other, and though
at first they seem to mix, yet they will separate before they be cold; try and
judge.

CHAP. XII.
To cast Medals or carved Figures in trasparent Colors; to Embellish Glasses,
Windows, or Shashes as if they were of Ruby, Amber, or Coral.
TAke a Medal or piece of carved Work, which mould off in prepared Earth, it
will do well in a pair of Flasques, then raise an Edging of Earth near half a
Finger thick about the Figure, experience will better teach the thickness; for
clear Amber, take Venice Turpentine, put it in a Pot well Leaded, boil it over
a small Fire, till by letting a little drop fall on your Nail or Knife, it
become so hard when cold, that you can hardly break it with your Nail; if it be
not hard enough, give it more boiling, and cast it in the Mould.

For the Ruby Color.
Mix fine Lake in fine Powder, with Turpentine boiled, and cast it into your
Mould of Clay before it be dry, because they are apt to break, cut a piece of
Glass of the size of your Medal, and whilst the Turpentine is yet melted, stick
it to the Medal; when dry, take away the Earth gently with a wooden Point of
Willow, then with Water and a gentle Brush of Bristles, clear away what may be
sticking of the Earth, place them in a good Light, and you will find them
wonderfully beautiful; after this manner you may make large Pieces, and add to
their Beauty by tempering Shell Gold or Silver with fasting Spittle, and laying
it on that side of the Glass which you intend to lay upon the Medal or Figure;
but because the taking away of the Earth does insure the Pollish, when it is
clean hold it at some distance from the Fire, which will recover it, taking
care you hold it not too near.

An Emrald Color
Is made with Verdigreece finely poudered, and mixed as above; Coral with
Vermilion, Jet with Ivory or Lamp-black.

CHAP. XIII.
To mould Embolished Figures in Plaster, or colored Paste tempered with Gum
Tragaganth Water, the Drapery being Laced or Seamed with Mother of Pearl.
TAke little Shells that are shining on the inside, those that are brought from
the East Indies are the best, break them in pieces, and with a little Paste or
Gum, dissolved to the thickness of Honey or Varnish, and with a Pencil stick,
the shining side of the Shell upon the Plaster Mould, till you have disposed
of all the Pieces according to your Fancy; if some of the hollow places are too
narrow to receive the pieces of Shell, some small Seed Pearl will do well;
remember that small Pieces render the Work more beautiful and free from
unevenness; of larger Pieces, having thus set the Pieces as close as may be,
make a Paste of Yellow and Chalk, or what color you think fit, make it into
flat pieces, about half a finger thick, with your Ti^ino press it into every
part of the Mould; that done, place some little sticks, where occasion
requires, to support it, then fill the Mould with Gum Tragaganth Water, that it
may glue all the parts together, then join the Mould, and tie it with a Cord,
when it is near dry, take it out, and you will find your Figure curiously adorned
with Mother of Pearl, thus may you have them of any color; having well oyled
the Mould, you may guild them if you think fit; the same may be done with
pieces of thin Blew, Purple, Green, or other colored Glass, having laid on
Silver or Gold with fasting Spittle; thus you may imitate all sorts of Mosaic
Work.

CHAP. XIV.
To make Medals or embolish'd Figures of Plaster of a Japan Color.
TAke a Syringe, at the end of which, make fast a thin Plate of Iron, in which
make little Holes of several sizes, then have Paste of all colors, not too
thick nor too thin, of which fill your Syringe, and by thrusting the Sucker,
force it through the Holes, thus will your several Pastes be formed in Threads,
which lay apart, and with your Thumb press them into the Mould till covered,
then fill it up with yellow Ocre, having before given a laying of Fish Glue.

The same another way.
Make a Paste of all sorts of Colors tempered with Gum Tragaganth, of each of
Pastes make a thin Cake with a Roleing-pin like the Lid of a Tart, lay one upon
another, being joined, place the Colors in order, then extend them again with
the Rouling-pin, then roll them up round as you would a quire of Paper, then
beginning at one end, cut in thin round slices, with which fill your Mould,
pressing it with your Thumb, and shutting it, cast in the Paste, dry it and
pollish with a Tooth.

CHAP. XV.
To make Medals of Fish-Glew.
TAke your Medal of Lead, Tin, or other Metal, oil it, then wipe it gently off
(not quite clean) with a linen Cloth, then having steeped the Fish-Glew in
water about three days, boil it to a degree thinner than Glue for Wood; make a
Circle of Clay about the Medal, pour on the Glue to the edge of the Circle,
laying a Paper over it to keep off the Dust, and leave it to dry; when it is so,
lift up the Medal by degrees, and you will find it hollow on one side, and
embossed on the other, more clear than the Horn of a Lanthorn; strain it before
you use it.

To color them.
Boil Brazil in Rainwater till it become strongly tinctured, divide it into
three parts, to one add a spoonful of Lie, to the other part a little
Limewater, with these you may make your Glue of three different colors; also
for Yellow take Saffron, for Green take Verdigreece beaten very fine and ground
with Water, stirring it well with a Stick; for Violet, Turnsole in Limewater,
of these you may fix several sorts on Cabinets and pieces of curious Work.

CHAP. XVI.
To mould off the Medals of Fish-Glow in Plaster, and to make Medals of Tin or
Lead.
HAving made your Medal of Fish-Glew, about the thickness of a Sixpence or
Shilling, lay it on a little Bed of Potters Earth, and with the Thumb press it
about the edges; that done, make a Circle of the same Earth, then cast the
Plaster mixed with Plume Alum, and tempered with Sal Ammoniac, ut dictum est
supra, being molded, turn the Plaster, oyling the edges and making a new
Circle about it, and casting the same Plaster upon it, you will have the Mould
of a Medal, of which one side will be hollow, the other embossed; being dry,
bake it thoroughly, ut supra, and cast your Lead or Tin to strengthen the Mould,
lay on both sides of it some Potters Earth, join it together, bind it with an
iron Wier and bake it, to make it fit to receive the Metal.

CHAP. XVII.
To make hollow Moulds of Sulphur, in which to cast Medals of Plaster very
neatly.
MAke the Medal very hot before the Fire, oil it with Linseed oil, make a
Circle of Potters Earth round about it, then have your Sulphur ready melted,
not too hot, but only that it begins to warm, as it were atop, pour it on as
gently as you can, least it blister and become knotty, and it is done.

To mould off Medals of Plaster in the hollow Moulds of Sulphur.
Take a short Brush, and rub the Sulphur Mould with Sallad Oil, dry it up
lightly, that it be not too Oily, then mix your Plaster about as thick as Pap,
and with a Brush sprinkle it nimbly on the Mould, and with your hand throw on
more of the same Plaster, pressing it with the Thumb into the hollow places of
the Mould, then with a Knife lay more on to what thickness you think fit; the
Plaster should (if not fine enough) be brayed in a Mortar with a wooden Pestle.

To print Paper upon the Sulphur Moulds.
Oil your Mould, then take Paper or Pasteboard well beaten and soaked in water
till it become a soft Pap, lay some of this on your Mould, upon that a Towel,
press it with your Thumb to get out the Water, if you find the Paper to lie
thick enough, press it with a Sponge till there remain no Water, and that the
Paper be entered into all the hollow places; being dry, rub over with a Dogs
Tooth to fix it in the finest Engraveings; you may strengthen your Mould with
Plaster on the back of it.

To make a Varnish to lay on the Figures or Medals of Plaster.
Take Soap of Alicant, which is white, scrape it in thin pieces, put it in a
glazed Pot with some Water, and with your Finger temper it by little and little
till it be all turned into Water, about the consistence of thick Milk, let it
settle about a week or more, covering it from the Dust, then with a soft short
Brush wash the Plaster, setting it at some distance from the Fire to dry by
degrees, being dry, rub it gently with a Cloth, setting it in a good Light, the
better to discern where to pollish; thus will your Plaster become bright as
Alablaster.

To make a Size to lay Leaf-Gold, or Silver, or Copper, or Tin, upon Figures of
Plaster, that will not sink into them.
Take Oil of Nuts, boil it with Lytharge till it become thick, then grind with
Water, White Lead and Yellow Ocre, each a like quantity very fine, when dry,
grind it with the same Oil, then lay it on with a Pencil pretty long, with a
stiff point, keeping it always covered in Oil, to preserve the point small and
plyant, and in laying on the Size, move your Pencil to and fro, to even the
Size; when dry enough to guild, lay on your Leaf-Gold or Silver with a pair of
wooden Pincers, or a piece of white Paper, cutting it on a Cushion according to
the manner of Gilders.

CHAP. XVIII.
A most exquisite way of casting all sorts of Figures.
TAke a pound of new Wax, a third of Colophony, melt them at a slow Fire, let
them cool so long as that you may endure some of it on your Hand without
burning it, then having oyled your Figure with Sallad Oil with a Brush, cover
it all over; if it be a living Face, cover the Hair of the Eyelids and
Eyebrows with Paste, as also the Beard, then with a Brush nimbly cover the
Face about the thickness of a Half-crown, being careful not to stop the
Nostrils, and that the Person squeeze not his Eyes together, which will render
the Face deformed; thus having your Face of Wax, take it gently off, then
strengthen it with Clay on the backside, that in pouring in the Plaster it may
not give way. Thus may you cast all sorts of Faces, Laughing, Weeping, Grimaces
or Wry Faces, also Feet, Hands, Fruit, Fish, or any thing else, dividing the
Mould into two pieces with a warm Knife, then join them and fortify them with
Potters Earth, than this, no way of casting is neater; I have often taken thus
living Faces, and with a small Gouge opening the Eyes afterward, all which you
may color to the Lise; this way of casting is very fit for Painters, Engravers
and Carvers to cast patterns.

CHAP. XIX.
To Figure or inlay with Figures any thing that is made of Wood.
THis is done with Mother of Pearl, by breaking the Shells, and cutting them
according to the Figures you design, inlaying them after you have with Gouges
cut your Wood; thus may you imitate all sorts of Fruits, for you will find some
Purple, others Blew, Green, Yellow, so that if you would imitate a black Grape,
the Leaf of a Tree, or other Fruit, you have a suitable Color; make a small
hole through every piece, pinning it with a small piece of Silver Wier to make
it stick fast, then take Linseed Oil and Orcanet, rub it well, and wipe off the
Oil clean, when dry, varnish it with the drying Varnish hereafter mentioned,
also (not oyling it) you may make very fine compartiment Work in fine Threads
that will look like Silver, thus make a Set of small Gonges of all sorts very
sharp, with these having cut your design, take Tin, melt it, adding to it as
much Quicksilver; stir it with a Stick, being cold, put it in the palm of your
hand; if it be too soft, add a little more Tin; grind this Composition with
water upon a Marble, put it into a Shell, and keep this Composition to fill up
the Engravings or Cuttings which you have made with your Gonges; when you have
left it two or three hours to dry, pollish it with your hand and it will look
like Silver. By adding more Quicksilver, you make a thinner Composition, which
with your Thumb you may rub into the Work you have cut till it be as bright as
Silver; instead of Tin you may mix Leaf-Silver with the Quicksilver, which
will add to the beauty of your Work. This is commonly practiced upon black and
colored Wood, pollishing them with a Tooth.

If you would have the Composition more beautiful, grind Tin-Glass, and wash it
till it leaves the Water clear, then mix it in a Shell with some Gum, and with
a Pencil fill up the Engravings; after three or four hours drying, quicken it
with the Conposition of Mercury and Leaf-silver.

CHAP. XX.
To make Wood of diverse Colors.
For the Red.
TAke Fernebourge half a pound, or what other you think fit, Rainwater, a
handful of Quicklime, two handfuls of Ashes; when these have steeped half an
hour in the water and settled at the bottom, take a new earthen Pot, put in the
Fernebourge with the Lee made of Lime and Ashes, having steeped half an hour,
boil it and let it cool a little, then pour it into another new Pot, adding
half an ounce of Gum Arabic; take another Pot or Pan, put in some Rainwater
and a piece of Alum, make it boil, soak your Wood in this Alum Water, take it
out and dry it, then warm your Red Color, and with a Brush rub it as long as
you think fit, dry it, and with a Cows or Dogs Tooth, pollish it, and it will
be shining and red as Scarlet.

Another excellent Red.
Boil Brazil in Rain Water till it be fully colored, strain it through a
Cloth, take heed no Iron either touch it nor come near it, then give one laying
of Saffron steeped in water upon your Wood; being thus of a pale Yellow, and
dry, give it several layings of the Brazil Water, till you like the Color,
when dry, burnish it with a Tooth, and varnish it with drying Varnish with the
Palm of the Hand, and you will have a beautiful Red inclinable to Orange; if
you put a spoonful of Lee amongst the Brazil, it will make the Red deeper, or
boil it with a little Alum, but the yellowing it improves the Color, and by
how much the Wood is whiter, by so much the more beautiful will the Color be.

Another Red.
Temper Brazil in Oil of Tartar, with which rub over the Wood and it will
become of an excellent Red.

To make a Violet Color for Wood.
Take Dutch Turnsole, temper it in water, and strain it through a Cloth, before
you use it on your Work, try it on a little piece of white Wood, to see if it
be not too deep, for it is better to lay it on clear than deep; having laid on
the Color, put some of the same Color to a quantity of water, to make it very
thin, and with this wash it till it become bright; dry, burnish, and varnish
it, and if the Wood were white, you will have an admirable Blew.

To make a Purple upon Wood.
Having your Turnsole steeped as above, add to it the Tincture of Brazil boiled
in Limewater, and it will be an excellent Purple; these Colors ought to be
varnished, as well to beautify as to preserve them.

To imitate Inlaying or Marble upon Wood.
Beat the Yolk of an Egg with water till it be thin enough to write with, take
a Pencil, and with the Yolk vein the Wood according to your Fancy; being dry,
some slake Lime in Urine till it become thick like Mud; with a Brush lay this
on the Wood, when dry, clean it with a Rubbing-Brush, rub with a clean Cloth,
burnish and varnish it, and you will have a very pleasant piece of Work.

To make all sorts of Vessels, as Flower-Pots or Dishes, to imitate very neatly
fine Porcelain or China ware.
Turn your Vessels according to the Fashi^ (...) the true China, it is no matter
what (...) except Beech, first glue it and whiten it with Whiting, and glue
very smoothly three or four times, make it more smooth with a wet linen Cloth;
last of all pollish it with dried Rushes, then give two layings of Cerus with
Oil of Turpentine and white Varnish, then with a Knife mix upon a Pallet a
little Blew Ammel with Cerus, till the Color become only a little bluish; the
Cerus and the Ammel must be ground very fine with water, and left to dry: when
this last laying of Bluish White is laid on with Varnish and dried, design
your Figures upon it with very fine blew Ammel spread on the Pallet with Oil of
Turpentine; in laying on this Blew, moisten the end of the Pencil in Varnish to
mingle with the Blew, taking care that the Ammel grow not hard in mixing, and
by that means trouble some to lay on; when dry, if you find occasion, you may
with the point of the Pencil touch it over again.

Another way of Staining or Marbling Wood.
Grind White-Lead and Chalk together on a Marble, put it in a Pot, and temper
it again with the Yolk of an Egg beaten with water, then with a large Pencil
lay on this White, when dry, repeat it, that being dry, take a Point made of
Stags-Horn, draw off the white, where, and in what Form you will, then sprinkle
the Lime mixed with Urine, the Violet Wood which Dyers use, will become black as
Ebony, by sprinkling the Lime and Urine, Plum-Tree, and Cherry-Tree turn of a
deep Red, the Pear Tree and Service-Tree turn Reddish, Wallnut-Tree grows black
by mingling some Galls in Powder with the Lime and Urine.

A Pencil made of Mutton Suet rubbed in those places where you would draw with
Yolks of Eggs, will do the same thing. 'Twill be excellent upon
Black-Cherry-Tree, or Plum-Tree, or any Wood of a dark Color.

To counterfeit Ebony.
The most solid Wood and freest from Veins is best, such as Pear Tree,
Apple Tree and Service-Tree; black well either of these; when dry, rub it with
a Cloth, then make a little Brush of Rushes tied near the ends, melt some Wax
in a Pot, mixing with it some Lamp-black, then with the Brush throw on some of
the Wax, brushing it till it shine like Ebony, then rub it with a Cloth and
some of the black Wax; the Wood should be well pollisht and rusht before you do
it.

To counterfeit Ebony, Holly is the best of all Woods, which you must put into
a Hat-makers Furnace where he dies his Hats; when you find it by cutting, to be
struck in about the thickness of a Sixpence, take it out and dry it in the
Shade, that it may the better drink up the Dye-Water, then pollish it with an
Iron to take off the foulness of the Dye; then with Rush and Powder of Charcoal
and Sallad Oil, as is done to Ebony; the Wood of Tunis pollishes easily, it
also burnishes well with a Tooth, and is better to cut than Ebony, which is
very brittle.

A pollisht Black.
Grind Lamp-Black with Gum-Water, and with a Pencil cover the Wood; when dry,
pollish with a Tooth, 'twill look very well.

Another black Dye for Wood.
Put into good Ink little pieces of Iron very rusty, leaving it so some days;
then rub the Wood, which 'twill penetrate, pollish with a Tooth, and 'twill be
very beautiful.

To make Wood of ^ Silver Color.
Beat Tin-glass in a Mortar to fine Powder; then put some Water to it, grinding
it to the fineness of Paint, or grind it on a Marble; then put it into an
earthen Pan, washing it two or three times till it be very clean, mix it with
clear Glue, and lay it upon the Wood, being first warmed, lay it on the Wood
with a Pencil, when dry, pollish with a Tooth.

To make Wood of the Color of Gold, Silver, Copper or Brass.
Take Rock-Cristal, beat it very fine in a Mortar, then grind it on a Marble
with clean Water; then put it in an earthen Pot with a little Glue, warm it and
lay it on; when dry, lay it on as above, rub it with Gold, Silver or Copper,
and 'twill be of the same Color you rub it with, then pollish.

To lay on Pencil-Gold or Silver on Wood.
Temper the Gold or Silver with weak Gum-Tragaganth-Water very clear, with a
Pencil lay it on the Lights of your Work, without touching the Shadows, which
must be made with Indico ground with a very weak Gum-Arabick Water, then
varnish it with drying Varnish made of Spike-Oyl and Gum Sandrac; if it be too
thick, add some Oil, in making it, let it not have a greater heat than may be
endured by the Hands; black Wood or Wood so dyed is most proper to gild.

For Silver upon Wood.
First glue your Wood over with Parchment Glue, when dry, figure it as you
think fit, as before mentioned; shadow and finish with Water in which Tallow
has been boiled, heighten with Silver (as in the Chapter for Gold) and varnish
it.

A Red Color for Wood.
Take Orchanet beaten in Powder, mix it with Oil of Nuts, make it lukewarm and
rub the Wood.

A Yellow Color
Is made with French Berries and Alum, also with Turmerick or Saffron, also
with Merita Earth; Yellow in most cases is an easy Color.

A Violet Color.
Take four ounces of Brazil, and half a pound of Logwood, boil these together
in two quarts of Water, adding an ounce of common Alum; in this boil the Wood.

An excellent Blew.
Take four ounces of Turnsole, boil it an hour in three pints of Limewater and
paint your Wood.

To make Bronze or Powder of the Color of Gold.
Take Gum Elemi twelve Darchms, melt it, then crude Mercury one ounce, Sal
Ammoniac two ounces, put all in a Glass Viol with Bole and Whites of Eggs, make
all melt, when melted add Orpiment at discretion, with some Filings of Brass;
being well mingled together, lay it with a Pencil on that which you would
bronze.

CHAP. XXI.
Diverse ways of Beautifying things made of Wood, Stone, Plaster, baked Earth
or Pasteboard; also to work in Gold or Silver burnisht, or in Oil, with all
sorts of Colors, as well Bronze as others, and to Stain and Varnish Boards of
several sorts.
For Burnish't Gold.
MAke Glue of the cuttings of white Leather or Vellum, which wash and boil till
it comes to a good thickness, strain it through a Cloth, take of this Glue, and
add to it a third part of Water; boil it, and while it is hot, strike over your
Wood, being clean, with a Brush; do this three times, each Course being first
dry; last of all, give one laying of only Glue, without Water, then take
Whiting, grind or mix it in fair Water; let it be thick enough, then take your
Glue, in which throw your Whiting, stirring it with a Stick till it is cold,
taking especial care that it be neither too strong nor too weak, being that on
which the whole Work depends; take a little off in a Pot, to which pour a
little of the weak Glue, warm it a little at the Fire, that it be almost as
clear as Glue alone; give a laying or two of this White upon your Work, leaving
them to dry one after another, then give a laying of White a little thicker,
taking care it be not too hot, which will occasion little holes or blisters;
use it therefore when it is but just melted, laying it gently and smoothly on,
working nimbly with the end of the Brush to stop the holes if any should
happen; you may give from four to eight layings on, as you find cause; be sure
the Whiting be not too thick, for if you guild carved or embossed Work, you will
hide all the fine Work of your Figure.

Being dry, repair it with Fish-skin, then rush it; lastly, smooth it with a
wet fine linen Cloth; observe that the more even you make it, and the freer it
is from little holes or knots, the more beautiful will the Gold be, for the
least defect in the White, will be a great fault when gilt.

The Size to lay on the Gold.
Take Sanguine or Burnishing-Stone, the reddest is the best, grind it on a
Marble with fair Water, and to the quantity of a Pencil as big and as long as a
Finger; add about half the Yelk of an Egg, which you must grind with it, adding
the quantity of a great Pea of white Soap, then put your Color in some Pot,
adding a convenient quantity of Water, till it become about the thickness of
Milk a little curdled, for it must not be laid too thick.

How to lay this Size on.
Make trial upon a piece of Board covered with the white Ground; when the Size
is laid on, and that it is dry, rub it with a linen Cloth, if the Color stick
to it, and leaves behind it upon your Work only the Flower of the Color of
your Size, then it is good; but if you find it sticks not at all to the Cloth,
put a little more Water to it, because there was too much Yolk of Egg; if then
in rubbing it, your Cloth take off all the Color from the White, then add a
little more Yolk, mixing them all well together, make another trial, and
finding it in fit temper, cover your Work, and leave it to dry; when you would
lay on the Gold, wet the place first with a large Pencil, letting a drop or two
run between the Leaf-Gold and the Size, leaving your Work accordingly, that it
may run, then leave it to dry, before you burnish the whole; try upon a corner,
if it peal not, you may go on; when burnisht, rub it with a Cloth; if any
chance not to stick, dissolve a very little of your Vellom Glue in a little
Water, by warming it, touch the place and it is done, taking care that no greazy
Cloth or Hands do touch your Gold.

Another more easy Size for Gold or Silver.
Take yellow Ocre of Berry, (English is as good) provided it be not stony or
sandy, wrap it in a linen Cloth, tie it with a Thread, and burn it in a red
hot Fire till from Yellow it become of a red. Color, the Fire having thoroughly
penetrated all parts of it, having also a care it be not too sharp a Fire, then
grind it well, and make it of a sufficient thickness; if it be hard to burnish,
add a little of the Yolk of an Egg, and a very little white Soap, and grind
them together.

To Gild a Carved or Embolish'd Figure, so that none of the finer Strokes of
the Work may be lost.
Having with boiling Glue washed over your Figure, give it three or four Courses
of Whiting very even; being dry, mix your Size as before directed and lay it
on; being dry, burnish it, then take Shell-Gold or Silver, tempered with weak
Gum-Tragaganth Water, or Arabic, cover your Work with it, and burnish with a
Tooth. Note that you may lay on Gold or Silver with one course of Whiting, if
it be Pencil Gold or Silver.

To Silver any thing over with Tin-Glass.
Grind Tin-Glass very fine, wash it till it leave the Water clean, mix it with
the aforesaid Glue and use it; when dry, burnish; this may be used without the
aforesaid Size, only laying it on the white Ground, and your Work will appear
like Silver.

Wash well your Tin-Glass, glue it well, burnish the white Grounds before you
lay on the Tin-Glass, and afterward with a Paper between the Tooth and the
Tin-Glass.

To Bronze with Copper.
Take Pin-dust, grind it well, and wash it till the Water be quite clear; mix
it with Glue as the Tin-glass, lay it on the white Ground with a Pencil and
burnish; the same may be done with Antimony.

Another excellent way to Silver Figures.
Take Silver in Froth or Scum, which the Refiners use to separate from Gold, in
washing the sweep of Goldsmiths; grind this Silver, gum it a little and lay it
on your Figure; burnish it, and you will find your embossed Figure well silvered,
being laid on a white Ground, and the Size used for burnisht Gold 'twill be
very fine, appearing like Massy Silver.

To grind Gold to lay on Figures.
Reduce a piece of gold into small File-dust, grind it on a marble; when
thoroughly ground, wash it in a shell, till the water be clear, then with glue
or gum lay it on the size as you did burnisht gold. You may also melt gold with
quicksilver, evaporate the Mercury by increasing the heat, when cold beat it
in a mortar, then grind it and lay upon the size as as you did the burnisht
gold, then burnish it.

How to Bronze.
Your figure being whited and made smooth grind Cristal and Touchstone with
water, temper it with glue and lay it on your work instead of burnishing, rub
the metal of which color you would have your figure, rub it well, and the
invention will be very neat.

CHAP. XXII.
To discover Gold under a black Color with an Ivory Point, a great Secret, and
as beautiful as those things gilt in China.
HAving well burnisht your Gold without fault, grind Lamb-black with Linseed
Oil or Oil of Nuts, adding as much Umber as Black to make it dry; then as much
Spike-Oyl as Linseed Oil; make trial with one Leaf of Gold burnisht; lay the
Black upon the Gold very smooth and even, then dry about a day, more or less
according to the time; if dry enough, 'twill not stick to your Fingers; then
take a Point of Ivory or Stags-Horn well sharpened, rub it on a piece of Glass
to take off the ruffness, that it scratch not the Gold or the White; then draw
what you please with the Point, discovering the Gold; if it appear bright and
shining, and that the Black be not uneven and slovenly about the edges of the
Strokes you have made, then is your Black in good temper, but if in discovering
the Gold it seem tarnish't, your Black is not dry enough; if the Black be
troublesome to get off, and cannot be easily done with an unslit Pen, then mix
Spike-Oyl till it comes to work easily, clean and bright; then may you easily
draw the finest hair Strokes: your Black thus made, cover your burnish't Gold
all over with a soft Pencil, then with the Feather of a Turkey Cocks Tail, paste
over the Black as even and smooth as you can, free from all manner of Dust or
Filth; being dry, and having made your Draught or Figure as large as the Work,
follow the Tract of the Line with the Point, and discover or lay open the Gold.

If you would have the Figures of Birds or little Beasts, or whatsoever else,
find out the strong Lights of them, discover them by hatching with a Pen, or
the point of a Pin, if not too sharp, but if by the Strokes approaching too
near each other, you make a Fault, you may mend it by laying on a little Black,
letting it dry; if the way of making great Lights be not profitable, or that
Shadows are more easy and pleasing to you, discover the Gold with a point of
soft Wood, that it may not scratch the Gold, which you must discover or lay
open to the bigness of your whole Figure, shadowing the proper places, as the
Nose, Eyes, Hair, etc. leaving it to dry; then hatch it with a point according
to the Judgment of him that draws it; to know when it is dry enough to hatch,
always at the same time you cover your Work, cover a little waste piece for
trials, to prevent the spoiling your Work; being finished, leave it three or
four days to dry, and varnish it with drying Varnish twice, if you see cause;
when you lay on the Black, do but one piece at a time, because some, by being
too dry, will be troublesome to discover the Gold; take care also that in the
first laying on of the Varnish, that you spread it gently, for fear of defacing.

For the same after a more easy manner.
Your Work being covered with burnisht Gold or Silver (it matters not which)
mix and grind Lamp-black and Umber together very well with Water, taking care
you put not so much Umber as to destroy the Black; then add some of the Yolk of
an Egg, which grind with it, and lay it on your Work with a soft Pencil or
Brush very smooth, when dry (if you find cause) give a second laying of the
same Black, and with an Ivory Point very smooth, discover your Work; if the
Black come not easily off, then there was too little of the Yolk; if the
Strokes be too broad and ragged, then there was too much Yolk of Egg; this way
of discovering the Gold, is more shining than the other, but be sure to be
careful that in varnishing, you pull not off the Black, nor cause it to fully,
to that end, be sure to work with a soft Pencil and smooth Stroke; you need not
much fear the laying on the Varnish the second time, provided it be not too
thick, and that it be Oil of Spike Varnish.

To do the same another way.
Having laid your Black on the burnisht Gold, as aforesaid, mix equal parts of
Linseed Oil, and Oil of Spike, which lay lightly on with a large Pencil, let it
dry four or five days, more or less, according as you find the Gold more or
less easy to appear bright and shining; by this way you may allow almost what
time you will, always remembering to make a trial before you fall to work; for
Blew, take Azure; for Red, fine Lake; for Green, Verdigreece; and so in all
other Colors, being mixed and ground with the Yolk of an Egg, as before
directed.

CHAP. XXIII.
An exquisite way of enriching and beautifying all sorts of wooden Work.
COver your Work with hot Glue, then with the aforesaid Mixture of Glue and
Whiting; upon this, lay the Size for burnisht Gold, and lay on the Gold or
Silver and burnish; then take right Indico, grind it with Water and Yolk of an
Egg; being very thin and clear, lay it on the Silver, so as the Silver may
appear through it; being dry, pounce your Pattern of Paper, being whitened with
Chalk, then with the same Indico draw over the pounced Strokes of your Figure
as neatly as you can, so as if you were to draw a Figure with a Pen upon a
piece of Paper; then with the same Indico made thinner, make the necessary
Shadows, after that, with Umber, then heighten with a wooden Point, by hatching
the Lights, then varnish the Work, which will seem enameled.

For the same another way, but a more glorious Color.
Instead of Indico, steep Dutch Turnsole, a day or two in Water, strain it
through a Cloth from the Dregs, grind and mix this Water with some Yolk of an
Egg; lay this on your Silver, then with Turnsole ground with Turnsole-Water,
draw with a Pencil what Lines or Figures you think fit, which you may shadow
and hatch in the proper places, which heighten in discovering the Silver, as
before directed, then varnish. To make a Purple Ground, boil Brazil in
Limewater, and mix with Turnsole-Water.

This will not last so well as that done with Indico, because the Turnsole in
time is apt to turn red, and will stain the Silver; therefore before you
varnish, lay upon it the White of an Egg beaten into Glair, which will make it
much more durable, and wonderfully beautiful.

CHAP. XXIV.
To enrich carved Work, as Pictures, Frames, and all other sorts of wooden Work.
HAving your Work covered with burnisht Silver, take Glue of Vellum or
Parchment boiled to a thick Jelly, strain it through a Cloth; when settled,
strain it again, then with this Glue give one laying upon your Work with a soft
Brush; if that be not enough, give a second, then varnish it, but before you
varnish, if you think fit, you may paint in Oil or Water, color Flowers,
Fruits, Leaves or Birds in their proper Colors, and varnish them, having first
laid them over with Glue. Note, you may mix with your Glue either Milk or Soap
of Alicant.

How to embellish a Frame with green Leaves.
Take Indico, a little Orpiment ground with Water, inclining toward a greenish
Brown, mixing with about half a pint of your Color, the quantity of a Muscle
Shell of the Yolk of Eggs, and as much Size as is requisite to make it stick.
Having first laid on your White in the same manner as if you were to gild it
with burnisht Gold, you shall then paint the Freezes of your Frame with this
brown Color, leaving untoucht the Mouldings, which you shall have before gilt
with burnisht Gold: Your Work being thus prepared, you shall either by pouncing
or otherwise, draw what ever you please; then with Indico alone, ground with
Water, a little Size, and a drop of the Yolk of Egg, you shall draw your
Figures or Leaves, which you shall shadow, and in shadowing, sweeten,
heightning them with Green. viz. You shall take Orpiment well ground with the
greenish Brown, wherewith you laid the first Layer upon your Frame; then
heighten it with Orpiment alone, ground with Water and Size, and a little drop
of the Yolk of Egg amongst your Colors, because it would dry in burnishing,
for the Yolk of Egg serves only to burnish the easier; of which things you may
make an experiment. But if you desire to paint your Leaves in Oil, you shall
burnish the first Layer of greenish Brown; then you shall paint your Leaves
with drying Oil boiled with Litharge of Gold; but instead of Orpiment, you may
if you will, work with Masticat.

How to beautify with Yellow, making it Wainscot Color.
Having laid your Frame with White, as you are told, take Yellow Oker of Berry,
or smooth English Oker, which you shall grind exactly with Water, putting
thereto a little Yolk of Egg; then put Size to your Color, and having mixed it
all well upon the Marble, you shall therewith paint your Frame; being dry, you
shall draw and shadow with a little of the black Hematite, wherewith Cutlers
sanguine their Hilts, ground with Water, and a drop or two of Yolk of Egg; then
mix Size to make the Color, wherewith you are to shadow, stick, and for the
shadow, observe to take Umber, or Moss, or else Lamp-black Water; then heighten
it with Oker and Chalk mixed together with a little Yolk of Egg, whereof you
shall make trial before you lay on your Colors; then burnish it with a Dogs
Tooth. If you desire to varnish it, you shall give it a Layer of Size, before
you lay on your Varnish, and if you will, you may paint your Figures and Leaves
in Oil, varnishing the Figures without varnishing the Ground.

Another way upon Black, discovering the White with an Iron Pencil.
Having well covered your Frame with White, well polished and rusht, take
Lampblack, and having ground it with Yolk of Egg, make trial thereof a part, to
see whether the Black, when fixed, will burnish very bright: you shall size your
Black, as much as is necessary, to make it stick. With this Black you shall
color your Frame, and being well laid on, and dry, you shall burnish it with
your Tooth. Then taking an Awl or Bodkin of Iron sharpened and flatted at the
end like a little Chisel, of such breadth as you desire your Fillet to be; you
shall with your Ruler, and this Iron thus sharpened, draw Fillets, scraping off
the Black till you come to the White; you may also, if you will, with a Bodkin,
make Moresk Works, which you may hatch into every Leaf; as also other branched
Works, the Imbossment wereof, you may hatch by scraping off with your Iron or
Bodkin the Black, till such time as the White be seen, still keeping your Iron
sharp and smooth. Hereby your Work will be of a fine Black, well burnisht or
polisht like Marble, wherein you will have branched Works, which will seem like
Ivory or Hartshorn, inlaid in the Wood. If your Figures appear too much
shadowed; after you have drawn out all your Work with a Bodkin, take one, or
more Irons like a Folding-Stick, or yet blunter, as you shall see convenient,
with which Iron, well smoothed and hardened, you shall the most evenly you can,
rub your Figures, till there no longer appears any Black, not letting your Iron
enter any farther than the Superficies of the White; that is, when the Black
shall be rubbed off, and the Figure shall appear very white and smooth,; then
shall you burnish with your Tooth, the White you have discovered, afterward
with a little Pencil you shall draw the Lines, and hatch the Shade, as if it
were Horn engraven or carved.

How to make upon an open White Ground, Fillets, Branched Works, or Figures
with Black.
You shall lay your Frame or other Work with boiling Size, as has been said
when we speak of laying upon White, to Gild with burnisht Gold: Having sized
it, take Lamp-black well ground with Water, then size it as the White, and go
over your Work therewith five or six times, then rush it, then take off the
same White, amongst which you shall grind as much Yolk of Egg, as may make the
White polish, and with this White go once or twice over your Work; when it is
very dry, burnish your White with the Tooth, then with your Iron draw upon the
White Fillets, branched Works, or Portraits, according to your Fancy, till the
Black appears, The Freezes of your Frame will seem to be of Ivory, and your
Black will seem to have been engraved, or like pieces of Ebony inlaid upon
Ivory. But to make it the better resemble Ivory, you shall have by you a little
piece of polisht Ivory, the better to represent its Color, which is not so
white as Chalk; but a little inclining to Yellow: And this you may imitate by
grinding with your Chalk a little yellow Oker, or a little pale Masticot, or
the Bones of Sheeps Trotters burnt and ground to Powder.

Another way representing Enammel.
Having gone over your Work seven or eight times with White, and polisht it
with Rushes, you shall go over it once or twice with Lamp-black mixed with a
little Yolk of Egg, and pretty store of Saffron, all well ground together with
Water, putting thereto as much Size as is necessary to make it stick; but have
a care of putting too much, and make a Trial, to see whether the Black, when
burnisht, shine like unto polisht Marble, from which this Black does no way
differ, provided the Yolk of Egg be put exactly in such quantity as is fit;
because if there be too much, it will not polish bright, and will in time lose
its polishing. Your Work being thus well laid, and polished with the Tooth
longways and overthwart, draw by pouncing such Figures as you please; this
done, take off your Black, mixed with a little White, to render it somewhat
Gray, and with your Pencil draw out the Proportion or Lines of your Work, which
must be done to hinder your Oil Color from separating upon your black Ground;
then draw with White-Lead in Oil, such Figures as you please, which shadow
according to Art with White and Black as sweetly and neatly as you possibly
can, putting some Azure amongst your Black, to the end your shadowing may bear
a little upon the Blew. Let your White and Black be ground with drying fat Oil,
that it may not sink into your Work, but may shine as if it were varnisht: But
if your White and Black shine not enough, you may varnish them with drying
Varnish, which you shall lay only upon the Figures with the point of the
Pencil, if you will here and there lay on some shell Gold, you may do it with
the Pencil, but Gum your Gold very little, that you may burnish it afterward,
if you will; because the Gold in this sort of Work, is laid on only in little
Lines, on the Ground of small branched Works, and take heed, that on the
Figures made of White and Black, there be no Gold (...) laid, till the White
and Black begin to dry, after the manner of Gold Color, and it will easily
take and hold, if you lay it on at such time as your White is neither too wet
nor too dry; you shall do the like upon the Varnish, if it be necessary, and
your Work will not differ from the Enamels of Limoges, in the Ground whereof,
you may see your self, as in polisht Marble, which is a thing wherewith you may
adorn a Closet.

How to draw Figures with Shell Gold upon a black Ground.
You may with Shell Gold or Silver make Grotesk Work, branched Works, or
Figures upon the Wood thus blackened, as aforesaid, always heightning the Work,
and shadowing it, as I have taught you. In this manner the Gold may be
burnished with the Dogs Tooth, especially if it be Grotesk, and other branched
Works, which are not liable to be shadowed; so that having the Freez of a
Picture Frame covered first with White, and then blackned and well burnisht,
drawing thereon Moresk Works with Shell-Gold or Silver, your Gold being thick
enough, and afterward burnishing it with your Dogs Tooth, your Work will
appear very agreeable, provided you work neatly.

How to lay Gold in Oil upon blackned Frames, where the Gold appears very fair,
and the Black very shining, without being varnished.
Your Work being laid with White, blackned and burnished, as aforesaid, take
Gold Color, and with your Pencil, which must be very long and fine, paint what
you intend to gild, lackring with your Gold-Colour what you will, be it the
Proportion of a Leaf, which you may afterward, if you please, hatch with your
Pencil; being dry, as it ought, lay on your Gold the most exactly you can; then
with a Feather brush off the Gold which does not stick. By this means you shall
have branched Works, or Moresk Works very complete, for as much as the Gold
will not stick on the Ground which has been burnished; but your Gold Color
must be very good, else you will not attain your Design. Now if you will
represent Birds, or Figures, you may lay them with your Pencil; then being
gilt, draw them with a Pencil of Black in Oil, and hatch the Shadows with the
Pencil as neatly as is possible. There are made Frames hatched in this manner,
which seem to be of Copper, gilt and engraven. But remember to hatch the
Shadows upon the Figures.

To make Frames, the Freezes whereof, shall on a Ground of burnisht Black be
filled with Flowers, either in Watercolors, or Oil.
Having your Frame, or other Work prepared with White, blackned and burnished,
you shall Gild with burnished Gold, or Gold in Oil, the Mouldings; then paint
upon your Freeze Flowers in Watercolors, after the manner of Limning. For to
make them well, having drawn your Design upon the Freeze or Frame of your
Picture, either by pouncing, or otherwise, with Black-Lead, you shall lay on
White mixed with Size, wherewith you shall draw the Platform of the Figures,
Flowers, or branched ^rks, which you desire to paint in Colors, then paint
thereon whatever you please. But if you will paint the Figures and Flowers in
Oil, you shall first lay it with White-Lead in Oil, then being dry, lay your
Colors in Oil thereon. You may paint Flowers upon a white Ground, the White
being well rusht and smooth, lay on your Watercolors after the manner of
Limning.

Upon a Ground of burnisht Gold, or Gold in Oil, to paint Flowers.
You shall gild your Frame with burnisht Gold, being well gilt and burnisht,
paint Flowers or Fruits upon the Freez of your Frame, with fine Colors in Oil
or Water. You may gild with Gold in Oil, and paint thereon.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to lay Leaf Gold on earthen Vessels, enamelled with white or blew Enamel:
Which are Works of long continuance, and seem to be rather of Gold enamelled,
than of Earth enamelled.
TAke a Vessel well enamelled, either with White or Blew, or any other Color;
then take Gold-colour well ground, and very fat, that the enamelled Earth may
not drink it up, and lay on your Foliage with the Pencil; the Size must be laid
on, as you are taught in the Chapter of laying Gold in Oil upon a black Ground.
Your Vessel being thus gilt, the Figures being well drawn, according to the
Pattern, and shadowed with Black, and very neatly stained, you will see a
Vessel upon a Ground of Azure Enamel pondered with Grotesk Work, Foliage and
Figures laid in Gold. But if you desire in some parts of your Work to represent
Brooches, you shall make Ovals and Squares, wherein you shall paint with Black
and White in Oil, what you desire to represent, your Oil being fat, to the end
they may not sink in, or varnish them apart.

CHAP. XXVII.
To Color Wood after the manner of Marble, as a Table, etc.
LAy seven or eight Layers of White, as it were to gild with burnisht Gold,
then grind Black, which is not over much sized, adding thereto a little Yolk of
Egg, and a little Saffron; having laid it on, let it dry, and then burnish it
exactly: By this means, you may counterfeit to the Life, all sorts of Marble;
having a little experience in Colors, and make also all sorts of Works, as
Frettized Work, Flat Work, Ovals, etc. Let there be in the Colors a little
Yolk of Egg and Saffron, that is, in such as can bear it, coloring the Marble
with diverse colors; the Colors must be laid on clear like Threads: you may
also on a Ground whited, as I have said, pour out a Shell full of Color in one
place, then turning it shelving on one side, cause the Colors to run, which
will make Veins, then take another shell full of another Color, and do the
like, so continuing with all your Colors; or else with a gross Brush, lay all
your Colors very clear one near another. This depends on him that works. After
your Colors are dry, you may make use of the Pencil to repair the Defects:
then burnish your Work, which will not be subject to dust or spoiling.

To Color a Frame with a fine speckled Red.
Grind Vermilion with Water, then size it, and grind it with a drop or two of
Yolk of Egg, with this Color speckle the Wood of your Frame with a Pencil, and
your Work being dry, take Lake ground with Water, and a little Size, two drops
of Yolk of Egg, wherewith you shall spot with the end of the Brush, and let
there remain as much White as you shall lay on Red, then burnish it with the
Tooth, and gild the Mouldings with burnish Gold.

CHAP. XXVIII.
To beautify Frames of Works, made of thick Paper, or Lead, Gilt.
TAke a Plate of Steel, polisht and burnisht, which cover with that Orange
Tawny Mineral, called by the French, Mine de Plomb, ground with Linseed Oil and
Looking-glass Tin, so that drawing with an Ivory Bodkin upon the Painting, the
Lines may be neat. Draw what you please, then harden the Painting, till it
become of a tawny Color. Afterward take Aqua fortis, wherewith you shall
besprinkle your Plate, letting it lie an hour or two, as shall be taught in the
Chapter of engraving upon Steel with Aqua fortis. Your Plate being graven and
cleansed, take a Paper as large as your Plate, and lay it upon the said Plate,
then put thereon a piece of Pastboard, such wherewith Bookbinders cover their
Books, which you shall adjust upon your first Paper, so that it may be printed.
You may do the same with Lead beaten thin. Your Paper being well printed, glue
it upon your Frame, then gild it with Gold in Oil, and make the Field with Lake
ground in Oil, or other color. You may stick on your Prints of Lead with
Mastick, and nail them with little Nails.

To make Moulds of Lead to print Cotton.
Put upon the Work, whereof you desire to have the Hollow, Potters Clay, and
make a Circle round your Work, and then put Plaster upon your Potters Clay
till it be covered a Thumbs depth; then take up your Mould, wherein you shall
make a Git-hole, and let it dry at leisure, bind your Mould with nealed Wire,
then harden with a Gentle Fire, letting it afterward cool leisurly, lest it
crack. Being hardened, and a little warm, set it in Sand, then cast your molten
Lead therein. If this Chapter be not intelligible enough, return to that of
Moulds. If you mix a little Brick and Stone Alum with your Plaster, it will
mould the neater.

CHAP. XXIX.
To make embossed Figures, whether great or little Images, which may be easily
done, and is very fine.
FIrst you must make Sticks of the bigness of every Limb, as from the foot to
the Knee, or of the Arm to the Eldow, and so of the rest, and make therein
Joints, to fasten them together,, and make them bend at your pleasure. This
done, put a stick cross the Hanches, to which you shall fasten the Sticks, that
represent the Thighs: then take Cloth, which you shall make into Breeches, and
stuff them either with Leather, Tow, Flocks, or whatever else you will,
wherewith you shall Cloth your Sticks set together, in form of an Antic. You
must put on your Breeches before you stuff them, then put your Figure in such
posture as you will; afterward make your Garments be cut and sowed by a
Tailor, and moisten them with very strong Glue of Leather; then put your
Garment on your Poppet in such posture as you desire; order it so, that bending
your Image, you fold also your Garment, for so your Fold will be much more
natural; if you see they do not of themselves fold according to the Order of
Drapery, fold them with your Fingers till they be according to your mind; then
let them dry, so that the Glue of the Garments may be stiff. If you would have
your Drapery spread clear, tie it with Packthread, and hang it up, and so it
will take what Fold you will, then having afterward put it in the Posture you
will have it, give it several layers of White; after which, you shall put on
the Head, Feet, and Hands, which will be better of Plaster than Paper; the
Parts, you will have naked, must be placed before your Puppet is clad; if it be
a Woman's Bosom, let it be of Paper cast in a Mould. Thus will you have a
Figure, which will represent to the Life Sculpture it self.

CHAP. XXX.
To stuff Embossed Figures.
FOr the Draperies, the best manner that can be, is to make a Mould of
Pear Tree of the bigness of a Leaf of Tin, and to do this, you shall pourtray
upon your Board, Foliages or Moresk Work, which you shall draw; then cause the
said Board to be cut by a Joyner, with his Instruments, viz. let him cut in the
Foliage the thickness of a Whipcord, leaving the Ground elevated above the
Figures; have Leaves of Tin somewhat strong, and beaten on purpose; paint the
said Tin all over with Gold-colour, then being dry, as is fit for gilding, lay
on Leaves of Gold whole, wherewith you shall gild your Leaves of Tin as much as
shall be necessary; then take White-Lead ground with Oil of Nuts, neither too
thick nor too thin; with this White, paint with your Pencil the elevated Ground
of your Board, leaving untoucht the Engravery, then lay your Leaf of gilt Tin
upon a Leaf of Paper, the Gold upwards, and put the Leaf upon a very smooth
Table; then take your Mould, and turn gently the side full of White upon your
Leaf of Tin, pressing the Mould a little, till such time as the Leaf of Tin
continues attached thereunto; then turning your Mould upside down, press
lightly with your hand upon the Paper, to the end the White may be imprinted on
the Gold; taking off the Paper, you will see whether the Tin be marked; this
done, take off your Leaf of gilt Tin, and you will see this white Ground; if
there be any Defect, where the White is not sufficiently marked, you shall mend
it with a Pencil. Then take Rock Azure, which you shall powder on the White, or
else Vert-Azur, which is clear, if you will have Green. Thus shall you have
Leaves of Tin gilt with Moresk Work or Foliage of Gold on a Ground Sky-colour
or Green, which afterward you shall put upon the Draperies of your Figure,
which you shall lay with Gold-colour to make the Tin stick, which you shall
cause to enter into the Concavities, which could not be done nor managed with
the Pencil.

Another manner for the same Mould.
Lay your Mould upon a Table, without putting thereon any White, take you Leaf
of Tin gilt, and lay the side thereof that is not gilt, upon the Mould, then
with the Palm of your Hand, or an Handkerchief, press lightly your gilt Tin, so
that the Leaf may enter far enough into the Engravery without breaking, then
with a gross Pencil lay on your Ground, which may easily be done without
letting the White get into your Engravery; then powder it with Azure, or
Vertazure as has been said. This last is the easier way, because the Leaf of
Tin is more easily taken off from the Mould without breaking.

If you desire the Field red and transparent, lay it with good Lake; if you
will have it Green, take Verdigreese calcined and ground in Oil; then being
dry, burnish it, varnish it with sparing Work, and by this means you shall have
Grounds of all colors, even of Purple, which you shall make of enamelling
Azure, Lacca and White: You may do the like upon Tin silvered, or not silvered,
on a White or other colored Ground.

CHAP. XXXI.
How to lay your Leaves of gilt Tin upon your Drapery.
YOur Figure being well imprinted with an Impression in Oil, grind white Lead
with very fat Oil, wherewith you shall lay your Draperies, where you would have
your Leaves of gilt Tin stick. Your White being a little less dry than is
necessary for gilding, that it will stick a little on the Finger, lay on your
Leaves of Tin upon the White, pressing the Tin with a thick gentle Brush, to
make stick and fasten to the White; then smooth the Tin with the Brush, to lay
them even in the Pleats. The Colors upon your Leaves of Tin must be very dry,
before you lay them on your Drapery; thus doing, your Draperies will be fair
and neatly done, which could not be done with the Pencil in the Pleats.

To make colored Foliage upon a Ground of Gold.
Press in the foregoing manner your Tin, that it enter and cover the Ground and
Foliage, then paint your Foliage with what color you will, laying your gilt
Leaf as before.

There may be made Works, where the Figures shall be of Gold on a colored
Ground, when the Colors of the Ground are laid; the Leaf of Tin being out of
the Mould and dry, draw with a Pencil the Lines and Shadows of the Hatchings
with the same Color, which may be counter-drawn, reinforced, and heightened,
before your Leaves of Tin are laid on the Figure.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Matthew Gillyflower, at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall, and James Partridge, at the Post House near Charing Cross.
PArthenissa, the most famed Romance, in six Volumes complete; Composed by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Orrery. Townsend's Historical Collections, being a
complete Journal of the Lords and Commons in the four last Parliaments of Queen
Elizabeth; in which, the Motions, Arguments and Speeches of Cecil, Bacon,
Rawleigh, Hobby, and other eminent Members of those Parliaments are faithfully
delivered, by Hayward Townsend a Member of those Parliaments. Clavel's Tables
of Interest, of all Sums from 10000 l. to one Shilling, from one day to 365,
with Tables of Forbearance, Discount and Purchase of Annuities to 31 years; by
which, all useful Questions in Arithmetic are truly resolved by Addition only;
formerly printed for the Use of His Majesty's Exchequer, Custom-house, and
Excise-Office, but now reprinted for public Good. Sir Robert Filmers Political
Discourses, viz. Patriarcha, The Freeholders Grand Inquest, etc. The
Institution and Life of Cyrus the Great, written by that Famous Philosopher and
General Xenophon of Athens, and from the Original Greek made English by Francis
Digby and John Norris. Hobbs's Tripos, being three Discourses, viz. The first
of Humane Nature, or the Fundamental Elements of Policy. -- The second, De
Corpore Politico, or the Elements of Law Moral and Politic. -- The third of
Liberty, Necessity and Chance. The Daily Office of a Christian, being the
Devotions of the Right Reverend Father in God, Doctor William Laud, late
Archbishop of Canterbury, the fourth Edition. The Humble Penitent, or daily
Devotions, consisting of Thanksgivings, Confessions and Prayers, the third
Edition. The Lord Bacon's Apothegms. Of the Law-Terms* A Discourse written by
the Learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman Knight, wherein the Laws of the Jews,
Grecians, Romans, Saxons and Normans relating to this Subject are fully
explained. The Learned Readings of Sir Robert Holbourn Knight, Attorney General
to King Charles the First, upon the Statute of 25 of Edward the 3d. Cap. 2.
being the Statute of Treason; to which is added Cases of Prerogative, Treason,
Misprision of Treason, Felony, etc. written by the Right Honorable Francis
Bacon, Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albane. The Fundamentals of the Protestant
Religion asserted, by Reason as well as Scripture, against those of the Roman,
written in French by the famous Monsieur de Gombaut, made English by Sidney
Lodge. To which is added his Letters to Monsieur de Militier, and other
Personages of the French Court touching Religion. Essays of Michael Seignieur
de Montaigne, with Marginal Notes and Quotations of the cited Authors; new
rendered into English by Charles Cotton Esquire The Refined Courtier, or a
Correction of several Indecencies crept into Civil Conversation, being a
Translation and Paraphrase of Galateus de Moribus.
Some Books lately Printed for James Partridge, and Sold at his Shop at the
Post House between Charing Cross and Whitehall.
THe Memoirs of the Duke of Rothefocault, containing the private Intrigues for
obtaining the Regency, since the Death of Lewis the 13th, King of France; being
a full View of the late Troubles in Paris, and the Imprisonment of the Princes;
also several Letters and Articles relating to Cardinal Mazarin with other
diverse remarkable Transactions in 8o. Price bound 4 shillings. A new Discourse
of the Smallpox and Malignant Fevers, with an exact Discovery of the Scorvy;
together with Observations and Discourses on Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies,
Rheumatisms and Gouts, with their several Methods of Cure and Remedies. By
Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in ordinary to his Majesty; in Twelves. Various
new Observations and Discourses upon the Venerial Disease, never published,
made know, or discovered before this time by any Author, comprizing all the
several kinds thereof, their Signs and Prognostics, with the several Cures and
Remedies for the same, with which is printed, Little Venus Unmaskt, the fifth
Edition, with many Alterations. By Gideon Harvey, M. D. in Twelves. New
Practical Observations in Surgery, containing diverse remarkable Cases and
Cures, by Hugh Rider, Surgeon in ordinary to his Majesty, in 8o. Approved on,
and recommended to be very useful, by the Testimonials of Dr. Gideon Harvey,
Dr. James Molins, Mr. Surgion Horsnell, and Mr. Surgion Sanderson, Wardens, and
Mr. Thomas Page, Assistant of the Company of Surgions. Price one shilling bound
The Conclave of Physicians, the second part, by Dr. Gideon Harvey, Physician in
ordinary to his Majesty, is in the Press, almost finished, and will be speedily
published; in Twelves. The Conclave of Physicians, Part first, the second
Edition, reprinted with the other, and sold both together, in Twelves. The
Unsatisfied Lovers, a pleasant and curious new English Novel, in Twelves. price
bound one shilling.

