THREE DIATRIBES OR DISCOURSES.

First of Travel, Or a Guide for Travelers into Foreign Parts. Secondly, Of
Money or Coyns. Thirdly, Of Measuring of the Distance betwixt Place and Place.
By Edward Leigh Esquire and Mr. of Arts of Magdalene-Hall in Oxford.

Teucri vox apud Ciceronem Tuscul. quaest. l. 5, Socrates, cum rogaretur,
Cujatem se esse diceret, Mundanum, inquit, totius enim mundi seincolam, and
civem arbitrabatur. Cicero ibid. LONDON, Printed for William Whitwood, at the
sign of the Golden Bell in Duck-Lane, near Smithfield. 1671.

The Epistle DEDICATORY.
To his deservedly Honored Friend Francis Willughbie, Esquire
SIr, Since I have had the happiness to be known to you, (my Habitation being
not far distant from yours) I have found so much Candor and Civility in you,
that I thought I needed not to seek further for a person, to whom I should
dedicate this little Tract of Travel and Coyns, you having Traveled into the
most famous Countries of Europe, Mr. Firth in his Sts. Monument, reports of my
Lord Willughbies eldest Son, that he had seen Rome, though he was not at all
tainted with her errors: he brought over many of the rarities of other
Nations, but none of their sins.
and (being inquisitive after all Curiosities) also improved your travel both
to the acquiring and knowledge of Coyns, and many other rarities, some of which
you were pleased formerly to show me and others, and have (for the better
completing of this Treatise) communicated to me several Observations, about
Foreign coyns especially. I would our Gentry generally were more studious, and
would spend their time as profitably as you and some others do. That would
confirm what Mr. Burton in his Melancholy Part 1. Sect. 2. Subsect. 15.
observes of some of our English Gentry, that they are excellently well
learned, like those Fuggeri in Germany, Du Bartas, Duplessis, Sadael in France,
Picus Mirandula, Scottus, Barottus in Italy. There is an Honorable Gentleman
Robert Boy Esquire
now of the Royal Society, (whereof you are likewise a worthy Member) who has
Traveled abroad to good purpose, and by his Philosophical Experimenta Fructi
fera and Luci. fera.
Experiments and other useful Treatises, has much honored the Nation. I may
here relate, what I have heard from a very worthy Divine; that he never knew a
Family, wherein the Men and Women both, were of so obliging a Carriage, and of
such great abilities. There is also a learned Knight and Baronet Sir Nor^on
Knatchball.
of this Parliament (mentioned among the Benefactors to the Polyglott Bible)
who has written Critical notes in Latin on the New Testament. I shall only
add this, that it may seem strange for me to publish a Discourse of Money, who
(when I had the honor to be a Member of the House of Commons) was always
silent when that Subject came into debate,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you Edward Leigh.

TO THE Candid READER.
REader, It is said of Ulysses, Qui mores hominum multorum vidit, and urbes,
Horat. De Art Poetica. Yet I would not have thee read my Discourse of Travel,
Peregrinante animo. The Commodity which comes to humane Societies, by the
Travells of prudent, pious, and well governed persons, is very great. The
Apostles, the Disciples of Christ, and also their Disciples, and many others,
have gone through a great part of the World to convert the Gentiles. So if a
Voyage be undertaken to know the rites and customs of several places, and the
forms of Cities, as the Roman Decemviri were sent to Greece, that they might
know the Laws of that Country, and especially Solons. Pythagoras, Plato,
Apollonius did go into diverse Countries to increase their knowledge. Diodorus
Siculus and Strabo Traveled into several parts of the World, that they might
be acquainted with the History and Situation of those places. Pausanias He
has written that excellent book of the Monuments and Antiquities of Greece,
remaining in his time.
compassed Greece, Arrianus, the Euxine Sea, and Cluverius Traveled into many
Countries of Europe, that they might more exactly describe those parts. The
knowledge of Languages has incited many to Travel; Vossius De Orig. and Prog.
Idololat. l. 3. c. 37.
instanceth in Jacobus Golius (that famous Arabist) who not satisfied with the
instruction of Thomas Erpinus in the Arabic Language, In Aethiopicis operam
impendebat ^uam. D. M. Wanslebius, qui ad perpoliendum ejus in iisdem ingenium,
in varias orientis oras longa atque periculosa suscepit Itinera. D. Cast.
Praelat. ad Lexic. Heptaglot. Christianus Rarius Clenard, and Warner, traveled
ar for the same purpose. Dr. Casaubon of Credulity and Incredulity. part 1.
says, that Jo. Ernestus Burgravius professes to have traveled the greatest
part of Europe to satisfy his Curiosity. Erasmus in his Colloquia entitles one
of them Peregrinatio Religionis ergo.
went first into Mouritania, and being chosen Successor to Erpenius in his
place after his death, he took a long Voyage into Syria, and there staid till
he had perfected his skill in that Language. I may very well here mention, our
worthy professor of the Hebrew and Arabic Tongues in Oxford, Dr. Edward
Pocock, who was long abroad at Aleppo, and other places on the same account.
Where he so demeaned himself, that he was very much respected by the Natives,
and chosen for an Vmpire amongst them, to compremise such differences as fell
out there. The learned works he has published, give ample Testimony of the
skill he attained in the Arabic, especially by that long Voyage. The Jesuits
themselves and others write much, how industrious the Jesuits were in the
propagation of the Christian Faith, and how they have sown the seed of saving
truth in China or elsewhere.

Mr. Baxter in the 2d. part of his last Book of Christianity, c. 14. p. 488.
says, The attempts of the Jesuits in Congo, Japon and China were a very noble
work, and so were the Portugal Kings encouragements: but two things spoiled
their success.

First, That when they took down the Heathens Images, they set them up others
in their stead; and made them think that the main difference was, but whose
Image they should worship.

Secondly, But especially, that they made them see, that while they pretended
to promote Religion, and to save their souls, they came to promote their own
wealth, or the Popes Dominion, and to bring their Kings under a Foreign power.

The honest attempts of Mr. Eliots in New England, is much more agreeable to
the Apostles way, Videsis Voretii Disputat. Select. Theol. partem fecundum De
Gentilismo page 650.
and makes more serious spiritual Christians.

Justus Heurnius (son to John Heurnius the learned Physician) left the study of
Physic, and wholly gave himself to the study of Divinity, that thereby he
might be the better enabled to promote the Conversion of the Indians, and
taking an Evangelical Embassy to the Indies, he there abode above 14 Years,
preaching to the Indians in their Mother Tongue, Catechizing them, and
admonishing them privately, and by his singular innocensie, He has published a
Book (which I have seen) De Legatione Evangelic^ ad Indos capessenda.
humility and modesty, and daily fervent devotion, and great charity to the
poor; He endeavored to propagate the Kingdom hf Christ among them.

The Pilgrimages See Cartwright Confutat. of the Rhemists Transtat. on Mat.
2.2. and Du Moulin De Peregrinationibus Superstit.
of the Turks to Meccha, and of the Papists to Loretto are vain, we need not to
travel for to find God.

I have joined these three Discourses together, since in that of Money and
Measuring, I write of the Foreign Coyns and Measures, and so hoping, that they
may be all useful to the Traveller, I remain

Thy Hearty Well-willer, Edward Leigh.

A Diatribe OF TRAVEL.

By Edward Leigh Esquire;

Psalm. 107.23, 24. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in
great waters:

These see the works of the Lord: and his wonders in the deep.

Patri est, Ubicunque est been. Printed in the Year, MDCLXXI.

A DIATRIBE OF Travel.
TRavel in the Younger sort, is a part of Education; in the Elder, a part of
Experience. Sir Francis Bacon's Essays.

There is no Map like the view of the Country; One journey will show a man more
then any Description can. He that searches Foreign Nations is becoming a
Gentleman of the World. Felthams Resolves of Travel.

Many Travelers returning to their own home, bring back only some vain Garbs
and Fashions, and are leavened with the ill Customs and Manners of the
Countries they passed thorough. Vagari, Lustrare, disquirere qui vis potest,
pauci indigare, discere, id est, vere perigrinari. Lip^^i Epistola ad Lanoium
de Peregrinatione Italica. The Marchioness of New-Castles Orations, part three.
I think it most requisite and fit, that none should Travel without leave of
the State, or Public Council; and at their return should be accountable to the
State and Public Council of their Travels, and the advantages they have made:
Dr. Hall in his First Decade of Epistles, Epistle 8th, giving advice to the
Earl of Essex for his Travel, says, There is nothing can quit the labor and
cost of Travel, but the gain of Wisdom; when young Nobles came to take their
leaves of our late King Charles, before they Traveled into Foreign parts; He
thus councelled them; My Lord, keep always the best Company, and be sure never
to be idle.

Alsted in his Systema Mnemonicum, l. 4. De Geographia, Zeilerus before his
Itenerary of Spain and Portugal Monsieur de Sorbiere in his Lettres and
Discourse Lettre 85. Mr. Palmer in his Traveller, part second, and Sir Francis
Bacon in his Essays, give directions to Travelers, and show what things are
fit to be observed by them.

Neugebavarus and Loyzius have written in Latin 'De Peregrinatione. Erpenious
has put out a little Treatise, De Peregrinatione Gallica. Lipsius, another, De
Peregrinatione ltalica. Gasper Ens has published Deliciae Apodemicae.


Dr. Hall has written in English of Traveling, his Tract is styled, Quo
vadis. Sir Balthazar Gerbier has Subsidium Peregrinantibus.

Mr. Howell has put out instructions for foreign Travel.

Mr. Palmer also has written an Essay of the means how to make our Travels
into foreign Countries profitable and honorable; he dedicated it to Prince
Henry.

Jones has put out instructions for Travelers.

The Merchant proposes to himself bonum utile in his Travel, and brings home
exotic Commodities, as Wine, Fruit, Spices, Metals, precious Stones, Silk, and
such like, serving both for use and luxury.

Impiger extremos Currit mercatas ad Indos, Horat. Epist, 1. lib. 1.

The dissolute rich young Gentleman, bonum jucundum; The well-bred Gentleman;
bonum honestum, or honor, that he may accomplish himself for the service of his
Traveling is an honorable or honest action of men into foreign States,
chiefly for a public good to the Country of which such are. ^a. l. mes. Est
Peregrinatio profectio quedam, occupiditate ac desideri, Extra Loca
perlustrandi, in vicendi and cognoscendi instituta, ad bonum aliquod inde
Acquirendum, quod vel patriae and amicis, vel nobis ipsis privatim prodesse
possit. Newgebaverus de Peregrinatione. Est Peregrinatio nihil aliud quam
studium per lustrandi terras Exoticus and Insulas ab homine idoneo suscipiendum
ad artem vel ea acquirenda quae usui and Emollumento patriae vel Rei esse
publicae possunt. Loysies De Peregrinatione c. 1. Ve^^it Peregrinus a Peregre
aut Pereger quod dicitur quasi per agrum, unde and peragrare quasi multos agros
pererrare, Voss^ Etymol. Ling^ae ^atinae.
Country.

In such a one going to Travel, there is required.

First, A competent age, that he be above 18 or 20 years old, although the
years of 14 or 15 are more proper for learning the true accent of any Language,
and all exercises belonging to the body.

Secondly, That he has the Latin Tongue, and some skill in the Liberal
Sciences.

Thirdly, See Mr. Evelius account of Architecture, and Junius's art of
Painting, l 2. c. 8. Painting and Sculpture are the Politest, and Noblest of
ancient Arts; what Art can be more helpful or pleasing, to a Philosophical
Traveller, Philos. Transact. Vol. 3. p. 785.
That he be skilful in Architecture, able so well to Limn or Paint; as to take
in paper the Situation of a Castle or a City; or the Platform of a
Fortification.

Fourthly, That he be well grounded in the true Religion, lest he be seduced
and perverted. Gal. 4.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth, Galli a peregrinando nomen habent; For Vuallen in
the Teutonick Tongue, signifies peregrinari, alluding therefore to this
Etymoligy: He chides the Galatians for their wandering in Religion, q. d. You
like Travelers, often change your Opinions about the Doctrine of Truth. I know
a Noble Person who being in France well acquainted with a Popish Gentleman,
once when the other left him, he wished that he were as good a Hugonot as
himself; the other immediately after sent him a Defense of their Religion, to
which he replied, and showed the same unto me: I more disliked the Popish
Religion when I was in France then before, and more esteemed the Protestants,
since at Nants, and some places, there were scarce any French Protestants.

Fifthly, He should be first well acquainted with his own Country, before he go
abroad; as to the places and Government.

If any came heretofore to the Lords of the Council for a License to Travel;
the old Lord Treasurer Burleigh, would first examine him of England; if he
found him ignorant, he would bid him stay at home, and know his own Country
first.

Sixthly, It were of use to inform himself (before he undertakes his Voyage,)
by the best Chorographical and Geographical Map of the Situation of the
country he goes to, both in it self and Relatively to the Universe, to compare
the Vetus and Hodierna Regio, and to carry with him the Republics of the
Nations to which he goes; and a Map of every Country he intends to travel
thorough.

Seventhly, Before his Voyage, This good and Christian Counsel is given by
Martinus Zeilerus in his Apodemical Canons before his Itenerary of Spain and
Portugal.
He should make his peace with God, Receive the Lords Supper, satisfy his
Creditors if he be in debt; Pray earnestly to God to prosper him in his Voyage,
and to keep him from danger, and if he be sui juris, he should make his last
will, and wisely order all his affairs, since many that go far abroad, return
not home.

In the Survey of a Country, these things are observable.
First, Finis Peregrinationis sit notitia sextuplex, Ling^ae Regionis
Religionis Rerum gestarum morum and Clarorum virorum. Erpenius De
Peregrination^ Gallica.
The Name and its derivation, the Latitude and Longitude of the place, the
Temperature of the Climate, the goodness or barrenness of the Ground, the
populousness or scarcity of the People, the limits of the Country, how it is
bounded by Sea or Land, or both, the Commodities, Natural, Artificial, the
Dis-commodities, either Imperfections or Wants, the Manners, Shape, Language
and Attire of the People, their Building, their Havens and Harbors, the
Religion and Government, the History of the Country and Families.

2. The Courts of Jones in his Instructions to Travelers mentions twelve
generals. 1. Cosmographie. 2. Astronomy. 3. Geography. 4. Chorography. 5.
Topography. 6. Husbandry. 7. Navigation. 8. The Political State. 9. The
Ecclesiastical State. 10. Literature. 11. Histories. 12. Chronicles, and under
every one of these Heads, has several particulars.
Princes are to be seen and observed, especially when they give audience to
Ambassadors, the Courts of Justice whiles they sit and hear Causes, and so of
Consistories Ecclesiastic, the Churches and Monuments therein, the Walls and
Fortifications, of Cities and Towns, Antiquities and Ruins, Libraries,
Colleges, Disputations and Lectures where they are, Shiping and Navies, Houses
and Gardens of State and pleasure near great Cities; Armories, Arsenals,
Magazines, Exchanges, Burses, Warehouses; Exercises of Horsemanship, Fencing,
Training of Soldiers, and the like; Treasuries of Jewels and Robes, Cabinets,
and rare Inventions.

Aubertus Miraeus in the Life of Lipsius, says, that when he came first to
Rome, he spent all his time (when he was at leisure) in viewing the stones and
ancient places, and other rarities there, and spent his time in the Popes
Vatican Library, in comparing together the Manuscripts of Seneca, Tacitus,
Plautus, Propertius, and other Ancients. He viewed also other famous Libraries
public and private.

Thirdly, The choice Herbs The Gardens, sorts of Herbs, Flowers, Arbours,
Knots, Mounts. The Orchards, sorts of Trees, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Berries,
Spices, Orrenges, Lemmons, Figs; the Vines, Vine-yards; sorts of Wine and
Drinks. Jones.
and Plants, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Insects proper to that Country, are to
be taken notice of; Minerals, Metals, Stones, and Earths; their Proverbs also
should be observed, in which much of the wisdom of a Nation is found.

Fourthly, Learned men, and such as have abilities in any kind, are worthy to
be known, and the best Books there, are to be inquired after. Men that Travel
must be very cautious both of their speech and demeanor; The Italian Proverb
says, For a man to travel safely thorough the world, It behooves him to have a
Faulcons Eye, an Asses Ears, a Monkies Face, Merchants Words, a Camels Back, a
Hogs Mouth, and Deers Feet.

Sir Henry Wotton in his Letters, mentions twice the answer that was given him
by Alberto Scipioni, when he begged his advice, how he might carry himself
securely at The Aethiopians say, when thou shall go into another Country, Ne
sis sicut tu, Esto sicut illi in Italia tota tria hac mihi serva, Frons tibi
aperta, Lingua parca men's Clausam. Lipsn Epistola ad Lanoyum. In peregrinatione
vitam agentibus hoc evenit, ut multa hospitia habeant nulla amicitias, Seneca
Epist. ad Lucilium Epist. 11. Peregrim autem and in cola officium est, nihil
praeter suum negotium agere, nihil de alio inquirere, minimeque in aliena esse
Republica Curiosum. Tull. Offic. l. 1.
Rome, Signor Arrigomio (says he) Pensieri Stretti, Et il viso Sciolto, Your
thoughts close, and your Countenance loose, will go safely over the whole world.

Fifthly, The prime Italian Dialect is Lingua Toscana in Bocca Romana, the
Tuscane Tongue in a Roman mouth. Howels Instructions for Foreign Travels.
Make choice of the best places for attaining of the Language, as Valladolid
for the Spanish, Orleans, or Blois for the French, Florence or Sienna for the
Italian, Lipsick or Heidelberg for the High Dutch Tongues: in these places the
best Language is spoken.

Abraham Ortelius in his Itinerarium Belgiae, persuades Travelers to note, and
observe what they see most memorable; Peregrinationes nostrae futurae nobis
erunt long gratiores, si una cum itineribus animadvertamus, and annotemus in
Chartis, si quid observatione dignum occurrerit.

What profit Traveling brings to an Architect, Vitruvius shows, what to a
Soldier, Vegetius, what to a Limner or Statuary, the Horses of Phidias These
with other Collossi Statues and Pictures are yet at Rome.
and Praxiteles made by art, witness; Merchandise is almost maintained by
Travel; How much are Cosmography, Topography and Astronomy, improved and
furthered by Travel.

Change of Air by Traveling, after one is used unto it, is good: And therefore
great Travelers have been long lived: The Countries which have been observed,
to produce long livers, are these; Arcadia, Aetolia, India, on this side
Ganges, Brasil, Topropane, Bitain, Ireland, with the Islands of the Arcades,
and Hebrides, Sir Francis Bacon's History of Life and Death.

How much may the art of Navigation further the spreading of the Gospel! Rem
profecto fastigio suo dignam principes fecerint, si sasseis non ad divitias
indagandas, quae hodie sola fere periculosarum and longin quarum navigationem
ille cebra est, sed ad verbi dominici promulgationem inter illos populos ad huc
very luce destitutos, missis ad hoc theologis propagandam instruerent, si quid
inde utilitatis postea ex commercii liberate in publico rediret, in lucro
ponentes and accessionis loco accipientes, nam ex eo esset ut Dei gratia, sine
qua nihil possumus, expeditionibus illis aspiraret, and aspirante illa citra
sanguinem and indigenarum vexationem res in his regionibus, quantum ad
religionem and civilem administrationem felicioribus auspiciis,
administrarentur, quam ab Hispanis factum est, qui avaritia Caeci xxx. Annos
mutuis lanienis miseros indigenas in Indiis and ad extremum seipsos grassante
inter eos divina ultione confecerunt. Thuan. Hist. lib. 64.
Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, that
is, say some Expositors by Traveling to and fro, as the Waldenses to learn and
propagate the Truth, knowledge shall be multiplied in the earth in the last
time. The same word is used, Numb. 11.8. Of the Children of Israel going about
to gather Manna, and of the Devils going to and fro, Job. 1. and 7. Manifestly
intimating, says, Sir Francis Bacon, De Augmentis Scientiarum l. 2. c. 10. Et
Nov. Org. l. 1. Aphor. 93. that God would so order it by his providence, that
the passing through the world (which is now fulfilled by so many far
Navigations) and the increasing of Sciences should fall into the same age.

Orbis terrarum factus est hac nostra aetate, mirum in modum faenestratus atque
patens Baconus De Augmentis Scientiarum, l. 2. c. 10. Nostris temporibus and
novi orbis parts complures, and veteris orbis extrema undique innotescunt.
Baconus Nov. Org. l. 1. Aphor. 72.

In the Philosophical Conferences of the Virtuosi of France Conference 87. It
is determined whether Travel be necessary to an ingenuous man. He says there,
if you except Embassies, Imperetam anima homo, qui Circum scribitur natalis
soli fine, Seneca.
in which the good of the State drowns all other considera^ions, those that
would Travel must be young and strong, rich and well borne, to get any good by
their Travells.

La Moth le Vair in his Opuscules Lettre 6. Humiles istae and plebeae animae
domi resident and affixae sunt suae terrae: illa divinior est quae coelum
imitatur and gaudet motu. Lipsii Epistola de Peregrinatione Italica.

Hodie magnum dedecus est Germanis patrios tantum nosse mores; praecipua vero
pars laudis exteras regiones, ad minimum, Italiam, Gallias, Hispaniam, Belgiam,
Angliam, ve per lustralle. Balduini Oration Panegyrica.


Speaks of the profit of Voyages, and Lettre 7. of the unprofitableness of
them, he says in the sixth Letter, that Traveling is the best School for
life, in several respects: The French say Un honest homme, Est un homme meste,
an honest or wise man is a mixed man, that is, one who has something in him, in
point of knowledge of all Nations.

Charles the fifth made Nine Voyages, The States of the Empire. Dial. 1.
into Germany, Six into Spain, Seven into Italy, four into France, Ten into the
Low Countries, Two into England, as many into Africa, he also passed the Ocean
and Mediterranean Seas eleven times.

The Emperor Hadrian traveled over a great part of the world, Linguetus non
minus doctrina quam diuturna totius Europae peragratione Clarus Bodini methodus
Ad Facilem Historiarum Cognitionem. Polybius nequid falsi scriberet imprudens,
in long semotas profectus est oras, easque suis lustravit oculis Diodor.
Sicul. Ex testimonia Justini martyris, annos triginta Europiam atque Aliam
lustravit Pauli Poet. not. in Marc. and Com. Imperat. Vitam. Prosper Alpinus
olim Aegyptum magno cum fructu studiosae juventutis peragravit. Pignorii mensae
Isiacae expositio Pythagoras quidem inter Barbaros discendi causa peregrinatus
est, atque ut nonnulli tradiderunt, Prophetam Ezechielem vidit Douneaeus in
Chrysostom. Vide Seldom. de jure, etc. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
and with his Head bare, though it was cold and wet, and so fell into a deadly
dsease; whence the Verses of Florus the Poet, whom Salmasius (in his notes on
Aelius Spartianus) thinks to be the Historian, who elegantly wrote the Epitome
of the Roman affairs and lived under Hadrian.

Ego nolo Caesar esse,
Ambulare per Britannos,
Scythicas pati pruinas.
I will in no wise Caesar be,
To walk along in Britainie,
The Scythick frosts to feel and see.
To which the Emperor answered in the like strain
Ego nolo Florus esse,
Ambulare per tabernas,
Latitare per popinas,
Culices pati rotundos.
And I will never Florus be,
To walk from shop to shop, as he,
To lurk in Taverns secretly,
And there to feel the Rome-wine fly
But (says Stuckius) how many Christian Princes and Nobles are now to be
found, In his Scholia in Arriani Periplum Pontei Euxini. William Postel a
Frenchman, was a great Traveller and Mathematician.
more like Florus than the Emperor Adrian?

They that have written the Iteneraries of the Apostles, See 2 Cor, 11.25.
have observed that St. Paul Traveled much farther, than either St. Peter or
St. John, as they have described the circuit; and Purchase both Divines, of
which last, Dr. Casaubon of Credulity and Incredulity, part first, says, a
book of very good worth with them that know the right use, and more valued
abroad, than it is at home by many. Of the Navigation of the French into
America, Johannes Lerius has written well of the Probaebile est ideo poetas
fixisse Aeneam, Herculem, The seum, Pyrithoum, Vlyssem and Orpheum, ad inferos
descendisse, propter longinquas Eorum Navigationes quibus a Conspectu hominum
diu separati, mox reduces, Existimati sunt eo pervenisse si animae post mortem
degunt Morysoti Orbis. Maritimi Hist. l. 1. c. 33.
Navigations of the Portugals and Spaniards, See Guicciardines History of
Italy, lib. 6. Of those of the English, Hackluit speaks sufficiently. Of the
profit which comes to men by Navigations, see Fourniers Hydrography, l. 4. c.
9. and of the Faith enlarged and amplified by means of Navigation: See the same
book, chap. 6. There are also the Navigations and Voyages of Leyis Vertomannus,
and Cadamusti Navigatio ad terras ignotas, of whom Peter Martyr says, in the
seventh Chapter of his second Decade, that he stole certain An notations out of
the three first Chapters of his first Decade, written to Cardinal Ascanius and
Acimboldus, supposing that he would never have published the same.

Dr. Casaubon (in his first part of Credulity and Incredulity, in things
Natural, Civil and Divine) says, I have (as all men, I think have, that are
any thing curious) read several relations of all the known parts of the world,
written by men of several Nations and Professions, Learned and Unlearned, in
diverse Languages; by men of several ages, ancient and late.

There are diverse Hodaeporica Voyages, and Itineraries, Ancient, Modern, in
Prose, Verse, in Latin, French, English.

Vixit Benjamin ut ejus interpres benedictus Arias^ testatur, anno ab orb
Condito. 4033. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 13. c. 2.
Benjamin Tidelensis, his Itinerary. He was a Jew, and traveled over a great
part of the world. Ecchellensis in his Preface to his Historia Arabum seems to
slight him: Constantine l'Empereur (who has published notes upon him) says, in
his Dissertat. Ad Lectorem. Cum judicio legendum hoc itinerarium, nec auctori
in omnibus habenda fides, praesertim ubi suorum conditionem ac statum extollit:
plurima tamen notatu digna passim occurrunt, ut quae de locorum distantiis
aliisque annotat.

There is Cotovici Itinerarium Hierosolymitanum and Syriacum.

Busbequii Angeriue Gistenus Busbequius multis legationibus Elarus.
Aubertimiraei Vita Justi Lipsii.
Itinerarium Constantinopolitanum and Amasianum.

Douza de Itinere Constantinopolitano.

Furerii Itenerarium Aegypti, Arabiae, etc.

Antoninus his Seu Antonii, seu Antonini, seu Aethici, Itinerarium Zeileri
Historici, Chronologi, etc. Geographi. Antonini Itinerarium sive Aethici potius
Vossii not ae in Fragmentum Peripli Ponti Euxini.
Itinerary (if it be his) for both Thuanus and Vossius De Historicis Latinis,
l. 3. c. 2. and others, seem to question it, with Mr. Burtons Commentary.

There are Les Fameux Voyages De Pietro De le Valle Surnomme Illustre Voyageur
in three Quartoes. His Travels into East India, and Arabia Deserta, are
Translated into English by Havers, and so I think are the other in three
Quartoes.

Voyage d'Orient du Philippe Carme Dechause Sieur de Loyer, his Relation de
voyage de Levant De la Haie of the Levant, and also Blunts voyage into the
Levant. Diverse Voyages du P. Alexandre De Rhodes.

Voyages du Seigneur de Villamont in three Books.

Voyage de la terre Saint.

Voyage du Duc de Rohan en Italy, Alemagne, Pays has uni, Angleterre and
Escosse.

Jo. Hugenvans Linschotens Discourse of Voyages into the East and West Indies,
whom Mr. Boil In his Skeptical Chemist.
styles the sober relater of his Voyages.

Sir Francis Drakes Voyages. Thuanus calls our He was the next after
Magellanus, that sailed round about the World. See Camdens Britannia in
Devonshire.
Drake, Celeberrimus universi orbis lustrator. Paulus Venetus has written both
an Itinerary, and three Books, de Religionibus Orientalibus.

Some think him somewhat fabulous for what he reports of Quinsay. Dolendum est
Marci Pauli Vemeti Itinerari totum mendaciis ab impostore quodam contaminatum.
Quis enim credit illa quae de Quinsai scribit, pontes in ea lapideos duodecim
mill altissimos sub nixos fornicibus fuisse ita ut ^^ves erectis malis ea
pernavigare potuerint. Hornius de Orig. Gent. Amerba. c. 3.
Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography in Madagascar one of the Afracan Isles, for what
he relates of the Bird called Ruck, of such incredible strength and bi^ness,
that it could snatch up an Elephant, as easily as a Kite does a Chicken.

Mr. Burton in his Melancholy, part 2. Sect. 2. Member 3. p. 244. says, I
would censure all Plinies, Solinus, Strabo's, Sir John Mandevils, Olaus Magnus,
Marcus Polus, lies.

Apollo said to the Author of the China History, that he should reduce the
immense Metropolitan City of so many Kingdoms, inhabited by many millions of
men to some credible measure; and particularly, that he should bring the Palace
of that King, which he had affirmed to be many miles long, to such a form, as
Vitruvius should not laugh at him for it; saying, that if that building were so
great as he had described it to be, the Halls must needs be half a mile long,
and the Chambers little less; which if it were true, the whole Academy of
Architects had reason to say, that to bring the meat but to the Table, the
servants of so great a King must ride Post. Boccalini his Advertisements A very
ingenuous piece much prized by Mr. Seldom, and which cost him his life.
from Pernassus. Century 2d. 16th. Advertisement.

Yet Mr. Boil in his experiments touching Cold, Title 19. says of him, a
writer not always half so fabulous as many think him, and Scickard in his
Tarich. p. 185. says, Marcus Polus Venetus, Minime vanus author, Cujus Narrata
pridem incredibilia, quotidie magis magisque verificantur.

There is Relation du Voyage de Muscovie, Mr. Terries Voyage into the
East Indies, and the History of the Caribee Islands, which I have seen in
French, and is translated into English by J. Davis.
Tartarie and de Perse du Sieur Olearius Secretaire de Duc de Holstein. Both
the Author and Book are commended by Bochart in his late learned Treatise de
Animalibus Scripturae. It is now translated into English. Mr. Boil styles him
the Applauded Writer Olearius. In his Experimental History of Colors,
Experiment 9. He styles him the Judicious Olearius, who was twice employed as a
public Minister.

There is the world surveighed, or Vincent le Blanck's Travels; He spent fifty
years making ten or twelve Voyages almost through all the parts of the World.
Mr. Boil calls him that Rambler about the world.

There are also Morysons Travels, George Sandy's Travels, and Sir Edwine Sands
his Relation of the State of Religion in the Western parts of the world, both
very good.

Biddulph's Travels.

Herbet's Travels.

Monsieur de Monfart's Travels.

The Preacher's Travels.

Coriat's Crudities.

Lithgow's Travels.

Ferdinand Mendez a Pinto's Travels; who five times suffered Shipwreck, was
sixteen times sold, and thirteen times made a slave, and spent one and twenty
years in Traveling.

Sir John Mandevil's Travels.

He Traveled thirty three, thirty four years, say some.

He was in Scythia, the greater and less, Armenia, Egypt, both Lybia's, Arabia,
Syria, Media, Mesopotamia, Persia, Chaldaea, Greece, Illyricum, Tartary, and
diverse other Kingdoms of the world.

He committed his whole Travel of thirty three years to writing, in three
diverse Tongues, English, French and Latin. Purchase his Pilgrimage. part 3. l.
3. c. 6. out of Baleus.

Joannes Mandevile, Non minimam Consecutus est laudem describendo regiones, vel
opere de re medica. Vossius 'De Hist. Lat. l. 3. ca. 2.

B. De Britannicarum Ecclesiarum primordiis c. 13.
Usher, speaking of Cloughte Kilti in Cork, says, In quo fundamenta
conspiciuntur amplissimae domus, quam nobilis illius Johannes Magnavillani (
sive de Mandevile 34. annorum peregrinatione notissimi) fuisse tradunt accolae.

Quibus relationibus olim fides nullatenus fuit adhibita, Spizelius de re
iteraria Sinensium, sect. 2.

Yet Sir Walter Raleigh in his History of the World, part 4. l. 4. c. 2. sect.
21. and Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography (as he somewhat improperly Non parvum
errorem Commisisse mihi videnturi, qui glo^i terrae and aquae descriptionem,
propium, particulareque Geographiae nomen habentem Communi, generalique nomine
Cosmographiam appellant. Barocii Praefatio ad Cosmographiam.
styles his great Folio) speaking of India, p. 882. show, how he was honored
abroad, and how many of his relations (though esteemed fabulous by some) were
since confirmed by the Portugals.

Daviti in his book entitled, Le Monde, Mentions Malherbe for a great
Traveller, spending twenty seven years in diverse Voyages almost through all the
parts of the World.

Purchase in his second part of his Pilgrims, l. 10. c. 1. Speaks of Damian a
Goes, a Portugal, who did see, speak, and was conversant with all the Kings,
Princes, Nobles, and chief Cities of all Christendom, in the space of twenty
two years.

Mr. Greaves in his Pyramidographia, Mentions the Travels of Monsieur de Breves
Ambassador at Constantinople, les Voyages de Monsieur de Breves, which I have
purchased from France.

Alexandre de Rhodes, in the third part of his Voyages, chapter 13. Speaks of
Monsieur de Boulaye, which has published, Un tres beau liver de ses voyages,
ou il faut voir ec autant de fidelite, Yanaquillus Faber in his notes on the
sixth book of Lucretius c. 1. says, Lambertus Massiliensis, has left a little
Book, De Peregrinatione Aegyptiaca, printed at Paris, which he undertook 1626.
que de nettete d'esprit, la, Conduite qu' il a monstree sans des Royaumes si
differents.

He has traveled over (says he) the greatest part of Europe, Asia, and
Africa. I have seen that French Book also.

There is Alex. Geraldini Itinerarium ad regiones sub Aquinoctiali, in sixteen
Books.

There are also Relations of Diverse Curious Voyages by Monsieur Thevenot, There
are also the Republics of several nations in little portable books.
in three Tomes, and Relation Du voyage, de l'Eveque de Breyte, per la Turquie,
la Perse, les Indes, etc. jusques au Royaume de Siam, and autres lieux par M.
de Bourges, Prestre, etc. Both mentioned in the Philosophical Transactions. I
have mustered up these several Itineraries and Voyages, both because I have
perused most, if not all of them, (except the two last) when I was about my
great book of Geography, though it be not yet printed. And because I suppose
Travelers may hereby furnish themselves with the best writers of those parts
of the world, whether they intend to go, either to instruct them about those
places before they go, or to carry with them: Who ever since the beginning of
things and men, has been so often by royal employment sent Ambassador to so
many Princes so distant in place so different in rites, as Sir Robert Sherlie!
There are the three English Brothers, and Sir Robert Sherley his Embassy into
Poland, both Printed. See Finets Observat. page 136, 137. 172, 173, 174, to 177.
Two Emperors, Rodolph and Ferdinand, two Popes, Clement and Paul, twice the
King of Spain, twice the Polonian, the Muscovite also, have given him Audience.
And twice also (though not the least for a born subject to be Ambassador to his
Sovereign) his Majesty has heard his Embassage from the remote Persian.
Purchase his Pilgrims, part 2. l. 10. c. 10.

Dr. Nicholas Wotton (Uncle to Sir Henry Wotton) was Privy-Counceller to four
successive Sovereigns, Viz. King Henry the 8th. Edward the 6th. Queen Mary,
Queen Elizabeth. He was nine times Ambassador for the Crown of England, to the
Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain, and other Princes. Camdens Hist. of Q.
Elizabeth.

Some have instanced in several English Ambassadors, how well they have
acquitted themselves; but I shall single out one as very deserving. The
Appendix to the History of Mr. Medes life.


Sir Thomas Row, after many Ambassages to almost all the Princes, and States
in Christendom; (all which were managed with admirable Dexterity, Success and
Satisfaction) was last of all Ambassador Extraordinary to Ferdinand the third,
Emperor of Germany; who gave him this Character, I have met with many Gallant
Persons of many Nations, but I scarce ever met with an Ambassador till now.

Bishop Bedell was Chaplain to Sir Henry Wotton at Venice. Dr. Featly, to Sir
Thomas Edmonds in France. Dr. John Burgess, to Sir Horatio Vere, in Germany.

Mr. Boil in his Preface to his Experiments, touching Cold, commends Captain
James his Voyages, it being scarce, and not to be met with, in Purchas's Tomes
(having been written some years after they were finished) and his Voyages
published by the last Kings command; He styles him in his Book, that Ingenuous
Navigator
He being bred in the University, and acquainted with the Mathematics.

He commends also Mr. Ligon of the Barbado's, Neither of these two have I seen.
and styles him ingenious Mr. Ligon,

But enough (if not too much) of this.

Geographers, who write of the four parts of the Earth, are as large in Europe,
as in the other three, Asia, Africa, and America, To which one part, all
learning seems now to be in a manner confined; which within this hundred, or
two hundred years, has produced so many able men of all professions; Divines,
Lawyers, Physicians, and Philosophers; Papists and Protestants.

Bolton in his Nero Caesar. c. 29. sect. 1. speaking of ancient Rome, says,
The wonder of the feat did not grow from the greatness only, but from the
innumerable ornaments of public, and private works, erected for use, delight,
and glory, dispersed over all the fourteen wards, or regions thereof. Temples,
Forums, Libraries, Therms, Aquaducts, Theaters, Amphitheaters, Circi, Porticus,
Arches, Columns, Statues, Palaces, and the rest, whose bare names scarce
remaining, do fill up Volums with their inventories.

The best Circuit a Traveller can take, is to go through Holland toward
Germany, thereby to satisfy his curiosity by degrees, for Germany will afford
more satisfaction than the Low Countries; France more then Germany, Italy more
then France, Gerbiers subsidium Peregrinantibus.

Paris, Rome, and Constantinople, are the Court of the World; Venice Geneva,
and Lisbon, the City; Provence, Andaluzia, and Italy the Garden, Africa, and
America, the Desert and Wilderness.

Flecknoes Relation of twenty years Travels, Letter 22.

Johnson in his Relation of the most famous Kingdoms. l. 1. of Travel, advises
a Traveller to take heed of the Pride of Spain, Dr. Hall thinks Italy a
dangerous place for Youth. Vrsin, in a Gratulatory Epistle to a friend returned
out of Italy, adds, Ex cloaca diabolorum. Necesse est peregri^aturam habere
duos saccos, patientiae unum, pecuniae alterum. Commenii Praxis Senicae par. 5.
Actus 4. S^ena. 1.
the Poison of Italy, the Treason of France, and the drink of Flanders.

Those who have a desire to travel to Jerusalem should take heed to themselves;
that they make no Shipwreck of Conscience, for if they come not well commended,
or well monyed, or both, there is no being for them, except they partake with
them in their Idolatrous Services. Purchase his Pilgrimage, part 2. l. 8. chapter 9.

Lud. Bartema Relates, that they that Travel over the Deserts of Arabia, which
are all covered with light and fleeting Sands, so that no Track can ever be
found, do make certain boxes of wood, which they place on Camels backs, and
shut themselves in them, to keep them from the Sands, and by the help of the
Lodestone, like the Mariners Compass, they steer their Course over the vast
and uncouth Deserts.

The Latin, the French, the Sclavonick, and the Arabian Tongue, are known in
many places, For Africa; Leo Leo Af^^ in rebus Africanis fere instar omnium
esse potest Hosmanni mantica. Leo Africanus A man of no small credit among them
who are well versed in the History of the World. Dr. Casaubon of Credulity and
Incredulity part. 1. Some say Golnitz is the best Itinerary for France, and le
Voiageur Irancois, Jodocus Sincerus his Itinerarium Gallia is well liked.
is the best, for the Levant; Blunt is a good book to take with thee thither,
and some others I have before-named; for Italy, Scotti and Capugnani
Itinerarium Italiae, and Raimunds Mercurio Italico, will be useful; for France,
Dallingtons View of France, and Mr. Evelins little book, for the Polity or
Government; for Holland, Colnitzius, for Germany Zeiler.

Sir Benjamin Ruddierd (whose discourse and speeches were full of Apothegmes)
was wont to say, France was a good Country to ride through, Let Italy glory in
this, that it is for pleasure the Garden of the World. It may be truly said of
great Britain, that it is the Court, and presence Chamber of the great King,
Esa. 8.8. Ezekiel. 48.35. Surely few parts of all the Earth are like England, for
the Showers of Heaven, and the Riches of the precious Ordinances of God. Mr.
Baxters Direct. to the Converted, for their Establishment.
Italy a good Country to look upon, Spain a good Country to understand, but
England a good Country to live in.

So wishing the Traveller a prosperous Voyage, There cast Anchor.

A Diatribe OF MONEY OR COIN.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXI.

A DIATRIBE OF MONEY Or COIN.
Coin seems to come from the French, Coin, a Corner; because the ancientest
sort of Coin, was cornered and not round.

Cowells Intepreter.
Coining of Money is a special right and Prerogative of Sovereign Freherus in
his Diatribe or Exposition of Constantines Silver Coin, says, the Roman
Princes, in cunenda moneta non minimam majestatis suae partem posuerunt, and
that Constantine the Emperor first ingraved the Cross upon his Coin, which
his successors after observed, as we may see among Antiquaries.
Majesty, Money is as the sinews and strength of a state, so the life and soul
of Commerce.

Money, Commonly is the mean for all Commodities, and answers to all, Eccles.
10.19. Yet the Spaniards Coming into the West Indies, had many Commodities of
the Country which they needed, brought unto them by the Inhabitants; to whom,
when they offered them Money, goodly pieces of Gold Coin, the Indians taking
the Money, would put it into their Mouths, and spit it out to the Spaniards
again, signifying, that they could not eat it, or make use of it; and therefore
would not part with their Commodities for Money, unless they had such other
Commodities as would serve their use.

That Money has been anciently used in a way of Commerce, we may see Genesis
33.19. And the most ancient was the purest Gold. Medals are certain pieces of
Money dispersed at the Coronation of Kings. They call them commonly Medallias,
in the Italian, Spanish, and French Languages, (says Antoninus Augustinus, De
veterum numismatum Antiquitate) from the Latin word Metalla, since those three
Languages had their Original from the Latin.

Pope Gregory the 13th after he had received tidings in the Consistory of the
Massacres in France, So in France, Medals were made in remembrance of the
Massacres, the Image of Charles the ninth, siting in his royal Throne, and in
one side, Virtus in Rebels, and on the reverse of it, the Arms of France, and
Pietas excitavit Justitiam Horae subcesivae. On some of Vespatians Coin, the
State of Judea is Deciphered, in form of a Captive Woman, with a ruefull
Aspect, sitting under a Palm Tree.
one thousand five hundred and seventy two, went to the Church that night to
give thanks, made Bonfires, and gloried in the bloody feats of those
Emissaries, having a Coin with his own Face on one side, and an Angel on the
other; with a Cross in one hand, and a Sword in the other, with this Motto,
Hugonothorum Strages.

Lewis the 12th of France, a moderate Prince, when his Realm was interdicted by
Pope Julius the second, caused Coin to be stamped with his own image, Id. Ibid.
with this superscription, See the Expositors on Act. 19.24.
Perdam Nomen Babylonis.

In Athens the Tower excelled, Mr. Seldom before the English Historians Printed
by Mr. Be, Cites, Ludovicus Paruta his Originale de. Yet Mr. Seldom in h^s
notes on Eadmerus, says, Caeterum ad vetustum Archiepiscoparum in Cantuaria
jus spectat etiam forsan priscunumisma cujus pars altra Plegmundi
Archiepiscopi, altera Eicmundi cusoris nomine signata est vide plura Ibid.
in which there was a Temple to Minerva. Juleus Pollux writes, that the Attick
tetradrachme was stamped with the face of Minerva, and he might have added with
the Noctua on the reverse. Mr. Greaves of the Denarius. Hugh Broughton said, it
was portended by his Arms, that he should be a Grecian, for he gave the house
Athens.

There is a Medal in Oxford made upon the sinking of the Spanish ships in 88.
Goltzius is the most copious and best writer about Medals.
with a Navy on one side and a Rock on the other. See Cambdens Annals.

The Lydians first invented Gold and Silver Money, Janus Brass Money.

Gutherius De Officio Domus Augustae. l. 3. c. 1. Bonitas Monetae est
intriuseca vel extrinseca. Intrinseca consistit in preciositate materiae and in
pondere. Extrinseca bonitas consistit in aestimatione publica vel voluntariam
Contrahentium. Angelocrator De Monetas c. 2.
out of Isidore, says three things are required in Money; the Metal, the
Figure, and the Weight; Gold is the most excellent of all Metals, says
Georgius Agricola. Gold has Greatness of Weight, Closeness of Parts, Fixation,
Pliantness, or Softness, Immunity from Rust, Color or Tincture of Yellow.

Sir Francis Bacon's Natural History, Centuary 4. Experiment 328.

Martial calls Gold, Yellow Money. The pureness and fineness of the Coyns, and
the weight for the intrinsic, and the outward form or Character, and
inscription of the Prince or State for the Extrinsick of Coyns, is observed by
knowing bankers. Mr Greaves of the Denarius.
Has nisi de flaxa loculos implere moneta. Non decet, argentum vilia ligna
ferant. Silver is next to it, it is not consumed in the fire. It is more
ductile than any other metal except Gold. Its white color is delightful.

Yet Budaeus De Contemptu Rerum Fortuitorum l. 3. says well, At Vsu sublato
quid tandem aurum and argentum aliis praestat metallis,

Diligent inquiring into Coyns, Felix sine diphthongo. Consensus librorum and
nummorum. Fecundus sine diphthongo? Eadem monum enta antiqua Dilherri Apparatus
Philologiae. Vide Vossii Etymologicon Linguae Latinae, Melius scribitur hoc
nomen cum aspiratione Hadrianus, nam ita nummi and lapides Constanter. Casaub.
notae in Aelii Spartiani Hadrianum: Scilicet ex statuis numis atibusque
cognoscere licet qualis fuerit vultus habitusque clarorum virorum faeminarumque
illustrium, quorum nos actiones auditae delectant; qua forma fuerint Dii de
aeque, and Heroes prisci cum suis illis insignibus; Cujusmodi fuerint sive
ornamenta, sive instrumenta religionum, bellornm, magistratuum, Coronae,
Curras, triumphi, sed ilia inumeraquc id genus alia. Vide Gassendii vitam
Leireskii l. 6. p. 552, 553.
is one great piece of antiquity; by the knowledge of which (as other ways) we
may come to understand the right writing of several words.

Heliogabalus, or Algebalus rather, as he was styled of old, as Egnatius (Notis
ad Caesares) proves out of some old Coyns.

Leonardus Aretinus, in the fourth Book of his Epistles, describing his journey
from Rome to Constance, says, when he enquired of some Citizens there, of the
antiquity and original of Constance, nemo adhuc mihi occurrit, qui vel avi sui
nomen and memoriam ne dum urbi tenere videretur. Yet by diligent searching, he
found a Marble Table Containing ancient letters, by which it appears, that this
City took its name from Constantius the Father of Constantine, being called
Vitudura.

There is much learned pleasure in the Contemplation of the several figures
stamped on each side of these Attique Coyns. Would you see the true and
undoubted models of their Temples, Altars, Deities, Columns, Gates, Arches,
Aquaeducts, Bridges, Sacrifices, Vessels, Sellae Curules, Ensigns and
Standards, Naval and Mural Crowns, Amphitheaters, Circi, Bathes, Chariots,
Trophies, Ancilia, and a thousand things more. Repair to the old Coyns and you
shall find them. Peachams Complete Gentleman, chapter 12.

There is a twofold Inscription of Coyns, obversa and aversa.

Vide Seldenum De Jure Naturali. l. 6, c. 17.

I have heard of some men, Dr. Casaubone of Credulity and Incredulity in things
Natural, Civil and Divine part 2
(but heard it only) who by the bare handling and smelling, would judge better
of old Coyns (which is a great trade beyond the Seas, and concerning which,
many Books are written) than others, not altogether strangers unto them, could
by the sight.

The general names for Money among the Romans are three, Apud Romanos quidem
res nummaria tria habet generalia vocabula, quibus nominatur, Moneta, Pecunia,
Nummus. Georg. Agricola De Veteribus and Novis Metallis. l. 1.
Moneta, Numus, Pecunia.

First, Moneta (whence the French Monnoye) a Monendo, because it shows us the
Author, the Value and the time.

Numisma, quasi Nomisma a nominibus scilicet and effigiebus principum quae ei
imprimebantur, Isidorus dici putat. Waserus De Antiquis Numis Hebraeorum,
Chaldaeorum and Syrorum c. 11.

Secondly, Numus, or Nummus rather, says Vossius, a Numa, says Angelo Cretor,
it has rather a Greek Original, (...) from the Law, because it is a Legitimate
and public price. Nomisma and Numus (says Martinius) seem to be of the same
Original.

Thirdly, Pecunia, either from the Images of Pecuniam a pecum dictam esse
constat, sed quae sit causa originis parum convenit inter auctores. Vossii
Etymologicum Linguae Latinae.
Cattle stamped upon it, or from their skin out of which money was Coined.

Genesis 33.19. For an hundred pieces of money, the Greek and Chaldee translate
it, a hundred Lambs. Others think they were pieces of money, on which the
images of Lambs were stamped. So in Jos. 24.32. Job 42.11. Ainsworth, Vide
Meneru in loc. and Brerewood De Ponderibus, etc.

The Money current in Attica was commonly stamped with an Ox, whence came the
Byword. Bos in Lingua, Dr. Heylins Cosm. in Greece. p. 5 88.
applied to such Lawyers as were bribed to say nothing in their Clients cause,
not much unlike to which was the Proverb rising from the Coin of Aegina, (an
Isle adjoining) stamped with the figure of a Snail, viz. Virtutem and
sapientiam vincant. Testudines.

The Names of the Brass Money among the Romans were, As Quadrans Sextans Triens


Of the Silver.

Denarius Quinarius Sestertius.
Of the Gold.

Aureus Vt aureus viginti quinque denarias complectebatur, ita totidem annos
Aureum vitae appellabant Mearsi mantissa ad Luxum Romanum. c. 19.
sive Solidus, it was valued with the Romans at 25 Denaries.

As or assis, is a little piece of money, whose baseness grew into a Proverb.
Omnes unius aestimemus assis,

Aes is also used for Money, because the first Money amongst the Romans was
made of Brass, whence aerarium also for a Treasury. Tam aeris quam argenti
nominibus in sermon latino pecunia indicatur. Camerarius.

Servius Tullius First Coined Money at Rome, as Pliny witnesses, l. 33. c. 3.
This was of Brass. Romani primum usi fuerunt qua druplici Moneta, ne mpe,
Plumbea, Aerea, Argentea, Aurea. Plumbeae usus quando coeperit, incertum. Aes
initio habuerunt rude, pondere distinctum, non nota Lipsius quasi forma and
exemplum, ad quos nummos alios omnes expenderent. Serarius in Josh. c. 7.
Quaest. 5.
They used this till the 5th year before the first Punick war. Then Silver
Money was first Coined, which is called Denarius, quia valeret december libras
aeris. The Golden Money was Coined at Rome, forty two years after the Silver
Money was used, as Pliny shows in the place before-named, 62. says Lipsius.
The price and esteem of Gold was different among the Grecians and Romans, among
the Grecians Golden Money was changed for ten of Silver, among the Romans for
twelve and a half; often it was much more esteemed. Vossius De Philiologia
Christianiae. l. 6. c, 35. Meursius has put out Denarius Pythagoricus
opusculum pereruditum, ac mihi eo gratius quod inscripserit nomini nostro
Vossius, ibid. l. 8. c. 3.

Amongst the ancient Hebrews Chaldeans and Syrians, Waserus de Antiquis Numis
Hebraeorum l. 2. c. 2.
the most usual money was the Siclus or Shekel, among the Latins the chief and
usual kinds of Silver money were Denarius and Scriverius on Martial adds
Victoriatus Consentiunt omnes Sicli nomen esse prorsus ab Hebraeo (...) Shekel,
hoc vero esse a verbo (...) Shakal quod appenderare significat, partim quia, ut
in multis hodie locis ponderari enim solebat argentea moneta, partim, quia apud
Hebr aeos hoc nummi genus, erat.
Sestertius, among the Grecians, Dram, Mina, Talentum.

A Shekel (coming from Shakal, he weighed, from whence our English Skole and
Skale to weigh with, is derived) is by interpretation a weight, as being the
most common in payments, in which they used to weigh their money, Genesis 23.16.
Jer. 32.9. The Chaldee calls a Shekel Silgna, and Selang (from whence our
English shilling seems to be borrowed) and the quantity of the common shekel
differd not much from our shilling, as the shekel of the Sanctuary was about
two shillings., Answ. on Genesis 20.16. See him on Exodus 33.13.

A shekel is about the weight of an English half Crown, Nehem. 5.14, 15. Forty
shekels of Silver, that is, five pounds sterling; a shekel is half an ounce,
which makes 2 s. 6 d.
Valet pro inde Shekel de nostro. 2 s. 6 d. Brerewood de Ponderibus and Pretiis
veterum nummorum. c. 1.

Exodus 30.13. Mr. Jackson on that place.
The Gerah is held to have been about a penny half penny, and by that estimate,
the shekel was two shillings six pence, and half the shekel fifteen pence.

It is the ancientest of all the moneys the Scripture mentions, Ar. Montanus,
De Mensuris Sacris.
the weight of it is almost four Spanish Reals, or four Roman Julii,

A Roman Julio In Italia Romana Scorta in singulas aebdomadas Julium pendent
Pontifici, qui census annuus nonnunquam viginti milia ducato excedet. Cornelius
Agrippa De vaenita. Scient.
or; a Spanish Royal, is about 7 pence English, a piece of eight called so,
because equal to eight Royals is about 4 s. 6 d. English, so that Ainsworth
seems to be mistaken.

Graeci pecuniarum summas number erabant drachmis, ut Judaea siclis, and Romani
sestertiis, Brerewood De Ponderibus and Pretiis veterum nummorum.

Mr. Greaves in his Denarius, Shekel is usnally understood where the Coin or
weight is not expressed, as Esai. 7.23. 2 Samuel 18.11, 12. Mat. 26.15. Exodus
30.13. The shekel of the Sanctuary, either because the shekel of the Sanctuary
was twice as much as the Common shekel, which is indeed the common opinion; or
rather because the Standard of all weights and measures was kept in the
Sanctuary, a shekel of the full weight and value, after the Standard of the
Sanctuary. Mr. Jackson.
would have the thirty pieces of Silver, which were given to Judas, as the
reward of his treason, to be thirty shekels, that being less then fifteen of
our ordinary Crowns.

We find in Exodus (says he) the price of a servant to have been thirty
shekels. Gassendus De vita Peireskii, says as much, and so does Dr. Hamon on
Matthew. 26.15. Mr. Greaves, there also says, the distinction of a double
shekel, the one sacred equal to the tetradrachme, the other profane weighing
the didrachme: that used in the Sanctuary, this in Civil Commerce, is without
any solid foundation in the writ, and without any probability of reason, that
in any wise State, the Prince and people should have one sort of Coin, and the
Priests should have another, and that this of the Sanctuary should be in a
double proportion to the other, and yet that both should concur in the same
name, Rivet. on Exodus 30.13. goes the same way and gives four reasons to prove
that the shekel was but one.

Matthew. 22.20. The tribute Money or Denarius, that was to be paid to Caesar by
way of tribute, had on it, says Occo, the picture or image of Caesar, and in
it these Letters written, Caesar Augustus, such a year after the taking of
Judaea, Dr. Hammond in loc.

Denarius may be considered in a double respect, either as nummus, M. Greave of
the Denarius.
or as pondus: In the first acception, the valuation of it in civil affairs is
remarkable, in the later, the gravity and ponderousness: The Denarius was a
Silver Coin in use amongst the Romans, passing at the first institution for
Dena era or ten Asses. whence the name: The Dutch esteem it at six Stivers, or
a shilling.

The Assis was a brass Coin weighing a pound. The assis is taken for the whole,
according to the usual phrase of Civilians, ex ass haeres, when one is Heir to
the whole inheritance.
The denarius had an impress upon it of the figure X. denoting the decussis, or
number of the Asses.

Denarius as Pondus was either Consularis, Argenteus nummus Romanorum Denarius
est, Atticorum dram. Scaliger De Re Nummaria. Denarii drachmae fere pondus
and aestimationem habebant Salmassii notae in Vopiscii. A Dram natum nostrum
Dram, which in Gold is six shillings three pence, in Silver seven pence half
penny.
made under the government of the City by the Consuls, or Caesareus, under the
Caesar's, sometimes there is the Effigies of the Consuls, and sometimes of the
Emperor on it. Denarius is of as great moment for the Discovery of weights, as
the Roman foot for the Measures.

It weighs of our Money seven pence, or seven pence half penny, and was the
pay of the Roman Soldiers, and the wages of a Day-labourer, Matthew. 20.9.

The Athenian Dram (the pay of their Soldiers) by account both of Merchants
and Physicians weighed alike, and was of one value

Sestertius signifies two and a half, Sestertius, quasi semissis tertius, ut in
lege duodecim tabularum pes sestertius, sunt pedes duo and semis Snellius De Re
Nummaria. Olim edoctus sum Sestertium valere duobus assibus and semisse quando
scilicet dicitur Sestertius genere masculino Sestertium autem neutro genere
valere mill sestertios. Ratio est quia neuiro genere subintelligitur pondo, ut
in masculino nummus cum simpliciter dicitur sestertius. Sarravii Epistolae
videsis Vossii Etymologi con Linguae Latinae and Lips. de Pecun. Denariorum tot
suut genera quot populorum, Spelmanui Glossarium.
as the vulgar note also imports H s. or joined H. s. that is, duo and semis,
two and a half, it is meant always of so many asses, four Sestertii are
equivalent to a denarius. Sir Henry Savil on Tacitus, and Mr. Greaves of the
Denarius.

Every Sestertium was valued at seven pound sixteen shillings three pence.

As the Sestertius according to Arruntius, was olim dupondius and semis,
anciently two pounds of brass and an half; so the Sestertius pes, was two foot
and an half. Mr. Greaves his Discourse of the Roman Foot.

As the Unity in respect of Numbers, or the Sestertius in Discourses de re
nummaria: So is the Denarius for weights, a fit rise or beginning, from whence
the rest may be deduced. Mr. Greaves of the Denarius.

The Dram as Nummus, was a silver Coin in use amongst the Athenians, Dram.
and so it was the measure of things vendible, as all Coyns are, and as pondus,
it was the measure of their gravity and weight. Mr. Greaves of the Denarius.

Dilher in the first Tome of his Academical Disputations, reckons up eight
kinds of Drachmae; See Beza Schmidius, and Dr. Hammond on Matthew. 17.27.

Gellius, Noct. Attic. lib. 1. chap. 8. says that Demosthenes went privately
unto Lais, and desired to lie with her; but she demanding 10000 drachmae of him
for one nights lodging with her; he refused, saying, He would not buy
Repentance at so dear a rate; This was Lais, the Daughter; for there were two
of that name, the mother and Sive naturalis, sive adoptiva.
daughter: both beautiful and infamous strumpets, as Palmerius ad Pausaniae
Corinthiaca shows.

The Attick (...) or Mina, Contained a hundred Drachmes in weight, as it is
clear out of Pliny, Pollux, and others; some derive it from the Hebrew (...),
From Maneh, in Hebrew, Mua in Greek, and Mina in Latin, for a pound, has its
name. Mr. Gataker on Esa. 65.11.
to number, the word is used Ezekiel. 45.12. and rendered Maneh.

Snellius De Re Nummaria says, it is manifest by the testimonies of Comedians,
that there was a double Talent in use among the Athenians, a greater and a
lesser.

A Talent is the greatest weight which was in use, Attica Talentum and Mina
sunt Numerus, and Collectio pecuniae, non species Nummi, Sealiger De Re
Nummaria. The Talent was manifold, the Attrick Talent is much celebrated.
Ainsworth.
every Talent was a twelve pounds weight; it weighed three thousand Shekels,
and every Shekel three hundred and twenty grains of Barley. An Hebrew Talent in
Silver, is of our money three hundred seventy and five pounds. In Gold, four
thousand five hundred pounds.

1 Chronicles. 22.14. See Brerewood De Ponderibus Pret. Heb. etc. c. 6.
Now behold in my poverty I have prepared for the house of the Lord an hundred
thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand Talents of Silver. Some
compute it to be above thirty three thousand Cart-loads of silver, allowing six
thousand pound sterling to every Cart-load, and seventy millions of French
Crowns of Gold. See Sir Walter Rawleigh his History of the World, part 2. chapter
17.. 9.

1 Kings 9.14. The Talent contained three hundred shekels, as may be collected
from Exo. 38.25, 26. The Hebrews valued Gold at ten times the rate of Silver.
The Jews had two Talents, the one sacred, the other common. The sacred was in
weight and worth, as much more as the common. The sacred in Gold was reputed to
be three thousand seven hundred and fifty pound in value; the common, one
thousand eight hundred seventy and five pounds sterling. Dr. Gouge in loc.

Edward Brerewood heretofore Professor of Astronomy in Gresham-Colledge in
London, has published a learned Book, De Ponderibus and Pretiis Veterum
Nummorum, eorumque cum recentioribus Collatione, which is in the Apparatus of
the Polyglot Bible.

Waserus has written so fully and exactly of the ancien Coyns of the Hebrews,
Chaldees, and Syrians, that there needs not to be said more of that Argument.

Budaeus Sed de istoc and caeteris ad rem monetariam pertinentibus, Consuli
malo Budaeum, Vortium, Hottomannum, Car. Moli naeum, Covarruviam, and
intelligentissimu in bujus argumenti, Reinerum Budelium Ruremundanum Ictum,
Electori Coloniensi, dum viveret, monetarum tam Rhenensium, quam West-falicarum
praefectum: Cujus geminus exstat. liber: unus de art cudendae monetae; alter
de quaestionibus Monetariis Vossius De Physiol. Christ. l. 6. c. 36, Inter
antiquos Orismius Lexoniensis Episcopus, and Caroli sexti Galldrum regis
praeceptor Curiosa de re Nummaria volumine, and inter recentiores Gulielm.
Budaeus libris de Ass, Joachim Camerarius de Nummismat. Graec. and Lat Demps.
in Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 7. c. 31. Vide Plure ibid.
in his Books de Ass, or the Breviary Collected out of him, with the
Annotations of Philip Melanchthon, and Joachim Camerarius, are the best for the
Greek and Latin Coyns.

Antonius Augustinus a man very acurate in Coyns, as appears by his Dialogues.
Mr. Greaves of the Denarius.

Marquardus Freherus, has put forth a learned Discourse of paying tribute,
where he speaks somewhat of Roman Coyns. Mr. Seldom De Jure Naturali ac
Gentium. l. 2. c. 8. calls it Eruditissima ac gravissima De Numismate census a
Pharisaeis inquestionem vocato Dissertatio.

Mr. Greaves has written learnedly of this subject in his discourse of the
Denarius.

The Roman Emperors Gold, Silver, and Copper Coin, (with their Images and
Inscriptions) are in the custody of that learned Knight, and my worthy Friend,
Sir John Cotton, as I have heard.

It Is pity that Sir Simonds D' Eus my great friend, had not published something
this way, he having spent so much time in this study, and having purchased so
many several Coyns of all sorts.

There are some other Gentlemen that have a good Collection of Coyns; There are
Coyns with Lazius, l. 3. Commen. Reipub. Romanae, c. 12. whose inscription is
Omnium ad Remp. pertinentium suprema lex est salus populi, sive Felicitas
publica. Tam in nummo Juliae Mammeae Augustae videre est forma maetronae solio
in sidentis, quae dextra gerit caduceum, sinistra copia cornu Inscriptio autem
est Felicitas Publica. Vossius in Physiologia Christiani and Theologia Gentili.
l. 10. c. 38.
Salas Publica Demps. in Rosin. Antiquit. Romans lib. 1.

There are two requisites (says Dempster) that Money pass, proba materia, and
vultus Imperatoris ei impressus.

False money (says He in Rosin Antiq. Romans l. 7. c. 31.) was forbidden by the
Roman Laws, and the Crime is called peculatus. Charles the Great had a shop in
his Palace for the Coining of Money, that it might be more diligently coined.

Camden in his Britain says, Nicolaus Fabricius de Peiresc. of France, was
very skillful in antiquities, and old medals or pieces of money.

He says there also that many pieces of Roman money are every As in Lancashire
at Lancaster, Rible, Chester, in Westmorland at Brougham Cumberland
where found among us in the ruins of Cities and Towns subverted, in
Treasure-Coffers, or vaults hidden in that age, as also in Funeral-pots and
Pitchers.

About thirty five years since, One that writes the History of England, says
of the Britains. Some of their Money was in Brass, other in Iron Rings; one
especial sort, had the Figure of a shield Embossed, and on that side a certain
Image the Device was within.
not far from Dunstable many pieces of silver were taken up, which the plow had
thrown upon the edge of the Furrough: Being examined, they were found to be
silver with the impression of Caesar on them. Mr. Seldom much valued them for
their Antiquity, some of them having been stamped (as he said) above nine
hundred, and some a thousand years. Mr. Peachams Worth of a Penny.

I have been informed, that some Medals have been dig'd up at Shawell in
Leichestershire, the Town where I was born and also at Braunston.

It is a great question, says Georgius Agricola, whether pure or mixed money be
more profitable for Countries and States.

Peacham in his Complete Gentleman, Terrie in his Voyage to the East Indies,
says that the Spanish Royal is the purest money of Europe. There is Pezzi di
Quatro which is equal to four Reals, there are also pieces of two Reals, one
Real, and half a Real.
c. 19. of Travels, says, the Spanish Coyns are the best of Europe.

Howell in his Dodonars Grove, or Vocal Forest, part 2. Walk 4. p. 44. says,
Druina (by which I suppose he means England) is renowned abroad to have her
Kings Face and Arms drawn in the purest sort of Minerals, and the generally
best current Coyns in the world.

Queen Elizabeth caused all such base moneys as were Coined by any of her
Predecessors, Dr Heylins Ecclesia Restauratu. p. 135.
to be reduced to a lesser value, and to be brought into her Majesty's Mint,
for which she gave them money of the purest silver, such as passed commonly by
the name of Easterling or Sterling money, Esterlingus and Sterlingus apad
Matthaum Parisium, atque alios, praecipue Anglicanos scriptores legas. Nec
tamen eo rejiciendum, quando hoc nihilo deterius est quam vulgata, illa
vocabula, daleri, ducati, floreni, ac similia. Nam peouniae novitas nova
exigebat vocabula. Notat ea vox Anglis denarium vox Sterling est ex eo inqu it
Watsius quia stellae figura in ea compareret, Vossius de Vitiis Sermonis l. 2.
c. 5,
since which time, no base money has been Coined in England, but only of pure
Gold and Silver, to pass for current in the same; save that of late times, in
relation to the Necessity of poor people, a permission has been given to the
Coining of Farthings, which no man can be forced to accept in satisfaction of a
Rent or Debt.

In all other States of the Christian World, there are several sorts of Copper
money, as current with them for public uses, as the purest metal,

Queen Elizabeth supplied the King of Navarre in his straits, with twenty two
thousand pounds of English money in Gold, (a sum of Gold Coin so great, as he
professed he had never seen together before) and sent him Arms and four
thousand men, under the Command of Peregrine Lord Willoughbey.

Camdens Annals of Queen Elizabeth. 4th Book, Anno 1589. the 32d of her Reign.

Sterlings are used in England, Scotland and Ireland.

That name of Sterling began in time of Hen. II. and had its original of name
from some Esterling, making that kind of money, which has its Essence in
particular weight and fineness; not of the Starling Bird, as some, nor of
Sterling in Scotland under Edw. 1. as others absurdly; for in Records much more
ancient I have read the express name Sterlingorum. Mr. Seldom on the 17th song,
of Draytons Poly-olbion.

Sterling is a proper Epithete for money current within the Realm. Occurrit
Esterlingus interdum simpliciter pro ipso denario, interdum ad distinguendam
monetam probam a re proba, and pro numo legali ingenere. Spelmanni Glossarium
vide plura ibid.
A certain pure Coin stamped first of all by the Esterlings here in England.

Cowells Interpreter.
Esterling money, now called Sterling, not from Striveling in Scotland, nor
from a Star, which some dreamed to be Coined thereon. Camdens Remains.

That denomination came from the Germans, of their Easterly dwelling, termed by
English men Esterlings, whom John, King of England first sent to reduce the
silver to the due fineness and purity. Camdens Britain. in Scotland.

There is one Thomas Hills that put out the Art of Vulgar arithmetic 1600.
who has p. 262. A Table of the names and values of the most usual Gold Coyns
in Christendom, and begins with our own Country Gold. He mentions the Rose
Noble, or Royal, Half Rose Noble, Old Noble, Half Old Noble, George Noble, Half
George Noble, Angel, Half Angel, Old Crown. K. H. Base Crown K. H. Half Crown.
Sovereign of K. H. other Sou. of all sorts, Double Sovereign, Great Sovereign,
Half Sovereign. Unicorn of Scotland. Scottish Crown.

There is for The English Gold being at a higher value beyond the Seas, then in
our own Nation, it is a great Cause of the transportation of it, Peachams Worth
of a Penny.
Gold.

The Carolus or Piece 20 s And the Ginie Pieces, 22 s The Angel 10 and 11 s And
Crown 5 s. and 5 s. 6 d. and 2 s. 9 d.

For Silver.

The Crown 5 s. Half Crown 2 s. 6 d. Thirteen pence half penny. Half and
quarter that and 4 d. ob. Shilling 12 d. 9 d. 6 d. Groat 4 d. Three Pence 3 d.
Two Pence 2 d. Penny There are so many kinds of Pence, as there are several
Countries or Nations. Our English Penny is a Scottish Shilling. See more there
Ibid.
1 d. Halfpenny ob.

Here in England that which was sold about an hundred years agone for ten
Groats, which then weighed and ounce, now since the discovery of the Indies,
can hardly be bought for ten shillings of our current Money, or two ounces of
the same goodness and weight.

Sir Henry Savill on a Place in Polybius.

In the Low Countries and Germany, the usual Coyns in Gold are Ducats, and
double Ducats, the Ducats are called Hungars at Venice, and are worth nine
shillings English.

In the Low Countries the usual silver pieces are Ducatoons equal to ten Dutch
shillings, or sixty stivers; Paracoons equal forty eight stivers, or eight
Dutch shillings; Shillings equal to six stivers. But the States money is a
little under this value, stiver, in brass, the fourth part of stivers pieces.

In Germany the most Common pieces in silver are Dollars, Copsticks, and half
Copsticks, equal just to our shillings and six-pences, Tafiletta the great
Emperor of Barbary, allows to every Horseman sixteen Dollars a Month, and to
every Footman eight, so that his men are not chargeable to the Country.
Relation of some part of his life.
and there is abundance of our shillings and sixpences which pass under that
name.

This word Copstick comes from Caput, as the Italian Teston from Testa.
Kreutzers, so called from the Mark of the Cross. Weiss-penny equal to two
Kreutzers. Grass equal to three Kreutzers; ten Weiss-pennies are equal to five
Copsticks, Guilders equal to three Copsticks, and half Guilders, a Weiss-penny
a White Penny in Dutch, these lesser pieces are of a mixed metal.

The German Dollars furnished all the Mints of Europe, The German silver Dollar,
called Rix Dollar, in England is worth 4 s. -- 6 d. or as some say 4 s. -- 8 d.
before the Mines of Mexico and Potosi were discovered in America.

There were the Latin, Attick, and Greek pounds.

Libra. Numaria or pound, Spelmanni Glossarium, See Ezra 2.69
took its name from the weight, because it weighed in times past a Trojane
pound, that is, twelve Ounces. Thence the Saxon punde, and the English pound.

The pound sterling in Britain (says Angelo Crator De Monetis c. 1.) is
esteemed ten Brabantine Florenes, or four Spanish Dollars.

In Spain for Gold The Spanish Pistol, is about seven pence better than the
Italian, The value of Money in Spain is very often varied according to the
wills and Interests of the Princes.
Pistolls, and half Pistolls, and double Pistolls. In Silver, the common pieces
there, are a piece of eight, a half piece of eight, a quarter piece of eight, a
half quarter piece of eight, and a piece that is but a sixteenth part of a
piece of the Royal eight.

In France for Gold, the common pieces are the Lewis, equal (not many years
since) to eleven Livers, the half Lewis half so much. The Escud' or now about
six Livers,. For Silver the Escue equal to three Livers, the thirty, fifteen,
and five Sous pieces. The Quart D'Escu (because the fourth part of the Escud'
or) equal to one Liver. Mixed metal, the Souse and the Souse Marque. For Brass
the Denier and the Lyard eequal to two Deniers, at first stamped for three
Deniers.

Johnson advises Travelers if they carry over money with them, that it be in
double Pistolets or French Crowns of weight, by these (says he) He is sure to
sustain loss in no place, and in Italy to gain above twelve pence in the pound.

Bizantines or Bezants, Constantinopolis primum Bizantium dicta formam antiqui
vocabuli praeferunt Imporatorii Nummi Bizantini Vocati. Spelmanni Glossarium.
Vide Cotgrave Dictionar. Gallico. Anglic, verb Besant.
as coined at Constantinople, sometimes called Bizantium, and not at Besanson in
Burgundy, plates of Gold are called Bezantes; and in the Court of England where
a great piece of Gold valued at fifteen pound, which the King offers upon
high Festival days is yet called a Bizantine, which anciently was a piece of
Gold Coined by the Emperors of Constantinople, Camdens Remains of money; in
his Britannia in Middlesex, He speaks of Bizantines of Silver vallued at two
shillings anciently.

Lar is a Coin much used in the East, both in Persia and the East Indies. There
is one of them to be seen within the Gallery above the public Library in Oxford

The Asper in Turkey is worth a Penny, Turkish Asper.
and often mentioned, one of which I have seen.

In Italy at Venice, for Gold there is the Chequeen equal to seventeen Livers,
the Ducat for silver, a Scudo which by a Bando, anno 1663 was rated at nine
Livers six Sous, one half, one quarter, and the eighth part of a Scudo, a
Ducaton.

For brass Soldo, and half Soldo, and Soldino, also a Denier. Genoa, for Gold,
double Pistolls, Pistolls. The Pistol is called Doppio or Dobla, the double
Pistol Doblone.

The silver pieces there are a Croison or Scudo.

For Brass D' otto pieces equal to eight Deniers, de Quatro equal to four
Deniers and the Deniers.

At Florence for silver, the Scudo equal to ten Julios, the Teston equal to
three Julios (so called from having a Head upon it which is in Italian Testa)
Julios, half Julios, and Quarto Julio pieces, the Grats equal to five Quatrins.

In Brass the Quatrin equal to the third part of a Soldo.

In the Popes Territories, in silver a Scudo equal to ten Julios, a Teston,
Julio, half a Julio and a quarter of a Julio,

At Banonia Bajocks, The Pope who has six and twenty thousand Crowns a day to
spend; on the day of his Coronation scatters among the people Baiocchi, and
Bagatini, half pence and farthings: saying with St. Peter Act. 3.6. Silver and
Gold I have none, but such as I have I give thee. Peter Du Moulius Confutat. of
Lurgat. chapter 5.
and two Bajocks pieces of a mixed metal.

Naples, in silver, Carolines equal to ^ulios, but not altogether so good, two
Caroline pieces.

In Brass Granos, Publicas equal to one and a half of a Grano.

There are pieces of Gold called Florentini, or Floreni Florens, because first
coined in the City of Florence, and having the shape of the flower of the Lilly
in one side, and of John Baptist in the other, it is called in Italian,
Florino. Vossius de Vitiis Sermonis, l 3. c. 12. says, that the French had
also in times past its Florene, thence called Franc says he, A Franc is one
shilling six pence in England, so is a Livre says he, and the English also of
the best Gold, thence called Auri Nummis apud Anglos geuus ante nostram
memoriam Exoletum. Spelmanni Glossarium.
Noble.

There were also the Rhenish Florens first coined by the four Electors at
Rhene, that of Mentz, Trevers, Colen, and the Palatine, after used by others,
something inferior to those first.

The pieces of Gold called Ducats were first coined by the Venetians and those
of Genoa.

There are (says Georgius Agricola) the Hungarian, Venetian, The Polomans Gold
Ducats are of the same value with the Hungarian.
Spanish and Turkish Ducats.

Artiabalipa King of Peru paid for his ransom ten millions three hundred
twenty six thousand Ducats in Gold. Du miroir des Francois Liver premier.

The Turkish Sultanie is of the same Standard, firmness, and value, with the
Hungarian Duckat.

The Venetian Chequeen, in England 9 s. 6 d. the Barbary Duckat, the Egyptian
and Turkish Erif, are almost all of the same pureness in respect of the Gold,
MGreaves of the Denarius.
and not differing above a grain in the weight.

The old Denarius, The Giulii or Pauli are two names of the same price, from
two Popes.
Dram Dutch shilling, Spanish Real Roman Julios or Paulos, are near of an
equal value; The French Escu or silver Crown, the Spanish Piice of eight, the
German Dollar, the Low Dutch Patacon are of an equal value.

Mr. Broughton says, he asked a simple Mariner which had been in the
West Indies, what they called Gold there, he said Cethem, just the Scripture
term.

Broughtons Epistle to the Require or Consent to the grounds of Divinity
studies.

Their current money in the West Indies is of the fruits of certain trees like
our Almonds, which they call Cachoas. Pet. Mart. first Decade, chapter 4.

The Coyns of the West Indies are Wampon Peague, (the sixth part of a penny
with us) which goes by number, and Ronokco which goes by weight.

In the East Indies the Rupihes of Ropees of diverse values and Mah Mudies.

They have in the West Indies also a Golden Coin which they call a Castellan,
it exceeds the Ducaet, it is commonly a third part called Pesus

The Coin or Bullion brought to the East Indies from any place, is presently
melted and refined, and the Moguls stamp (which is his Name and Titles in
Persian Characters) put upon it. The Coin there is more pure than in any other
part of the world, being made of pure silver, without any Allay.

Sir Thomas Roes Voyage into the East Indies.

Madines are the small silver Money current in Egypt. The Arabic uses to
express the least piece of money that is by Phals, for two Mites, Mark 12.42.
They read Phalsam.


Mr. Greaves in his Denarius, says at his being in Egypt, five Madines passed
for a Dollar: Sands in his Travels says forty.

Most Countries (says Mr. Greaves) use the same weights for Silks, Gold and
Silver.

The Persians loved shooting so well, Pliny l. 7. c. 5. writes that Perses the
son of Persius, of whom the Persians had their Surname, Should be the first
deviser of Shafts. Yet the Scripture, (which is ancienter then any kind of
learning) mentions Archers. Genesis 21.20. 1 Samuel 31.3. 2 Chronicles. 35.23.
that they set an Archer on the reverse of their Coin of Gold, which was of
great value. The King of Persia being offended at Agesilaus, gave the Athenians
ten thousand pieces of this great Coin of Gold of theirs, and so corrupted
them; which thing when Agesilaus understood, he said merrily, but yet truly,
That he was driven away with ten thousand Bowmen, (meaning the^r Coin of Gold
with an Archer on it) and how should he a poor man be able to withstand so many
Archers. See Plutarch in Agesilaus.

The Muscovites have but one kind of money which they call Copeca, fifty of
which make a Crown, it is of Silver of an Oval figure, and so small, that the
value of two Crowns will searce bear the bulk of four pence in French Deniers;
that which they call Muscofske is the fourth part of a Copeca, Poluske is the
half, an Alim is three pence, a Grifna is ten, a Rouble a hundred, but these
are not to be had of one piece.

Relation of three Embassies by the Earl of Carlisle, p. 68.

Many Coyns resemble the Dragon with the title of Health. This most vigilant
Creature is a Type of Aesculapius. Vigilance is necessary for a Physician.

It were worthy the inquiry of some studious persons, how the custom came up
of dividing money into pounds, shillings and pence, which is used in most
places of Europe. A Liver or pound, say some, is every where equal to twenty
solidi, soldi sous or shillings, a shilling is equal to twelve of the modern
Denarii or pence, but the value of the Livers is very different in France. a
Liver is about 1 s. 6 d. English, in Flanders a Liver is equal to 11 s. 3 d.
English; in Venice a Liver is about seven pence half penny, at Genoa a Liver is
about one shilling English, at Turin a Liver is about one shilling three pence,
at Ligorn a Liver is 9 d. at Millain a Liver is 10 d. in the Popes Country a
Liver is 13 d. at Naples 12 d. in the Popes Territories in Catalonia a Liver is
about 3 s. 6 d. in Valentia a Liver is about 5 s. in Castile and Granada not
long since, a Liver was 2 s. 6 d. in Scotland a pound is equal to 1 s. 8 d.

A Diatribe OF MEASURING OF THE DISTANCE Betwixt PLACE and PLACE.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXI.

A DIATRIBE OF MEASURING, etc.
GEometry is an Art of Measuring well.

The several Dr. Wilkins his Essay toward a Real character pars 2. chapter 7.
Nations of the World do not more differ in their Languages, then in the
various kinds and proportions of their Measures.

That the Foot was the most received and usual measure amongst the Romans,
Mensurant Talmudici, aliquando per Milliaria aliquando per Parsas, aliquando
per Dietas. Vnam quamque harum Comperies apud eos frequent issime. D. Ligh^^.
Decas Chorographica. c. 8.
as the Cubit amongst the Jews, is a thing not controverted by any. Mr. Greaves
of the Roman Foot. As the Denarius contained sixteen Asses, so the Foot
contained sixteen Digitos.

The Roman Milliare contains Mill p^ssus as the very name imports, Quem
admodum Persae Paras^ngis, Aegypt^i Schenis, Galli Leucis, ita Latini Millibus
Passuum Lapidum mensuras designaverunt, Suritae Prefat. ad Comment in Antom
August. Itin.
and every p^ssus consists also of five Feet, as Columelia and Isidorus
expressly tell us. Mr. Greaves of the Roman Foot.

The Sun according to the Mathematical Computation, every hour, and that in
respect of the Earth only, by this course absolves two hundred twenty and five
miles, in the day and night, and in respect of the earth, it runs over five
thousand four hundred miles. How great then will its course be in respect of
its Orb.

The Philosophers are of opinion that the Earth, together with the Sea, Totius
globi terreni ambitus est milliarium Germanicorum Communium 5400. Keck. System.
Geog. lib. 1. chapter 4.
do contain in compass or circuit six thousand three hundred Dutch miles.

The Romans used to Measure out the distance betwixt one place and another, A
Mill est Milliare ac Milliarium, mill passuum spatium. Vossii Etymologicon
Linguae Latinae. Notissimum lapides veteribus dictos pro Milliaribus, quae
singula singulis lapidibus denotabantur, Barth. ad Rutil. l. 2, Animadvers.
by thousands of Paces, which they call Milliaria, Miles; and whereas there was
placed at each Miles end, a stone, or pillar, the word Lapis came to be used to
signify a Mile, as ad Decimum lapidem positaurbs, a City ten Miles off.

Ad Lapidem Torquatus habet praetoria quartum, Mart. Epig. l. 10. Epig. 79.

Whence grew also the usual Phrase, Ad tertium quartum quintum ab urbe lapidem,
for three, four or five miles from the City.

Sir Henry Savill in his notes on the first Book of Tacitus his History, where
he also observes; that as there were milliaria laepidea, Little pillars of
stone erected by order from C. Gracchus at the end of every mile; so there was
Milliarium aureum, a Golden pillar set up by Augustus; so called because from
thence began the account of Miles.

There are still in the Appian way several Columnae or Lapides Milliarii,
standing, Columna quaedam in Capite Romani Fori, in quam omnes Italiae viae
terminabantur. Salmuth in Pancirolli Nova Reperta Tit. 16. The Columna
Milliaria, from which they began to measure, is still in the Court before the
Capitol at Rome.
whereby the Romans divided and distinguished their Miles, which occasioned
those phrases, ad primum, ad quartum, ad centesimum lapidem.

Mr. Greaves, Among the diverse Measures which Geographers use to show the
dimension of the Earth, Intervalla locorum certis signis distinguere publico
quasi gentium Consensu receptum est: Vt puta in Italia Millibus Passuum in
Graecia Stadiis; in Perside Parasangis, quod nomen hodie ineagente remanet, in
Syria Schaenis in Gallia and Hispania Leucis, quod ad huc retinetur: in
Germania Rustis, ut est apud Hieronymum. Scaligs De Emendat Temp. l. 5.
the most usual are these.

First, A Geometrical pace which is five feet.

Secondly, A Furlong which is 125 paces, or 625 feet.

Thirdly, A Mile which is eight furlongs, or a thousand paces.

Fourthly, A League which is 2 Miles in the quantity of Measures, we go from a
Barley Corn to a Finger breadth, from a Finger breadth to an inch; from an inch
to a hand breadth; from an hand breadth to a span; from a span to a foot; from
a foot to a pace, and so forth to a perch, a furlong, a leque, a mile.

Keckerman in his Systeme of Geography. l. 1. c. 4. says, the general
instruments of measure are either lesser, a Barley Corn, a Finger, a Palm, a
Foot; or greater, a Pace, a Furlong, a Mile. He says, the Pace is either
simple two Feet and a half, or Geometrical, five Feet.

The Sabbath Days journey, Acts 1.12. was the space of two thousand paces, that
is, half a German mile. Victorinus Strigelius in loc.

There are Mensurae applicationis, as a span, a cubit, a yard.

Et mensurae Capacitatis, either of things liquide, a Pint, Quart, Pottle,
Gallon, Firkin, Barrel, Hogshead, Pipe, Tun, or things dry; a Peck, Bushel,
Quarters.

The Greeks did mete out the distances of places by Stadia Stadium apud Romanos
DCXXV. pedes Romanos facit, apud Graecos DC. pedes Graecos. DC. pedes Graecos.
Dilh. Disputat. Academ. Tomus 1. Stadium quod Latin Curriculum dicitur, locus
erat, in quo homines and equi cursi, tabant, and aethletae certabant, a
statione, quod Hercules eo spatio uno spiritu confecto constitisset Onuphrius
Panvinus De Ludis Cirensibus. l. 2. c, 1.
or Furlongs; one Stadium does contain 125 paces; hence eight Stadia make one
Roman mile, that is, one thousand paces. Mr. Greaves says seven Greek Stadia
and a half, make a Roman mile.

Furlong Sulcum nostri dicunt agricolae id quod uno progressu arat rum
describit antequam regreditur. Spelmanni Glossarium.
quasi a Furrow long, a Furrow, hoc est quod longitudinem sulci determinatur, a
125 paces.

An Acre mentioned, 1 Samuel 14.14. and Esa. 1.10. Jugerum est quantum jugum
bonum uno die potest ex arare. Peter Martyr in 1 Samuel 14. An Acre is so much
land, as a couple of Oxen are able to Plow in one day. Among the Romans, it was
esteemed to be 240 Foot in length, and a 120 in breadth. See Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 18. c. 3.

The Persians made use of their kind of measure called Parasanga, Est vox
Parasangae Persica, ac socero meo Fr. Junio in Elogio Linguae Hebraeae videtur
corrupta ex Parasch, hoe est, Eques, and Aggarus, hot est, tabellio. Quia nempe
sic vocaretur intervallum inter duo loca, loca, quibus equum mutaret tabellio.
Vossi Etymologicon Linguae Latinae.
and by them at this day Farsach, whereof each did contain 30 Stadia, 4 miles,
says L'Empereur in his Notes on Benjamins Itinerary.

See of it in Mr. Greaves his Epistle to Mr. Seldom before his Discourse of the
Roman Foot and Denarius. Musladinus Sadus calls them Farseng, the Arabians
Fersach, and the Latins Parasanga. Gentius; Whence the Latins use that
Phrase, Multis parasangis superare.

Among the Greeks and Romans for measuring, the Perch was in use, as in these
times in Europe, among the Egyptians, Arabians and Persians, the Parasanga and
Schoenus, Among the Hebrews the Kane or Reed, Angelo Crator.

Now a days the name of Mile is most used by the Italians, Germans, Danes,
Norweigians, Sweeds, English, Scots.

Keckerman in the book and chapter before quoted, says, a mile is either
proper, containing a 1000 paces, which being always used in Italy, is called
Italian, or improper, either a league or a German mile: A league (says he) is
either old, that is, a proper mile and a half, or new, (which they call a
French mile) two proper miles. Four German mile is either common 4000 paces, or
great, 5 thousand paces.

The Spaniards and French met out their distance of places by Leagues, Leuca
perperam, ut puta, vulgo nuncupatur, Cum Leuva sit genuinum nomen, quod Cursum
and destimatum certum spatium Cursus de notat Barthi. Ad Rutil l. 2. Animadvers
vide Spelmanni Glossarium. Leuca recentioris mensurae nomen Massaeus. Hist.
Ind. lib. 1.
Leucae or Leugae, which are of a different length, as the miles in other
Nations, Peter Martyr in his Decades says, a league contains four miles by
Sea, and but three by Land. From Spain to Hispaniola is a 1200 leagues.

The Russians or Muscovites reckon their distances of places by a certain space
which they in their native tongue call Vorest.

Purchase in his Pilgrims speaks of the Cose among the Chinois and East-Indians.
The Course or Cose, says he, is a mile and a half, sometimes two miles; most
English Mathematicians accord with the Italians, and reckon 60 miles to a
degree. The Gothic and Sweedish mile is 5 or 6 Italian miles, sometimes 8. The
Common English An English mile contains 5280 foot.
mile makes one and a half Italian; Villamont says, that a French league
contains two Italian miles.

The common German mile being for the most part in plain makes more then 3
English or 5 Italian miles; but in some places the solitude and the ascent of
mountains make the miles of Germany seem much longer; one Dutch mile and a half
makes a mile of Switzerland. The miles of Switzerland being over continual
mountains are so long, as the passengers distinguish their Journey more by the
spaces of hours, then by the distances or numbers of miles. The miles of
Bohemia and Moravia are no less tedious, and though the length of the Switzers
and Bohemian miles may in part be attributed to the climbing of the mountains
and bad way, yet no such reason can be given for the miles of Moravia, which
country is either a plane, or full of little pleasant Hills, and the ways
fair, and the Country well inhabited.

The Low Country miles are of a middle length between the German and French
miles, among which the miles of Holland and Freezeland are longer than the rest.

The mile of Denmark is somewhat longer then 3 English miles, and answers to
the common German mile.

The miles of Poland generally are like the miles of Denmark.

The Turks at this day have no distinction of their ways by miles, nor days by
hours. Massaus Hist. Ind. l. 6. Cubitus dictus plerisque videtur a cubando.
Vossii Etymologicon Linguae Latinae. Jos. 3.4. John 21.8.


Ychan is a kind of measure among those of China, the journey of one day.

A Cubit is the length of a man's arm from his Elbow to the top of his middle
finger, it contains six hand breadths, or a foot and an half.

It was the most common measure in dimensions of length, breadth, height and
depth among the Jews, Genesis 6.15. Exodus 25.10.

Some say the Cubits were of 2 sorts, Plerique tam Ebraeorum, quam nostrorum
qui eos sequuntur, duplicem in illo populo fuisse mensuram velunt ejusdem
nominis, unam communem, quae minor fuerit; alteram sacram, quae major: Itaque
Communem Cubitum fuisse quinque palmorum, sacrum autem Sex. Rivetus in Exodus
25.10. Vide plura ibid.
the Civil or common Cubit, consisting of one foot and an half six hand
breadths, 24 finger breadths, and eighteen thumb breadths; and the sacred or
holy Cubit, that consisted of an hand breadth, or 4 fingers more then that
other, Ezekiel. 40.5. and 43.13, Vide L'Empereur praefat. ad Cod. Middoth.

Mr. Ley on Genesis 5.15. mentions 3 sorts of Cubits.

1. The Common Cubit containing 5 palms of 4 fingers breadth.

2. The Cubit of the Sanctuary one palm more, Ezekiel. 40.5.

3. The Geometrical Cubit, 6 times as great as the common Cubit. See him on
Gen, 20.16. and on Deuteronomy. 3.11. and Dutch Annotat. on Genesis 6.15.

Epephanus has written De Mensuris. And Casper Wolphius has put out an
Alphabetital Enumeration of the famous men, who have written of the doctrine of
weights and measures.

FINIS.

