MR. SPEAKERS SPEECH On Thursday, the thirteenth of May, 1641. as it was
delivered to the Kings Majesty, before the Lords in Parliament.

At the presenting of these three BILLS, viz.

An Act
For the shortning of Michaelmas Term. For the pressing of Mariners for the
Kings Ships. For the remainder of the six entire Subsidies.
LONDON, (...) Anno 1641.

Mr. SPEAKERS SPEECH On Thursday, the thirteenth of May, 1641. as it was
delivered to the Kings Majesty, before the Lords in Parliament.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
THe great security of the Kingdom, rests in the happy concurrence of the King
and people, in the unity of their hearts.

These joined, safety and plenty attends the Scepter; but divided, distraction
and confusion, as Briars and Thorns over-spreads, and makes the la^d barren.

No peace to the King,
No prosperity to the people.
The duties and affections of your subjects are most transparant, most clear
in the cheerful, and most liberal contributions, given to knit fast this
union with the bond of peace.

The Treasures of the privy purse, are but the supplies of Fancies, warranted
by a common Interest; But the public Tribute given by common assent, supports
Royal Dignity, is sheltered under the wings of Prerogative, and by that power
covered from the eyes, from the touch of deceivers.

In these we render Caesar, what is due to Caesar, and Tribute to whom Tribute
belongs.

The proper inscription of the Crown, is borne here, and censures those
malignant spirits that dare whisper, (nay) into the ears of sacred Majesty,
that our selves only, not your sacred person, not your Royal posterity, are
the supreme objects of the givers.

The preservation of the public union, the supply of your Armies, the
distresses, miserable distresses of the Northern parts, the common Calamities
of the times, begat the consideration of this Bill, (the remainder of the six
entire Subsidies, happily presented to your sacred Majesty, by this unworthy
hand) the first vote advanced a credit to us, to issue them for the use of your
sacred Majesty.

The full perfection adds growth to that credit, and enables us to return to
your sacred Majesty, as to the Ocean, the Tribute due to Justice and
Sovereignty.

These are the vast earnests of our desires, which take their rise from the due
regard, from the safety of your Throne, of your posterity.

Your Royal assent stamps your Image here, and makes this yours, and yours
only, which I by the commands of the Commons humbly beseech of your sacred
Majesty.

FINIS.

