THE REPRESENTATION OF THE CASE OF Sir JOHN LENTHALL, Knight, IN HIS LATE
SUFFERINGS.

Printed in the Year, 2654.

IF the life of man could be wafted on in his voyage of this World, with a
constant Gale of happiness, we should love that too well, yet should be
unhappy in this, that we should never be brought to a remembrance of our
selves and condition, nor to a due acknowledgement of that supreme power in
whose hands we are, but as Chafe before the Wind, to whose just and wise will,
we ought absolutely to resign our selves, without murmuring or grudging. He
draws light out of darkness, and consolations out of afflictions. His
corrections are instructions, which lesson my troubles taught me, and my
experience found in my late dark and sad condition, when my God was graciously
pleased constantly to give me inward comfort in my unparralleld sufferings,
when there was nothing but outward appearances of discomfort, there being risen
up against me malicious and black mouthed adversaries formerly Prisoners, who
were for their mutinous behavior while they were in Prison, sent by the Judges
to Newgate, whose false tongues were dipped in the Poison of Aspes, and yet
they received encouragement and countenance from Mr. Fountain, who (being
advanced in his own thoughts to a high place) should have preferred Justice
before partiality and self ends, yet were Heavens dispensations so wisely
disposed, that these fiery trialls did purify my innocence, and make it
appear as I hope brighter. Their prosecutions against me, were beyond measure,
violent malicious and bloody. But their false accusations when they were
filed, did only polish truth and made it more splendid. They belched out the
fowlest accusations that their own wicked imaginations could devise or invent,
hoping thereby, to make me odious to all good and pious men: but their
injustice could not obscure the Almighties justice, the bright beams whereof
dispersed the black Clouds of their hellish plots; and so displayed them to
all men's eyes, and ears, that he has clothed them with shame, and
established (I trust) my innocence and credit with them that were Auditors and
spectators.

Their calumnies were very fierce (and that's the way which malice thinks the
best to prevail) and they raised a triple accusation of a dangerous and horrid
nature against me. First, the breach of public trust, which struck at my
reputation and fortune. The second, that of delinquency, which struck at my
being in the Commonwealth, and the well being of my posterity. And the third,
that grand one, of Murder, which did strike not only at my life in this
world, but at my happiness in the world to come. Which accusations were most
forcibly carried on, and injuriously countenanced.

But because every man cannot possibly be satisfied of all perticulars by
general rumor and report, I thought it charity to them, and justice to my
self, faithfully and impartially to set down all the passages of that cruel
prosecution, which I shall do, with all the truth and modesty, that a just
vindication will permit.

If that malice which has brought this affliction upon me, could have been
contented with ordinary and legal prosecution; and if my estate and livelihood
were the things only in question, and my good name not sullied with infamous
and filchy slanders, I should in all probability rather patiently have sat
down under my sufferings, then have been induced to lay open my condition
unto the world. But since I cannot but be of opinion, that many persons both of
worth and conscience, content to rest in the first representations, may by this
means be brought to a just knowledge of the whole matter; and consequently
be reduced to the moderation of doing what is but just, and that my good name
(which to an honest man ought to be dearer then life) may be in some measure
retrived; I could not but put down as well the true circumstances of my
condition, as the violent and passionate proceedings of my prosecutors against
me.

I have been these twenty three years together Marshall of the (Kings Bench,
now the) Upper Bench Prison, by Letters Patents under the great Seal of
England, wherein, as I am inwardly satisfied to have behaved my self uprightly
and legally, so till this storm overtooke me, I hope it was without infamy or
reproach. But it is the misfortune of such employments as mine, that we must
necessarily in doing our Offices, raise up to our selves Enemies. For it is so
difficult, if not impossible, to carry our selves even between Creditor and
Debtor, that there is no avoiding or it, but one of them will be dissatisfied.
For if the Debtor be either unruly, or unable to put in security, for his true
imprisonment, and so kept safe, he straight cries out of Restraint and hard
usage; but if he put in security, and lie in the Rules, or legally go abroad
about his occasions with a Keeper, then does the Creditor cry out of too much
liberty, and it may be files a Bill for an Escape. So that let a man carry
himself with all the care and circumspection which is possible, he shall be
sure to meet with clamors and enemies; And these so much the more in regard
that being persons either in low condition, or decayed fortunes, they account
it somewhat either of ease or pleasure, to revile or vex those whom they look
upon as the instruments of their misfortunes.

After the dissolution of the former Parliament, then some persons did take
upon them a power (by what authority or order I know not) to enquire into all
matters concerning Prisons, and Keepers of Prisons, by virtue of whose power I
was summoned to appear before them, which I obeyed. But it was a wonder to me
(who had been a faithful servant to the Parliament in their most doubtful and
difficult times, and who had been constantly in all their Commissions, and
stuck to them thorowout, when others declined them) to see Mr. Fountain in
the Chair, one of the most active for the late King, and one by whose power
and interest at Oxford, my place was given away, for disobeyng a Warrant of the
late Kings, dated the 23. of November 1643. for the discharge of William Cobb.
Yet humbly submitting (as it was my duty) to the Authority over me, and
withal weighing with my self the Right that all Governors have to call whom
they please to their assistance; besides, hoping that Mr. Fountain had
manifested unot them his hatred to his former principles and courses; I, with
all the submissio^ I could, prepared my self to give the best satisfaction
that lay in my power unto that Co^mittee.

The General things they fell upon, were first, About the List of my
Prisoners, a perfect and full Copy whereof I delivered in. Next, about the
Extent and Liberty of the Rules of the Prison, by which means (as was
alleged) there are many Escapes occasioned, and Creditors extremely delayed,
if not absolutely defrauded. In answer to this, I only said, That the Prison
house being so little, as that it is not able to contain a fourth part of the
Prisoners, my Predecessors in their several times, and that always by
permission and appointment of the Judges, used to lodge them (having first
taken security for their true imprisonment) in the houses about, and that they
call the Rules: which as it avoides a grand inconvenience (for otherwise every
particular man must have a particular Keeper which were a charge to him
unsupportable, or else the Marshall of the Prison were to maintain them, and
so he should be a loser by his office) so it brings this great advantage and
security to the Creditor, that the security being double the debt, it is
thereby strengthened, and the Creditor in better probability to recover his
own. For if any escape be made, I am liable to pay the debt, and upon recovery
had against me at Law, I either resort to the security, or turn it over to
the Creditour, by which means many have recovered their debts, which probably
otherwise they had not done. But these bonds being of late doubted to be
within the Stat. 23. H 6. (though ever before held good and so often adjudged)
many have under this pretense escaped, or violently broke Prison; and thereby
both defrauded the Creditors and occasioned great damages to be given against
the Marshall.

And although I have done nothing, but what by Law was formerly accustomed and
justifiable, yet I desire a difference may be made, between voluntary and
involuntary escapes; that is to say, escapes happening either by my granting
too much liberty, or by negligence, or connivence; and those which in despite
of the strength of the Prison, and the care and diligence of the watchmen, are
oftentimes made by desperate Persons, groaning under their wants, and impatient
of restraint: and therefore I appeal to all the Nation, whether there was yet
ever any debt recovered against me for an escape, which I have not satisfied.
And as I cannot be denied the liberty of a true English man, to make my best
defense, when I am impleaded at Law, which in many cases plentifully relieves
me, as 3. Edw. 1. Cap. 3.1. Edw. 2. Cap. 10. Bonitons case Cook. 3. part. pa.
67. Ridg ewayes case, Cook. 3. Page. pa. 54. Wesbies case. So if it can be
proved that any escape has been wilful in me, or that I ever took a penny
of money for granting any illegal liberty, I shall be content to suffer all
that which the malice of my adversaries would inflict upon me.

Nor is it enough to say that the best and most considerable Prisoners should
be put into the house, for so the more insolvent should be set at random,
and their debts by this means become desperate: for the security of the others
(besides their own reputation) renders them as safe in the Rules, as if they
were close; and there is many a man that will rather be bound in a bond of 1000
l. for a man's true imprisonment, then be bound with him in a bond of 100 l.
debt.

But when they came to descend into particular matters, it was very strange to
me, to see Mr. Fountain (more like a feed Lawyer, or an enraged enemy, then a
sober Judge) afford so much countenance to all Petitions and complaints that
came in against me, to stretch matter further then by Law they would endure.
And when I desired but Coppies of Petitions that I might be the better enabled
to make my defense, utterly to refuse me, and put me to answer upon the place:
which when I endeavored to do, as well as the smalnesse of the time, and my
own sur-prisall would permit me, I was sundry times reviled, many opprobrious
speeches, both against my self and my nearest relations, were publicly
uttered, without the least control or check. The witnesses which I bought in
order to my justification, were discountenanced; Mr. Fountain in the mean
time, privately comenting and glossing his own conceptions, as I have reason to
conceive, and writing them down, so that things seemed to be carried on (I
will not say by design or injustly) merely in a manner to compass my ruin.
The Petitions and charges that came in, to look on the number, were a great
many, on the weight of them, a very few. Some of them are either so false, or
inconsiderable, that they are not worth mentioning here, as I have done
otherwhere; some the very stating of my case, immediately detects the malice
and impertinency. But since that there is one particularly insisted upon as a
matter very horrid and ugly, I shall not forbear to set it down, that by the
estimate of this grand business, an account may be taken of the rest.

And the business stands thus:

One John Guyet was committed to the Upper Bench Prison Feb. 10.1650 upon an
Action of Trespass at the suit of Edmund Child, but not upon Judgment or
Execution. This Guyet broke the Prison house (he being in close Prison,
together with four others) in the night time, having burned down the window
with hot irons, poisoned a fierce Mastiffe, and given some opiate medicin to
the Watchman, where with he laid him in a dead sleep all night: and by that
means the said Guyet went away in the night time, by Ladders of Ropes,
provided for that purpose, as is prooved by many witnesses.

Thereupon Child brings his Action of the Case against Sir John Lenthall for
579 l. for the Escape, and at a Trial at Guildhall had given him by the Jury
(who faild not to be his friends at a dead lift) the whole money and damages
584 l. 13 s. 4 d. For relief of the verdict, I preferred a Bill in Chancery, to
which he put in an unperfect answer, and sat in contempt. Hereupon I moved at
the Roles for an Injunction to stop proceedings at Common Law, which the Master
of the Rolls being satisfied that Child in equity ought to have no more of me
then he could have recovered of Guyet at Common Law, and for that a man may lay
an Action of 10000 l. and yet possibly not recover 100 l. and for that this was
the only course I had left, to make Child confess what his debt really was;
(he having already in his answer confessed 100 l. was given by the verdict
more then was due to him) the Injunction was granted, as well for these
reasons, as that it had been the constant practice and rule of hat Court, to
grant Injunctions upon the lkie occasions. And whether I had not reason to
seek for relief in Chancery or no, let any man judge: For though there were
abundance of equitable circumstances, which I could not make out at my trial;
yet by that (among other things) which I said before, the equity was very
evident.

Nay this Case among others was referred by the Parliaments order of the
ninteenth o^ January 1652, to the Justices of the Upper Bench, who upon hearing
of the whole matter, declared me not in fault for the Escape, and the business
therefore only for the Chancery: wherein being a Court of equity I was only
relieveable. For certainly the verdict was a strange one, and the oppression
that lies upon me by the means of it as heavy, and of as ill example, as can
be possible.

This is the great business as to the execution of my Office; but because the
rage of my enemies was not content to stay here, but would strike at my life,
as well as my livelihood, they have set abroach an old business voted
scandalous by the Parliament many years ago, and threatened to try me for my
life about it. The business stands thus. George Smithson was committed to the
Upper Bench Prison June 13.1637. where he carried himself with such extreme
disorder, that in the year 1640. he was put into the common Goal, where he
was not only so troublesome, but also so dangerous to the Prisoners, that they
Petitioned for his removal. Hereupon I ordered him every night to be put
into the house which is set apart for unruly Prisoners: there continuing his
old manners, he was kept for some time, all which space he was fed with
victuals sent from my own Table, and the Stewards of the house, had express
order to take care that he should be constatly relieved. He died the 5 of
September 1640. A Crowner sat upon him, a Jury was sworn, six Prisoners, and
six neighbors, who found that Smithson died by the visitation of God, and not
other wise, or by any other means, as appears by the Record.

I thank God, I have this comfort yet left me, that I can say, I find not in
my heart to thirst after blood. And certainly these people, had they not been
blinded by their own malice, and carried on by an extreme defire of my ruin,
might have found out somewhat more probable to have employed their perjuries
about, then for to say, that I should hazard, my salvation, my reputation, my
life, the well being of my Wife and Children, and all this for the blood of a
poor Lunaticke in Prison, whom till that time, I had never known, and from
whose death I could draw no advantage.

The very same men that have revived this complaint against me, before that
Committee, brought the same complaint to the Parliament seven or eight years
since. At which time, it was examined with all industry, scrutiny,
earnestness, and integrity possible: all their own examinations, and those of
what witness they could produce, were taken, and several persons were
admitted by that Committee, in the name and behalf of the City, to take notice
of all proceedings. The Committee after a full hearing made the Report to the
Parliament, that they found the accusations false, and prosecuted without
cause; whereupon the 5 of September 1645 they voted, that the complaints were
raised, and prosecuted, without any ground at all, falsely, maliciously, and
scandalously; and that William Pendred, Edward Jenks, Hanna his wife, James
Freez, and Stephen Prat, were principal instigators and prosecutors of these
proceedings; and do deserve severe and exemplary punishment, and accordingly
referred it to a Committee to consider what exemplary punishment were fit to be
inflicted upon them.

Nor indeed did they vote it malicious, without ground: for Freez and Jenks,
with one Magic (who was a great stickler in the business, though not so openly
as the other) having been formerly Prisoners in the Upper Bench, and there very
unruly and mischievous, the Judges did remove them to Newgate, which first
kindled in them that malice, that has several times since attempted my life.

Notwithstanding all this, their wickedness was so restless, that though they
saw how little they were able to satisfy any just men of the ground of their
complaints, they had the impudence to renew the business again at the
Committee for the Army, who alo upon examination voted, Aug. 24. 1649. to the
same purpose as the Parliament had formerly done; yet after all these repulses
they have again brought it to Mr. Fountains Committee, where it seems, it
received fresh entertainment.

These are the two principal things, out of which with some other helps, (I
will not say Additions of his own) Mr. Fountain has stuffed his Papers, and
at last harche'd a Report. But however it is, though it be not fitting for me
to say, that he carried himself there rather like an Adversary then a Judge,
so it should feeme he has a mind, by the carriage of this business, that men
should find him turn from a Judge to a Solliciter. For this report of his, he
very assidiously promoted to the Committee of the last Parliament, who upon the
report ordered July 25. 1653. that I should appear before the same Committee
the next day, which was Tuesday following at 3 in the afternoon, and bring
with me a perfect list of the names, sirnames, places of last abode, of all
the Prisoners in custody, since the last list in print; together with all
Bonds, Statutes, Judgments, Warrants of Aturney, to acknowledge Judgments to
Creditors or others in their behalf.

Heerupon I Petitioned the Committee, Teusday July 26. 1652. in regard I had
not received their order till late the last night that I might have Coppies of
Reports, and Petitions, and be admitted to put in my defense in writing, or by
my Counsel.

But being expressly commanded to attend the Thursday after, I accordingly did
so, and carried in the list; but showed them that I could not deliver in the
Bonds, by reason they were the only security which enabled me to perform
several trusts settled out of the Office, and the only defense I had against
all Escapes, sued, and to be sued. But the Committee pressed me for a
positive answer, whether I would deliver them or no, and though I Petitioned
for it, would grant me no longer time, then the next morning, for my positive
answer; which I was to deliver to the Chairman by 10 of the Clock. According
to the appointment, next morning being Friday, I delivered a Letter to the
Chairman, with a Paper of Reasons enclosed, Why I could not in discretion, and
safety, deliver in the Bonds: both which, since I am so much concerned in them,
for better satisfaction follow thus.

The Humble Answer of Sir John Lenthall Knight, Marshall of the Upper Bench
Prison.
IN obedience to the commands of this Honorable Committee whose Persons and
Power in all humility I ever shall have in high esteem, I humbly offer, that
the possibility that the Marshall of the Upper Bench has for the preservation
of such Prisoners as shall be thereunto committed (by reason of the smallness
and unsafenesse of the Prison house) are only such collateral securities as
by his own industry and endeavors he can obtain from persons that shall
engage for the true imprisonment of the Prisoners; which securities (howsoever
good in Law as he humbly conceives) are only perticularly belonging to
himself, and to his own private estate, and to such others as have likewise
interest in those securities as well as himself, and no way concerning the
public interest, and by the Law of this Land are disposable by him, and such
other particular persons to whom they in right and equity do belong, as any
other personal securities to any other particular person: that this present
Parliament by their most pious and Religious Declaration lately set forth to
the contentment of many thousands of this Nation, encourages him (with all
thankful acknowledgement) to assure himself that as the Parliament the
highest and supreme power of the Nation, has declared that they will be as
tender of Lives, Estates, Liberties, Just rights and properties of all others,
as they are of themselves and their posterities, so this honorable Committee
who are a part of that honorable body will not be offended, if that he the
said Sir John Lenthall shall on his and the others behalf, presume upon that
honorable favor and grace which the said Parliament has with such abundant
care offered to the people, and therefore cannot in justice or equity deliver
up such securities, which cannot be useful or advantageous unto him by the
Law (as appears by his former reasons humbly offered to the Committee and
other grounds) if taken from him without a particular Act of Parliament therein
to relieve him. This being thus humbly offered without the least disregard to
the power of this Committee, or disrespect to any of their persons, whom as
becomes him in the place wherein God has placed you, he shall ever honor:
this in all humility assuring himself of justice and equity according to the
known right of Law and property.

JOHN LENTHALL.
July. 29. 1653.

Reasons humbly offered and presented to the honorable Committee for Prisons
and Prisoners, wherefore the Bonds and securities taken for the true
imprisonment of Prisoners by Sir John Lenthall Knight, Marshall of the Upper
Bench Prison, cannot safely be delivered out of Sir John Lenthalls hands.
I. FOr that many of the said Bonds and securities upon Escapes made, are
already delivered to Creditors, thereby to recover their Debts due from the
Prisoners; and Sir John stands engaged by his promise to deliver diverse more.

II. For that as scone as the Prisoners shall take notice their seourities are
out of Sir John Lenthals power, they will and may make Escapes; and Sir John
having no other way to restrain them, or to secure himself, other then by his
Bond and securities, shall be left without remedy.

III. For that there now being several Actions of Escape depending against Sir
John Lenthall, amounting to 100^0 l. and several recoveries had, Sir John has
no other means to secure his Person and Estate from the said Actions, and
recoveries, but by the said Bonds and securities, many of which he has
delivered to his Atturnies to put in suit to be indemnified from the said
actions and recoveries.

IV. For that the said Bonds and securities are made to him in his name, for
his indemnity, and suable only by him and in his name, and can only be
released by him.

V. For that the said Bonds etc. are not forfeited or to be sued until after
Escapes brought against Sir John Lenthall, so that if the same should be
delivered out of his hands, the Prisoners, Creditors, Sureties, and Sir John
Lenthall, may be much damnified.

VI. For that upon the discharge of Prisoners (which is daily) the said Bonds
and sureties are to be delivered up, otherwise the sureties may be
endangered, and the Prisoner damnified upon his Counter-security given by him
to his sureties.

VII. For that every Defendant has liverty to crave Oyer of the condition of
the Bond, upon which he is sued, before he plead; which Sir John not having in
his hands to produce, will be delayed in his suit, or lose the benefit of his
Actions.

VIII. For that the Bonds and securities taken for true imprisonment are Sir
John Lenthalls undoubted right and property, which he hops this honorable
Committee will inviolably defend.

IX. For that the sureties, who are most of them tradesmen in this City, and
live by their Credits, and will be bound for a Prisoners true imprisonment,
when they will not be bound with him for any money, when they shall perceive
their names are published, and their bonds put to other uses then they intended
them, will presently call in their Bonds, and that will be a means to deter
all others from being bound; which will prove a very great prejudice to the
Creditor.

X. For that such bonds and securities, as are in Sir John's hands were given to
him by the Prisoner, and his sureties, by way of trust and upon condition that
no use shall be made thereof but in case of Escape. And therefore the Prisoner
having made no Escape, Sir John cannot without breach of trust part with their
securities.

The morrow after, which was Saturday, the thirtieth of July, the house was
made acquainted with this my answer, who thereupon made an Order for my
commitment to the Sergeant at Arms, to answer to such matters as should be
objected against me; and another Order that Sergeant Dendy should take the care
and custody of the Prisoners, which he accordingly did, my self being
apprehended with a Warrant from Sergeant Birkhead, under which durance I
continued, though I did humbly beseech them in regard of the multiplicity of
the troublesome and entangled business that lay upon me, and for that I knew
not what might be brought out against me, having had so many years to do in
a troublesome Office, to be pleased for to take off this restraint from me,
which certainly as I did not see what prejudice could arise from it, all my
estate and livelihood lying at the stake, and it concerning me so nearly to
make out my interest, so had it been to me a deed of very great mercy and
compassion. For as it would have been a means to save me from a great
charge, which in the miserable condition I was in, lay heavy upon me, so
would it have enabled me to go about to make such defense against what might
have been brought against me, in behalf of the Common wealth, as that I might
thereby enjoy the benefit of the Law, and the freedom of a Native English man.

The great offenses which they alleged against me as is before set down, being
only broched, but nothing proved, I did little expect such a restraint should
have been put upon me as to imprison my body, and to put Sergeant Dendy into
the possession of my Office before I were heard or had leave to make my
defense. And I cannot but say this by the way, that it being my mis-hap to be
the miserable president in this case, in what doubt may it leave all other
Officers who have acted according to the known Laws of the Nation, (as I ever
did,) and what security can they imagine to themselves, if upon every
alteration they shall be called in question, for actions done by virtue of
Laws in force?

For my part, I do aver that what I did in the execution of my Office, was
nothing but what the Rules of the Court (to which I was a servant) permitted,
what my predecessors had constantly practiced, and what was not against the
Laws that then stood in force, and notwithstanding the overflowing malice of
my adversaries, they could never prove any one thing against me to the
contrary.

Standing thus committed to Sergeant ^irkhead, for no cause expressed, I could
not find that Sergeant Dendy who was possessed of my Office, had any bowels of
mercy, for I received this letter from him, sent to my Prison: Sir, I
acquainted the Committee the other day with your answer, with which they were
so much dissatisfied, as they resolved to report your contempt to the
Parliament; yesterday they sat not, but adjourned till this afternoon, till
when I desired they would forbear acquainting the house, for that you promised
you would do your endeavor, of which if you give not a real proof by a
return of the books, wherein all the names of your Prisoners with their
securities, and place of abode are, it will be in vain for you to think of
securing your self by a refusal. Sir, the complaints of several Creditors
undone by you, are very great, and our Law you know has condemned many a man
who thereupon has suffered death, though but for the value of a sheep;
therefore all things considered, it concerns you not to contemn any longer
the Authority of the Parliament, who if incensed, as you give them just cause
to be, neither you nor yours know what evil to them a day may bring forth.
Sir, the Committee being to meet this afternoon between 2 and 3 a clock, I
have sent the bearer on purpose to receive your answer which is expected by.

Your humble Servant, E. DENDYE.


By this Letter it may be conceived in what a sad condition I was, whereby it
plainly appears that Sergeant Dendye had never any intention to restore my
Office, but still to have kept it from me. To which purpose he used all his
power to get the books and securities into his hands; the books I delivered,
but not the Bonds given to me for security of the Prisoners, which if I had
given up, I had been left naked of my defense of suites for Escapes, and I
doubted, that many Bills might be filed against me before the next term, for
Escapes made in Sergeant Dendyes time, as it afterward happened, many
declarations being brought against me for them, for which if I had parted with
my securities, there might have been so much recovered against me for his
neglects, as might have ruined me and my posterity, which was the principal
cause that I did not deliver them, and not disobedience to the Parliament, to
which I was prepared to prostrate my self in all submission, not doubting but
that they would in good time take into consideration my innocence, and withal
the number of innocent persons, that were involved in my ruin, and that they
would so mix their justice with mercy, that they would again restore me to
my liberty, and just right. But the malice of Mr. Fountain did hang still as a
danke Cloud overmy head, from which I knew I was to expect a storm; nor was I
deceaved, for it was grown to that malicious and unchristian height, that
though when the accusation concerning the Murder of Smithson and others were
heard, and eagerly examined before him and his fellows of that Committee, he
expressed upon a full and open hearing his opinion of the improbability of the
charge and the untruth thereof. Yet not willing to let so much as a shadow
pass, which might destroy me, he inserted and interwoove this charge into
his furious Report to the Counsel of State, as an high crime against me, and
fit for examination to whom he delivered it.

Afterward as soon as the late Parliament sat, this Report of Mr. Fountains
was transmitted (I doubt not but by his means and solliciation) to the
Committee of the Parliament for Prisons and Prisoners. The same Committee the
18. of Aug. 1653. having the day before brought in a charge against me, which
was then read.

The maine heads thereof consisted of breach of Trust, Delinquency, and
Murder, which I having spoken of before, I shall at the present mention no
otherwise.

The two first Charges the Parliament referred back to the Committee, and the
matter of blood, to fowr Justices of Peace for Surrey, to examine the same, and
to proceed therein according to Law and Justice.

Saturday the 20. of August, the Committee sent for me to the Star Chamber,
where they sat, and there delivered me a Copy of the Charge of all Referred
unto them, excepting Delinquency, and appointed me to bring them such an Answer
as I would stand to on Thursday the 25. following, which accordingly I obeyed,
and delivered in my Answer subscribed with my Name.

The same Thursday two of the aforesaid Justices signed a Warrant to hear the
cause concerning the Murder and blood, the Monday following, at the White Lion
at Lambith, where I attended with my witnesses, but Hannah Jenks and the rest
of her malicious accomplices were not to be found.

I cannot omit one passage which happened there at that time, which was, that
there being then present, a poor Beggar Woman, who heard something of the
business of that meeting, and did speak some words tending to clear my
innocence, whereof the Justices being informed, they presently sent for her,
and committed her to the County Goal (though she totally denied the
accusation) where she lay in great wants and misery five weeks at the least;
and though she offered them often Bail, such as she was able to procure, and
made several Petitions unto them, expressing her sad condition, yet she could
find no mercy in all that time, till by reason of wants of bread and other
necessaries, she fell very sick, and was near the instant of perishing, when
they condiscended to Bail her out, but afterward did not prosecute her at all.

Hannah Jenks and her witnesses sailing to appear, it occasioned another
appointment, which by their Warrants dated the second of September was to be on
Monday after, being the fifth day, at the Bull head Tavern in Southwark; there
I attended them with my Parliament Keeper, where I found Mistress Jenks, her
husband, and James Freeze, and some other accomplices, such as bribes, promises,
and similitude of wickedness could gather about her, where indeed her nimble
tongue like a Trumpet, sounded forth such loud noyses and falsities (which much
retarded the business of that day) that I began to believe that she would
swear up to the height, according to her former custom, that my innocence (how
white soever) might be clouded by her oaths.

But this day we were put off and adjourned to the same place on Friday
following, where Mrs. Jenks with her tribe sailed not. They were called
presently in by the Justices, and were private with them almost all the
afternoon, under a pretense of being examined, though there be very great
reason to believe that they were not then examined at all, but only asked
questions to a presented paper which was sent unto them from Mr. Fountain,
which was the rather believed, in regard he that was pretended there to be the
Clark that writ, and to have taken the Examinations, could hardly read them
when they were put into his hand for that purpose. But howsoever, me thinks,
this privacy was not consonant to the old Law of England, which in cases of
Life, brings Witnesses face to face, and admits cross Examinations, the Law
being most especially tender of Life, and never intending that should be taken
away without all possible Defense of the accused party.

But at length (to give the Devil his due) I having attended on this secret
Conference all the Afternoon, my self and witnesses were called in, and those
I brought were such as I doubted not, would convince the Justices of the
falsity of the testimony against me, and clear me of the crime.

But I no sooner entered, but I found a Warrant signed and sealed by the
Justices, for my Commitment to the County Goal, which my Keeper opposing (as
in right he ought) they threatened to imprison him, and called for a Constable
to carry me away. But none being then present, the better to gain time while
they could get one, (wherein they neglected no diligence) they yielded to hear
two Witnesses on my side, whose testimony was sufficient to have satisfied
them. But still they forget not with all earnestness to call for a Constable
to Hurry me away. But at last upon much entreaty, almost upon the knees of
some of my children then present, they prevayled with them to read the
Parliament and Armies Votes, before expressed, about the business, whereby they
were Voted false Accusers, and to have corporal punishment: And thereupon with
much ado and great difficulty, they yielded and consented to take Bail.

And here I cannot but note by the way, the mercy and regularity of these men,
who at the same time did, (what Nature cannot do) splitt me into a double
Prisoner; a Prisoner I was to the State, under custody of the Supreme Power,
preceding theirs, and yet during that time they made a mittimus, and would have
sent me to the Common Goal of the County, which may be conceived a high
presumption to take me from the Parliaments immediate Officer, and send me to
another Prison, without their leave or privity.

Observe by the way, here is a Warrant signed without examination of the party
accused. Next the Justices offer to take a Prisoner out of the hands of that
power by whose Commission they sare.

And lastly, notwithstanding the malice and falsity of these Prosecutors
appeared by the Votes of Parliament and Army, they Bayled me after they had
made a mittimus to commit me for Murder.

On Tuseday the 30. of August I was sent for again to the Committee of
Parliament at the Star Chamber, who there Examined Witnesses to prove their
Charge against me; as they did also on Saturday following: At which time I was
enjoined to bring in proofs to justify and maintain my Answer.

On the 8. of September following I brought my former answer, wherein I quoted
the objections made against me in my charge, and to every particular put in a
distinct answer, with the names of the witnesses in the margent which were to
prove the same.

But I should have told you before, that during the examination of witnesses
against me, Freeze and Hannah Jenks were the chief, who were so transcendently
malicious, that they swore at any thing they thought might prejudice me: for
James Freeze, who was the chief witness was there in the face of the Court
proved to have sworn false in two of his Testimonies, whereupon I excepted
against them, as witnesses invallid, and their evidence not to be taken for
that they had formerly in their prosecution against me, been voted by the
former Parliament false accusers, and to have corporal punishment, with which
vote the Counsel of Officers of the Army afterward concurred, upon a new
complaint made to them by those wretched creatures, whose malice was
unquenchable and restles.

My exception to them after some debate was allowed good, for that they who
would swear falsely in one thing may do it in another.

And you may guess by this, that if the chiefest prosecutors and witnesses,
were of this stamp, that the other by them procured and suborned, were not of
a much better allay, as hereafter we shall have occasion to instance.

But see the insecurity and impudency of wickedness and the constant though
unexpected protection that Divine providence ever provides for innocence,
though what has been before alleged might have sufficiently invalidated
their Testimony and Credits before any Court of Justice, yet it plea^ed God for
further discovery of their impious plots against me to stir up the spirit of
one Mr. Francis Anguish who was then an accidental auditor of their violent
prosecutions of me, (...) declare the truth; Which was, that he being a
Prisoner in the Fleet Anno 1649. at which time Freeze was then also Prisoner
there, he often heard the said Freeze, Jenks, and others, plot together
against Sir John Lenthall, and conclude, that they would endeavor to hang him,
if they could, by accusing him of Murdering and Poisoning of Prisoners. But if
they could not prevail, to take away his life, then they would accuse him of
Delinquency against the State, and by that means Freez and the rest would get
a share of his estate, and that they made no question, but to bring their plots
to pass when the time should serve, and a new Parliament should sit. Which
evidence Mr. Anguish justified upon oath to the Committee; who examined him
upon what grounds, or upon whose instigations he came thither to evidence for
Sir John Lenthall? who answered that he being present at a former examination
before them, and hearing the said Freeze and Jenks so to prosecute him,
according to their former combinations and conspiracies, he could not in
conscience but declare the truth of that which he had formerly heard and
known them to conclude. But he averd, as truth was, that he never had any
reference to Sir John Lenthall, nor was never moved to give this Testimony by
any but his own conscience: and besides Mr. Anguish several other witnesses
instifified their unjust endeavors and false accusations against Sir John
Lenthall; and as these fiery trialls have already cleared me, so I doubt not,
but time the mother of truth, will make it more appear. But Mr. Fountayns
malice was of a harder metal then to be blunted with all this; for of a
Judge (as he formerly took it upon him) he was now become a Solicitor, daily
attending, incensing, and informing the Committee against me: and his spite
was so successful, that he prevayled to have Bills posted up at Westminster
Hall Gate, and other places, inviting all that had any Complaint against me,
to repair to the Committee where they should be heard.

I was commanded to attend the Committee two or three days every week, from
August, till the beginning of December following. By which time they had
received, heard, and considered all accusations and complaints which malicious
enemies, or suborning suggestors, could bring or procure: and the Committee
were ready to draw up their Report and to make it to the House, of all their
proceedings herein with all possible speed, but the Parliament resigning their
power the 12. day of December, into the hands of his Highness the Lord
Protector, I was plunged into a gulf of misery, as never any distressed person
was. The power that laid me in Prison and sequestered my estate, they were
dissolved. Those that had me in Custody, neither would, nor could release me.
I was at a stand, and amazed: Remedy and Relief I knew of none; yet
notwithstanding, some worthy and conscientious men of the Committee taking my
sad condition into their pious considerations, whereof the Chayrman was one,
though they had resigned their power, yet were pleased for conscience and
truths sake, to declare their Judgments and Opinions, by a Certificate under
their hands, bearing date the 6. of January 1653. wherein they did certify,
That the Charge against Sir John Lenthall in Parliament, consisted of three
several heads. The first, for Escapes of Prisoners. The second, for
Delinquency. The third, for Murder.

For the Escapes, they Certify to have been very few, in respect of the great
clamours made against him; and that those were mere matter of Law, and
properly triable* and determinable there.

For the Cause of Delinquency, they Certify, That by the Judgment of the
former Parliament, 15. September 1645. the same was resolved scandalous, and
the Prosecutors in that Cause to deserve exemplary punnishment; which Votes of
Parliament were after confitmed, by the Votes of the Council of the Army 1649.
upon the prosecution of the Persons and Witnesses in the former Complaint, and
we find nothing in proof to the contrary.

For the murder, We judge that Charge to be most malicious against Sir John
Lenthall, and that he is innocent of any such crime, and we do conceive the
said Charge to have been prosecuted with much malice against him, and the
testimony of the Witnesses to be altogether invalid; to which Certificate they
subscribed their names.

I being left thus destiture and disconsolate without my liberty restrained in
Prison, and deprived of my Estate, and consequently of all subsistence, It
pleased God to prepare means to turn my mourning into joy, by putting the
civil Sword into my Lord Protectors hand, I addressed my self unto his
Highness by my Petition, and had the happiness to be one of the first fruits of
his justice, who immediately referred it to his honorable Council; they with
the like dispatch appointed four of themselves a Commit to hear and examine
my Cause, by whose command I attended on Monday the 16 of January where they
took the business into consideration, and with much integrity, Justice, and
prudence, examined the state of my accusation, as it stood before the late
Parliament. So conscientious and scrupulous they were, that they not only
deliberately perused all the Papers that I produced, but most judiciously (as
intending to hear at both ears) sent for all the Notes and Examinations which
remained in the hands of the Clerk of the Committee of Parliament, by which
they might be truly instructed of all accusations and informations against me,
which the Clerk accordingly brought in, and upon a through and mature
consideration thereof, those honorable persons were pleased (after they had
with great diligence and patience perused and examined all that could be said
for or against me) to make their Report to the Council the 24. of January how
they found the State of the business.

The Lords of the Counsel debating the business upon the Report ordered the
27. of the said January, that it should be referred to the Lord Chief Justice
Roll, and to other Justice or Justices of the Upper Bench, to examine all
Complaints against Sir John Lenthall, so as the same may be determined in a
legal way, and thereby they were required to take such course for disposing the
custody of the Prison and Prisoners as may be most secure and advantageous for
the Creditors, and is agreeable to Law and Justice: and certainly if that way
had been thought of before, Sergeant Dendy had not now had so many Escapes
brought against him, nor so many men in all probabilities endangered of so many
considerable D^bts, nor my self have had several Declarations brought against
me for Escapes made and suffered in Sergeant Dendy's time when he was
possessed of the Prison.

By Virtue of the Order of the Counsel, the Lord chief Justice, and Mr.
Justice Ask, summoned Sergeant Dendy and my self to appear before them on
Monday the 30 of January, where we both attended with out Counsel, and after
a full debate and examination of our respective interests and titles in the
said Office, His Lordship and Mr. Justice Ask were both pleased to declare
that Sir John Lenthall had a good title in Law, which neither Sergeant Dendy
nor his Counsel either did or could deny.

Thereupon the Lord chief Justice and Mr. Justice Ask did make their
Certificate to the Lords of the Counsel, Dat. the 13 of Febru 1653. that upon
hearing Counsel of both sides, they found that Sir John Lenthall had a good
title, which Sergeant Dendy did not deny, and that they were informed and it
was confessed by both parties, that diverse Prisoners, who were in Prison, when
Sergeant Dendy first entered into the custody of the Prison, are now absented,
to the great prejudice of their Creditors, and dishonor of the Law, and of the
Upper Bench in particular, we have thought fit to settle Sir John Lenthall in
the Office of the custody of the Prison and Prisoners, which course we
conceive to be most secure and advantageous for Creditors, and most agreeable
to Law and Justice.

The Judges did also declare in open Court the 11 of February, that the Lord
Protector and his Counsel had appointed them by their order to hear any
complaints against Sir John Lenthall, so that they might be determined in a
legal way, and that they also required them to settle the custody of the
Prison and Prisoners, according to Law and Justice; and therefore they did
declare Sir John Lenthall, to be Marshall, and admitted him to sit in Court,
and to take the custody of the Prison, and Prisoners pon him, and ordered a
Rule of Court to be entered to that purpose which was done accordingly. By
virtue whereof I was possessed of my Office and livelihood, and after some
struggling with Sergeant Dendy was suffered quietly to enjoy it. And I cannot
but here acknowledge and extol Gods wonderful and abundant goodness, who
out of the depth of his mercy, looked upon me in the depth of my miseries, and
out of the strength of his power delivered me from the malice of my potent
enemies who were ready to devour me and swallow me up.

Rational and conscientious men might think this had been enough to have
cleared any man: the Law (which I ever threw my self upon, and the Law is the
supreme directory and definitive sentence of all our actions) had reinvested
me into that which was my own propriety, and would have inflicted a condign
punishment upon me in any thing wherein I had offended.

That honorable Court of the Upper Bench had power to take cognizance of any
offenses I should commit, whose ears are ever open to hear and relieve the
injured and oppressed, which might have incited my adversaries to have
complained there, whose mouths were not stopped in seven years before from
thundering out their false clamours against me in all places. But behold the
insatiable malice which my wicked adversaties bore against me (which will lie
like burning coals on their own heads) ended not here, my estate and
inheritance had stood their shock. But by Gods protection they could not shake
it, therefore their wicked spirits must now rove higher; they conspire to strike
at my life again, and endeavor to wash their hands in my blood.

And indeed it was one of the most accursed pieces of wickedness in all the
world, to endeavor to plunge me into such infamy, who have lived, as I hope,
in honest repute in my Country, that have seen many children and childrens
children, that have been thought worthy by the highest powers to be imployd
in all commissions, and almost all Committees in the County, where I have dwelt
so long, and sat upon the Bench there, to be brought to be tried at that Bar
where I had so long sat, and into the danger of so shame full an end as our
Law ordained for Murder; and to say more, the Divine Law threatens for this
offense, I heartily wish it may not fall heavy upon the heads of my accusers
and prosecuters.

But now the Assizes begin in Southwarke, I appeared there according to my
Bond, but no prosecutors showing them selves. I desired they might be called
and their Recognisances might be returned, which the Court granted, and so
called them, whereupon one witness appeared whese name was Robert Ell^s, upon
whose Testimony it was supposed the whole manifestation of the business would
lie: this man being urged by the Court to prefer his Bill of Jndictment against
me, he openly professed he knew nothing against me, and could not tell how to
preserre a Bill, and so refused to prosecute, saying further, that he was
enforced by the Justices to whom the Parliament referd it to enter into Bond,
otherwise he should not have done it.

Edward Jenks another of these Witnesses, and one of the chief contrivers of
this plot also appeared, who being required to prefer a Bill, he told the
Court that he came not to prefer any Bill, but was assured by Mr. Blackwell,
one of the Justices then sitting upon the Bench, that an Indictment should be
drawn, and preferred, and cost him nothing, and that he and the other Justices
required him to prosecute, which he refused to do.

Thereupon he was so impudent to tell the Justice to his face in the open
Court, that he threatened him to send him to the Goal, and was ready to do it,
if he refused to be bound to prosecute, the fear whereof compelled him to be
bound.

But see the bold spirits of these men, who durst charge so foul, unjust, and
malicious a matter, in open Court, upon a Justice then present, and sitting
upon the Bench. But the Judge required Jenks either to prefer a Bill, else he
should forfeit his Recognisance; he denied it, and plainly answered, that he
knew nothing of his own knowledge against me, and that he was compelled by the
Justices to do what he did, and that his prosecution was merely by their
command.

Upon this the Court commanded the Clerk of the Assizes to draw up an
Indictment, and ordered Jenks to give Instructions, which was done as far as
their Evidence would bear, But Jenks disliked it. The Judge commanded him to
go to any of his own Counsel, but he did not do it, neither as was
conceived could he find any matter to ground an Jndictment upon, and so none
was preferred; whereupon I was acqitted by Proclamation the last morning before
the Assizes were ended and adjourned.

I having suffered such an infamy and disgrace, I considered with my self and
Counsel, which way to redeem and vindicate my wounded credit and reputation.
And for that end I was advised to Indite the Prosecutors for Conspiracy against
my Life, at the next Quarter Sessions holden for the Courty of Surrey, which I
accordingly did. The Bill was found against them all, and they stand convicted.

And that every one might see what kind of people they are, I shall tell you
that since those proceedings, Freeze being employed in some place about the
Excise Office, he has been put out thereof, being convicted of bribery, and
deceiving the State; Oliffe and Magewick have been since convicted and
sentenced for bribery and perjury, at the suit of other men.

But I cannot omit to express some passages of Mr. Fountain, which came
lately to my hands from Mrs. Jenks, and Mrs. Somerscall, in a paper which they
sent me the first of August 1654. by them subscribed, wherein they directly
express that they were urged with great earnestness by Mr. Fountayn to
prosecute me, which they refused to do, yet Mr. Fountayn was restless, and
could not be satisfied till he compelled them to come in; for which purpose he
meeting Mrs. Somerscall in Westminster Hall, one Saturday evening (for these
are the words of the Certificate) he asked where is Mrs. Jenks* and commanded
her to tell her that we have been in jest with Sir John's business all this
while, but now we will go on with it in earnest, which he so prosecured, that
he got an Order from the Committee, for the Witnesses to go into Surrey, which
they refused to do; then Mr. Fountain said to the Committee, we must force
the Witnesses to go into Surrey, or else we shall never cut him off. Behold
the greediness of this bloodthirsty man, who when he could find no Witnesses
that could or would prosecute, he would raise some up, and compel them. Oh! I
cannot but wonder how this man's heart contracted such an unparalleld malice
against me, who never had difference with him, but often retained him in the
times of his practice as my Counsel, and esteemed him as my friend. And truly
I cannot in charity but be so much his friend still, as to pray to God that
the judgment pronounced against bloodthirsty men, may not fall upon him.

The 22 of August 1654 Hannah Jenks sent another Paper unto me to this effect,
that whereas, she had formerly prosecuted me with diverse accusations of some
Capital crimes and offenses, these are to certify that she received the
notion of them from others informations, and by their only procurement and
instigation did pursue those allegations against Sir John Lenthall. But
insomuch that they do not lie in my proper and peculiar knowledge, I do heerby
utterlie renounce and abjure all farther prosecutions and proceedings against
him, to which Paper she subscribed her name before credible witnesses. And
these are the persons that led up the chief place in my several accusations,
and by these you may easily guess the rest.

I have here presented the large heaps of my disasters and troubles, my
Prison thoughts and Prison experiences; I had infinite afflictions and yet
infinite comforts, light out of darkness, and joys out of sorrows; the Lord
manifested himself to me in my secessions and imprisonment, which was but a
sequestration from the world, that I might the more converse with God, and this
done he manifested his glory and power in delivering me from the Jaws of the
Lion and Lions whelps. I had in all my troubles a strong trust and confidence
in my God who has drawn me out of many waters and through a brazen wall. To
him I refer my self, vengeance is his, and he will repay it, and if man
shall not think fit to make me satisfaction for these wrongful expressions
(which I hope they will) yet they are in Gods hands, to whose providence and
protection I wholly refer my self; for the Lord is my strength and my shield,
my heart trusted in him and I was helped, therefore my heart shall rejoice, and
with my song will I praise him.

FINIS.

