SELECT AND CHOICE OBSERVATIONS, Containing all the Roman EMPERORS. The first
eighteen By EDWARD LEIGH M. A. of Magdalene-Hall in OXFORD, The others added by
his Son HENRY LEIGH, M. A. also of the same House.

Certain Choice French Proverbs, Alphabetically disposed and Englished added
also by the same EDWARD LEIGH.

LONDON. Printed by ROGER DANIEL, for JOHN WILLIAMS at the sign of the Crown in
St Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and his loving Father HENRY LEGH Esquire.
Loving Father:
HOW much I am obliged unto you both for my being and well-being, I desire now
to testify unto the world; for though to requite your love and bounty, be not
within the sphere of my Activity, yet since the Apostle Quicquid est, quod dat
Patri Filius, utique minus est, quia hanc ipsam dandi facultatem Patri debet.
Seneca lib. 3. de Beneficiis. Patribus and D^is non possumus retribuere
aequali^. Arist. 8. Ethic. (...) 1 Timothy 5. 4
commands Children to learn to requite their Parents, and Nature it self has
taught the unreasonable The fow which teaches children to requite their
Parents is the Stork from (...) natural affection, and she is called (...):
hence comes (...) when children study to requite their Parents.
Creatures this lesson, I shall endeavor, (God assisting me with his grace) to
pay that threefold debt, of reverence, obedience, and gratitude, which all
children owe to their Parents: As Aeschines therefore, when he saw his
fellow-Schollers give great gifts to Socrates (being poor, and having nothing
else to bestow) did give himself to Socrates, professing to be wholly devoted
unto him: so I shall ever devote my self unto your service, to whom (next under
God) I owe my self, and those abilities I have, both natural, and which through
Gods blessing upon your liberal education, by a double apprentiship in two
Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, and the Middle Temple in London.
famous and flourishing Societies I have acquired. To express therefore my due
observance, and grateful recognition of your former care, and cost, and withal
to give you some account of the fruitful spending of my time, I here present
unto you some Choice Observations concerning the twelve first Caesar's,
Emperors of Rome. A work (as I conceive) both delightful, and useful, and
therefore to you (I hope) not unwelcome; as Geographers express the whole world
in a little Map, so have I labored Graphically to describe these great
Monarchs of the world in a little model, neither strictly tying my self to any
one Historian, nor relating all the passages of their lives, but excerping out
of the most principal Tertul. Eusebius. Eccles. Hill. Josephus, Plutarch. Taciti
Hist. and Annal. Aurel. Vict. Eutropius, Pliny, Solimis, Seneca, Macrob.
Saturn. Suetonius, with Casaub. Animadvers. Eras. Apotheg. and Chili^d.
Authors, such things of them as were most memorable. Amongst all which Writers
(though I confess Tacitus his style is elegant, and full of wise se^tentious
Est orati^ Taciti ^^rum in mod^^m arguta, and prudentiae plena Bodin. l. 4. de
Method. Histor.
Apotheg.) I have chiefly followed Suet. 1. because my worthy Mr. William Pemble.
Tutor (whosememory I shall ever honor) made choice especially (of that
History to read to his Pupils. 2 Because his Phrase is pure and polite, and
himself a faithful Historian: Of whom it is recorded (as I think) by Erasmus,
that he wrote the lives of the Roman Emperors, prorsus ea liberate, quaipsi
vixerunt, with the same freedom that they lived. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dier.
lib. 1. c 1. calls him sincerissimum. Scriptorem, and Ludov. Su^tonius
Tranquillus Graecorum and Latinorum Scriptorum diligentissimus, atque
incorruptissiimus, res duod^cim C^sarum videtur mihi integerrime exponere qui
in optimi^ Principibus nec vitia, nec suspiciones vitiorum tacet: in pessimi^
vero colores virtutum non di^simulat. Ludov. Vives de tradend. Discipl. lib. 5
Tranquille and aequaliter Fluit, rebusque unice addictu, orationis ornamenta
non negligens, sed securus praeterit, and tamen hunc ipsum ornatum velut umbram
^on id agens trahit. Famian: Strada, lib. 2 Prol^s. Histor.
Vives, incorruptissimum. And I desire to write as freely and unpartially of
them, since I may say of them all, as Tacitus does of some of them, that they
were Mihi nec beneficio nec injuria cogniti; only I shall herein fail, that I
write not of these Emperors Stylo Imperatorio, with a high and lofty style.
Julius Caesar is here placed in the forefront, he being the first Emperor. For
this title was at the first given unto him, that had fought valiantly for his
Country and slain many enemies; Julius Nature meant Caesar for a Conqueror,
when she gave him both such courage, and such courtesy, both which put Marius
into amaze. They which durst speak to him, (said he) were ignorant of his
greatness; and they which durst not, were so of his goodness.
Caesar (having brought the greatest part of the then known world into the
subjectio^ of the Romans) was the first that was saluted by the title of
absolute Emperor, and all the Emperors succeeding were called Imperatores and
Caesares from him, Mat. 22. 21. Dunbar in his fifth Century of Epigrammes has
these verses of Julius Caesar's and Pope Gregory's reforming the Calendar.

Caesar Gregoriusque annum dum jure reformant,
Deformant regnires sine jure, sui:
Scilicet antiqui facies a Caesare regni
Versa est, a Papa Pristina religio:
Malo reformari civilem a Caesare stammam.
Malo reformatam Gregoriique fidem.
The Emperors after Julius Caesar were called Augusti from Octavius, the
second Roman Caesar, who revived the good laws, and reformed the bad. But the
Emperors succeeding him, having more ^are to be great then good, rather raged
then reigned, and the decrees of some of them, viz. Tiberius and Caligula, are
witily termed furores non judicia. Quatuor Principes ferro interempti (says
Tacitus in his History) four of these Emperors were slain with the Sword,
Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian: which three first Plutarch compares (in
regard of their short reign) to Kings in a Tragedy, which last no longer then
the time that they are represented on the stage, Julius Caesar, and Caligula
were also slain, Claudius, and Titus were poisoned, Nero slew himself, Augustus
Caesar dyed in a Complement; Livia, Conjugii nostri memor, vive, and vale.
Tiberius in dissimulation; as Tacitus says of him. Iam Tiberium vires and
corpus, non Dissimulatio deserebans. Vespas^an in a Jest, sitting upon the
stool, Vt ^^to D^u^ ^io. Galba with a sentence, Feri, six re si^ (...) Romani;
holding forth his Ne^k, (...) last Essays in 4. ^
Augustus dyed in a complement, Tiberius in dissimulation, Galba with a
sentence, Vespasian with a jest, yet he died peaceably in his Bed, which no
Emperor since Augustus ever did. The Macrob. lib. 1. in some. Scipion.
Heathens shadowed the sting of conscience by the Eagle or Vulture that feed
upon the heart of Prometheus, and by the three Virgins which they called
Furies, following men in a hideo^s form, with burning torches in their hands,
which some of the worst of these Heathen Emperors really felt after their
bloody cruelties, and verified that old Timeo incustoditos aditus, timeo and
ipsos custodes.
Maxim, he must needs fear many, whom many fear. See in the Book of him, and
Domitian.
Caligula (though he contemned the gods, as they called them) yet at the least
thundering and lightening would run under his bed, and cover his head. Dion in
Nerone.
Nero that monster of Mankind having killed his Mother Agrit^ina, could never
after endure the worm and sting of conscience for his foul fact, Our English
Chronicles report of King Richard the third, that having imbrued his hands in
the Blood of two Orient Princes, he never after had quiet in his mind, his body
was privily fenced, his hand ever upon his Dagger, his countenance grimme and
ghastly, his sleep unquiet, for he rather slumbred than slept. The night before
the Battle fought in Bosworth-Field, he dreamed a terrible dream. Credo non
erat so^^lum, sed Consei^ntia scelerum. Polyd. Virgil.
but confessed that he was often haunted with the apparition of his mothers
Ghost, and tormented also with scourges, and burning torches of the Furies. We
may take notice of many Moral virtues also in the best of these Heathens,
Julius Caesar, Augustus Vespasian, and Titus that mirror of humanity, and see
in them the truth of that old Maxim, Magistratus virum indicat, a place
shows the man, and it shows some to be better, some to be worse. It was
said of Caligula, that there was never better servant and worse Master: Omnium
consensu capax Imperii, nisi imperasset, says Tacitus of Galba: but of
Vespasian he says, Solus Imperatorum Vespasianus mutatus in melius. But least
I should be upbraided with the City of Myndus, for making my Porch too big,
here will I cast Anchor, ever remaining.

Your dutiful Son to command EDWARD LEIGH.

Julius Caesar.
THe Iulii were so called (says Alex. ab Alex.) a prima barbae lanugine, Genesis
dier. lib. 1. c. 9. (...) in Gr. (says he) signifies Primam in mento
lanuginem.
from the first wool or down of the beard. Others think the name of the Iulii
came from Iulus Ascanius, the Son of Aeneas.

At puer Ascanius, Virg. lib. 2. Aeneid.
cui nunc cog nomen Iulo. He reformed the Calendar which was then confused,
An^^m ad cursum Solis accommod^vit. Sueton.
and framed the whole year just unto the course of the Sun, that it should
contain 365 days, and appointed that every fourth year a whole day should be
inserted. Therefore we call our year Annum Iulianum, and the Calendar which we
use Calendarium Iulianum, He was born in that Month.
and that Month which was by them called Quintilis, because it was the fifth
Month, Macrob. Saturn. cap. 12.
is now called July in honor of him.

For his other name Caesar, there are different opinions of the original of
it. Some derive it a caesiis oculis, from his gray eyes. But Suetonius Sueton.
describes him to have been, Nigris vegetisque oculis micantibus, of a black
quick ^parkling eye.
refutes that, and says, he had black eyes. Others say he was so called a
Caesarie, from a bush of hair with which he was born. Some say he was Primus
Caesar, ^caeso Matris utero dictus.
cut out of his Mothers womb: although Festus Pompeius thinks, such are rather
to be called Caesones, and Casaubon Animadvers. in Sueton. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 1. c. 9. Beckman de Orig. Ling. Latin. vide Christiani Matthew. Theatr.
Histor. Theor. Pract. in Iul. Caes. cap. 1. Et Commentar. Schild. in Suetonium.
rejects that Etymology. Others derive it a Caeso Elephanto, from his
Grandfathers killing an Elephant, which in the Carthaginian tongue is called
Caesar. Sigonius speaks much of it, but so that it should seem to be ambiguae
fidei, and therefore I shall leave it undermined.

He was tall of stature, Forma omnium civium excellentissimus, vigore animi
acerrimus, munificentiae effusissimus. Paterculus.
white, and clear of complexion, somewhat full faced, his limbs were well
trussed, and in good plight, his eyes black, lively, and quick. He was also
very healthful, saving that in his latter days he was given to faint, and
swoon suddenly. Comitiali quoque morbo bis inter res agendas correptus est, Seu
inter res gerendas. i. e. cum aciem ordinaret. Plutarch.
says Suetonius, twice in the midst of his Martial affairs, he was surprised
with the falling sickness, which he styles Morbum comitialem, Whiles he was
setting his army in battle array
either because it chiefly invadeth, and seizes on men in Comitiis, in popular
Assemblies, or because their Comitia, Fuchs. Instit. Medic. l. 3. Sect. 1. c.
1^. Plato morbum divinum appellat, quia occupat in noble divinae particulam
aurae. Alii morbum sacrum, vel quia detestandus est, vel quia divinitus
immi^titur. Dicitur etiam Herculeus, quia Hercules eo laboravit; item ^ulgo
caducus. Lipsius.
their Parliaments or Assemblies were dissolved, and broke up by occasion
thereof, if any chanced to fall sick of that disease, they reputing such an
accident to be a sinister presage.

Est Morbi species subiti cui nomen ab illo est,
Quod fieri nobis suffragia justa recusant.
Saepe etenim membris acri languore caducis,
Concilium Populi labes horrenda diremit.
In Eloquence and warlike feats together, he either equalled, or excelled the
glory of the very best.

Eloquentia attigit summorum gloriam: re militari excessit. Lipsius.
Caesar quine scait moins bien fair, que bien dire.
Caesar who knows as well to write as fight.

He held a Sword in one hand, Imperatoriam Majest^tem non solum ar^^s
decoratam, sed etiam legibus oportet esse armatam, ut utrumque tempus, and
bellorum, and pacis recte possit gubernari. Justinian. Pro^m, Institut.
and a Book in the other, with this Motto, Ex utroque Caesar, Emperor by both.

He was counted the second man for Eloquence in his time, and gave place to the
first, because he would be the first and chiefest man of war, and Authority.
Julius Caesar Scalig^r writes thus of him: Duae sunt aquilae solae in natura
rerum, altera bellicae laudis, altera literariae; illa potentiae, haec
sapientiae; Caesar and Aristotle's. Exercit. 94. Sect. 2.

Paterculus reckoning up the famous wits of those times says, Summis
Oratoribus aemulus. Tacit. He was Ci^ero's rival in Eloquence.
Et proximum Ciceroni Caesarem. Nay Cicero himself in his Catalogue of Orators
to Brutus, Illum omnium fere Oratorum, latin loqui elegantissime, says
Atticus there of him. Caesar quotidiano sermoni egregie utilissimus, cui Cicero
laudem tribuit puri and incorrupti Sermoni^ Latini, Ledov. Viv. lib. 3. de
tradend. Discipl.
says, He cannot see any to whom Caesar might give place, and he highly
commends him in his Oration pro Marcello. Est ejus viri pura oration, sine fuco
ac calamistris ornata, vel Romany vel Atticis Musis dignissima. Lipsius. Aulus
Gellius scribit Caesarem sermonis fuisse praeter alios suae aetatis castissimi.

He left Commentaries of his own Acts, touching the Gaul war, and the Civil
war, which (Sr. Francis Bacon Advance of Learn. (...). l. 2 Commentarios
quosdam scripsit rerum suarum valde quidem probandos, nudi enim sunt recti, and
venusti, sanos quidem homines a scribendo deterruit. Cicero de Clar. Orat.
says) is the best History of the world. King James exhorting his Son to the
study of History, above all profane Writers commends this Book of Caesar's to
his reading, both sor the sweet flowing of the style, and the worthiness of
the matter in it self.

He was a famous Mathematician, and diligent in that study, as Lucan writes of
him.

-- Media inter proelia semper
Stellarum, coelique plagis superisque vacavi.
He could at one time read, Scribere and legere simul, dictare, and au ^ire
accepimus: Epistolas v^ro tantarum rerum quatern^s pariter librariis dictare,
aut, si nihil aliud ageret, septenas. Plin. Natural. Hist. lib. 7. c. 25.
and write, hear, and indite, and if he did nothing else, he could dictate to
7. Actuaries or Penmen at once.

We ought to admire two things in him, which he had to perfection, and which
render a Commander excellent; viz. that he forecast and provided for all things
which might either further or hinder his design before he undertook it; and
that in the very execution he failed not to take his advantage when occasion
presented it, or to remedy upon the instant such unexpected accidents as
befell; wherein he has been inimitable. The Duke of Rohan's observe. upon Caes.
Com. L. 6.

In his Enterprises he was both valiant and fortunate, and therefore singled
out for an Idea, or pattern of an absolute General, especially for four
Military properties very resplendent in him. First, laboriousnesse in his
Affairs. Speed Chron.
Secondly, courage in his dangers. Thirdly, industrious contriving of what he
undertook. Fourthly, quick dispatch in accomplishing what he had once begun.
Nam Caesar in omnia praeceps,
Nil actum credens, Lucan.
si quid superesset agendum.
Quintus Curtius speaking of Alexander the Great says, Nullam virtutem Regis
istius magis quam celeritatem laudaverim. I can commend no virtue more in this
King then speed.

In eleven days he marched with his army six hundred miles.

Suetonius affirms, that Caesar did ever march foremost before his troops,
and most commonly bare-headed, and on foot, whether the Sun shined, or it
rained. Tully reports of him, that he was never heard to say to his Soldiers,
Ite illuc, go forth thither, as if they should go forth upon service, and he
tarry behind in his tent, but As you see me do, so do ye. Judge. 7. 17. One
says the like of trajane, that in all hazards and perils, he never said unto
his Captains Go, but let us go: Do, but let us do.
Venite huc, Come ye hither.

-- Ignave, Lucan. l. 5. v. 487.
venire
Te Caesar, non ire jubet.
Pertinax was wont to say to his Soldiers, Solinus.
Militemus; The two principal men of the world Alexander and Caesar. have
slain each of them (as Pliny reports) more then a million of men.
and Severus Septimius, laboremus: Livie brings in Valerius Corvinus thus
speaking; Facta mea, non dicta vos milites sequi volo, nec disciplinam modo,
sed exemplum etiam a me petere.

Under his conduct were slain eleven hundred fourscore and two thousand
enemies. He fought in pitched Field two and fifty times, Signis collatis
quinquagies dimicavit. Plin. Natural. Hist. lib. 7. c. 25.
says Solinus, fifty says Pliny, and never was so much as in any hazard save
only twice.

He Conquered all France, Germany, discovered us Britains, He took 1000
Towns, conquered 300. Nations.
and made us Tributary; and triumphed five times in Rome with unspeakable
admiration.

It is observable, that in all his wars he has always been inferior to his
enemies in number; for which cause he has always helped himself by
Fortifications, more then ever any other has done, which he made much the
better, when he found himself not sufficiently strong to give battle, as he was
a long time in Africa; insomuch that Scipio himself wondered at his coldness,
nevertheless he always continued his Soldiers in exercise, and himself
exercised new levied men, and entered them by small skirmishes, wherein by his
industry for the most part he had the best, and always attempted something
upon his enemy. The Duke of Rohan's Observe. on Caesar's Comm. L. 5.

Tam celer in agendo and consulta exequendo, (...). Nec (...) de se praedicatio
est Caejaris, ante victum bostem esse (...) L. Flor. (...)
ut persaepe nuntios de se praevenerit. He is renowned for his celerity in
doing, and preventing the very report of his coming.

Caesar has made himself as much redoubted and admired by the great works
which he caused his Soldiers to make, as by his great Battles. The Duke of
Rohan's treatise of Modern War. Cap. 4.

Having overcome King Pharnaces, and being desirous to advertise one of his
friends of his quick expedition in dispatching that war, he only wrote three
words unto An^tius at Rome, veni, vidi, vici; I came, I saw, I overcame.

Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany said, Veni, vidi, Deus vicit. Surius in
bello Germanico.

He never put enemy to flight but he discamped him, Suetonius.
and drove him out of the field: By this means he gave them whom he had once
discomsited no time to bethink themselves.

In any doubtful and dangerous service, Suetonius.
his manner was to send away the Horses, So William the Conqueror at his
arrival into England, burnt the ships which transporported his Army.
and his own with the first, to the end that when all means of flight were
gone, they might of necessity be forced the rather to stand to it, and abide to
the last.

He called not his Soldiers Milites, but Commilitones: not plain Soldiers,
but by a more pleasing name, Lucan seems to have alluded to this: Bellorum o
socii, qui mill pericula mortis. Augustus did much reprove this humor in his
Uncle, saying, Dum affectat carier fieri, auctoritatem Principis emolliverat.
Aurel. Vict.
Fellow Soldiers. He maintained them so trim and brave, that he stuck not to
set them out in polished Armor, damasked with silver and gold, as well for
goodly show, as because they should in Suetonius.
Battle keep the same more surely for fear of damage and loss.

He loved them so affectionately, that when he heard of Tiberius his overthrow,
and the Legions with him: he suffered the hair of his head and beard to grow
long, It is reported of Alexander that he infused such courage into his
Soldiers, Vt illo praesente, nullius hostium arma vel inermes timuerint.
and would not cut the same before he had revenged their Death. By which means
he both had his Soldiers most devoted unto him, and also made them truly
valiant.

He was so entirely beloved of his Soldiers, that to do him service (whereas
otherwise they were but like other men in any other private quarrel) if
Caesar's honor were touched they were invincible, and would so desperately,
Justin. l. 12. e. ult.
and with such fury venture themselves, Caesar's eye made his Soldiers prodigal
of their blood.
that no man was able to abide them.

A private Soldier of his fought so valiantly in Britain, that by his means
he saved the Captains, Plutarches Lives.
which otherwise were in great danger to have been cast away (being driven into
a Bogge;) then marching with great pain through the mire and dirt, half
swimming, and half a foot, in the end he got to the other side, but left his
shield behind him: Plutarch.
Caesar wondering at his noble courage, ran to him with joy to embrace him: but
the poor Soldier hanging down his head, the water standing in his eyes, fell
down at Caesar's feet, and besought him to pardon him for leaving his target
behind him.

Petronius being taken by Scipio, he said he would give him his life, but he
answered him again, that Caesar's Soldiers did not use to have their lives
given them, but to give others their lives; and with these words he drew his
sword and thrust himself through.

Caesar at Alexandria being busy about the assault and winning of a Bridge,
was driven by a sudden sally of the enemies to take a Boat, Plutarchs Lives.
and many besides making have to get into the same, he leapt into the sea, and
by swimming almost a quarter of a mile recovered the next ship, Paludamentum
mordicus trahens, ne spolio potiretur hostis.
bearing up his left hand all the while, for fear the writings which he held
therein should take wet, and drawing his rich coat armor after him by the
teeth, Sueton.
because the enemy should not have it as a spoil. Milites erant sagati,
Imperatores pal^dati.


Beholding advisedly the Image, or portraiture of Alexander the Great in the
Temple of Hercules at Cales, Plutarch and Suetonius.
at the sight thereof he fetched a deep sigh, as being ashamed that he had yet
performed no memorable act at those years, i. e. 33. Saepe audivi Q. Maximum,
P. Scipionem, praeterea civitatis nostrae praeclaros viros solitos ita dicere,
cum majorum imagines intuerentur, vehementissime sibi animum ad virtutes
accendi; scilicet non ceram illam, neque figuram, tantam vim in sese habere;
sed memoria rerum gestarum eam flammam egregiis viris in pectore crescere,
neque prius sedari, quam virtus eorum famam atque gloriam adaequaverit,
Sallustius in Bello Iugurthino.
wherein Alexander had conquered the whole world.

He was very much disquieted and dismayed with a dream the very night before,
(for he imagined in his sleep that he had carnal company with his own Mother:)
the Diviners and Wizards incited him to the hopes of most glorious
achievements, Suetonius. Ita visum interpretari va^issimae artis auctoribus
^^nis^imis. Casaubon. Animadvers.
making this exposition of his dream, that thereby was portended unto him the
sovereignty of the whole world; for his Mother whom he saw under him, betokened
the subjection of the Earth, which is counted the mother of all things.

There were two Factions in Rome at that time, Sylla was the chief of the one,
and Marius of the other; Marius stood for the people, and Sylla defended the
Nobles. Marius and all his Confederates were proclaimed Traitors, and enemies
to the Commonwealth. Plutarch.
Sylla determining to kill Caesar, some of his friends told him, Suetonius.
that it was to no purpose to put so young a Boy as he was to death: but Sylla
answered again, Caesari multos Marios inesse, that there were many Marii in
that one Boy, implying, that he would be a great enemy unto their state. When
the day of Election for summus Pontifex came, he told his Mother kissing him,
that that day she should see her Son chief Bishop of Rome, or banished from
Rome.

He said, he had rather be the chiefest man in a poor Village, then the second
person in Rome.

Nec quenquam jam far potest Caesarve priorem, Lucan.

Pompejusve parem. --
He did extremely affect the name of King, and some were set on as he passed
by, in popular acclamation to salute him King; whereupon finding the cry weak
and poor, he put it off thus in a kind of jest, as if they had mistaken his
surname, Non Rex sum, sed Caesar.

He often used these verses of Euripides, which he himself thus translated.

Nam si violandum est jus, Imperii causa
Violandum est, aliis rebus pietatem colas.
He alone managed all the affairs of state: his Colleague or Fellow-Consull did
nothing, in so much as diverse Citizens pleasantly conceited, whenever they
signed, subscribed, or dated any writings to stand upon records, would merrily
put it down thus; Such a thing was done not when Caesar, and Bibulus, but when
Julius and Caesar were Consuls: setting down one and the same man twice by his
name and surname; yea, and soon after these verses were commonly current.

Non Bibulo quidquam nuper, sed Caesare factum est:
Nam Bibulo fieri Consule, nil memini.
Caesar of late did many things, but Bibulus not one:
For naught by Consul Bibulus can I remember done. Equitandi usus Caesari a
pueritia facilis adeo extitit, ut reflexis in tergum manibus, equum
velocissimis con^itare cursibus saepe consueverit. Plut. Solinus. Sueton.

He was such an excellent Rider of a Horse from his youth, that holding his
hands behind him he would gallop his Horse upon the spur. The Horse he used to
ride upon was strangely marked, with feet resembling very near a man's, and the
hoofes cloven like toes: Like to Alexanders Bucephalus. Plutarch.
The Beast would abide no man else to ride him, and he himself was the first
that backed him.

When one brought him his Horse to get upon, which he used in Battle, he said
unto him, When I have overcome mine enemies I will get upon him to follow the
chase, Solinus. He gloried in nothing so much (says Austin. 5. Epist.) as in
pardoning his enemies, and gratifying his friends.
but now let us give them charge.

Benignitate adeo praeditus, ut quos armis subegerat, clementia magis vicerit.

He was of so good a nature, that such as he subdued by Battle, he more
overcame with gentleness.

He said the greatest pleasure he took of his Victories was, that he daily
saved the lives of some of his countrymen that bare arms against him. He held
neuters for his friends contrary to Pompey, who held them for enemies. Aurel.
Caesar dando, sublevando, ignoscendo, gloriam adeptus est. Salust. in bell.
Catilin.

When Pompey's head was presented to him, Vberrimas lachrymas profudit, he wept
bitterly, and caused him to be honorably buried, Idem dixit, non mihi placet
vindicta, sed victoria.
saying, Ego Pompeii casum deploro, and meam fortunam metuo, I lament Pompey's
fall, and fear mine own fortune.

When he found many Letters in Pompey's coffers, Dion. King Cotis having
received for a Present many beautiful and rich Vessels, yet frail and easy to
be broken, brake them all, that he might not be stirred to choler when they
should happen to be broken.
wherein diverse testified their good will unto Pompey, and their hatred toward
him, he neither read them nor copied them out, but presently burnt them, least
being exasperated by them, he should have been forced to have committed some
greater evil.

When Pompey's Images had been thrown down he caused them to be set up again,
Plutarch in Tullies life. Pompeii sta^^^s erigendo su^ confirmavit.
and Cicero thereupon used this speech, that Caesar in setting up Pompey's
Images again, made his own to stand surer.

He accounted his conquest of the two Pompeys (Sons to Pompey the great) in
Andaluzia in Spain the most glorious of all his victories, for he would often
say afterward, that at others times he fought for Fame and Victory, but that
day he fought for his life, which he had never fought for before.

When some of his friends did counsel him to have a Guard for the safety of
his Person, Mori satius est semel, quam timore semper torqueri Plutarch. Sueton.
and some also did offer themselves to serve him, he would never consent unto
it, but said, It was better to dye once, then always to be afraid of death.

He said also, Mori se quam timeri malle, says, Paterculus, when some advised
him to keep by Arms what he had got by Arms.

When he was hindered by one of the Tribunes from taking some of the common
Treasure out of Saturnes Temple, Silent leges inter Arms.
and told that it was against the Law, Tush, said he, Time of War and Law are
two things.

That speech of his was compounded both of terror and clemency, Adolescent
difficilius est mi^i hoc dicere, quam facere.
to Metellus the Tribune; for Caesar entering into the inner Treasury of Rome to
take the money there kept, Metellus forbad him; whereto Caesar said, That if he
did not desist he would lay him dead in the place; and presently taking himself
up, he added, young man, it is harder for me to speak it then do do it.

Magno illi Alexandro, sed sobrio, neque iracundo simillimus, qui semper and
somno and cibo in vitam, non in voluptatem uteretur. Paterculus. Plutarch.
Suetonius.
He was a spare drinker of Wine, as his very enemies confessed, whence arose
that Apothegme of Cato, That of all that ever were, Caesar alone came sober to
the overthrow of the state.

He was the first that devised the way for friends to talk together by writing
Ciphers in letters, when he had no leisure to speak with them for his urgent
business, and for the great distance from Rome.

He said, Caesar's wife ought not only to be without fault, but also without all
suspicion of fault.

Being certified that Cato had slain himself with his own hands, Plutarch. in
Apophtheg. Dixit invidere se Catoni mortem, quando sibi salutem invidisset.
Plutarch in the life of Cato.
he seemed to be very sorry for it, and said, O Cato, I envy thy Death,
because thou did envy my glory to save thy life.

Cicero wrote a book in commendation of Cato, to justify that action, which
Caesar answered with another, which he called Anti-Cato, both which are lost.
Schildius out of Beroaldus says, Cicero wrote a book entitled Cato, in
commendation of him, which vexed Caesar, because he conceived the commendation
of the other tended to his dispraise, and therefore he wrote two books against
Cato, discovering his crimes, called Anti-Catones.

Being in a Pinnase or small Boat in a great storm, Caesarem vehis, and
fortunam ejus.
he said to the Master of it: Fellow, be of good cheer, for thou have Caesar
and his fortune with thee.

[So Charles the fifth taking his Horse to rush into the main battle, was
requested to forbear, but he answered, An Emperor was never shot through with
a Bullet.

So William the second of England, coming to imbark at Portsmouth, the Master
told him the weather was rough, and there was no passing without imminent
danger, Tush, said he, set forward, I never yet heard of a King that was
drowned, Dan. Hist.]

Yet I may say of him as our Chronicler does of one of our English Kings,
Cambd. in Annal. De Henry. 8.
Inerant illi confuso quodam temperamento, virtutes magnae and vit^a non minora.

Suetonius and others, speak of his unnatural uncleanness, and prodigious
prodigality. He stole out of the Capitol 108000. pounds (reduced to our money)
in gold at once, gave to Servilia a Jewel which cost him 46875. pounds, Plin.
lib. 7. c. 25.
owed 1953125. pounds more then he was worth by his own confession. His shows,
and public Donations, in costlinesse are almost invaluable.

About the trimming of his body he was over curious, Circa corporis euram
morasior, ut non solum tonderetur diligenter, ac raderetur, sed velleretur
etiam. Suetonius.
so as he would not only be shaven very precisely, but also have his hair
plucked.

The chiefest cause that made him mortally hated, was his excessive desire of
honor, and his slighting the Senators.

When his friends complained unto him of Antonius and Dolabella, that they
intended some mischief toward him, he answered them again, As for these fat
men, and smooth-combed-heads, Odi pallidos and macilentor.
quoth he, I never reckon of them, but those pale-visaged, and carrion lean
people, I fear them most, meaning Brutus and Cassius.

He never refused to fight but in his latter days, being then of this opinion,
that the oftener he had gotten^victory, the less he was to venture, and make
trial of fortune: also that a victory could gain him nothing so much as some
disastrous calamity might take from him.

There conspired against him more than threescore, the heads of which
conspiracy were Cassius and Brutus. He had fair warning of his death before it
came, by many evident prodigies; Fires were seen in the Element, and spirits
running up and down in the night, and solitary Birds at noonday sitting in the
great Marketplace; as the Bird Regaliolus did fly with a little branch of
Laurel into the Court of Pompeius, Or Regaviolus, quasi Rex avium. Casaub.
Animadvers.
a sort of other Birds of diverse kinds from out of the Grove hard by pursued
after, and there pulled it in pieces.

Caesar sacrificing to the gods, Nec centum victimis perlitare poterat. Florus,
l. 4. Hist. Romans c. 2.
found that one of the Beasts which was sacrificed, had no heart, and that was
a strange thing in Nature, how a Beast could live without a heart.

There was a certain South-sayer that had given Caesar warning long before, Eo
ipso die dum ad senatum iret, libelli conjurationem and conjuratorum nomina
indicantes, in manus ipsi traditi.
to take heed of the day of the Ides of March (which is the fifteenth of the
Month,) for on that day he should be in a great danger. That day being come,
Caesar going unto the Senate House, and speaking merrily to the South-sayer,
told him, The Ides of March were come: Plutarch. Suetonius.
So they be, softly answered the South-sayer, but yet they are not past.

[Christianus Matthias Theat. Histor. Theoret. Pract. in Iul. Cap. 3. has an
elegant and memorable parallel history.

Henry the 4. King of France was dissuaded from going abroad that day he was
slain* by some; as a day marked out by Astrologers to portend danger to his
person: yet he, a second Caesar as well in the course of his life as of his
death, was little swayed therewith, but like a King, and a Christian replied;
that it was an offense to God to give credit to these Prognostiques, and that
having God to his guard, he feared no man. The Life and death of Henry the 4.]

The night before this Discourse had with the South-sayer, all the windows and
doors of his chamber did fly open, and his Wife Calphurnia dreamed that
Caesar was slain, and that she had him in her arms.

He was stabbed with 23. wounds; Sueton. He was slain in Pompeys court. Tribus
and viginti vulneribus ad terram ditus est; sic ille qui terarum orbem civil^
sanguine impleverat; tandem ipse sanguine suo curiam implevit. Luc. Flo. l. 4.
Hist. Romans c. 2.
he only gave one groan at the first thrust, without uttering any words. Some
say, That as M. Brutus came running upon him, he said, (...); And thou my Son?

All men are of opinion, that such a death befell unto him as he desired; for
when he had read in Xenophon how Cyrus being at the point of death, gave order
for his Funeral, he seting light by so slow and lingering a kind of death,
wished to dye quickly and of a sudden.

The very day before he was killed, in a certain discourse moved at supper in
Marcus Lepidus his house, upon that point, which was the best end of a man's
life? He preferred that which was sudden and unlooked for.

He dyed in the 56. year of his age; In the St. Septenarie. Plutarch. Sueton.
Deum honor principi non ante habetur quam agere inter homines desierat. Tacit.
Et in Deorum numerum relatus est, he was made a god after death (which could
not defend himself from death, from cruel murder) and that, Non Sueton. Of
this Ceremony of the Apotheosis or deifying their Emperors, see Dr. Hackwels
Apology of Gods providence. l. 4. Sect. 2.
ore modo decernentium, sed and persuasione vulgi, Not only by their voice
which decreed such honor unto him, but also by persuasion of the common people.

A Comet shined then for seven days together, arising about the eleventh hour
of the day, and it was believed by those blind Heathen to be Caesar's soul, who
had been a Comet of combustion to the world.

-- Micat inter omnes
Iulium sidus, Horace. lib. 1. Ode 12.
velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
Also upon his Image there is a Star set to the very crown of his head.

Of these Murderers there was not one that either survived him above three
years, Percussorum autem fere neque triennio quisquam amplius supervixit, neque
sua morte defunctus est. Sueton. Bella res est (Inquit Seneca) mori sua morte.
or dyed a natural death.

All stood condemned, A notable judgment of God upon the unnatural murderers
of their Sovereign.
and by one mishap or other perished; some by shipwreck, others by battle, and
some again shortened their own days with the very same dagger wherewith they
had wounded Caesar: Cassius, as Plutarch reports, and Brutus according to
Dion.

Choice Observations OF OCTAVIUS AVGUSTVS.
HE was styled by the name of Augustus, Vel ab augurio, vel ab augendo dictus.
i. e. worshipful or sacred, which they thought to be a name of reverence and
Majesty, because all consecrated and hallowed places were called Loca Augusta.
That Month which was by them called Sextilis, because it was their sixth
Month, is called Augustus in honor of him, and things of greatest splendor
are called Augustissima. Julius Caesar was his great Uncle, but his Father by
Adoption. He was called Octavius from his Father, and Augustus from his victory.

A man most nobly descended; for riches, honor, friends, Empire, fortunate
victories, almost adored; for bodily good things, of comely stature, Forma
eximia and per omnes aetatis gradus venustissima. Suetonius. Oculorum acies
clarissimorum syderum modo vibrans. Corpore toto pulcher, sed oculis magis.
Aurel. Vict.
Of most amiable visage, and that also majesticall by his bright and shining
eyes, Quibus etiam existimari volebat inesse quiddam divini vigoris. Wherein
also (as he would have men believe) was seated a kind of Divine vigor: and he
joyed much, if a man looking wishly upon him, Sueton.
held down his face, as it were against the brightness of the Sun; therefore a
certain soldier turned away his eyes from beholding his face, and he demanding
the reason why he did so, he answered; Aurel. Vict
Quia fulmen oculorum tuorum far non possum.

His hair was somewhat yellow, and his body freckled with spots, which his
flatterers would have the world believe were in form like stars.

He was indeed somewhat low, Sueton. His shoes were underlaid somewhat with
the highest, that he might seem taller then he was.
nevertheless of a comely stature, five foot and nine inches, the just measure
(says one) of our late famous Queen Elizabeth, who as she matched that Roman
Emperor in happiness, and duration of Reign, so did she likewise in the
stature of her body. Cities were called Caesareae in honor of him,
Calciamentis altiusculis utebatur, ut procerior quam erat videretur. Suetonius.
so in honor of our Virgin Queen was there a Country called Virginia.

Augustus Imperii formator, ne Dominum quidem dici se volebat. Augustus the
founder of the Roman Empire (for his Father Caesar was but Metator rather then
Imperator, Tertul. Apol. c. 34.
the chalker of it out, then the setter of it up) This great man would not be
called Lord. Orosius lib. 7 c. 2.
Upon the same day that our Savior was born, Orosius.
he forbad them by Edict to call him Lord, that all Lordship might be ascribed
to him.

In his time our Savior was born, Imperante Augusto natus est Christus,
imperante Tiberio crucifixus. He consulting with the Oracle of Delphos about
his Successor, received this answer:

Puer Hebraeus diis beatis imperans, jubet me
Hanc domum linquere, and rursus in orcum reverti:
Quod superest, abi tacitus ex aris nostris.
Whereupon Augustus coming home, in the Capitol erected an Altar, and thereon
in Capital letters caused this inscription to be engraven, Haec est Ara
Primogeniti Dei.

He is mentioned in the Scripture, Totus orbis) ad verbum, Tota habitabilis,
ita ut subaudias Terra, A Hyperbolicall speech.
Luke 2. 1. There came an Edict from Augustus Caesar that all the world should
be taxed, i. e. all the Provinces subject to the Roman Empire, for the Romans
called themselves Lords of the whole world.

He made not war upon any people without just and necessary causes; Nulli Genti
sine justis and necessariis causis bellum in^ulit.
his saying was, That neither battle nor war was to be undertaken, Suetonius.
unless there might be evidently seen more hope of gain then fear of damage.
Bellum est Iustum, quod necessarium est; and arma sunt pia, quibus nulla nisi
in armis relinquitur. spes. Livie Decad. 1. Lib. 9.
He likened such who sought after small commodities with great danger, unto
those that Angle with a golden hook, which if it be broken off, no draught of
Fish whatsoever is able to make amends for the loss. [That was prudent advice
of Henry the fourth K. of France, to Henry the third his Brother, who would
needs with those small forces they had, salley out of Tours upon the great Army
of Charles Duke of Mayen; Sire (quoth he) N'hazardons pas un double Henry,
contre un Carolus, i. e. Let us not venture a double Ducket for a single penny.]
He was so troubled and astonished at the Relation of a Foyl and overthrow of
Varus, that for certain months together he let the hair of his beard and head
grow still, and wore it long; yea, and otherwhiles would run his head against
the doors, crying out, Quintilius Varus, Deliver up my Legions again.
Suetonius.

He deemed nothing less beseeming a perfect and accomplished Captain, Aurel.
Vict.
then temerity, or rashness: using this speech, Satis celeriter fieri, Sueton.
quicquid commode geritur, That is done soon enough which is done well enough.

He was so exceedingly delighted with that proverbiall saying, Aul. Gel. 10. l.
11. c. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 6. Eras. Adag.
Festina lent, that he would not only use it frequently in his daily
Colloquies, but would insert it often in his Epistles; admonishing by these two
words, that to effect any enterprise, both the speediness of Industry, and the
slownesse of Diligence should concur.

The City being not adorned according to the Majesty of such an Empire, Vrbem
lateritiam accepi, relinquo vobis marmoream. Aurel. Vict.
and subject to the casualties of Deluges and fires, he beautified and set out
so, Sueton.
as justly he made his boast, Macrob.
that whereas he found it built of brick, Liberalibus studiis, praesertim
eloquentiae in tantum incumbens, ut nullus ne in procinctu quidem laberetur
dies, quin legeret, scriberet, declamaret. Aurel. Vict.
he left it all of Marble.

Augusto profiuens and quae Principem deceret, Eloquentia fuit. Tacitus. He had
a ready, fluent, and eloquent speech, such as well became a Prince.

Seeing upon a time a number of Citizens clad all in black, assembled to hear a
public speech, he with great indignation cried out, Behold,

Romanos rerum Dominos, gentemque togatam* The Romans, Lords of all the world,
and long robbed Nation.

He never recommended his sons unto the people, Suetonius.
but with this clause added thereto, If they shall deserve. Si merebuntur.


He gave charge to the Praetors of Rome, Ne paterentur nomen suum obsolefieri,
Not to suffer his name to be worn threadbare.

He would never lie awake in the Nisi aliquo assidente, nunquam tenebris
evigilavit. Sueton. lib 2. c. 5.
dark without one sitting by his Bed side.

The Senate and people of Rome jointly saluting him by the name of Pater
Patriae, he with tears standing in his eyes made answer unto them in these few
words; Now that I have (mine honorable Lords) attained to the height of all my
vows and wishes, what remains else for me to crave of the immortal gods,
but that I may carry with me this universal consent of yours unto my lives end?
Macrobius writes of him, that he carried such an entire and fatherly affection
to the Commonwealth, that he called it, ^il^am suam, his own Daughter; and
therefore refused to be called Dominus, the Lord or Master of his Country, and
would only be called Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country, because be
governed it not per timorem, sed per amorem, not by fear, but by love.

He would not lightly depart forth of the City, or any Town, nor enter into any
place but in the evening, or by night, for disquieting any person in doing him
honor by way of dutiful attendance. Sueton.

The beginning of friendship between him and Cinna was strange; Cinna had
conspired against his life: After Augustus had discovered to him all his
conspiracy which he knew, he said, I have given thee thy life twice; first as
an enemy, then a Rebel, and now I give thee the Consulship. Let us now be
friends, and henceforth strive, whether I have with a better faith given thee
thy life, or thou owe it to me. Augustus (says Suetonius in vita August.)
had not thenceforward in all Rome a greater friend then Cinna, while he lived,
and when he died, Cinna made him sole heir. vide Senec. l. 1. de clement. c. 9.

This was duly observed, that how often soever he entered Rome, no punishment
that day was inflicted upon any person.

Qui cum triste aliquid statuit, Seneca said of him, Poenas dat, dum poenus
exigit. lib. 1. De Clemen. cap. 10.
fit tristis and ipse;
Cuique fere poenam sumere, poena sua est.
He was grieved himself when he pronounced a grievous sentence, and he thought
himself punished when he punished others. Damnatorum poenar interdum acrius
ferebat, quam qui plectebantur. Senec. lib. de Ira.


Quique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox.
Aurel. Vict.
Rarus quidem ad recipiendas amicitias, ad retinendas constantissimus.
He would not suddenly entertain a league of friendship with any, but was a
constant friend to those he loved. His special friends were Mecoenas, Agrippa,
Virgil. Propertius.


-- amare
Nec cito desisto, nec temere incipio.
Late ere I love, as long ere I leave.
Dion reports of him that when he gave commandment to take tribute of the
Jews, He permitted the Jews to use their liberties.
he would not suffer it to be taken from them on their Sabbath, but caused them
to delay it till the next day.

He slept but upon a low bed, Ne toro quidem cubuisse ajunt, nisi humili and
modice instrato. Vest non te^^ere alia usus est, quam domestica, ab ^^ore and
sor^re, filia, ^eptibusque confect^, Sueton. He termed sumptuous garments,
Vexillum superbiae, nidumque luxuriae, the banner of pride, and nest of lechery.
and the same but meanly spread, and laid with coverlets. He seldom wore any
apparel but of huswives cloth, made within the house by his Wife, his Sister,
and Daughter.

He was a man of very little meat, and fed for the most part on cheat bread and
small Fishes.

He caused the bones of Thallus (who had opened a Letter committed to his
trust) to be broken, to the terror of such untrusty attendants. Suetonius.

By one speech he did appease a tumultuous Army, Plutarch. in Apoph.
Audite juvenes senem, quem juvenem senes audiverunt. Ye young men hearken to
me now old, whom old men have hearkened unto when young.

He had a special care to express his mind and meaning most plainly, and
reprehended Marcus Antonius for writing such things, that men did rather wonder
at then understand.

It was elegantly said of him, I hate alike as departing from the mean,
Suetonius. Cacozelos and antiqu^rios, ut diverso genere vitiosos, pari fastidi^
sprevit.
both Antiquaries, and affectors of novelties.

He did not so much observe Orthographie, i. e. the form and precise rule of
writing set down by Grammarians, but seemed to follow their opinion who think
men should write according as they speak.

He could not away so much as with the Winter Sunshine, and therefore at home
he never walked up and down in the Air, without a broad-brim'd hat upon his
head.

In general Salutations he admitted the very commons, entertaining the suits
and desires of all comers with so great humanity, Putas t^ asse^ Elephanto
dare? Macrob. 2. lib. Sat. c. 4. Quasi Elephanto stipem. Sueton.
as that he rebuked one of them merrily, because in reaching unto him a
supplication, he did it so timorously, as if he had been reaching meat to an
Elephant. Augustus militem donis, populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otii
pellexit. Tacit. lib. 1. Annal.

He won the soldiers with gifts, the people with provision of victuals, and
all with the sweetness of rest and peace.

He said of Tiberius, Miserum populum Romanum, qui sub tam lentis maxillis
erit, O unhappy people of Rome, that shall be under such a slow pair of jaws.
By this Enigmaticall speech, he compared the state of the people of Rome unto
the miserable case of one, whom some savage and cruel beast has gotten between
his teeth, not devouring and dispatching him at once, but there holds and
cheweth him a long while in exceeding pain; alluding to the secret malice and
dreaming nature withal of Tiberius.

To express the speedy expedition of a thing done hastily, Sparages soon
sodden, See Eras. Adag.
he used this Proverb, Citius quam Asparagi coquantur. Quicker (would he say)
then Sparages can be sodden.

Beholding certain rich strangers and forrainers at Rome carrying whelps of
Dogs and Apes in their bosoms, and making much of them, Plutarch in the life
of Pericles says no more then Caesar, but Eras. in his Apothegmes took it to
be meant of Augustus.
he did ask, Whether women brought not forth children in their countries?
Hereby giving a worthy and Princely admonition to them who do consume and wast
upon Beasts, the natural affection and love due to men.

When he purposed never to do what he was requested, he was wont by way of
Proverb to say, Suetonius. The Greeks had no Calends. See Eras. Adag.
That he would do it, ad calendas Graecas, i. e. in our English Proverb, at
later Lammas, never.

He was so much afraid of Thunder and Lightning, that he ever carried about
with him for a preservative remedy a Seals Or of a Sea-ca^f, which as Pliny
writes, checketh al lightnings. Tonitru^ and fulgur^ ^^ulo infirmius
exp^^escebat, ut sem^er and ubique pellem vituli marini circumferret ^ro
remedio, ^que ad omnem (...) tempe^^uis suspicionem, in ab^itum and concam.
(...) se reciperet. Suetonius.
skin; yea, and whenever he suspected there would be any extraordinary storm
or tempest, he would retire himself into a close secret room under ground, and
vauled above head.

In his time wars ceased, Aurel. Vict. In the time of war the Temple was open.
and learning chiefly flourished. The Temple of Ianus was then shut in Rome,
peace being general through the whole world.

Ianum Quirini clausit: Horace lib 4. Carminum.
Et ordinem
Rectum, and vaganti fraena licentie.
Injecit, emovitque culpas,
Et veteres revocavit arts.
Our Savior was born in the 42. year of his reign say Epiphanius and
Eusebius; 41. say Tertullian, and Irenaeus.

Receiving a challenge from Anthony, he returned him this answer, He bid
Catullus the railing Poet to supper, to show that he had forgiven him.
That if Anthony had a disposition to dye, or were weary of life, there were
ways enough else to death besides that. Thus the challenge was rejected, and
yet his Honor untainted.

Affectabat jocos, Macrob. Saturn. l. 2. c. 4.
salvo tamen Ma^estatis pudorisque respectu. He was very pleasant, and had both
an excellent dexterity in breaking of Jests, Seneca de Ira.
and was very patient likewise in bearing of flouts. Vide Christ. Math. Th^at.
Hist. in August. p. 55. 56. Convitia, si irascare, agnita videntur; spret^
ex^l^s^unt. Tacitus.
Probrosis in se dictis arrisit. He made himself merry with reprochful speeches
touching himself, therein manifesting his clemency, and also his wisdom.

When he had by Proclamation promised a great sum of money to him that should
bring in that famous Pirate Corocota, and put him in his power; He knowing the
Emperors mild and pleasant vein, took the boldness to come himself, and told
him that he was Corocota which came to submit himself, and demanded the sum
promised to him that should bring him in; Augustus both pardoned him, and gave
him the money. Dion.

Macrobius reports of him, l. 2. Saturn. cap. 4. Mat. 2. 16. For his Jewish
devotio^ prohibited him to deal with swine, but not Religion, nor reason, nor
nature could protect those Innocents from slaughter.
that when he heard that at the commandment of Herod, all the children of Syria
under two years old were slain, and that in the stir his own son was also
slain; Melius est (inquit ille) Herodis porcum esse quam puerum. I had rather
(says he) be Herod's swine then his son.

He commanded Herennius a dissolute young man to depart out of the Camp, and
when he submissively entreated him not to send him home, Macrob. ib. Qnoniam
pudebat adolescentem fateri quibus ipse Caesari displicuisset, Caesar permisit
ut sermonem inverteres, and culpam in ipsum conferret. Eras. Appotheg. Macrob.
ubi supra.
alleging that he could not tell what to say to his Father, he answered, Dic
me tibi displicuisse, say, that I displeased thee.

When Pacuvius did petere ab eo congiarium, and said, That it was commonly
spoken among men, that he had given him a great deal of money, Sed tu, inquit,
noli credere.

Galba, who had a crooked back pleading before him, and often saying, Corrige
in me si quid reprehendis, If you find any fault in me correct it; Augustus
answered, Ego te monere possum, corrigere non possum, I can but admonish thee,
Macrob. Saturn.
I cannot correct thee.

Being entertained by one at a Banquet very meanly and sparingly, after all was
finished he departed, and at his farewell only whispered this in his ear, Non
putabam me tibi tam familiarem, I did not think we had been so familiar.

When one tilled the place where his Father was buried, Id. Ib.
he said, Hoc vere est monumentum Patris colere.

He was choleric by nature, This counsel was given him, that when the object
and occasions of Choler were in his eye, he should not be moved before he had
pronounced over the letters of the Alphabet.
but his patience in bearing of bitter Jests deserved much to be commended. A
certain Countryman came to Rome, who did much resemble him in outward
feature, insomuch that all men's eyes were cast upon him, and Augustus hearing
of it, caused him to be brought before him, asking him this question, Whether
his Mother had ever been at Rome; the young man answered, No, but his Father
had oftentimes.

He sitting between Virgil and Horace, being asked by one what he did,
answered, Sedeo inter suspiria and lachrymas; per suspiria, intelligens
Virgilium suspirabundum, and per lachrymas, Horatium lippientem.

He hearing that a certain Gentleman of Rome (who was deeply indebted) did
sleep most securely, Habendae est ad somnum culcitra, in qua ille cum tantum
deberet, dormire potuit, Macrob. Sat. l. 2. c. 4.
desired to buy the Bed whereupon he rested; it seeming a matter of much marvel
to him, that one fallen into so deep arrerages could take his rest so well.

When a soldier bragged too much of a great scarre in his forehead, At tu cum
fugisti, nunquam post te respe^^ris?
he asked him if he did not get it when he looked back as he fled.

He wrote a Tragedy called Ajax, which afterward (because it displeased him)
he blotted out with a sponge. Therefore when Lucius a writer of Tragedies,
asked him what his Ajax did? Caesar very wittily answered, In spongiam
incubuit, alluding to the Argument of the Fable, in which Ajax when he knew
what things he had spoken and done in his madness, lying upon his sword killed
himself. Besides the pretty allusion unto the fabulous History of Ajax,
Torrentius has observed in the word Spongia a double signification, viz. a
Sponge called deletilis, which writers had at hand, either to wipe and wash out
what misliked them, or to blur and blot the same; whereupon Martial says of
it, Vtilis haec quoties scripta novare voles: and also a Sword, which adds
the better grace unto the conceit, considering that Ajax fell upon his own
sword.

Having conquered his enemy, and returning home victorious, amongst others that
came to congratulate his happy conquest, there was one holding a Crow, which he
had taught to say, Macrob. Saturn.
Ave Caesar, Victor, Imperator, God save the Emperor, and Conqueror. He
wondering to see the Bird so officious, gave a great sum of money for him. His
fellow workman to whom none of that liberality came, affirmed that he had at
home another Crow for Caesar, which he entreated he might bring; being brought,
he expressed the words which he had learned, Ave victor, Imperator Antoni. The
Emperor being nothing provoked therewith, thought it sufficient to bid him
divide the donative with the other: being saluted in like manner of a Parret,
he caused him to be bought. This example allured a poor Cobbler to try whether
he could teach a Crow to use the like salutation, but he being at great
expenses in vain, was wont often to say, Opera and Impensa periit, all my
pains and charge is lost; but at the last the Crow began to utter the same
salutation, which Augustus once hearing as he passed by, he answered, Satis
domi salutatorum talium hab^o, I have such saluters enough at home.

The Crow remembered to add that which he had heard his Master complaining say,
Opera and impensa periit, at which Caesar laughed, and gave more for him then
any of the rest that he had bought.

Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...)?
Corvos quis olim concavum salutare, Persiu^.

Picasque docuit verba nostra conari?
Magister artis, ingenique largitor
Venture, negatas Artifex sequi voces.
He wrote a bitter Satyr against a Poet, but he wiped his lips and replved
not, saying, Periculosum est in eum scribere qui potest proscribere.

Suetonius writes of him, that he loved the expressions of the good will of
his friends, and especially such as appeared by some Legacy given at their
death: but yet whatsoever it was, he would return it at one time or other to
their children with advantage.

He wished three things to his Son, Non tamen vir t^ntus vitiis ^aruit; fuit
enim paululum im^^tiens, leviter iracundus, occulie invidus, palam factiosus,
dominandi supra quam aestimari p^test avidissimus, stu^iosissimus ale^ lusor.
Aure^. Vict.
the favor of Pompey, the boldness of Alexander, and his own fortune.

He was not without his vices, being very impatient, secretly envious, and
openly factious, very desirous to rule, and much given to dicing.

Though he was a man severe enough, yet he did not know the exceeding
wantonness of Iulia his own daughter, and her open and audacious boldness;
but Suetonius seems to be of a contrary opinion, for he says, That he was
much ashamed of her, and that once he thought to put her to death. And when a
freed woman of his named Phoebe, one that was privy to Julia's lewdness, knit
her own neck in a halter, and so ended her days, he gave it out, That he wished
with all his heart he had been Phoeb'es Father.

Out of great indignation against his two Daughters, and Posthumus Agrippa his
Grandchild, whereof the first two were Heroum filii no^ae.
infamous, and the last otherwise unworthy, he would say, that they were not his
seed, but some impostume broken from him, and he used this verse of them,

O utinam aut coelebs mansissem, aut prole carere^! He was almost peerless in
his Government, Soli^^s.
yet there are to be found so many misfortunes in his life, that a man cannot
easily discern whether he was more miserable, N^m fore quoties audisse^, cito,
aut nullo cruciatu defunctum quempiam, sibi and suis (...) similem (hoc enim
and verbo uti solebat) precabatur. Suetonius.
or more happy.

Bonam mortem putabat celerem and insperatam, quae nulla aegritudine pulsaret
fores: So often as he heard of a man that had a quick passage with little sense
of grief, he wished for himself and his such Euthanasy, such an easy death. He
being at the point to dye, thus addressed himself; called for his
looking-glass, Suetonius.
commanded to have his hair and beard combed, Vita nostra sicut fabula, nec
refert quam diu, sed quam been acta sit.
Et malas labentes corrigi, his riveled cheeks smoothed up; then asking his
friends if he had acted his part well, Cum it a responderint, vos omnes igitur,
inquit, Plaudite.

Aulus Gellius mentions, l. 15. c. 7.
that he sent a letter unto his step-son to this effect, The Climacterical year
is fatal.
Rejoice with me my Son, for I have past over that deadly year and enemy to old
age, threescore and three, in which number the sevenths and ninths do concur.

He lived fifteen years after Christ was born, and dyed in his 76. year.

He was beloved of his people, for they erected a statue to Musas the Physician
who in a sickness recovered him, and placed it by Aesculapius: and the Senate
much honored him being dead, by consecrating Temples to him at Rome, and in
other famous Cities, and all the people much lamented his death, using that
speech, Vtinam aut non nasceretur, Aurel. Vict.
aut non moreretur, would he had never been born, or never dyed.

Paterculus said of the Roman Empire after Augustus death, when there was such
hope of enemies, fear of friends, expectation of trouble in all, Tanta fuit
unius viri Majestas, ut nec bonis, neque contra malos opus armis foret^ such
was the Majesty of one man, that his very presence took away all use of Arms.

Choice Observations OF TIBERIUS CAESAR.
LIVIA his Mother, Tiberius dictus a fluvio Tibere, quod juxta Tiberim natus
esset.
whiles she went with child of him, among many and sundry experiments which she
made, and signs that she observed (and all to know whether she should bring
forth a man-child or no) took closely an Egg from under a Hen that was
sitting, and kept it warm, sometime in her own, otherwhiles in her woman's hands
by turns one after another, so long until there was hatched a Cock-chicken
with a notable comb upon the head. And when he was but a very babe, Scribonius
the Astrologer gave out, and warranted great matters of him, and namely, that
he should one day reign as Monarch, but yet without the Royal Ensigns, for
as yet the Sovereign power of the Caesar's was unknown.

He was of Personage tall, corpulent, big set and strong, of stature above the
ordinary, broad between the shoulders, and large breasted, fair of complexion,
great goggle-eyed, whereby he saw so clearly as is incredible to report.
Suetonius.
He used both hands alike; Nullius manus velad feriendum vel adimpellendum
fortiores fuerunt, quum in ^igitis nervos videretur habuisse non venas; nam and
carra venientis digito sahitari repulisse dicitur, and fortissimos quosque uno
digito sic afflixisse, ut quasi-ligni vel ferri obtusioris i^tu percu^^^
dolerent. Multa d^^rum digitorum allisione contrivit. Trebel. Pollio de
trigin^a ^y^annis in Mario.
his joints were so firm, that with his finger he was able to boar through a
green and sound table, with a fillop also to break the head of a good big boy;
his speech was exceeding slow, not without a certain wanton gesticulation and
fumbling with his fingers.

He refused the Empire a long time, putting on a most impudent and shameless
mind, and seeming to rebuke his friends encouraging him thereto, as those who
knew not what a monstrous and untamed beast an Empire was. Tiberio suspensa
sem^^r, and ob^^^ verba. Tacitus.
He also held the Senate in suspense by ambiguous answers, and crafty delays,
when they besought him to take it upon him, yea and humbly debased themselves
before his knees, insomuch as some of them could endure him no longer, and one
among the rest in that tumult cried out aloud, Let him either do it at once,
or else give over quite; and another openly to his face upbraided him in these
words, Aut agat, aut desisiat. Eras. Apophtheg. Simile est Ciceren^s ^^iud de
Epi^^^is 2. de fin. C^teri (inquit) existimantur dicere melius quam facere, hi
mihi videntur facere melius quam dicere.
Caeteri, quod pollicentur tarde praestant, tu quod praestas tarde polliceris.
Whereas other men be slack in doing and performing that which they have
promised, thou art slack in promising that which thou performest. In the end,
as if he had been compelled, and complaining withal that there was imposed
upon his shoulders a miserable and burdensome servitude, he took the Empire
upon him.

The cause of this holding off and delay that he made, was the fear of imminent
dangers on every side, in so much as he would often say, Dicitur in eos qui
ejusmodi negotio involvuntur, quod neque relinquere sit integrum, neque
tolerari possit. Eras. Adag. Eras. in Apoph. and alii.
Lupum se auribus tenere, he held a Wolf by the ears.

He knowing excellently well how to conceal his own private passions, made
himself be known to be an excellent Doctor in the cunning Art of discovering
other men's thoughts, by which he may be said to set the roof over the Roman
Monarchy. Advertisements from Parnassus by Bocalini. Century 2. Advertis. 33.
See more there.

He was very patient when any bad rumors or slanderous Libels were cast out,
either of himself or those about him, and was wont to say (how wisely I
determine not) In civitate libera linguam mentemque liberas esse debere, That
in a free State men ought to have both tongue and thought free.

He taxed the indiscretion of the Ilienses comforting him long after the death
of his Son, Sueton.
with this answer, That he also was very sorry for them, because they had lost
that worthy Citizen Hector, Sueton.
one dead many hundred years before.

He was mild and gracious at the first, and seemed to be inclined to the good
of the Commonwealth: when the Presidents and Governors abroad gave him
counsel to burden the Provinces with heavy Tributes and Taxes; Et Alexand.
Magnus solitus erat dicere, se odisse olitorem qui herbas radici^us convellete^.
he wrote back unto them, Boni Pastoris est tondere pecus, non deglubere, That
it was the part of a good shepherd to shear his sheep, and not to flea them.

He held it good policy not to change his Officers often, lest new ones
succeeding should oppress the people too much; whereas the old having means
to enrich themselves, would not so fleece them in the latter end as at the
beginning, making have to do it, lest they were removed before they could
feather their nests well. See Montagues Acts and Monum. of the Church. c. 5. p.
37.

That by his own Example he might put forward the public frugality, Et ut
parsimoniam publicam exemplo quoque juvaret, solennibus ipse coeni^ pridi^na
saepe ac semesa opsoni^ apposuit, dimidiatumque aprum, affirmans omnis eadem
habe^^ quae totum.
he himself at his solemn and festival suppers, caused oftentimes to be served
up to the Board viands dressed the day before, and those half eaten, saying,
That the side of a wild Boar had in it the same of the whole.

One there was who called him Dominus, that is, Sir, but he gave him warning
not to name him any more by way of contumely. Another chanced to say, His
sacred business; and a third again, That he went into the Senate, Auctore se,
that is, by his warrant or authority. He caused them both to change those
words, and for auctore to say suasore, that is, By his advise and counsel; and
in stead of sacred, to put in laborious and painful.

Quotidiana oscula prohibuit edicto, item strenarum commercium. He forbad
expressly by Edict the usual and daily kisses commonly given and taken,
likewise the intercourse of New-yeares gifts to and fro.

Suetonius writes of him, that he did Iura omnibus fere asylis adimere, Take
away the privilege of almost all their Sanctuaries, because he observed the
licentious abuse of them.

At length he discovered those vices, which with much ado for a long time he
had cloaked and concealed.

He was very cruel, No^^em continuumque bi^uum e^ulando potandoque consumpsit.
covetous, and libidinous. He spent with Flaccus Pomponius and L. Piso, a whole
night and two days ou^right in nothing else but eating and drinking; Sueton.
giving the Province of Syria into the Government of the first, Suetonius.
and conferring the Provostship of Rome on the other, professing even in all
his Letters, that they were Jucundissimi, and omnium horarum Amici, his most
pleasant Companions, and friends at all Assaies. Propter nimiam vini
aviditatem, for his excessive love of wine and hot waters, or because he loved
to drink wine hot, which is delicate, Elegans Paranomasia. So some played upon
the name of Epiphanes, and called him Epimanes, or madman. See Iunius on 8.
Din. Others call the Duke of Lorrain the Duke des Larrons. Le Theater du monde.
l. 2. See after in Caligula and Titus. Pliny l 1^. of Natural Hist. Nor the
thrice gallant Knight. Athen^us memorat de Xenocrate, illum scilicet uno haustu
s^rp^isse v^nt co^gium. Gassend. de vita Epicuri. lib. ^* c. 6.
he was for Tiberius named Biberius, for Claudius, Caldius, for Nero, Mero.

One gives this reason of his drunkenness, because his Nurse that gave him
suck would drink exceedingly her self, and nourished him with sops soaked in
wine.

A Lombard, for drinking in his presence three Gallons of wine at one dr^ught,
and before he took his breath again, was dubbed Knight by him, and surnamed
Tricongius, The three-Gallon Knight.

He erected a new Office, Nero had an Officer about him (to wit Petronius) who
was called Arbiter Neroni^ne libidinis, Tacit. Ann^l. l. 16.
a voluptatibus, for the devising of new pleasures, wherein he placed Priscus a
Gentleman of Rome, and one who had been Censor.

He advanced Sejanus to the highest place of Authority, not so much for any
good will, as to be his instrument for the accomplishing his wicked purposes.

He put to death a Soldier one of his own Guard, Latinis abstracta pro
concretis simpliciter posita intendunt id quod dicitur; plus enim quam vel
sordidum designat, vel sanguineum, eximie nimirum ^alem. Mentitur qui te
vitiosum, Zoile, dixit. Non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed vitium.
for stealing a Peacock out of a Garden.

Theodorus Gadareus his Master observing his bloody disposition, called him,
Lutum sanguine maceratum, A lump of clay soaked in blood; these verses were
cast out of him:

Fastidit vinum, quia jam suit iste cruorem;
^am bibit hunc avide, quam bibit ante merum.
He loat^eth wine, and now he aft^r blood does thirst;
Drinks this as greedily as wine he drank at first.
He thought simple death so light a punishment, that when he heard that
Carnul^us one of the Prisoners had laid violent hands on himself, Heins.
Exercit. Sac.
he cried out, Carnulius me evas^t, Sueton.
Carnulius has escaped my hands.

His saying was, Sueton.
Oderint dum probent, Let them hate me so long as they suffer my proceedings to
pass.

Nullus a poena hominum cessavit dies, ne religiosus quidem ac sacer.

There passed not a day over his head, no not so much as any festival and
Religious Holy day, without execution and punishment of some: many were accused
and condemned, together with their Children and Wives. Straight commandment was
given, that ^he near kinsfolks of such persons as were condemned to dye should
not mourn and lament for them. No Informer and Promoter was discredited, but
his Prefentment taken, and every crime and trespass was accounted capital.

He said to one that requested death rather than long imprisonment, Nondum
tecum redii in gratiam, Suetonius.
Thou art not yet reconciled to me that I should show thee such favor.

Because Virgins by a received custom were not to be strangled; Tacitus.
he caused the Hangman first to defloure a Virgin, Suetonius.
and then to strangle her.

Among other kinds of torment he devised, Suetonius.
that when men had drunk largely of strong wine, their privy parts should be
fast bound with Lute-strings, that so for want of means to avoid their Urine,
they might endure intolerable pain.

Faelicem Priamum vocabat, quod superstes omnium suorum extitisset. Suetonius.
He called Priamus happy, in that he over-lived all his Sons and Daughters.

He feared Thunder exceedingly, See the like in Augustus his life.
and when the air or weather was any thing troubled, he ever carried a Chaplet
or wreath of Laurel about his neck, because that (as Pliny reports) is never
blasted with Lightning.

He loved liberal Sciences most affectionately, Ingenio ad repentina long^
^^riore. Aurel. Vict.
he would do things better of a sudden, ex tempore, then upon study and
premeditation, Repentinis responsionibus aut consiliis melior, quam meditatis.

He was much addicted to Astrologicall predictions, Scribit Plutarchus in
Apophtheg matis, Augustum dicere solitum, se Romani Imperii successorem eum
esse relicturum, qui nunquam bis de eadem reconsultasset; Tiberium significare
volebat. Josephus lib. 18. of the Antiquity of the Jews, c. 8.
and such curious Arts, so that the greater part of those things which he
executed in all his life time was ordered thereby; he gave the more credit to
Divination, because in certain things he had found the conjectures
correspondent to truth.

He seeing Galba one day coming toward him, Tu quoque Galba degustabis
imperium.
spoke thus of him to certain of his familiars, Tacit. l. 4. Annal.
Behold the man that shall be one day honored with the Roman Empire.

He made a Law called Lex Papia, by which he forbad sucl. men as were past
sixty, or women past fifty to marry, as thinking them i^sufficient for
generation; to which Lactanti^s seems to allude, Lib. 1. Divin. Instit. c. 16.
thus jesting at the Heathen touching their great god Jupiter; How comes it to
pass, that in your Poets, salacious Jupiter begets no more children? is he
past sixty, and restrained by the Papian Law?

Many of the Roman Caesar's have been transported with self-admiration, they
have shared the Months of the year among them; April must be Neroneus, Vide
Tacit. l. 16. A^al. c. 12.
May Claudius, Domitian will have October, November is for Tiberius, by the
same token, that when it was tendered to him, he asked the Senatewittily (as
Xiphiline reports it) What they would do when they should have more then twelve
Caesar's?

It is called the Sea of Tiberias, John 6. ^. from a City on the bank of it, of
that name, built by Herod, in honor of Tiberius Caesar, as Josephus writes in
the 18. Book of his Jewish Antiquities.

Livie and Ovid dyed in the fourth year of Tiberius. Eusebius.


Pilate by Letters signified unto him the Miracles of our Savior Christ, his
Resurrection, and that he was supposed of many to be God. The Romans had a Law,
forbidding any Emperor to consecrate or set up any god which was not first
approved by the Senate; for Tiberius Caesar hearing of Christ's fame, by virtue
of that Law moved the Senate to promulgate and relate Christ among the number
of their gods, who rejected him because he would be God alone, or because
contrary to the Law of the Romans he was consecrated for God, before the Senate
of Rome had so declared and approved him; whose folly Tertullian thus scoffeth;
In Apologet. They refused to do it says Eusebius, l. 2. Hist. Eccle. c. 2.
that the wisdom and Divine power of God in the Doctrine of salvation might
not need the allowance and commendation of men.
Apud vos de humano arbitrio divinitas pensitatur, nisi homini Deus placuerit,
non erit Deus, homo jam Deo propitius esse debet, That God should be God if man
would let him.

Josephus a Jew, and an enemy to Christ, in his 8. Book of Antiquities, c. 4.
speaks the same things of Christ that Matthew does; that he was a most worthy
man, if it be lawful to call him a man (said he,) that he wrought many
Miracles, and that he rose from the dead. Tacitus and Suetonins speak of his
Miracles, Christus Tiberio impe^rante, per Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum
supplicio affectus era^.
Tacitus l. 15. Annal. c. 10. affirms that he was Crucified under Pilate in
the time of Tiberius, and that Tiberius would have put him in the number of his
gods. Plutarch De interitu Orac. reports, that under the Reign of Tiberius all
the Oracles of the world ceased, of which the Poets bear witness, -- cessant
oracula Delphis. Iuv. Sat. 6.

Plutarch also in the same book reports, that in the later years of the reign
of Tiberius, a strange voice and exceeding horrible clamours, with hideous
cries, screetches and howlings were heard by many in the Grecian Sea,
complaining that the great god Pau was now departed. And this was brought
before the Emperor, who marvelled greatly thereat, and could not by all his
Diviners and Soothsayers whom he called to that consultation, be able to gather
out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful accident: but Christians may
persuade themselves, that by the death of their great god Pan (which signifies
all) was imported the utter overthrow of all wicked spirits. John 12. 31.

Our Lord was Crucified in the 15. year of his reign, say Lib. adversus
Iudaeos.
Tertullian and Lib. 4. de vera sapientia c. 10. Vide Vossium de tempore
Dominicae passionis. Sect. 3.
Lactantius.

But Luke the Evangelist, 3. c. 1. v. makes his Baptism to fall in the 15.
year of Tiberius his reign. So then his Passion must be in the 18. or 19. for
three years he preached salvation. Jerome and Eusebius.

The fear of losing his Office under Tiberius Caesar, (whose Deputy he was over
the Province of Judaea,) made Pilate condemn Christ, John 19. 12. 13. but not
long after, he lost his Deputy-ship and Caesar's favor, and fled to Vienna,
where living in banishment he killed himself; Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 7.

Matthew. 22. 21. Our Savior says, Romani Caesares imaginem suam imprimebant
monetae tam ^ureae quam argenteae. Drusius.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

The money declared the subjection of their Nation; as if he should have said,
If you think it absurd to pay Tribute, be not subject to the Roman Empire; but
the money declares that Caesar reigns over you, and your own secret
allowance declares that the liberty which you pretend, is lost and taken away.
Jerome on the place does well observe, that the name of Caesar is not proper,
but Appellative, because from the first Emperor Julius Caesar all the rest
were so called. Yet says Gerhard in his Harmony, Christ properly understands
Tiberius who then ruled, whose Image the money did bear; to that wicked
Emperor Tribute was due; so that charge 1 Timothy 2. 2. was given by Paul, even
then when Caesar was a persecutor of the Christian Religion.

Austin tells us, He that gave Sovereignty to Augustus, gave it also to Nero;
he that gave it to the Vespatians Father and Son, sweetest Emperors, gave it
also to Domitian that bloody monster, De civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 21.

Tiberius approved of the Christians Opinions, and threatened Death to them
which accused them: This came to pass (says l. 2. Eccles. Hist. c. 2. He
withheld a Legacy from the people of Rome, which his predecessor Augustus had
lately given; and perceiving a fellow round a dead Corse in the ear, he would
needs know wherefore he did so, the fellow replied, that he wished the
departed soul to signify to Augustus, the Commons of Rome were yet unpaid: for
this bitter jest the Emperor caused him forthwith to be slain, and carry the
news himself.
Eusebius) by Divine providence, that the Doctrine of the Gospel having no
rub at the first, might run over the whole world.

Dion writes, that ^a Phoenix was seen before the last year of Tiberius, which
bird is an Emblem of the Resurrection, and signifies that at that time Christ
rose from the dead, and that the Gospel was then spread abroad, which affirms
that the Dead shall rise again. Charion. Chron.

He dyed in the 78. year of his age, say Suetonius, Tacitus, and Aurel. Vict.
83. says Eutropius. It was thought he was poisoned.

He reigned 23. years say Eutropius, Suetonius, Orosius. 24. says Aurel.
Vict. 22. years, 7. months, and 20. days, Tertull. 22. years, Clem.
Alexand. 22. years, 7. months, and so many days, says Dion, 22. years and
six months, Iose^hus.

He reigned 22. years and 7. months; Doctor Willet on the Romans 22. years,
11. months, 14. days, says Eusebius. as Doctor
but the reason of the different computation, why some give unto him but 22.
years, some 24. some but 23. is, because some count only the full years, some
the months of his first and last year for whole years, Willet shows in his
Hexapla on Dan. where the account differs from this certain months, because he
follows Eusebius. computation there.
some put the odd months together, and make one year of them.

He reigned after our Saviors Passion 4. years, 11. months, and 18. days.

The people joyed so much at his death, that running up and down at the first
tidings thereof, some cried out in this note, Tiberium in Tiberim, Let Tiberius
be cast into Tiber; some offered sacrifices when they heard of it, and one
meeting with his Master in some public place, told him in the Hebrew Tongue,
The Lion was dead.

Choice Observations OF CAIUS CALIGVLA.
SOme say this name of Caligula was given him, for a certain kind of shoe
called Caliga, used among men of war, and worn by him; or he got it by
occasion of a merry word taken up in the Camp, Suetonius Quia natus in exercitu
suerat, cognomen^um calceamenti milit^ris, i e. Caligulae ^ortitu^ est. Aurel.
Vict.
because he was brought up there in the habit of an ordinary and common
soldier among the rest.

Cajus, cognomen Caligae cui castra dederunt.
Ausonius.
He carried himself well before he was Emperor, so that it was said of him,
Nec servum meliorem ullum, nec deteriorem Dominum fuisse. There was never a
better servant, and a worse Master.

He was very tali of stature, pale and wan-coloured, of body somewhat gross
and unfashionable, his eyes sunk in his head, and his Temples were hollow, his
forehead was broad, the hair of his head grew thin, in all parts else he was
hairy and shagged, and therefore it was a capital offense, either to look upon
him as he passed by, from an higher place, or once but to name a Suctonius. It
was held crimen^ laesae Majestatis, against his Imperial person. Speed. Vultus
horridus. Sueton. Torserat per omnia quae in rerum natura tristissima sunt,
fidiculis, Eculeo, igne, vultu suo. Seneca. lib. 3. de Ira. He said, that he
did approve of nothing so much in his nature as his immodesty.
Goat upon any occasion whatsoever. His face and visage being naturally stern
and grim, he made of purpose more crabbed and hideous; composing and dressing
it in a looking-glass, all manner of ways to seem more terrible, and to
strike greater fear. Being clad oftentimes with a cloak of needle work, and
embroidered with diverse colors, and the same set out with precious stones; in
a coat also with long sleeves, and wearing bracelets withal, he would come
abroad into the City.

On a time esteeming it a thing correspondent to his greatness who was
Emperor, to exact that superiority on the Sea, which was answerable to his
Sovereignty on the Land, being to cross the Sea between Puteoli a City in
Campania, and Misenum another maritime town, Sueton. Novum and inauditum
spectaculi genus.
he caused a Bridge to be built betwixt one Cape of the Sea unto another, for
the space of three miles and more, on which he commanded himself to be drawn in
a Chariot, as if it were answerable to his Dignity.

Some are of opinion that he invented such a kind of Bridge in emulation of
Xerxes, who not without the wonder of the world, made a Bridge of planks over
Hellespont an arm of the Sea, somewhat narrower than this: Others, that by a
bruit blazed abroad of some huge and monstrous piece of work, he might
terrify Germany and Britain, upon which Countries he meant to make war.

He maintained his reputation with his Grandfather Tiberius, by no means but
this; he shadowed his cruel mind with subtle modesty, and showed not
discontent either for the condemnation of his Mother, or the banishment of his
Brethren: Pari habitu semper cum Tiberio, hand multum distantibus verbis, He
did imitate him in his apparel, in his words, in all things as near as
possibly he could.

He succeeded Tiberius in the Empire, but in cruelty far exceeded him. Tacit.
lib. 6. Annal.
Thus far forth as of a Prince (says Suetonius,) relate we must as of a
Monster.

He usurped the name of a god, Sueton. Aurel. Vict.
commanding his subjects to dignifie him with more then humane honors; In his
Temple stood an Idol of fine gold, of himself; which was daily clothed and
adorned with the like garments which he then wore: Cuffe of Affectation.
and ascending the Capitol, which among all he Temples in Rome is most
religiously honored, he was so bold as to salute Jupiter, and to call him
brother.

-- Divumque sibi poscebat honores. He sent Petronius with an Army to
Jerusalem, commanding him to set his statue in the Temple, and if the Jews
refused to receive it, that those who withstood him he should put to the sword,
and lead the rest captive; Joseph. l. 18. Antiq. c. 11. and 2. de belle Iudai^.
c. ^.
but partly by Petronius his prudence, and through Aristobulus his intercession
with him, and King Agrippa's with Caligula, it was hindered.

The like is in the 21. lib. of Tacitus, where he thus writes of the Jews,
Sub Tiberio quies, deinde jussi a Caio Caesare effigiem ejus in Templo locare,
arma potius sumpsere; quem motum mors Caesaris diremit.

He gave it out openly, Suetonius.
that his own Mother was begotten by Incest which Augustus committed with his
own daughter Iulia.

He caused his Brother Tiberius to be slain, Suetonius.
and reserved his Uncle Claudius (who was his Successor in the Empire) for
nothing else, but to make him his laughing stock.

Many of honorable rank were by him put to death, and sawed asunder in the
midst, Per Genium Principis Romanos jurare solitos, testes sunt Iurisconsulti
nostri, quemad-modum and per salutem Principis, and per Principis venerationem.
Schildius in Calig.
because they had no good opinion of his shows, or had not sworn by his Genius.

An ordinary thing it was at Rome to swear by the Genius, as also by the
Fortune, and the health of their Emperors. And what a devout Oath was this,
Per Genium, that is, the spirit or superintendent Angel of the Prince? which I
take to be as much as his own good self, as appears by Tertullian, Citius
apud vos per omnes Deos, quam per Genium principis, Apologet. c. 28.
peseratur, Doct. Holland in Annotat. in Sueton.

He forced Parents to be present at the execution of their own children.
Suetonius.


And when one Father excused himself by reason of sickness, he sent a litter
for him. Another of them immediately after the heavy spectacle of his Son put
to death, he invited to his own board, made him great cheer, Suetonius.
and by all manner of courtesy provoked him to jocondnesse and mirth.

When his Grandmother Antonia seemed to give him some admonition, Memento,
ait, omnia mihi in omnes licere.

When he had at one time condemned a sort of Frenchmen and Greeks together, he
made his boast, That he had subdued Gallo-graecia, a Nation mixed of French and
Greeks.

After he had well drunk and eaten, he took pleasure to cast his friends into
the Sea, from on high from a bridge which he built at Puteoli before mentioned,
and caused many to be drowned which sought to save them. Dion. lib. 50. of his
Hist. Suetonius in Calig. cap. 32.

He would not permit any to suffer death, but after many strokes given, and
those very softly. His Command being generally and commonly known, Ita in bello
civili Mariano, Marius quidam particulatim amputatus, diu vivere vel potius diu
mori coactus est, ut inquit eleganter Augustine lib. 3. de civ. Dei. Schildius.
Ita seri ut se mori sentiat, Strike so, that they may feel themselves dying,
and endure the pains of an enduring death.

IIe executed on a time one whom he had not appointed to dye, by error only,
and mistaking his name: but it makes no matter, quoth he, for even he also has
deserved death.

A certain Citizen of Praetors degree, desired oftentimes from the retiring
place where he was at Anticyra (into which Isle he went for his healths sake)
to have his License continued; but he gave order he should be killed outright,
adding these words therewith, That blood-letting was necessary for him who in
so long time had found no good by Hellebore, Hellebore that grows in the ^sle
Anticyra, is of most effectual operation; the root is that whereof is made our
sneesing powder, it purges extremely by vomit; thereupon arises the Proverb,
Naviget Anticyram, that is, Let him sail to Anticyra; applied to one that is
melancholic in the highest degree, and little better then mad. See Plinies
natural Hist. l. c. 342.
that is, by purging.

Being highly displeased upon a time with the multitude, for favoring the
contrary faction to his, would God (quoth he) that the people of Rome had but
one neck, At tu (inquit) unam cervicem habes, nos vero ^anus multas.
meaning to chop them off at one blow; Vox carnifice quam Imperatore dignior.
Xiphil. A speech fitter for an Hangman then an Emperor: Over whom the people
of Rome afterward insulted, being killed by Chareas.

He was wont openly to complain of the unhappy condition of his time wherein he
lived, Queri de condition temporum suorum solebat, quod nullis calami^atibus
publicis insignirentur, Su^ton.
as not renowned by any public calamities; that his Government was like to be
forgotten by the calm and prosperous current of all things, and therefore he
would often wish for the overthrow of his Armies, Famine, Pestilence, Fire,
Earthquakes, and the like.

Nonnunquam horreis praelusis populo famem indixit. Suetonius.

He proclaimed a famine without scarcity.
While he was at his recreations and disports, he practiced the same cruelty
both in word and deed; oftentimes as he sat at dinner, some were examined upon
the Rack in his presence, and others had their heads struck off.

His saying was, Oderint dum metuant, Let them hate me, so they fear me.

Being one day very free at a great feast, he suddenly brake forth into a great
laughter, and the Consuls who were next him, demanding whereat he laughed so,
his answer was, Quid, nisi uno meo nutu jugulari utrumque vestrum statim posse?
At what else (quoth he) but this, that with one nod of my head I can have both
your throats cut immediately?

As often as he kissed the neck of his Wife or Concubine, he would commonly add,
Tam bona cervix, Suetonius. Dirissimae immanitatis dictum; sed in Historia
Turcarum factum legimus hoc etiam dicto crudelus.
simulac jussero, demetur. As fair and lovely a neck as this is, off it shall
go if I do but speak the word.

He complained of the iniquity of the time, that one doubting to be poisoned of
him, did take counterpoison, or a remedy against it; what says he, Antidotum
adversus Caesarem? Schildius in Calig. vide plura ibid.
Is there any Antidote against Caesar?

His cruelty (as Dion says) was not imputed to his Father or Mother, but to
his Nurce, which was a most cruel woman herself, and used to rub her breast
nipple with blood, causing him to suck it; which he practiced also afterward,
for he did not only delight in the committing of many Murders, but through his
insatiable desire of blood, would with his tongue suck and lick of the blood
that stuck upon the sword or dagger.

Videtur Natura edidisse, De Cons. ad Helviam. c. 9.
(says Seneca) ut ostenderet quid summa vitia in summa fortuna possent. Nature
seemed to have brought him forth, to show what effects the greatest vices
joined with the greatest fortune could produce.

And it may justly be verified of his times, what Senecca says in another
place, In his Preface to his fourth book of natural questions.
Res humanas sub illo in eum statum decidisse, ut inter misericordiae opera
haberetur occidi. Under him things were brought to that pass, as it was
reckoned amongst the works of mercy to be slain.

De quo nescio an decuerit memoriae prodi, Aurel. Vict.
nisi sort quia juvat de Principibus nosse omnia, ut improbi saltem famae metu
talia declinent.

Concerning whom (says Aurel. Victor) I know not whether it shall be meet to
have recorded any thing, but that peradventure it is expedient to know all
things of Princes, that wicked men at least with fear of the report may decline
such things.

He was very expert in the Greek, and vulgar Roman Tongues. He was also of a
fluent speech, and if he had been to plead and declaime against one, when he
was angry once, he had both words and sentences at will: when he was about to
make an Oration, his manner was to threaten in these terms, Peroraturus
stricturum se ^ucubrationis suae telum mi^abatur. Sueton.
viz. That he would draw forth and let drive at his adversary, the keen weapon
and dart of his night-study by Candlelight.

He would have removed the writings of Virgi^ and Livie out of all Libraries;
he said, Virgil was a man of no wit, and very mean learning, and taxed Livie of
verbosity, and negligence in penning his History.

He said, Minutissimis senten^iis rerum fregit pondera, says Quintilian of
Seneca. Sueton.
Seneca's works were Arena sine calce, Sand without Lime, because he often
spoke short Sentences, having no connection amongst themselves.

Nepotinis sumptibus omnium prodigorum ingenia superavit. In riotous and
wastfull expenses he exceeded the wits and inventions of all the prodigal
spend-thrifts that ever were, Commentus portentosissima genera ciborum atque
coenarum. Sueton.
inventing most monstrous kinds of meats, and making sumptuous Feasts. He would
drink off most precious and costly Pearls dissolved in Vinegar. Luxus fuit
portentosi, ut qui etiam panes deauratos habuerit. He spent in one year two
Millions, and 700000. of Sestertiums. He would set before his Guests, loaves of
Bread and other viands all of Which had a glorious sight to look on, yet there
was nothing for the contentation of Nature: so the Papists set their glittering
service of Heb. Gr. and Lat. before the people, a goodly show to gaze on, and
wonder at. Bish. Jewel. Cael, Rhodig. Suetonius.
Gold, saying commonly withal, Aut frugi hominem esse oportere, aut Caesarem,
That a man must either be frugall, or else Caesar.

He held the wills of great men as void and of no effect, Hic non toto vertente
anno sex millia septingenta and quinquaginta myriadum aureorum prodegit. ^ael.
Rhod.
in case any person would come forth and say, That they purposed and intended
at their death to make Caesar their Heir; he declared also by an Edict, that he
would receive New-yeares gifts, and so he stood the first day of January in the
entry of his house, Iect. Antiq. l. 20. c. 14.
ready to take what pieces of money soever came, which the multitude of all
sects and degrees, Contrectandae pecuniae cupidine incensus. Saepe super
immensos aureorum acervos patentissimo diffusos Ioco, and nudis pedibus
spatiatus, and toto corpore aliquandiu volutatus est. Sueton.
with full hands and bosoms powered out before him; nay, he took such delight
in handling of money, that oftentimes he would both walk barefooted up and
down, yea, and wallow also a good while with his whole body upon huge heaps of
coined pieces of gold spread here and there in a most large open place.

There were in his secret Cabinet found two Books, bearing diverse titles. The
one had for the inscription, These things were found after his death. Pugio a
pungendo, quis punctim potius quam caesim vulnerat. Sueton.
Gladius, the Sword; the other, Pugio, i. e. the Dagger, or Rapier; They
contained both of them the marks and names of such as were appointed unto
death. There was found beside, a big chest full of diverse and sundry poisons,
which soon after being by Claudius drowned in the Sea, infected and poisoned
the same, and many Fishes were killed therewith, which the Tide cast into the
next shores.

He set light by the gods, and threatened the Air if it rained upon his
Game-players, Quanta dementia fuit? putavit aut sibi noceri ne a Jove quidem
posse, aut se nocere and Iovi posse. Senec. de Ira. lib. 1. cap. 16. How great
madness was it to think that either Jupiter could not hurt him, or that
himself could hurt Jupiter? See before in the life of Augustus and Tiberius.
Yet notwithstanding at the least thunder and lightning he used to wink close
with both eyes, to enwrap also and cover his whole head; but if the same were
greater and somewhat extraordinary, he would start out of his Bed, and hide
himself under the Bed-sted.

Dion reports of two, that when the Emperor was sick, thinking to get much
as a reward for their great love to the Emperor, vowed, that on condition he
might live, they themselves would dye to excuse him; he recovering, afterward
took them at their word, and put them to death, least they should break their
vow, and prove perjured persons.

Having recalled one from exile which had been long banished, he demanded of
him, What he was wont to do there? Who made answer thus by way of flattery, I
prayed (quoth he) to the gods always, that Tiberius (as now it is come to
pass) might perish, and you become Emperor. Hereupon Caligula thinking that
those whom he had banished prayed likewise for his death, sent about into the
Islands to kill them every one. Sueton.

In taking the review of Goales, and Prisoners therein, as they were sorted to
their offenses, he without once looking upon the title and cause of their
imprisonment, standing only within a Gallery, commanded that all in the midst,
a calvo ad calvunt, that is, from one bald pate to another, should be led forth
to execution. Sueton.

He was murdered at last himself, who had put so many to death. Only 28.
years, 4. months, and 24. days, Casaubon. There is a great difference among
Chronographers, about the computation of his years. Three years, ten months,
and eighteen days, says Eusebius. Doctor Willet on the Epist. to the Romans
He lived 29. years says Suetonius, 39. Eutropius. He reigned three years, ten
months, and eight days, say Suetonius and Eutropius; four years say Clemens,
Tacitus, and Sextus Aurel. four years, ten months, and eight days, says
Beda; three years, nine months, 28. days, says Dion; three years, eight
months, and thirteen days, says Tertullian; three years, six months,
Josephus; three years, nine months, 22. days says Epiphanius: but the whole
time of his reign was three years, ten months, and eight days. They which
give to him full four years, count the odd months and days for a whole year.

Valerius Asiaticus, who had been Consul, came forth among the people, who were
in an uproar because of the rumors of the Emperors death, Joseph. l. 19. of
the Antiq. of the Jews. c. 1.
and supposing it a strange matter that no man knew who had slain the Emperor,
whilst every one enquired who it was that had done the deed, Vtinam ego eum
intefecissem. Xiphilin.
O, said he, would it had been I that had done it!

His death concerned the security of the Laws, and the safety of all men; and
had he not been speedily cut off, Our Nation (says Josephus) almost had been
utterly exterminated.

His moneys were all melted by the decree of the Senate; as King Richard the
thirds Cognizance the white Bore was torn from every sign, that his Monument
might perish. Speed.

Choice Observations OF CLAUDIUS CAESAR.
AFter the death of Caligula, certain Soldiers in a hurry going to plunder the
Palace, one perceiving the feet of a man hidden in a hole, plucks him out by
the heels; this proves to be Claudius, who falling on his knees, and desiring
his life might be spared, the Soldiers lift him on their shoulders, and
proclaim him Emperor; This took so with the multitude, that the Senate for
their own safety were fain to give way unto it.

In the fiftieth year of his Age he attained to the Empire, and he was the
first of all the Caesar's, Primus Caesarum fidem militis praemio pignoratus.
Sueton.
that obliged unto him the Soldiers fealty by a fee and reward.

His Mother Antonia was wont to call him, Portentum hominis, The Monster, and
fantastical shape of a man, Nec absolutum (...) Natura, sed inchoatum.
as if he had not been finished, but only begun by Nature; and if she reproved
any one for his foolishness, Su^^onius.
she would say, He was more sottish then her Son Claudius.

He was personable, and carried a presence not without Authority and Majesty.
His countenance was lively, his gray hairs beautiful, which became him well,
with a good fat and round neck under them; yet many things disgraced him, viz.
undecent laughter, and unseemly anger, by reason that he would froth and
slaver at the mouth, and had evermore his nose dropping, his head continually
shaking, somewhat stammering in his speech.

He was inhumane toward strangers, and made an Edict forbidding all strangers,
Romanorum gentilitia nomina far, to be called by the Roman names. Sueton.

He commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, Acts 18. 2.

The Jews (says Suetonius) who by instigation of one This some think is to be
understood of Christians, whom we find in the Ecclesiastical writers to be
misnamed by the Ethnic Infidels Chrestians, like as Christ himself Chrestus in
scorn.
Chrestus, were evermore tumultuous, he banished Rome.

Acts 11. 28. there is mention made of a great Dearth throughout all the World,
which came to pass in the days of Claudiu^ Caesar, of which famine Eusebius,
Lib. 20. Antiq. c. 2.
Josephus, Lib. 12. of his Annals.
Tacitus, and Suetonius likewise speak.

There was a woman that would not acknowledge her own son, and when by
evidences and arguments alleged pro and contra on both sides, the question
rested in equal balance doubtful, he awarded that she should be wedded to
the young man; and so forced her to confess the truth, and to take him for her
child.

One cried out upon a forger of writings, and required that both his hands
might be cut off; Sueton.
he made no more ado, but forthwith called instantly to have the Hangman sent
for, with his chopping-knife and Butchers block to do the deed.

The Lawyers were wont to abuse his Patience so much, that as he was going down
from the Judgment Seat, they would not only call upon him to come back again,
but also take hold of his Gown-lappet and skirt, yea and some while catch him
by the foot, and so hold him still with them: one of the Grecian Lawyers
pleading before him, in earnest altereation used these words, (...), Et tu
senex es and stultus. Thou art both old and fool besides.

Claudius invisae privato in tempore vitae,
In regno specimen prodidit ingenii. Ausonius.

Libertina ferens nuptarumque improba facta,
Non faciendo nocens, sed patiendo fuit.
He gave this counsel to a libidinous young man, Si non cast tamen caute.
And his Symbol was, Generis virtus nobilitas.

He was very forgetful; Idem plane accidit H^^di Magno, cum uxorem Mariamnem
occidisset. Josephus Orig. lib. 10. c. 11. Casaubonus.
when Messaliua was (by his own commandment) killed* within a while after he
asked, Cur Domina non veniret? Why his Lady came not to him? Many of those whom
he had condemned, the very morrow immediately after he sent for, to hear him
company at dice-play.

One of his Guests, who was thought to have closely stolen away a cup of Gold
the day before, Sueton.
he re-invited again the morrow, and then set before him a stone-pot to drink
in.

It is reported that he meant to set forth an Edict, Sueton.
Quo veniam daret flatum crepitumque ventris in convivio emittendi, wherein he
would give folk leave to break wind downward, and let it go even with a crack
at the very board; having certain intelligence, that there was one who for
manners and modesty sake, by holding it in endangered his own life.

Hence the Epigramme,
Edicto vetuit crepitus ructusque teneri
Claudius: o medici Principis Imperium!
He played at Dice most earnestly, Suetonius.
(concerning the Art and skill whereof he published also a little Book) being
wont to ply the Game even whiles he was carried up and down, having his Caroch
and Diceboard so fitted, as there might be no confusion nor shufling at all in
play.

He was very timorous and pusillanimous at his first coming to the Empire; Erat
Nature performidolosus. Aurel. Vict.
he durst not for certain days go to any feast, without Pensioners standing
about him with their Spears and Javelins, Sueton.
and his Soldiers waiting at the table; neither visited he any sick person,
unless the Bedchamber where the party lay was first searched: He would scarce
suffer Attendants and Clerks to carry their Pen-sheaths, and Pen-knife-cases.

He concealed not his foolishness, but gave it out, and protested in certain
short Orations, that he counterfeited himself a fool for the nonce during Caius
days, because otherwise he should not have escaped, nor attained to the
Imperial place which he aimed at, Claudius C^sar tumu^toantem Britanniam
perdomuit, ab eo C^^udiocestrium oppidum, quod nun^ Glocestrium dicunt.
and was then entered upon.

He sailed beyond Britain, and subdued the Orcades, added them to the Roman
Empire, and called his Sons name, Eutropius.
Britannicus.

He was not uneloquent, nor unlearned, but was rather a great student in the
Liberal Sciences. He wrote Histories, Livie being his Tutor. He had good
skill in the Greek Tongue, professing as any occasion was offered, his
affectionate love to it, and the excellency thereof. When a certain Barbarian
discoursed in Greek and Latin; See you be skillful (quoth he) in both our
Languages. V^reque sermon nostro sis peritus.


It was generally thought that he was killed by poison; and it was a just
Judgment of God upon him, for he was so gluttonous and insatiable in eating
and drinking, that he thought no time or place sufficient thereto; and ever did
eat so much, that most commonly surfeiting, Others say, Agrippin^ his wife
tempered the poison in the meat which he most delighted in. viz a Mushrome.
Infusum delectabili ^ibo boletorum (...) Tacit. Annal. Bole^m medicatum
avidissimo ciborum talium obtulit. Sueton. Whence Martial. Boletum, qualem
Claudius edit, ed^^.
he used Vomits to di^charge his stomach, putting a feather into his throat; in
which feather some Authors affirm that poison was given him.

The Virgin Mary dyed in his time, in the 59. year of her age, says Nicephorus.

He lived 64. years, say some: 63. years, 2. months, and 13. days, says
Casaubon.

He reigned 13. years, 13. years, 9. months, and 7. days, says Tertul.
8. months, and 20. days, say Dio, and Josephus. He reigned 14. years,
according to Tacitus, Suetonius, Clem. Alexand. Eutrop. Orosius. 13. years 8.
months, and 20. days after Eusebius. 14. years, Doct. Willet.
7. months, and 28. days after Beda. But the whole time of his reign was 13.
years, 8. months, and 20. days. They which do give unto him 14. years, do
count the odd months for a whole year.

Choice Observations OF NERO CAESAR.
NERO was a proper Name (which noted Virtue and Fortitude, Alex. ab Alex. Genesis
dier. l 1. c. 9. Gell. l. 11.
of that Greek word (...) the sinews, being the conjunction and strength of the
members) and such persons also were of the Romans called Neroes, as excelled
others in the most egregious Fortitude and Noble Virtues. Afterward when this
Tyrant Nero (who descended of the Claudii which were Sabines) had degenerated
from all the Heroical virtues of his Ancestors, and became so bloody and
cruel, he gave occasion to posterity to change that proper name into a name
Appellative, so that they called them that were cruel Nerones, and those that
were more cruel Neroniores.

When Domitius his friends by way of gratulation wished him joy of his Son new
born, Suetonius. Mali corvi malum ovum. See the like of Tiberius, and of
Caligula in Suetonius* c. 11.
he said, That of himself and Agrippina there could nothing come into the world
but accursed, detestable, and to the hurt of the weal Public.

Of stature he was indifferent, within a little of 6. foot; his body full of
speckles, and freckles, and foul of skin besides. The hair of his head
somewhat yellow, his countenance and visage rather fair then lovely, and
well-favoured. His eyes gray and dim, his neck full and fat, his body bearing
out, and his legs slender and small.

He began his reign with a glorious show of piety and kindness. Those
Tributes and Taxes which were any thing heavy, he either quite abolished or
abated. Whenever he was put in mind to subscribe, and set his hand to a
warrant for the execution of any person condemned to dye, Suetonius.
he would say, Lib 2. de Clementis.
Quam vellem nescire literas! O that I knew not one letter of the book! Seneca
his Tutor did much extol that speech of his, as if it had proceeded from a
pitiful heart.

He was framed by Nature, Fa^tus Natura, and consuetudine exercitus velare
odium fallacibus blanditiis. Tacit. Annal. 14. Sueton. Imitatur illam Augusti
vocem* si merebuntur.
and practiced by custom (says Tacitus) to cloak hatred with flattering
speeches.

Many times he saluted all the degrees of the City one after another, by rote
and without book. When the Senate upon a time gave him thanks, he answered,
Cum meruero, do so when I shall deserve.

His quinquennium or first five years were such, that Trajan himself is said
to have admired, Aurel. Vict.
using this speech, Procul differ cunctos Principes Neronis quinquennio. But
it is thought that it was rather the reign of his Governors Seneca and
Burrhus, then properly his.

He delighted exceedingly in Music, Suetonius.
and would show his skill upon the open stage, often using the Greek Proverb,
That hidden Music was naught worth. All the while he was singing, it was not
lawful for any person to depart out of the Theater, were the cause never so
necessary. It is reported, that some great-bellied woman falling into travail,
Suetonius.
were delivered upon the very Scaffolds; He not only commanded all the Statues
and Images of the most excellent Musicians to be defaced, and his own to be
erected in leiu of them; but also put many of them under hand to death. by
emulation of their fame.
yea, and many men besides weary of tedious hearing, and praising him, when the
Town gates were shut, either by stealth lept down from the Walls, or
counterfeiting themselves dead, were carried forth as Co^ses to be buried. But
how timorously, with what thought and anguish of mind, with what emulation of
his concurrents, and fear of the Umpires he strove for Mastery, it is almost
incredible. He never durst once spit, and reach up phlegm, and he wiped away the
very sweat of his forehead with his arm only.

There was a boy named Sporus, whose genitories he cut off, Sueton. and Bapt.
Fulg. l. 8.
and assayed thereby to transform him into the nature of a woman: then he
caused him to be brought unto him, Sueton.
as a Bride without a dowry, in a fine yellow veil after the solemn manner of
Marriage, not without a goodly train attending upon him, whom he maintained as
a wise; whereupon one brake this witty jest, That it would have been happy for
the world, if Domitius (his Father) had wedded such a wife.

He said jestingly of Claudius, That he left morari inter homines, with a long
syllable, meaning that he spent his days foolishly.

Epulas a medio die ad mediam noctem protrahebat.
He held out his Feasts from noonday till midnight. Suetonius.

Divitiarum ac pecuniae fructum non alium putabat quam profusionem. Sueton.
Nero quadragenis in punctum Sestertii^ al^^m lasit. Co^ l. Rhod. l. 20. c 24.
suetonius. Bis and vicies mill sestertium donationibus Nero effuderat. Tacit.
l. 1. Hist. c. 6. He most lavishly gave away two and twenty hundred millions of
Sesterces.
He was very profuse and prodigal in expenses, he never put on the same
Garment twice; when he played at hazard, he ventered no less then 3125. pounds
at a cast, upon every point or prick of the chance. He fished with a golden
Net, drawn and knit with cords twisted of purple, and crimson silk in grain.
When he made any journey, he never had under 1000* Caroches in his train, his
Mules were shod with silver, but in no one thing was he more wastful then in
building. See Sueton. and Tacitus of this house, Annal 15. c. 10. It is
reported also of Heliogubalus, that his apparel was rich, and most extreme
costly, and yet he would never wear one garment twice; his shoes were
embellished with Pearls and Diamonds; his seat strewed with musk and amber;
his bed covered with gold and purple, and beset with most costly jewels; his
way strewed with the powder of gold and silver; his vessels (even of basest
use) all gold; his diet so profuse, that at every supper in his Court was
usually spent 1000. l. sterling.
His house was so large that it contained three Galleries of a mile a piece in
length, and a standing Poole like unto a Sea, and the same enclosed round about
with buildings in form of Cities. It was laid all over with gold, garnished
with precious stones, and mother of pearl. He said, He now at length began to
live like a man: and himself named it, Domum auream, a golden house. His Mother
Agrippina being with Child with him, went to consult with the Chaldeans or
South-sayers about her Son; they answered her, That he should reign, but kill
his Mother; but she being very ambitious slighted that, saying, Occidat modo
imperet, Let him kill me so he may be King.

This was accomplished afterward, Neque tamen sceleris conscientiam, aut
statim aut unquant post far potuit; saepe confessus exagitari se materna
specie, verberibus furiarum, ac taedis ardentibus. Suetonius.
for he caused his Mother to be murdered, and not only so, but (which was more
horrible) he took an axact view of her dead body, and beheld it Crowner-like,
saying, He did not think he had had so fair a Mother.

His Father he poisoned, he slew his Brother Germanicus, and his Sister
Antonia, and both his wives Poppaea and Octavia, his Aunt Domitia, his son in
law Rufinus, and his Instructers, Eutropius. Suoton.
Seneca and Lucan.

There was no kind of affinity, Aurel. Vict.
and consanguinity, Orosius.
were it never so near, but it felt the weight of his deadly hands.

The first persecution was under him in the 13. year of his reign. Tertullian
calls him, Dedicator damnationis nostrae, i. e. the first that made a Law to
condemn Christians to death.

In Apologet. cap. 5. Nero ex Caesaribus primus in Christianos distrinxit
gladium.
Tertullian, Hist Eccles. l. 2. c. 25.
Eusebius, L. 14. de vera Sap. c. 21.
Lactantius, Aret. Probl. Pet dit M^ul.
and others say, that he put Peter and Paul to death.

Paulus a Nerone (says Eusebius) Romae capite truncatus, Def. of the Cathol.
Faith. Lla^bi supra.
and Petrus palo assixus scribuntur; and Historiae huic fidem facit, quod illic
coemiteria habentur in quibus Petri and Pauli nun cupatio ad hunc usque diem
obtinet.

Chrysostom. and Theophyl. upon the fourth Chapter of the second to Timothy, allege
this to be the cause wherefore he put Paul to death, because Paul had converted
to the Christian Faith Nero's Butler, whom he made great account of, thereupon
he commanded him to be beheaded; others say, it was because he converted one of
Nero his Concubines, which afterward refused to company with him; but we need
assign no other cause of Nero's rage against the Apostle, Though N^ro were so
wicked, yet Paul mak^th mention of some Saints in his Court. Phil 4 22.
then that which Eusebius and Jerome both do touch, the cruelty of that bloody
Tyrant joined with a wicked detestation of the Christian Faith.

His cruelty is by Paul compared to the mouth of a Lion, 2 Timothy 4. 17. but here
then arises an objection, how Paul should suffer under him, when he says
there, that he was delivered? Therefore Paul was his prisoner twice, he was set
at liberty after his first imprisonment at Rome, Phil. 1. 25. Philem. 22. Heb.
13. 23. 2 Timothy 4. 16. 17. The reason is thus alleged by Eusebius; Neronem in
principio Imperii mitiorem fuisse, That Nero in the beginning of his Empire was
more gentle, and mild, but afterward when Paul was taken again, Eusebius. in Chron
and Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccles.
Nero then being become a most cruel Tyrant, caused him to be put to death. He
dyed in the 14. year of Nero's reign, and the 37. year after the Passion of
Christ.

Seneca dissuaded him from killing some, with this speech, licet (says he)
quam plurimos occidas, tamen non potes successorem tuum occidere. Xiphiline.
Although thou killest very many, yet thou can not kill thy Successor.

The Tyrannous rage of this Emperor was so fierce against the Christians (as
Eusebius reports) usque adeo ut videret repletas humanis corporibus
civitates, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 4. 25. 26.
jacentes mortuos simul cum parvulis senes, Nero subdidit reos, and
quaesitissimis p^nis affeciteo^, quos per flagitia invisos, vulgus Christianos
appellabat; Auctor ejus nomini^ Christus.
faeminarumque absque ulla sexus reverentia in publico rejecta starent
cadavera, i. e. Insomuch that a man might then see Cities lie full of men's
bodies, the old lying there with the young, and the dead bodies of women cast
out naked, without all reverence of that Sex, Tacit. 15. Annal.
in the open streets.

In this persecution also James the greater, and the less, Philip,
Bartholomew, Barnabas, Mark, suffered.

Christians were covered in wild beasts skins, Addita pereuntibus ludibria, ut
ferarum tergoribus contecti* canum laniatu interirent, aut crucibus affixi, aut
flammandi; and ubi dies defecisset, in usum nocturni luminis urerentur. Tacit.
l. 15. Annal. Sueton. in Claud.
and torn in pieces with Dogs, or fastened on crosses, or burnt in fire; and
when the day failed, they were burnt in the night, to make them serve as
torches to give light. They put a pitched coat upon the Christians to make them
burn the better, called Tunica molesta, a troublesome coat.

Sulpitius Severus observes this of Nero (in the 3. book of his History) that
it was his own bad life which made him hate Christians; for he still thought
they censured him, and could not but expect what they knew he deserved.

He caused Rome to be set on fire in twelve places together, that he might the
better conceive the flames of Troy, singing unto it Homer's verses, and being a
pleasant Spectator thereof, as at a Feu-de-joy. Ad levandam sceleris
atrocitatem (says Polyd. Lib. 8. de invent rerum cap. 6. Tacitus calls them,
hated for their wickedness, guilty, and worthy of utmost punishment, and their
Religion a pestilent and pernicious superstition. See 15. of his Annal. 10 c.
Virgil) to avoid the infamy thereof, he laid the fault on the innocent, and
suborned some falsely to accuse the Christians, as Authors of that fire;
whereupon he put many of them to death: but Tacitus will clear them, who yet
was their enemy. Non perinde (says he) crimine incendii, quam odio humani
generis convicti sunt.

Suetonius (being no Christian) calls the Christians men of new and
pernicious superstition: Affl^cti suppliciis Christiani, (says he) genus
hominum superstitionis novae and malesicae. Sub Nerone saeva and infesta
Virtutibus tempora. Non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Neron^ damnatum. Tertul.
Apol. adversus Gentes. Nero virtutem ipsan^ exscindere concupivit. Tacit.
Annal. l. 16.


Under Nero to do ill was not always safe, always unsafe to do well. He was
so hateful an adversary to all righteousness, that Eusebius following the
example and words of Tertullian, affirms, that if the Gospel had not been an
excellent thing, it had not been condemned by Nero. He was (as Augustine Lib.
20. c. 19. De Civit. Dei. In his time Amnes retro ^uere vis^ saut. Plin. l. 2.
c. 103.
witnesses) commonly reputed Antichrist. He came into the world an Agrippa, or
born with his feet forward, and turned the world upside down before he went out
of it. In him alone all the corruptions which had been engendered in Rome, from
the birth of Rome till his own days, seemed drawn together into one impostume
or boil.

When one in common talk upon a time chanced to say,

(...).
When vital breath is fled from me, Sueton.

Let earth with fire mingled be.
Nay rather, quoth he, (...), whiles vital spirit remains in me.

He had a desire (though it were foolish and inconsiderate) of eternity and
perpetual fame, Erat ei aeternitatis perpetuaeque famae cupido; sed
inconsulta. Suetonius.
and therefore abolishing the old names of many things and places, he did put
upon them new after his own. Which thing in him Commodus the Emperor imitated,
calling Rome Commodians Tacit. l. 13. of Annal.
He called the Month April Neroneus, he meant also to have named Rome
Neropolis, Nero's City.

He pronounced an oration composed by Seneca: It was observed, that he was the
first Emperor that needed another man's Eloquence; for Julius Caesar was equal
with the famous Orators; and Augustus had a ready, fluent, and eloquent speech,
such as well became a Prince; Tiberius had great skill in weighing his words;
yea, Caligula's troubled mind hindered not his eloquence; neither wanted
Claudius elegancy, when he had premeditated.

The study of Nero was Versification, which Tacitus thinks he borrowed, having
no gift therein at all; Post Tacitum scripsit, eumque interdum tacit
redarguit. Famia. Strad. Prolus. Hist. l. 1.
but Suetonius (who often does disagree with Tacitus, though unnamed) both
proves he had, and proves it well: It was one of his exercises to translate
Greek Tragedies into Latin, who made true Tragedies in blood, such as even the
Greeks never feigned.

Nothing netled him more then when he was blamed by Vindex for an unskilful
Musician: Being admonished by Astrologers that he should once be cast out of
the Empire, he is reported to have used this speech to himself, Artem quaevis
terra alit; nimirum intelligens citharisticam, principi gratam, privato
necessariam, quam excercere eum non puduit.
he said of himself a little before his death, Qualis Artifex pereo? What an
excellent Artisan do I dye? meaning of his skill in playing of Tragedies; as
indeed his whole life and death was all but one Tragedy.

Vespasian asked Apollonius, what was Nero's overthrow? he answered, Nero could
touch and tune the Harp well, but in Government sometimes he u^ed to wind the
pinnes too high, and sometimes to let them down too low; thereby intimating,
that he applied Corrosives where gentle Lenitives would have served the turn,
and again he applied Lenitives where Corrosives were needful.

Additum nomine Neronis Donativum Militi, Deductus (Nero) in forum tyro, populo
congiarium, Militi Donativum proposuit. Sueton.
congiarium plebi. Tacit. 12. Annal.

The Princes liberalities to the Soldiers were called Donativa, (which they
bestowed, upon some great victory, or rather extraordinary occasion;)
Imperatoris munus quod popul^ dabatur, congiarium dictum est, quod vero
Militibus, Donativum. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. cap. 24.
to the people, or otherwise to his friends, Congiaria; doubtless because at
the first certain measures called Congii, of wine or oil were bestowed, and
afterward other things were given, yet the ancient name remained.

Vindex first stirred the stone, which rolling tumbled Nero out of his seat.

When it was told Julius Vindex, that Nero by public Edict had prized his head
at 10000. thousand Sesterces, Sir Henry Savil on Tacit. Nec adhuc erat damnati
Principis exemplum, Neither was there ever before a President of any Prince by
public sentence deposed. Tacit. l. 1. Hist. Sueton.
(that is above four-score thousand pounds in our coin,) Well, quoth he again,
and he that kills Nero, and brings me his head, shall have mine in exchange. Qui
Neronem interfecerit, and ad me caput ejus attulerit, is meum accipiet caput in
mercedis loco. Xiphilin.

Nero consulting the Delphick (or rather divellish) Oracle, he received this
answer, That he should take heed of the year 73. which he supposing to be meant
of his own age, He entreated that some one of those that were with him, would
kill himself first, and by his example help him to take his death. Itaque nec
amicum ^abe^ nec inimicum; dedecorose vixi, turpius peream. Aurel. Vict.
Defecitque extantibus rigentibusque oculis, ad horrore^ ^ormidinemque
visentium. Sueton.
rested secure, being far short of it; but he was deluded by the ambiguous
construction of those words, and so fell into the hands of Galba, a man indeed
of those years.

At last the Senate proclaiming him a public enemy unto Mankind, condemned him
to be drawn through the City, and to be whipped to death; which sentence when
he heard of, finding no man to strike him, and exclaiming against them all,
What, have I neither friend nor foe? (said he) I have lived dishonourably, let
me dye shamefully; and then he struck himself through with his own sword, and
was a horrible spectacle to all beholders.

He dyed in the 32. year of his age, says Suetonius; and 14. year of his
reign, say Tacitus, Clem. Alexand. Eusebius, and Eutropius, the very day of
the year on which he had murdered his wife Octavia; and by his death brought so
great joy unto the people generally, that the Commons wore caps to testify
their freedom recovered, and ran sporting up and down throughout the City.

Some say that Nero is yet alive (says Baronius out of Sueton* and Severus)
although he did thrust himself through with a sword, Vide Boxhornii Hist.
Universe. a Christi tempore. p. 125. 126. 127.
yet some think that his wounds were healed, and that he survived according to
that in the Rev. 13. 3. and that he shall be Antichrist; but Bellarmine himself
says, It is a presumptuous folly to say that Nero shall be revived and
received as Antichrist; and Suarez calls it, Anilem fabulam, a foolish Fable.

Choice Observations OF SULPITIUS GALBA.
SOme think his name Galba came by occasion of a Town in Spain, which after it
had been a long time in vain assaulted, he at length set on fire with burning
brands besmeared all over with Galbanum: others, because in a long sickness
which he had, he used continually Galbeum, i. e. remedies lapped in wool: some
again because he seemed very fat, and such a one the French does name Galba:
Sueton.
or contrariwise because he was slender, as certain little worms are called
Galbae.

He succeeded Nero, and his age being much despised, Ipsa aet^s Galbae and
irrisui and fastidio erat assuetis juventae Neronis, and Imperatores forma ac
decore corporis (ut est mos vulgi) comparantibus. Tacit. l. 1. Hist. Statura
fuit justa, capite praecalvo, oculis caeruleis, adunco naso, manibus pedibusque
articulari morbo distortissimis: ut neque calceum perpeti, neque libellos
evolvere aut tenere omnin^* valeret. Suetonius. Ingenium Galbae male habitat.
there was great licentiousness and confusion; whereupon a Senator said in
full Senate, It were better to live where nothing is lawful, then where all
things are lawful.

He was of full stature, his head bald, his eyes gray, and his nose hooked; his
hands and feet by reason of the Gout exceeding crooked, in so much as he was
not able to abide shoes on the one, or to hold his Books with the other.

There was an excrescence, or bunch of flesh in the right side of his body, and
it hung downward so much, as it could hardly be tied up with a truss or
swathing band; yet he had a good wit, though a deformed body, like a good
instrument in a bad case.

Being with general applause, and great good liking placed in state, he
behaved himself under expectation, and though in most points he showed himself
a virtuous Prince, Suetonius. Sir Henry Savill on Tacit.
yet his good Acts were not so memorable, as those were odious and displeasant
wherein he did amiss.

He obtained the Empire with greater favor and authority then he managed it
when he was therein; so that he overcame Nero by his good name, Plutarch.
and the good opinion men had of him, and not through his own force and power.

Major privato visus dum privatus fuit, Tacitus, l. 1. Hist.
and omnium consensu capax Imperii nisi imperasset* He seemed more then a
private man whilst he was private, and by all men's opinions capable of the
Empire, had he never been Emperor.

Spem frustrate senex, Auson. Epigr.
privatus sceptra mereri
Visus es, Imperio proditus inferior:
Fama tibi melior juveni, sed justior ordo est,
Complacuisse dehinc, displicuisse prius.
He lived in honorable fame and estimation in the reign of five Emperors,
Alieno Imperio faelicior quam suo. Tacitus, l. 1. Hist.
He was in greater prosperity, and lived more happily under the Empire of
others then in his own. His house was of ancient Nobility, and great wealth.
Famae nec incuriosus, nec venditator: Pecuniae alienae non appetens, suae
parcus, publicae avarus.
He neither neglected his fame, nor yet was ambitiously careful of it: of
other men's money he was not greedy, sparing of his own, of the common a Niggard.

As he sacrificed within a public Temple, Tacitus. l. 1. Hist.
a Boy among other Ministers holding the Censer, Suetonius.
suddenly had all the hair of his head turned gray. Plutarch.
Some made this Interpretation of it, Aurel. Vict. E^tropius.
that thereby was signified a change in the State, and that an old man should
succeed a young, even himself in Nero's stead.

He was of a middle temperature, neither to be admired nor contemned; Tacitus
l. 1. Hist.
Magis extra vitia, quam cum virtutibus, The same says Hayward of our Henry
the fourth.
rather void of ill parts, then furnished with good.

In the Palace, Julius Atticus, one of the Billmen met him, holding out a
bloody sword in his hand, with which, he cried aloud, he had slain Otho; Hujus
breve Imperium fuit, and quod bona haberet exordia, nisi ad severitatem
promptior videretur. Eutropius.
My friend, quoth Galba, who bad thee? A man of rare virtue (says Tacitus) to
keep in awe a licentious Soldier; whom neither threats could terrify, nor
flattering speech corrupt and abuse: thence it was a usual speech through the
Camp;

Disce Miles militare,
Galba est, non Getulicus.
Learn Soldiers service valorous,
Galba is here, and not Getulicus.
For eight years space (before he was Emperor) he governed a Province of
Spain variably, and with an uneven hand, at first sharp, severe, violent,
afterward he grew to be slothful, careless, idle.

Being entreated for a Gentleman condemned, The Delinquent pleaded that he was
a Roman Citizen, and therefore not to be crucified.
that he might not dye the death of ordinary Malefactors, he commanded that the
Gallows should be dealbata, whited, or colored for him; Quasi solatio and
honor poenam levaturus, as if the painted Gibbet might add solace and honor
to his Death.

When there was question made of an heifer before him, whose it should be,
arguments and witnesses being brought on both sides; he so decreed it, that she
should be led with her head covered to the place where she was wont to be
watered, and there being uncovered, he judged her his, to whom she went of her
own accord.

Among the liberal Sciences he gave himself to the study of the Civil Law.

He cried to his Soldiers, Laudata olim, and militari fama celebrata severitos
ejus angeba^ coaspernantes v^terem disciplinam, atque ita 14. annis a Nerone
assu^factos, ut haud minus vitia Principum amarent, quam ^lim virtutes
verebantur.
Ego vester, and vos mei; I am wholly devoted unto you, and you are wholly
devoted unto me.

His severity which was wont to be highly commended by the voice of the
Soldiers, was now displeasant to them who were generally weary of the ancient
Discipline, and so trained up by Nero 14. years, that now they loved their
Emperors no less for their vices, then once they reverenced them for their
vertue^.

His hardness toward his Soldiers caused him to fall; Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
for a large Donative being promised to them in Galba's name, and they
requiring if not so much, yet so much at least as they were wont to receive, he
wholly refused the suit, Cornel. Tacitus. l. 1. Hist.
adding withal, Legi a se militem, non emi, That his manner had ever been to
choose, and not to buy his soldiers.

Vox pro Republica honesia, Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
ipsi anceps; A saying no doubt fit for a great Prince in a more virtuous age,
not so in those seasons for him, who suffered himself to be sold every hour,
and abused to all purposes.

He was killed by the wiles of Otho, Eutropius.
in the Marketplace; the Soldiers flying upon him, Plutarch.
and giving him many wounds, he held out his Neck unto them, and bade them
strike hardily, if it were to do their Country good.

He dyed in the 73. year of his age, Suetonius. Eutropius.
and seventh month of his Empire. 7. Months, ^. days, Tertul.


He reigned seven months, and so many days. 7. Months 2. days, Eu^^^us.
Aurel. Vict.

Choice Observations OF SALVIVS OTHO.
TAcitus and Suetonius observe, that his Father was so like unto Tiberius, that
most men held him to be his own Son.

Tam non absimilis facie Tiberio principi fuit, Sueton.
ut plerique procreatum ex eo crederent.

He was of a mean and low stature, he had feeble feet, Galericulus capiti
propter raritatem capillorum adaptatus. Sueton.
and crooked shankes. He wore by reason of his thin hair a perruck or
counterfeit cap of false hair, so fitted and fastened to his head, that any man
would have taken it for his own. He was wont to shave, and besmear his face
every day all over with soaked bread; this bread was made of Bean and Rice
flower, of the finest Wheat also; a Depilatory to keep hair from growing,
especially being wet and soaked in some juice or liquor appropriate thereto, as
the blood of Bats, Froggs, or the Tunie-fish: to this effeminacy of Otho
alludeth the Satyricall Poet in this Verse,

Et pressum in faciem digitis extendere panem. Iuvenal.
Which devise he took to at first, when the down began to bud forth, because he
would never have a beard.

He was of a noble house (says Plutarch), His Mothers side was more noble then
his Fathers.
but ever given to sensuality and pleasure from his Cradle: insomuch as his
Father swinged him and soundly for it. Vita omni turpis, maxim adolescentia.
He used night-walking, and as he met any one either feeble or cupshotten, he
would catch hold of him, Aurel. Vict.
lay him upon a Soldiers Gabardine, Suetonius.
and so toss and hoist him up in the Air.

Pueritiam in curiose, Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
adolescentiam petulanter egerat. He spent his tender years without regard of
his honor, his youth afterward in all dissolute disorder.

He repaired often to his Glass to see his face, Suetonius.
that he might keep it clean.

He was one of Nero's chief Minions and Favorites, Similitudo morum parit
amicitiam, likeness is the cause of liking.
such was the congruence of their humors and dispositions.

Gratus Neroni aemulatione luxus. He was in grace with Nero through emulation
of vice. Tacit. l. 1. Hist.


Neroni criminose familiaris, Aurel. Vict. Otho flagrantissinnis in amiciti^
Nerenis habeb^tur.
He was sinfully familiar with Nero. He was privy and party to all his
Counsels and secret designs; to avert all manner of suspicion, that very day
which Nero had appointed for the murdering of his Mother, Tacit. Annal. l. 13.
he entertained them both at supper with most exquisite Dainties, Sueton.
and the kindest welcome that might be.

He subscribed Nero's name unto his Letters Patents, Suetonius.
till the Noble men of Rome misliked it. Plutarch.


Frustra moritur Nero, Tacitus Hist. lib. 1.
si Otho vivit. He strove by gifts, Adorare vulgus. ja^ere oscula, and omnia
frevit^ter pro Im^erio.
and all other means to oblige the Soldiers unto him before he was Emperor,
and to win their hearts by fair promises; he protested before them all
assembled together, Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
that himself would have and hold no more then just that which they would leave
for him. He worshipped the people, dispensed frequently his courtesies and
plausibilities* crouched and accommodated himself to the basest routs, that
thereby he might creep into an usurped honor.
One calls him the Roman Absalom.

Cui uni apud Militem fides, dum and ipse non nisi Militibus credit. The
Soldiers only trusted him, because he trusted none else.

All of them together put up a petition to him, and besought him to command
their persons, whilst they had one drop of blood left in their bodies to do
him service. But amongst others, there was a poor Soldier drawing out his
sword, said unto him, Know, O Caesar, that all my Companions are determined to
dye in this sort for thee, Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
and so slew himself.

Rebus prosperis ^^certus, Plutarch.
and inter adversa melior. Tacitus.


A man in prosperity uncertainly carried, and governing himself in adversity.

Duo omnium mortalium impudicitia, Tacitus. l. 1. Hist.
ignavia, luxuri^ deterrimi, velut ad perdendum Imperium fataliter electi,
says Tacitus of Otho and Vitellius.

Two of all mortal men the most detestable creatures in slothfulness,
incontinency, and wastfull life, fatally elected to ruin the Empire.

But though in the first Book of Tacitus his History they are both compared as
like, in opposition to a good Prince; yet in his second book they are opposed
the one to the other as unlike, with notes of distinction. Vitellii ignavae
voluptates, Othonis flagrantissimae libidines. Vitellius ventre and gula sibi
ipsi hostis; Vitellius a Drunkard and Glutton, Otho a wanton and licentious
liver.
Otho luxi^, saevitia, audacia, Reipublicae exitiosior ducebatur; of the one
side, an ill mind in a man of nothing, and of the other, an ill mind joined
with courage and edge.

The drowsy Pleasures of Vitellius were feared less then the burning lusts of
Otho. Plutarch.
Vitellius in excess of Belly-chear was an enemy to himself; Otho in riot,
cruelty, audaciousnesse, reputed more dangerous to the state.

It was hard to judge which of them two was most licentiously given, Plutarch.
most effeminate, least skillful, poorer, or most indebted, before he was
Emperor.

Magna and misera civitas eodem anno Othonem Vitelliumque passa. Tacit. l. 2.
Hist.
A great and miserable City, which in the same year supported an Otho and a
Vitellius.

We may learn by Otho (says Sir Henry Savil) that the fortune of a rash man is
Torre^ti similis, which arises at an instant, and falls in a moment.

Alii diutius Imperium tenuerunt, Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
nemo tam fortiter reliquerit; it was his own speech, Others have kept the
Empire longer, none has ever so valiantly left it.

Plura de extremis loqui pars ignaviae est. Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
He thought it a part of dastardy to speak too much of death.

When he saw his side the weaker and going to the walls, Irent propere, ne
remorando iram victoris exasperarent.
he counseled his Soldiers to provide for their safety by hying them to the
winner. Tacit. Hist. l. 2.


He slew himself with his own hands, but slept so soundly the night before,
Plutarch reports the like of Cato.
that the Grooms of his Chamber heard him snort.

Many of his Soldiers who were present about him, Plutarch.
when with plentiful tears they had kissed his hands and feet as he lay
dead, Suetonius.
and commended him withal for a most valiant man, Aurel. Vict.
and the only Emperor that ever was; presently in the place, and not far
from the funeral fire killed themselves. Many of them also who were absent,
hearing of the news of his end, for very grief of heart ran with their weapons
one at another to death.

Most men who in his lifetime cursed and detested him, He lived not much more
honestly then Nero, but dyed far more honorably.
when he was dead highly praised him; so as it was a common and rife speech,
that Galba was by him slain, not so much for that he affected to be Sovereign
Ruler, as because he desired to recover the state of the Republic, and the
freedom that was lost.

His saying was, Melius est unum pro multis, quam pro uno multos mori; An
excellent and worthy speech of an Emperor, preferring the Public good before
his own private; Sic imperium quod maximo scelere invaserat, maxima virtute
deposuit, as Xiphilinus notes out of Dion.

He dyed but 37. years old says Plutarch; More suo Tranquillus annum
inchoatum propleno numerat. Nam alii 37. solum vixisse aiunt. Casaub.
Ani^advers.
38. say Eutropius, and Suetonius; and was Emperor but three months,
Plutarch; three months and five days, Tertullian; four months, Aurelius
Victor. He dyed in the 59. day of his Empire, says Eutropius; 95. says
Suetonius. Sueton.


Choice Observations OF AVLVS VITELLIVS.
HE was beyond measure tall; Famili^^ bonorat^ magis quam nobili.
he had a red face, Eutropius.
occasioned by swilling in wine, and a great fat paunch besides, and somewhat
limped upon one leg, by a hurt formerly received.

He was stained with all manner of reprochable villainies; he was familiar with
Caius for his love to Chariot-running, and with Claudius for his affection to
Dice-play, but he was in greater favor with Nero for his wicked conditions
likewise; for he attended and followed him as he did sing, not by compulsion,
as many a good man, but selling his honor to nourish his Riot, and feed his
belly, to which he enthralled himself.

He found some supplications that were exhibited unto Otho, by such as claimed
reward for their good service in killing Galba, and gave command that they
should be sought out and executed every one. A worthy and magnificent
beginning, such as might give good hope of an excellent Prince, had he not
managed all matters else according to his own natural disposition, and the
course of his former life, rather then respecting the Majesty of an Emperor.

When he came into the Fields where a Battle was fought, and some of his train
loathed and abhorred the putrified corruption of the dead bodies, he stuck not
to hearten and encourage them with this cursed speech, Optime olere occisum
hostem, and melius civem, That an enemy slain had a very good smell, but a
Citizen far better.

[That was also a wicked speech of Charles the ninth of France, at the Parisian
massacre, when beholding the dead carcasses, he said, that the smell of a dead
enemy was good.]

He banished from Rome and Italy all the judicial Astrologers called
Mathematicians, because they had said, that his reign should not endure one
year to an end.

If he could have forborne his riotous living, Prorsus si luxuriam temperaret,
avaritiam non timeres.
or used any moderation therein, Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
covetousness was a crime in him not to be feared, but he was shamefully given
to his belly without all order or measure; Epularum foeda and inexplebilis
libido, Homo profundae gulae.
says Tacitus; for which purpose there were daily brought out of Rome and
Italy, Sueton.
Irritamenta Gulae, Ad vos deinde transeo, quorum profunda and insatiabilis
gula, hinc Maria scrutatur, hinc terras.
all provocations of Gluttony. The highways from both the Seas sounded of
nothing else but of Caterers, and Purveyours; the greatest men in the City were
spent and consumed in providing of Cates for the banquets; Seneca Epist. 89.
the Cities themselves were wasted.

The Soldiers grew worse, and degenerated from labor and virtue, partly by
turning themselves to pleasures, and partly through the contemptiblenesse of
the commander.

He would eat four meals a day, ^ Says Eutropius.
Breakfast, Dinner, Supper, and Rere-banquet, or after Supper, being able to
bear them all very well, he used to vomit It was an ordinary practice among
the^. Epul^s qu^s toto orb conqui^unt nec concoquer^ dignantur.
so ordinarily. His manner was to send word that he would break his fast with
one friend, Seneca.
dine with another, and all in one day; and every one of those refections when
it stood them least, cost 3235. l. sterling. But the most notorious and
memorable supper above all other, was that which his brother made for a welcome
at his first coming to Rome; Suetonius calls it an Adventitious Supper.
at which were served up at the Table before him two thousand several Dishes
of Fish, Eutropius.
the most dainty and choycest that could be had, Sueto.
and seven thousand fowl.

Yet himself surpassed this sumptuous feast at the dedication of the platter,
His meats were not touched in gross, but an eye only of this bird, or a
tongue of that Fish were tasted, that the spoils of many might be taken at one
meal. Phaenicopterus is a water fowl haunting lakes and fennes, and the (...)
Nilus, as Hesi^dus writes. The feathers be of color red, or purple, where^of
it takes the name, and the tongue is a most dainty and pleasant morsel*
which for its huge capacity he used to call the Target of Minerva. In this he
blended together the Livers of Guilt-heads, the delicate brains of Pheasants
and Peacocks, the tongues of Phoenicopters, the tender small guts of
Sea-Lampries sent as far as from the Carpa^thian Sea, and the straights of
Spain, by his Captains over Galleys.

For the making of this charger there was a furnace built of purpose in the
field. Mucianus (after the death of Vitellius) alluding to this monstrous
platter, and ripping up his whole life, upbraided the memorial of him in these
very terms, calling his excess that way, Patinarum paludes, Platters as broad
as Pooles or Ponds.

Nunquam ita ad curas intentus, Tacitus l. 2. Hist.
ut voluptatis oblivisceretur. He was never so intentively addicted to serious
affairs, that he would forget his Pastimes.

In his Train all was disorderly and full of drunkenness, Apud Vitellium
omnia indisposita, temulenta, pervigiliis ac Bacchanal^bus, quam discipline and
castris propiora.
more like to Wakes and Feasts of Bacchus, then to a Camp, where Discipline
should be.

He was forward enough to put to death any man; he killed Noble men, and his
School-fellowes. He delivered Blaesus over to the executioner to suffer death,
Tacit. l. 2.
but straightwaies called him back again; Hist. Iste mente crudelis avarusque
cum profusione.
and when all that were by praised him for his Clemency, he commanded the said
party to be killed before his face, Aurel. Vict.
saying withal, Velle se pascere oculos, Audita est saevissima V^tellii vox,
qua se pavisse oculos spectata inimici morte jactavit.
that he would feed his eyes with seeing his death. Tacit. Hist. l. 3.
At the execution of another he caused two of his Sons to bear him company,
because they presumed to entreat for their Fathers sake.

A Gentleman of Rome being haled away to take his death, he cried aloud unto
him, Sir, I have made you my heir; then he compelled him to bring forth his
writing. Tables concerning his last Will, Sueton.
and so soon as he read therein, that a freed man of the Testators was
nominated fellow-heir with him, he commanded both Master and Man to be killed.

He was suspected also to have consented to his own Mothers death.

Impar curis gravioribus, says Tacitus of him, he was unmeet to weild weighty
affairs.

The Empire was conferred upon him by those which knew him not, and yet never
man found so constant good will of his Soldiers by virtuous means, as he did
with all his cowardly sloth.

Tanta torpedo invaserat animum, Tacit. l. 3. Hist.
ut si Principem eum fuisse caeteri non meminissent, ipse oblivisceretur.

So great a sencelesnesse did possess his mind, that if other men had not
remembered that he had been a Prince, (and therefore was not to look for
security in a private estate) he himself would quickly have forgotten it.

A contumelia quam a laud propius fuerit, Tacit. l* 2. Hist.
pos^ Vitellium eligi.

It was more a disgrace then a praise to be chosen after Vitellius.

He used no other defenses against the ruin which approached him, but only to
keep out the memory and report of it with fortification of mirth and
sottishness, that so he might be delivered from the pains of preserving
himself. Praeterita, instantia, futura, pari oblivione dimiserat, mirum apud
ipsum de bello silentium, prohibiti per civitatem sermones, etc. Tacit. Hist.
lib. 3.

Ita formatae Principis aures, Tacit. l. 3. Hist.
ut aspera quae utilia, nec quidquam nisi jucundum and laesurum acciperet.

The Princes ears were so framed, that he accounted all sharp that was
wholesome, and liked of nothing but that which was presently pleasant, and
afterward hurtful.

Amicitias dum magnitudine munerum, Tacit. l. 3. Hist.
non constantia morum continere putat, meruit magis quam habuit.

He deserved rather then found faithful friends, because he sought them more
by great gifts then virtuous behavior.

At the last he was slain in an ignominious manner, having many scornful
indignities offered unto him both in deed and word; Suetonius.
they drew his head backward by the bush of the hair (as condemned Malefactors
are wont to be served) and a swords point was set under his chin, He was killed
by Vespasians soldiers upon the stairs Gemoniae, where he suffered
Vespasians brother to be slain.
to the end he might show his face, and not hold it down while some pelted him
with dung and dirty mire; others called him with open mouth, Incendiary or
Firebrand, because he burnt the Capitol; and Patmarium or Platter-Knight, for
his Gormandizing, and great Platter; and some of the common sort twitted him
with the deformities of his body: being all mangled with many small strokes, he
was killed in the end. Numerosis ictibus confossus interiit.

He was slain Aurel. Vict.
in the 57. year of his age, Tacitus. Suetonius. Eutrop.
when he had reigned eight months and five days, say l. 5. of the wars of the
^ewes, c. 13.
Josephus, and Chron.
Eusebius; eight months and ten days says Lib. adversus Iudaeos.
Tertullian. Hist. 2. 27. Ipse abunde ratus si praesentibus frueretur, nec in
longum consultans, novies mill sestertium paucissimis mensibus intervertisse
creditur.
Tacitus reports, that in those few months wherein he reigned, he had wasted
nine hundred millions of Sesterces, which amounts to seven Millions, thirty
one thousand two hundred and fifty pounds sterling; and Josephus Octo menses ac
dies quinque potitus Imperio, jugulatur in m^dia Vrbe; quem si vivere diutius
contigisset, ejus Luxuriae satis esse Imperum non potuisset. Joseph. de Bello
Iudaies.
thinks if he had lived longer, the whole Revenues of the Empire had not been
sufficient to have maintained his Gluttony.

Choice Observations OF FLAVIUS VESPASIANUS.
PRinceps obscure quidem natus, Eutropius.
sed optimis comparandus, privata vita illustris.

He was of a middle stature, well set, his limbs compact and strongly made,
vultu veluti nitentis, Suetonius.
he looked still as if he strained hard for a stool, That saying of Martial
agrees with this. Nam faciem duram Phaeb^ cacantis habes.
whereupon a Buffon brake a pretty jest on him; for when Vespasian seemed to
request him to say something of him as well as of others in the company, Dicam,
inquit, cum ventrem exonerare desieris. Vir multorum salium. Lodovic. Viv.
I will let you alone, says he, till you have done your business.

He was very pleasant and facetious himself; for being advertised by Florus to
pronounce A word in Lat. that signifies Carts or Waines.
Plaustra rather than plostra, he saluted him the next morning by the name of
Flaurus.

When the apparition of a Comet or blazing star was thought to portend his
death, Convitiorum plaustr^.
he replied merrily, that the bushy Stella crinita, Sueton.
noted not him but the Parthian King, Aurel. Vict.
Ipse enim comatus est, ego vero calvus, for, he wears bushy locks, but I am
bald. System. Phys. l. 6.
But he dyed a little while after, and by his example (says Keckerman) warned
men to forbear jesting at Gods great works and Prodigies.

An Ox having cast off his yoke, A presignification of his advancement. Being
elected Emperor, it is reported of him, that he cured one desperately blind by
spitting upon his eyes.
ran furiously into the room where he sat at Supper, where affrighting his
Attendants from him, he straight prostrates himself before his feet, as if he
had been weary, offering his neck to his clemency, Suetonius.

When he came to the Empire, the Exchequer was so impoverished, that he
protested in open Senate, that he wanted to settle the Commonwealth 40.
Millions of Sestertiums; Tacit. Hist. l. 4.
which protestation (says Sueton.) seemed probable, Suetonius.
Quia and male partis optimusus est.

He fought 30. Battles in Britain, took 20. Towns, and adjoined the Isle of
Wight to the obedience of the Roman Empire.

When a certain gallant youth smelling hot of sweet balmes and perfumes, came
unto him to give thanks for an office obtained at his hands, after a strange
countenance showing his dislike of him, he gave him also in words a most bitter
check, Maluissem allium oboluisses.
saying, I would rather thou had stunk of Garlic, and so revoked his
Letters Patents for the grant. Suetonius.


He never carried in his mind, nor revenged displeasures done unto him. He
married the daughter of Vitellius his enemy into a most noble house, gave unto
her a rich Dowry withal, and furniture accordingly.

He was made Totus ex clementia (as the Historian tells us) yet for all that,
Suetonius.
Machinationes nefariorum assiduas expertus est, Pladicissimae bonitatis.
He found daily treacheries attempted against him. Eutropius.


Justice etiam suppliciis illachrymavit and ingemuit. Sueton.


He was so compassionate a Prince, that he was wont to sigh and weep, even for
them that were condignly punished.

An innocent person was not punished but when he was absent, Eutropius.
and not aware thereof, or at leastwise unwilling thereto, and deceived.

But he was severe toward Julius Sab inus, who in times past said he was
Caesar; and taking up arms, was at last conquered and brought to Rome. His
wife spoke to Vespasian in his behalf, pleading that he had two sons of her;
and supplicating to him for mercy to her husband and her self, used these
words, Ego, ^ Caesar, hos in monument^ peperi aluique, ut plures tibi supplices
esse^nus: By which speech, although she drew tears from him and those that
were present, yet she could not procure her Husbands pardon. Dion.

The Soldiers elected him Emperor, and requested him to preserve the Empire
being in great danger to be lost. Yet he (though he had been always careful
for the good of the Commonwealth) refused to be Emperor, Josephus, l. 5. of
the wars of the Jews, c. 10.
deeming himself indeed to have deserved it, but rather choosing to live a
private life, wherein was security, then in the height of fortune and honor
with perpetual danger. The Captains were most earnest because he refused it,
and the Soldiers flocked about him with drawn swords, threatening his death
except he would consent to live as he deserved; yet he strove a long time to
avert their determination, being loath to be Emperor; at last seeing he could
not avoid it, he accepted their offer.

He comforted his Soldiers with these and such like speeches, Josephus, l. 4.
of the wars of the Jews, c. 1.
I will expose my self to all dangers with you, and go first to fight, and come
last from fight.

Ipse Vespasianus milites adire, Tacitus l. 2. Hist.
hortari, bo^^os laud, segnes exemplo incitare saepius quam coercere; vitia
magis amicorum quam virtutes dissimulans.

He would go in his own person, and encourage the Soldiers, inciting the good
by praise, the slow by example rather then correction; he was more ready to
conceal the Vices of his friends, then the virtues.

It was a worthy report which Pliny gave of him, if he flattered him not, to
whom being Emperor he wrote thus; Nec quicquam in te mutavit fortunae
amplitudo, nisi ^^prodesse tantundem posses and velles. Greatness and Majesty
have changed nothing it you but this, that your power to do good should be
answerable to your will.

Solus omnium ante se Principum, Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
in meliu^ mutatus est.

The only Prince before his time which changed to the better, for after him
Titus his Son changed also the same way.

A vigilant Warrior, and in all respects, set avarice aside, comparable to the
Commanders of ancient times, says Tacitus.

Sola est in qua merito culpetur, Sueton.
pecuniae cupiditas. Homo turpiter avidus.


The only thing for which he might worthily be blamed was covetousness. Eras.
Adag.


Prorsus si avaritia abesset, antiquis ducibus par. Tacitus.

He not only called for arrerages due in Galba's time, but raised new
Tributes, and laid upon the Provinces more grievous impositions, doubling them
in some places.

Negotiationes vel privato pudendas propalam exercuit. Suetonius.


He did negotiate and deal in certain Trades, which it was a shame for a
private person to use: buying up and engrossing some Commodities at a cheap
hand, that afterward he might vent them at higher rates. Neither did he spare
to sell Honors to such as sued for them, or absolutions to such as were
accused, whether they proved guilty or not. Suetonius.
He was thought of set purpose to have made choice of the most greedy proling
Officers he could any where find out, and to have advanced them to the highest
places, that being thereby grown rich, he might condemn their persons, and
confiscate their goods. And it was commonly said, Not unlike to this was that
speech of Diogenes, Dixit Diony.
that he used these men as spunges, Quod quasi and siccos madefaceret, and
exprimeret humentes; s^um amicis uti pro vasculis, quae dum plena sunt evacuat,
and abiicit vacua.
because he did wet them well when they were dry, and press them hard when
they were wet.

Some write that he was by nature most covetous, and an old neatherd upbraided
him once therewith, who being at his hands denied freedom without paying for it
(which he humbly craved of him now invested in the Empire) cried out with a
loud voice, Suetonius.
Vulpem pilum mutare non mores, Quicquid infixum and ingenitum est, leniri
potest art, non vinci.
that the Fox might change his hair but not his qualities.

He laid an imposition upon urine, and being by his Son Titus put in mind of
the baseness of it, Seneca.
he took a piece of money received for the use, and putting it to his Sons
nose, Sueton.
demanded of him whether he was offended with the smell or no, Atqui (inquit) e
lotio est, and yet (quoth he) it comes of urine: Sat. 14.
Vnde Juvenalis,

-- Lucri bonus est odor e re
Qualibet.
Ad quod alludens etiam Ammianus, dixit, and lucrum ex omni odorantes
occasion. ^nfirmus, ut quidam prave putant, adversus pecuniam, cum satis
constet aerarii inopia and clade urbium, neque novas cum neque postea habitas
vectigalium pensiones exquisivisse,

There are some of a contrary opinion, Aurel. Vict.
that he was driven to spoil, to pill and poll of necessity, even for extreme
want, both in the common Treasury, and also in his own Exchequer, whereof he
gave some testimony in the beginning of his Empire, professing (as was said
before) that there was need of forty Millions to set the state upright again;
which opinion (says Suetonius) seems to sound more near unto the truth,
because the money by him ill gotten he used and bestowed very well, for he was
most liberal to all sorts of men.

Restitutionem Capitolii aggressus, ruderibus purgandis manus primus admovit,
ac suo collo quaedam extulit, Suetonius.

In the third building of the Capitol, Vespasian carried the first basket of
earth, after him the Nobility did the like, to make the people more forward in
the service; and perhaps the custom of laying the first stone in a building,
has from hence, if not beginning, yet growth. Sueton.


It was his speech, Aurel. Vict.
Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori, Oportet Episcopum concionantem mori.
An Emperor ought to dye standing. Jewel.
And likewise he said at his death, Vt puto Deus fio, id est, morior; nam post
mortem Caesares referebantur in numerum deorum. Me thinks (quoth he) I am a
deifying, and growing to be a god. Aurel. Vict.


Annum agens vitae absque uno septuagesimum interiit. Sueton.


He lived threescore and 9. years, 7. months, and 7. days over.

He reigned 2. years, says Eusebius.

Choice Observations OF TITUS VESPASIANUS.
FOR his Natural goodness and noble disposition, he was called Amor and
deliciae humani generis, Speed says as much of Henry the fifth, whom he
compares to Titus. Edgar Etheling, Englands darling.
The lovely darling, and delightful joy of Mankind. Tantum illi ad promerendam
omnium voluntatem, vel ingenii, vel artis, vel fortunae superfuit. Sueton.

So fully was he either endued with good nature and disposition, or enriched
with skill and cunning, or else graced with fortunes favor.

Augustine De Civit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 21. calls him Suavissimum Principem, a
most sweet Prince.

Yet God made him a terrible scourge to the Nation of the Jews, who forsook
the Lord Jesus, and preferred Caesar; for as our Savior prophesied concerning
Jerusalem, that a stone should not be left upon a stone, Matthew. 24. 2. So it
was fulfilled forty years after his Ascension, by Vespasian the Emperor, and
his Son Titus, say Eusebius and Josephus. And by that which follows in the
same Chapter 21. v. he means the tribulation the Jews were to endure at the
siege, Dr. SclO^.
and surprisall of Jerusalem by Vespasian and Titus. In the time of which siege
the Jews were oppressed with a grievous Famine, Mr. Perkins.
in which their food was old shoes, old leather, old hay, and the dung of
beasts. There dyed partly of the sword, Vespasian brake into their City at
Cedron, where they took Christ, on the same feast day that Christ was taken, he
whipped them where they whipped Christ, he sold twenty Jews for a penny, as
they sold Christ for thirty pence. Andr. Cat.
and partly of the famine, eleven hundred thousand of the poorer sort: two
thousand in one night were imbowelled: six thousand were burned in a Porch of
the Temple. The whole City was sacked and burnt, and laid level to the ground;
and ninety seven thousand taken captives, and applied to base and miserable
service.

So many of the Jews were crucified, that (by relation of their own Josephus
de bello Iudaico lib. 6. c. 12.) there remained no more space to set crosses
in, nor any more crosses to crucify bodies upon.

At the very first, even in his childhood there shone forth in him gifts both
of body and mind, and the same more and more still by degrees, as he grew in
years.

He was therefore sickly, Lampridius.
because his Nurse was so.

Ingenium quantaecunque fortunae capax, Tacitus, l. 2. Hist.
decor oris cum quadam Majestate.

A person capable of any dignity, Forma egregia, and cui non minus auctoritatis
inesset quam gratiae.
were it never so great; of a goodly presence and countenance, wherein was
seated no less Majesty then favor and beauty.

His stature was not tall, Sueton.
and his belly bare out somewhat with the most. Facundissimus, bellicosissimus,
moderatissimus.
He had a singular memory, and was very docible; he was most skillful in
handling his weapon, and withal a passing good Horseman. Eutropius.
He was facilis ad extemporalitatem usque. Sueton.
He was of a prompt and ready wit, and would have spoken well ex tempore; He
was also skillful in Music; he could write with ciphers, and by artificial
characters, both very fast and very fair, striving by way of sport and mirth
with his own Clerks, whether he or they could write fastest: He was able to
express and imitate what hand soever he had seen, Sueton.
and would often say, that he could have been a notable forger, and
counterfeiter of writings.

Suo quam Patris Imperio modestior. Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
Whiles he was a private person, he behaved himself not altogether so well as
when he was Emperor.

His youthful affections were settled somewhat upon Berenice the Queen of Iewry;
Berenice.
notwithstanding in no such degree that it was any hinderance to his honorable
actions. Dion. and Josephus.


The Feasts which he made were pleasant merriments rather then lavish and
sumptuous. Sueton.


No gross vice could be found in him, Convivia instituit jucunda magis quam
profusa.
but many excellent virtues. Suetonius.


Neminem a se dimisit tristem.

He never dismissed any Petitioner with a tear in his eye, or a heavy heart;
and when his Domestical servants about his Person would seem to tell him, that
he promised more then he was able to perform; Sueton.
his saying was, Hadrianus Caesar said, It was troublesome to him if he saw any
sad.
Non oportet quenquam a sermon Principis tristem discedere. No man ought to
depart from the speech of a Prince, sad and discontented.

Calling to mind one time as he sat at Supper, Aurel. Vict.
that he had done nothing for any man that day, Sueton.
he uttered this memorable and praiseworthy Apothegme, Eutropius.
Amici, Or rather it must be read (says Casaub.)
diem perdidi. My Friends, I have lost a day.

If he had not bestowed some benefit upon one or other, Amici, hodie diem
perdidi.
he was wont to say (says Mollerus) Hodie non imperavi quia nemini benefeci.

His rule and Government was merciful, he received no accusation against those
who were reported to have spoken evil of him, saying, Ego cum nihil faciam
dignum propter quod contumelia afficiar, mendacia nihil curo. When I shall do
nothing worthy of blame, I care not for lies.

He said, Periturum se potius quam perditurum adjurans. Sueton.
he would rather dye himself then put others to death. He proceeded no further
against two Noblemen convicted for affecting and aspiring to the Empire, then
to admonish them to desist and give over, Suetonius.
saying, Eutropius.
that Sovereigne Power was the gift of Destiny and Divine Providence; Aurel.
Vict.
if they were Petitioners for any thing else, he promised to give it unto them.

He would not endure to kill, or sequester and confine his Brother Domitian
(though he never ceased to lay wait for his life) but still made him partner
with him in his Sovereigne Government, Aurel. Vict. Suetonius.
and often with tears exhorted him to mutual love.

There fell out in his days some heavy accidents; a fire in the City of Rome,
which lasted three days and three nights; Tacitus. Sueton. Aurel. Vict.
and a grievous Pestilence, wherein there dyed ten thousand a day: and Vesuvius
a mountain in Campania flamed with great horror; Pliny the natural Historian
then Admiral of the Roman Navy, desirous to discover the reason, was
suffocated with the smoke thereof, as his Nephew witnesses in an Epistle of
his to Cornelius Tacitus. Pliny. l. 6.
Marcellinus observes, Epist. 16.
that the ashes thereof transported in the Air, obscured all Europe; others
say, that they darkened the Sun.

He was a valiant Soldier; going once to espy the enemy, Joseph. l. 6. c. 2.
and not to fight, notwithstanding that an infinite number of darts and arrows
were shot at him, Of the wars of the Jews. From his wonderful escape at the
view of the walls of Jerusalem, Josephus collects.
and he had no Armor at all, yet received he not one wound, but all past him,
as though upon purpose every one had strove to have mist him. And he with his
sword made way and cut many upon the face that opposed themselves against him,
Imperatorum pericula Deum curare; That God takes care of Princes in their
danger. Ibid.
and so they falling down, he with his horse past over them. The Jews seeing
Titus his valor* exhorted one another to set upon him, but whithersoever he
turned, the Jews fled and would not abide by it.

In the last assault of Jerusalem, he slew twelve enemies that defended the
wall, with just so many arrows shot, Suetonius.
and won the City with great joy, Eutropius.
and favorable applause of all his Soldiers.

He being to see that executed which Christ foretold should happen to
Jerusalem, Josephus de Bell. Iud. l. 6. c. 14. and 7. 10.
stretched forth his hands, and called Heaven and Earth to witness in great
bitterness, that he was not to blame that the Jews perished in such sort, but
they themselves; and would not by any means that fire should be set on the
Temple. Comparing the desolation of Jerusalem with the beauty and goodly
buildings that were before it was destroyed, L. 7. of the wars of the Jews. c.
24.
he lamented and pitied the overthrow thereof, says Josephus.

It is likely that he would have carried a milder hand upon the Jews his
Prisoners, after his sacking the City of Jerusalem, then to cast so many
thousands of them to the Lions, Illud adagium Festina lent, arridebat duobus
Imperatoribus Romany, omnium facile laudatissimis, Augusto and Tito; quorum
utrique singularis quaedam aderat animi magnitudo, cum incredibili quadam
lenitate facilitateque conjuncta. Eras. in Adag.
and other beasts to be devoured, as he did on the Birthday of his Brother
Domitian, but that the heavy curse of God which boiled against that Nation, did
urge his gentle and calm nature to bring them to destruction.

He did stamp in his Coin a Dolphin and an Anchor, with this Impresse, Sat cito
si sat been. A Dolphin out-strips the ship, that is soon enough; an anchor
stays the ship, that is well enough. A Dolphin and Anchor, Soon enough if well
enough.

It was said of him, Abstinuit alieno, ut si quis unquam. If ever any man
abstained from that which was not his own, he was the man.

Though he was the Mirror of men among the Heathen, yet he was loath to depart
out of this world; for being carried in his Horse-litter, Suetonius. Multum
conquestus, eripi sibi vitam immerenti, neque enim extare ullum suum factum
poenitendum, excepto duntaxat uno. Whether his over familiar acquaintance with
his Brothers wife Domitia, as Sueton. or with the Queen Berenice, as Speed, is
uncertain.
and knowing that he must dye, he looked upwards toward Heaven, and complained
very pitiously, that his life should be taken from him who had not deserved to
dye, for he knew not (he said) of any sin that ever he committed but only one.

Suetonius writes as if he had dyed of a natural death, but Aurel. Vict. says,
he was poisoned by his Brother Domitian. Titus a Domitiano leporis marini vi
peremptus. Cael. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 6. cap. 30.

Morte praeventus est, majore hominum damno quam suo.

He was cut short and prevented by death, to the greater loss of Mankind then
of himself, says Suetonius.

The Senate gave him more thanks being dead, Senatus tantas mortuo gratias
egit, laudesque congesset, quantas ne vivo quidem unquam atque praesenti.
Suetonius. Aurelius. Eutropius. He lived 39 years, five months, 25. days,
says Carrion.
then ever they did living and present.

His death was much lamented, so that they called him generally, Delicias
publicas; and wept for him as if the world had been deprived of a perpetual
Protector. Tantus luctus eo mortuo publicus fuit, ut omnes tanquam in propria
doluerint orbitate.

He dyed in the 42. year of his age, says Suetonius. 41. say Aurel. Vict. and
Eutropius.

When he had reigned two years, two months, and twenty days, say Suetonius,
Aurel. Vict. Carrion; eight months, says Eutropius.

Choice Observations OF FLAVIVS DOMITIANVS.
HE was called Domitian from his Mother Domitilla, Titus cognomine paterno
dictus Vespasianus, alter frater cognomine materno a Domitil^a Domitianus est
appellatus. Casau.
as Titus (his Brother) was called Vespasian from his Father.

He was Associate to his Brother Titus in government during his life, and after
his death was his Successor.

Perceiving many of his Predecessors to be hated, he asked one, how he might
so rule as not to be hated? the Party answered, Tu fac contra, Do thou contrary
to that they have done.

Yet he neither resembled his Father Vespasian nor his Brother Titus. Eutropius.
Neroni, aut Caligulae, aut Tiberio similior, quam Patri vel Fratri suo.

He was tall of stature, his countenance modest, and given much to redness;
his eyes full and great, but his sight very dim. He was fair and of comely
presence, especially in his youth; all his body was well shaped throughout,
excepting his feet, the toes whereof were of the shortest; afterward he became
disfigured, and blemished with baldness, with a fat grand panch, and slender
shankes.

In the beginning of his Empire his manner was to retire himself daily into a
secret place for one hour, Stylis ^ridiculle remotis omnibus, muscarum agmina
persequebatur. Aurel. Vict. Hippocrates reckons up this for one sign of
Melancholy, when men catch flies; Muscas captar^ atrae bili^ indicium. Sueton.
and there to do nothing else but to catch flies, and with the sharp point of a
bodkin prick the^ through, in so much as when one enquired whether any body
were with Caesar within? Crispus made answer not impertinently, Ne Musca
quidem, No, not so much as a Fly.

In the Administration of the Empire, he behaved himself for a good while
variable, as one made of an equal mixture and temper of Vices and Virtues,
until at length he turned his virtues also into vices.

He neglected all Liberal Studies in the beginning of his Empire, albeit he
took order to repair the Libraries consumed with fire, sending as far as At
Alexandria in Egypt was that famous Library of King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, and
the other Ptolomies Progenitors, containing the number well near of 700000.
Books, Aul. Gel. Noct. A^tic. l. 7. c. 1.
Alexandria for copies of Books.

His ordinary speech was not unelegant, Vellem tam formosus esse quam Metius
sibi videtur.
sometimes he would deliver Apothegmes; as for example, he wished, That he had
been as fair and well-favoured as Metius did think himself to be; another time
he said, Conditionem Principum miserrimam aiebat, quibus de conjuratione
comperta non crederetur, nisi occisis. Sueton.
That the condition of Princes was most miserable, who could not be credited
touching a Conspiracy plainly detected, unless they were first slain.

This speech was used also by Adrian, Miser a conditio Imperatorum, quibus, de
affectata tyrannide, nisi occisis non potest credi. Vulcat. Gallic. in Avidio
Cassio.

He had no affection to bear Arms, Sagittorum tam doctus fuit, ut inter
patentes digitos exte^ae manus viri procul positi spiculi ejus transvolarent.
Aurel. Vict. Suetonius. Simile quid audivi a fide dignis and (...) factum de
duc^ Brundewizensi, qui suis pedissequis ac pueris h^norariis imperavit, inter
digitorum extensorum intervalla retinerent dilerum Imperialem, quem sumpto
sel^po minore, e patenti^us digitis globulo innoxie exemit. Paulus Voetius in
Herodiani Marcum and Commodum. p. 178. and 179.
or wield weapons, but delighted especially to shoot Arrows. He would drive
his Arrows point blank, so just against the Palm of a man's right hand,
standing a far off, and holding it forth stretched open for a mark, as they
should all directly pass through the void spaces between the fingers, and do
him no harm at all.

During his abode at Alba, many have seen him shoot at an hundred wild beasts
at a time, and purposely so to hit some of them in the head, that his shafts
appeared there like a pair of horns.

It was rumoured abroad, that in his Infancy, Dragons were found about him, in
manner of a Guard, Tacitus l. 11. Annal.
which is but a Fable; for he himself, who never derogated from himself, was
wont to report but of one Serpent which was seen in his Chamber.

When he was mounted once to the Imperial state, Suetonius.
he made his boast in the very Senate, that it was he who had given unto his
Father and Brother both the Empire, and they had but delivered it up to him
again.

Martial writes thus to him in his Epigrams.

Magna licet toties tribuas, majora daturus
Dona, Ducum victor, victor and ipse tui:
Diligeris populo non propter praemia, Caesar;
Propter te populus, praemia, Caesar, amat.
He was precise and industrious in ministering Justice, he reversed many times
definitive sentences given for favor, and obtained by flattery; he did so
chastise those that were faulty in that kind, that the Officers were never more
temperate, or just in their places.

He repressed false informations, and sharply punished such informers, using
this saying, Princeps qui delatores non castigat, irritat. The Prince that
chasteneth not Promoters, sets them on to promote.

At the first he so abhorred all Bloodshed and slaughter, that he purposed to
publish an Edict, forbidding to kill and sacrifice any Ox; and he scarce gave
the least suspicion of Covetousness. But he continued not long in this strain,
but fell after both to Cruelty and Avarice.

He was not only cruel, but very subtle and crafty in cloking of his cruelty.

Nunquam tristiorem sententiam sine praefatione clementiae pronunciavit,
Suetonius.
ut non aliud jam certius atrocis exitus signum esset, quam Principis lenitas.
He never pronounced any heavy and bloody Sentence without some preamble and
preface of clemency, so that there was not now a surer sign of some horrible
end and conclusion, then a mild beginning and gentle Exordium.

It is reported of him, that, Eum se impensissime diligere simulabat, quem
maxim interemptum vellet. He would seem to love them most, whom he willed
least should live.

It was sufficient, if any deed or word whatsoever was objected against any
one, to make it high Treason against the Prince. Suetoniu^. Primus Domitianus
Dominum se and Deum appellari jussit. Eusebius in Chronicis. Sueton. Eutropius.
Aurel. Vict. Virgil called Augustus God, D^us nobis haec otia fecit. Vnde
institutum post^ac, ut ne scripto quidem nec sermon cujusquam appellaretur
aliter. Suetonius.
Inheritances (though they belonged to the greatest strangers) were held
confiscate, and adjudged to the Emperors Coffers, in case but one would come
forth, and depose that he heard the party deceased say whiles he lived, that
Caesar was his heir.

He was the first Emperor who commanded himself to be called Lord, and God. He
sent out his writs in this form, Dominus and Deus noster sic fieri jubet, Our
Lord and God thus commands. Whereupon afterward this order was taken up, that
neither in the writing or speech of any man, he should be otherwise called.

Edictum Domini Deique nostri. Martial. A true forerunner of his successor the
Pope, who in the Extravagants (and well it deserves to be put there) is styled
Dominus Deus noster Papa, An Oracle signifies the answer of God. Romans 3. 2.
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 15. Portio Neronis de crudelitate. for his
cruelty a piece of Nero. Tertul. He was reprochfully called by the people bald
Nero, because he was like him in cruelty, but bald. Et calvo serviret Roma
Neroni. Juvenal.
and his Decrees are styled Oracles.

The second persecution was under him in the twelfth year of his reign; he
most cruelly persecuted the Christians, because they would not give the Title
of Lord to any but Christ, nor worship any but God. In this second great
persecution, the beloved Disciple of Christ, the Evangelist John, when he
taught the Church of Ephesus, was banished to the Isle of Patmos for the Word
of God, where he wrote the Revelation.

Cletus, Nicomedes, Pontia, Theodora, Domicilla, were then famous Martyrs.

There were many learned Scholars in his time; Iuvenal, Martial, Valerius
Flaccus, Silius Italicus, Poets: Epictetus the Philosopher, and Apollonius
Tyanaeus a famous Magician: Cornelius Tacitus the Historian, Julius Solinus,
Quintilian, Josephus the writer of Jewish Antiquities.

He was proud like Nero, and persecuted innocent Christians as he did.

Tertullian called him Neronis portionem, Eusebius haeredem, In vita Agricolae.
Nero tantum subtraxit oculos, jussitque scelera, non spectavit. Praecipua sub
Domitiano miseriarum pars erat, videre and aspici.
the one a part, the other the heir of Nero: and Tacitus puts only this
difference between them, that Nero indeed commanded cruel Murders, but
Domitian not only commanded them, but beheld them himself; and so he was Bis
Parricida (as Valerius L. 9. c. 11. Valde solicitus, quod sciret ultimum vitae
diem, says Suetonius He was much tortured in mind, because he foreknew his
end. Sueton.
Maximus says of another) Consilio prius, iterum spectaculo.

He caused the line of David to be diligently sought out and extinguished, for
fear lest he were yet to come of the house of David, which should enjoy the
Kingdom.

He was so fearful, that he walked almost continually in his Gallery, which he
caused to be set with the stone Phengites, that by the brightness thereof as
in a glass, (Plin. l. 36. c. 22) he might see what was done behind him.

That is admirable which writers have related concerning Apollonius Tyanaeus, a
Pythagorick Philosopher and famous Magician, who suddenly as amazed, cried out
at Ephesus the same time, O Stephen, strike the Tyrant; and a little after, he
said, It is well thou have struck him, thou have wounded him, thou have killed
him.

As his life was like unto the life of Nero, so was he not unlike him in his
death; for his own wife Domitia, Suetonius. Aurel. Vict. Carrion.
and friends conspired against him, and slew him; his body was carried to the
grave by Porters, and buried without honor; the Senate of Rome also decreed,
that his name should be rased, that all his Acts should be rescinded, and his
memorial abolished quite for ever.

He perished in the 45. year of his life, Aurel. Vict. and Eutropius. Carrion,
Chron.
about the 15. of his reign.

With whom both Tacitus and Suetonius end their History.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
REader, I know Books have their doom according to thy capacity, and that such
are usually most free in censuring other men's works, which are least able to
publish any of their own. But as the Poet says, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel
ede tua: Many Carpes are expected when curious eyes go a fishing, and Books
are pressed to the war as well as men; Ad praelum tanquam ad praelium. I
neither deserve that favor from thee nor desire it, that thou should
respect my toys, as Pliny said to Vespasian, Tu soles nostras esse aliquid
putare nugas: and yet if thou be such a one, that Augustus-like thou art ready
to tax all the world, I know no reason why I should regard thy censure; the
French Proverb says, De fol juge brieve sentence, and Nihil facilius quam
reprehendere alium. However, I shall say now with Julius Caesar, Iacta est
alea, I have put it to the hazard; thy applause shall not much tickle me, nor
thy rash sentence discourage me. I have taken notice of a witty allusion used
by diverse of these Emperors, and others concerning them, which I thought fit
to commend to thy observation, viz. a descanting as it were upon the double
signification of the word, as first, that of Julius Caesar's Soldiers:

Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem:
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat, qui subegit Gallias;
Nicomedes non triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem.
Caesar did subdue the Gauls, and him has Nicomede:
Behold now Caesar does triumph, who did the Gauls subdue;
But Nicomede triumphs not, who Caesar has subdued.
Subegit carries a double sense, the one signifies the conquering of a
Nation, and so it is taken in the former place, as it is applied to Gaul; the
other, the wanton abuse of the body, in which acceptance it is to be
understood in reference to Caesar abused by Nicomedes.

So in the History of Augustus, Suetonius says, Quasi alii se puerum, alii
ornandum tollendumque jactassent; ne aut sibi aut veteranis par gratia
referretur. The grace lies in the ambiguity of the Latin word tollendum,
which in one signification, is in a manner equivalent with laudandum and
ornandum, and betokens to be advanced, extolled, or lifted up, and so it is
to be taken in good part; but in another, it is all one with tollendum de medio
or occidendum, that is, to be dispatched out of life or killed, in which sense
Augustus took it; much like to that you shall read of Nero in Martial,

Quis neget Aeneae magni de stirpe Neronem?
Sustulit hic matrem, sustulit ille patrem.
The like appears in some of Augustus his witty speeches, as that to Galba;
Ego te monere possum, corrigere non possum. Iocatus est ambiguo verbo,
corrigitur quod reprehenditur, corrigitur quod ex distorto sit rectum. Eras.
Apophtheg. Hoc vere est monumentum Patris colere; Colimus ea quae veneramur,
and colitur ager aut aliud simile. Gemina fuisset amphibologia, si pro
monumento dixisset memoriam, quod ab illo dictum arbitror; siquidem eorum
memoria nobis sacrosancta dicitur, quos vita defunctos veneramur, and memorias
ad Graecorum imitationem vocamus defunctorum monumenta. Erasm. in Apoph.

Nero said jestingly of Claudius, That he left morari inter homines; in which
Verb morari there is couched a double sense, which gives the grace unto this
pleasant scoff; for being a mere Latin word, and having the first syllable by
nature short, it signifies to stay, or to make long abode, and taking it thus,
Nero might he thought to imply thus much; that Claudius was now departed out of
the company of mortal men: but take the same word as Nero spoke it, derived of
(...) in Greek, which signifies a Fool, and has the first syllable long, it
imports, that Claudius played the fool no longer here in the world among men.
In the time of the two first Caesar's, which had the Art of Government in
greatest perfection, there lived the best Poet, Virgilius Maro; the best
Historiographer, Titus Livius; the best Antiquary, Marcus Varro; and the best
or second Orator, Marcus Cicero, that to the memory of man are known. The time
that the Roman Monarchy seemed to be at his (...) was (says Carrion) from
Julius Caesar to the end of Antoninus the Philosopher his reign.

Afterward, many filthy Monsters reigned, and many seditious and civil wars
followed; therefore I have not only enlarged the former Treatise, by inserting
here and there some other special observations, but have made an addition also
of six more Emperors since, (as Sir Francis Bacon also says in his
advancement of Learning) the six next Princes were all learned, or singular
favorers and advancers of Learning: which age (as he also says) for temporal
respects, was the most happy and flourishing that ever the Roman Empire (which
then was a Model of the world) enjoyed: a matter revealed and prefigured unto
Domitian in a dream, the night before he was slain; for he thought there was
grown behind upon his shoulders a Neck, and a head of Gold, which came
accordingly to pass, in those golden times which succeeded. Fulke in his Book
of Meteors observes, not long before the contention of Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, for the Empire of Rome, there appeared three Suns, as it were
pointing out the strife which followed soon after between them three for the
Imperial Diadem; of threescore and thirteen Roman Emperors (that perished
within the narrow compass of one hundred years) only three died a natural
death in their Beds, the rest were cut off by their lusts.

It was a heavy time then with Christians, when they groaned under the
Persecuting Emperors three hundred years together, yet in that time they had
many Lucida intervalla, many breathing spaces under Princes not altogether so
bloody; there were too principal Persecutors of the Church, Diocletian, and
Julian, but the last was the most pestilent. Jerome justly styled him Canem
rabidum; and it is remarkable what is observed of him, that going forth to the
Persian War, he asked in scoffing manner, What the Carpenters Son (meaning
Christ) was doing? To whom it was answered by a good Christian, Loculum
fabricatur, He is making a Coffin for Julian; which Prophetical speech was
indeed verified by the event; for Julian was strangely wounded and slain in
that War, and as in his life time he had blasphemed Christ, so he died
blaspheming Christ, and casting up his Blood toward Heaven, he cried, Vicisti
o Galilaee, Thou have overcome O Galilean.

This may suffice to have spoken of some of the chief Persecutors in general,
since I purpose not to enlarge this Treatise any more, because there is little
said of many of the Roman Emperors, and the Mexia translated by Grimston.
History of them altogether is already written in our Mother tongue: but I
intended only at the first, Analecta, some choice and pithie observations of
them, if these therefore may benefit thee, summam votorum attigi, I have
attained the end of my desires, and so I rest

Thy Well-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

Choice Observations OF COCCEIVS NERVA.
DOmitian thus made away, Coccejus Nerva a prudent, He was 76. years old when
he was Emperor. Carrion.
honorable, and aged person was elected Emperor by the Senate; his birth was
noble, and of Italy, in the City Narnia, and of the Province Vmbria, ruling so
well, as he may be esteemed too good a Prince long to continue in so bad an
age; who reformed many enormities, and remitted many grievous tributes and
exactions; also he recalled from banishment the Christians severally dispersed,
and suffered them to enjoy the freedom of their profession, Suidas. Nicephorus.
at which time John the Evangelist returned from Pathmos (wherein he had been
confined) unto Ephesus, a City in Asia the less, where after his return he
lived 4. years. The excellent temper of his Government is by a glance in
Cornelius Tacitus touched to the life, In vita Agricolae.
Postquam divus Nerva resolim insociabiles miscuisset, imperium and libertatem.
Dion writes of him, that he was so good a Prince, that he once uttered this
speech, Nihil se fecisse quo minus possit deposito imperio privatus tuto
vivere, He remembers not to have done any thing why he should not live
securely, and without fear of any body, although he gave over the Empire. His
symbol was, Men's bona regnum possidet. He discharged the City of the new
impositions which Vespasian and Domitian had laid upon them, and commanded that
goods unjustly taken should be restored to the owners.

He was very eloquent, and a good Poet, as Martial testifies of him,

Quanta quies placidi, tanta est facundia Nervae. See Martial's Epigramme of
him, lib. 11. epig. 6.

Herodes Atticus found a great treasure in his house, but fearing calumnies, he
wrote to Nerva, and discovered it. He wrote back again, Vtere, use it. But he
being not so secure, wrote again, At enim thesaurus privati hominis conditionem
superat, but the treasure exceedes the condition of a private man: Nerva again
nobly replied, Ergo abutere. Lips. in Plin. Paneg.

On a reverse of Nerva is found a team of horses let loose, with this
inscription, Vehiculatione per Italiam remissa; whereby we learn (which no
Historian remembers) that the Roman Emperors commanded all the carriages of
the country; that Nerva remitted that burden; and that the grievance was so
heavy, that coins were stamped in remembrance of this Emperors goodness that
eased them of it. See the coins in L. Hulsius, and Speed's Chronicle.

Sextus Aurel. Victor writes thus; Quid Nerva prudentius aut moderatius? quid
Trajano divinius? Quid praestantius Hadriano.

Having reigned only one year, four months, and nine days, de dyed of a
passionate anger conceived against a Senator, Dion Cassius.
in the year of Christ his Incarnation ninety nine, the twenty seventh day of
January, and seventy sixth of his own age.

Choice Observations OF ULPIVS TRAJANVS.
UNto Nerva succeeded Vlpius Trajanus into the Roman Empire, Speed Chro.
Trajanus Tudernino Hispaniae oppido oriundus est, in quo nihil praeter unum
Trajanum est quod commendemus. Opes nec exiguae, nec supra privatum modum
evectae. Corpore valido, and forma quae digna imperio videbatur, erat. Boxhorn.
orat. de vitae and moribus Trajani.
in the 42. year of his age, who was born near unto Sevil in the Territories of
Spain, of a Noble Family, but was much more ennobled in himself for his
Princely endowments; which moved Nerva in his life time to adopt him into so
high a Calling, and the whole Senate after his death joyfully to confirm his
Election, and so often to honor him with the title of the most Excellent
Prince in publik Dedications. He raised the Roman Empire unto the very highest
pitch of glory, and spread the power of their command into the largest circuit
that ever before or since has been possessed.

He subdued Dacia, made subject Armenia, Parthia, Caput non diadema sed gales
orn^bat: and qua manu sceptrum domi, eadem gladium bello tenebat. Boxhorn.
and Mesopotamia, conquered Assyria, Persia, and Babylon; passed Tigris, and
stretched the confines of the Roman Empire unto the remotest Dominions of the
Indies, which never before that time had heard of the Roman name. For his
Person, he was not very learned, yet he was a great admirer of, and Benefactor
to Learning; a Founder of Famous Libraries, a perpetual advancer of Learned
men to Office, Eruditissimos, quamvis ipse parcae esset scientiae, moderateque
eloquens, diligebat. Aurel. Vict. Plutarch was his Master.
and a familiar Converser with learned Professors. Praesens aderat non spectator
tantum, sed and inter primos bellatorum; ut virtuti consiliisque ejus omnia
deberentur.
Quem honorem dicendi Magistris? quam dignationem sapientiae doctoribus habes?
ut sub te spiritum, and sanguinem, and patriam receperint studia, quae priorum
temporum immanitas exiliis puniebat. Plin. Secund. Paneg.

Of stature he was big, of complexion swarthy, thin of hair both head and
beard, he had a hooked nose, broad shoulders, long hands, and a pleasant eye.

He stirred up the third Persecution, wherein Ignatius, and Simon the Son of
Cleophas, and many other worthy Saints of God received the Crown of Martyrdom
in such cruel manner, as that his other virtues are much clouded by that
Taxation; Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 30.
for mollification whereof, he was entreated by Plinius secundus, whose
Epistles to that purpose are yet extant, viz. the 97. of his tenth Book, where
he has this passage to Trajan concerning them; Affirmabant hanc fuisse summam
vel culpae suae vel erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire,
carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem; seque Sacramento non in
scelus aliquid obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria
committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent, etc. to
which Letter Trajan thus replyeth, Conquirendi nnon sunt; si deferantur and
arguantur, puniendi sunt.

Whereupon Tertullian in his Apology has this passage, Nemo supplici vultu,
sed sati and ala^res non tam principem quam patrem agnoscebant. Boxho^rn. Orat.
O Sententiam necessitate confusam! negat inquirendos innocents, and mandat
puniendos ut nocentes; parcit and saevit, dissimulat and animadvertit. Quid
teip sum censur a circumvenis? Si damnas, cur non, and inquiris? si non
inquiris, cur non and absolvis?

He was affable and familiar even with his inferiors; of such carriage toward
his subjects, as he himself would wish (he said) his Prince to use toward him,
if he had been a subject. Aequus, clemens, patientissimus, atque in amicos
perfidelis, says Aurelius Victor of him. Accipe gladium quem pro me, si recte
impero, sin minus, contra ^^e distringe.
He was a great observer of Justice, in so much that when he invested any
Praetor, in giving him the Sword, he commanded him to use the same even against
his own person, if he violated Law or equity.

He erected many famous buildings, whence Constantine the Great called him
Parietariam Wall-flower, because his name was upon so many walls. Alexander
Severus is rather to be commended, who caused that precept of the Gospel to be
engraved on the frontispiece of his palace, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alterineseceris.

Dion reports this Apothegme of him, Nullum se unquam virum bonum male
habiturum, nedum occisurum Dies ille triplici gaudio laetus (says Pliny in a
Panegyric to him) qui principem abstulit pessimum, dedit optimum, meliorem
optimo genuit.

In solo Plinio Trajanum habemus, in Trajan^ imaginem omnium magnarum virtutum.
Qui ea liberate omnia scripsit, qua Trajanus fecit; adeo ut incomparabili
principe opus dignissimum sit and ipsum incomparabile. Boxhorn. Orat.

Rara temporum felicitas, ubi sentire quae velis, and quae sentias dicere
licet, L. 1. Hist,
says Tacitus of his reign: a man so exceeding wellbeloved of the Senate, and
of the people of Rome, that after his days, whenever a new Emperor was
Elected, they wished unto him the good success of Augustus, and the
uprightness of Trajanus.

He dyed by a Flux the seventh day of August, Carrion Chron.
after he had reigned 19. years, six months and 15. days, and of his age 64.

Choice Observations OF AELIVS HADRIANVS.
AFter the decease of Trajan, It was his word, Non mihi sed populo, signifying
that which he was often heard to say; Ita se rempublicam gesturum, ut sciret
rem populi esse, non suam,
his Nephew Aelius Hadrianus by the consent of the Army, who swore to him
obedience, was proclaimed Emperor; the Senate likewise confirmed their choice,
as being a man endued with gifts both of Art and Nature, answerable to the
fortunes of his estate. His birth was of Spain, in the City Italica, near unto
Sevil where Trajan was born; his Father Noble, Hic Graecis literis impensius
eruditus, a plerisque Graecul^^s appell^tus est. Aurel. Vict.
and his Mother in Cales descended of an honorable stock. He was a great
Mathematician, skillful in Arithmetic, Geometry, and judicial Astrology,
learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues, well seen in Physic, and knew the
virtues of Herbs, Roots, and Stones; a singular Musician both for Theory and
Practice, and could both limne and carve with approbation of the skillful; He
said rightly, Testibus non testimoniis ^^redendum.
but above all is the admirable report of his memory, who never (they say)
forgot any thing that he had either read or heard.

If he discovered any man to have the like skill with him in all sciences (in
the which he very much excelled) by whom there might be danger lest he were
overcome, through envy and too greedy a desire of singularity, he caused him to
be killed. Among the which was Apollodorus the Architect, a man beyond
comparison excellent in that Art; for that the Emperor having sent unto him
the platform of a great work which he had contrived, he by his efficacious
reasons had proved, that in some place it was to be corrected. Cuffe of
Affectation. He quotes Dion and Bapt. Fulg. l. 8.

He was the most curious man that lived, and the most universal inquirer, in so
much as it was noted for an error in his mind, that he desired to comprehend
all, and not reserve himself for the worthiest things; Sir Franci^ Bacons
Advanc. of Learn.
but it pleased God to use the curiosity of this Emperor as an inducement to
the peace of the Church in those days: for having Christ in veneration, not as
a God or Savior, but as a wonder or novelty; and having his picture in his
Gallery matched with Apollonius (with whom in his vain imagination he thought
he had some conformity) yet it served the turn to allay the bitter hatred of
those times against the Christian name, so as the Church had peace during his
time.

He was a great favourer of learned men. In Adriani Principis aulam non viri
tantum militares, sed innumer abiles Philosophorum greges, tanquam in Lycaeum
aut veterem Academiam magnis de rebus disputaturi confluebant. Alphonsus
Garcias Matamorus in narrat. Apologet. de Acad. and viris liter atis. t. 2.
Piccartus Observat. Historico-polit. Dec. 17. c. 5. instanceth in K. Alphonsus
and others, who delighted in the society of learned men.

He was minded (as Lampridius writes) to have built a Temple to the service of
Christ, had not some dissuaded him therefrom.

He was of Personage tall and very strong, of a good complexion, and amiable
countenance, wearing the hear of his head and beard long.

To show that he counted hatred retained a base and unprincely disposition, as
soon as he came to the Empire, he laid aside all his former enmities; insomuch
as that meeting with one who had been his capital enemy, he said unto him,
Evas^s^i, Thou art now escaped from my displeasure. Spartianus in Hadriano.
videsis Casuabonum.

When a woman called to him passing by, saying, Audi me Caesar, Hear me Caesar,
and he answered, Non est Some say this was spoken to Philip of Macedon.
otium, I have no leisure, she cried out, Noli ergo imperare, then cease to
reign; at that speech he being moved, staid and heard the Dion laudat Adrianum,
qui in causis cognoscendis fuerit and fa^cillintus and diligentissimus, adeo ut
uni causae cognoscendae and dijudicandae saepe dies undecim aut duodecim
tribueret, nonnunquam etiam noctes simul insunieret.
woman. It was accounted discretion in him, that would not dispute his best
with him, excusing himself, That it was reason to yield to him that commanded
thirty legions.

Though he was famous for his industry, wit, memory, and fortunate success,
and could in his fatal sickness command others to be slain, yet death denied
subjection to him. His servant which undertook it fled, his adopted Son
pretended piety, his own hand was prevented by Attendants, his solicited
Physician flew himself that he might not slay the Emperor, Turba medicorum
Caesarem perdidit.
who yet complained at his death, Many Physicians have slain the Emperor. He
sported at death with these Verses:

Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque Corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut soles, dabis jocos.
My fleeting fond poor darling,
Bodies Guest and equal,
Where now must be thy lodging?
Pale, and stark, and stripped of all,
And put from wonted sporting.
When he had reigned in great honor and love the space of one and twenty
years, five months and fifteen days, and lived sixty two years, he dyed the
eighth or tenth day of July of a Dropsy, which malady so tormented him, that
willingly he refused all sustenance, and languished away through faintness.

Choice Observations OF ANTONINUS PIUS.
UNto Adrianus succeeded Antoninus Pius, Hunc fere nulla vitiorum labes
maeculavit. Aurel. Vict. Vixit ingenti honestate privatus, majori in imperio;
Pius propter elementiam dictus est. Eutropius.
who was for his many virtues, or rather piety toward the Gods, Sur-named Pius;
For piety (to speak properly) is the true worship of God, as Austin shows in
his 10. book de Civit. Dei c. 1. But he was not truly pious, because he knew
not the true God.

He was compared for his peace and policy unto Numa Pomplius, the second King
of Rome. His birth was in Lombardy, the Son of Aurelius Fulvius. He was a
Prince excellently learned, and had the patient and subtle wit of a
School-man, insomuch as in common speech (which leaves no virtue untaxed) he
was called Cymini-Sector, a carver or a divider of Cumine Seed, which is one
of the least seeds; such a patience he had, and settled spirit to enter into the
least and most exact differences of causes: he likewise approached a degree
nearer unto Christianity, and became as Agrippa said to Paul, half a Christian;
holding their religion and law in good opinion, and not only staying
persecution, but giving way to the advancement of Christians. In his time
Justin Martyr wrote notable Books of Apology for the Christians, His Symbol
was, Meliu^ servare unum quam occidere mill.
which were preserved and read in the Senate of Rome, and mollified the
Emperors mind toward them. He was favorable to all sorts of men, Scipio
Africanus was wont to say, Malle se unum civem servare quam mill hosts
occidere.
having that Apothegme of Scipio Africanus rife in his mouth, that He had
rather save one Subjects life then kill a thousand enemies.

He was of stature tall, of a seemly presence, in countenance majesticall, in
manners mild, of a singular wit, very learned and eloquent, Solus omnium
principum sine civili sanguine fuit. Carrion.
a great lover of Husbandry, peaceable, merciful and bounteous, he neither in
his youth did any thing rashly, nor in his age any thing negligently. In time
of great famine which was in Rome, he provided for their wants, and maintained
the people with bread and wine, the most of the time that the famine lasted;
making victuals to be brought from all parts, and paying for the same at his
own cost.

Having reigned twenty and two years, 23 Says Carrion.
seven months, and twenty six days, he dyed of a Fever at Porium the seventh
of March, 70 Carrion.
the year of his life 75. and of Christ 162.

His death was generally lamented, and the Romans did him great honor, and
made sacrifices to him, Canonizing him for a God, and building a Temple also to
him.

Choice Observations of LUCIUS COMMODUS VERUS, AND ANTONINUS PHILOSOPHUS.
THere succeeded Antoninus the Divi fratres, This was the first time wherein
the Roman Empire was governed by two Augusti; Domitian was Titus his Associate,
yet was he not called or accounted* Augustus until the death of his Brother
Titus: but now two Emperors reigned at one and the self-same time.
the two adoptive Brethren, Lucius Commodus Verus, Son to Aelius Verus, (who
delighted much in the softer kind of learning, and was wont to call the Poet
Martial his Virgil,) and Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, whereof the latter who
obscured his Colleague, and survived him long, was named the Philosopher, who as
he excelled all the rest in learning, so he excelled them likewise in
perfection of all royal virtues. Betwixt their natures and conditions was as
much odds as between day and night; the one very moderate, loving, and
industrious; the other proud, careless, and cruel; the fruits whereof the poor
Christians felt, whose chiefest Pillars, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and
Justin Martyr an excellent Philosopher, with infinite more were put to most
cruel deaths.

After his death the whole Government returned to Antoninus Philosophus only,
Vir quem mirari facilius quis quam landare possit; a principio vitae
tranquillissimus, adeo ut in infantia quoque vultum nec ex ga^dio nec ex
maerore mutaret. Eutropius.
whose Symbol was, Regni Clementia custos. He was Sur-named the Philosopher,
not only for his knowledge, but also practice of Philosophy; he had often in
his mouth that speech of Plato, Tunc florent respublicae, quando vel
Philosophus regit, vel Rex Philosophatur. This good Emperor possessed the Seat
of Majesty nineteen years and eleven days, wherein he always approved
himself in wit excellent, in life virtuous; very learned and eloquent, Tantum
Marco sapientiae, innocentiae, ac literarum fuit, ut is Marcomannos, cum filio
Commodo quem Caesarem suffecerat, petiturus, Philosophorum obtestantium vi
cir^umfunderetur; ne se expeditioni aut pugnae prius committeret, quam sectarum
ardu^ and occulta explanavisset, etc. Aurel. Victor.
full of clemency, justice, and temperance, nothing inferior to most of all
the worthiest Emperors before him, nor matchable in qualities by many of the
Monarchs that followed him.

He would not believe that Avidius Cassius could ever have deposed him; and his
reason was, The Gods had greater care of him, then to let Cassius wrong him
undeservedly, Vulc. Gallicanus in vita Aridii Cassii.

Julian the Emperor in his book entitled Caesares, being a Pasquil or Satyr
to deride all his predecessors, feigned that they were all invited to a banquet
of the gods, and Silenus the Iester sat at the lower end of the table, and
bestowed a scoff on every one as they came in; but when Antoninus Philosophus
entered, he was gravelled and out of countenance, not knowing where to carpe at
him, save at the last he gave a glance at his patience toward his wise.

When his Armies were even famished The Christian Legion was after that time
called Fulminatrix. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. His Wife Faustina (by whose means
partly he obtained the Empire) was a Princess, but a lewd and wanton woman;
one counseled him to put her away, but he answered, Si uxorem di^^ttimus,
reddamus and dotem; choosing rather to have his house defiled then little.
for want of water, Tertul. in Apolog.
the Christians by their prayers procured wine from Heaven to their great
refreshing, and the Barbarians were dashed with thunder and fire; whereupon he
mitigated the rage against Christ's Professors, and in his time the Church for
the most part was in peace. He dyed the seventeenth day of March, in the year
of our Lord 181. and of his own age, 59.

Choice Observations OF COMMODVS.
HIS name agreed not with his disposition, he being called Commodus, who was
(says l. 7. c. 6. Semper incommodus says Vopiscus in vita Taciti.
Orosius) cunctis incommodus.

Concerning his birth there passes this story or fiction; His mother Annia
Valeria Faustina, daughter of Antoninus Fius, and wife of Antoninus
Philosophus, when she saw certain Gladiators or sword-players going to fight,
Heywood in his various history of women.
was monstrously inflamed with the love of one of them, upon whom she dored so
extremely, that her affection was almost grown to phrensy, languishing
wherewith, she confessed her love-madnesse to her husband. He perceiving her
distemper to increase, consulted with the Chaldaeans or soothsayers, what was
best to be done in so desperate a case, for the saving of his wives life, and
the quenching of her unchaste desires. They after long consideration determined,
that there was left for her but one only remedy, as strange as the disease;
viz, to cause the said Gladiator to be murdered secretly that she might not
know of it, and that the next night that her husband intended to lie with her,
a cup full of his lukewarm blood Casaubonus in Historiam Augustam.
changed into the likeness of water should be given her to drink, ut sese Nescia
quis primus sublavaret hoc loco reposuit proe^ quod v^tus editis and scripti
codices habeb^nt, sublevaret. quam veram esse scripturam quovis pignore
contendere sum paratus. Non dicit i^tem (...) sublevar^t se Faustina sanguine
illius gladiatoris occisi. Quod de industria t^^^uit hic au^tor, and modestis
^erhis m^llivit horrend^m m^^ic^tionis genus. Non (...) cerie est, pro remedio
sanguinem illum ebibisse Faustinam, atque ita se subleva^se, etc. Salmasius in
Historiam Augustam. p. 91.
sublevaret: which was performed accordingly, and she cured of her disease, but
with this bad success; for that night, as it is said, she was delivered of
Commodus, who in qualities resembled that Gladiator upon this occasion, as some
reported; which they ascribed to the power of her imagination, but others
esteemed him a Bastard. Ferrand. of lovemelancholy out of Capitolinus in
Antonino Philosopho c. 19. editionis Gruterianae.

The conject^re that Commodus was born in adultery, is confirmed by the
behavior of Faustina his mother at Cajeta, where she was wont want only to
gaze on naked gladiators and mariners. Capitolinus ibid. Aurel. Victor.

When his mother was with child with him and his twin-brother Antoninus, who
dyed when 4. months old, she dreamed that she brought forth two Serpents, one
whereof, viz. Commodus, as the event proved, exceeded in fierceness. Lamoridius
in Commodo. c. 1.

Commodus was more noble by descent then any of the former Emperors, and the
most beautiful person of his time. Herodian. l. 1. in fine.

He was so excellent a marks-man, that he could hit with an arrow or dart
whatsoever he aimed at, exceeding the most expert Parthian Archers, and
Numidian Darters which he had about him. Herodian l. 1. c. 15. editionis
Boeclerianae.

Once he shot forked arrows at Moresco Estriches, which were wonderful swift
of foot, using their wings as sails in running. These he did hit so full in
the neck, that though their heads were struck off with the furiousness of the
blow, (...).
yet they ran awhile headless, as if they had not been hurt. Id. ibid.
Aliquandiu tamen viventibus similem cursum continuabant. ut Herodianum
interpretatur Politianus.


Neque haec superant very sidem, cum instrumentamotus, spiritus s^ilicet
vitales, aliquandiu motum continuare possint, non exhausti uno temporis
momento; quod colligunt medi^^e motu cordis anguillae exsecti. Simile quid
memini inter historias a nonnullis narratum, de quodam pyrata, qui interceptus
cum suis sociis navalibus hoc unum suppliciter petiit, ut sociorum singuli
vitae redonarentur, quos capite truncus cursu praeteriisset. Largitum hoc est
supremis ejus votis: stans capite truncatur; cursum intendit, quem usque ad
posiremos (...) continuasse^, nisi a carnifice ac l^ctoribus adstantibus in
terram fuisset detractus. P. Voet. in Herodiani Marc. and Commod. p. 183.
videsis Fromondum de Anima l. 1. c. 4. art. 3. p. 97. etc,

Another time a Panther having fastened upon a man, (who was brought into the
lists) so that all thought she would instantly tear him in pieces; he darted at
her so happily, that he killed the beast and saved the man, (...). Herodian. l.
1. c. 15.
preventing the impression of her teeth with the point of his weapon.

[Alcon seeing his son Phalerus (one of the Argonauts) sleeping on the grass,
and a Serpent creeping on his breast, slew the Serpent, and saved his son:

-- Non sic libravit in hostem
Spicula, qui nato Serpentis corpore cincto
Plus timuit dum succurrit; dum jactibus iisdem
Interitum vitamque daret; stabilemque teneret
Cord tremente manum; totamque exiret in arte^
Spe propiore metus; dans inter membra duoru^
Vnius mortem. --
Sidonius Apollinaris in paneg. Majoriani. videsis Servium in fextam Virgilii
Eclogam.]

He slew also 100. Lions with so many darts; See Domitian p. 113.
their bodies falling in such order, that they might easily be numbered (not
one dart miscarrying.) Herodian ubi supra.

He resembled his Father in nothing but fortunate fighting against the Germans,
with whom notwithstanding he made a dishonorable peace.

He was faithful to none; See Nero p. 68. and Domitian p. 114. etc.
and most cruel to those whom he had before advanced to the greatest honors,
and enriched with most vast rewards. Sextus Aurelius Victor.

He and Heliogabalus conferred all the dignities of the Empire upon men for
lust and licentiousness most like unto themselves. Walsinghams Manual.

He was the first Roman Emperor who through covetousness sold offices for
money; Vespasian had done it before him, but through necessity, finding the
commonwealth in debt, and the treasure exhausted. The History of Spain
translated by Grimston.

He killed some though innocent, instead of others who were guilty, and did let
offenders escape for money. Lampridius in Comm.

If any one had an enemy of whom he would be revenged, he needed but to bargain
with Commodus for a sum of money to kill him. Id. ibid.

He pretended that he would go into Africa, that he might raise money for that
feigned journey, which when he had gathered, he spent in banqueting and
gaming. Id. ibid.

He was so careless in serious matters, that he wrote nothing more then Vale in
many of his letters; and so serious in things of light or ill concernment, that
he caused to be registered how often he frequented the fense-schoole, with all
his cruelties and impurities. Id. ibid.

He employed not himself in any thing which became an Emperor; making glasses,
dancing, singing, piping, playing the Buffoon and fencer; bathing 7. or 8.
times in the day, eating in the Bath, drinking in the theater in woman's habit;
mingling humane excrements with the daintiest fare, tasting them himself,
thinking so to mock others. Id. ibid.

He kept 300. Concubines, and so many boys which he used as women; like
Commod. Imperator, qui natus est eo die quo Caligula; tanquam eundem haberet
horoscupum, and ipse sorores constupravit, concubinasque suas sub oculis suis
constuprari ab amicis jubebat. Beroaldus in Suetenium. Caligulam habuit velut
exemplar quod initaretur. Id. Ibid.
Caligula commanded women to be ravished in his sight, committed incest as he
did with all his Sisters, and exceeded him (says Tristan) in polluting the
Temples with whoredom and human blood.

His natural incontinence was incredibly inflamed by diverse sorts of ointments
(used by him to preserve himself from the pestilence, whilst it reigned
throughout Italy) which were of so hot and subtle a quality, that they excited
in him the unquenchable flames of extraordinary lasciviousness. Tristan.

He was so cruel, that when he was but 12. years old, because the bath in
which he was washed was a little too warm, Lamprid. c. 1.
he commanded that the heater of it should be cast into a furnace.

Dion confidently reports that the Physicians poisoned his Father to gratify
him.

He put to death his Wife Crispina, his eldest sister Lucilla, and Annia
Faustina his Fathers Cousin German, with 24. of the Eminentest Personages of
the Roman Empire.

He commanded one to be cast to wild beasts, Lamprid. c. 10.
for reading the life of Caligula in Suetonius, because he had the same
birthday with Caligula. August. 31.


His very jests were cruel; Id ibid.
seeing one have white hairs among black ones, he set on his head a starling,
which thinking it picked worms made festers.

He cut a fat man off at the middle of the belly, Id. ibid.
that he might see his entrails drop out suddenly.

He called them Monopodii and Luscinii whom he deprived of a foot or eye.

He made men exercise that cruelty upon themselves in reality, which they used
to act but in show. Lamprid. c. 9.

He imitated Chirurgions in letting blood, Xiphiline.
and barbers in trimining, under which pretense he cut off ears and noses:
wherefore such was his jealousy of all men, Lamprid. c. 17.
that he was forced like Dionysius to be his own barber.

Histories not only affirm, Neronis insania Commodi turpitudini per omnes
flagitil gradus (...) est: egregium sc. par, princeps histrie and gladiator.
that he played the Gladiator in person, but his statue in that fashion stark
naked, with his naked sword in his hand, is yet extant at Rome in the Farnesian
palace.

He imitated Nero in driving of Chariots, and if Quintus Aemylius Laetus had
not deterred him, he would have burned Rome (as Nero did) thinking he might do
what he pleased with that place which he called after his name. Boecleru^. See
Nero p. 75.


So exceeding great was the madness of this vile monster, that he sent a letter
to the Senate with this style: Imperator Caesar Lucius, Aelius, Aurelius,
Commodus, Antoninus, Augustus, Pius, Foelix, Sarmaticus, Germanicus Maximus,
Britannicus, pacator orbis tevy rum, Invictus, Romanus Hercules, Pontisex
Maximus, Tribunitiae potestatis, XVIII. Imperator, VIII. Consul, VII. Pater
Patriae, Consulibus, Praetoribus, Tribunis Plebis, Senatuique * Commodiano
soelici Salutem. Xiphilin.

The former Emperors at pleasure sometimes times took some few names to
themselves, sometimes bestowed them on others. In the later times, virtue
decaying, ambition in titles increased. Yet Justinian accounted of as a sober
Emperor, has his style notwithstanding not much shorter. Imp. Caesar Flavius
Justinianus, Alemannicus, Gothicus, Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus, Alanicus,
Vandalicus, Africanus, Pius, Foelix, Inclytus victor, ac Triumphator semper
Augustus. Sr. H. Savil on Tacitus.

He changed the names of all the months, calling them after his own sur-names,
which was observed no longer then he lived.

He ever and anon changed all his surnames, except that of Amazonius, taken up
out of love to Marcia his Concubine, whose picture he wore upon the outside of
his garment; and of Exuperans, because he would have been thought to excel all
men: as appears by his being sacrificed to as a God.

When his Favorite Perennis was dead, he repealed many things that were done
by him, but persisted no above 30 days in his reformation, permitting Cleander
to be more licencious then Perennis, Lamprid.

Yea to such drunken dotage he was grown, that he refused his fathers name,
commanding himself in stead of Commodus the son of Marcus, Quid mirum si
Commodus Hereulem se vocari voluit, cum id fecerit Alexander praeceptis imbutus
Aristotelis?
to be styled Hercules the son of Jupiter; and accordingly he forsook the Roman
and Imperial habit; and in stead thereof, thrust himself into a Lions skin,
and carried a great club in his hand: and (which made him extremely ridiculous)
he put on also purple Amazonian robes embroydered with gold; Athenaeus.
expressing in one and the same garb austerity and effeminateness: this was his
daily attire.

He commanded many Statues of himself made in likeness of Hercules, to be
erected throughout the City, and one before the Senate House in form of an
archer ready to shoot; that his very Images might strike a terror into the
beholders. Herodian.

He ranged so far in a mad humor, as that he purposed to forsake his palace,
and live in a fence-school; and now being weary of the name of Hercules, he
assumed the name of a famous sword-player deceased.

On New-yeares day he determined in great solemnity to issue forth of a
senceschool, from which Marcia, Laetus, and Electus dissuaded him; but he
incensed with them, commanded them to depart, and retiring into his
bedchamber, to repose himself at noon (as he was wont,) he wrote their names
in a table book, dooming them to death that night. Having done this, he laid
his table book on the pailet, not imagining that any would enter into his
chamber.

But his darling Philo-Commodus being full of play, Multos praeterea paraverat
interimere, quod per parvulum quendam proditum est, qui ^abulam e cubiculo
ejecit. Lamprid. videsis Gru^erum.
went (as he usually did) into the bedchamber (while Commodus was bathing) and
taking the book to play with, went forth, and was met by Marcia; who took the
book from him, lest he might spoil some weighty matter. As soon as she
perceived it was Commodus his own hand, she greatly desired to read it. But
when she found the deadly contents, she discovered to Electus and Laetus the
danger they were in, and they all resolved to purchase their own security by
Commodus his death, and concluded it most convenient to dispatch him by poison;
which Marcia having given to him, it cast him into a slumber, out of which
awaking he vomited extremely: the conspirators fearing fullness might expel
the poison, cause him to be strangled.

He lived 31. years, 4. months, and reigned 12. years, 9. months and 14.
days. In him the Aelian together with the Aurelian family was extinguished, as
the Julian in Nero. Tristan.

How joyful his death was both to Senate and people, their assemblies in the
Temples to give thanks for their deliverance, and their execrations pronounced
against him, at large reported by Lampridius, do manifest.

He was called the enemy of God and men; the very name of the Devil.

The Christians escaped persecution from him by the mediation of Marcia, who
favored their doctrine. Dion.

Of all Emperors until Constantine he was most favorable unto Christians,
whatsoever he was otherwise. Mountague's Acts and Monuments of the Church. c.
7. paragr. 115.

In respect of much persecution before, those times were called Halcyonia sub
Commodo Ecclesiae. Lloid's consent of time, p. 599.

Commodus insequitur, pugnis maculosus arenae;
Threicio princeps bella movens gladio.
Eliso tandem persolvens gutture poenas,
Criminibus fassus matris adulterium.
Ausonius. Choice Observations OF PERTINAX.
WAS so called, either for his reluctance in accepting the Empire, or rather
for his pertinacious resolution in his youth to be a Woodmonger, as his father
was, when he would have made him a Scholar.

Yet at last he was persuaded by his father to apply himself to learning, in
which he was such a proficient, that he succeeded his Master Sulpitius
Apollinaris in the teaching of Grammar: But gaining little thereby, he served
in the camp with such proof of his valor, that upon the death of Commodus he
was chosen Emperor. For the murder being done in the night, Laetus went in
all have to Pertinax, and saluted him with the unexpected name of Emperor; but
he thought Laetus was sent from Commodus to kill him, See Claudius in initio.
till he was certified of Commodus his death, by one of his servants whom he
sent to view his carkase.

So different was the opinion of all men concerning Pertinax and Commodus, that
many hearing of Commodus his death, thought the report was raised by himself to
try men's inclinations; wherefore many Governors of Provinces imprisoned those
who related it, not because they would not have had the news to be true, but
for that they thought it more dangerous to believe the death of Commodus, then
not to come in to Pertinax, by whom every one was confident that they should be
easily pardoned, whereas with Commodus innocence gave no security. Excerpta
Petresci. p. 728.

Pertinax was forced to accept of the Empire by Laetus and Electus, when he was
above 60. years old; yet admitted not any symbol of sovereignty, and declined
so envious a Title, till compelled by the Senate. Recusabat imperare; quod erat
been imperaturi. Plinius de Trajano. panegyr. 5.

He chiefly re^used the Empire, because he was to succeed a Tyrant, who by his
disorders had so impoverisht the State, and rendered the soldiers so loose,
that he saw 'twas impossible to avoid a publik odium, by the use of a necessary
remedy. Tristan.

He would not let his wife receive the title of Empress, nor his son be called
Caesar, as the Senate had decreed, lest he should be corrupted, but deferred it
till he might deserve it; nor admitting him being a youth into the Court, but
causing him to lead a private life.

He permitted not his Name to be stamped on the peculiar goods of the
Emperors, saying, That the propriety thereof belonged to the State in
general. Herodian l. 2. c. 4. As Marcus Aurelius, whom he imitated, said to
the Senate; Nos usque adeo nihil habemus proprium, ut etiam vestras aedes
habitemus. Xiphilinus in Marco Aurelio.

He enacted that all the wast ground in Italy and other countries (though of
the Princes demesne) should be improved, and freely given to them who would
manure it: to which purpose, he granted to Husbandmen 10. years immunity from
all taxes, and security from all further trouble during his reign. Herodian.

He banished informers, preserved the commoners from the injury of soldiers,
and released all Imposts exacted by Tyrants. Id.

He never could be induced to revenge an injury. S. A. Victoris Epitome.

He was too negligent of his wife Flavia Titiana's chastity, who openly loved a
fiddler; he in the mean time being as ardently and infamously enamoured on his
Concubine Cornificia. Capitolinus c. 13.

He was called (...), a giver of good words, because he was rather a Fawning
than a kind Prince; promising well but performing ill.

Such was his niggardliness, that he would set before his guests a Sallad of
Lettuce, etc. and part of a Tripe; but if he at any time exceeded, a leg or
wing of a Hen. Capitolinus c. 12.

Tristan parallelleth him with Vespasian.

His strict discipline and short donatives displeased the soldiers, who
conspired against him, and elected Falco Emperor, whom the Senate sentenced,
but Pertinax cried out, God forbid, that during my reign any Senator be put
to death, though deservedly. Xiphiline.

Laetus pretending to punish this sedition, causes the death of diverse
soldiers, that the rest might mutiny, which they did, 200. entering the palace
with drawn swords, whom Pertinax was advised to fly from: but he indiscreetly
rejecting that good counsel, met them, thinking with his Majesty to make them
afraid and leave off their enterprise, which fell out accordingly, for
immediately they all retreated, except one Tausius a Tungrian, who ran him into
the breast, saying, Hunc tibi gladiu^ milites mittunt.

Dion censureth him thus, Non norat homo multarum rerum peritus, multa simul
tuto corrigi non posse: sed si quid aliud in rebus humanis, tum imprimis
reipublicae constitutionem and tempus and sapientiam requirere.

He having endured all manner of labors, and being bandied from one extreme
condition to another, was called the Tennisball of Fortune.

He lived 67. years lacking 4. months and 3. days, and reigned 87. days,
says Dion.

Pertinacis Principatus solo tempore minor est optimi cujusque Principis
regimine, says Boeclerus.

Helvi, judicio and consulto lecte Senatus,
Princeps decretis prodite, non studiis.
Quod docuit malefida cohors, errore probato,
Curia quod castris cesserat Imperio.
Ausonius.
Choice Observations OF JULIANUS.
Soldiers proclaiming the sale of the Empire, Julians wife and his daughters
with some Parasites, urged him to accept of the proffer, since he could exceed
any in largesses. Herodian l. 2. c. 6.

Sulpitian Father-in-law to Pertinax offered each soulder 200. Crowns, but
Julian outbidding him, and promising more then they demanded or expected,
obtained the Empire of them, who feared lest Sulpitian might revenge Pertinax
his death, as his Competitor suggested to them. Xiphiline.

He entered the City, all the Soldiers calling him Emperor, the Citizens
neither daring to resist, nor yet approving the election by joyful
acclamations, as the custom was to other Emperors; but cursing him and
throwing stones at him. Herodian ubi supra.

He being hated, Syria elected Niger, Germany chose Severus Emperor, who took
Albinus as partner.

The rise of these 3. Commanders, with the fall of Julian, See the
Advertisement. page 21.
was prognosticated by the appearance of 3. Stars about the Sun (while Julian
sacrificed) conspicuous to all but the flattering pur-blind Senators. Xiphiline.

A boy also divining by a looking-glass, saw Severus his advance and Julians
departure. Spartian c. 7.

Severus hasting to Rome was met by Ambassadors from Julian with the offer of
half the Empire; which he refused, and was by the Senate (who lately proclaimed
him Traitor) declared Emperor.

The soldiers discontented because Julian kept not his Covenant, and hoping to
purchase favor with Severus, slew their Chapman in his palace; he thus
expostulating with them, Quid rei gravis admisi? quem interfeci?

Severus who had been acquitted by him from the imputation of Adultery,
wherewith he was charged, slew him with the like ingratitude, as Julian did
Laetus, who had saved his life. Tristan.

He lived 60. years, Orosius, ab initio Pertinacis ad finem Iuliani, ^nnum
unum absumptum fuisse dicit, senis mensibus utriusque Imperio imputatis. Quod
falsum est; vix enim dimidium a^ni inter initium Pertinacis and Severi
interjectum est. Scaliger in Eusebium.
4. months, and so many days; and reigned 66. days. Dion.

He being old, honorable and rich, by the purchase of the Empire lessened his
estate, impaired his credit, and lost his life.

Dii been, quod spoliis Didius non gaudet opimis;
Et cito perjuro praemia dempta seni.
Tuque Severe pater titulum ne horresce novantis;
Non rapit Imperium vis tua, sed recipit.
Ausonius.
Choice Observations OF SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS.
HE was one of the 25. Consuls made in one year by Cleander Commodus his
favorite. Xiphiline in Commod.


He was an African, of so low birth, Xiphiline.
that, when he enrolled himself into the family of Marcus Aurelius, one
Pollenius Sebennus is reported to have said, O Caesar, I congratulate thy
^ortune, that thou have found a Father: as if he had not had a Father before,
his original being so base and obscure; Tristan.
reflecting hereby also upon the chastity of his mother.

Having ascended from mean estate to the highest honor, he was wont to say;
Omnia fui, nihil expedit. Spartian in Severo c. 18.

He dreamed that he saw in one of the marketplaces at Rome a horse to throw
Pertinax, Xiphiline.
who had mounted on him, and to suffer himself to back him; Herodian. l. 2. c.
9.
a brass Image of which dream remained in Herodians time.

He was expert in the Mathematiques, a good Philosopher, and eloquent orator.

Nothing is comparable to Severus his conflicts or conquests, either for
multitude of forces, commotion of countries, number of battles, length of
journeyes, or speed in marches. Herodian l. 3.

His soldiers endured all difficulties cheerfully in emulation of him, who
excited them to hardship by his own example, being wont as Silius Italicus
says of Hannibal:

-- vertice nudo
Excipere insanos imbres, coelique ruinam.
He was so inured to continual action, that even at his last gasp he said; Is
there any thing for me to do? Xiphiline.

In stead of punishing he entertained and rewarded Priscus an Engineer, who did
him most mischief in his siege of Byzantium. Xiphiline.

Entering into Alexandria he found this inscription, Domini Nigri est urbs; with
which being offended, the inhabitants met him, crying, Novimus nos dixisse
Domini Nigri esse urbem; tu enim es Nigri Dominus. For which ready excuse he
pardoned them. Suidas in (...).

When certain of his Officers went about to persuade him to raze out an
Epigramme made in commendation of Niger, (at the basis of whose statue it was
engraved) he expressed his dislike by these words; Si talis suit, sciant omnes
qualem vicerimus; si talis non suit, putent omnes nos vicisse talem: immo sic
sit, quia fuit talis. ingenuously and wisely confessing the worth of his enemy.
Spartianus in Nigro c. 12.

When he was Lieutenant in Afric, one of his inferior acquaintance met him
going in state with his bundle of rods carried before him, and embraced him
familiarly as his quondam chamber-fellow; whom he caused to be beaten, the
crier proclaiming, Embrace not rudely a Roman Lieutenant. From which time
Lieutenants have not gone on foot. Spartian.

Plautian his favorite was so great with him, that one of Plautians Officers
being commanded by Severus, then at leisure, to plead a cause, refused, saying,
He could not do it unless Plautian commanded him. Xiphiline.

At the siege of Atra, when he had beaten down a great part of the wall, and
his Soldiers were ready to enter, he commanded a retreat, hoping thereby to
induce the Arabians to discover that great treasure there laid up. But his
covetous design was miserably disappointed, for the besieged immediately made
up their wall and kept him out. Xiphiline.

Being used to get the victory, he now reputed himself conquered, because he
could not overcome. Herodian l. 3. c. 9.

When one who lived in Albinus his quarters, would have excused his forced
assistance of him to Severus, demanding what he would have done if it had been
his own case; Severus answered, Ea perferrem quae tu, I would suffer as you do.
Aurel. Vict.

He boasted to the Senate of his clemency, although he slew at one time 40. of
the most Illustrious personages of the Roman Empire, not hearing them in their
defense, contrary to a Law which himself first made; proving himself thereby
truly to answer his name, being (as was said of him) vere Pertinax, vere
Severus: so that Silenus might well say, (in Iuliani Caesaribus) I dare not
speak against him, I am so terrified with his inexorable cruelty.

10. Antiochenus says he was a great Soldier, but his covetousness
transported him beyond his valor.

He was more covetous and cruel then any of his Predecessors. Tristan.

When he warred in Britain, he commanded an universal slaughter of his
enemies, in these verses:

(...)
(...)
(...).
Let none escape your bloody rage,
With terror let all die;
Spare not the mother, nor the babe
Which in her womb does lie.
Having taking Albinus prisoner, he commanded him to be slain, caused his body
to be laid before his palace, rode over him, and at last cast his mangled corpse
(the stench whereof could not be endured) into the river Rh^s^e, with the
carkases of his wife and children.

Having compelled Nigers Captains (whose children he kept as pledges) to
betray Nigers affairs, Herodian l. 3. c. 2. and 5. Of his virtues and vices,
but especially his dissimulation, see Brochmands Ethica Hist. c. 3.
when he had attained his ends, he slew them and their children.

He gained his sur-name Britannicus, by building, or at least repairing the
Picts-wall between England and Scotland, 132. miles in length, against the
incursions of the Scots and Picts. At every miles end was a tower, and pipes of
brass (in the wall betwixt every tower) conveied the least noise from garrison
to garrison, without interruption; so news of an approaching enemy was quickly
spread over the borders, and occasional provision made for resistance. There
were also resting places for the Areans, who were appointed by the Ancients
(says Amm. Marcellinus) to serve for foot-posts, to run as occurrents fell
between the Officers, and carry them word of the least stirring. Since the wall
is ruined, and that way of dispatch taken away, many inhabitants thereabout
hold land by a tenure in Cornage (as Lawyers speak) being bound by blowing a
horn to discover the irruption of the enemy. Cambden's Britannia. ubi videsis
plura.

It is reported by Spartian, that in his passage to York a little before his
death, a Black-Moor with a Cypress garland on his head did meet Severus, (who
bid him, as unfortunate, to be put out of his sight) and saluted him thus;
Totum fuisti, totum vicisti, jam Deus esto victor. At his entrance into the
City, he was by error of a rusticall Soothfayer (who guided him) brought into
the Temple of Bellona: and black beasts, being appointed for sacrifice, did of
themselves follow him to his palace. Which things, howsoever they fell our
accidentally, yet were interpreted as ominous by others in respect of the event.

While he lay sick of the gout at York, the soldiers saluting his son
Bassianus Emperor, he arose and caused the principal of them to be brought
before him, and when they prostrate craved pardon, he laying his hand on his
head, said, Sentitisne tandem caput imperare, non pedes? Spartian c. 18.

A little before his death he caused his urne to be brought before him, and
taking it into his hand, said; Thou shall contain him whom the world could not.
Xiphiline.

He said to his Sons on his deathbed, Agree among your selves, enrich the
soldiers, and contemn all others. Id. ibid.

In relation to which union he bade them read in Salust, Mycypsa's dying speech
to his sons, in which there is this expression; Concordia res parvae cres^unt,
discordia magnae dilabuntur. Spartian. c. 21.

By his pernicious advice to his sons to study only the enriching of the
soldiery, he made a breach in the impenetrable wall of the Roman power, as the
Greek Epigrammatist calls it. For after Severus his reign, for 30 lawful
Emperors, the Roman Empire saw in the space of 150 years, more then an 100
Tyrants. The discipline of the virtuous Emperors occasioning the wicked ones
to mount on the throne. As the tragical ends of young Gordian, of Alexander
Severus, of Posthumus, Probus and Aurelian manifest. Tristan.

He ended his life with these words, Turbatam Rempublicam ubique accepi,
pacatam etiam Britannis relinquo, senex and pedibus aeger, firmum Imperium
antoninis meis relinquens si boni erunt, imbecillum si mali. Spartian c. 23.

Before he dyed he was so pained in all his body, but especially in his feet,
that not able to endure the torment, he called for poison, which being denied,
he greedily glutted himself with gross meats, and not able to digest them,
dyed of a surfeit. Sex. Aurel. Vict.

The imprecation of Plautius Quintillus had the like effect upon Severus, as
that of Severianus had upon Hadrian. Xiphilin.

Some say he dyed rather through grief for his son Caracalla's wickedness,
then of any other malady.

He lived 65 years, 9 months and 25 days, and reigned 17 years, 8 months
and 3 days.

He was buried in a place near York, which to this day is called Severs-hill.

It was said of him by the Senate, that either he should not have been born, or
not have dyed; having done so much mischief in pursuit of greatness, and so
much good when he was established. Spartian. c. 18.

He married Martia, and after her death Iulia Domna, because he found by her
nativity she should be matched with a King; though he foresaw not by his art his
destiny to marry a whore; whom yet he bare with through excess of affection,
though she was guilty of a conspiracy. Spartian. c. 3. and 18.

He was deifyed after his death by the Senate.

After the death of Charles the 9 of France, his image was laid in a rich bed,
in triumphant attire, with the Crown upon his head, and the collar of the order
about his neck, and 40 days at ordinary hours, dinner and supper was served
in with all accustomed ceremonies, as sewing, water, grace, carving, etc. all
the Cardinals, Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen and Officers attending in far greater
solemnity, then if he had been alive. Now this I confess was a piece of
flattery more then needed, but not comparable to that of the Romans, in making
their Emperors Gods, which they might well have conceived, was neither in the
power of the one to give, nor of the other to receive. Dr. Hakewill in his
Apology.

In Severus his reign the world was so loose that 3000 were indicted for
Adultery. Id. ib.

When Julia blamed the wife of Argento^oxus a Northern Britain, because her
country people accompanied promiscously (10 or 12 men having 2 or 3 Women
common among them) she not ignorant of the Roman incontinency, replied; We
accompany openly with the best, but vile persons defile you secretly. Xiphiline.

Dion writes that in Severus his time it rained silver at Rome in Augustus his
forum.

O pluviam salutarem, and supparem illi, qua Jupiter ad Danaen suam penetravit!
sed nimis hic inf^equentem inquies. Sed avaritiam tuam effervescentem infusa
hac frigida confutabo. Rore illo argenteo, addit Dion, nummos aliquot aereos
oblivi, mansit color 3 dies; 4to. quicquid oblitum fuerat, evanuit. Fromondus
Met^orolog. l. 5. c. 6. Art. 3.

Severus caused the 5. persecution, it being the Devils policy to employ
especially men noted for moral honesty and abilities, to massacre Gods Saints,
that the world might believe, that those could not choose but be most
abomiable, whom such wise and pious men were so earnest to extinguish. Dr.
Prideaux.

Impiger egelido movet arma Severus ab Istr^,
Vt parricidae regna adimat Didio.
Punica origo illi; sed qui virtute probaret
Non obstare locum, quum valet ingenium.
Ausonius.
PESCENNIUS NIGER, And CLODIUS ALBINUS. Usurpers.
ENgaged both in the war against Septimius Severus, with like unfortunate event
being both conquered, and having their heads set upon a pole; Niger had his
name a nigra cervice, says Spartian in his life.

Albinus was so called, quod, exceptus utero, contra consuetudinem puerorum qui
nascuntur, and solent rubere, esset candidissimus. Capitoli^us in his life; who
confirms his relation with this passage in an Epistle of Cejonius Posthumous
(Father of Albinus) to Aelius Bassianus then Proconsul of Africa. Filius mihi
natus est, ita candidus statim toto corpore, ut linteamen quo exceptus est,
vinceret. Quare susceptum eum Albinorum Famil^ae, quae mihi tecum communis est,
dedi, Albini nomine imposito.

Niger was overthrown at the first encounter of his party with Severus, through
the treachery of Aemilianus his General, as it was thought; and in the next
fight in which he engaged personally was totally defeated, near the Bay of
Issus, where Alexander the Great vanquished Darius.

Albinus warred with Severus, for withholding the copartner-ship which he
promised to Albinus, whom he feared because he was a valiant Soldier, whereas
he slighted Julian and Niger, who were negligent and luxurious.

Choice Observations Of BASSIANUS CARACALLA. And ANTONINUS GETA. Brethren.
BAssianus was so called from Julius Bassianus his Grandfather by the Mothers
side, and his Father named him Antoninus, out of respect to the Antonini, whose
memory was honored by the Romans.

He was called Caracalla from a new fashioned cassock he wore, See Caligul^ p.
49.
reaching down to his ancles.

He was a hopeful youth, and endeared himself to the people by weeping and
turning away his eyes, when condemned persons were cast to wild beasts, (which
tenderness Baronius thinks proceeded from his Christian nurse Euhodia) yet
after he was so changed he seemed not the same. Spartian c. 12.

Knowing well that he could not make himself seem more beautiful then he was,
See Caligul^ p. 55.
he would take the advantage to appear more terrible, affecting a cruel and
furious countenance. Tristan. in the 2 part of his Commentaires Historiques.
See the 12. 18. 21. 26. 29. 31. Medails of him there.

He attempted to kill his Father; and put to death the Physicians for not
hastening his death (as he commanded;) slew his Father in law Plautian, his
wife Plautillae, and her brother Plautus, Antip^ter the famous Sophister of
that age, Cilo his Tutor, and Euhodus his Foster-father: sparing not any who
either honored his father, or was honored by him.

When at the Circensian sports (where himself was a spectator) the people cast
some scoff at a chariotier which he favored, he taking it as an affront to
himself, suddenly commanded his soldiers to rush among the multitude, and kill
all who had scorned the chariot-driver. Upon this command, it being impossible
to find out the delinquents in so great a throng (none confessing himself
guilty) the soldiers spared none whom they light upon, but either slew them,
or took away what they had for a ransom. Herodtan l. 3. c. 6.

He put down Aristotle's Schools, burnt his books, saying he conspired against
Alexander. Xiphiline.

Having seen the body of Alexander the Great, Andr. Schottus l 3 observe. Human.
c 19 has collected a Catalogue of those who said they resembled Alexander the
Great.
he commanded his followers to call him Alexander and Antoninus Magnus; and by
flatterers was brought to a fond conceit, that he walked like Alexander with an
awful countenance, and bent his head to the left shoulder; and whatever he
observed in the countenance of Alexander, he imitated to the life, and
persuaded himself that he had the same lineaments and proportions. Sext. Aur.
Victor. vide Schottum.

I have seen diverse ridiculous Images, which had one entire Body; and one Head,
which had 2. half-faces, to wit, Alexanders and Antonines; says Herodian. l.
4. c. 8.

He was excessively given to Adultery, while able, yet most severely punished
it in others. Excerpta Peiresci. p. 755.

Being unable to wear true armor through his weakness of body, he wore
counterfeit harness that none might attempt to assassinate him. Excerpta
Peiresci.

Fuit ejus immanitatis, ut its praecipue blandiretur quos ad necem destinabat:
ut ejus magis bland^mentum timeretur quam ir acundia.

He would show courtesy when he intended mischief; See Commodus p. 142.
so that his kindness was more feared then his anger. Spartian in Geta c. 7.

Having miserably impoverished the people, his mother reproved him, to whom he
showing his naked sword, replied; As long as I have this, I will not want,
Xiphiline.

Where he wintered, or but intended to winter, he caused Amphitheaters and
Cirques for public games to be erected, and within a while to be taken down
again. Id. ibid.

He learned the vices of 3 Nations from whom he drew his original; of the
French, vanity, timorousness, and idleness; of the Africans, roughness and
wildness; of the Syrians, cunning and malice. Excerpta Peiresci.

He preferred Hannibal, Sylla, and Tiberius, before other commanders for their
cruelty; in which he exceeded his father, and all the preceding Emperors.

He confessed that in all his life he never learned to do good. Xiphiline.

When Maximinus the younger (yet a child) got up into Caracall' as Chariot, and
was hardly drawn thence, there were some who admonished Caracalla to beware of
him, to whom he answered, Long est ut mihi succedat iste. Capitolinus in
Maximino juniore. c. 4.

[Tiberius in like manner when he knew that Galba should be Emperor, but not
before old age, said; Vivat sane quando id ad nos nihil pertinet. Suetonius in
Galba. c. 4.]

He delighted more in Magicians and Juglers then in men of worth; for seeing
himself hated, he told the Romans he could command his own security, though not
their love; and therefore he less valued reproaches, or feared dangers by their
disfavour. Xiphiline. Zonaras.

Yet Oppian who when banished by Severus wrote the Cynegeticks, and after his
decease dedicated that work to Caracalla, was therefore recalled from exile,
and received a piece of gold for every verse in his Poem.

As Caligula having killed many French and Greeks, In Parthia quid gesserit,
^siter Herodianus, aliter Dio narrat. Certum tamen est eum etiam illi^ perfidia
truculenta potius quam virtute grassatum. Jacobus Capellus in 5. Centuriis.
bragged that he had conquered Gallo-Graecia: so Caracalla having perfidiously
slain a great number of Germans and Parthians, usurped the titles of Germanicus
and Parthicus. Tristan in his parallel of Caracalla with Caligula.

Being incensed against the Alexandrians, who traduced him for his fratricide,
and nicknamed his mother Iocasta, he commanded the strongest of them to be
listed for service; whom when he had enrolled, he killed, after the example of
Ptolomeus Euergetes, the 8 of that name, called Physcon; giving moreover a
signal to the soldiers to kill their hosts.

He restored all profligate persons who were exiled, to their liberty; and
presently after filled the Islands whither they were banished with more exiles.
Xiphiline.

He slew his brother Geta in his mothers arms, Baronius produces a Medaie of
Severus with Caracalla and Geta's heads on the reverse, and these words,
Concordia perpetus.
whom he forced to dissemble mirth; He consecrated the sword wherewith he killed
him sequestered their goods in whose will Geta's name was found, and slew 20000
persons related to him; spending whole nights in such tragical executions.
compare Dion with Herodian.

To cloak which fratricide with show of constraint, first to the soldiers, and
then in the Senate, he accused his brother to have sought his death, and that
in defense of himself he was forced to kill him; and thereupon fled to the
Praetorian bands for safety of his life, as though further conspiracies had
been intended against him in the City.

Notwithstanding which cruelty he arrogated to himself the name of Pius, and
after, conquering the Germans, he was not ashamed of the title Germanicus,
though through the ambiguity of the word he might be thought to boast of his
brothers murder. Hemelarius.

He allowed Geta a good funeral, buried him in a stately monument built by
Severus, called Septizonium; wept as often as he saw his picture, or heard
mention of his name: and being told that his Fratricide might be expiated in
some degree by calling his brother a God, he answered; Sit Divus modo non sit
vivus. Spartian in Geta. c. 3.

For the murder of his brother he was punished with madness by the Furies,
deservedly called Vltrices Deae.

Affrighted with the Ghost of his Father and Commodus, he prohibited any upon
pain of death to name Geta; and broke the money stamped with his effigies, and
abolished all the plays instituted in honor of his birthday.

By his Favorites, the name of Geta was raced out of all Monuments and
Imperial inscriptions, as we have seen some of them defaced upon some Altar
stones found in Britain. Speeds Chron.

He slew Papinian the famous Lawyer, because solicited by him to defend his
Fratricide, he said; It was a crime easilyer committed then excused. Spartian
c. 8.

He did chide the executioner, because he beheaded Papinian with an Axe, and
not with a sword. Spartian in Caracalla c. 4. and in Geta c. 6. Xiphiline.

When he ascribed to himself the titles of Germanicus, Arabicus, and
Alemannicus, Sarmaticus Maximus, and Parthicus Maximus; Helvius Pertinax son to
the Emperor Pertinax jestingly said, Add if you please Geticus Maximus,
because of his brother Geta's murder, and because the Goths (whom he overcame
in his passage to the East) are called Getae; which occasioned Pertinax his
death. Spartian in Geta ubi supra, and in Caracalla c. 10.

Being in Mesopotamia, he writes to Maternianus to whom he committed command at
Rome, to enquire of the Magicians, (to whom he was so addicted) whether any
intended to surprise the Empire. Maternianus writes back that Macrinus
treacherously aspired to the Empire; which letter with others Caracalla
received while he was at his sport, and delivered them to Macrinus to give him
an account of. Macrinus broke up the letters, and fell upon that which aimed at
his destruction; wherefore finding his own danger, he reserved that letter to
himself, acquainting Caracalla with the rest. But fearing lest Maternianus
should write again of the same business, he resolved to prevent his imminent
danger by this plot. He persuades Martialis a Centurion, and one of Caracalla's
guard (whose brother the Emperor had slain a few days before, upon an
accusation without proof) to dispatch him, which he did whilst the Emperor
was about to ease nature.

When he went out of a certain gate, he heeded not the detaining of him, and
tearing his garment by a Lion, whom he used to play with, and named Acinaces;
who held him as it were by an extraordinary instinct, as if he foreknew the
misfortune ready to befall him. Dion.

It was but just, that he who had killed so many of his friends, should be
slain by the treason of his enemies.

Both Caligula and Caracalla reigned but a little while. Both were killed by
military Tribunes, the one by Cassius Chaerea, whom he was wonted to tax with
effeminacy: and the other by Martialis, who was employed by Macrinus, whom
Caracalla charged with the same fault. And which is wonderful, they both dyed
being 29. years old, and both their Assassinates were slain after them.
Tristan in his parallel of Caracalla with Caligula.

He reigned 6 years, 2 months and 2 days.

Serapion an Egyptian a few days before told him, that he should dye shortly,
and Macrinus should succeed him: for which he was cast to a Lion, and though
the beast spared him, Macrinus would not. Xiphiline.

Both Nero and Caracalla dyed violent deaths, and both had for their successors
old men whom they loved not at all, and who reigned not long, being both slain
by the practices of two effeminate persons, who were Otho and Heliogabalus.
Tristan in his parallel of Caracalla with Nero.

When he was dead, it appeared that he procured as much poison from the
inhabitants of upper Asia, as cost 220000 crowns, that he might poison several
ways as many as he pleased. Xiphiline.

It is to be admired, that a man so extremely wicked, tempered himself from
slaughter of the Christians.

His wife Plautina had as much for her dowry as would have served 50 Empresses.
Her Father Plautian made men Eunuchs, who were married and had children; and
their children also were gelded, that she might have musick-masters who might
teach her the better, and domestiques of this sort fitter to compose tunes for
her.

Dissimilis virtute patri, and multo magis illi,
Cujus adoptivo nomine te perhibes;
Fratris morte nocens, punitus fine cruent^,
In risu populi tu Caracalla jaces.
Ausonius.
Choice Observations OF OPILIUS MACRINUS, And his Son ANTONINUS DIADUMENVS.
MAcrinus was of so obscure par^ntage, that according to the custom of the
Moors, he had one of his ears bored thorough. Xiphiline.

He was made a prefect by Caracalla, after whose death he was elected Emperor
by the Soldiers, who were ignorant of his treason, the suspicion whereof he
escaped by a seeming sorrow.

The Romans were so glad of Caracalla's death, that they considered not whether
Macrinus was good or bad; men who are injured, when they overcome their
enemies, respect not so much their profit as revenge.

He associated with himself his son Diadumenus, so called either from his
Grandfather by the Mothers side, or because he was born with a Diadem on his
head, like a bow-string. Lampr^d. in Diadumeno. c. 4.

He commanded Diadumenus forthwith to be called Antoninus by the Soldiers, and
assumed to himself the name of Severus, whose memory he pretended to reverence,
that he might deface the suspicion of assasinating his Son.

He imitated Marcus Aurelius in a slow pace and low voice, and Nero in a cruel
life.

Instead of Macrinus, he was by his own servants called Macellinus, as one
would say Butcher, quod macelli specie domus ejus cruentaretur sanguine
vernularum. Because his house was like a shamble of murdered men. Capitolinus
in Macrino. c. 13.

He was named Mezentius, because like him he joined live bodies to dead.

He commanded 2. soldiers, who had ravished their hostesses maid, to be sewed
up in the bellies of 2. great Oxen, their heads only left out, that they might
speak one to another.

He caused those soldiers who committed Adultery to be tied to the women, and
burnt alive; though his Wife Nonia Celsa was insatiable that way.

He shut live men in seiled walls, where they dyed miserably.

Mothe le Vayer in his Opuscules p. 27. etc. thinks that one reason why
Macrinus banished Lucius Priscillianus a valiant Captain into an Island where
he dyed, was because he had the boldness to encounter alone 4. such fierce
beasts, as a Bear, a Leopard, a Lioness and a Lion; though his cruel carriage
under Caracalla who advanced him, afforded sufficient pretense for his
punishment, as Dion informs us. l. 78.

Macrinus said he was clement, when he punished but one soldier in an hundred
with capital punishment for a mutiny, when he thought they deserved to be
decimated or at least one in 20. to suffer.

Having written to the Senate, that he knew no body desired his death, Fulvius
Diogenianus cried out; Yes but we all do.

After he had concluded a peace with Artabanus the Parthian King, he returned
to Antioch in Syria, and there spent his time in sensual pleasures, being
drenched so far therein, that the Army began to dislike his government, and to
favor young Bassianus the son of Caracalla, then present at Emesa a City in
Phoenicia, with Maesa his Grandmother by his Mothers side, who there had built
a Temple to the Sun, and therein ordained him a Priest, for which cause he was
called Heliogabalus, which in the Phoenician language is, the Priest of the Sun.

To this temple resorted many of the Soldiers, and seeing the beauty of the
youth, allured Maesa to bring him to their Camp: where known to be the Son of
Caracalla, the Soldiers proclaimed him Emperor, and maintained his right
against Macrinus; who after this revolt, met young Heliogabalus in the confines
between Phoenicia and Syria, where he fought a bloody battle, but being put to
flight, hasted to Chalcedon, fell sick, and was with his Son Diadumenus put to
death by the Soldiers, because he contracted their pay, and suppressed their
luxury.

He lived 54. years, reigned one year and 2. Months:

Principis hic custos, sumptum pro Caesare ferrum
Vertit in auctorem caede Macrinus iners.
Mox cum prole ruit. Gravibus pulsare querelis
Cesset persidiam. quoe patitur, meruit.
Ausonius.
Choice Observations OF HELIOGABALUS.
THis Monster had more names and sur-names (says Tristan) then Hydra had
heads; for whilst he was a private man he was called Varius Avitus Lupus,
Varius from his reputed Father Varius Marcellus, Avitus Lupus from Julius
Avitus Lupus his Grandfather by the mothers side; after being presented to the
Soldiers to obtain their favor, he was named Bassianus: by whom when he was
received and proclaimed Emperor, they gave him the name of Antoninus. He was
the last Emperor upon whom that name was conferred, which because he
dishonored, he was called Pseud-Antoninus. He was named Assyrius (says Dion)
because he was often seen in public clothed with a barbarous habit, such as
his Countrymen the Priests of Syria, anciently called Assyria, used to wear.
His debauchednesse made him to be sur-named the Roman Sardanapalus. He had the
sur-name of Heliogabalus given to him, Novo exemplo hic fanati^us, de nomine
cjus dei cujus sacerdos fuit, se quoque dici voluit. quod non minut insolens
quam si Iovis sacerdos aut dialis flamen ipsam Iovis appellationem sibi
vindicasset. Casaubon.
because he was Priest of Heliogabalus the peculiar god of the Emesenes; so
strange a Deity, that Authors agree not about the writing, or meaning of his
name: though it be most probable that it signifies the Sun.

He was the spurious issue of Caracalla and Symia Syra, which Sealiger renders
Lunula Onychine.

He had 6 Wives in the short time of his reign; the first of which was Annia
Faustina, of Commodus his lineage, for the enjoyment of whom he caused Pomponius
Bassus her husband to be put to death, not permitting her to weep for him. On a
reverse of Aunia Fanstina is written Concordia, and on one of Paula's Concordia
aeterna. Tristan. See p. 171. in the margin.
Divorcing her he married Cornelia Paula a most Illustrious Roman Lady (that he
might the sooner be a Father (said he) who was not able to be a man) yet soon
after only because she had a spot in her body, as he said, he put her away,
and stripping her of all honors, sequestered her to a private life. After
pretending he was in love, he violently took out of Vesta her sacred Nunnery at
Rome, Julia Aquilia Severa a Vestal Virgin, and married her, which by the
Heathens was held such a crime, that the Number which had carnal knowledge of a
man, was buried alive: writing to the Senate, who were grieved at his
sacrilegious act, That she was a fit match for a Priest, and impudently
affirmed he did it, That from himself a Priest and his Wife the chief
Priestesse of Vesta there might be born issue worthy of the Gods. Yet he
quickly turned away this wife, for to espouse another, with 2 more whose names
are unknown; it being difficult to determine whether he be to be blamed more
for his frequent and illegal marriages, or his sudden and causeless divorces.
And at last being possessed with a continual inconstancy (having changed 5
times in 4. years) he returned to Aquilia Severa. compare Dion. l. 79. with
Herod. l. 5. c. 6.

Nor did he thus play at fast and loose with humane matrimonies only, but now
his God also wanted a wise. Him he married first to Pallas, after (saying, His
God liked not so martial a wife) to Urania, concluding it was fitter to match
the Sun and Moon together, making his God almost as fickle as himself. Herodian
l. 5. c. 6.

He gave all the treasure in the Temple of Urania to his God, for a portion
with her.

He commanded all the people of Rome and Italy to use all public and private
feasts for joy of the wedding:

He erected in the suburbs a magnificent Temple, into which every year with
great solemnity he brought his God, whom he preferred before Jupiter, and made
an edic^ that the Romans should pray to the ne^ god Heliogabalus before all
other gods, who he said, were servants of his God, spoiling their Temples to
enrich that of his, nay would have had no other gods worshippe^ at Rome, says
Lamprid. in Heliogab. c. 3. Ne^ Romanas tautum voluit extinguere religioues sed
per orbem terrae unum studens ut Heliogabalu^ deus unus ubique coleretur. Id.
ibid. c. 6.

He was a man for all women, and a woman for all men. Coeffeteau.

He so far differed from the manners o^ men, that modesty permits not to
relate his greatest vices; the Devil in the form of an Hermaphrodite, not being
able to act greater lewdness then he did says Tristan.

Lampridius thus begins the story of Heliogabalus: I would never have wrote
the beastly life of Heliogabalus, that it might not have been known, that he
was a Roman Emperor, unless Caligula, Nero and Vitellius had before sat in
the same throne.

Boccaline feigneth that Lampridius was severely proceeded against by Apollo,
and that by order of the whole congregation of Parnassus, his Histories was
turned back upon his hands, and he was freely told, That he should go and teach
those execrable lusts in the public Classis, wherewith he had so delighted
himself to fill his shameful papers, wherein he had written the lives of
Heliogabalus, Caracalla, and other las^^vious Monsters of Nature. Parnassus
cent. 1. advertisement 55.

It is questioned whether were greater his boundless Prodigality, his
stupendous Leachery, or his fantastical Foolery: the last of which his
Imperial virtues he gave proof of, when he commanded his servants to bring him
a thousand pound weight of Spiders offering them a reward, and received of them
ten thousand pound weight, whereupon he said, that now he understood the
greatness of Rome: At another time he caused to be gathered ten thousand Mice,
a thousand Wezels, and a thousand Polecats, which he brought forth in a public
show to the people, for some wise State-purpose, like the former. Speeds Chron.

He disfigured his fair face with foul tinctures; He slept in the day,
transacted affairs in the night.

Being near the Sea, he never tasted fish; nor flesh, when he was farthest in
the Continent: He said that fare was best which cost most.

He ridicously wore Jewels, and those curiously engraved, on his feet; as if
the rarity of the work could be discerned there. Lamprid. c. 23.

That he might seem magnificent, he drowned Ships in the haven; paying the
owners for their fraught: and drew Fishes out of his Ponds with Oxen. Lamprid.
c. 32. and 24.

He built stately Bathes, which being but once used were plucked down. Lampr.
c. 30.

He said, If he had an heir he would teach him to do as he did.

When he was but a private man, being reproved for his prodigality by a friend,
who asked him, Whether he did not fear want hereafter; he answered, What can be
better for me then to be heir to my self?

He conferred honors on sordid persons, and put great persons upon mean
employments, causing the entrails of the sacrifices to be born by Generals of
armies, and the chief Officers of State.

In imitation of Apicius he would frequently eat Camels heels, the combs of
Cocks newly cut, the tongues of Peacocks and Nightingales, with the entrails of
Mullets, Partridges eggs, the heads of Parrats, Pheasants and Peacocks, and
the brains of Thrushes and Phoenicopters. Id. ibid. c. 20.

He had served in at a meal the heads of 600. Estridges, only that he might
eat their brains. Id. ib. c. 30.

He fed his horses with grapes, his dogs with Geese livers (a dainty then)
Lions and other beasts with Parrats and Pheasants. Id. ibid. c. 20, and 21.

He often changed his Pallets, and lay not on any couch unless it was stuffed
with Hares furre, or the feathers under Partridges wings. Id. ib. c. 19.

One day he would eat nothing but Pheasant, another day Chickens, on another
this or that Fish, at one time Ostriches, at another Herbs, or Apples, other
whiles sweetmeats or white-meats only. Id. ib. c. 32.

One of his feasts was hardly ended in a day, the several messes being
prepared, and eaten successively in the houses of his several friends, one
dwelling in the Capitol, another upon mount Caelius, a 3 beyond Tiber, etc. one
staying for another, till the dishes went through all their houses. Lampridius
c. 30. In parasitas tantum scelestus nebulo ingeniosus and justus fuisse
videtur, says one.


He tied his Parasites to a wheel, and turned them up and down in water,
calling them his Ixionian friends. Id. ibid. c. 24.

He thrust them also out of his diningroomes, which had deceitful floores,
into chambers filled with roses, that smothered with them, they might meet with
the bitterness of death in sweetness. Id. ib. c. 21.

He Tantalized them with mock-feasts in wax, wood, ivory, marble, glass;
sometimes what himself did eat was woven or wrought with a needle on their
Napkins: otherwhiles so many dishes of meat as were provided for him, were
painted upon their tables: only allowing them to drink. Id. ib. c. 26. and 27.

At the 2 and 3 course he caused Bears, Pardals, Lions and Leopards, which
lacked their teeth and claws, to be brought in suddenly by their Keepers, to
terrify them, who were ignorant of their inability to hurt. Lamprid. c. 21.

He shut them up when they were drunk, turning in upon them in the night these
disarmed beasts, with the fear of which many dyed. Id. ib. c. 25.

Their yearly salaries were pitchers full of Frogs, Scorpions, Serpents and
Flies. Id. ib. c. 26.

Many times he kept them in their lodgings from night to morning with old
Black-moor women, whereas he told them he had provided most beautiful ones for
them. Id. ib. c. 30.

When the people had taken up their places before day in the Theater to behold
the sports, he caused Serpents to be thrown among them, whereby many of them
were sore bitten and hurt by flight. Lampridius c. 23.

He did fantastically set up a Senate of Women, with suitable Orders, as how to
attire, where take place, when salute; but after his death all Women were
deprived of that privilege by the Senate. Id. ib. c. 4. and 18.

He did drive Chariots drawn by Elephants in the Vatican, levelling the tombs
which stood in his way; he was also drawn by 4 Camels in the Circus, by 4
Mastives in the Palace, after he was Emperor; by 4 stags in public, sometimes
by Lions he naming himself Magna Matter, also by Tigers counterfeiting Bacchus,
unto whom through his excessive humor of drinking he was something more like:
other whiles 4 naked Wenches drew him, he being also naked. Lamprid. c. 23. 28.
29.

He was addicted to divination by inspection of the bowels of young men
sacrificed, choosing many fair Gentlemen throughout all Italy, whose Parents
were living, that their sorrow might be the greater, Lampridius c. 8.

By persuasion of Maesa his Grandmother, who pretended to free him from cares
of state, he proclaims Alexander Severus his Cousin German Caesar, makes him
Consul with himself, and adopteth him for his Son, the Senate ridiculously
voting what he commanded, viz. Alex. Severus who was 12 years old, to be the
Son of Heliog abalus who was but 16.

He assaying in vain to draw his cosen to his unseemely courses, repented that
he had made him his colleague in the Empire; expelled all his Tutors from the
Court, and put the chief of them to death: alleging ridiculously, that the
Pedants spoiled his Son, not suffering him to dance and revell, but teaching
him to be Modest and use manly exercises. Herodian. l. 5. c. 7. Lamprid. c. 13.

That he revenged himself on none who mocked him upon the reading of Macrinu^
his letters against him at Rome: Tristan imputes to the prudent moderation of
Maesa and Eutychianus, by whose means chiefly he got the Empire, whom yet he
put to death with cruel ingratitude, only because he was advised by him to
reform.

The Syrian Priests having foretold him that he should dye a violent death, he
build a rich and stately Tower whence he might throw himself down; preparing
also cords of crimson silk and gold to strangle himself with; rich swords to
thrust himself through; keeping poison in boxes of Emeralds and Jacynth, that
he might choose a death according to his humor: saying, That however he dyed,
his death should be glorious in the eyes of men, and such a one as none ever
dyed.

But he failed of his hope, though not of his desert; for the Soldiers of his
own guard, whom he commanded to make away his Cousin-german, and deface his
statues, for the love they bore to Alexander Severus, killed Heliogabalus
himself in a privy, whither he fled to escape them.

His body was drawn by a Soldier through all the streets of Rome, like the
carkas of a dog, with this military proclamation: The whelp of untamed and
ravening lust. At last when the quantity of his body was greater then would
enter into the stool of a privy, wherein for the last funeral ceremony it
should have been buried, they drew it to Tiber, binding it to an heavy weight,
and so cast it into the River, that it might neither float above water nor be
buried; he being the only Emperor who was ever so punished.

They did also thrust stakes through the fundament of some of his lewd
companions, that their death might be conformable to their life.

It is observable that notwithstanding he not only permitted, but also
encouraged his subjects to live licentiously: moreover was so liberal toward
them, that he fed them with most delicate and exquisite meats, gave unto them
abundance of money, and all the plate, were it of gold or silver, wherewith he
was served, to them who dined or supped with him, and made many other very
sumptuous distributions to the people: yet the Romans nevertheless abhorring in
him their own vices, or rather being satiated therewith, slew him as is above
mentioned, in the 21 year of his age, when he had reigned 3 years 9 months and
4 days.

Choice Observations OF ALEXANDER MAMMAEAE.
HE was named Alexander, because he was born in the Temple of Alexander the
Great, and on that day that Alexander dyed; he had a Foster-father called
Philip, and a nurse named Olympias: in allusion to Alexander the Great's Father
and Mother. Lampridius in Alexandro Severo. c. 5. and 13. who reckons 14.
omens of his coming to the Empire.

He is called Alexander Mammaeae from his mother Mammaea more known then his
Father. Of his pedigree, see H. Valesius on Peiresci, Excerpta p. 112.


Though he was strict in his discipline, yet Lampridius erroneously affirms
that he was named Severus for his severity to the Soldiers. Tristan tom 2. p.
385.

His mother Julia Mammaea (daughter of Maesa) was a Christian woman, and did
send for Origin to instruct her son in the grounds of the Christian religion.

He was the first who received at one time all ornaments and tokens of honor,
which he purchased by his honest life and virtuous manners, whereby he obtained
such favor of all men, that when his Cousin-German Heliogabalus would have
slain him, he could not for the Soldiers and Senates resistance: he proving
himself worthy to be saved harmless by the Senate and Soldiers, and to be
elected Emperor by the votes of all good men, when he was but 16. years old.
Lamprid. c. 2.

He was then so modest, that when the Senate and people would have given to him
the sur-names of Antoninus and Quod ei qussi Alexandre est oblatum.
Magnus as principal titles of Honor, he humbly refused them, saying openly
unto the Senate; It pleases me not to assume what belongs to others, and I
find my self overladen with your love, for these high names of honor are too
burdensome to me. Whereupon (says Lamprid. c. 12.) he gained more honor, than
if he had taken titles upon him, and from that time he had the repute of a
moderate and wise man.

[Eruditionis gloriam famamque declinando eruditissimus habebatur says Hierome
of Nepotianus.]

He went usually in the morning betime to his devotion into his closet, where
were set the images of Apollonius, Christ, Abraham, and Orpheus. Lamprid. c. 29.

He did read much the life of Alexander the Great, See p. 13. in the margin.
whom he imitated especially, yet abhorred his drunkeness and cruelty toward
his friends. Id. c. 30.

He would not hear Orators or Poets speak any thing to his praise, counting it
folly, but willingly heard Orations of the acts of other good Princes, or of
famous Romans; and most gladly such as were made in praise of Alexander the
Great. Id. c. 35.

He had the picture of Virgil and Tully, with Achilles and other great persons
in his lesser lararium; Alexander the great among those he worshipped as Gods
in his greater. Id. ibid. c. 31.

He was at first harsh, after favorable to Christians, thought to build a
Temple to Christ, but was diverted by Vlpian and others who having consulted
their Heathen gods, See p. 44. and 132.
received this answer (says Lamprid. c. 43.) that if that were suffered, all
men would be Christians, and all other Temples desolate.

He delighted not in cloth of gold or silks, saying; Government consisted in
virtue, and not in costly apparel. Lamprid. c. 33.

At his table he drunk not in cups of gold, and kept not above 200. pound
weight of silver vessels in his house, Id. ibid. c. 34.

He sold Jewels that were given to him, Lamprid. c. 51.
counting it unfit for himself to possess such things, as he could neither
give to his soldiers, nor any man find profit in. Wherefore when an Ambassador
had given to the Empress 2. unions of wonderful greatness, he commanded them
to be sold: and when none could be found who would give as much as they were
prized at, lest any ill example should proceed from his wife, if she wore that
which no body could buy, (...) caused them to be hanged at the ears of the
Image of Venus: Sr. Th Elyot his image of govern.
thereby declaring that such things either for the inestimable price were
^itter for gods then men: or for the unprofitable beauty thereof served only
for persons of wanton dispositions, whereof Venus was goddess and patroness.

He would not suffer any to come into his presence, but such as were honest and
of good report, commanding that none should enter into his Palace, but only
such who knew themselves to be free from vice: causing it to be proclaimed that
no person knowing himself to be a thief, should presume to salute him upon pain
of capital punishment. Lamprid. c. 18.

He prohibited infamous women to salute his Wife or Mother. Id. c. 25.

He was strict in his own manners, wherefore all noble men assayed to imitate
him, and honorable matrons followed the Empresses example. Id. c. 41.

He caused the sinews of one of his Secretary's fingers to be cut through, See
p. 62. and 63.
so that he could never write after, and banished him, for forging a false bill
in his Counsel. Id. ib. c. 28. Videsis plura.

He commanded one of his own servants, who had abused him by receiving 100.
Crowns of a Soldier for a bribe, to be hanged in the high way, wherein his
servants most frequently passed to his manors without the City. Id. c. 23.

He used like severity toward soldiers; for when he heard that one of them had
wronged a poor old woman, he cashiered him and made him be bond slave to the
woman, that he being a carpenter might with his trade and labor maintain her:
and when the Soldiers were grieved thereat, he persuaded them to be contended,
and made them afraid to grudge at it. Id. c. 51.

He would in no case permit offices to be sold; for (said he) he who buyeth,
must sell; I will not endure any merchandise of authority; which if I tolerate,
I cannot afterward condemn; and I shall be ashamed to punish him who sold what
I permitted him to buy. Id. c. 49.

He so abhorred bribery, that if by chance he saw a Judge therewith corrupted,
he was ready to scratch out his eyes; and was so incensed at the sight of such
extortioners, that he would immediately vomit up choler, his face being as it
were on fire, and he not able of a long time to speak a word. Id. c. 17.

He had a favorite named Vetronius Turinus, who used to be more familiar with
him then others, which so blinded him, that he by lies confirmed the opinion of
many, who thought the Emperor would do nothing without his advice. Which abuse
the Emperor hearing of used this plot to circumvent him. He caused one to
desire something of him openly, and after to sue privily to Turinus to help him
in his demand, and secretly to move the Emperor for him: which being done,
Turinus promised good will to the petitioner, and soon after said that he had
solicited the Emperor therein, (whereas he spoke not a word thereof) and
expected his answer; whereupon he received of the said person a great sum of
money, which the Emperor knowing, caused him to call often on Turinus; who, as
if he had other business in hand, only beckened on him without speaking any
thing to him; the Emperor in the interim having given to another that which
this man sued for, who grudging thereat, discovered openly what Turinus had
received of him: whereupon the Emperor commanded Turinus to be accused openly
in his presence, and all things being proved by sufficient and credible
witnesses, in whose presence he had received bribes, and in whose hearing he
had promised great matters: he was adjudged by the Emperor to be bound to a
stake in the market place, and to be smothered to death with smoke of green
sticks and wet stubble, the bedell being commanded to cry the mean while, Fumo
punitur qui vendidit fumum; He perishes by smoke who had vented smoke in stead
of substance. But lest men should think the judgment was too rigorous for one
offense, before he was condemned to dye, the Emperor made diligent search, and
found by evident proofs, that Turinus had often and in many causes received
money of both parts, promising to promote their cause to the Emperor. Lamprid*
c. 35. and 36.

He had in his chamber bills containing the number of his Soldiers, with their
names, and what time they had served; and when he was alone, he perused their
accounts, and the number of them with their dignityes and wages, that he might
be surely provided upon all occasions: wherefore when he had any thing to do
with them, he could tell many of their names. When he was solicited to promote
any one, he marked his name, and then searched his books of remembrance,
wherein were the names of them who served him, with the time of their service,
also their reward, and at whose request they were promoted. Id. c. 21.

In his expeditions if any Soldier going out of the way passed through an
other man's ground, he would cause him to be beaten with rods, or be drubbed in
his sight: or if the dignity of the person freed him from such punishments, he
would severely reprove him, saying; Visne hoc in agro tuo fieri, quod alteri
facis? Lamprid. c. 51.

When his Soldiers mutinyed at Antioch, See p. 128.
because he exercised martial discipline upon some of them for debauchednesse,
he stilled them with these words; Quirites discedite, atque arma deponite. A
wonderful example, they all putting off their arms and soldiers coats,
departed to their several lodgings. Then the Emperors guard brought all the
Standards into the Camp, and the people themselves brought all their armor to
the Emperors Palace: Yet that very Legion which he disbanded, being sued unto
30 days before he went toward Persia, he received again, and by their valor
especially, he overcame his enemies: notwithstanding ere he departed he put to
death the Commanders of that Legion, because the soldiers passed their time
riotously at Daphne, through their negligence or connivence. Id. ib. c. 53. and
54.

He so heard the complaints of soldiers against their Commanders, that if he
found any Officer faulty, he punished him according to the quality of the
offense, without purpose of pardon. Id. c. 23.

He made one a pretorian prefect, who fled to avoid so arduous employment,
saying; Invitos, non ambientes in republica collocandos, They were fit to bear
office of state who shunned them, not those that sued for them. Id. c. 19.

[King William Rufus (sacrilegious in other acts) herein discharged a good
conscience. Two Monks came to him to buy an Abbots place of him, seeking to
outvie each other in offering great sums of money, whilst a third Monk stood
by, and said nothing. To whom said the King; What will thou give for the place?
Not a penny, answered he, for it is against my conscience; but here I stay to
wait home on him whom your Royal pleasure shall design Abbot. Then quoth the
King, Thou of the three best deservest the place, and shall have it, and so
bestowed it on him. Fullers Holy stare. l. 2. c. 12.]

He never made a Senator without the Counsel and approbation of the whole
Senate, testimony of him being given by honorable persons; but if either the
Senators who gave their suffrage, or the witnesses were found to have spoken
untruly, they were put into the lowest place of esteem, being also condemned by
the people as deceivers and forgers without hope of remission. Lamprid. c. 19.

He loved learned men, and feared them also very much, lest they should write
any thing sharply of him. Lamprid. c. 3.

His Mother Mammaea and his Grandmother Maesa chose out of the Senate 16 grave
and honorable Peers for his Counselors and Assistants, without whose consent
nothing was to pass as an Act of State. Herodian. l. 6. c. 1.

He transacted no weighty matter of judicature, without the advice of no less
then 50 most learned and wise men, beside 20 Lawyers (18 whereof were Scholars
of Papinian) of whom Vlpian was chief.

Every man's opinion was heard, and what they said was written; a competent time
being given each Counselor to consider what they propounded, that they might
not speak unadvisedly in matters of importance. Lamprid. c. 16. and 68.

In Law and business of state, intelligent, learned and eloquent men were of
his Council; in military affairs old Commanders, who had behaved themselves
valiantly in several battails, and were expert in the situation of places,
pitching of fields, and preparation of camps; in each matters he advised with
the best Historians: asking them, what the Emperors of Rome or Princes of
foreign countries in former times did in like cases as were then in debate.
Id. c. 16.

When he appointed Governors of Provinces, he published their names, exhorting
and encouraging the people to bring in what exception they could against them,
and manifestly to prove the crime, if there was cause of accusation; provided,
if they did not sufficiently prove their charge, and that their accusation
proceeded from malice, the accuser should forthwith be beheaded: for, said he,
Since Christians and Jews use this method in ordination of Priests, it is most
reasonable that the like course should be taken in the choice of Rectors of
Provinces, to whom are committed the lives and fortunes of those who are under
them. Id. c. 49.

When certain Hucksters and Cooks pretended they had right to a place which
was consecrated by the Christians, and it was inquired what was his pleasure
therein, he answered; It was better that God should be worshipped there after
any sort, then that the place should be put to vain uses. Id. c. 49.

Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History l. 6. says, that there were many
Christians in his family.

He wrote down so far as he could remember, what he had given to any man, and
if he found any to whom he had either given nothing, or that which was not
equal to his merit, he called them unto him, saying What is the cause that
thou ask nothing of me? Would thou have me to be in thy debt? Ask
something that thou may not complain of me for want of promotion. Id. c. 46.

When any one had exercised his office in the Commonwealth well, at the end of
his term when there was a Successor appointed, he would say to him who
departed out of his office; Gratias tibi agit Respublica: and would so reward
him, that being a private person, he might according to his degree live the
more honestly. Id. c. 32.

He allowed every Judge of a Province 20 pound weight in silver, 6 silver pots,
2 Mules, 2 Mulets, 2 Horses, a Horse-keeper and a Muletour, 2 Robes to sit in
judgment, one honorable garment to wear in his house, one for his bath, one
cook, and 100 crowns; their employment being ended, they were bound to restore
the Mules, Mulets, Horses, Muletours and Cooks: but might retain the residue if
they had discharged their office well, otherwise they paid 4 times as much as
they received. Id. c. 42.

He did let no day pass without exercising himself in learning and martial
affairs. Id. c. 3.

Every day also he did some good to others, in which (says Tristan) he had an
advantage of happiness above Titus, who could not express the like goodness
above space of 2 years in which he reigned.

If necessity required, he heard matters before day, staying till it was late;
never seeming to be weary or troubled: but had all the time the same
countenance, in all things appearing merry and pleasant. Lampridius c. 29.

He was so courteous, that he visited the meanest of his sick friends, desiring
them to tell him their minds freely of every thing, and hearing them
attentively; and when he had heard them thoroughly, whatsoever he found amiss
he carefully amended: and when his mother Mammaea and his wife Memmia blamed
him for his great civility, saying it made his authority contemptible, he
answered; but more secure and durable. Id. c. 20.

He repaired most of the Bridges which were built by Trajan, leaving
notwithstanding the name and honor thereof to Trajan. Id. c. 26.

His Soldiers marceed like Senators to the Persian war, the Country loving
them as brethren, and honoring the Emperor as a God. Id. c. 50.

When he dined or supped abroad, he had ever with him Vlpian or other learned
men, that he might benefit himself by their discourse, with which he said, that
he was both recreated and ^ed. Id. c. 34.

In all the time of his reign, which lasted 14 years he suffered none to dye,
but those who were condemned by law; a rare virtue, and not practiced by any
since Marcus Aurelius: and there had been nothing wanting to have rendered him a
most excellent Prince, had not his Mother who was (a good woman but) too
miserable, blasted his honor by her sordid demeanor. Lampridius c. 14.
Herodian l. 6. c. 9.

He meeting with a Druid as he went into Germany, she said to him; Vadas, nec
victoriam speres, nec militi tuo credas. Lampridias c. 60.

Thrasybulus his friend foretelling that he should die by the hand of a
barbarian, he rejoiced, thinking that he should die a warlike death; but he was
mistaken in his interpretation, dying not in war: for the soldiers enraged
with his discipline, and his mother Mammaea's covetousness, slew both near
Mentz in Germany, by the instigation of Maximus a muletour whom he had raised.

He lived 29 years 11 months and 7 days, and reigned (says Lampride) 13
years and 9 days. S. Aur. Victor says that when Alexander saw himself
forsaken of his guard, he cried out upon her which gave him his life, as the
cause of his death; adding that Mammaea had reduced her son to such an
extremity by her sparing humor, who if never so little was left at their
overfrugal table, Matris cultu plus quam pius. Aur. Victor.
reserved it till another time.

Vere Mammaeus a studio in matrem Mammaeam, ex cujus arbitrio and consilio
multa administrat infeliciter and cum proprio exitio. Dietericus in breviario
historico.

Julian brings in Silenus thus deriding him: O te hominem amentissimum, and
nullius plane consilii! qui ad tantum dignitatis fastigium elatus, tuas res ex
animi tui sententia non administrasti, sed tuas pecunias matri commisisti,
neque tibi tn mentem venit, long satius and utilius esse eas amicis impartiri,
quam sibi recondere.

He is the more to be honored and admired, since being come of uncertain
lineage, born far from Rome, and in so barbarous a Country as Syria, he so well
governed the Roman Empire, which before his time was extremely corrupted with
detestable vices.

Dion was contemporary and Consul with Alexander, with whom he ends his
history, of which Bussieres in his Flosculi historici passes this censure:
Tunc Dio Cassius principi charus and fastis insertus, inauguravit literas
trabea; Romanae Graecus scriptor historiae perquam accuratus, quam tamen
negligentia temporum perdidit, dum studiosus brevitatis in Xiphilino,
ignorantiam sovet, and umbram amans corpus amittit.

Choice Observations OF MAXIMINUS, And his Son MAXIMUS.
MAximinus spent his youth in keeping cattle, yet was advanced afterward for
his stature which exceeded 8 foot by 6 fingers. Capitolinus in Maxim. c. 1. and
in Maximino I un, c. 2. secundum correctionem Casauboni and Salmasii. [Ego (ut
(...), cui magna solet esse fides, testem saciam) Belgam (Antwerpianum se fere.
bat) in Galliis, Anno 1583. vidi novem pedes altitudine excedentem, etc. Merula
Cosmographis part prima, l. 3. c. 14.]

His body was so great that his wives bracelet served him for a ring.
Capitolinus in Maximino, c. 6.

His stomach was answerable; he eating daily 40, sometimes 60 pound weight of
flesh; and drinking 6 gallons of wine, Id. ibid. c, 4.

His strength was suitable; he being able to draw waines laden with his hands;
to strike out the teeth of a horse with his fist, to break his thighs with a
kick; to crumble tophy stones between his fingers, and to cleave young Trees:
for which he was called Hercules, Antaeus, and M^lo; as Achilles, Hector, and
Ajax, for his valor. Id. ibid. c. 6. and 8.

Sept. Severus celebrating the birthday of his Son Geta, with military sports,
gave the winners for a reward jewels, collars, bracelets, belts; Maximinus who
was newly come to the army, and could scarce speak Latin came before him,
entreating his leave that he might put forth himself in these exercises.
Severus wondering at the greatness of his body, granted his request; but upon
conditition, that he should not encounter with any soldier, Nequid a rudi
homine militaribus viris venires injuriae, says Iorna^des in Geticis. c. 15.
but with such as were water-bearers and servitors of the Camp, among which
were very strong and stout men. Maximinus overcame 16 of them before he rested,
receiving so many smaller rewards, but not such as were given to the Soldiers,
and was listed for service. Three days after the Emperor riding to view his
Camp, saw Maximinus (who was yet but a fresh water-souldier) out of order;
wherefore he commanded a Colonel to call him into his rank, and to instruct him
in the duty he was to obverve in the wars: Maximinus imagining the Emperor
spoke of him, kneeled down at his feet. The Emperor desiring to see whether he
could run well or no, spurred his Horse and took several Turns in the field;
and seeing Maximinus left not of running, old Severus being tired said to
Maximinus, Thracian, will you wrestle after your race? whereto he answered, So
long as it shall please your Majesty. Then the Emperor choosing 7 of the
strongest men in his army, Maximinus overcame them without resting between.
Whereupon Severus commanded a collar of gold to be given to him alone, with
certain pieces of silver; made him one of his guard, and commanded that he
should continually attend in the palace: by which means he came to be esteemed
by the Commanders and Soldiers, and to obtain what he desired of the Emperor,
Id. ib. c. 2. and 3.

He was diligent as well after as before his preferment, saying, Ego quo major
fuero, tanto plus labor abo: and rather then his Soldiers should be out of
action, he employed them in hunting.

Even in his old age he would throw down 5, 6, or 7 Soldiers (whom he wrestled
with) one after another; and being challenged by a Tribune who envied him, when
they met, Maximinus gave him such a blow on the breast with the palm of his
hand, that he threw him flat upon his back, saying, in sport; Date alium, sed
Tribunum. Id. ib. c. 6.

Caracalla made Maximinus a Centurion; (in Macrinus his reign he left the army
out of hatred to the assasinate of his sovereign;) even Heliogabalus permitted
him to be a Tribune: but Alexander Severus gave him the command of a Legion,
whose death notwithstanding he disloyally practiced (as is before mentioned;)
whereupon he was elected Emperor by the soldiers, without the consent of the
Senate. Id. ibid. c. 4. 5. 7. 8.

It appears unquestionably that he committed this villainy (notwithstanding
the doubts of some) because he killed all Alexanders relations and friends.
Tristan.

He arrogantly usurped the names of Cajus Julius Verus, and the proud Epithets
of Invictus, Fortissimus, and Nobilissimus; notwithstanding his ignoble
extraction. Tristan.

He suffered no noble person to be about him, and out of a desire to conceal
the baseness of his birth, slew even the best of his friends who were conscious
of it. Lampridius c. 9.

His tyranny caused many to conspire against him, which he discovering, took an
occasion to renew his cruelty.

Maximinus first thanked Macedonius, who treacherously slew Tycus that had
rebelled against him, but afterward put him to death as a Traitor. Capitolinus
c. 11.

Prae^larum tyranni factu^, and vere singular, nam tota vita unicum hoc laud
dignum. Elenchus Numismatum in Bibliotheca Bodlejana.

He slew all of the faction of his adversary Magnus without any judicial
process, not satisfied with the slaughter of above 4000. Capitolinus c. 10.

Maximus Pupienus (who made preparations at Ravenna to wage war against him by
the Senates appointment) was exceedingly afraid of him, and saying often; that
he was not engaged against a man, but a Cyclops: and Balbinus (who was made his
colleague in the Empire by the Senate, and staid at Rome) trembled at the
naming of him.

He was so feared at Rome, that, when he was in Italy, the women with their
children prayed solemnly in their Temples that he might never return; having
heard that some were crucified by him, some enclosed in beasts newly killed,
others cast to wild beasts, others bruised with clubs, without any regard to
the quality of persons. Id. ibid. c. 8.

For his cruelty (which he thought necessary for his security) he was hated,
and called Cyclops, Busiris, Syron, Phalaris, Typhon, and Gyges. Id ib. etc. 9.

He was so infatuated with the confidence of his own greatness and personal
strength, that he entertained a conceit, that death durst not adventure to
encounter him, for fear of having his Javelin broke about his own crazy skull,
and all his Skeleton of bones rattled to dust. Dr. Charletons Darkness of
Atheism dispelled by the light of nature, p. 178.

Because he thought himself immortal, he was covertly defied in the Theater by
a Comoedian in these verses:

Qui ab uno non potest occidi, a multis occiditur:
Elephas grandis est, and occiditur:
Leo fortis est, and occiditur:
Tigris fortis est, and occiditur:
Cave multos, si singulos non times.
If thou fear not the force of one alone,
Beware the strength of many joined in one.
Capitolinus c. 9.
What was spoken in sport, befell him in earnest; for Maximinus hasting with
his army toward Rome to be revenged of the Senate which intended resistance,
was opposed at Aquileja, where women made bow-strings of their hair to shoot
against him; at which repulse he became so furious that he killed many of his
own Soldiers; Capitolinus in Maximimino Ian. and id Maximo and Balbino.
wherewith the rest being enraged slew him and his Son, saying; Canis pessimi
ne catulus quidem relinquendus: Of a bad litter not a whelp is to be left.

He was 65 years old when he dyed, and his Son 21.

The time of their reign is not agreed upon.

The Messenger who brought word of their death, came from Aquileia to Rome (798
miles) in 4 days, Capitolinus c. 25.

Magna sane diligentia: sed non incredibilis; cum similis celeritatis aut etiam
majoris exempla and apud veteres legantur, and hodieque ed saepissime videamus.
Constat hodiernos veredarios Roma Lute^iam saepe diebus sex septem commeare:
quae long major contentio est, Casaubonus.

When his head with his sons were brought to Rome, all ran to the Altars to
thank the Gods, and Balbinus sacrificed Hecatombs for his deliverance,
commanding the same to be done throughout the Empire.

Maximinus was the Author of the 6 persecution, which Tristan thinks he raised
only that he might confiscate the Christians goods, his sacrilegious
covetousness not permitting him to spare Heathen Temples.

In his reign GORDIAN the father and son took upon them the Empire in Africa,
the Son was slain by Capellianus a friend to Maximinus, the Father through
despair strangled himself.

Choice Observations OF MARCUS CLODIUS, PUPIENUS MAXIMUS, And DECIMUS CAELIUS
BALBINUS. Colleagues
Upon the death of the 2 Gordians the Senate chose Pupienus and Balbinus
Empeperours in opposition to Maximinus. In the mean time the Commons decryed
the election, but especially rejected Pupienus, as too austere; and cried out
that they would presently kill them both, and have a Prince of Gordians lineage,
that the Empire might continue in that name. Balbinus and Pupienus assaying to
go forth of the Capitol, were kept in with clubs and stones, till they deluded
the people by this invention.

There was in the City a little boy, son to Gordians daughter, and of his
Grandfathers name; whom they sent for thither. They who were sent for him,
finding him playing at home, lifted him on their shoulders, and so carried him
through the crowd, telling the people he was Gordians Nephew, and of his name:
the people shouting for joy, and casting leaves upon him. When the Senate had
proclaimed him Caesar (his minority not permitting him to manage the state) and
the people were calmed, the elected Emperors were suffered to pass to the
Palace, Herodian. l. 7. c. 10.

Balbinus was both noble and ancient, Ridicule Orosius l. 7. fratres fuisse
scribit, cum alter nobilis, ignobilis alter fuerit, Capitolin^ auctore Schottus
in Aur. Victorem.
Pupienus was ignobly descended, but had born many offices, which having
discharged with wisdom and valor, he was highly prized by the Senate.

These Emperors were not joined in affection, as in authority; each holding
himself most deserving: each having their own, and standing upon their own
guard.

The election of these Emperors by the Senate displeased the soldiers so
much, that at last they assaulted the Court, and easily slew these Senatorian
Emperors, (as they carried them) being at variance; crying out that they had
but slain them, whom themselves first rejected.

Zosimus, says that Balbinus and Pupienus, would have killed young Gordian,
because he was more beloved of the soldiers, by whom he was made Caesar; who
hearing of their design, prevented them: but Boeclerus thinks he is mistaken.

Choice Observations Of ANTONIUS GORDIANUS
UPon the dath of Balbinus and Pupienus, Gordian the third, before created
Caesar by the Senate through the importunity of the soldiers; was made
Emperor by a general consent in the thirteenth year of his age.

He married Tranquillina daughter of Misitheus, whom he loved and honored for
his learning; by whose advice he transacted state-affaires prosperously,
expelling Sapor King of Persia from Syria, recovering Antioch, Nisibis, and
Carrae by his assistance: for which success the Senate appointed a triumph for
Gordian, and a triumphal chariot for Misitheus with this inscription: Misitheo
parenti principum, Pop. Romans tutori r^ip. S. P. Q. R.

Misitheus was soon missed for counsel and trust, being poisoned by Philip an
Arabian of ignoble parentage, Eutropius.
who was made Prefect in his stead, and aspired to the Empire.

Philip secretly caused a scarcity of victuals in the Army, which he did, that
the soldiers might imagine it to be occasioned by Gordians neglect, whom he
charged with inability to govern, being so young.

The Officers were corrupted by Philip, and the soldiers through ignorance of
his deceit, make him Gordians Governor, whereupon he grew so insolent, that
he commanded all, as if he had been sole Emperor.

Gordian discerning his aim complains openly to the soldiers of the wrong
which was done to him by Philip, notwithstanding all obligations to the
contrary; but Philips project prevailing, Gordian since he could not share in
the Empire, sued to be a Captain, which was denied him: Philip not thinking
himself safe (whilst Gordia^ of great blood and esteem was alive) slew him in
the 22 year of his age, and 6 of his reign; as if Justice her self appeared
evidently to take vengeance on the Traitors, See Julius Caesar, p. 19.
each of his Murderers with the same Poinyard wherewith they slew him, killed
himself.

Gordiaus Motto was Miser est Imperator apud quem vera reticentur; which was
his own case.

Choice Observations OF PHILIPPUS ARABS, And his Son CAIUS JULIUS SATURNINUS
PHILIPPUS.
PHILIP the Father writing to the Senate of Gordians death as if it had happened
naturally, was by them proclaimed Emperor, through fear of the Soldiers.

The Goths infesting Mysia and Asia, Philip sent Marinus against them, who as
soon as he came into those parts drew his Army into a rebellion, and proclaimed
himself Emperor; taking (he said) his example from Philip, who raised his
title by his sovereignes fall.

Philip complaining very much to the Senate of Marinus his ingratitude, Decius
bid him not fear, for Marinus should suffer for it, as he did, for the mutable
soldiers, who even now erected him, suddenly threw him down, and slew him.

Decius being sent in Marinus his room, was also proclaimed Emperor by the
soldiers, though against his will, out of their hatred to Phil^p.

Decius sent secretly to Philip, professing he meant to escape the soldiers,
and persist in his allegiance: Philip fearing that was but policy (lest Decius
should be stronger by delays) hasted himself with a great Army, and being
overcome was slain by the soldiers at Verona, his head being cut off through
the teeth.

At the news whereof the Pretorian soldiers slew his son, but 12 years old;
who was so composed, that it from the 5 year of his age none could make him
laugh: and when his Father was tickled with laughter at the secular plays, he
looked on him with an estranged countenance.

The time of their reign was 7 years say some, others say 6, some but 5.

The elder Philips age is not related by any Historian.

Choice Observations OF TRAJANUS DECIUS, And his Son ETRUSCUS DECIUS.
DECIVS was elected Emperor by the Persian legions, proclaimed in Verona by
the Roman soldiers, and had the voices of the Senate to confirm him.

He was noble by birth, an experienced, wise and valiant Prince; and might have
been reckoned among the best; had he not with an heathenish rage persecuted the
Christians, being Author of the seventh persecution.

He put more Christians to death in a year and an half, than Trajan (whose name
he had, and whom he would have been thought to resemble) in 20. Tristan.

The Novatians would not communicate with them, who had denied the faith in the
persecution of Decius, and afterward repenting turned to the same faith again,
Nicephorus Callistus l. 12. c. 28. The fear of his persecution gave the
original to a Monkish life.

He was victorious against the Goths, and joining a fresh battle with them,
Of Brutus says Aur. Victor.
was overthrown by the treason of Gallus his General: says Pomponius Laetus.

His son was mortally wounded by an arrow, he leaping into a whirl pool was
never seen after.

Tristan thinks this misfortune befell Decius for a punishment of his
persecutions.

Vopiscus in the life of Aurelian, and Pomponius Laetus compare Decius and his
son with the Decii Mures, who devoted themselves to destruction in a dangerous
fight, for the safety of their Country, which depended thereupon. But the
comparison does not agree says Tristan. For the 2 ancient Decii rendered the
Romans victorious by their death, whereas these by theirs made them slaves to
the Barbarians, and lost many of their Provinces. Besides that Decius the
Father was drowned and swallowed up in his flight, which has no resemblance
with the end of the Decii of the ancient Commonwealth.

He dyed at the age of 50, having reigned 2 years.

Choice Observations OF TREBONIANUS GALLUS, And his Son VOLUSIANUS.
GALLVS appearing much grieved for Decius his death, was not suspected; which
facilitated his attaining of the Empire.

He caused Virtus Augustorum to be stamped upon his and his sons medails, as if
he had got the Empire by valor and not by deceit.

Under these two Emperors arose a plague in Ethiopia, Sola pestilentia, morbis
atque, a^gritudinibus, Galli and Volusiani notus fuit principatus. Eutropius.
which spread it self by degrees in all the Provinces of the Roman Empire, and
lasted 15 years together, without intermission; and so great was the mortality,
that in Alexandria, as Dionisius himself (at that time the Bishop of that Sea)
reports, there was not one house of the City free, and the remainder of the
inhabitants equalled not the number of old men in former times: By means
whereof St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, who lived in that age, took occasion
to write that excellent Treatise de Mortalitate: And Lipsius his censure of
this pestilence is, Non alia unquam major lues mihi lecta, spatio temporum sive
terrarum.

Aemilianus his General having overcome the Goths, grew so proud thereupon,
that he aspired to the Empire, which he purchased by the good will of the
soldiers, who slew Gallus and his Son in battle.

Dexippus who lived in those times says he governed but 18 months.

Choice Observations OF AEMILIANUS.
HE was an African of obscure parentage, and arose to be a General from a
common soldier.

His election was at first contradicted by the Italian band, who sought to make
Valerian Emperor, to which the Senate inclined, because of Valerians renown.

Aemilians Army hearing of the election of Valerian, tumultuously murdered
their own creature, who reigned almost 4. months.

Some reckon him among Usurpers, but his title is allowed by Eutropius.

Of 30 Emperors who reigned since Octavius Augustus time, until Valerian, 6
of them escaped not the hands of murderers. Lloids consent of time.

Choice Observations OF VALERIANUS.
HE was nobly descended, and of such esteem among the Romans that being a
private man, and absent they chose him for their Censor; Valeriani vita censura
est.
an office of great dignity, ever conferred upon the best says Trebellius
Pollio who wrote his life.

At the beginning of his reign he was gracious to the Christians above any of
his Predecessors, but after being perverted by an Egyptian magician and
Macrianus, he was author of the 8 persecution.

He was very cruel; Massa Candida in Africa.
pulled out the eyes of young children thereby consulting of future Events.

In his reign there suffered 300 Martyrs together at Carthage, whom the
Governor of the City commanded either to throw frankincense into the fire (set
before them) in honor of Jupiter, or else to cast themselves headlong into a
Brick kiln hard by, which they did, choosing rather to embrace fire, than resist
light. Prudentius in Peristeph.

When he warred in Mesopotamia, he was taken prisoner by Sapor King of Persia
(through the treachery of Macrianus) and used like a slave as long as he lived,
Sapor setting his foot upon his neck whenever he mounted on horseback, to
the utmost vilifying of Majesty, and the regret of diverse interceeding Princes.

It was the most signal affront which the Romans hitherto ever received in the
person of their Emperors. Tristan.

At last says Eusebius, by Sapors command, his eyes were pulled out, wherewith
he dyed; Agathias says he was flayed alive, and rubbed all over with salt: a
calamity which may challenge tears of blood.

He lived along, but disgraceful age; was 76 years old before he was taken
prisoner: after his captivity he lived 7 years in reproaches, and then died a
violent death. A man of a poor mind, and not valiant; notwithstanding lifted up
in his own, and the opinion of men, but falling short in the performance. Sr.
Fr. Bacon. Infaelicissimus Principum a filio Gallieno in Deos relatus est,
quasi Deum facere posset, quem liberum facere aut nequiverat, aut neglexerat,
Cluverus.

Gallienus tam claro Dei judicio territus miseroque collegae permotus exemplo,
pacem Ecclesiae trepida satisfactione restituit, says Orosius.

Choice Observations. GALLIENUS.
WHen Valerian his Father was taken prisoner, he was made Emperor.

He was expert in Oratory, Poetry, and all other arts, but was defective in
other qualifications which are requisite in an Emperor.

At first he acted like a valiant Captain, Initio imperium faeliciter, mox
commode, ad ultimum perniciose gessit, Eutropius.
overcame and slew Ingenu^s (who usurped the Empire) as also Trebellianus; and
overcame 300000 Goths, and Almans, having but 10000 on his side (says
Zonaras) but after he gave himself so much to sensuality, that when the World
was infected with Wars, he continued for the most part in Rome among whores,
compassed with Roses and Flowers; seeking new delights, often bathing himself,
studying how he might keep Figs and other fruits green all the year; having
ordinarily at his table most exquisite and delicate meats, and of great cost.
Trebellius Pollio in Gallieno c. 16.

He commanded one, who had sold counterfeit jewels to his Wife, to be cast to a
Lion; but the den being opened, nothing came forth but a Capon: at which when
the people wondered, he bade the Crier proclaim, Imposturam fecit and passus
est; being content to have the impostor more frighted than hurt. Id. ib. c. 12.
Videsis Christiani Matthiae Theatrum Historicum Theoretico-practicum. p. 263.

When a shooting prize was played before him, he gave the garland to one who
shot always wide, concluding that it was the more improbable difficulty to aim
so often, and never to hit. Taurum toties non sagittis vel jaculis ferire
difficile est. Id. ib.

When it was told him that Egypt rebelled, he answered, Cannot we live without
the linen of Egypt? Being advertised of the loss of other Provinces, he
answered so scornfully, that he seemed to care for nothing: which occasioned 30
Tyrants to make themselves Emperors in his time; whereof two were Women,
Zenobia and Victoria.

In his reign the Heavens were darkened so that the Sun was not seen for many
days; in the bowels of the earth were heard roarings, with the fear whereof
many dyed; Earthquakes threw down many houses, whereby the Inhabitants were
destroyed; these Earthquakes were frequent in Rome, Africa, but especially in
Asia; the Earth opened in many places, and showed Vaults and Caves, from whence
salt water streamed; and several Cities were drowned by the Sea: and in Rome
there dyed above 5000 in one day of the pestilence. Treb. Pollio c. 5.

Gallienus addicted only to his pleasures, was not affected with these
calamities, thinking they proceeded rather from chance than any signal
punishment.

He grieved not for his Fathers captivity, but, when he was informed of it,
said, alluding to the speech of Xenophon the Philosopher, who having lost his
son, said, Sciebam me genuisse mortalem; Sciebam patrem meum esse mortalem: I
knew that my Father was liable to the same miseries as other men. Nec defuit
Annius Cornicula, qui eum quasi constantem Principem salso sua voce laudaret,
pejor tamen ille qui credidit, says Pollio, c. 17. videsis Cuspinianum in
Gallieno.

Odenatus though an Independent Prince, was of such moderation, that he held
correspondence with Gallienus, and sent him such of the Persian Nobility as he
had taken prisoners, for monuments of his victory over Sapor, and revenge of
the indignities offered to Valerian: thus Odenatus conquered, and Gallienus
triumphed, who when he could not eclipse Odenatus his merit by any Princely
virtue, nor suppress it by valor, sought to deface it by treachery; but
failing of his aims therein, he made him partner of the Empire for fear;
Odenatus receiving the titles of Imperator, and Augustus, from Gallienus and
the Senate.

Being not ashamed ridiculously to triumph over the Persians, who detained his
Father prisoner, and to lead the^ captive in his mock-shew; some jeering
companions mixing themselves with the Persians, exactly viewed their
countenances, and being asked wherefore they did it, answered, We seek for his
Majesty's Father; which when Gallienus heard of, he was so incensed at the
taunt, that he commanded those who uttered it to be burned alive.

The Scythians invading Cappadocia, the soldiers attempt to make a new
Emperor, for which Gallienus put them all to the sword, Pollio c. 11.

In his time the City Byzantium (renowned for sea fights, and the place which
barreth in the Euxine Sea) was destroyed by his soldiers; to revenge which, he
being received into Byzantium, compassed them unarmed with armed soldiers, and
slew them contrary to his covenant. And as if he had done some great matter, he
posteth to Rome, and summoning the Senators, appoints decennial plays to be
celebrated novo genere ludorum, nova specie pomparum, exquisito genere
voluptatum, says Pollio c. 7.

He killed sometimes 3 or 4000 soldiers in a day. Id. Ib. c. 18.

At last he himself with his brother Valerian and his son Gallienus were slain
near Milain (where he besieged Aureolus) by the treachery of Marcianus
Ceronius, aliter Aur. Victor.
or Cecropius and Heraclian. Pollio. c. 14.

He lived 50 years, reigned 15, 7 with his Father, 8 alone.

Choice Observations OF CLAUDIUS GOTHICUS, And his Brother QUINTILLUS.
CLAUDIUS was appointed Emperor by the will of Gallienus being ready to die,
unto who^ by Gallonius Basilius, he sent the Imperial Robes to Ticinum.

He was elected by the soldiers before the Walls of Milain, and confirmed in
Rome by the Senate with much joy.

He was so renowned a Prince, that he was said to have Augustus his moderation,
Trajans virtue, and Antoninus his piety met in him.

A Woman desiring him after he was Emperor, to restore an inheritance, which
he had unjustly took from her when he was but a private person; he graciously
granted her request, saying, Quod Claudius dum privatus erat, nec leges
curabat, abstulit; factus Imperator restituit. Zonaras.

In his time Athens was ransacked by Goths, who piled heaps of Books to burn,
but were advised by one to for bear, that the Graecians spending their time in
them, might be less fit for war. Cedrenus. B. Egnatius. Judicium barbari non
prorsus vanum. Etsi Cleodemus Atheniensis, fuga elapsus, coactaque manu and
navibus hosts invadens, Graecis librorum tractatione virtutem non demi ipsorum
clade docuit. Heidmannus in Epitome Historica de Imp. Romans in Claudio. ex
Zonora.

Aureolus being slain by his own company, Claudius received the government of
those Countries, and fighting against the Almains, he overthrew above half of
them. S. Aur. Victor.

He waged war with the Goths, who infested the Empire 15 years with continual
irruptions (says Iornandes) and now in league with many barbarous Nations,
invaded Thrace and the Countries before them, even to Macedonia; and thence
came through Hungary down Danubius with 2000 sail of ships fraught with
munition and men: to meet which Claudius prepared, and engaged them so
valiantly, that he slew and took 320000 men, and 2000 ships laden with shields,
swords, lances, etc. so that houses were filled therewith.

He intended to go against Tetricus and Zenobia, but was hindered by a fever
which soon put an end to his life. He reigned 1 year, 10 months and 15 days.
He was deifyed by the Senate; had a statue of gold 10 foot high erected in the
Capitol in honor of him by the people at their own cost, (which they never did
to any before:) and a target of the same metal, with his picture in it, was
hung up in the Court by the Senates appointment. There was also by general
consent set up for him a pillar composed of the prowes of ships; upon which was
placed his statue, representing him clothed with his Consular robe, of 1500
pound weight of silver.

It was a providence, that Claudius found the Empire so beset with enemies,
that he could not exercise so much cruelty as he intended against the
Christians.

Julian feigneth that Constantine the great and his children were delivered
from torments in Hell, in favor to Claudius their ancestor; the reason of
which fiction of that Apostate was certainly, because Claudius was a great
persecutor. Tristan.

His brother Quin tillus endeavored to succeed, and was chosen Emperor, but
being not able to resist Aurelian, chosen at the same time by the army, he made
away himself by opening a vein, at Tarsus in Cilicia, say some, having reigned
but 17 days; but others write that he was killed by the soldiers.

Choice Observations OF AURELIANUS.
HIS Parents being mean, he followed the Wars, and advanced himself thereby.

There being in the Army another tribune, who was named Aurelian, Aurelianus
ma^^ad ferrum.
and had been taken prisoner with Valerian the Emperor, to distinguish the one
from the other, this was called Aurelian with his hand upon his sword; he being
upon all occasions with a weapon in his hand, ready for service. Vopiscus in
Aureliano. c. 6.

He was very temperate, made no use of Physicians when he was sick, but cured
all excess by abstinence. Id. ibid. c. 50.

Though temperate himself, yet he delighted in Phago, who in his presence at
one meal ate 100 loaves, and a boar, with a weather and a pig; and drank
through a tundish plus orca, which Lipsius says was bigger than the Amphora,
The Amphora Copitolina held 6 Gallons.
but how much he knows not; and honored Bonosus a great drinker; of whom he
was wont to say, Non ut vivat natus est, sed ut bibat: He was not born to draw
in breath, but beer.

Aurelian married this Bonosus a Spaniard (but son of an Englishman) to Hunila
a noble Gothish Woman, merely that by her means he might discover the Goths
secrets. Vopiscus in Bonoso.

Aurelian appointed Bonosus to carouse with Ambassadors, that they might be
brought to bewray secrets by this lene tormentum; whilst he (who had this
wonderful property, that he could piss as fast as he drunk, without
containing any jot within his body) faultred not, but was more discreet. Id.
ibid.

[Schenkius arma nunquam accuratius tractabat, quam quum effuse potus, ac vino
amens: immo ebrietate ipsa, quae resignare ac aperire occulta quaeque
consuveerit, illum ad arcana occult and a uti solitum ferunt. Strada Belli
Belgici Decade secunda, l. 10.

Aurelian was Colonel of Horse under Claudius in Persia; he slew in one day 48
of his Enemies with his own hands in the War against the Sarmatians: and slew
in several days above 950; whereupon Ballads were sung by Boys on Festivals
in praise of him. Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 6.

When the Enemies of the Romans, had overrun all France, he made such havoc of
them at Mentz, that he slew 700, and sold 300 sub corona; upon which occasion
new I^gges were made. Id. ib. c. 7.

He overcame all his Enemies in 3 years, whereas Alexander the Great traveled
13 years by great victories, before he came into India. Caesar spent 10 years
in overcoming the Gauls, and 4 years in conquering the Romans. S. Aur. Victor.

He caused a Soldier, See Macrinus, p. 177.
who had committed Adultery with his Hostess, to have h^s feet tied to the
tops of 2 Trees bent downward, and suffered suddenly to start back again; so
the wretch was twitched in sunder, and hung on both sides in halves.

He wrote to one of his Lieutenants, If thou will be a Captain, nay if thou will live, contain thy Soldiers in their duty. I will not have a peasant
wronged in a Chicken, nor a Grape taken without his permission; not a grain of
Salt, or a drop of Oil unjustly exacted. I desire my Soldiers should be
enriched with spoils of Enemies, not the tears of my Subjects. I would have
them chaste in their Quarters, and no Quarrellers. Which commands Baronius
compares with that of John the Baptist to the soldiers, Luke 3. 14.

He advanced Tetricus (one of the 30 Tyrants in Gallienus his time, whom he
overcame) and made him Provost of Lucania, who had been before proclaimed
Emperor by the French Army; elegantly upbraiding him, That it was more
majestical to rule some part of Italy, than to reign beyond the Alps. S. Aur.
Victor.

Being incensed against Tyana, See in Herberts Travels the pillar of beasts
heads erected at Spa^awn on such an occasion.
because the Gates of the City were shut against him, he vowed, He would not
leave a Dog in it; but having taken it, upon a fright by the ghost of
Apollonius Tyanaeus dead long before, he commanded his Soldiers to kill all
the Dogs, but spare the Citizens. Grande Principis dictum, grandius militum
votum: nam dictum Principis quo praeda negabatur, civitas servabatur, totus
exercitus ita quasi ditaretur, accepit. Vopiscus.

Aurelian demanding how he might govern well, was answered by a great
personage; You must be provided with Iron and Gold; Iron to use against your
Enemies, and Gold to reward your friends. Zonoras.

His chief engagement was against Zenobia, the most beautiful, chaste, learned,
wise, and valiant Woman of that age.

Her Letter in answer to him, who sorely tired, proffered her life, and liberty,
and wealth, if she would yield, shows her resolves for fight.

He was so enraged at her haughty reply, that he forthwith besieged Palmyra,
destroyed her aids, and at last took her prisoner, whom he led in triumph; ea
specie, ut nihil pompabilius populo Romans videretur, says Treb. Pollio in
Zenobia.

He put Longinus to death upon a supposition that he dictated Zenobias Epistle.
He is called Necessarius magis quam bonus Imperator, because he wanted
clemency, which is Imperatorum dos prima, says Vopiscus.

He was so bloody, that he put to death his own Sisters son.

Being about to sign an edict for the 9 persecution (of which he was the
author) God hindered his purpose. Theodoret. l. 4. reports of Valens the Arrian
Emperor) that as he was attempting to sign an edict for the banishing of
Basil, he could not write one tittle of a Letter, Providence breaking his Pen 3
several times; at the fourth assay his hand was struck with a palsy, cramping
(as it were his knuckles, and thereupon as a man affrighted, with his own hands
he tore the paper in pieces; manifesting to all, that the Princes of this World
have no power to practice any thing against the Church, any farther than God
permits. Eusebius l. 7. Haymo l. 7. c. 11.

At the same time also a Thunderbolt fell so near him, that all thought he was
slain; by which messenger God warned him to be wise, lest he perished in those
destructive ways, as shortly after he did; Mnestheus his Secretary fearing
punishment for some offense, for which the Emperor threatened him with death,
and knowing that he used not to pardon if he threatened, counterfeited the
Emperors hand, and wrote the names of many in a roll as appointed by him to
die; mixing the names of some, with whom the Emperor was truly offended, with
those of others whom he was not displeased with, adding his own name that he
might the easilyer be believed. They upon sight hereof, thinking to prevent the
worst, slew him in a Castle called Coenophrurium, betwixt Byzantium and
Heraclea.

When Mnestheus his Treason was discovered, he was cast to wild beasts, as
appears by marble statues erected in honor of Aurelian, even by those who
slew him.

He reigned 4 years, 11 months, and 7 days. Vopiscus calls him Bonum
Medicum, sed mala ratione cur antem; A good Physician, had he not administered
too bitter potions: in reference to which, Julian feigneth that he had much ado
to defend himself at the tribunal of Minos, before whom many accused him of
unjustice; but that the Sun, who had always in his life specially assisted him
in all his enterprises, excused him to the other Gods, saying, That he had been
punished enough by his death, according to the Delphick Oracle, which says:

(...).
Iudicium, si quis quae fecit perfer at, aequu^ est.
Choice Observations OF TACITUS, And his Brother FLORIANUS.
UPon the death of Aurelian, the Soldiers who would not have any of his
assassinates to succeed, sent to the Senate to choose an Emperor; the Senate
refer the election to the Soldiers, who, they knew, used not to be pleased
with the Senates choice: half a year passed in complements with a peaceable
interregnum, at last, the Senate and Soldiers jointly elect Tacitus.

He retired to his manor in Campania, where he was secret 2 months, shunning
that dignity which might prove his overthrow; was often solicited, but, with
hearty thanks, absolutely denied; affirming his age made him unable to satisfy
expectations; at length, necessity of state so requiring, he accepted of their
proffer; at which all rejoiced but himself.

He was such an example of moderation to others, See Alexander Serus, p. 192.
that he permitted not his Empress to wear jewels.

He honored Tacitus the Historian, He called September Tacitus, because he was
born and made Emperor in that month.
whom he called his Father, commanded his Works to be put in every Library
through the Empire, to be transcribed 10 times every year at public cost.
Vopiscus in Tacito. c. 10.

When the Senate chose him Emperor, they cried out, Quis melius quam gravis
imperat? and quis melius quam literatus imperat?

When he objected his age, they answered, that Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus
were old, when they came to the Empire; whom they mentioned because they
reigned well and fortunately: omitting Vespasian, Nerva, Pertinax, Macrinus and
Decius, who came older to the Empire; but their reign was short, especially
that of the four last: the three last also dyed a violent death. Tristan.

When the Senate denied him the Consulship, which he sought for his brother
Florianus, he took it very well, saying; Scit Senatus quem Principem fecerit.
Vopiscus.

He gave the Soldiers all the money he had in silver, which was a great sum;
he having had more than 9 millions in gold for his patrimony.

His death was caused by grief occasined by factions, infirmity of age helping
to break his heart and his life, when he had reigned 6 months. Vopiscus.

His brother Florianus ambitiously strove to get the Empire as true heir,
though he knew Tacitus was engaged to the Senate, that he would prefer worth
before his relations in the designation of his Successor.

Being not able to withstand Probus who was chosen by the Army, he was killed
by the Soldiers, say some; but most write, that by opening a vein he killed
himself at Tarsus, as Quintillus also did, who was reduced to the same
extremity.

Choice Observations OF PROBUS.
Upon Tacitus his death, the Army unanimously cried out, Let us have Probus for
our Emperor; and the Senate with applause confirmed the election.

The manner of his being chosen by the Soldiers was thus; The Officers told
them the requisites of one that should be elected, that he should be Fortis,
Sanctus, Verecundus, Clemens, Probus: which when it was spoke to many
companies, on all sides they cried out as it were by a divine instinct, Probe
Auguste, Dii te servent. Vopiscus in Probo, c. 10.

Valerian the Emperor called him Vere Probum, saying in an epistle, that if he
had not had Probus for his name, he deserved to have had it for his surname. Id
ib. c. 4.

He was made tribune by Valerian, in which office he served under Gallienus,
Claudius, Aurelian, and Tacitus.

His first service, after he became Emperor, Vopiscus in Probo, c. 13. 14, 15.
Iulianus in Caesaribus.
was in France, against the Germans who had conquered it; wherein one battle he
slew almost 400000 Germans, 9 of whose Kings prostrated themselves at his feet:
he won also and repaired 70 of their Cities in less than 7 years.

The Egyptians electing Saturninus a wise and valiant Captain* Emperor, so
sore against his will, that he was like to be slain for gainsaying their
desires; Probus hasting toward them offered them pardon, out of an
unwillingnes to shed civil blood, or to loose such a man as Saturninus: but
upon refusal of his clemency, he engaged in a sharp battle, wherein most of
the revolters were overthrown, and Saturninus slain in the assault of a
besieged Castle, to the grief of Probus who sought to save his life. Vopiscus
in Saturnino.

Bonosus who had charge of ships, which the Germans burned in the mouth of the
Rhine through his negligence* if not treachery; who fearing punishment for his
fault, rebelled against Probus, but was overcome and through despair hung
himself: whereupon it was said, Amphoram pendere, non bominem; That a barrel
or tankard hung there, and not a man; because he was so given to drink.
Vopiscus in Bonoso.

There rebelled also against Probus, Proculus as insatiate a vassal to Venus,
as Bonosus was to Bacchus; so impudent that he did not only commit
filthiness, but boasted of it, as appears by his Letter wherein he braggeth
that having taken 100 Sarmatian Virgins he deprived 10 of that name in a night,
and all the rest within a fortnight: inter fortes se haberi credens si criminum
densitate coalescat, says Vopiscus in Proculo.

He honored Aradion a most valiant man (whom he overcame in wrestling) with a
tomb 200 foot broad remaining in Vopiscus his time; which he caused the
soldiers, whom he never suffered to be idle, to erect: testifying the
greatness of his respect by his largenes of his monument. Vopiscus in Probo c.
9.

Quo latior agri modus sepulchro assignabatur, eo magis crescebat honos.
Casaubonus.

Being presented with a Horse taken in War, which it was said, could go an 100
mile in a day, for 8 or 10 days together, he said, He was fitter for a
cowardly than a valia^ soldier. Id. Ibid. c. 8.

Some say he was the last Emperor who triumphed, after his Victory over the
Germans and the Blemiae a people of Africa.

He commanded to be let loose at once 1000 estriches, 1000 stags, 1000 wild
boars, 1000 fallow dear beside wild goats, wild sheep, and other creatures
which sed upon grass, as many as could be fed or found; which he gave to the
people to catch as they could; the Circus being set all over with great trees,
which by the soldiers were taken up by the roots, as they grew in the woods,
and planted there with green turf about them, and fastened with beams and irons:
next day he let into the same place 100 maned Lions, which filled the air with
roaring as if it had thundered; 100 Lybian Leopards, 100 Syrian, 100 Lionesses,
and 300 bears. Vopiscus in Probo. c. 19.

As Hanibal filled most parts of Africa with Olive-yards planted by his
soldiers that they might not be idle, to the indangering of the Commonwealth;
so Probus, who for his famous acts is compared with Hanibal and Caesar, for the
same reason caused his soldiers to plant vineyards throughout all France, both
the Pannonias, and the Mysian hills. Aur. Victor.

He undid himself by that speech of his; Brevi milites necessarios non futuros:
wherewith the soldiers being offended murdered him, when he had lived 75
years, and reigned 6 years 4 months; others say 6 years.

Julian feigneth that Silenus reproched him with his severity toward his
soldiers, who added that he underwent deserved punishment, though unjustly
inflicted by them.

It is thought, that because he suffered the Christians to live in peace, God
gave him so many victories against the Barbarians.

Choice Observations OF CARUS, With his Sons CARINUS And NUMERIANUS.
PROBVS being slain the Army chose Carus Emperor, whereunto the Senate
consented.

The Sarmatians threatening Italy he engaged with them, and overthre^ them with
the slaughter of 16000, taking 20000 prisoners. Vopiscus in Caro. c. 9.

Leaving Carinus his elder son to govern Britain, France, Illyricum, and Spain;
he prepared with Numerian against the Persians, in which expedition he took in
his way Mes^potamia, Ctesiphon, etc. Whereby he purchased the surname of
Persicus.

Ambassadors coming to him from the King of Persia, find him lying upon the
grass, eating black broth and morsels of swines-flesh; (whom he bade to tell
their young master: If he continued obstinate, within one month, all his woods
and fields should be as bare as hisb. ^ld pate, which he showed; offering them
to eat out of the pot, if they pleased, otherwise to depart forthwith.

Lipsius in his Notes to his second Book of Politics and the fiftenth Chapter
out of Synesius de Regno, where see Petarius who applies it to Probus.

Surprised with sickness he pitched his tent on the shore of Tigr^s; where he
and others were slain in their beds by a thunderbolt.

-- Fulmine captus Imperator
Vitam fulminibus parem peregit.
Sidonius Apollinaris.

Arrius Aper a Pretorian prefect having murdered Numeri^^n (his Son-in-law)
being troubled with sore eyes upon his return from Persia (says Zonaras)
pretended to those of the Army who enquired how de did, that his infirmity
only kept him from sight, but at length his treason was discovered by the
putrefaction of Numerians body. Whereupon he being brought by the soldiers
before the tribunal was slain by Diocletian; who was both his Judge and
Executioner. Vopiscus in Numeriano.

Carinus gave himself to all lusts, married 9 Wives and then divorced them
being big with child; he was twice overcome by Diocletian, and slain by a
Tribune, whose wife he had abused. Vopiscus in Carino.

Some say Carus and his Sons reigned but 2 years or some what more, others say
but a little above one.

These 7 Emperors Claudius his brother Quintillus, Aurelian, Tacitus, his
brother, Florian Probus and Carus reigned but 18 years. Lloids Consent of Times.

Choice Observations OF DIOCLETIANUS, And MAXIMIANUS. Colleagues
DIOCLETIANS parentage is uncertainly reported, some making him the son of a
Scrivener, and others of a bondsman made free by Anulinus a Senator: but all
agree that he was a Dalmatian of base birth.

The name of his Mother (and of the Town wherein he was born) was Dioclea,
whence he was called Diocles till he came to be Emperor, and then named
himself Diocletian (converting a Greek name into a Roman form) and upon the
conquest of the Persi^^^ and Egyptians, Iovius; as Maximian his Colleague styled
himself Hercullus: velut ille Iovis, hic Herculis haeres says P. Laetus, who
parallels Diocletian with Jupiter, and Maximian with Hercules.

When Diocletian serving as common soldier in France, reckoned with his
hostess (one of the Druides) she told him he was too penurious; he jeastly
ansvvered, that he would be bountiful when he came to the rour of Rome:
Oraculum apud Plutarchum monebat quendam ut anguem sedu^o vitaret: id cum
praestaret ille, in militem cui anguish insigne clypei erat, incidit, ac
obtruncatu^ fuit. Quanquam putem ego (pace magni istius Philosophi, and
Histori^i tamen) monuisse Deum ut (...) vitaret, quod commune nomen and clypei
and serp^n^is est, ita oraculo illi aequivocatio sua constat. Heinsius in
Crepundiis. Vide Val. Maximum l. c. 8. de Daphida and Philippo Macedone.
she bid him not jest, saying; Imperator eris, cum aprum occideris.

From that time he hunted often and killed many boares, to see if a Crown would
spring from their blood; but he still missed the Empire, which he saw Aurelian,
Tacitus Probus and Carus obtained, whereupon he said: I kill many boars, but
others go away with the flesh.

At last Aper having killed Numerianus (as is before mentioned) was brought by
the soldiers before Diocletian, who being told his name, (and concluding at
length that the predictio^ was to be understood of a man presently killed him;
in outward show ^or zeal of justice, as being not able to endure so foul a
fact: but in truth to fulfill the prediction of his hostess, the Druid; for
that Aper signifies a Boar. Vopiscus in Numeriano says that his Grandfather,
from whom he had this report, was present when Aper was slain, to whom
Diocletian, when he struck him, said in a bravado; Gloriare Aper, Aeneae magni
dextracadis: adding; Tandem Aprum fatalem occidi.

Diocletian was the first who wore cloth of gold, trod on silk and purple
embellished with pearls; and (next after Caligula and Domitian) was the first,
who would be sued unto as a god, though (says Aur. Victor) he carried himself
liker a Father, than a Tyrant.

Omnibus aequandus principibus, si a piorum sanguine abstinuisseth, says B.
Egnatius. It was a good speech of him though an evil Emperor, That the best
and most wary Prince may be abused by bad servants. Vopiscus in Aureliano.

Notwithstanding his cruelty condemned even by Libanius a Heathen (in his
Oration to Theodosius the Great) yet he counterfeited Clemency, and in
appearance had the memory of Marcus Aurelius in great veneration, as a God,
saying often that he desired to resemble him in humanity. Capitolinus in Marco
Antonino Philosopho.

These 2 Emperors chose 2 Caesar's; Diocletian chose Galerius surnamed
Armentarius, and Maximian; Constantius Chlorus, enforcing them to put away
their wives, and Theodora take their Daughters for an assurance of love by the
bonds of that alliance Aur. Victor.

Diocletian by his profound wisdom, wherewith he was endued, found out a more
assured way to secure himself against rebellions, than others had discovered:
for having taken Maximian for his companion and allie: and afte^wards created
Galerius and Constantius Caesar's, he rendered himself formidable to those who
desired to make themselves Emperors. For in what part soever the rebels rose,
one of these four was upon their backs, and stifled them in the birth. Only
Carausius, whom the situation of great Britain rendered invincible, stood out 7
years. But all the other who had the the boldness to make themselves Emperors,
as Aelianus, Amandus, Julianus, etc. were quickly defeated, before they could
make any considerable progress. Tristan. Quae persecutio omnibus fere
anteactis di^turnior atque immanior fuit. p. Orosius, l. 7. c. 25.


In the 19 year of his reign he raised the 10 and extremest persecution,
wherein 17000 men women and children were martyred within one month, besides
infinite numbers otherwise punished: the Christians torments lasting 10 years
without intermission, Incessabiliter acta est. Id. ibid.
no place being free.

Nullus dies cui non ultra quinque millium numerum Martyrum reperiri posset
ascriptus, excepto die Calendarum Ianuarii.

There was never a day in the year, except the first of January, whereto the
number of 5000 Martyrs at the least might not be ascribed says Hierome in his
Epistle ad Heliodorum and Chromatium.

Quis non horreat in una Aegypto 144 millia mortalium caesa, 700 millia in
exilium acta; praeter Africam totamque Europam in carnificinam versas? ut totum
orcum dicas in orbem effusum, ubi nemo nisi tortus vel tortor sit. Bussieres in
Flosculis Historicis.

Maximian at Octodurum commands the Army to sacrifice to false gods; the
Theban Legion consisting of 6666 Christians remove their quarters to Agaunum,
to avoid (if possible) occasion of discontenting the Emperor; who summoneth
them to perform their parts in this devilish worship: they return an humble
denial, with their resolve not to disobey God, for whose sake they would ever
continue faithful to him. He unsatisfied with this answer, puts them to a
decimation; to which they submit with cheerfulness, praying for their murderer.
His commands are renewed but prevail not on the remainder, who are butchered
without resistance, there being no delay in their death, except from the
wearines of their executioners. Mauricius their Colonel could not contain his
joy, when he saw the first decimation gallantly suffered. How ^eareful was I,
said he to his, awhile, surviving soldiers (for armed men may be tempted to
defend themselves) lest any of them might upon color of just resistance for
self-preservation in an innocent cause have strugled against this blessed
slaughter. I was watchful and had Christ's example in readiness, who commanded
his Disciple to put his sword into his scabbard. Salus vestra non
periclitabitur, nisi armis vestris. Despair it self could not conquer one
single patience, which yet creates valor in cowards, and makes them more
courageous in such extremities, because they are fearful; since they are
likely to do most to preserve life, who are most afraid of death. Eucherius
Lugdunensis.

Diocletiano and Maximiano imperantibus, acerbissima persecutio exorta, quae
per december continuos annos plebem Dei depopulata est, qua tempestate omnis fere
sacro martyrum cruore orbis infectus est: quippe certatim gloriosa in certamina
ruebatur, multoque avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus quaerebantur, quam
nunc Epistopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur. Nullus unquam bellis mundus
magis exhaustus est, neque unquam majore ttiumpho vicimus, quam cum december
annorum stragibus vinci non potuimus. Sulpitius Severus Sa r. Hist. l. 2.

There was a Column as a Trophy of the extinguishing the Christian faith
erected to him with this inscription. Nomine Christianorum deleto Qui Remp.
ever^ebant. in another Inscription mentioned by Baronius anno 304.


Dioclesiano Caes. Aug.
Galerio in Orient
Adopt.
Superstitione Christi ubique deleta.
Et cultu Deorum ubi que propagato,
Gruters Inscriptions, p. 280.
This most bloody persecutour of the Church, Zonaras, Nicephorus Callist. Th.
Metochita, etc. but neither Tristan, nor Chr. Matthias hold this to be the sole
cause of his resignation
at last persuaded Maximian to lay aside with him all government (not because
he was weary of persecuting, but of disappointment) since he could not hatch
his long brooded designs for the utter extirpation of the Christians, being
thus out of hope to do all the mischief he intended, by resigning the Empire,
he puts himself out of power to do any.

Being solicited 4 years afterby Maximian to reassume his charge, he answered;
You would not tempt me to it, did you see the herbs set with my own hands in my
garden at Salona.

Diocletian being invited by Constantine the Great and Licinius to their
marriage feast, excused himself, that by reason of his age he could not come;
upon which they wrote back threatening Letter, wherein he was charged to favor
Maximinus, and to have showed favor to Maxentius: whereupon fearing some
shameful death, he poisoned himself. S. Aur. Victor.

Maximian seemingly taking offense at his son Maxentius, then at variance with
his son-in-law Constantine the Great under color of this dislike, repaired to
Constantine, who married Fausta his daughter, with whom he tampered to make
away her husband: but she revealed his treachery to Constantine, who thereupon
put him to death.

Vtinam Maximianus suo potius ingenio, quam alieno exemplo fastidi^set fortunae
fastigium. Diocletianum secutus est. Sic vero animi inconstans; quia cum ex
Augusto privatus esset, e privato tyrannus esse volu^. Nam ut ad Imperii
majestatem eveheret M^xentium filium, acriter aff^xit Rem Romanam: ut deinde
evectum rejiceret, pater quoque esse recus^vit. Iam nec in filio Maxentio, nec
in genero Constantino purpuram ferens, dum insidias utrique struit,
interficitur. Puteanus in Historia Insubrica.

Choice Observations OF CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS, And GALERIUS ARMENTARIUS, To whom
are joined SEVERUS MAXIMINVS, MAXENTIVS LICINIVS. Colleagues
WHen Diocletian and Maximian laid down the ensigns of command, Constantius
Chlorus was chosen Emperor in these Western Provinces of France, Spain, and
Britain.

Unto Galerius his government fell, Egypt and the Provinces in Asia:
Constantius (who chose rather to govern well than much) gave up Africa and
Italy to him, as too remote from the seat of his residence, and eye of his
direction.

Constantius was by birth a Roman; his Father was named Eutropius, his Mother
Claudia, Niece to the Emperor Claudius Gothicus.

Tristan thinks that Constantius was not called Chlorus from his Palenes,
since Eumenius attributes to him a very sanguine complexion; but from some
green garments which he wore when he was young: and he mentions others who
had the same surname.

He was very affable, reigned to enrich his subjects, saying; It was fitter
that the wealth of the Land should be dispersed into the Commons hands, than
locked up in Princes coffers: in which kind he was so averse from all
superfluities, that he may rather be adjudged faulty the other way: for he was
an enemy to extortions, even to the lessening of the train of his house.

Being but nominated for the Empire, Eusebius de vita Constantini, l. 1. c 10.
and reproched for his poverty by Diocletian, who sent to exhort him to heap up
treasures; he advertised the people of his want* who vehemently contended among
themselves to fill his Exchequer, rejoicing greatly, that now they had that
long wished for opportunity to witness their benevolous minds unto the
Emperor: whereupon he truly and excellently said; That the love of the people
is the richest and safest Treasury of the Prince. Showing to Diocletians
Ambassadors, the great sums which he had ammassed in few hours, they were
amazed thereat; after whose departure he returned all the Subsidy that was
presented to him: Gonstantius Pa^per. See Suidas in (...)
by which custom he rather got the Epithet of poor, than, so indeed being by
this voluntary poverty, richer than Diocletian himself, yea than all the other
Princes together who were partners with him.

And as this one action showed his royal magnificence, so this other declares
his piety; in both which he was exemplary. To try the hearts of his Courtiers,
Sozomen, l. 1 The like History Theodorus Lector ^elteth of Theodorick King of
the Goths an Arrian, in the second book of his Collections.
he proclaimed, that all they who would not forsake the worship of the true
God, should be banished the Court, and should have heavy penalties and fines
laid upon them; presently upon this (says the Story) all who were base and
came to serve him only for ends, went away, forsook the true God, and
worshipped Idols: by which means he found out who were the true servants of
God, and whom he intended to make his own; thinking as such as he found
faithful to God would prove so to him. What this exploratorie stratagem of
Constantius effected in his Court, the same did that which Julian the Apostate
set forth in good earnest, against the Christians. He no sooner caused it to be
proclaimed, that whosoever would not renounce the Faith should be discharged
his service, and forfeit both life and estate to his high displeasure; but
presently upon the publication of that decree, they who were indeed Christians;
Socrates, l. 3.
and they that had only the title, presented themselves as it were on a common
stage to the view of all men.

Eusebius says that Constantius preserved (...) such Christians as were under
his command from harm.

Under him the Church in these parts had a breathing-time from persecution. But
I am afraid that that learned goes a little to far, Camden his Brit in
description of York.
who makes him founder of a Bishopric at York, and styles him an Emperor
surpassing in all virtue, and Christian piety. Mr. Fuller in his Ecclesiastical
History of Britain.

He married Helena (daughter of Coilus, Nullo modo Iacobus Philippus
Bergomensis audiendus est, qui Constantium repudiata Theodora Helenam, Anglorum
regis filiam captivam, uxorem duxisse fabulatur: cum ex Romannorum annalibus
certo constet, Helenam illum coactum repudiasse, ut Theodoram Maximiani Augusti
pri^ignam conjugem acciperet. Usserius in Antiquitat. Britann.
who entertained him when he was Lieutenant of Britain) but Maximian
tyrannising as well over loves, as men, declares Constantius Caesar, on
condition he would forsake Helen, and marry Theodora his daughter-in-law. He is
won by ambition, and easines of his nature (which bowed to those who seemed to
wish him well) and by the luster of the purple presented to him.

He marries Theodora; which alteration Helena bore with great constancy,
counting it an honor, that to refuse her no other cause was found, but the
good fortune of her husband; Constantius lived in body with Theodora, and in
heart with Helen: the torrent of ambition and affairs of the world having
parted their bodies could not hinder the inclinations of their hearts.For
Constantius returning to Britain, dyed in York; and being asked on his
deathbed which of his children should succeed him, since besides Constantine
he had two sons by Theodora viz. Constantius and Annibalinus: he then
forgetting his seo^nd wife and her offspring, cried aloud Constantinu^ piu^,
he would have no other successor than the pious Constantine, which was
approved by the army: who cast the purple Robe upon Constantine at York,
whilst he wept, and put spurs to his horse, that he might avoid the
importunity of the soldiers, who attempted and required so instantly to make
him Emperor: but the happiness of the state overcame his modesty.

Constantius lived 56 years; was Caesar 16 years, and Emperor 2 says
Eusebius. Cambde^ reports that at the demolition of Monasteries, there was
found in his supposed monument in Yorkshire, a burning lamp, thought to have
burnt there ever since his burial, about 300 years after Christ, and he adds
out of Lazius, that the ancient Romans used in that manner to preserve lights
in Sepulchers a long time, by the oylines of gold, resolved into a liquid
substance.

Galerius born of mean parents (surnamed Armentarius because he kept cattle)
bragged that a Serpent begat him, as one did Alexander the Great. Moribus
certeodioque in Christianos Draco fuit, nec indignus eo, quo se natum parente
fatebatur. Cluverus.

When he rifled the camp of Narseus King of Persia, a common soldier having
met with a Parthick satchel, wherein were pearls, through simplicity threw out
the gems, and went away contented with the beauty only on the leather bag.
Amm. Marcellinus l. 22. c. 3. Vide Piccarti Observationes Historico-politicas.
Dec. 3. c. 3.

He took for ease of his burden Severus and Maximinus surnamed Daza his sisters
(...), whom he elected Caesar's and after Augusti; which honors Severus enjoyed
not long, being slain at Rome by treachery of Maxentius when he had reigned but
one year.

Galerius incensed with the outrage of Maxentius intended to fall upon the
West; but distrust of the safety of his territories stayed him, and made him
create Li^inius Caesar: after whose nomination he survived not long.

He boasted the acutenes of his wit by the invention of new tortures for
patient Martyrs; notwithstanding when he felt himself invaded with a verminous
Ulcer, or Fistula in his secret parts; which did evaporate so contagious and
pestilential a stench, that some of his Physicians, not able to endure that
mephitis or steam of intense corruption, fell down dead; he understanding this
to be a judgment sent from God to retaliate upon him those tortures, which he
had inflicted on many innocents; then his flinty heart melted within him, and
at length he began to think of his wicked practices against the holy
worshippers of God, gave commandment for cessation of the Christians
persecution, confessed the equity of divine retribution, and in the midst of
these confessions of his own guilt, and Gods justice, he breathed out his
execrable soul from a gangrenous and loathsome body.

He lived not a year after his edict for the persecuting of the Christians.
Eusebius, l. 9.

After whose death, Licinius, and Maximinus beheld each other with a jealous
eye, and made show of contest; but Maximine at Tarsus decided the difference by
an irrevocable resignation.

Maximinus was much inclined to wine, in the excess whereof he commanded many
things, of which he afterward repented, giving a charge to his followers, that
they should not execute his desires, except he was sober, or gave them a
command in the morning Sextus Aurelius Victor.

Maxentius made himself Emperor, by consent of the soldiers, to recompense
whom he gave leave to sin cum privilegio; no words being more frequent than
these in his speeches to them; Fruimini, dissipat^, prodigite.

He being inamoured on a Woman, sent for her by his servants (her Husband not
daring to refuse for his life) of whom she desired time to make her self ready;
which having obtained, she goes into her chamber, and kills her self: the
Officers (when they could stay no longer) broke open the room, and finding her
dead, report it to Maxentius, who became more insolent than before. Eusebius l.
8.

By his Necromancy, Adulteries and Murders he grew so intolerable, that the
Senate sent to Constantine, craving his aid against him.

Constantine drawing Licinius to his side (by marrying his sister Constantia to
him) hasted to Rome with 90000 foot and 8000 horse, levied out of Britain,
France, and Germany.

Maxentius framed a deceitful Bridge over Tiber near Pons Milvius, to entrap
Constantine: but being overcome in battle, he fled (through forgetfulness or
have) over the same Bridge, which falling under him, he and many more were
drowned.

Licinius had nothing good in him, but that he disliked Eunuchs, calling them
the Mothes and Rats of the Court.

He was a great enemy to learning, calling it, through his ignorance, a poison
and public plague.

He thought that none could live chastely, measuring others dispositions by his
own vicious inclination.

He maligning Constantines fame, at last, persecuted the Christians in the
East, where he reigned with Martinianus, whom he before made Caesar at
Byzantium, and his son Licinius at Arles.

He was overthrown by Constantine in several battles, loosing many thousands of
men, Heme^arius, p, 1^6.
and was himself taken prisoner; yet by meditation of his wife, had his life
spared, and was confined within Nicomedia: where for his treasons after, he and
his son, who somewhat survived him, were put to death.

He lived 70 years, and reigned 15 Victor. Licinius a Constantino morte
mulctatur: vel ut alii tradunt, quum filiam suam Herinam eo quod Christiana
esset, ab equis discerpi mandasset, ipse adstans and inspecturus, equi morsu
interfectus est. Elenchus Numismatum in Bibliotheca Bodieeja^a.

Select and Choice French Proverbs, some of which were collected out of
Gruterus, de la Noue, and other Authors, diverse observed by my self when I was
in France, Alphabetically disposed and englished, and compared also sometimes
with the Refranes or Spanish.
A.
ALler ou le Roy va a pied. To go where the King goes a foot. 1. To the Stool.
Aller sur la Hacquen^e des Cordeliers. To go upon the Franciscans Hackney, 1.
to go a foot. Aimer n'est pas sans amer. Love is not without bitterness* Love
is (...) a bitter sweet.
Ainsi va le monde. So the world goes. Amasser en saison, despencer par
raison, font la bonne maison. A seasonable gathering, and a reasonable spending
make a good housekeeping. Amiens fut priuse en Renard, repriuse en Lion.
Amiens was taken by the Because the Archduke took it by a stratagem, and Henry
the fourth regained it by force.
Fox, retaken by the Lion. Amor peut moult, argent peut tout. Love can do
much, silver can do all. Amor, toux, fumee and argent, on ne peut cacher
longuement. Love, The Italian Proverb is: Love, the Itch, and the Cough cannot
be hid.
the cough, the smoke and money, can not long be hidden by any. A Pere, a
Maistre, a Dieu tout puissant, Null ne peut render l'equivalent. To Father,
Master, and God, All-sufficient, None can render equivalent. A petit Mercier,
petit panier. A little Peddler, a little pack. Apres We say, After Eecf Mustard.
disner de la moustarde. Paroum parva decent.
After dinner mustard. Apres la mort le Medecin. After death the Doctor. Apres
la pluye Post nubil^ Phoebus. After a storm comes a calm.
vient le beau temps. After rain comes fair weather. A quoi pensez vous, quand
vous nepensiez rien? A vous respondre, quand vouy me demandez rien. On what
think you when you think on nothing? To answer you when you ask me nothing.
Argent content port medicine. Ready money is a ready medicine. A rude Chien
faut dur lien. A cursed Dog must be tied short. Attente tourmente. Expectation
torments. Au jourdhuy marry, demain marri. Married to day sad to morrow. A un
bon Entendeur ne faut que demi mot. Half a word is enough Verbum s^t sapienti.
to an understanding Hearer. Autant de Pais, autant de coustumes. So many
Countries so many customs.
B.
BEau parler n'escorche pas la language. We say, Good words cost nothing.
Good speech flees not the tongue. Beauty sans bonte est comme vin esvente. The
Spaniards say, It is much worth and costs little, to give to evil words a good
answer. Refra^es ^'Oudin.
Beauty without goodness is like wine that has taken wind. Belles filles se
trovent au bourdeau, and les beaux hommes es mains du Bourreau. The fairest
woman in the St^wes, and the hansom'st man at the Gallows. Bon march tire
l'argent de la bourse. Good cheap commodities are not able pickpurses. Bon sang
ne peut mentir. A worthy nature cannot conceal it self.
Good blood cannot lie. Bonne renommee vaut mieux que ceniture doree. See Prove.
22. 1.
A good renown is better then a golden girdle. This Proverb is well explained
by E^din de Reaub. l 5. c. 3. and Pasqui^r de Recherches de la France, l. 6. c.
11. Some make it all one with that Proverb, The hood or habit makes not the
Monk, others say that only women of a good name and not whores were suffered
to wear a golden girdle. The Spanish Proverb is, He that has lost his renown,
is dead in the world. The English is, He who has an ill name is half hanged.
Bonne Terre mauvais Chemin. Bon Advocat mauvais Voisin. Bonne Mule mauvaise
best. Bonne Femme mauvaise test. Good Country and bad Way. Good Lawyer and
bad Neighbor. Good Mule and a bad beast. Good Woman and a bad head. Borgne est
Roy enter les aveugles. He that has one eye is a King among the blind. See
l'E^ymologie des Proverbes Francois. l. 1. c. 9.

C.
CEqu'on apprend au bers, dure jusques au verse. That which one learnes in youth
will continue till old age. Quo semel est imbu^a re^ens servabit odarem Testa
(...).
Cela est la Philosophy de Quenoville. It is the Philosophy of the Distaff.
C'est un mouton It is the custom of the Shepherds of that Province in France
so to mark their Sheep, therefore if in brabling or otherwise one has received
a blow on the nose and it appears, the^ men merrily say so.
de Berri, il est marque sur le nez. It is a Sheep of Berrie it is marked upon
the nose. C'est un bon harquebusier, See l' E^imologie des Proverb Francois.
l. 3. c. 25.
il vise aux talons and frappe le nez. They speak merrily of a fa^r.
It is a good Harquebusier, it aims at the heels and hits the nose. Chair du
Mouton manger de Glouton. Flesh of Mutton is meat for a Glutton. Chascun a son
tour, Le devise du Mounsieur de Guise. Every one has his turn, The devise of
the Duke of Guise. Chascun est Roy en sa maison. Every one is King in his own
house. Commun n'est pas comme un. The Public is not as private. Court mess
and long disner. Short Mass, and long dinner.
D.
D'Eau benite le moius suffis. Of holy water the less suffices. De fol Juge
brieve sentence. From a foolish Judge a quick sentence. We say, A fools bol^
is s^^n shot.
De la pance vient la dance. Dancing follows a full belly. De mauvais payeur
il faut prendre paille. Of an ill play master take any thing. Desjuner de
chasseurs, disner d'Advocats, Souper de Marchands, and collation de Moines. The
Huntsmans break fast, the Lawyers dinner, The Merchants supper, and the Monks
drinking. De trois chooses Dieu dous guard, De Beuf sale sans Moutarde, D'un
Valet qui se regard, D'une Femme qui se farde. From three things God keep us,
From powderd Beef without Mustard, From a Servant which vieweth himself, From a
Woman which painteth. Tollere nodosam niscit medicina podagram. Ovidius.
Du cuir d'autruy large courroye. A large-thong of another leather.
E.
EN gouttes Medicin ne voit Goutte. The Physician sees but littie in the Gout.
En Orange il n' ya point d'Oranges. In Orange The Prince of Orange his
Countryis fertile of all fruits save Oranges, whence came this Proverb, says
Iodo^^^ Sincerus in his T^i^erarium Galli^.
there are no Oranges. En Pont, en Planche, and en Riviere, Valet devant
Maistre derriere. On Bridge, on Plank, and on River, The Servant before, and
Master after. Like to this is the Spanish Proverb, Algran arroyo, passar
postrero. At a great River one should pass last. Multa cadunt inter calicem.
supremaque lab^a.
Enter deux selles le cul a terre. Between two stools the tail to the ground.
Enter la bouche and le verre, Le vin souvent tomb a terre. Between the lip and
the cup. The wine is often spilt. Eschorhcer le To spue, cast, vomit,
(especially upon excessive drinking) either because then one makes a noise like
a Fox which barks, or because the flaying of so unsavory a beast will make any
man vomit. See l'Etymologie de^ Proverb, Francois. l. 2. c. 33.
Renard. To flea the Fox. Estre sur la board de* la fosse. To be upon the brink
of the pii. Alterum pedem in cymba charonti habere.
F.
Fair de Chasteaux en Espagne. To build Castles in Spain. We say, to build
Castles in the air. Fair de son Medecin son heritier. To make his Phisician
his heir. Fair grond cas de peu de chose. To make great account of a little
thing. Femme, argent and vin on leur bien and leur venin. Women, money, and
wine, have their good and their evil. Femme rit quand elle peut and pleure
quand elle veut. A Woman laughes when she can, and weeps when she will. Fille
fenestriere and trotiere, Rarement bonne mesnagere. Beneficium accepisti,
libertatem vendid isti, Terence.
A gazing and gadding maid seldom proves good House-wife. Fille qui done
s'abandonne. A Maid which gives is easily gotten. Fille qui prend son Corpse
vend. A Maid which takes sels her body. Fille trope veue, rob trop vestue,
n'est past chere tenue. A maid often seen, a garment often worn, Are
disesteem'd, and held in scorn. The Italian Proverb is: A woman that takes is
easily yielding. Formage, poir, and pain, Est repas de vilain. Cheese, bread,
and pear, Is the Husbandmans fare. Les plus courts folies sont les mellieures.
The shortest follies are the best. Fols sont sages quond ils se taisent. Fools
are wise men when they hold their Prove. 17. 28. Si sapiens stultus, si stultus
sapiens. Pitissando dolium ex^auritur. Terence.
peace.
G.
GOutte a goutte la Mer s'esgoute. By drop and drop the Sea runs out. Homme
chiche, jamais rich. A covetous man is never rich. Semper au^rus eget.
Homme roux and femme barbue, De trente pas loin le salu^e, Avecques trois
pierres au poing, Pour t'en aider a ton besoing.
Salute no red hair'd man, nor bearded woman nearer then thirty foot off, with
three stones in thy fist to defend thee in thy need.

I.
JEunesse oiseuse, vie illesse disetteuse. An idle youth makes a needy old age.
The Italian Proverb is, A young man idle, an old man needy. Il a tousiours une
This is spoken of one that has a great appetite, the second small gut is
named, Iki^num because it is always void, whence springs this Proverb.
aulne de boyaux vuides, pour festoyer ses amiss. He has always an ell * of
empty guts to feast his friends withal. Il est bien avance qui a bien commence.
He is well advanced who has begun well. Dimidium facti qui been caepit, habet.
Il a beau mentir qui vient de loin. A Traveller may lie by authority. Il gaste
comme le fange de Paris. It staineth like the dirt of Paris, Lutetia a luto. Il
a la conscience large, comme la manche d'un Cordelier. He has a conscience as
large as a Franciscans sleeve. Il joue de moy a la pelotte. Me quasi pilam
hab^t Plautu^.
He plays at foot-bal with me. Il meant comme un Aracheur de dents. He lies
like a Tooth-drawer. Il n'est eschappe qui train son lien. He is not quite got
away who drags his chain after him. Il n'est jamais feu sans fume. There is
never fire without some smoke. Il n'y a pire sourd que celuy qui ne veut o^ir.
There is none so deaf as that will not hear. Il ny a tant des Moutons en Berry
There be not so many Sheep in There i^ such store of Sheep in that Province,
that they have this by word when they would tax a fellow for his notable
lying, and telling a greater number then the truth.
Berry. Il ni a que la premiere pint chere. The first pint is the dearest. Il
vaut mieux tard que jamais. It is better late then never. Jeu, putain, and vin
friand Font l'homme panure en riand. Play a whore, and brisk wine make a man
poor laughing.
The Italian Proverb (whence this seems to be borrowed) is, Play, woman, and
wine c^nsume a man laughing.

L.
LAbelle plume fait le bell oyseau. The fair feathers make a fair fowl. See
l'Etymologie des Proverbes Francois. l. 1. c. 4.
L'appetit vient en mangeant, est la soifs'en va en beuvant. The stomach comes
by eating, the thirst is quenched by drinking. L'asne du common est tousjours
malbaste The common Ass is always ill sadled. La soye esteiut la feu de la
Cuisine. Silk sumptuousness of apparel destroys Hospitality and good
Housekeeping.
does quench the fire of this Kitchen. La trop longue demeurer fait changer
l'amy. Too long abiding causes a friend to change. L'eau qui dort est pire qui
celle quid court. The standing water is worse then that which runs. Le coust
en fait perdre le goust. The cost takes away the desire to the thing. Le desir
nous tormente and l'espoir nous content. Desire torments us, and hope comforts
us. L'habit ne fait pas le Moyne. The habit makes not the Monk. (...)
Le maison est malheureuse and mechante, O^ le Poul plus haute que le coq
chante. The house is unhappy and wicked where the hen croweth louder than the
cock. Le mari veut (and doit) estre maistre, la femme veut (and doit) estre
maistresse, mais non pas de son mari. The husband will and ought to be master,
the wi^e will and ought to be mistress, but not of her husband. Les mots
termines en ique font au Medecin la nique. The words ending in Such be
Hectique, paralitique Apoplectique, Lathargique, because they are hardly or
never cured.
ique do mock the Phisician. Le plaisir engendre l'autre. One good turn
requires another. Le Royaume du France ne tomb point en quenouille. Lex salica
Gallorum imperii successor masculus esto.
The Kingdom of France falls not to the distaffe. Les Apprentifs ne sont pas
incontinent maistres. The Prentises are not presently masters. Les bons r^deurs
font les bons presteurs. Good restorers make good lenders. Le Soleil qui se
leve matin, La Femme qui parle latin, L'enfant qui boit du vin, Font rarement
bonne fin. The Sun which shines early in the morning, A Woman which speaks
Latin, A Child that drinks wine, Seldom make a good end. Le test d'une
Femme, La corpse d'un Sergeant, Les jambes d'un Lacquai* C'est un Diable
parfaict. The head of a Woman, The body of a Sergeant, The legs of a Lackey
Make a Devil perfect. Le vin se cognoist a la saveur, and le drap a la coleur.
Wine is known by its smell, and cloth by its color. Lire beaucoup and rien
n'entendre, C'est beaucoup chasser and rien prendre. To read much and
understand and nothing, Is to hunt much and catch nothing,
M.
MA chemise chascun blanch Baise mon cu chaque dimanche. My fair shirt kiss
me behind once a week. Manger It is spoken of those who in their youth have
all prosperity, but in the end sorrow and care.
son pain blanc le premier. To eat his white bread first. Mars venteux, and
Auril pluvieux font le May gay and gracieux. A windy March, and rainy April
make a May trim and gay.
N.
N'irrit ez point les chiens, au paravant que vos soies aux pierres. Provoke
not the Dogs before you beat the stones. Nouer l'esguillette. To tie the A
Charm which they use to hinder a man from accompanying with his wife.
point. Nourriture pass nature. Nature surpasses nature. Null bien sans peine.
No good without pain and labor. This Proverb is meant principally of virtue,
it comes not without labor.
O.
OI, voy, and te tais, si tu veux veure en pais. Hear, see, and be silent, if
thou will live in peace. Audi, vide, tace, si vis vivere in pace. Oignez
vilain, il vous poindra, poignez vilain il vous oindra. Sooth a Clown and he
will deal roughly with you, deal roughly with him, and he will speak you fair.
The Italian Proverb is, Do good to a Clown, he wishes thee evil for it, do him
an evil turn and he wishes thee good for it. On n^ doit parler Latin devant
les Clercs. One must take heed to speaking of Latin before Scholars. On ne
prend pas le lieure au son de Ta^bour. Men catch not a Hare with the sound of a
Drum. On ne scait, que la chose vaut, jusqu' a tant qu'on l'ait perdue. One
knows not what a thing is worth till he have lost it. The Spanish Proverb is,
Buen perdido ay conocido. A good thing lost is known. Bonum magis carendo quam
fruendo cognoscimus. Oui dire va par ville. Hearsay goes throughout the town.
P.
PApe par voix, Roy par nature, Empereur per force. The Pope comes by voices,
the King by nature, the Emperor by force. Pardon, on a pardon. By a gift on
obtains a pardon. Par l'eschantillon on cognoist la piece. By a pattern on
knows the whole piece. Petite pluye abbat grand vent. A small rain all aies a
great wind. Poisson sans vin est poison. Fish without wine is poison. Pour un
plaisir mill douleurs. For one pleasure a thousand sorrows.
Q.
QUand Italy sera sans poison, France sans trahison, Angleterre sans guerre,
lors sera la mond^ sans terre. When Italy shall be without poison, France
without treason, England without war, the World shall be without earth. Quand
le danger est pass, le Saint eff oubile. When the danger is past the Saint is
forgotten. Quand le soleil est couche tons les bestes sont a l'ombre. When the
Sun is set all the beasts are in the shade. Quatres bonnes meres engendrent
quatre mauvaises filles, Grande familiarite mespris, verite haine, virtue envy,
richesse ignorance. Four good mothers beget four bad daughters, great
familiarity contempt, truth hatred, virtue envy, riches ignorance. Qui a bon
voisin, il a bon matin. He that has a good neighbor has a good morrow. Est
aliquod bonum propter vicinum bonum
Qui a le bruit de se lever matin peut dormir jusques a disner. He that has
the same of rising early may sleep till dinner. Qui a terre il a guerre. He
that has land has also strife. Qui monte plus haut qu'il ne doit, descend
plus bas qu'il ne voudroit. He that mounteth higher then he ought, shall
descend lower then he would. Qui naist de geline il aim a gratter. He that
comes from a Hen loves to be scrat^ng. Matrem proles sequitur See IN Etymology
des Proverbes Francois, l. 2. c. 15.
Qui parle du loup, il en void la queue. He that speaks of the Like to which is
both the Latin Proverb; Lupus in fabula, See Erasm. Ad^g. and the Arabic,
Quando mention^m feceris lupi, praepara illi ^aculnm.
Wolf, sees his tail. While the Shepherds talk of the Wolf he comes sometimes,
so does he often of whom we speak. Qui regimbe contre l'aiguillon, merit d'en
estre picque deux fois. He that kicks against the pricks, deserves to be
pricked twice. Qui veut jeune chair and vieux poisson, se trove repugner la
raison. He that loves young flesh and old fish, loves contrary to reason. Qui
veult manger de noiau, qu'il casse la noix. He that will eat the kirnel, Qui
vult ^ucleum, nucem frangat oporte^.
let him break the nut.
R.
REmede contre la Peste par art, Fuir tossed and loing* retourner tard. An
Artificial remedy against the Plague, Ci^o long ^ard^. P^r p^ri r^^erre.
t^ fly swift and far, and return slowly. Render la pareille. To render the
like. Retournons a nous moutons. Let us return to our Sheep. This Proverb is
used when in some long discourse, one having made some digression from the
matter, will return to the thing he first spoke of. The original of it is taken
from Shepherds which sometimes leave their Sheep to solace themselves while
they feed, but fearing danger to them, after say, Let us return to our Sheep.
Rouge soir and blanc matin, C^est le plaisir du Pelerin, The evening red and
the morning gray, Are hopeful ^ignes of a fair day. The Italian says, See of
the French Proverb, l' Ety^^logi^ des Proverbes Francois* l. 1. c. ^.
The evening red, and the morning d^skie joyeth the Traveller.
S.
SI l'espine non picque quand nai, A peine que picque jamai. A thorn unless at
first it prick, Will hardly ever pierce to the quick. Souvent and peu manger,
Ce faict l'homme engraisser. Often and little eating makes a man fat.
T.
TELL refuse qui apres muse. He refuses who after bethinks himself. Tout se qui
reluist n'est pas or, All is not gold that glistereth. Tossed ou tard, prezau
loing, Le fort du foible a besoign. Soon or late, near or far, the strong has
need of the weak. Trois chooses sont d'un accord, L'Eglise, la Court, and la
Mort, L'Eglise prend de vif and mort, La Court prend le droict and le tort, La
Mort prend le foible and le fort, Three things agree in the world; The Church
the Court and Death, the Court right and wrong, Death the weak and strong. The
Italians have the like Proverb, Three things are much of nature: A Priest, an
Attorney, and Death; The Priest takes from the living and the dead; The
Atturny right and wrong, And death takes along with it both weak and strong.
Trop grater cuist, trop paller nuist. To much scratching smarts, too much
speaking hurts. Rem acutetigisti.
Tu as frappe au blanc. Thou have hit the white. The Cony by reason of his fear
is very forgetful, whence came this Proverb.
Tu as memoire du Lieure ou Lapin, tu la pers en courant. Thou have as much
memory as a Hare or Coney* thou have lost it in running.
V.
UN coup de langue nuist plus qu^un coup de lance. A word hurts more then a
wound. Un grand Seigneur, Un grand Clochier, Une grande Riviere sont trois
mauvais Voisins. A great Lord, A great Bell, A great River are three ill
Neighbors. Une bonne femme est une mauvaise best. A good wife is an ill
beast. Oftentimes in the contracted inscriptions of ancient Tombs these 2
capital letters, M. B. have been found which signify Mulier Bona in French
Bonne Femme. Some Drollers finding that these 2 letters M. B. signify as well
Mala bestia as Mulier bona; thrice used this Proverb. Un homme de paille vaut
une femme d^or. A man of straw is worth a woman of gold. Un Ministre ne doit
scavoir que sa Bible. That is, to teach or profess no more* 1 Cor. 22*
A Minister ought to know no more then his Bible. Vouz mangez vostre chemie,
par ou retournerez vous. You eat your way, Mocking those that eat by the way.
which way will you return.
FINIS.

