THE TRANSPROSER REHEARSED: OR THE Fifth ACT OF Mr. BAYES's PLAY.

Being a POSTSCRIPT to the ANIMADVERSIONS on the PREFACE to Bishop Bramhall's
Vindication, etc.

SHOWING What Grounds there are of Fears and Iealousies of Popery.

OXFORD, Printed for the Assigns of Hugo Grotius, and Jacob Van Harmine, on
the North-side of the Lake- Lemane. 1673.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE PREFACE TO Bishop Bramhalls
Vindication.
THE Author of the Animad-versions upon the Preface to Bishop Bramhalls
Vindication, etc. (if it be not too great a favor to call him an Author that
writes a Book upon a Preface) having posted up a Play-Bill for the Title of his
Book: And here by the way, we cannot but congratulate his honorable employ,
and question not but to hear of his being preferred from writing of Bills for
the Play Houses to penning of Advertisements for the Stage-Coaches and Bills
for the Pox, and after a proficiency therein, to be admitted upon the next
vacancy, to form Draughts for the Arithmetic and Short-hand-men, and frame
Tickets for the Rope-dancers and the Royall-Sport of Cock-fighting, that so he
may arrive in a short time to be Author of most of those ingenious Labors
which curious Readers admire at Passing times in their passage between
White Hall and Temple Bar.

I say, this great Author (of Play-bills) having in conformity to his promising
Title Transposed the Rehearsal, or at least all of Mr. Bays his Play extant,
four Acts. I thought it was great pity so facetious and Comical a work should
remain incomplete, and therefore I have continued it on, and added the Fifth,
the Argument of which, and its dependence on the other Four, I shall give you
an account of after a preliminary examination of the Characters and Plot in our
Authors Transposed Rehearsal.

But before I proceed to either of these, it will not be unnecessary to
consider on what bottom he has erected his Animad-versions, and this I find to
be no other then the Preface to Bishop Bramhalls Vindication, which is as much
as to say, here is a House wrought out of a Portal. It Is pretty I confess, and
exceeds the power of common Architects. But what follows is more strange, that
100. pages (the Preface is no more by his computation) should be foundation
sufficient enough to support his mighty Paper-building of 326.

Now it is very probable, that which gave the principal hint to our Authors
Rehearsal Transprosed, was the near accord he observes betwixt the Preface and
Mr. Bays his Prologue, P. 14. and here, I cannot but applaud his admirable
dexterity that could extract four Acts of a Farce, from a single Prologue, but
such is the singular felicity of some Animadverters, (and of ours amongst the
rest) in their illustrating of Authors, that they have heightened and refined
some of their Notions, not only above all others, but above even the intentions
of the dull Authors themselves; A rare Art! and followed so well by some of our
Translators of French Farce, that some of them have been luckily mistaken for
Authors. For instance, the Writer of the Preface had said, He could not tell
which way his Mind would work it self and its thoughts; now this our Improver
of Verity, according to his peculiar excellence, P. 12. resolves into Prince
Volscius his Debate betwixt Love and Honor, and tells you more of the Authors
mind in Verse, than he could do himself in Prose. And this feat is performed by
no other Magic then Regula Duplex, turning Prose into Verse, and Verse into
Prose alternativa. See what M^racles men of Art can do by Transversing
Prefaces, and Transprosing Plays.

But to go on with our Prologue, (so the A imadverter will warrant me now to
^^ll the Preface) our Critic has found a (...) in it, and what is that? It has
no Plot. (...), ^ P^^logue without a Plot! It is impossible, ti^ a cross-graind
objection this, (...) not easily evaded, had not our Cri^ ^laid Mock-Apologist
and answered (...), P. 11. the Intrigue was out of his head, which is very
civil I gad.

Another weighty exception against o^r P^ologue is, that it is written in a
Style, part Play-Book, and part Romance, p. 22. (Which of these two is Gazett,
for that the Animadverter says, is our Authors Magazine.) this is more
unpardonable than the former; for what can be a higher Indeco^um than a
Prologue written in Play-Book style. But that we may the better understand the
pertinenc^ of this Remarque, we must desire the Reader to observe, That the
Writer of the Preface had said, That the Church of Ireland was the largest
^cene of the Bishops Actions. Now it will go very hard, but this Passage will
be condemned for one guilty word or two; for Histories are Plays without
Scenes, and without Action; and these two words being neither of the Historians
Profession, nor Divines: the Bishops Historian must of necessity be cast,
unless he have any hopes of benefit of Clergy; however we hope before Sentence
be past, the Animadverter will inform us, what words are of the Clergy, and
what of the Layity, which in Holy Orders and which not; and then their several
Divisions, which Catholic, and which Schismatical; and amongst them, which
Classical, Congregational, and of inferior Sects; whethar for Church of
Ireland he would read Congregation, for Scene, Diocese or Pulpit, and for
Actions, Spiritual Exercises or Labors.

But if at last the Animadverter intend by Play-Book-Stile, whatever is written
above the common elevation, unless he would have the Priest and the Poet write
in two distinct Languages; I see no reason to allow him, that the Priest should
make use of a less refined and polisht Style than the Poet. If after all this
any one should be so impenitently inquisitive, as to demand a reason why our
Prologue Critic would have a Prologue with a Plot, and not written in
Play-Book-Stile, he will answer him, no doubt, because it is New.

From the Prologue, pass we to the Rehearsal Transprosed, in which the
Characters, the Action, and the Humor offer themselves to our consideration.
The principal person concerned in this Farce is Mr. Bays, whom our Transproser
makes to be of the same Character with the Writer of the Preface; for which he
alleges these following reasons, page 15, 16.

First, Because he has no name, or at least will not own it ( Good.)

Secondly, Because he is I perceive a lover of elegancy of Style, and can
endure no man's Tautologies but his own; ( Good again) and therefore, I would
not distaste him with too frequent repetition of one word, ( Very good
I-faith.) But chiefly because Mr. Bays, and He do very much symbolize in their
understandings, in their expressions, in their humors, in their contempt and
quarrelling of all others ( and all that) though of their own Profession. Then
less chiefly, Because our Divine, the Author, manages his contest with the same
prudence and civility which the Players and Poets have practiced of late in
their several Divisions ( there is a bob for the Playhouse. And lastly, Because
both their Talents do peculiarly lie in exposing and personating the
Non-conformists. ( I gad sir, and there you have nickt the present juncture of
Affairs.)

To all these Reasons, our Farce-monger might have added another, which is a
non pareillo, namely, that which Mr. Bays returned when it was demanded of him,
Why in his grand Show (grander than that in Harry the VIII.) two of the
Cardinals were in Hats, and two in Caps, because -- By gad I will not tell you,
Which after a pause, is a reason beyond all exception.

Now though the foregoing Parallel betwixt Ecclesiastical Mr. Bays, and Mr.
Bays in the Rehearsal be so exact, that it were hard to distinguish betwixt Mr.
Bays, and Mr. Bays, had not one writ a Preface, and the other a Play; Yet
because in the nearest resemblances of Twins, it is not impossible to trace some
marks of distinction and House-wives there have been upon Record, so expert, as
to discern a difference even in Eggs, so as they never mistook one* for
another; we shall endeavor to show, that these two are not so alike, but that
they are as unlike too; nay most unlike in their nearest resemblances.

First, Then our Trans-proser craves leave to call the Writer of the Preface
Mr. Bays, because he has no name, or a least, will not own it; from whence we
may infer, That every Anonymus Author may be as well called Mr. Bays, as this
Writer. And what may we then think of the Gentleman himself, who would be
Gossip to all the nameless Offsprings of the Press, and yet has not fathered
his own Bastard; but let him learn to Christen his own Brat first, before he
gives Nicknames to others; for who can endure that he should undertake, as
Godfather, for another child, that leaves his own to the Parish; Had not his
brain been delivered of this By-blow, without the Midwisery of an Imprimatur;
the Printer and the Stationer at least, would have appeared as Sureties for the
Child's behavior, and the Issue might have been judged legitimate, though the
Father were not publicly known. But now that the Infant has crept into the
World without a lawful Father, without Gossips, nay, without a name (or what
is all one, without a name of its own) we cannot but expostulate with Fate; as
Prince Pretty-man much upon the like occasion.

Was ever Child yet brought to such distress!
To be, for being a Child, made Fatherless.
Though every Nurse can readily point to Daddy's Eyes and Mouth, in the little
Babies face, as if the dapper Stripling were to be heir to all the Fathers
features; and a Dimple, or a Mole, if hereditary, were better Titles to an
InHeritance, than Deeds and Evidences. Yet none certainly was ever born with
fairer Marks than this. For it is stigmatized in the Forehead, and bears in
the Front the legible Characters of well-meaning Zealot.

And thus much in consideration of the first Reason, that induced the
Animadyerter to call the writer of the Preface Mr. Bays, because he has no
name: for which reason he might as well have called him Bays Anonymus in
imitation of Miltons learned Bull (for that Bulls in Latin are learned ones,
none will deny) who in his Answer to Salmasius, calls him Claudius Anonymus.

The second Reason is, Because he would avoid Tautologies and distastefull
Repetitions of one word; and to avoid this, he has taken a sure course; for
since his own Invention could not supply him with variety of names, he has run
over the Dramatis Personae of the Rehearsal; and because Mr. Bays alone was not
sufficient for his purpose, he has made bold with Mr. Thunderer, Draw-can-sir,
and Prince Volscius. These Titles he has conferred on our Author in
consideration of his Dignity, as he is a Clergyman of Honor.

But chiefly (as he goes on) because Mr. Bays and he symbolize in their
understandings, in their Expressions, in their Humor, in their Contempt and
quarrelling of all others, though of their own Profession. Now because these
with their subsequent Train of Reasons [ because that Players and he manage
their contests with the same prudence and civility, and both their Talents lie
in personating and exposing the Nonconformists] seem to make the most Pompous
show of all the rest, (for the precedent ones conclude nothing, why he should
be called Mr. Bays more then any other name) yetas you will easily discover,
this Pomp is far from a Triumph, and not less ignoble then Cardinal Campejus
his Pageantry, whose Mules under glorious Trappings, and rich foot clothes,
carried such disgraceful lumber, as is not usually concealed in Carriers Packs.

1. Then as to their Symbolizing in their Humor and Expressions, Mr. Bays you
know, prefers that one quality of fighting single with whole Armies, before all
the Moral virtues put together; and not with standing whatever the peaceable
Morallist says to the contrary, allows Fortitude the Precedence of the
Red-Hatted Virtues, and that Fortitude which consists in Conquering, not in
Suffering, (for these two differ one from another more then Mr. Bays his two
Cardinals in Hats, from those two in Caps) whereas the Bishops Historian gives
the Palm to Innocence, Innocence which is no less a stranger to the use of
Swords and Guns then the naked Indian! this and an untainted Reputation were
the Bishops Armor. Your Weapons of Offense, and your good old Fox you would
have girt him with, you might have reserved for some of your Pulpit-Officers,
who made less use of the Sword of the Spirit when they fought under the Banner
of the Lord of Hosts, (so they called the Earl of Essex).

Again Mr. Bays places most of his Art in the various Representations of
Battles, and in entertaining your eye with Encounters betwixt the great
Hobby-Horses and the Foot, or your ear with the Battle in Recitativo (which
resembles not a little your Troops singing of Psalms in their Marches) nay he
gives it as one of the greatest Elogiums to his Play, that it shall Drum,
Trumpet, shout and Battle, I gad, with any of the most Warlike Tragedies
Ancient or Modern. But in the Bishops Panegyric, We hear of nothing but the
softer sounds of Peace, and a happy Composure of those Divisions which have too
truly made the Catholic Church Militant: An Union, or at least an
Accommodation, between the Churches of Christendom, was one of those glorious
Enterprises, and great designs, which the Bishops active and sprightly Mind was
butied in; and for such Enterprises and Attempts (Mr. Bays, and you call
nothing Enterprising, but going to Fifty-Cuffs with Armies) you enviously
compare him to the Bishops of Munster, Strasbonrg and Colen, and might with as
much show of reason to the three Kings of Colen, and that had been Majestic
indeed, ay and greater to the Ear then the two Kings of Brainford, for that had
been three Kings of one Place.

But then the Animadverter adds, because they symbolize in their Contempt and
Quarrelling of all others, though of their own Profession. The Bishops
Panegyrist, it is true has expressed some Contempt, and not unjustly of the
Army-Divines, and of such as were admired by the Elue and White Apron'd
Auditories; but this will not amount to Scandalum Magnatum. Nor can I conceive
that every Cashierd Red-Coat once listed for a Levite, or every broken
Shopkeeper made free of the Preaching-Trade, without serving a just
Apprenticeship in it, has a Title to a Profession so sacred as our Writers is,
and except only this unconsecrate LayClergy, these Reverend Divines of the Shop
and the Camp, I know of none that the Author of Ecclesiastical Policy quarrels
with.

The next reason is, because our Divine the Author, manages his Contest with
the same Prudence and Civility which the Poets and Players have practiced of
late in their several Divisions. Here it is with the same Civility, and yet in
the very next page he tells us, that Mr. Bays is more Civil then to say,
Villain and Caitiff, and yet these are not so tuant as Malapert Chaplain,
Buffoon-General (and because it is an accomplishment to rail in more Languages
then one) Opprobrium Academiae and Pestis Ecclesiae.

The last is, because both their Talents do peculiarly lie in exposing and
personating the Nonconformists. And who so fit to be brought upon the Stage as
the Pulpit-Players, and those Religious Mimicks that personated the Gravity of
Divines without their Habits. Whom can our Theaters more deservedly expose,
then those that turned the Church into one. Eccleastiques of the Sock and
Buskin! To deny that they were Actors, were to question Nature that gave them
Vizors for Faces. Certainly Lacys best Grimaces were never so Artificial as the
Squints of a Humiliation Saint, and Mr. Scruple in the Pulpit has moved more to
Laughter then on the Stage. Such has been the good fortune of your eminent
Preachers, that their Sermons have been Acted with the same applause at the
Theater, which they have had in the Church, and been at the same time diversion
to the Court, and edification to the Saints. But yet what the Playhouse gives
us, is but Repetition of their excellent Notes, and we must confess, Ananias
and Tribulation are Copies short of their Originals. The exploits of a
Thanksgiving-Romance have far exceeded the boldest of our Heroick-Plays, and no
Farce yet was ever comparable to one with Doctrines and Uses.

We have been somewhat the larger in the examination of this Character, because
our Farce-Poet (in imitation of the French no donbt) has made but one Person
considerable in his Play, and the rest as it were, but Attendants on him; for
besides Mr. Bays his part, we have only Thunder and Lightning, Prince Volscius
and Draw-Can-sir Transprosed, and what is most observable here, is the fixing
the Characters so, that one man may Act any of these Parts, nay one man may Act
them altogether; for the Writer of the Preface is to present Mr. Bays,
Draw-Can-sir, Prince Volscius, and Thunder and Lightning all at one and the
same time. A notable and compendious piece of Wit indeed; for by this means we
have a whole Play Acted by one man, and if our Clergyman under the notion of
Pluralist, may present five several Persons, why not ten, twenty, thirty, and
so on till he represent an Army in Disguise, and by degrees at last the whole
Church Militant, (that is greater than a single Army) now if Seculars be
invested with the like power of representing Pluralities, one man may go for
the Representative, not only of one Shire, but of all England, and by
consequence a single Burgess may sit for the whole Parliament (this you may
call a Parliament Individuum to match it with your Synodical Individuum.) But
this it seems is the new way of Acting; First the Gentleman claps a pair of
Boots on the Clergy-mans legs, and so he personates Prince Volscius, and is
sent on a Journey to Knights-Bridge (though perhaps you will hear by and by, he is
not gone neither) anon he arms him with Sir Solomon's sword, and then he is the
Ecclesiastical Draw-Can-sir (you forget that wearing a Sword is against the
Canons) and after this had he planted a Ruff upon his neck, under that he
might have quartered an Army Incognito; unless that this Army might better lie
encamped in his Collar of Fortifications Sheerness, Innerness, etc. (which he
has hung about our Authors neck for a Collar of Nesses.) This I must confess is
more Magnificent, because it represents the Army, and their Trenches too. Thus
it is but acting a different Dress and Equipage, and the same man is a Riding
Prince, a Hero, and an Army in Masquerade, in his booted capacity he is Prince
Volscius, in his Sworded Draw-Can-sir, a pair of Buskins thus may personate a
whole Tragedy, and a single Sock a Comedy.

But this notable Art of Summing up an Army in one Man, the Gentleman no doubt
has learnt from the Schools, which tell us, That from a Muster of Peter and
Paul, and several Individuals, we come to frame a Character of bulky
Vniversals; and if so, that one man in different capacities may act several
Persons; no question but in many more, he may personate Mankind (which in the
Malmsbury Style is but Artificial man) for so great a Latitude is there in this
way of Representation by Symbols, and Hieroglyphical Signatures; that not only
every variation of Dress, but every Change of Posture alters the property of
the Actor, better than a P^rriwig or a false Beard. Thus the Philosophers have
wisely taught us to distinguish betwixt Peter standing, and Peter Sitting; and
the Transposer of the Rehearsal without all controversy will allow us, that
the same man that sitting in a Chair, and pulling on one Boot, personates
Prince Volscius, may, when he is prostrate on the ground, present Prince
Pretty-man intranc'd.

Now having had our Geneva Jigg, let us advance to our more serious Councils.
First then, after beating up of the Pulpit-Drums through the Ecclesiastical
Camp, Draw-Can-sir (an Army in Himself) enters the Lists against Hungaria,
Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden,
and all Scotland, (for these, besides many more, he encounters in the disguise
of Germany and Geneva) and to avoid the dull prolixity of relations of
Squadrons here, and Squadrons there, their Forces ranged in Battalia, their
Cannon placed, the Charge sounded, and the Alarm given.

Advance from Lambeth with the Curiasiers. At the very same instant these
reply, The Band you Boast of, Lambeth Curiasiers,
Shall in Geneva Pikes now meet their Peers.
Draw down from Dort the Spiritual Mijn Heers
To join with the Bohemian Musketeers.
Let the left wing of Zurick Foot advance,
And line that Bramble Hedge,
The Hugonot Horse we raised in France
Shall try their chance,
And scour the Meadows avergrown with Sedge.
While our Blue Brethren of the Tweed
Shall guard the Lake, if there he need,
Secure our Trouts, and save their Breed.
This, now, is not improper I think, because the Reader knows all these Towns
and Territories, and may easily conceive them to be under the Spiritual
Jurisdiction of John Calvin, John Huss, John Kn^x, Zuinglius, and the Hogen
Mogen Clergy. And thus far in imitation of Mr. Bays his singing-Battel, and
though his way of fighting in Recitativo is very pretty, yet, if this were
represented with Bag-pipes (instead of Lutes) and sung to the tune of a Psalm,
I think, you would grant it a little better. But if this Representation of a
Battle will not do, Transprosing Bays (for all this is but a Scene derived with a
little alteration from his Rehearsal, as you may see p. 42. 43. 188. 202. 203.
of his Play-book) has contrived it the other way too, and here, if I am not
mistaken, you will have fighting enough. You must imagine then after a terrible
Sea Fight passed betwixt Draw-Can-Sir, (Who single man's a Navy) and an Armada
of New England Divines (concealed in a Fleet of Colliers) and many a Broadside
of one whole Gun fired; a desperate Land-sight to ensue between the same
numerous Draw-Can-Sir, and the Congregational Forces of the Swiss, Scotch,
French, Dutch, Bohemian, and Genevois; in this Fray many a Monsieur Huguonot
falls to the ground, many a Geneva Doctor loses his Ruff, and many a Scotch
Kirkman his Blue Bonnet: here lies an Ecclesiastical Butter-box frying in his
own grease, and there a Brawny Swiss Divine, (stripped of his Red and yellow
Breeches) weltring in gore with a plump Bohemian; to contract, the
Nonconformists bad need desire a truce to bury their Dead Nay, there are none
left alive to desire it: but they are slain every Mothers Son of them: And now
that Draw-Can-sir, striding over the dead Army, and brandishing his Sword, had
Proclaimed his Triumph, I kill whole Nations, I slay both Friend and Foe, and
you would expect that he had Hectored and Achilliz'd em all out of the Pit, and
routed them beyond the delivery of a Thanksgiving; Mr. Bays, to surprise you
in the very Nick, tells you, that they are but stounded perhaps, and may revive
again. Mr. Bays had no sooner spoke the word, Rise, Sirs, and go about your
business; but all on a sudden, up they get, Horse and Foot, some upon their
legs, and some upon none, and away. There Is ago off for you, this can be a
Miracle to none that have heard of a certain Note, that Mr. Bays has made in
Effaut flat.

Some Critical People there were, that took the liberty the other day, to
examine your Romantic Tales, and one amongst the rest, who could not choose but
deplore the sad sat of the Nonconformists that were forced to follow the
wheels of Draw-Can-Sirs Chariot, was very curious to know why whole Nations, as
Hungaria, Transylvania, Bohemia, etc. would suffer this Hero to use them so
scurvily. Phoo! replied a Friend of the Transprosers, that is to raise the
Character of those Nations; for they were such as Triumphed in their being
knocked oth' head; an Army of Martyrs, provided with no other Arms then Prayers
and Tears; p. 303.
and what defense could these be against a hard hearted Infidel, that without
respect to Law, Justice, or Numbers, would put them all to the Sword, beging on
their bare knees for Quarter? One of the company would not let that pass so,
but told us, that Prayers and Tears were a sort of weapons anciently in use
among the Primitive Christians, before Bows and Arrows came up, but unknown to
the Moderns for this many years, as much as any of Pancirollus lost Inventions;
slighted they were at first it is thought, because they were not for dispatch;
for a good murdering Cannon does more execution in one hours time, then Prayers
and Tears use to do in many Ages: the German Churches therefore, and some of
their Neighbors, found a certain composition of Nitre and Charcoal, more
necessary for the carrying on their Reformation then all the antiquated
Artillery of the Ancient Christians. Captain Zuinglius, and John Calvin,
converted more with Swords and Guns, then with their sweaty Preaching, and
these are the powerful Arms they have bequeathed to all their followers in
Transylvania, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy, France, the Netherlands,
Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, Geneva and Germany. But this increases my wonder,
said his next Neighbor, that Draw-Can-Sir, unless he were Enchanted and
Cannon-proof, should with his single Arm defeat so vast an Army, and so well
appointed! Ay, replied he that spoke last, but he defeated only Geneva and
Germany, and the other ten Nations virtually and inclusively. But is it
possible answered another, that the greater should be included in the less, and
that an Army compacted of ten different Nations should be drawn out of Geneva
and Germany. Alack, alack, said I, that was upon the moderating part, you must
conceive Sir, this is elevate, this is the new may of writing, for the
Hungarians, Transylvanians, Bohemians, Poles, Savoyards, French, Netherlanders,
Danes, Swedes, and all the Scots, lay concealed in Geneva and Germany. But is
not this, says one, a thing somewhat difficult to keep this Spiritual Army thus
concealed? Not at all, answers another, to continue on the mirth, if they made
the German and Geneva Hosts their Friends. But this we took fora Play-Conceit
ill Transprosed. Some therefore there were that spoke of the unhoopable Tun of
Heidelberg, some of Sir Politick's comprehensive Tortoise, and some of Sir John
Falstaff's more capacious Buckbasket: in short, after many reasonings and
debates, while some said one thing, some another, a Gentleman in the
conclusion, to put a period to the descourse, told us, that Wesiphalia in
Germany bred a Number of very large Hoggs, and the greater part of those being
but Ratt-Divines, might be stowed in the fair quarters of their Bacon-Buttocks,
as commodiously as that Army of Ratts engammon'd in the fat Hanches of the
Arcadian Sow; and with this pleasant solution the Company was dismissed well
satisfied.

Now Sir, after this, the Reader may judge, how largely the Rehearsal has
contributed to your controversial Adventures, and the Knight-Errantry of your
faith; for to recapitulate. Page 42, 43. You sum up a whole Battle in two
Representatives, so lively, that any one would swear, not only ten Thousand
men, but ten Armies, and more, were at it, realley engaged: for besides
Hungary, Transylvania, etc. many more, which for brevity, you omit (as the
Churches of New Atlantis and Vtopia) are included under Germany, and Geneva
(that is virtually as Maggots in Filberds.) Nay, what is more monstrous yet,
the united Armies of ten Nations, (like Falstaffe's Buckram-men) have started
out of three; for the six first, Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Poland, Savoy,
France, fight under the Standard of the Roman-Church; and Scotland under the
English, and only Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands (that sounds more pompous
than the 7. Provinces) have listed themselves under Germany and Geneva.

This is one of your bold strokes; another is p. 188. When you have ranged all
your forces in Battle, when you have placed your Canon, when you have sounded a
Charge and given the word to fall upon the whole party; if you could then
persuade every particular person of them, that you gave him no provocation; I
confess this were an excellent, and a new way of your inventing, to conquer
single, whole Armies. To see the superfetatious Miracles of Art here in the
Accumulative Virtues of a single Hero! He ranges his multiplied self (Horse and
Foot) in battle array, he places all his Cannon (with fewer hands than
Briareus by 98.) and in the same breath, sounds a Charge (with as many Trumpets
as mouths) and gives the Signal to himself to fall on; this you may boldly
challenge for your non ultra, it is as high as you can go.

So, now come in Thunder and Lightning, that is, the Bishops Historian in those
two shapes; and this way of making one Person represent a Dialogue between two,
is very artificial indeed, yet this is performed with a little alteration of
the voice (for besides the diversity of dress and posture, that of the Tone and
Accent is no less considerable in an Actors Representation of many Persons at
one and the same time) it is but rattling in a big and hoarse voice, I am the
bold Thunder; then squeaking in a shrill and tender, the brisk Lightning I, and
the business is done; this now if you mark it, is extraordinary fine, and very
applicable to the Bishops Historian; for he says, Some that pretend a great
interest in the holy Brotherhood descry Popery in every common and usual
chance; a Chimney cannot take fire in the City, or Suburbs, but they are
immediately crying Jesuits and Fireballs. Now what does our Transproser do,
but transverse this thus, I strike Men down.
I fire the Town.


Where, by the way, it is a marvel our Author, when he called his Book, the
REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED, forgot to add, the PREFACE to Bishop Bramhall's
Vindication TRANSVERS'D, that double Elegancy would have been as pretty as two
Flowers growing on one stalk. And this I mention the rather, because I sind he
is a professed Critic in Titles, for page 308, 309. observing, by chance, the
Title age of this Book. A Rationale upon the Book of Common Prayer, of the
Church of England, by A. Sparrow, D. D. Bishop of Exon. With the form of
Consecration of a Church or Chapel, and of the place of Christian Burial; by
Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester; sold by Robert Pawlet, at the
sign of the Bible (one would have thought that Sign might have atton'd for all)
in Chancery Lane. This he tells us, was an Emblem how much some of them
neglected the Scripture, in respect to their darling Ceremonies: So that the
Animadverter cannot be better employed next, than in writing another Book of
Animadversions upon Title-Pages. And because it is a Task so agreeable to his
Genius, I could wish, if all other preferments fail, the Gentleman might be
advanced to the Office of Title-Licenser, (then Robert Pawlet and James Collins
might shut up their Shops, for any trading in Rationales, or Ecclesiastical
Policies) and if he shall appear sufficiently qualified to discharge this
trust; I would have him removed next (or if he please, Translated) to the
greater Dignity of revising Prefaces, if he be not averse from that, because
Prefaces, as well as Epistles Dedicatory, fell under the inspection of
Archbishop Laud.

But seriously had not our Author Entitled his Pamphlet, the REHEARSAL
TRANSPROSED, we could have given it a more express Name (unless there be some
mystery more than ordinary, couched in the word TRANSPROSED) which is the
REHEARSAL TRANSSCRIB'D, for in Transcribing more Verses of the REHEARSAL, than
he has Transprosed, his Play-Observations seem rather to have answered the
latter Title. Besides his Verses before cited, page 170. of his Animadversions.

I strike men down.
I fire the Town.
Page 62. He has haled in the two last Verses of the Song, which the two Kings
of Brainford sing, descending in the clouds: for a Couplet in a Song gives a
better Ragoust to a Controversial Discourse, then Bacon to an Olio, or St.
Au^tin to a Sermon.

Page 12. His Animadversion on these words of the Writer, He knows not which
way his mind will work it self, and its thoughts amounts to no more than this;
that our Clergyman was taken violently with a fit of Love and Honor, and
being sick of Prince Volscius his disease, there was no other cure, but this
Charm, Go on, cries Honor, tender Love says, Nay:
Honor aloud commands, pluck both Boots on.
But safer Love does whisper, put on none.


And though the Writer protested He was neither Prophet nor Astrologer enough
to foretell what he would do; the Animadverter (being both) tells us it is
precisely, For as bright Day with black approach of Night
Contending, makes a doubtful puzzling Light.
So does my Honor, and my Love together
Puzzle me so, I am resolved on neither.
Though the Verses come in to no more purpose then one of Bays his Similes.

Again, for Bays his Verses will serve for all occasions, as well as his
Prologue, for all Plays, page 202. he has borrowed these from the singing
Battle.

Villain, thou lie, --
-- Arm, Arm, Valerio Arm,
The lie no flesh can bear I trow.
If Mr. Bays (as you tell us, page 17.) was more civil then to say Villain, he
might have taught his Actors better manners. All these, (besides the two last
verses of the event of the Battle) you have diligently Collected, and for the
most part faithfully transcribed, unless in these last recited, where for
Gonsalvo in the Rehearsal, you have put in Valerio, and by the alteration of
that one word, have made it your own, just so Mr. Bays used to do with many a
good notion in Montaign and Seneca's Tragedies: yet though your Title promise
us so fairly, you have not Transprosed three whole Verses in all your Book. But
be it the Rehearsal Transprosed, or transcribed, or if you will, Reprinted, for
your Pamphlet is little else but a Second Edition of that Play, and Mr. Hales
his Tract of Schism: though methinks you might have so much studied the Readers
diversion, and your own, as to have exercised your happy talent of Rhyming, in
Transversing the Treatise of Schism, and for the Titles dear sake you might
have made all the Verses rung Ism in their several changes. I dare assure you
Sir, the work would have been more gratefully accepted than Donns Poems turned
into Dutch, but what talk I of that, then Prynnes Mount Orguil, or Milton's
Paradise lost in blank Verse. But as it is, you give us quotations of whole
Books, like him who wrote Zabarella quite out from the beginning to the end,
professing it was so good he could leave none behind (how like is this to our
Transcriber, yet whatsoever I omit, I shall have left behind more material
passages, before his Edition of Hales, p. 176.) It is no absurdity now to say,
your Text is all Margent, and not only all your Dishes, but your Garnish too is
Pork. And thus much for your Regula Duplex, changing Prose into Verse, and
Verse into Prose, that is your first Rule. Your second Rule, is the rule of
Observation or Record, by way of Table Book. As thus, in my Observation (say
you p. 168.) if we meet with an Argument in the streets, (An Argument! how
civil that is for a brawl, so modest, so gent!) both Men, Women and Boys, that
are the Auditory, (that is well, but Congregation would have bin better) do
usually give it on the modester side; and conclude, that he that rails most,
has the least reason. Very subtly concluded by our Observer, the Boys, and
the Women! Now I had thought that in a Controversy betwixt the Oyster-women
and the Opponent Tankard-bearers, the cause had ever been carried with
confidence and Noise, and that the Rabble adjudg'd the Victory on their side,
who managed the dispute with the greatest clamor and violence, prosecuting the
baffled Scold, that is the modester, with stones and hooting. But I will allow
our Authors experience in the Rabble-Affairs to be greater, as having been a
frequent and assiduous Spectator of these little broils of the Rascality. He
has told us where to find the contemplative man, at the head of a troop of
Boys and Women, in the corner of a Street, his Table Book out, and his hand
and eyes very busy in remarking the petty disorders of a Riot. This is his
Diary, in which our small Historian registers the proceedings of every Suburb
Tumult; in this he sums up all the Billinsgate Debates and Conferences. It Is
his scolding Common-place-book, which acquaints him with all the Moods and
Figures of Railing; here he has all the terms of that Art which Smectimnuus,
Marchmont Needham, I. Milton, or any other of the Professors ever thought of,
for there is a certain form and Method in this as well as all other Arts; but
yet, our Author being a well-wisher to the Railers, to encourage those that
have any inclination this way, to improve that faculty, assures them. Page 261.
That the secret is not great, nor the Process long or difficult, if a man would
study it (and though in other things your knowledge may be above his, you may
believe him in this, he has made it his business) Every Scold has it
naturally. It is but crying Whore first, and having the last word. Next he
instructs his Pupil in the several kinds of Railing; for besides the Common
scurrilous way of calling men Buffoons, Brokers,etc. p. 270. page 106. in which
he is so expert, that I am confident, that Fellow in Plutarch, that busied
himself to find out how many several ways the Letters in the Alphabet might be
ranged, tranpos'd and altered, could not invent more changes of the Letters,
than he has in instructing them to scold; There is yet another by which dumb
men may be taught to rail, that is by Signs, (for there is a Language of the
Hand and Head.) This is page 160. Where he tells us of an incorrigible Scold,
that though she was duck'd over head and ears under water, yet ^tretch'd up her
hands, with her two thumb-nails in the Nit-cracking posture, or with two
fingers divari^ated, to call the man still in that language, Lowsy Rascal, and
Cuckold: It is a pretty Tale, I confess, but so miserably foisted in, that
whoever will consult the forecited Page, cannot but allow with me, that our
Disputant is better capacitated to maintain an Argument (in his own Phrase)
with a rude bustling Carrman, or a Porter in the street, then with an
Ecclesiastical Politician.

But to follow our Street-walker with a full Cry of Boys and Women at his
heels, (he wants only the Fiddles to make up the Frolic) marching in state
with his Retinue through Lincalns-Inne-fields to ^haring-Cross, after a sober
remark or two, according to his wonted formality, on the Boys whipping their
Giggs, and the Lacqueys playing at the wheel of Fortune, p. 206. he casts his
Eye sometimes upon the Booksellers Stalls, and sometimes upon the Wall; and
gazing at last with admimiration at a Preface, showing what GROUNDS there are
for FEARS and JEALOUSIES of POPERY: after a solemn pause and profound silence,
having spit twice, he turns him round to his Auditory, (the White Aprons, and
the Boys) and with a grave Nod, pointing to the Preface, See here (says he) is
one of the dutiful Sons of the Church, that has writ a Preface, showing what
GROUNDS there are, etc. when he knows as well as I, or any of you, I marry does
he, that there are no GROUNDS at all, and therefore if he would have said any
thing to the purpose, it should have been rather, A Preface, Showing the
CAUSELESNESSE of the Fears and Iealousies of POPERY, at which the Rout shouting
Victoria, Victoria, the Gentleman big with wonder at his Lucky hit, turns to
the wall, (as the Privy-Councellor in Montaigne on the like occasion) and
pissing, cries, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the
glory; then having damned the Rationales, as he passed along, he slips into a
Coffee-house, leaving the Rabble to the following Adventures of the day.

Here, placing himself at the Tables-end, and calling for a dish of Coffee,
which no sooner brought, but after a short grace, drunk up; he exalts his
Superciliums, and vexes his formal Beard, to make his Face look like the Turks
in the bottom of the Dish, (for by that Glass the Sages lean to dress
themselves in their Oracular looks) insomuch that the Coffee-Boy, who had all
this while intentively observed the Affectations of our Man of Gravity and
Understanding, had much ado to forbear asking him, whether, that was not his
Picture which his Master had hung out, imagining, as he well might, that he had
sat for the Coffee-house Sign. To proceed, the Gazett being examined, and many
Political Discourses passed betwixt our Intelligent Sophy, and the more
judicious Boy, (for this little Officer you must suppose is his principal
Camerade, as being of greater quality then those that make up his Street-
Auditory, and no less then our Authors Library Keeper). I say after several
facetious reflections on both sides, on the Polish King, and his Cross-legg'd
Parliament of Tailors, (managed in the style of Prince Prettyman and Tom
Thimble) and many other Arguments too long to relate; Company coming in, and
the house beginning to fill, more Coffee is the word, and away goes our Authors
Camerade. By this time, the Politic Cabal-men were most of 'um set, and all
the Rooms rung with nothing but a continued Noise of Arcana Imperii, and
Ragioni di ^tato (in these places some think, most of our late Forms of
Government were modeled, and there are, that say, Machiavel the Florentine was
born in a Coffee-house) And now one sinks the Dutch in a dish of Coffee, and
another beheading the clean Pipes, prognosticates the fate of De-Wit and
VanPutten, a third blows up a Fire-ship with a provident Whiff of Tobacco, and
a fourth pouring a flood of Rheum upon the floor, opens the Hollanders Sluices.
Many secret Intrigues were whispered too close to be heard, but amongst all,
none we so loud, as a Junto of Wits, that had seated themselves near our
Author: while they were engaged in a very warm dispute, the Man of Observations
draws out his Table Book ('it is his most dangerous Tool) making all this while
as he minded nothing, but no sooner had the Wits spoke of the Designs and
Enterprises of the Bishops of Cologne and Strasburg: Oh ho (says he) are you
there abouts, I think these are Bishop Bramhalls fellows, or any an
enterprising Bishops of'um all; pop, he slaps them down, and makes them his
own; and as they went on with the Attempts of the Bishop of Munster: So,
there is another, I shall ^it'em for Bishops now I warrant you, and pricks him
down. Bishops he knew they were, and enterprising designing Bishops; but never
minded whether their Enterprises or Designs were of the same nature with
Bishop Bramhalls, or whether they acted in the like Capacity. If the Readers
cannot find out that themselves, even let them alone for Bays. Resolved it seems
he was, come what would, to drag them by main force into his Book, and he has
thrust'em in accordingly, by head and shoulders, two of them in one place; but
of this he repents him afterward, and says, he was too prodigal of his
Bishops; but if the Gazett Commentators had furnished the Man with any more,
you should have had them freely, and what can be more reasonable? Where the
Writer of the Preface tells us, that Bishop Bramhall finished all the glorious
designs that be under-took. This says he, might have become the Bishop of
Munster; though he, we all know, has not accomplished all his designs; but our
Author had never another Bishop left, and he must stop the gap, or no body,
therefore to bring himself, and his Bishop off, he tells us, it might have
become him, before he had raised the Siedge from Groningen. Nay, then it is
well enough, if it might have become him at all. But if yet you think these
Bishops are not like Bishop Bramhall, he can dress up Bishop Bramhall like
these Bishops, and because his reputation and Innocence were Armor of Proof
against Tories and Presbyterians, he arms him with a good old Fox, (mark, here
is Innocence with a Sword by its side,) and let any one judge now, whether
Bishop Bramhall, in our Authors accoutrements, be not very like the Bishops of
Cologne, Strasburg, and Munster.

Ditto, (for we are yet in the Gazettstyle, and our Scene is still in the
Coffee-house) We have advice, that the French, after a small dispute, forcing
the Dutch from their Post, gained the passage over the Bettuwe, etc. I foresaw
this all along (says a Vertuoso) this is Momba's and DeGroots doings, to leave
this passage open and ungarded. My life for yours (replys another supping up
his Coffee, and scalding his chaps for have) this is a Plot, I plainly see it, a
Plot of the Arminian Party; this has been a brewing any time this Thirty years
and upwards, thus it always has been, and thus it always will be, as long as
any of the Race of Barnevelt and Grotius are left alive. I gad, Sir, and you
speak a great deal of Truth (says our Coffee-house Notary, whose hand was
moving all this while) these Arminians are the rudest ill bred'st persons, and
all that, in the whole world. There has been a party of them in England, that
shall be nameless; of such a Pontifical stiffness, as if they were Companions
for none but Princes and Statesmen forsooth. Well, I Will say no more, they shall
know what a Satyrist I am, I Will Lampoon, and print'em too, I gad. So, out he
goes, leaving the Arminian and Calvinistical Wits to fight it out at Argument.

It is not easy to imagine now, with what pleasure our Author takes a review
of his Forces drawn out in their Notional Parade. Here Is a fantastique Bishop
Bramhall, accoutred like a German Prelate, at the head of the Irish Army; there
a Fairy Gr^tius making a Bridge for the Enemy to come over; while those
Churches seated on the frontier of Popery, take Alarm at their march. Thus
having raised and ranged in order his Martial Phantomes, he sets them a
fighting through all the Tropes and Figures of Rhetoric. He knew this way of
resolving controversy into Eccle^ia^tical Combat, and deeds of Chivalry, would
delight, a muse, and all that: Besides he had a politic fetch or two in it,
for these Warlike N^^ions, and armed Ideas being terrible to him* he conceived
they would be no less to others, and that no answerer would have the courage to
engage such a Rhetorical Soldier, unless he were able to give him battle in
all the Metaphors of War. But alas, it is not every Fight in Puppet-Shows
strikes a terror in the beholders, nor are Armies figured, in the imagination,
so dreadful.

And though I will not deny, that these hostile Shapes and Military Figures,
which our Romancer had quartered in the three Ventricles of his Capacious Brain
(his Memory, Fancy and Judgment being transformed into Fortification and
Garrison) might raise such ^umults in his Sconce, and so far invade his civil
Peace, as to make the Gentleman startle at his own dreams: yet to those who
consider that these are but the fumes of Melancholy, such Visionary Battalia's
are no more frightful than thosefighting Apparitions; which Exhalations raise
in the Clouds. But to indulgeour Author in the love of his Chimerical conceits,
struck blind with his own daz'ling Idea of the Sun, and admiring those
imaginary Heights which his fancy has raised Since even timorous Minds are
Courageous and bold enough to shape prodigious Forms and Images of Battles; and
dark Souls may be illuminated with bright and shining thoughts. As, to seek no
farther for an instance; the blind Author of Paradise lost (the odds betwixt a
Transproser and a Blank Verse Poet, is not great) begins his third Book thus,
groping for a beam of Light.

Hail, holy Light, Offspring of Heaven first born,
Or of the Eternal Coeternal beam.
And a little after, -- thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy Sovereign vital Lamp; but thou
Revisitst not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing Ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop Serene has quenched their Orbs,
Or dim suffusion veiled. --


No doubt but the thoughts of this Vital Lamp lighted a Christmas Candle in his
brain. What dark meaning he may have in calling this thick drop Serene, I am
not able to say; but for his Eternal Coeternal, besides the absurdity of his
inventive Divinity, in making Light contemporary with it is Creator, that
jingling in the middle of his Verse, is more notoriously ridiculous, because
the blind Bard (as he tell us himself in his Apology for writing in blank
Verse) studiously declined Rhyme as a jingling sound of like endings. Nay, what
is more observable, it is the very same fault, which he was so quick-sighted,
as to discover in this Verse of Halls Toothless Satyrs.

To teach each hollow Grove, and shrubby-Hill. This, teach each, he has
upbraided the Bishop with in his Apology for his Animadversions on the
Remonstrants Defense against Smectymnu^s.

You see Sir, that I am improved too with reading the Poets, and though you may
be better read in Bishop Dav'nants Gondibert; yet I think this Schismatic in
Poetry, though nonconformable in point of Rhyme, as authentic every jot, as
any Bishop Laureat of them all. Tell not me now, of turning over the moth-eaten
Critics, or the moldy Councils: the Gazetts and the Plays are fitter Texts
for the Rehearsal -- Divines (men more acutely learned than Parson Otter and
Doctor Cutberd the Canonist) than a company of dry Fathers and Schoolmen, that
write in Latin and Greek; Romances are thumb'd more than St. Thomas and
Gondibert is Dogs-ear'd, while the Rabbis are untoucht. Mr. Bays his Ipse
Dixit will pass, when Pythagoras his will not, and the Rehearsal is more
universally applicable than Homer or Virgil; though they and their Commentators
have taught the World the Mysteries of Handicraft, the Principles of Arts and
Intrigues of Government. This Mock-Play, not only reveals all the Stratagems of
War; all the Policies of Courts, and Subtilties of Schools; but is so
sufficient of it self for all Professions, Trades and Sciences; that if all
other Books were lost, it is conceived they might be abundantly supplied from
this. It has not only thrust the Duellist's Caranza out of doors, but the
Politicians Machiavil, the School-mans Scot^^, and the Soldiers Vegetius too.
So completely necessary it is for resolving all Scruples and Cases of
Conscience, that the neglected Casuists, unregarded and forsaken of all, lie
covered over with dust and cobwebs; as in Astragons's Library, where -- a deep
dust (which Time does softly shed.
Where only Time does come) their Covers bear;
On which, grave Spiders, streets of Webs have spread;
Subtle, and slight, as the grave Writers were.


Now my curiosity tempts me to wonder not a little, why the Poet, after he had
enumerated the Linguists, Schoolmen, Natural Philosophers, Moralists,
Historians, Physicians, Civil Lawyers, and Poets, in Astragon's Library; should
in the tale omit the mention of the Dramatists and Gazetteers; it being a thing
wholly unlikely, that the wise Astragon should be unprovided of such excellent
Authors. I conclude therefore, that the Dramatists must be included under the
Title of Poets, and the Gazetteers under the name of Historians; and the latter
at least, I am the rather inclined to believe, because our Animadverter (a man
of profound learning) page 187. tells us, the story of Macedo is matter of
Gazett; which by the way, is an important Discovery, as it serves to correct a
popular mistake; for if Justin and Quintus Curtius were Gazetteers, it is most
certain, Gazetts are not so late an Invention, as is supposed. And of this I
doubt not but our Author can produce undeniable Testimonies, if any man should
be so bold as to call his authority in question; for I presume he has all the
Gazetts upon the file, from Alexander the Great, to this present Day and Year.
Well, such a Collection is an invaluable Treasury; but of all the rest, the
Greek and Roman Mercuries best deserve a corner in a States-mans Cabinet. Who
would not give more for an Express from Salamis, or the Letters from Pharsalia,
then would purchase the Sibyls Leaves, and rate the Diurnals of Caesar and
Pompey at the price of Philadelphus his Library? How cheap was Fame then, when
Luean acquired it by transversing the weekly-Posts? Who might despair of
Honor, when it cost Livy no more than a Body of Collections not much superior
to Rushworths; and Pliny procured it by setting forth a Volumn of Phylosophical
Transactions.

But I am too sensible, these Reflections are not proportionable to their
Subject. Your Notion Sir, is capable of higher improvements, and I leave it as
an ample Theme for the Wits to dilate upon. Only from hence, if I may augurate
the good fortune of your Writings. I dare assure my self, when the Acts and
Monuments of Hen. Elsing. Cler. Par. Shall suffer by the hands of the
well-affected Cooks and Pye-men; yours deserving a more honorable fate, shall
be preferred to the Gazett- Vatican, and live amongst the immortal Memoires of
the Coffee-House.

The zealous Citizens (if Fame be no lier) have bought up three Editions of
your Book, and not unlikely, for they are yearly at a great expense in Paper
for Prunes and Castle-Sope. Your Writings are made free of all the Trades, and
w^oso has occasion to buy at many shops, purchases all your Treatise in
parcels; for that and Pack-thread are given into the bargain.

This way of selling your Book by Retail, is a notable expedient some have
found out to disperse Orthodoxy with their Wares, which no policy can prevent,
unless by making an inspection into the Covers of the Non-conformists Sugar
loaves and Comfits. You travel with every Pound of Candles, and make every Race
of Ginger a dear Token to the Brethren. Each Page of yours is sold by weight,
and as Dr. Do^^e on a like Writer.

-- for vast Tomes of Currants and of Figs,
Of Med'cinal and Aromatique twigs;
Your leaves a better Method do provide,
Divide to Pounds, and Ounces sub-divide.
Disdain not Sir, to stoop to these inferior Offices, for some of your Papers
may be reserved unhappily for baser uses, and dye the common death of
Illegitimates; thrust into no other grave than the ordinary Jakes, and meriting
no nobler Epitaph than this, Here lies in Sheets, TRANSPROSED RFHEARSAL;
Condemned to wipe his, or her A -- hole.


If ever the Blue and White Aprons should be solicitous for a fourth
Imp^estion, the Coffee-men I hear will bid fair for your Stationers; for
besides that you have singularly obliged them, in demonstrating to the world
the wonderful effects of an Education in their Academies, you have no less
engaged their Customers in furnishing them with the best part of their Cheer,
News and pleasant Tales. As any one may see, p. 242. 243. and at large in your
whole Treatise, which is a Gazett of 326. pages. To this we may add, that your
Wit is much after the same Rate and standerd with theirs, and your Disputes
maintained with as much Zeal, and as little Reason. For let any of the oldest
Graduates in those tattling Universities resolve me, whether there was ever so
sure and compendious a Method of silencing opponents, as you have found out.
For it is but calling a man Mr. Bays four times in a page (this you do under
pretense of avoiding Tautologies) Lampooning the An^agonists Booksellers; nay
his Stall, and the very Avenues on which the Title of his Book is posted, (for
it is an horrible affront to any Idle gaping fellow, that he cannot so much as
look at the Wall, nor pass by a Stall, but he must be out-star'd by an impudent
Preface) tacking such words together, as Roman-Empire, and Ecclesiastical
Policy, crying, this is a Scene out of the Rehearsal, and that is matter of
Gazett, (for these two like Th^ramenes his Shoe, must fit all feet) saying,
that the style confines on the Territories of Malmsbu^y, and then that it is
part Play-book, and part Romance, (which of these come nearest Mr. Hobbs his
Language) and in short, forcing in a wretched Tale, Rhyming to the Isms and
Nesses, making three or four miserable Quibbles, and at last pronouncing in sum
of all, that what the Adversary has wrote, is nothing but Railing, (which
indeed in this Gentleman's sense is nothing but Argument, for so he calls
Railing in the Street) if the greatest Disciples of Prattle shall not approve
of these, for Reasons convincing and powerful enough to carry the Cause let 'em
even look for better somewhere else, and when they have done, light Tobacco
with the Book, the Coffee-man will be no great loser by it; and for any
requital of their own loss of time, 'twas a sign they had little to do, when
they first began to read it; if they are bilkt in their expectation, who bid
'em expect great matters from one that performs so little. Now to our business,
for methinks I hear some say, the Plot stands still; but I may answer with Mr.
Bays, What is the Plot good for, but to bring in fine things? To proceed then
to the Plot and Design of the Transprosed Rehearsal, which was the next thing
proposed to be examined. In this Farce, there is a several design for every
Scene, for sometimes he tells us, that he accounted it a work of some Piety to
vindicate the Bishops Memory from so scurvy a Commendation as the Writer of the
Preface has given; and by this it should seem, that he has written a
Vindication of the Bishop from the Ecclesiastical Politicians Vindication, and
yet elsewhere he says, that Bishop Bramhall, so he might (like Caesar) Manage
the Roman Empire at it is utmost extent, had quite forgot what would conduce to
the Peace of his own Province and Country. And again, that he cannot look upon
these undertaking Churchmen, however otherwise of excellent Prudence and
Learning, but as men struck with a Notion, and crazed on that side of their
heads, and so he thinks the Bishop might much better have busied himself in
Preaching, (you can never magnify that enough) in his own Diocese, and
disarming the Papists of their Arguments, instead of rebating our weapons; then
in taking an Oe^umenical care upon him, which none called him to, and as
appeared by the sequel, none conn'd him thanks for. And after proceeds to
instruct him, whom he believes to have been a very great Politician, (a great
Politician, but a little crazed) in chalking him out a better way for
Accommodation, with the same absurdity as he, who read Hanibal a Lecture in the
Art of War. These, if they are Commendations, I am sure, are scurvy ones. And
as scurvy as those are, which the Writer of the Preface has given the Bishop,
you envy him even those, for p. 22. you tell us these improbable Elogies (a
pretty word that for scurvy Commendations) are of the greatest disservice to
their own design. For any worthy man (say you) may pass through the World
unquestioned and safe with a moderate Recommendation; but when he is thus set
off, and bedaub'd with Rhetoric ( scurvy Rhetoric) and embroidered so thick,
that you cannot discern the ground, etc. find no fault Sir, when your Picture
comes to be drawn, you shall have no reason to complain, the Colors are laid
too thick; there are many Wrinckles and Chaps we will not fill up with the
Paint of Art: indeed, to shape a smooth and well proportioned Visage for a
Satyrists Crooked Body, would be as preposterous a sight, as a young Whores
face on the neck of an old Baud. But if the last passage be not envious enough,
what think you of that, p. 37. a zealous and resolute Asserter (as the Bishop
was) of the Public Rites and Solemnities of the Church, those things being
only matters of external neatness, could never merit the Trophies that our
Author erects him. Thus both the Ecclesiastical Politician, and the
Animadverter have vindicated the Bishop; that is, both differently vindicate a
different Bishop Bramhall, the one magnisies a Bishop, whose Reputation and
Innocence were Armor of Proof against the Tories and Presbyterians; the other
a Bishop with a Sword by his side. You see now, that the Gentleman's moderate
Recommendations are infamous and base Reflections. He allows the Reverend
Prelate no Elogiums but Ironical, and his Modesty (it is his own Bull) is all
impudent. In one place, he says, he finds him to have been a very good natured
Gentleman, and one that complied much for peacesake, and in another, that the
Mediating Divines (under these, our Bishop is comprehended) who were not yet
past the Sucking-Bottle; seemed to place all the business of Christianity in
persecuting men for their Consciences. (He was as much a Persecuter, as the
Brethren are Saints) 'Twere endless to recount all the inconsistencies and
contradictions throughout his Book, and it were an easier task to reconcile the
Animadverter and the Ecclesiastical Politician, then the Animadverter with
himself. Well, either this Author is several Men, or at least one Man in
several minds. Sitting, he is a Nonconformist, and Kneeling a Conformist. Every
distinct Inflexion of his Body, and every new wrinkle in his Forehead produces
an answerable Distortion within. His Laughing Face, sooner then a light touch
of a Pencil can change it, is turned to a Crying. Nay, on one side of his Face
he often Smiles, and looks very gravely on the other. Each turn of his
Countenance proves him a Cheat, and each cast of his Eyes calls him Hypocrite.
He pretends to look directly on the Writer, but squints on Bishop Bramhall, and
casts a Sheeps-Eye at Bishop Laud and all the Loyal Clergy.

The Ecclesiastical Politician was too mean a Conquest for him, who designed
more then an Ovation-Triumph; our Author therefore, the Nonconformists Dimock,
throws down his Gaun^let, and in the names of John Calvin and Theodore Beza,
bids a general Defiance to all the Miter'd Heads in England; daring them, or
any of their dead Predecessors, to maintain their Ancient Rights and Dignities,
which he is ready to oppose to the last drop of blood. It is a bold Challenge,
but no body will accept it, none will engage so Heroic a Champion; who has
given proofs of a Soul as large as that which animated Alex^^der Ross at his
greatest dimensions (though he merited no less then the name of Alexander the
Great, for combating the Worthies by Troops) and of whom it might be more
justly sung, then once of Oliver.

The Worthies, are like Nine-Pins, let Him go, And down they all come at a Tip
and Throw. Every Age is not constellated for Heroes; such Prodigies are as
rarely seen as a New-star, or a Phaenix. Once, perhaps in a Century of years,
there may arise a Martin-Mar-Prelate, a Milton, or such a Brave as our present
Author. Every day produces not such Wonders. Men, that mark out Epocha's are
not born in many Revolutions. Time forms and perfects such as slowly, as
teeming Elephants their young, and is delivered but of one at a Birth.
Subverters of Roman Empire and Ecclesiastical Policy, like unusual Conjunctions
of the Planets, signalize Remarkable Events, and fill up only the brightest
spaces of Annals.

Now saddle the Mogols Horse, and mount our Hero according to the ancient
fashion of riding in Triumph, with his Face toward the Tail, (the Headstal
then may pass for the Crupper) the Earth already trembling under so glorious a
weight, the 8. Elephant Supporters not being able to poize it on their heads;
display his Victorious Banners as far as the vast Kingdoms of Garter or
Clarencieux do extend, and proclaim before him, this is the Dead-doing-man that
has knocked down Durham, Rochester, Oxford and Canterbury, with the But-end of
an Archbishop. A new and unheard of Weapon you will say, it is true, but such a
one as has performed more incredible Exploits then Captain Jones his Whinyard,
which (if the Reader dread not the Event) will appear by the sequel. So
formidable a Tool is the But-end of an Archbishop, when weilded with the arm
of a well meaning Zealot, that none of the Episcopal Rochets are proof against
it, nay, nor Reputation and Innocence (of proof against Presbyterians) this
dreadful Weapon that had for a long time been peacefully laid up amongst other
Instruments of War in Rushworths Armory (like those rusty Arms of our
Ancestors hung up in their Halls) our Author having a fit occasion for its
Service, has taken down, and to avenge the Quarrels of the Foreign Divines
and Nonconformists, without any further Ceremony (no Ceremony, but a small
Preamble of 4 Pages) falls upon the Ecclesiastical Politician, as the Episcopal
Champion: and now let us see to ward off the blows as well as we can, for the
same Magazin which our Adversary repaired to for a Weapon of Offense, will if
well searched furnish us too with a Shield.

A better enquiry into the story of Sibth^rps Sermon and the Loan, will free
the Clergy, and Bishop Laud in particular, from many unworthy and false
imputations of our Author, if not Sibthorp too in some measure from being
thought to play the Bishop in the States-mans Diocese. For the truth on it is,
he has omitted so many material passages, and dislocated the rest, that the
Story as he has castrated it, is so mutilate and deficient, as the Narrative
which he gives us, page 285. is not so much Archbishop Abbots, as the Reverend
Animadverters. To look back a little into the occasion of this Loan: Rushworth,
page 418 of his Historical Collections informs us, That the late King receiving
news of the disasters that had befaln his Uncle, the King of Denmark, commanded
his Council to advise by what means and ways he might fitly and speedily be
furnished with moneys suitable to the importance of his affairs, (his Allies
being weakened and himself threatened with Invasions from abroad) Hereupon after
a Consultation of diverse ways together, they came to this resolution, that the
urgency of affairs not admitting the way of Parliament, the most speedy, equal,
and convenient means were by a general Loan from the subject, according as
every man was assessed in the Rolls of the last subsidy. Upon which Result, the
King forthwith chose Commissioners for the Loan, and caused a Declaration to be
published, wherein he alleged for this course of Supply besides other Reasons,
that the urgency of the occasion would not give leave to the calling of a
Parliament; but assuring the People, that this way should not be made a
President for the time to come, to charge them or their Posterity to the
prejudice of their just and ancient Liberties, enjoyed under his most noble
Progenitors, endeavoring thereby to root out of their minds the suspicion that
he intended to serve himself of such ways, to the abolishing of Parliaments:
and promising them in the word of a Prince; First, to repay all such sums of
money as should be lent without Fee or Charge, so soon as he shall in any ways
be enabled thereunto, upon showing forth the Acquittance of the Collectors,
testifying the Receipt thereof. And Secondly, That not one penny so borrowed,
should be expended, but upon those Public and General services, wherein every
of them, and the body of the Kingdom, their Wives, Children and Posterity, have
their Personal and common Interest,

Then he proceeds to the private Instructions which were given to the
Commissioners, besides which, his Majesty commanded the Bishop of Bath and
Wells to draw up other Instructions to be communicated to the Archbishops,
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of this Realm upon this occasion, in order
to the preparing the people toward a dutiful compliance to his Majesty's
desires. Which was accordingly performed by the Bishop, and the Instructions
thus drawn up, being approved of by the King and Council, were sent to the
ArchBishops of Canterbury and York, with a command to see them published and
dispersed in the several Diocesses of their Provinces. The Instructions are to
be seen at large in Dr. Heylius History of Archbishop Laud, in obedience to
these Dr. Sibthorp, as Rushworth tells us, page 422. preached that Sermon at
Northampton, Entitled Apostolic Obedience, which he afterward printed, and
dedicated to the King, expressed to be those Meditations which the Doctor first
conceived upon his Majesty's Instructions unto all the Bishops of this Kingdom,
fit to be put in execution, agreeable to the necessity of the times; and
afterward brought forth upon his Majesty's Commission for the raising of
moneys by the way of Loan. And for refusing to license this Sermon, Archbishop
Abbot fell under the Kings high displeasure, and not long after was sequestered
from his Office. Page 431. and page 436. the Archbishop in his own Narrative
tells us, that Sibthorp being a man of low Fortune, conceived that the putting
this Sermon in Print, might gain favor at Court, and raise his Fortune higher,
on he went therefore with the Transcribing of his Sermon, and got a Bishop or
two to prefer this great Service to the Duke of Buckingham, and it being
brought unto the Duke, it comes into his Head, or was suggested unto him by
some malicious body, that thereby the Archbishop might be put to some
remarkable strait: For if the King should send the Sermon unto him, and command
him to allow it to the Press, one of these two things would follow. That either
he should Authorize it, and so all men that were indifferent, should discover
him for a base and unworthy Beast; or he should refuse it, and so should fall
into the Kings indignation, who might pursue it at his pleasure, as against a
man that was contrary to his Service. Out of this Fountain (says the
Archbishop, if he may be allowed to speak for himself, and not our
Animadverter for him) flowed all the water that afterward so wet. For Mr.
Murrey of the Bedchamber being sent from the King to the Archbishop, with a
command that he, and no other should License the Sermon, the Bishop (in pure
obedience to his Majesty's command no doubt) would have declined the Office,
and shifted it off to one of his Chaplains, alleging very dutifully, It was
an occupation that his old Master King James did never put him upon: but in the
end, being urged to License it himself, he framed several Reasons, why he could
not consent unto it, to which Mr. Murrey two or three days after, (having
particularly acquainted the King with the objections) brought an answer from
his Majesty. But this not satisfying the Archbishop, he dismissed him with a
desire, that his Majesty would be pleased to send the Bishop of Bath and Wells
to him, that so he might by this means make known his Scruples. But Mr. Murrey
returning after one or two days more, told him, the King did not think fit to
send the Bishop of Bath to him, but expected he should pass the Book. While
these things proceeded thus slowly, the Archbishop tells us, the minds of
those that were Actors for the publishing of this Book, were not quiet at
Court, that the thing was not dispatched, and therefore one day the Duke of
Buckingham said to the King, Do you see how this business is deferred, if more
expedition he not used, it will not be Printed before the end of the Term; at
which time it is fit that it be sent down into the Countries. Which so quickened
the King, that the next message which was sent by Mr. Murrey, was, that if the
Bishop did not dispatch it, the King would take some other course with him.
Whereupon finding how far the Duke had prevailed, he thought fit to set down in
writing his Objections, wherefore the Book was not fit to be published, which he
did, and sent them to the King. These Bishop Laud was commanded to answer in
Writing, and upon this the Archbishop flies out into a Rage, and taxes Laud so
severely, as the Animadverten tells us, Page 286. So difficult was it for that
incomparable Prelate to fulfill the Will of his Royal and not incur the
displeasure of the Archbishop, who had not only contemptuously refused to
conform to the Command of his Prince, after so many urgent and repeated
invitations but justified his refusal in Writing, and well might we expect that
they who undertook an Answer, should not escape his sharp Censure, for besides
that, possibly Abbot (who, as it is evident from his Narrative, had no mean
opinion of himself) might conceit his Scruples unanswerable. In so doing, they
seemed to disarm him of all just pretenses, and to call in question his wilful
Denial. And accordingly he lays it on with a Vengeance upon Bishop Laud, for
this man (says he) who beleives so well of himself, framed an Answer to my
Exceptions, (this was that which stung him) but to give some Countenance to it,
he must call in three other Bishops, that is to say, Durham, Rochester and
Oxford, tried men for such a purpose. Why he, that believed so well of himself,
(though he thrust not himself upon the undertaking, but was called to it by his
Master) should call in three other Bishops to his help, I understand not. Well,
the Confutation seemed so strong, that the Bishop of Durham, and the Bishop of
Bath, for reward of their Service, were sworn of the Privy Council. And in the
end, the Archbishop persisting still in his Refusal, notwithstanding that many
things upon his motion were altered in the Book, or expunged out of it,
(insomuch, that he seems unwilling, that his refusing to sign the Sermon,
should be judged by the Printed Book.) He was by the Kings Command (which in
the Animadverters modester Phrase is the under working of his Adversaries)
removed from Lambeth to Foord in Kent, and afterward sequestered, and a
Commission past to exercise the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction to Mountain Bishop
of London, Neal Bishop of Durham, Buckridge Bishop of Rochester, Houson Bishop
of Oxford, and Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, (who, as our Animadverter says,
page 291. but falsely, from thence arose in time to be Archbishop, for Abbot,
as all know, was before his death restored again, and Laud took London in his
way to Canterbury.) The Approbation of the Sermon refused thus by Abbot, it was
carried to Mountain Bishop of London, who Licensed it. As for the Story of
Doctor Woral his Chaplain, who advised with a Gentleman of the Inner Temple,
concerning his own Licensing it. Rushworth, has told us that it was Mr. Seldom,
and it is enough we know the man. His Expostulation with the Doctor was not
unlike him, if ever the Tide turned (a civil expression that, for if ever the
Government changed) he might come to be hanged for it. But Mr. Seldom in this
appeared more scrupulous then Abbot himself, who seemed not to disallow so much
of the ^rinted Book, as that any man from that should take a measure of his
refusing to sign it. And it is observable, that the Loan being demanded of the
Societies and Inns of Court, the Benchers of Lincolns-Inne received a Letter of
Reproof, from the Lord of the Council, for neglecting to advance the Service in
their Society, and to return the Names of such as were refractory. Historical
Collections, p. 422.

With what justice now can the Animadverter call this an Ecclesiastical Loan,
and tell us, that part of the Clergy invented these Ecclesiastical Laws instead
of the Common Law of England, and Statutes of Parliament, for the whole Quire
(says he) sung this Tune, page 294. and yet page 304. he makes us believe,
they sung so many different Tunes, as the Presbyterians never invented more for
one Psalm. For there was Sibthorps Church, and Mainwarings Church, and
Montagues Church, with many more; and all this, whether more ignorantly or
maliciously, it is hard to say, for it is manifest this Loan the King was advised
to by his Privy Council in 1626. Nor was Bishop Laud, nor any of those Bishops
that Archbishop Abbot calls tried Men then of the Council, for Durham and
Bath, were not sworn Counselors till 1627. So that he might have spar^d that
Invective against the Clergy and Bishop Laud page 294, 295, 296, 301. were it
not impossible for him to speak well of any but the Tradesmen and the Foreign
Divines. That Bishop was so far from being a Principal in the matter of the
Loan, that he was no otherwise an Accessory then as he was employed by his late
Majesty in drawing up the Instructions for the Clergy, and penning an Answer to
Arch Bishop Abbot's Exceptions: and as to his undermining the Archbishop,
Abbot himself seems to acquit him, in telling us, that all the water which
afterward so wet him, flowed from another Fountain.

For the Picture of Bishop Laud, which the Archbishop has drawn with so black
a Coal, and this Gentleman has Copied, it is done by too ill a Hand, to be
thought to resemble the Life, and what may serve to convince us of the
partiality of the Painter, is the Character given Abbot by one of our
State-Historians, none of Lauds greatest friends; that his extraordinary
remisness, in not exacting strict Conformity to the prescribed Orders of the
Church in point of Ceremony, seemed to resolve those legal Determinations to
their first Principle of Indifferency, and to lead in such a habit of
Inconformity, as the future reduction of those tender Conscienc'd men to long
discontinued Obedience, was interpreted an Innovation. From hence any man may
judge, what construction is to be put upon the ArchBishops Accusation of Laud,
for informing against the honest Men that settled the Truth, (which he called
Puritanism) in their Auditors. For which the good man represented Laud as a
Papist to King James. So every stickler for the Church of England was termed in
the Language of those times. But if his Marrying the Earl of D. to the Lady R.
when she had another Husband, was not the unpardonable Sin, it may seem strange
that neither the Archbishop, nor our Writer should absolve him, when we cannot
in charity conceive but God did, upon that his Penitent and Submissive
acknowledgment, which we find recorded at large in the History of his Life, p.
59.

Sure I am, the most inveterate Enemies of this gallant Prelate have not so
blackt him, as the Pens of the Archbishop, and our Animadverter; for to report
him to the World in the 1 Character, Sir E. Deering tells us, he had muzzled
Fisher, and would strike the Papists under the fi^t Rib, when he was dead and
gone. And being dead, that wheresoever his Grave should be, Paul's would be his
Perpetual Monument, and his own Book his Epitaph. Nay, in that infamous Book
called Canterburys Doom, we are told that at his Trial, he made as Full, as
Gallant, as Pithy a Defense, and spoke as much as was possible for the wit of
man to invent, and that with so much Art, Vivacity and Confidence, as he showed
not the least acknowledgment of Guilt in any of the Particulars which were
charged upon him. So eminently remarkable were his Accomplishments, which the
most Malicious could not dissemble, nor the most Envious conceal. His sharpest
Adversaries were his boldest Encomiasts, and when they intended Libels, made
Panegy^icks. At the same Bar condemning themselves, and acquitting this Great
Man, who, after he had been an honor to the higest place in our Church (which
was higher yet in being his) was Translated to a more Glorious Dignity in the
Church Triumphant, received therewith the joyful A^thems of a Quire of Angels,
and instal'd in White Robes, according to the usual solemnities of Saints; sent
thither (as it were) before, to assist at the following Coronation of his Royal
Master, and to set the Crown of Martyrdom on the head of that Heroic Defender
of the Faith.

Now methinks, our Author, had he any spark of Virtue unextinguish'd, should
upon considering these things, retire into his Closet, and there lament and
pine away for his desperate folly; for the disgrace he has, as far as in him
is, brought upon the Church of England. And though the comfort is, an ill man
(you may believe him, when he speaks against himself) cannot by reproaching fix
an ignominy; yet the same thanks are due to his honorable Intentions, and his
Endeavors are not the less commendable. For to say the truth, he has out
pitched the Executioner half a Bar, so dextrous is he in severing the Head from
the Body at one blow; that were he Probationer for the Headmans Office, I am
confident he would carry it in a free Election on without the least Opposition;
and so he might become a more serviceable Member of the Commonwealth, then he
is at present. Seriously, it is great pity a man of such. Accomplishments should
be lost, when no body can deny but he is every way qualified to fill the Place
and Quality of Squire Dun. Especially if they saw how passing well he looked in
the cast Robes of a Malefactor, Woe be to the Bishops if ever he procures a
Patent for that Honor, they cannot in reason expect any greater favor then to
have the Traitors Quarters removed from the City Gates, and their own hung up
in the room. Axes are the most necessary, because the most powerful Arguments
against the Clergy (they confuted him, whom Fisher could not.) Well, these
Bishops are the men have ruined all, they brought the late King to the Block,
and have contributed to all our miseries ever since. How came Cromwell, Ineton,
and Bradshaw trow, to merit their ^yburn Pomps and second Funeral Solemnities?
Sure 'twas through some mistake, that those who were but Accessaries and
under-Instruments of our late troubles should be thus highly honored above the
Principals, the Prelates. No doubt but it was a great Affliction to this
Gentleman (poor soul) to see the Heads of his Master and the other two well
deserving Gentlemen raised to that ignominious Eminency on purpose to be
pointed at by the Beholders, and what is worse, exposed without their Hats to
the rude violence of the Weather; when for ought appears, it was an Exaltation
they never sought, and they have been undeservedly advanced to that Pitch of
Greatness; which Bishop Laud and two or three of the Villainous Clergy (had the^
had their deserts) should have climbed. But since they are there, much good may
it do 'um with their places. For, after all the fatal Consequences of their
Rebellion, they can only serve as fair Marks unto wise Subjects to avoid the
Causes. And now shall this sort of Men still vindicate themselves as the most
zealous Assertors of the Rights of Princes. At best, they are no better
Subjects then Jesuits, or well-meaning Zealots, betwixt whom, as the best of
Poets draws their Parallel, there lies no greater difference then this, They
dare kill Kings, (Mr. Cowly's Puritan and Papi^t.)
and 'twixt you here is the strife;
That you dare shoot at Kings to save their Life.


This Doctrine of killing Kings in their own Defense, you may safely vindicate
as your own, it was never broacht before. And from such unquestionable
Principles may we reduce your Account of the late War, p. 303. Whether it were
a War of Religion, or of Liberty, is not worth the labor to enquire.
Which-soever was at the top, the other was at the bottom; but upon considering
all, I think the cause was too good to have been fought for. Which, if I
understand not amiss, is nothing but Iconoclates drawn in Little, and Defensio
Populi Anglicania in Miniature. Besides, the War as most gave out at first, was
for the removal of Evil Counselors, but because as we are told, page 252 A new
War must have, like a Book that would sell, a New Title, our Author who has a
singular knack in giving Titles to both, has founded the late War upon the more
specious and plausible names of Religion and Liberty. These which he has
assigned for causes of our Rebellion being the same with those for which the
Netherlanders took up Arms against their Lawful Sovereign, it is worth the
while to enquire, whether the Consequences of both were not alike. Sir R.
Filmer in his Observations, touching Forms of Government, speaking of the
Low Country Rebellion, delivers himself thus. Two things they say, they first
fought about, Religion and Taxes, and they have prevailed it seems in both; for
they have gotten all the Religions in Chri^endome, and pay the greatest Taxes
in the World. And I wish I could not say, such was the Freedom of Religion
imposed upon this Nation, and such the Liberty to which we were enslaved: for
the glorious Defenders of either against their King and Country, seemed no
otherwise to prevail in both; rescuing us from such great grievances as our
Authors Ecclesiastical Loan, to the milder payments of the Twentieth Part,
Poll-mony raised by Prerogative of the Subject, and Loans upon Public Faith:
all which cannot be better expressed then in the words of our incomparable
Cowley, in his Puritan and Papist.

What Myst'ries of Iniquity do we see?
New Prisons made to defend Liberty.
Our Goods forced from us for Proprieties sake,
And all the real Nonsense which ye make.
And to show that through the multitude of Religions as well as Taxes we were
turned Dutch, the same Poet a little after in that Satyr.

It Was feared, a new Religion would begin,
All new Religions now are entered in.
So that upon a better Calculation, it will appear, that the Clergymen have not
been the only Inventors of New Taxes and Opinions, therefore let not them alone
arrogate to themselves the honor of making other Laws in the room of the
Common Law and Statutes of Parliament, for others are to have a share as well
as they, and this Gentleman's Masters have deserved as highly of the Nation, and
ought to be celebrated no less for Imprisonments, Fines, Sequestrations, and
many kind Impositions, all, questionless for the good of the People. In
comparison of these, the heaviest Pressures complained of under the power of
the Clergy in the late Kings Reign, were Acts of Grace. Only so much may be
added in favor of those rigorous Burdens and Exactions, that they seemed to
have some color of Legality at least from these Doctrines, that the Elect had
a Right to all, and Propriety was founded in Saintship. For making themselves
the Saints and the Elect, they had an undoubted title to whatever the Reprobate
possessed, and it is unreasonable to say they plundered, when they took but their
own; the Cavaliers being not so great Delinquents as their Estates; so low they
descended, till at last our Israelites had not only a right to the Jewels and
Earrings of the Egyptians, but to their Bodkins and Thimbles too.

Neither, as far as I can discern, have this sort of men since his Majesty's
return, given any better Assurances of their Fidelity and obedience For not
withstanding that his Majesty, to demonstrate he was Heir no less to his
Majesty's Virtues then his Crown, was graciously pleased to pass an Act of
Oblivion, thereby covering in Eternal Silence those offenses, which none but
the SON of the ROYAL MARTYR could forget; and in order to a better agreement
betwixt both parties, to appoint a Conference between the Episcopal Divines and
Non-conformists; but this producing no better an effect then that in his Royal
Grandfathers time at Hampton Court; the peevish Dissenters senters having but
too well learnt to turn all Disputes into impertinent Wrangles, and what our
Animadverter calls Arguments in the Streets; sufficiently manifesting how
justly that Character in Hudibras besits them.

^ Sect, whose chief Devotion lies
In odd perverse Antipathies;
In falling out with that or this,
And finding somewhat still amiss.
That with more care keep Holy Day
The wrong, than others the right way;
Still so perverse and opposite,
As if they worshipped God for spite.
How they have behaved themselves from that time to this, let the Sober Apogies
for Non-conformists and the Humble Pleas, for Toleration, Indulgence and
Liberty of Conscience speak; or the Avenue-Readers, the Wall - Observers, and
those that are acquainted: with Stall-Learning as well as our Author, testify.
And now, that after all, his Majesty issued his Declaration of Indulgence for
tender Consciences; and that they had all that could be devised in the World,
to make a Phanatick good natured. Yet what do these Men? To show, that they
were the same cunning revengeful Men, as before, and that it is easier to
straighten a Crooked Body, then bend a stubborn Fanatic; they waken the memory
of those Crimes, that might (but for them) have slept eternally in the Act of
Oblivion, either imagining that that Act concerns only the suffering Royalists,
or that the Instruments of our late Miseries have so great an Interest in it,
that they have a Pardon granted not only for what is past, but to come; and so
having canceled all their old Scores, they might now begin upon a new. And
accordingly they have arreign'd the late King once more at the Bar, and brought
the Archbishop of Canterbury again to his Trial. For though our Author
promised us page 281. he would as little as possible, say any thing of his own,
and speak before good witnesses. Yet his forecited passage concerning the
Original of the War. page 303. Whether it were a war of Religion, or of
Liberty, is not worth the labor to enquire. Which-soever was at the top, the
other was at the botrome; but upon considering all, I think the Cause was too
good to have been fought for. And the other page 304. after all the fatal
Consequences of that Rebellion, which can only serve as Sea marks unto wise
Princes (not a word of the Rebels) to avoid the Causes. A dutiful Caveat this
to wise Princes to avoid the causes of Rebelling against their Subjects. These
I presume are his own, till he produce his Authors. And the same I think of
another, which is well worth weighing, page 304. His late Majesty being a
prince truly pious and religious, was thereby the more inclined to esteem and
favor the Clergy. And thence, though himself of a most exquisite
understanding, yet thought he could not trust it (does it relate to
understanding) better than in their keeping. Compare this with page 299. where,
he tells us, the Clery were Licentious in their Conversation; and page 224. that
some of the Eminentest of them made an open defection to the Church of Rome;
and then tell me if he has not worthily vindicated his late Majesty's Piety and
Religion, and whether he was not courageous and bold in telling his Adversary
he feared not all the mischief that he could make of this. It Is well, he has
told us the story of the Ass, who because he saw the Spaniel play with his
Masters legs, thought himself priledg'd to paw, and ramp upon his Shoulders;
for it is the best Apology in his own behalf, and now he may plead like
himself, he does nothing without a Precedent. True it is, he tells us, page 106.
that being a man of private Condition and breeding, and drawn in to mention
Kings and Princes, and even our own; whom, as he thinks of with all duty and
reverence (which will appear by the sequel) so he avoids speaking of either in
jest or earnest, least he should, though most unwillingly, trip in a word, or
fail in the mannerlyness of an expression. Thus being conscious to himself that
he should offend, he thought it a point of discretion as well as good Manners,
to ask Pardon before hand. For it is very hard for a Private man that has seen
no Kings but those in the Rehearsal, to frame any other address to Princes,
then such as might become King Phys, and King Ush of Branford. And accordingly
so it happens, for p. 310. speaking of the Laws against Fanatics, Hence is it
that the Wisdom of his Majesty and the Parliament must be exposed to after Ages
for such a Superfaetation of Acts in his Reign about the same business. This is
so high a Complement that he has passed upon the King and Parliament, that I
cannot but admire, how one of his Private Condition and Breeding could arrive
to this Degree of Court-ship, especially considering how well it agrees with
what our Private Courtier says, page 242. where he tells us, these Kings have
shrewd understandings, and he is not a Competent Judge of their Actions. Fie,
fie, that is too modest Sir, you wrong your self too much not a Competent Judge,
Of My word Sir, but you are, a great Judge. This Humility does not become such
great Wits as are Princes Companions. 167^
It Is too low a Condescension for any Gentleman of Archees Robe. This
Familiarity with great ones is a Privilege entailed upon your Place, and was
conferred upon you with your Cap. Little better do I like his Animadversion,
page 320. in these words, If the Fanatics by their wanton and unreasonable
opposition to the ingenious and moderate Discipline of the Church of England,
shall give their Governors too much reason to suspec^ that they are never to
be kept in order, etc. Whom does he mean by our Governors? The King; No, for he
is a Single Person. (A pretty Artifice to shut the King out of that Text, Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers) the Parliament, or the Bishops?
Mark whether there be a King, and Bishops sitting in this Exclusive Parliament
of his. This Quere methinks might better have become those Times, of which Mr.
Digges (he who wrote a Book of the Unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms
against their Sovereign, (excepting no Causes as too good) If Foreigners (says
he) shall inquire, under what Form of Government we live, the answer must be,
we live over a King.

And having taken this Liberty with Princes and Senates, no wonder if the
Gentleman presume to treat the Bishops (Peers and, Privy-Councellers are his
Fellows) with a little more Freedom. Though for what reason he treats the
present Clergy with so little Respect, may be hard to say, yet as for Bishop
Lauds particular, and his course usage of him, I think I could give a guess,
what moved him to it. Not that I believe as some, that his Quarrel might be the
same with Archees, who, they say, was exasperated against the Bishop, because
he was whipped at his procurement, for taking too much Liberty (a Crime much like
what is charged upon this Gentleman) or as others, that he or some of his
Family came sometime in danger of a StarChamber Censure, and hazarded losing
their Ears; but rather upon better Consideration, that there might be no
greater occasion for this Picque, then those several Cringes and Genuflexions
which the Archbishop (as he thinks) introduced in the Church, or rather
restored, and this I must confess is sufficient ground for a Grudge, for it is
an unreasonable thing that the Church should expect that every man of how
private a Condition and Breeding soever, and however unpracticed in the
Graceful Motions and Inflections of his Body, should be conformable to the
Genuflexions and Cringes of the wellbred Ecclesiastics: Every man has not had
the good Fortune to be trained up at the Dancing-School, nor so happily
Educated, as to pull off his Hatt and make a Leg with an Air. And would they
have these men expose themselves by not Conforming to the Ceremonies of the
rest of the Congregation, or betray their Breeding by an aukard Bending of
their Bodies, or an unsightly Bow, proclaming at every Rustic Scrape, that
they have not been initiated by a Dancing -Master in the common Rudiments of
Civility. No, I am confident that many of the English Protestants, and
especially, those of a private Breeding are so averse from this, that they
would decline coming to their Churches at all first. As I have known some
People somewhat wanting in the little Decencies of Behavior, avoid
Conversation and appearing in Public. These Persons naturally affect a
plainness of Fashion, and a Homeliness in Worship. And such a Diversity of
Motions, such quick Interchanges of Gestures, distract and confound them.
Besides, that they are like the unquiet Variety of Postures of one in a sick
Bed, and and really they consult their ease, and what is more their health;
which is not a little endangered by being too Ceremonious, and many a violent
Cold occasioned by a Citizens sitting bare-headed all Service-while: without
the Defense at least of a pair of Broad-fring'd Gloves laid a cross, well
knowing* that their Betters rather then incommode them, in such a Case will
desire their Worships to be Covered. Several other Occasions there are, that
for Convenience sake may require a Dispensation, as if a fat Burger lie under
an inevitable necessity of breaking Wind, (in a Sister'tis not civil to call it
any thing but venting a Sigh at the wrong end) shall not this tenderconscienc'd
Man be permitted to strain a point of Decorum, because it is in the Church,
rather then hazard a fit of the Colic? Another thing is, that one Man may have
an Antipathy against Wine that comes out of a gilt Chalice, and another against
Bread delivered to him by the Hand of one in a Surplice, and will the Priest be
so uncivil, as to cram it down the throat of that puling Christian? The Clergy
certainly cannot be so rude, and in an affair of Conscience. to exact this
compliance. Since great Persons out of Civility will condescend to their
Inferiors, and all Men out of common humanity will yield to the ^eak. We may
add to what we have said before, should any more flexible then the rest, and
more inclinable to the Superstitious practices of the Primitive Christians, be
contented to bend their stubborn Knees, or to bow their Bodies to the East as
often as is required, might not such Gentlemen as our Author be at a loss, and he
that was so far out in his Situation of Geneva, through pure Devotion it may be
to that Place, direct his mistaken Reverence toward the West, which though it
were neither Vice nor Idolatry, yet might perhaps occasion more sport then a
man of his Gravity could bro^^ unoffended. It Is possible too, he may not be a
little displeased at the Imag'ry of our Churches, in the behalf of those of a
private Condition and Breeding, who having never seen any thing more glorious
then Dives and Lazarus, or the Picture of the Prodigal in their own Halls,
might be tempted unawares to worship the first fine Picture they saw abroad.
This which I have hinted might be some Cause of his disaffection to Archbishop
La^d for restoring the Innovations of Order, of Decency and Uniformity. But for
his Quarrel at the present Clergy, I concluded, there must be some more
important Inducement, and ruminating on many Causes, I had the lack at last to
pitch upon one more remarkable, why the Clergy fell into his high displeasure.
This Gentleman, it seems, not very many years ago, used to play at Picket; Now
he used to play Pieces (which was fair for one of a private Condition, and the
Game gentile enough for one of p^ivate Br^eding) there was a Dignitary of
Lincoln (as he tells the Story) who always went half a Crown with him, and so
all the while he sat on his hand, he very hone^^ly gave the Sign, so (says he)
that I was always sure to loose. I afterward discovered it, but of all the
Money that ever I was cheated of in my Life, none ever ^ext me so, as what I
lost by this occasion. And ever since, (as he adds) I have born a great grudge
against their fingering of any thing that belongs to me. The Man is angry, and
who can blame him when he had lost his Money. ('It Is usual with Gamesters to say
they are cheated, when they have lost) He has been bitten it seems, and Losers
may have leave to speak. I have ever observed, that Gamesters when not favored
by Fortune, are the passionatest of men, but never thought that they could
manage a Wrangle so sharply for 326. pages. Who would have imagined that a Game
at Picket could have made so much mischief? for though it may appear
unconscionable, to dun a Man when he has paid the last debt to Nature, yet this
Book against the Dignitary of Lincoln, was I suppose, designed in his life
time, though it happens I know not how, to come out against him, after he is
dead. And though it was intended purely for his sake, yet is it indifferently
calculated for Bishop Laud, or any of the Gamester Bishops that made the best
of their Masters. Allowing now, that the Peeks of Players among themselves, or
of Poet against Poet, or of a Conformist Divine against a Nonconformist, are
dangerous, and of late times have caused great disturbance; yet I never
remarked so irreconcilable and implacable a spirit, as that of Gamesters
against those that have won their Money. It Is a Quarrel not to be ended with
their Deaths, but sets 'em in Railing Tune for ever, and they are never so
flippant as in their Curses of Ecclesiastical Fortune, and Ecclesiastical
Politicians; now we better understand the meaning of those words. Indeed, it
may happen so, that at one time or other, some of the Ecclesiastics may be
drawn in to play with Olivers Servants, you may suppose his Clerks if you will;
and knowing the men, for whether it is that they smell strongly yet of Bishops
Lands, or how; they will make a shift it may be to pay their old Scores, and
wheedle 'em out of a considerable sum in reparation of their former losses.
In the mean time, this may be a fair warning to any one of private Breeding,
and unpracticed in those little Arts; to take heed he be not rookt by such
Politicians. And though when I game, I confess if I must lose, it is a thing to
me indifferent, whether to a Clergyman or another. Yet our Author is not of my
mind. For since he was choused by the Dignitary of Lincoln, he is resolved that
none of the Tribe shall ever be the richer for him. And therefore, hands off my
Masters; and pretend not now the Power of the Keys, for those of his Coffers
hang not at your Girdles. Well, if this Gentleman build no Hospitalls, nor
endow no Schools, the blame must lie upon this Dignitary, that made him
incapable. Which way the Clergy will recover their esteem with him, I see not,
unless by some such devise as peecing the Fortunes of our broken Gamester with
a Brief, recommending his Case to the Charity of well affected People. For
since he is undone by the Church, it is all the reason in the World they should
make him Reparation. But let him aloan to be Revenged on them, for since they
have cheated him, they shall not the Public. Therefore to make the better
provision for that, he in his Wisdom has thought fit to exclude them from
meddling with Parliamentary Aids, adding in the close, that English Men always
love to see how their money goes (especially at Picket) and if there be any
Interest or profit to be got by it, to receive it themselves. Very good! The
Man has made a fair speech to be B^x-keeper, and 'twas providently done, for
then let who will be the Gamesters, he is sure to sweep the Stakes. But were it
true what you pretend, that you were abused by the Dignitary of Lincoln; which
we have ground enough to suspect, considering that you have more then once
shown how singularly you can oblige the Dead; yet what would you gain by it?
Will you thence infer that none of the Clergy are men fit to be trusted?
Methinks that of your Adversaries is here highly pertinent, and very applicable
to Men of your no Religion. Put the Case (says he) the Clergy were Cheats and
Juglers, yet it must be allowed they are necessary Instruments of State to awe
the Common People into fear and Obedience, because nothing else can so
effectually enslave them as the Fear of Invisible Powers, and the dismal
apprehensions of the World to come; and for this very reason, though there were
no other, it is fit they should be allowed the same honor and respect, as would
be acknowledged their due, if they were sincere and honest men. Indeed, should
all men remember an injury as long as you implacable Gamesters do, or could you
persuade the Rabble to cry, No Bishops; as often as you have ill Luck at Cards,
the World would never be at quiet.

Whereas, the Gentleman seems displeased with the Temporal Power and
Employments of the Clergy, telling us page 300. 301. Whether it be or no, that
the Clergy are not so well fitted by Education, as others for Political
Affairs, he knows not; yet it is generally observed that things miscarry under
their Government, etc. This making a great noise with some People, I
endeavored to inform my self the best I could, concerning the truth of this
Matter, resolving withal, not to receive Impressions from any of the Clergy,
but to gather my Lights from the most Impartial Authorities I could meet with.
And I think I am now prepared, to give our Author some better satisfaction in
this point. If we look abroad then, we shall find that Bishops make a part of
the three Estates in all Kingdoms, and that in Europe there are only two
Republiques which exclude the Clergy from meddling with Civil Affairs, and the
same great Enemies to Monarchy, namely Venice and the Low Countries. Both which
our late Commonwealths-men made choice of as convenient Models for their
newfangled Government, reconciling Church and State to these disagreeable
Platforms. And here I think it not impertinent to insert what a great Wit, the
fore mentioned Sir R. Filmer in his ^bservations upon Aristotle's Politics
remarks concerning them. The Religion in Venice and the Low Countries, (says
he) is sufficiently known, much need not be said of them: they admirably agree
under a seeming Contrariety, it is commonly said, that one of them has all
Religions, and the other no Religion; the Atheist of Venice may shake hands
with the Sectary of Amsterdam. This is the Liberty that a popular State can
brag of, every man may be of any Religion, or no Religion, if he please, their
main Devotion is exercised only in opposing and suppressing Monarchy. They both
agree to exclude the Clergy from meddling in Government, whereas in all
Monarchys, both before the Law of Moses, and under it, and ever since: all
Barbarians, Grecians, Romans, Insidells, Turks and Indians, have with one
consent given such respect and reverence to their Priests, as to trust them
with their Laws. To come nearer home, In this our Nation (says he) the first
Priests we read of before Christianity were the Druides; who, as Caesar says,
decided and determined Controversies, in Murder, in Case of Inheritance, of
Bounds of Lands, as they in their discretion judged meet; they granted Rewards
and Punishments. It is a wonder to see what high respect even the great Turk
gives to his Mufti, or chief Bishop. So necessary, (as he concludes) is
Religion to strengthen and direct Laws.

With him concurrs an Honorable Member at present of the House of Lords, in a
Speech, about the lawfulness and convenience of the Bishops intermedling in
Temporal Affairs. Never was there any Nation that employed not their Religious
men in the greatest Affairs. Hereof Christendom has had a long evperience for
1300 years. Bishops have voted here ever since Parliaments began, and long
before were employed in the Public. The great and good Emperor Constantine,
had his Bishops with him whom he consulted about his Military Affairr, as
Eusebius. And then in Answer to our Author, who would have them restrained to
their Bibles, he says further, My Lords, there is not any that sits here, more
for Preaching then I am. I know it is the ordinary means to Salvation; yet, I
likewise know, there is not that full necessity of it as was in the Primitive
Times. God defend that, 1600 years acquaintance should make the Gospel no
better known to us. Neither my Lords does their Office merely and wholly
consist in Preaching, the very form o^ Episcopacy that distinguishes it from
the inferior Ministry is the orderly and good Government of the Church. And the
same Noble Orator pleading for their Right to sit in Parliament in another
speech says, That this hinders their Ecclesiastical Vocation, an Argument I
hear much of, has in my apprehension more of shadow then substance in it: if
this be a reason, sure I am it might have been one six hundred years ago. A
Bishop, my Lords, is not so circumscribed within the circumference of his
Diocese, that his sometimes absence can be termed, no not in the most strict
sense a neglect or hindrance of his duty, no more then that of a Lieutenant
from his County, they both have their subordinate Ministers, upon which their
influences fall though the distance be remote. Besides, my Lords, the lesser
must yield to the greater good; to make wholesome and good Laws for the happy
and well regulating of Church and Commonwealth, is certainly more advantageous
to both, then the want of the personal Execution of their Office. And again,
The House of Commons represents the meanest Person, so did the Master his
Slave, but Bishops have none to do so much for them, and what justice can tie
them to the Observation of those Laws, to whose constitution they give no
consent, the wisdom of former times gave Proxies to this House (the House of
Lords) merely upon this ground, that every one might have a hand in the making
of that which he had an Obligation to obey. This House could not represent,
therefore Proxies in room of Persons were most justly allowed.

And to manifest the better, that their immediate dependence upon the King is a
great Obligation he has upon their Loyalty and Fidelity (whatever our Author
says to the contrary) we need no clearer proof then this acknowledgment of a
Common-wealahs-man and a great Wit in his Speech against Richards Cobbler and
Dray-men-Lords, in 59. One of the main reasons for exclusion of the Bishops out
of the House of Lords, was because that they being of the Kings making, were in
effect so many certain Votes for whatever the King had a mind to carry in that
House.

That they are not incapable of the greatest Offices of Trust and the Noblest
Employments, can be a doubt to none that have heard of the unparalled
Integrity of the incomparable Lord Tresurer Iuxon. Nay, the Lord Vi^count
Falkland in a sharp speech against them, confesses, that some of them in an
unexpected and mighty Place and Power expressed and equal moderation and
humility, being neither Ambitious before, nor Proud after, either of the
Crosier Staff, or White Staff.

Now shall the Ancient Rights and just Dignities of the Clergy, which our
Nobility and Gentry have thus unanimously and constantly asserted, be called in
question by a few Levellers and Common-wealths-men? No, this device is stale.
The Sport of Bishop-hunting is too well known, and though the Clergy be the
Game in view, yet they have the Temporal Lords in Chance. These cunning
Archers, though they wink with one eye at the Spiritual Lords, yet have another
open, with which they take aim at the rest of the Peers. Many of those Arrows
which were once darted at the Bishops, glanced on the Nobles, and not a few
were cast over their heads at the King. The same hands that were lifted up at
the one, struck at the other, levelling Coronets with Miters, and trampling on
both together with the Crown. No sooner were the Prelates declared useless, but
a House of Lords was voted dangerous and unnecessary, and Monarchy called
Antichristian; and Experience proves that Coordination in the State, was the
natural result of Parity in the Church. So little (...) is Ecclesiastical from
Civil Ana^c^^. Had I ever yet heard of any one Opp^ser of Episcopacy, whose
Princi^les or Practices declared him not a professed Enemy to Monarchy, I
should willingly How, that Monarchy and Episcopacy are not so nearly linkt, as
that Royal Aphorism of King James, No Bishop, No King, seems to imply. For
though Royalty and Priesthood, which anciently by right of Primogeniture
concentered in one, the same being Lawgiver and Sacrificer (see here, Mr.
Author the Kings Right to the Priestly Office and the Clergies Interest in
making Laws) were in succeeding ages derived to different Persons, their
Interests yet were not divided with their Persons. But as the Royal and
Sacerdotal Dignity have the same Original, and anciently Prince and Priest had
one and the same Name; so, though differently Branch't now, yet as springing
from the same Root, they flourish and decay together. So regularly is the
Religious State incorporate with the Civil, that the Image of Episcopacy (like
the Statuaries in Pallas Target) seems so riveted in Monarchy, that none can
attempt defacing the one, without breaking the other. Nay, those who have been
taught by Calvin and Beza to demean themselves so irreverently to the Fathers
of their Church, have learned from such Apostles as Knox and Buchanan (to whom
duller Mariana might have gone to School) to pay as little Obedience to the
Fathers of their Country. This is evident from these Opinions.

That the Kings Personal and Politic Capacity are distinct, and so they
fought for his Crown, when they shot at his Person.

That the Original of Government is in the People, and that he derives his
Sovereignty from their Consent, and not from Succession, and by consequence is
no King before he is Crowned, and his Style should not run Dei ^^atia, but
Populi Consensu.

That he is greater then his Subjects singly and apart, but lesser then them
altogether, that is, as Mr. Digges speaks, a Father is greater then this or
that Son; but less then all his Children together.

That there is a Co-ordination of the three Estates, but this is moderate;
others go farther, and tell us the King is subordinate to the other two Estates
under whom he governs: Nay, Milton holds, that the Legislative Power is in the
Parliament exclusively and the Executive only in the King.

And that the Supreme Magistrate is accountable to the Inferior, and though
Paraeus's Book was burnt for this, yet Mr. Baxter in his Holy Commonwealth
maintains, he may be called to an account by any single Peer.

Now because they have been too liberal, and conferred too large a Power in
Civil Affairs on their Sovereign, they will be sure to retrench it in
Spirituals. O they can never give enough to the Lay Elders! for they admit
Laymen to intermeddle in Ecclesiastical Matters, though they exclude the King
upon that account. Therefore Bishop Bramhall speaking of the Scotch
Disciplinarians in his Fair warning to take heed of their Discipline, says,
Besides those encroachments which they have made upon the rights of all Supreme
Magistrates, there be sundry others which especially concern the King of Great
Britain, as the use of his Tenths, First Fruits, and Patronages, and which is
more then all these; the dependence of his Subjects; by all which we see that
they have thrust out the Pope indeed, but retained the Papacy. The Pope as well
as they and they as well as the Pope, (neither Barrel better Herrings) do make
Kings but half Kings, Kings of the Bodies, and not of the Souls of their
Subjects, They allow them some sort of Judgment over Ecclesiastical Persons, in
their Civil Capacities, for it is little (according to their Rules) which
either is not Ecclesiastical, or may not be reduced to Ecclesiastical. But over
Ecclesiastical Persons, as they are Ecclesiastics, or in Ecclesiastical
Matters, they ascribe unto them no judgment in the world. Here, he cites the
Vindication of their Commissioners, wherein, they say, It cannot stand with the
word of God, and that no Christian Prince ever claimed, or can claim to himself
such a Power.

So that that great Prelate, whoever he was (be he amongst the Living or the
Dead, or in the World of the Moon) that said, The King had no more to do in
Ecclesiastical matters, then Jack that rubbed his Horses heels, may retract his
Aphorism, since he is out-shot in his own Bow by Synods and Presbyteries, for
according to them, Jack that rubbs the Horses heels, (if he be but a Lay-Elder)
is Supreme in Ecclesiastical matters. Though why our Author would have his
Adversary write a Book in defense of that Aphorism, who had reserved the
Priesthood and the exercise of it for the King, I see not, unless it be to vye
him, and see him, and re-vye him in Contradictions. This Figure now is lost to
any man that is not a Gamester.

Upon considering all, I am afraid that Reformation is Tinkers work, making two
holes for stopping one; and therefore I am sorry that this Gentleman is
employed in pulling Pins out of the Church; for though the State should not
totter, he may chance to pull an old House upon his Head. And really he has
undertaken a desperate Vocation, and there are 20 other more honest and painful
ways by which he may earn a Living. Not that I would have him to do in
Ecclesiastical Matters, so much as to rub down a Bishops Horses heels, for fear
my Jack should take himself for a Gentleman if he rides sometimes, though it
were but to water his Masters Horse. Besides, cleansing a Stable (were it the
Augean) being a matter only of external neatness, can never merit the Trophies
of Hercules. For neither can a Justice of Peace for an Order about Dirt-Baskets
deserve a Statue. Nor for the same reason would I have him Chimney-Sweeper to
the City, though to give him his due, he ought to be considered by them, the
next Offices they have in their disposal, for taking such a care of their
Chimneys and their Consciences. None of their painful Pastors can admonish them
better of their duty or their Interest; Fear God, Honor the King, preserve
your Consciences, (sweep 'em rather, Page 78.
they are fouler then your Chimneys) follow your Trades, and look to your
Chimneys (not forgetting the Crickets) this is well enough for a Belmans Song,
instead of Look to your Fire, Locks and Candle Light. But Chimney-Reformation
is somewhat below the man, and there are many other Callings more advantageous
and beneficial then crying Chimney Sweep, Ay, or then Card-Matches and
Save-alls, or the more substantial Mouse-Trap-men; many, I say there are of a
more Orthodox Invention then these, and less distastful to the sanctified ear
of English Protestants, witness the London-Cryes of the late blessed Times,
when. The Oyster-Women locked their Fish up,
And trudged away to cry No Bishop.
And some for Brooms, old Boots and Shoes,
Cried out to purge the Commons House.
Instead of Kitchen-stuff some cry,
A Gospel - Preaching - Ministry;
And some for Old Suits, Coats, Cloak,
No Surplice, nor Service - Book.
Well, since Bishops must down, (and to be sure then down falls Popery) I think
the fairest way to rid our hands of them is, for Mr. Animadverter to put his
Book in the hands of the Itinerant Gospellers that travel up and down with two
penny Books, and Preach the Desolation and downfall of the Man of Sin. (Ah,
many a good Book of Mr. Bs. and I. O's have these Bawlers cried) the Project
will take wonderfully with your Street-Auditory, the Rabble. Then they may sing
the Fall of Antichristian Magistrates and Laws, you have plentifully provided
them with Canting for that purpose, for from Page 243. to Page 250. you have
carried on the Cause. I will point to some of it, Page 249. Page 250. Princes
consider, that God has Instated them in the Government of Mankind, with that
encumbrance (if it may so be called) of Reason, and that encumbrance upon
Reason of Conscience. That he might have given them as large an extent of
ground, and other kind of Cattle for their Subjects: but it had been a
melancholy Empire to have been only Supreme Grasiers and Sovereign Shepherds.
And therefore, though the laziness of that brutal magistracy might have been
more secure, yet the difficulty of this does make it more honorable. That men
therefore are to be dealt with reasonably: and Conscientious men by Conscience.
That even Law is force, and the execution of that Law a greater Violence; and
therefore with rational Creatures not to be used but upon the utmost,
extremity. That the Body is in the power of the mind; so that corporal
Punishments do never reach the offender, but the innocent suffers for the
guilty. That the Mind is in the hand of God, and cannot correct those
persuasions which upon the best of its natural capacity it has collected: So
that it too, though erroneous, is so far innocent. That the Prince therefore,
by how much God has endued him with a clearer reason, and by consequence with
a more enlightened judgment, ought the rather to take heed lest by punishing
Conscience he violate not only his own, but the Divine Majesty. So that if any
Prince will hold his Kingdom by Mr. Animadve^ters Tenure, he is fully Instated
in the Melancholy Empire of all his Parks and Chases, and next and immediately
under Conscience, over all Persons (their Bodies only reserved in the power of
their minds, and their minds in the hand of God) and all other kind of his said
Majesty's Cattle, within his rational or irrational Realms and Dominions,
Supreme Head and Governor. This indeed is the most full and comprehensive
Inventory of the Goods and Chattels of Monarchy (if I may so speak) that eve^
was heard of. Instating Princes not only in the Government of irrational
Cattle, a Right which all successively have claimed from Adam; Brutal
Magi^tracy being a Flower of his Crown, and a Prerogative of his Melancholy
Empire, transmitted from him to the Patriarchs, and all the Supreme Grasiers
and Sovereign Shepherds: but assigning also other kind of Cattle for their
Government as their rational Subjects. Ay, and such Cattle as Conscientious
Men. Which Right as it was at first derived (as some fancy) from the Original
Consent of the People, so is the Exercise of it confirmed by a like Consent of
their Heirs, or rather of their Consciences.

Now these tamer Subjects, (the Brutes) are to be governed by force, that is in
our Authors words, by Law; for Hunters though they have an absolute Power of
Life and Death over those we call the Ferae Naturae, yet give Law even unto
them: but the Conscientious Drove are not so easily yoked as the horned
Subjects of the Wood, and therefore Law is not to be used with them, but upon
the utmost extremity. For which reason our Autho^tels us that Brutal Magistracy
is more secure* and the latter more difficult: which confirms an opinion of the
Malmsbury Philosophers, that Horses, had they Laws amongst them, would prove
more generous Subjects them, Men.

It Is true, the Animadverter says, that God might have given Princes as large
as extent of Ground, and other kind of Cattle for their Subjects, (Subjects are
one kind of Cattle it seems) but it had been a melancholy Empire to have been
only Supreme Grasiers and Sovereign Shepherds. And yet as Melancholy an Empire
as that would have been, he has instated them in one far more unpleasant and
uncomfortable, over Subjects, from whom they must expect no greater security
for Obedience, then their own good Nature: for punish them they must not if
disloyal and unjust, for fear of disobliging their Consciences: for though he
says that Laws should not be put in Execution, but upon the utmost extremity,
it is plain he intends they should not be Executed at all; for in the very next
words he affirms, that the Body is in the power of the Mind, so that Corporal
Punishment do never reach the Offender, but the Innocent suffers for the
Guilty. Admirable Stoic! but say that the infamy of a Gibbet cannot shame the
Generous Mind, nor the Severities of the Rack and Wheel awe the most Servile:
say further that Corporal Punishments cannot reach the Principal Offender, the
Mind; must therefore the Accessory and subordinate Instrument, the Body, escape
unpunisht? But the Mind it seems, is not only out of the reach, but
Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate. For it is in the hand of God, and cannot
correct those persuasions, which upon the best of its natural capacity it has
collec^ed: So that if too, though erroneous, is so far innocent. That the
Prince therefore, by how much God has endued him with a c^earer reason, and by
consequence with a more enlightened judgment, ought the rather to take heed,
lest by punishing the Conscience, he violate not only his own, but the Divine
Majesty. So, now let any of the most desperate Patrons of Fatal Necessity come
out and speak any more. Truly, this is a pretty way not only of excusing, but
hallowing all the Villainy in the World, by dedicating it, (I dread to speak it)
to the Deity. This is the Syntagm of Calvin's Divinity, and System of our
Authors Policy. Bishop Bramhall (as was before noted) accused the Scotch
Disciplinarians for making Kings but Kings of the Bodies, and not of the Souls
of their Subjects, but this Gentleman is so courteous as to release them from
the charge of both, for the Bodies of their Subjects are exempt from their
Jurisdiction, as being in the Power of their Minds, and their Minds are in the
hand of God, and so Monarchs had best take heed, least by punishing the
Consciences of their Subjects, they violate with their own, the Divine Majesty.
And now shut up the Church doors, there is no use of Altars for the Guilty,
they need run no farther then to their own Consciences for Sanctuary, and be
safe. Cut in pieces the Whipping Posts and Pillories, make Bonfires of the
Gallowses, set open all the Prisons, and let there be a general Jail-delivery,
for Corporal Punishments are all unjust, and reach not the Guilty, but the
Innocent; and what is more, they are manifest infringments on our Libertys, and
the Magna Charia of Conscience. Sheath the Sword of Justice, mure up
Westminster Hall, and set Bills on the Courts, for Laws are force, and the
Execution of them (though in inflicting the smallest Penalties) a greater
Violence. Away with these Oppressions of the Freeborn. All Causes are to be
tried in Foro Interno. And every Man is his own Judge in that High Court of
Judicature, his Conscience, from which (in the Character of Sovereignty) there
is No Appeal. Here Kings are deposed for violating the Divine Majesty, and
their own in the Exercise of that large Power which God has entrusted them as
his Deputies with. To this, all must swear Allegiance and Supremacy, and those
that are Loyal to Conscience, may lawfully be Traitors to their Sovereign. The
Supreme Magistrate is accountable to the Inferior, but the Conscientious Man in
this preposterous way of climbing downwards, is an Inferior Magistrate above
even the Inferior, as he is a Supreme over the Supreme. Thus Conscience is at
once (like Mr. Calvin) Pope and Emperor, seated in St. Pet^rs Chair and the
Imperial Throne, invested with as great a Power in ordine ad Spiritualia, as
Gods Viceroys justly challenge, or Christ's Vicar General usurps: So have we
rejected one Pope, and set up as many in his room, as there are Subjects. For
had not Infallibility place in every private Judgment, (and Conscience is no
more) why should our Author imagine, that Princes in punishing Conscience,
violate their own, and the Divine Majesty? For can they violate the Divine
Majesty in punishing Error? Sure I am, if those Consciences do not err, that
are tender of offending God in obeying Men, and not tender of offending him in
disobeying them, we must alter the Scripture, and say, Disobey for Conscience
sake: but he adds, the Conscience though erroneous, is so far innocent as it is
in the hand of God, and cannot correct those persuasions which upon the best of
its natural Capacity it has collected. But if the Prince in punishing an^thers
Conscience, proceeds according to his own, is not his so far innocent too? And
since you are so great an Advocate for absolute Necessity, you should do well
to remember, that Zeno when his man pleaded a Necessity of Offending, answered
him with a Cudgel, alleging the like Necessity of Beating him.

Thus have you divested Princes of an Unlimited and Vnco^^roulable Power, and
given it to a more Imperious and Arbitrary Tyrant, Conscience. And because your
Adversary had told you, that Princes have power to bind their Subjects to that
Religion that they apprehend most advantageous to Public Peace: to avoid this
Rock, you split upon a worse, concurring rather with your Dear Friend Mr.
Milton: who says, that the only true Religion if commanded by the Civil
Magistrate, becomes Unchristian, Inhumain and Barbarous. In cashiering the
Magistrates Authority in things Indifferent, you rob him of all his Power; for
those things that are absolutely lawful and necessary in themselves were
commanded by God before. And besides, that that Opinion, that things
Indifferent in themselves become unlawful when imposed, is irrational and
absurd; as if (says one) that were unlawful to be done when commanded, which
was lawful to be done even without a Command. The Consequence is yet wilder,
For if things indifferently lawful, become sinful when imposed, then by the
same reason they must needs become necessary, when they are forbidden. And so
consequently, whatsoever of this nature the Magistrate shall forbid, men must
look upon themselves as bonnd in conscience to practice; and thus you give him
that power over your Consciences by his Prohibitions, which you deny to his
Commands.

No less ridiculous is this, That Law is force, and the execution of that Law,
a greater Violence, and therefore not to be used with rational creatures, but
upon the utmost extremity. But if the People be forced to obey those Laws, to
the making of which they consented in their Representatives; certainly they are
not forced without their own Consent. Besides, what have Rules of force in
them, and Laws in their primary intention were no more. The Penalty was only
annexed in case of nonperformance. And here the Casuists (those Reverend
Serieants at the Gospel) will tell you, that it is not lawful without great
reason to prefer Passive Obedience before Active, because the Law aims not so
much at Punishment as Conformity. Neither is the execution of the Law, so great
a Violence as is imagined. For some are Condemned to suffer, for a Terror to
others. To condemn them, because they have offended, is a folly says Plato: for
what is once done, can never be undone. But they are condemned because they
should not offend again, or that others may avoid the Example of their Offense.
And one man is hanged to prevent the hanging of many more.

Upon considering all, I see not but your State of Conscience leads to a wilder
Anarchy then the Hobbian State of Nature, and how much better might you have
assigned Princes the Government of an innocent Flock according to the Rules of
Arcabian Policy, then that of such ungovernable Cattle, as Conscientious
Savages. The Command of Fields and Pastures is more honorable on these terms,
then that of populous Towns, and Cities (which our Poet and your Bishop D'
Avenant calls the Walled Parks of Herded men) What Monarch, rather then he
would be clogged with such conditions, would not exchange his Royal Purple for
a Forresters Green, and the formality of that Dress (you know) no man would
scruple in order to the Sylvan Empire. So far however it is agreed by all in
favor of your Supreme Grasiers and Sovereign Shepherds, that their Melancholy
Empire, and Brutal Magis^racy shall for ever shut out of doors Roman Empire.
and Ecclesiastical Policy.

As to those Misfortunes which you observe, Page 244, 245. befell some bold
Princes that were too saucy with their Subjects, I shall only match them with
some Historical Remarks in an ingenious Writer against Mr. Milton, concerning
the Rise and Fall of Republics, He tells us, That it was not the Tyranny of
Spain, nor the cruelty of Duke D'Alva, nor the blood of their Nobility, nor
Religion, nor Liberty, that made the Dutch cast off their obedience to their
Prince, but one penny excise laid upon a pound of Butter, that made them
implacably declare for a Commonwealth; That the Venetians were banished into a
Free State by Attila, and their glorious Liberty was at first no other, then he
may be said to have, that is turned out of his House. That the Romans were
Cuckolded into their Freedom; and the Pisans Trepan'd into their's by Charles
the Eighth. That as Commonwealths sprung from base Originals, so they have
ruined upon as slight occasions. The same Pisans, after they had spent all they
had upon a Freak of Liberty, were sold (like Cattle) by Lewis the 12th. The
Venetians Hectored, and almost ruined by Maximilian the First, a poor Prince,
for refusing to lend him money, as they were not long before by Francesco
Sforza about a Bastard. And the Florentines were utterly enslaved for spoiling
of an Ambassadors speech, and disparaging Petro de Medicis fine Liveryes. To
this I might add, that many Stories there are of Subjects, who have in all
humility condescended to bear with the Infirmities of their Princes (remembering
your rule, that Great Persons do out of Civility condescend to their
Inferi^urs) nay have been proud to imitate them, even your Alexanders followers
bore their heads sideling as their Master did, and Dionysius his Courtiers
would, in his Presence, run and justle one another, and either stumble at, or
overthrow whatever stood before their feet, to show, that they were as
pur-blind as he.

So much for his design against Monarchy, There is a deal of Plot yet behind,
but now it begins to break. Page 224. he says, In the late Kings time, some
eminent Persons of our Clergy made an open defection to the Church of Rome. And
instances him that writ the Book of Seven Sacraments, which had been pertinent
indeed, had he writ of Seven Sacraments all necessary to Salvation. But how can
this man imagine that we should believe, that some eminent Persons of the
Clergy in the late Kings time, made an open defection to the Church of Rome,
when he does not believe himself, for p. 297. he cannot think, that they had a
design to alter our Religion, but rather to set up a new kind of Papacy of
their own here in England. Then this was the reason it seems, why Archbishop
Laud gained Hales from Socinus (you great wit confessed when bassled by that
Prelate, that he understood more then Ceremonies, Arminianism, and Manwaring)
and many besides of considerable Quality from the Church of Rome, but none of
greater note then Ch llingworth; for this it was, that he twice refused a
Red-Hat: and no wonder, a Cardinal-ship could not tempt him, when he designed
an English Popedom.

But to prove this Surmise of his groundless, we need go no farther then the
Reconciliation which the Archbishop labored betwixt us and Rome, for the
compassing of which, amongst other Articles proposed, the Tope was to be
allowed a Priority. This Accommodation, notwith standing your Wisdom censures as
a Design impossible to be effected, was in so great a forwardness once, that it
was thought, nothing but the Opposition of the Jesuits on the one side, and
the Puritans on the other, could obstruct it, as the Popes Nuncio, affirmed to
be written by the Venetian Ambassador, expresses it. And indeed, the
Pragmaticalness of these two, had made the Breach much wider then at first,
else the more Moderate of each party by distinguishing betwixt the Doctrines of
private Men, and the Confessions of either Church, might easily have adjusted
those Differences, and so have laid a lasting Foundation for the Peace of
Christendom And as for all our Authors idle talk of Infallibility and Secular
interest, he shows, he has clearly mistaken the whole matter; for 'twas not an
Agreement with the Court, but with the Church of Rome, that was proposed in
this Mediation.

But the Gentleman is wonderful pleasant, for who knows (says he page 35.) in
such a Treaty with Rome, if the Alps would not have come over to England. (No,
I would not they should, for they have stood ever since the Flood at least, and
I am a great enemy to the removing of ancient Landmarks) England might not
have been obliged, lying so commodious for Navigation, to undertake a Voyage to
Civita Vechia. That need not neither Sir, and though it is pity this Conceit
should have been lost, yet there is a better way then this; for since our
Island is so conveniently situate for Trading, had there been a good
Correspondence maintained betwixt the Catholic Merchants and ours, they mght
more easily have drove on the Traffic; interchangeably exporting our Religion
in Cabbages, and importing the Roman in Oranges and Lemons. So that there was
not that necessity of Englands lying at Dover, for a fair Wind to be Shipped for
Civita Vechia. For besides that Transportation of Kingdoms is somewhat more
troublesome then Removing House, such a little Spot of Ground as this Island
would soon have been missing in the Map, had it been moved out of its place;
and so have occasioned many Disputes in Geography. Who knows too, if the
English had once broke up House, and packed up their Goods and their Lands to
be gone, but some of their Neighbors might have followed their Example; and
the Hollanders after they had given their old Landlord the King of Spain
warning, might have flung up their Leases, and in time, the Neth^rlands would
have been to be Let. And though his Catholic Majesty might possibly be
provided with better Tenants, for these it is said have not paid him a farthing
since the Duke of Alv^ distrain'd last for Rent; yet if all these new Planters
should not have had Elbow-room in St. Peter's Patrimony, his Holiness I fear
would have been put to the trouble of building some Cottages upon the Wast, or
at least of making a Law against Ecclesiastical Inmates to have secured his
Parish from an unnecessary Charge.

Certainly, had Mr. Author been one of the Commissioners for draining of the
Fennes, he could not have argued more profoundly against the cutting of the
Ecclesiastic Canal. page 30. he compares it with those Attempts in former ages
of digging through the Separating Istmos of Peloponnesus and making
Communication between the Red Sea, and the Mediterranean. But since he is so
averse from any Commnnication with Rome, he might have done well to forbid any
correspondence between their Elements and ours. Who can tell at how great a
distance every Breath of moving Air may continue articulate? Especially, if
vocaliz'd in Sir S. Moreland's Trumpet. Nay, why may not those Birds that
sojourn with us half the year, when they fly thither for Winter Quarters, sing
strange stories in the Italian Groves? and those the learned in Ornithology
understand. How if those Winds that whistle near our Coasts, should whisper
Tales there? and strange Secrets may be discovered by the Roman Eaves-droppers,
if they lay their Ears to the ground. What does he think of a Communication
between Rivers? for it may so happen, that the Protestant Thames may at some
time or other mix with the impurer streams of Papal Tyber, and hold some kind
of Intelligence in their prattling Murmurs, when they both discharge into the
Sea (there may be another Communication too this way, between the Roman
Piss-pots and the Reformed) I am somewhat unwilling I must confess to venture
too far into these Depth's, for fear of being plunged past recovery. I leave
them therefore to be fathomed by this Gentleman's Plummet. He has been over
Shoes already, ay, and over Boots too. He has waded through the Leman Lake and
the River Rhosne, and knows every Creek and Corner in each (better then any of
the Water-Rats or Natives) p. 55. he tells you that the River ducks under
ground, such is its apprehension (a very apprehensive River indeed) least the
Lake should overtake it (that is to say, the Lake stands still, as fast as the
Current can run) So great a Wader in Discoveries I am confident might be
successfully employed in groping for the Head of Nile.

But to conclude his Discourse of Accommodation, and with that his Plot. I have
heard of a Hampshire Clown who being upon the Seashore, and seeing nothing but
Water beyond England, would not be persuaded that there was any such Country as
France, but that all the Relations of it were Travelers Tales. And this
Gentleman belike, having collected upon the best of his Capacity (and what
persuasions the mind has so collected, it cannot correct) that the clearest Day
could not discover Rome to one standing at Dover, imagined not absurdly, that
two Places removed at such a distance, could never meet, unless England made an
Errand over the Water, or the Catholic City were transported hither. And good
reason it is, according to the Geography of Religions, and assigning one
Religion to Islands, and another to the Continent, that the same Sea which
makes a Separation of Places, should also make a Schism in Religions. Well, I
see it now all along this can be no less a man then Sir Politic Would-bee
himself, his Reasonings, his Debates, and his Projects are the same, both for
Possibility and Use. And what does more abundantly confirm it, his Diary
proclaims him right Sir Pol. There is nothing so low or trivial that escapes a
Place either in his Memory or Table Book. Every Action of his Life is quoted.
He notes all Occurrences in Gaming-Ordinaries, and all Arguments in the Str^et:
how the Boys agree in whipping Gigs in Lincolns Inn Fields, and what luck the
Lacqueys have at Charing Cross in Playing at the Wheel of Fortune. How often
every man urines, and whether he looks on a Preface that while or no. All these
he books, and many more of that Politicians Memorandum's he has in reserve; as
no question the Day and Year set down when the Rats gnawed his Spur-leathers,
and the very Hour when he burst a Pick^tooth in discoursing with a Dutch
Merchant about Ragioni di Stato.

There is one Project more of that Politic Knights, not much below this
Gentleman's reflection, in relation to the Security of the City, and that is
concerning Tinder-boxes, for since almost no Family here, is without its Box,
and that is so portable a thing, how easy is it for any Man ill affected to
the State, to go with one in his Pocket into a Powder-Shop, or where any other
Combustible Wares are lodged, and come out again, and none the wiser. How sit
were it therefore; the State should be advertised that none but such as are
known Patriots and Lovers of their Country should be trusted with such
dangerous Furniture in their Houses, and even those too sealed at the
Tinder-box Office, and of such a bigness, as might not lurk in Pockets.

Well, though our Transproser makes no difference as to the Plot or Characters
in his Heroic Plays, yet his Rehearsal is as full of Drollery as ever it can
hold; it is like an Orange stuck with Cloves; as for Conceit. Page 6. he leads
us into a Printing House, and describes it in the same style as the Man who
shows John Tradescants Rarities (which is extraordinary fine for those who have
never seen such a Sight) the Letters are shown for Teeth of strange Animals
(sure Garagantua's hollow Tooth would have gone for a Capital Letter.) And what
is more surprising for Serpents Teeth. And those very Teeth which Cadmus sowed,
from which (it seems) he had a large Crop of Printing-Letters. The first Essay
(he has told us) that was made toward this Art, was in single Characters upon
^ron, wherewith of old they stigmatized Slaves and remarkable Offenders. He
might have pursued the Subject further yet, and told us of another use of these
single Characters upon Iron, (God knows how ancient) which is, that of
Proprietaries marking Cattle, and from hence have learnedly concluded a
Propriety in Letters, as well as Beasts. The Argument if improved might have
been of force for the Peoples Propriety in Language, (a new Privilege of
Subject for which our Author contends) for how justly may he plead, that they
give Names to their Dogs and Horses, (an original Flower of Adams Crown) and
fix distinguishing Characters on their Sheep, (nay, mark their Piss-pots, Bowls
and Flagons) they exercise a petty Royalty in pinfolding Cattle, and pounding
Beasts, in making Wills and Testaments; Leases made with no less Caution then
Laws, pass (in the Imperial style) under their Hand and Seal; and why should
not they be entrusted in wording Laws for the Public? for it is unreasonable to
fill the Princes Head with Proclamations. P. 233.
And since Cattle-Blazo^ry, (as was said before) is their due, why might not
they have the dispensing of Coats of Arms. And if their Pocket-Seals are
Authoritative enough for setting their Lands, and binding their Sons, why not
for disposing of Offices too, as well as the Great Seal? If any man shall say,
that some of them are unlettered (as some few of a private Condition and
Breeding are) and so incapacitated for Lawmakers, because they are not good
Scribes: the Answer is easy, if they cannot write their Names, they may set
their Mark, (this I conceive was the first Essay toward the Art of Writing, as
that in single Characters upon Iron, was toward that other of Printing) and to
authenticate this, I remember Sir Politic Would-bee (that worthy Predecessor
of this Gentleman) tells us of a Letter he received from a High and Mighty
Cheesemonger, one of the Lords of the States General, who could not write his
Name (at least at length, and with all his Titles) and therefore had set his
Mark to it. Not but that he had Secretaries under him ( Latin or no, I know
not) that could do it. But this was for the greater Majesty.

But if the People will be so civil as to forego their uncontrollable Power in
Language (which they have by a Natural Right, antecedent to Christ) they may,
but our Author will not upon so easy terms recede from his Prerogative. For
there are two Letters I. O. over which he claims an absolute Power to make them
signify any thing, or nothing, as he pleases. He had looked in his Dictionary
('it is one of his highest Authors) and found that Io uses to go before Paean,
and then amongst the Proper Names he saw Io was the Daughter of Inac^us, and so
(as he tells us, page 83.) that as Juno persecuted the Heifer, this I. O. was
an He-Cow, that is to say a Bull to be baited by Mr. Bays. It seems then in
his Accidence (whether it be the same with Miltons Accidence commenced Grammar,
I know not) it is Hae^ Io, a Cow both He and She. But though I. O. be the
Letters which make up four pages of his Book, (as if his Printer could furnish
him with no other) yet is his Alphabet Wit further improvable for this I being
the tallest slendrest Letter of the Alphabet, and O the roundest, he could not
have picked out two in all the Criss-Cross-Row that point more plainly at the
Man that owns them, for according to Signatures, they Emblem a Tall Sir John
that has been a Roundhead. As to the first part of his Character, our Author
has so far deciphered him, telling us page 68. of one I. O. a tall Servant of
the Ecclesiastical Politician's. And for the later, the Owner of those two
Letters has deciphered himself in his Books. But if these be not sufficient
Marks to know the Beast by, he has described the Monster with the punctuality
of a Gazett-Advertisement that gives notice of a Crop-ear'd Gelding strayed
from his Master. For page 83. he tells us this I. O. has a Head, and a Mouth
with Tongue and Teeth in it, and Hands with Fingers and Nails upon them. Which
is almost as apposite a Description of an Independent, as his Friend Mr. Milton
has given us of a Bishop, who in his Apology for his Animadversions upon the
Remonstrants Defense against Smectymnuus, says, that a Bishops foot that has
all his Toes maugre the Gout, and a linen Sock over it, is the aptest Emblem
of the Bishop himself; who being a Pluralist, under one Surplice which is also
linen (and therefore so far like the Toe-Surplice, the Sock) hides four
Benefices besides the Metropolitan Toe. So that when Archbishop Abbot was
suspended, we might say in Mr. Miltons style, his Metropolitan Toe was cut off.
But since Milton is so great an Enemy to great Toes (however dignified or
distinguished, be they Papal or Metropolitan) we would fain know, whether his
are all of a length, since the Leveller (it seems) affects a Parity even in
Toes. Whether now his Bishop with a Metropolitan Toe, or our Authors
Congregational Man with ten Fingers and long Nails upon all, be the fitter
Mo^ster to be shown, is hard to say. Only, I am glad to hear that the Author of
Evangelical Love has got Claws, since belike his Evangelical Love (like that of
Cats) is exercised for the most part in Scratching and Clawing. And now let the
Bishops look to their Faces, and beware of some with long Nails. For unluckily,
among other Calamities of late, there has happened a prodigious Conjunction of
a Latin Secretary and an English Schoolmaster, the appearance of which, none
of our Astrologers foretold, nor no Comet ^ortended. It may be for our Authors
reason, because it is of far higher quality, and has other kind of employment,
And therefore, though an Hairy Star, it might afford no Prognostic of these
two Monkeys lousing the Bishops heads.

But if Milton's Sock will not well endure a comparison with the Surplice, what
think you of our Animadverter's joining the White-Surplices and the
White-Aprons in one period, page 195. (observe John Milton, they are both
Linen and both White.) It Is much we heard not here of the Sympathy of White
Linen, as well as of the Sympathy of Scarlet, page 68. where our Author has
married the Tippet and the Red Petticoat. See how the Turky-Cock (if that be
not too Masculine an Emblem for a Capon-wit) bristles at the Sight of any thing
that is Red. However, this I hope may be a means to reconcile the Holy Sisters
to the Church, for if there be so good an Agreement between the Tippets and Red
Petticoats, and the White Surplices and White Aprons, they are come one step
nearer to Conformity then they were aware of. Who knows too, but in time they
may be persuaded that their's are Canonical Vestments, save only that the
Doctresses wear their Tippets at the wrong end, and inverting the usual Form,
under their Surplices. In the mean time, I think the Regulating Canonical
Habits an Employment no way commensurate to our Authors Abilities, wishing him
rather to concern himself in such Worthy Cares as a Reformation of the
Hospital-boys Blue Coats, or the Water-mens Red-Coats and Badges, and so till
he proceed to the Lacquey's Liveries. And then possibly he may conceit himself
qualified in some degree for an Undertaking in Heraldry. A Perfection he envies
in Bishop Bramhall. For it looks like upbraiding in any man to vaunt his skill
in Heraldry before any one of his private Condition that wants a Coat of Arms,
or at least like reflecting on his private Breeding that never learnt to Blazon
another. For what else can you make of his Animadversion, page 34. upon this
Maxim of the Bishop, That second Reformations are commonly like Metal upon
Metal, which is false He raldry. Upon which, it is a wonder, (says he) that our
Author in enumerating the Bishops perfections in Divinity, Law, History and
Philosophy, neglected this peculiar gift he had in Heraldry, which is
altogether as sleeveless as the Heralds Coat, if I may have to offer at that
low Wit with which our Author so Plentifully abounds. For to give you some of
his Clenches, p. 158. he says, his Adversary leaps cross, and has more doubles,
(nay triples and quadruples) then any Hare. And to show, that he as well as Mr.
Bays is an enemy to all the Moral virtues, page 322. he tells us, the
Ecclesiastical Politician makes Grace a mere Fable, of which he gives us the
Moral. And p, 135. if the Archbishopric of Canterbury should ever fall to his
lot, I am resolved instead of his Grace, to call him always his Morality.

Whereas he tells us a Story of the Scurvy Disease, page 134, his History, and
his hard names of Podostrabae, Doctylethrae, Rhinolabides, etc. page 132.
declare him sufficiently Graduated in Canting for a Pox-Doctor. I shall only
mind him here of another Scurvy Disease derived from Geneva, Contemporary with
that brought over from the Indies. For unless our Calculators are out, the Pox
and Presbytery broke out at the same time in Europe. And therefore are the
Twin-Diseases deservedly associated in a Fatal Chronology.

And now for what he discourses p. 47. of those who having never seen the
receptacle of Grace or Conscience at an Anatomical Dissection conclude that
there is no such matter; the Learned in Anatomy are so far from granting him
this, that they assure him of the contraty. Maintaining upon dissection of the
Presbyterian Carcasses that they have made an undoubted discovery of the
Receptacle of Conscience, unanimously agreeing upon their best Observation that
it lies very near the Spleen.

There is one Conceit behind which I had almost forgot, in his Discourse of the
Liberty of Unlicens'd Printing p. 6. (which is little else but Milton's
Areopagitica in short hand) The very Sponges which one would think should
rather deface and blot out the whole Bo^k, and were anciently used to that
purpose, are become now the Instruments to make things legible. But truly, I
think the Sponge has left little else visible in his Book more then what it did
in the Figures of those two Painters in the one of which it fortunately dash't
the Foam of a mad Horse, and in the other, the Slaver of a weary Dog; the
Sponges ruder Blot prevailing above all the light touches and tender strokes of
the Pencil. And indeed for this inimitable Art of the Sponge, this of
Expressing Slaver and Foam to the Life, I will not deny but his work deserves
to be celebrated beyond the Pieces of either Painter. If you will have it in
his Elegancy, I never saw a man in so high a Salivation. If in Miltons (I know
he will be proud to lick up his Spittle) He has invested himself withal the
Rheum of the Town, that he might have sufficient to bespaul the Clergy.

But enough of these two loathsome Beasts, and their spitting and spauling. Now
what think you of washing your mouth with a Proverb or two. For I cannot but
remark this admirable way he has of Embellishing his Writings Proverbial-Wit.
As for instance. One night has made some men Gray, page 144. and better come at
beginning of a Feast, then latter end of a Fray: page 166. Which (to express
them Proverbially) are all out as much to the purpose as any of Sancho Pancha's
Proverbs. For the truth of this Comparison, I shall only appeal to the
Leaf-turners of Don Quixot. Some there are below the Quality of the Squires
Wit, and would better have become the Mouth of his Lady Joan, or any old Gammer
that drops Sentences and Teeth together, As (speaking of his own Tale of the
Lake Perilous,) he faith in its Applause, this Story would have been Nuts to
Mother Midnight, page 56. and page 142. A year, nay an instant at any time of a
man's Life may make him Wiser. And his Adversary has, like all other fruits his
annual Maturity. Though there is one sort of fruit trees above all the rest,
that bears with its Fruit, a signal Hieroglyphick of our Author; and that is a
Medlar: A Fruit more remarkable for its annual maturity, because the same also
is an annual rottenness.

As for his wonderful Gift in Rhyming, I could furnish him with many more of
the Isms and Nesses, but that I should distaste a Blank Verse Friend of his, who
can by no means endure a Rhyme any where but in the middle of a Verse, therein
following the laudable custom of the Welsh Poets. And therefore I shall only
point at some of the Nesses, the more eminent, because of the peoples Coiage;
and of a Stamp as unquestionable as the Breeches, and so far more legitimate
then any that have past for current since the People left off to mind words
(another Flower of their Crown which they fought for, besides Religion and
Liberty) they are these, One-ness, Same-ness, Muchness, Nothing-ness,
Soul-saving-ness; to which we may add another of our Authors own,
Pick-thank-ness; in which word (to keep our Rhyme) there is a peculiar
Marvelousness.

I should now in imitation of our Author proceed to his Personal Character, but
I shall only advise his Painter if ever he draws him below the Wast, to follow
the example of that Artist, who having completed the Picture of a Woman, could
at any time, with two strokes of his Pencil upon her Face, two upon her Breast,
and two betwixt her Thighs; change her in an instant into Man: but after our
Authors Female Figure is completed, the change of Sex is far easier; for
Nature, or Sinister Accident has rendered some of the Alteration-strokes useless
and unnecessary. This expression of mine may be somewhat uncouth, and the
fitter therefore (instead of Figleaves, or White Linen) to obscure what ought
to be concealed in Shadow. Neither would I trumpet the Truth too loudly in your
ears, because ('it is said) you are of a delicate Hearing, and a great enemy to
noise; insomuch that you are disturbed with the too^ing of a Sow-geIders Horn.

Some busy People there are, that would be forward enough it may be to pluck
the Vizor off this Sinister Accident, not without an evil Eye at your Distich
on Un Accident Sinistre, to which they imagine some officious Poet might easily
frame a Repartee to the like purpose as this Tetrastich.

O mavelous Fate. O Fate full of marvel;
That Nol's Latin Pay two Clerks should deserve ill!
Hiring a Gelding and Milton the Stallion;
His Latin was gelt, and turned pure Italian.
Certainly to see a Stallion leap a Gelding, (and this leap't fair, for he
leapt over the Geldings head) was a more p^eposterous sight, or at least more
Italian, then what you fancy of Father Patrick's bestriding Doctor Patrick.

Neither is it unlikely but some may say in defense of these Verses, that Nol's
Latin Clerks were somewhat Italianiz'd in point of Art as well as Language, and
for the proof of this refer those that are curious to a late Book called the
Rehearsal Transprosed, where p. 77. the Author or some body for him asks his
Antagonist if the Non-conformists must down with their Breeches as often as he
wants the prospect of a more pleasing Nudity. And for his fellow Journey-man,
they may direct the Leaf-turners to one of his books of Divorce, (for he has
learnedly parted Man and Wife in no less then four Books) namely, his Doctrine
and Discipline, where toward the bottom of the second Page, they may find
somewhat which will hardly merit so cleanly an Expression as that of the Moral
Satyrist, words left, betwixt the Sheets. Not but that he has both excused and
hallowed his Obscenity elsewhere by pleading Scripture for it, as page 24, 25.
Of his Apology for his Animadversions upon the Remonstrants Defense against
Smectymnuus. And again in his Areopagitica, p. 13. for Religion and Morality
forbid a Repetition. Such was the Liberty of his Unlicenc'd Printing, that the
more modest Aretine were he alive in this Age, might be set to School again, to
learn in his own Art of the Blind Schoolmaster.

Thus have you had the Transproser Rehearsed. And now perhaps you may be in
expectation of the F^fth Act promised you in the Title; but because it is the
Bookseller's as well as Poet^s Art to raise your Expectation and bring you off
some extraordinary way, I will not deprive you of the Pleasure of being
Cheated: but since the Transprosing Muses are gone to Dinner, I shall at
present, according to a late Precedent only read you the Argument of the Fifth
Act, receding as little as I can, from that which was found in Mr. Bays his
Pocket, and then making our Author personate Prince Pretty-man, and varying old
Joan to the Church of Geneva; it is in effect no more then this, that Prince
Pretty-man (the Character is Great enough for a man of Private Condition) being
passionately in Love (you may allow him to be an Allegorical Lover at least)
with old Joan (not the Chandlers, but Mr. Calvin's Widow) walks discontentedly
by the side of the Lake Lemane, sighing to the Winds and calling upon the
Woods; not forgetting to report his Mistresses name so often, till he teach all
the Eccho's to repeat nothing but Joan; now entertaining himself in his
Solitude, with such little Sports, as loving his Love with an I, and then
loving his Love with an O, and the like for the other Letters. And anon with
such melancholy divertisements as angling in the Lake for Trouts. And making
many an Amorous Comparison between his Heart and the silly Captives, his
innocent Prey, His fishing lines you may conceive, framed of a no less delicate
contexture, then old Ioan's Hair, (the Mode of wearing Hair-Bracelets was
scarce in use then, or else you had heard of that.) To be short, after he has
carved his Mistresses Name with many Love-knots and flourishes in all the
Bushes and Brambles; and interwoven those sacred Characters with many an
Enigmatical Devise in Posies and Garlands of Flowers, lolling sometimes upon
the Bank and sunning himself, and then on a sudden (varying his Postures with
his Passion) raising himself up, and speaking all the fine things which Lovers
used to do. His Spirits at last exhaled with the heat of his Passion, swop, he
falls asleep, and snores out the rest.

If this Argument shall require a Key, I shall only say, I call not the Church
of Geneva old, for any other reason then that Antiquity in Mistresses is
reckoned a Deformity. Besides, I think it would have been an high Indecorum to
have supposed Mr. Calvin's Widow younger then the Chandlers. And for Conferring
the Honor of Prince Pretty-man on our Author, I shall allege such Reasons as
these; because, they Symbolize in their humor, and not a little in their
Expressions: in their Contempt and quarrelling of all others that are not in
love with the same Mistress, and lastly, in the choice of their Mistresses.

And first for their Symbolizing in their humor and expressions. Our Author
begins very briskly with Love and Blazing Comets, but in the middle of his Book
(as Prince Pretty-man in the height of his Rapture) he grows heavy and dull;
and a Lethargy at length seizing on his Spirits, by that he comes to page 263,
he falls asleep, having first bid Mr. Bays Good Night, but before you can
speak a Simile of eight Verses over him; whip, he starts up, and cries Good
Morrow. (which is all out as well as It is Resolved.) Add to this, that his
Snip-Snap Wit, hit for hit, and dash for dash is pure Prince Pret and Tom
Thimble. As to their Symbolizing in their Contempt and quarrelling of all
others that are not in love with the same Mistress, his whole Book is a
Demonstration of their admirable Agreement in this point of Singularity.
Hectoring all that are not equal adorers of Mr. Calvin's charming Dowager,
though he himself would sooner have a Passion for a Whale, then any other
Mistress but his own. And for the choice of their Mistresses; the Prince quits
that Chloris, whom Gods would not pretend to blame for old Joan, the Chandler's
Widow, and this Gallant no less preposterously, espouses the sluttish Mother
Church of Geneva before our Church with all her Ornaments and Decorations,
preferring the Blue and White Aprons before the Glories of her Yellow Hood and
Bull-head, admiring most the Wrinkles of a homely Widow, and the Beauties of
the Grub-street Gossips, her Ragged Daughters and Grandchildren.

Now'tis but a little walk to Geneva, and to invite you thither, I dare
undertake for your Welcome. That you shall have good Cheer there, and good
Company. And besides your other Entertainments there, you may shoot with the
Arbalet, or play at Court-boule. The Divines there are notable Good Companions.
They are incomparable Pall-mall-Players. And very good Bowlers too no doubt
(would they were as honest Men) But though we have Geneva in the Wind, I am
afraid we had need of a better Guide then our Noses, else we shall never come
thither. And for Strangers to ask the way, would be the readier means perhaps
to set'em out of it. If we enquire of some they will tell us, it lies South of
the Lake; if of other, they say it lies West, and Geographers are in as many
Stories as the Country People. In this uncertainty of Information, what Course
shall we steer? shall we consult the Oracle? We must go then to the
Transproser. He Will direct us sure, as Wisards to lost Cattle. Navigators may be
taught to sail by him, truer then by the Compass. He has breathed the Air of
as many Countries as the Traveling G^eek and Pious Trojan. And may more justly
challenge the Honor of Citizen of the World, then that wise Philosopher. A
Geographer born and bred, even from his Cradle. Rockt from his Childhood on
the Sea's. Coriat himself was not a truer Traveller. And what one sung of him,
is with more justice due to our Author. Some say when he was born (O wondrous
hap)
First time ^e pi^t his Clouts, he drew a Map.
If we ask his Advice then, he will bid us Steer to the West; and yet those that
have Traveled as far as Geneva in Mercator, Botero, etc. cry, to the South of
the Lake. Must we then correct Maps, no, rather, our Compass; and add a New
Point of this Pilot's Invention, called South and by West.

Well, fain I would have saluted Mr. Calvin's House, and paid my obeisance to
his Threshold. But since the Way is so difficult, and my Guides unresolved; I
have no great Maw to it. I shall only therefore leave a Ticket for his
Assigns. It is an Enquiry concerning certain things laid to the Charge of that
harmless, honest Divine. In which, if I could receive any Satisfaction from
them, I should gladly acknowledge the Obligation, and be more ready for the
future to pay a just Veneration to his Memory. The one is, a Story of an
Italian Marquess, which because I am afraid it tends not much to his Honor,
and there is a paltry Book on purpose set out concerning the whole matter, I
shall forbear to recite here. The other, a scurvy Report of one Servetus, who
after he had been confuted by the English Bishops, and so dismissed (where were
the Pillories, WhippingPosts, Galleys, Rods, and Axes, that are the Ratio
Vltima Cleri) was more secreetly handled by Mr. Calvin and lighted into the
other World by Fire and Faggot (add these two to all the rest, and together
they are, Ratio Vltima Calvini) for which reason Bellius, Eleutherius, and
their fellows styled him a Bloody Man, and the villainous Montfort drew Calvin's
Picture not in a Gown and Cassock, but in a Helmet, Back and Breast, belted and
armed like a Man of War, (this showed more noble then Bishop Bramhalls
Metaphorical Armor) Nay, to go further, he was burnt, and as if the World might
not know for what, his Books too. But what makes the Case somewhat the worse,
Grotius and two or three unlucky Fellows lighted unhappily upon some of them,
and would bear us in hand, that there were no such Crimes there, as Calvin
imputed to him. Serveti Libri, no^ Genevae tantum, sed and aliis in Locis per
Calvini diligentiam exu^ti sunt, fateor tame^ unum me exemplum vidisse Libri
Servetiani; in quo certe ea non reperi, quae ei objicit Calvinus, says ^rotius
in his Votum pro Pace.

I have now done, after I have (which is but just) taken leave of my Author.
Sorry I am, to waken him out of that pleasant Dream I left him in, when reposed
under the Arms of a spreading Bramble. But I will disturb him as little a time
as may be, a few things only I have to say to him at parting, and then let him
take the other Nap. First then I cannot but take notice of his Scripture
Railery, for though he has told the Ecclesiastical Politician, p. 166. that he
really makes Conscience of using Scripture with such a drolling companion, yet
he makes none of Travesteering it, for amongst the many good jests (he says,
page 198) he has balk'd in writing his Book, lest he should be brought to
answer for every profane and idle word, he could not find in his heart to balk
such as these, The Nonconformists were great Traders in Scripture, and
therefore thrown out of the Temple, p. 232. and p. 207. he tells us, his
Adversary is run up to the wall by an Angel. And again, p. 77. that He is the
first Minister of the Gospel that ever bad it in his Commission to rail at all
Nations. So that if any Man will learn by his Example (as he advises in the
Close of his Book) he may proceed a most accomplished Burlesquer of the
Scripture, wiithout violating and profaning those things which are and ought
to be most sacred.

Next for his Politics; when I observed how he limited Kings and set Subjects
free, exempting all Affairs of Conscience from the Jurisdiction of the
Sovereign and exclaiming against Laws as Force, and the Execution of them as a
greater violence; divesting the Civil Magistrate of his Authority in things
Indifferent, (the greatest part of his power) and ca^olling Princes out of
their Right in Complement to their Subjects (forsooth) flourisht with many
Stories culled for the purpose, and garnish't with a Bumkin Simile or two, of
such ill bred Clowns as would desire to be covered before their Betters: I
imagined he made his Collections out of such Authors as Buchanan and Iunius
Brutus. And when I remarked how small a matter he made of exposing the Wisdom
of King and Parliament for a Superfetation of Acts about the same thing, I
could not but wonder that any one of a Private Condition and Breeding, who (it
may be) never had the Government of so large a Family, as that of a single Man
and a Horse; should think himself sufficiently capacitated to make better Laws
for the Government of three Kingdoms. Certainly, not every Man that has set his
foot in Holland and Venice, or read over Baxters Holy Commonwealth and
Harrington's Oc^ana, and made a Speech once in the ROTA, is Statesman complete
enough for such an undertaking. No, the Training of Boys and Education of
Horses, are Tasks above the experience and abilities of some of these imperious
Dictators, that assume to themselves a Power of correcting their Governors. The
new Modelling of a State is somewhat beyond the Economy of a School, and
Monarchs are above the Pedantick Discipline of the Ferula; it is Arrogance then
in a great Degree for Pedagogues to Lecture Princes and Senates, and a high
Presumption for every Tutor to claim the Authority of a Buchanan.

'Twas this I was displeased with, his irreverent and disrespective usage of
Authority. His Malicious and Disloyal Reflections on the late Kings Reign,
traducing the Government of the best of Princes, and defaming his faithful
Counselors in so foul a manner, as if he had once made use of Miltons Pen, and
Gerbier's Pencil. So black a Poison has he sucked from the most virulent
Pamphlets, as were impossible for any Mountebank but the Author of Iconoclastes
to swallow, without the Cure of Antidotes. And certainly if that Libeller has
not clubb'd with our Writer (as is with some reason suspected) we may safely
say, there are many Miltons in this one Man. Not to recite too often his too
good Causes of Rebellion, and his Caution to Wise Princes only, to avoid the
like occasions. To which I may add his insolent Abuse of his Gracions
Sovereign, in so cheaply prostituting his Indulgence for a Sign to give notice
of his Seditious Writings.

I was not a little offended to see him cast so much Dirt on the Venerable
Names of Laud, Bramhal, and Cousens, aspersing the last as a Papist,
notwithstanding his incomparable History of the Canon of the Scripture, and
with the like Solecisme branding him that wrote De Deo for an Atheist. His
disingenuity is visible in his misrepresentation of the Loan, and his
mis-quoting of Thorndikes Passage of Schism. And what is no less remarkable, is
his injurious dealing with Mr. Hales, in citing his Tract of Schism, which he
could not but disallow of, when he declared himself of another Opinion,
obtaining leave of Archbishop Laud (who converted him) to call himself his
Graces Chaplain, that naming him in his Public Prayers for his Lord and
Patron, the great notice might be taken of the Alteration.

But to conclude all the Impertinences of our Author, I will not deny but the
Transproser has merited that Crown at least which Gallienus the Emperor
awarded him, who in a solemn Hunting flinging ten Darts against a Bull, from a
little distance, never touched him with one. Alleging this Reason, when some
seemed to wonder at the Sentence; This Man (says he) is Expert above you all.
For to cast ten Darts so little a way against so great a Mark, and not to hit
it, is a thing which none knows how to do besides himself.

Give me leave to close all with this short.

EPILOGVE.
-- For ours and for the Kingdoms Peace
May this Prodigious way of Writing cease.
Once in our Lives let somewhat be Composed;
Not bare REHEARSAL all, nor all TRANSPROSED.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. for transposed twice, read transprosed. p. 5. for impenitently, r.
impertinently. p. 7. for Anonymus r. Anonymous. p. 17. for Transposer r.
Transproser p. 20. for ago off r. g^ off. p. 36. for we so loud, r. were so
loud. p. 40. for a muse r. amuse. p. 48. for the Antagonist's Book sellers and
Stalls, r. Book seller and Stall p. 72. for reduce r. deduce, and for Populi
Anglicania, r. Populi Anglicani. p* 75. for Heir to his Majesty's Virtues, r.
Heir to his Fathers Virtues. p. 80. for in these words, r. on these words. p.
112. for Arcabian, r. Arcadian.


