THE SECRET MIRACLES OF NATURE: In Four Books.

Learnedly and Moderately treating of Generation, and the Parts thereof; the
SOUL, and its Immortality; of Plants and living Creatures; of Diseases, their
Symptoms and Cures, and many other Rarities not treated of by any Author
Extant; whereof see more in the TABLE of the CONTENTS.

Whereunto is added one Book containing Philosophical and Prudential RULES how
MAN shall become Excellent in all conditions, whether high or low, and lead his
LIFE with Health of Body and Mind.

Fit for the use of those that practice Physic, and all Others that desire to
search into the Hidden Secrets of NATURE, for increase of Knowledge.

Written by that Famous Physician Laevinus Lemnius.

LONDON, Printed by Jo. Streater, and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley at the
Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, John Sweeting at the Angel in
Popes-Head-Alley, John Clark at Mercers-Chappel, and George Sawbridge at the
Bible on Ludgate Hill, 1658.

THE PREFACE OF Laevinus Lemnius, A Physician, TO The Friendly Reader.
Reader,
THere are two Instruments of Art which are serviceable to the profit and use
of men, Reason and Experience, by which all things are wont to be confirmed,
and established. For by these, Physic it self, and other Sciences, for the
most part, besides Mathematical Arts, are supported. But such things as are to
gain credit with men of an exact and searching Judgment, ought to be proved by
the Line, yea, to be examined by the Touchstone. But what great thing can a
Physician undertake, if he endeavors by Reason to convince, that herbs and
Medicaments have strong effects, unless he could prove it by Experience? On
the contrary, with what confidence could he trust a trial, which for the most
part the undiscreet temerity of practical Physicians, does declare to be
deceitful and dangerous, applied without Judgment, unless Reason does assist
him? And although he might be accounted a Sophister, to try reason by a proof
contrary to the declaration of experience; and any one of sound Judgment, and
that does consider the delight of things, will never agree to the trial, or
abide to prove it rashly, unless it be approved and underpropped by reason in
every particular: Yet I cannot deny, or gainsay, but there are many hidden and
secret things in nature, of an hidden and unknown effect, that it would be
undiscreet to attempt to declare the reason and cause of the effect of such
things. These very things are called by Dioscorides, (...), that is, Lib. 6. c.
34.
destitute of reason, and bereft of the knowledge of causes, which do not
present a manifest demonstration to the sense and understanding, Occultae
proprietates.
and therefore are called by Physicians, hidden qualities. But if they perceive
any thing of this kind to interpose us, either by the course of the Stars, and
moving of the glittering signs, or by the divine will, or by Concretion and
mixture of the elements: or lastly, by the force of the whole substance, and
the particular form, which we cannot attain to by the Reason and Judgment of
the mind, we cast those things into the hidden essence and secret properties,
and by such refuge we do escape and deliver our selves out of that Labyrinth.
But I, whereby I might stir up the minds of the learned to search out the
demonstrations and causes of things of this nature, will to the uttermost of my
power endeavor, to draw out the reason by a probable and artificial
conjecture, or as near hand as I can by levelling to hit the mark. I confess
there are many things in nature of an unknown original, wrapped up in abundance
of difficulty, whereof notwithstanding a probable reason may be devised, and
the cause of the effect might be showed very likely, if not apparently, and
clearly. For example: The Basilisk does kill a man by his sight. Who that is
exercised in the works of nature does not know it to happen out of the hurtful
breath that proceeds from him, which by little and little he breaths forth
secretly to the destruction of man. Yet neither the Basilisk only, but almost
all kind of Wild beasts is hurtful to man, and does rejoice to bring
destruction by breath, and hissing. So the sight of a Woolf, if he can but come
near a man, does cause hoarsenesse, and almost in a manner takes away his
voice by the gaping of his mouth, and his venomous breath. So the Feminine Sex
having their Monthly terms flowing from them, do make dusk the brightness of
Ivory, and a Looking-glass; does blunt the edge of a Sword, does choke the
Corn; the infecting of the breath does kill the herbs of the garden, and she
does not only deform every one that she meets, but her own self with spots and
blemishes. By the same reason the eyes being corrupted with blearey'dnesse, and
(...), that is, redness in the eyes, or bloud-shot, does happen to corrupt the
eyes of others. Which Ovid does express in a handsome similitude, and Juvenal,
Satyr. 2.

When Eyes distinctly view those that are sore,
The more they look, they hurt themselves the more.
And many things the body do infect
By mere transition. Soth' scab of one, effects
A filthy scurf in the whole flock in the field,
Cattle, herds, Oxen, to the same must yield;
And so a Grape regarded solemnly,
Does draw a color from a Grape that is nigh.
But men do breath forth the greatest infection to men, where they stand just
opposite, for it does not bring so great evil, and infect with so great
corruption, if the breath does bend overthwart, or if it happen to pass away
on the right or left side. For as the transverse, or oblique sight, as it is
wont to be with such as have rolling or are dimsighted, sometimes do wax dull
and dim: so these things which flow from the eyes, and any other part of the
body, if they are carried obliquely, it happens that they are repressed and
grow dull, and bring less evil to those that stand by. Which very thing I
more diligently observe, when I go to assist those that are sick of a
contagious disease, so that when I talk with them I am always turned away,
never standing between the Chimney and he that keeps his bed. This breathing
and flowing out, although it does not present it self to our eyes, and less
declared to our seeing sense, yet it bears it self into our nostrills, ears,
brain, vocal artery, and the strings of the lungs. So I have observed some
with such a stinking damp and strong smelling breath, that unless you stand
farther off they would strike every one that they meet, with the contagion of
their breath, and kill them. But every one may perceive how largely the breath
of living creatures may stretch it self, how far a contagious disease may
extend it self, especially in the Winter season. But because of the thickness
and grossness of the Air, the breath smoking out of the most inward bowels by
a certain retiring as we see the flowing and ebbing of the Ocean to break forth
and dilate it self all abroad: which although it be not plainly perceived in
Summer days, and is less presented to the eyes, yet thou do perceive it,
either by smell, or do apprehend the hidden poison in thy inmost bowels. And
as these very things work destruction to the body, and bring in deadly poison,
so sweet smells and fragrant herbs do stir up the spirits, and do cherish and
recreate the heart it self the fountain of life. Which even any one of a dull
Judgment can perceive, when he sees the strength weakened by swounding, and
fast a sleep by the defect of the mind, to be restored and stirred up by sweet
smells. But these mean things being let alone afterward by the assistance of
the most high God, I will relate more secret things. For which if I shall seem
to any one to have wholly searched out the secrets of nature, and the uses
under weak and very unconstant reasons, and a very small proportion of
judgment, and with no trimmed sentences, to have furnished nature with no
store; I would desire him to be persuaded, that I rather afford and demonstrate
matter of writing to the learned, then take it up before hand. But I have
attempted, and undertaken to handle those things, not with so great hope, and
confidence of accomplishing it, as desire and will to try it, and also that I
might the better deserve of my Advocate, and that I might more oblige my
Citizens by this service. But after Plato, Persius does stir up to attempt
things of this kind, and does desire that this should be paid to our Country
and Citizens as a due benevolence. For so he does prick us up to the
consideration of things, to the study of virtue, to searth out those things
which are profitable to men.

O wretched men, ye ought to learn and show
The cause of things, and what we are to known,
Or to what end we are made on earth to live,
What order, or what bounds does nature give
To gentle-sliding Rivers, and what measure,
Of silver, or what is lawful to wish for pleasure,
What good does money afford, how much we owe,
Unto our Country, and what we should bestow
On neighbors, what direction God does give,
To thee, how thou in humane things do live.
Therefore I will try, what I can perform, or wherein I can go forward; if I do
not proceed in every thing exactly, I may beg pardon for my fault; and so much
the more justly, because the argument of the appointed Work is so great, and
does stretch it self forth so unmeasurably, so that it requires infinite
labor, and no mean Wit to accomplish every thing exactly, The chief City of
Laconia in Peloponnesus.
and adorn that * Sparta for its honor and amplitude. Which if Horace in a
homely, and very easy argument,

Does pardon faults, which want of care does cause, Or are neglected by humane
Nature's Laws:

By how much the more is it convenient to wink at and keep silent most things
in so great difficulties, and not to cut every thing (as it is said) to the
quick. For it can scarcely be expressed, how great weariness is to be born
patiently by Physicians, what labors are to be undergone, what troubles,
complaints, and bewailing speeches, are to be endured at home and abroad, when
they follow their own affairs, and diligently employ their assistance to their
Citizens: when all their study and industry does consist in action, their no
less troublesome then gainful practice does suffer no liberty, no time to take
breathe; so that when they meditate on those things that were dispatched in
borrowed hours, (that is) in convenient service, they are scarce at leisure to
write them, much less to make them perfect. Which when it daily happens
true, and these kind of occupations do continually environ me at home and
abroad, all things scarcely, and very hardly, could be perfected according to
my mind; but when the consideration of Nature did only delight me, neither a
more acceptable Argument could be thought upon, it seemed good to me, to write
of its Miracles more at large, and make all the Works of Nature more known.

Wherefore after I had dedicated these four Books of the Miracles of Nature, to
ERICUS King of Swedland, the most invincible token of this New Year, I do
purpose to add Two of the same Argument in short, whereby the most Serene King
having brought to an end, and quieted the War, (which he undertook by Sea and
Land against some conspiring Enemies, by most excellent virtue, and the
greatness and courage of an high and invincible Mind,) might be refreshed more
abundantly by the Contemplation of Nature and Things. Having required this of
William Simonds a Printer of Antwerp, that he would bring these honorable and
notable examples into the favor of the King's Court, and of the desirous
Reader; which when he promised to accomplish, and very truly performed by the
industry of Christopher Plantin, I think to finish the rest suddenly, if it be
so that no hindrance happen, and our Heavenly Father grant constant and durable
health; For I hope it will be so, that some new thing will come forth at the
next Franckford Mart, whereby at length the studious Reader may delight
himself. For News and Delight is the encouragement and allurement of Reading
and Learning, especially where the thing is declared very evidently, and with
convenient words, and serious things are mixed with merry, and profitable with
sweet and pleasant; which very thing I have studied to perform, according to my
power, by that moderation of practice, that I may no where digress from
comeliness, no where pass beyond the limits of honesty.

An Index of all the Chapters contained in this BOOK.
The Contents of the Chapters contained in the First Book.
Chap. 1. OF Nature, Gods Instrument. Page 1 Chap. 2. Man's Worth and Excellen
Page 6 Chap. 3. It is most natural to procreate one like himself, and men ought
to use it reverently as a divine gift, and Ordinance of God. Page 8 Chap. 4. Of
the likeness of Parents and Children; whence it is that outward accidents are
communicated to the Children, and the Mothers Imagination is the cause of the
production of many Forms. Page 10 Chap. 5. Of the strange longing of Women with
child, and their insatiable desire of things; And if they cannot get them, they
are in danger of life. Page 16 Chap. 6. That a Woman does afford seed, and is a
Companion in the whole Generation, Page 18 Chap. 7. Whence grows the Sex and
Kind; that is, whether of the two, Man or Woman, is the cause of a male or
female Child, Page 20 Chap. 8. Of Prodigious and Monstrous Births, and by the
way what is the meaning of the Proverb, Those that are born in the fourth Moon.
Page 22 Chap. 9. By what means he that will, may get a Boy or a Girl; and by
the by, whence Hermaphrodites are bred, and people of both Sexes. Page 25 Chap.
10. Whether the Child be nourished with the menstrual excrement, and whether
Maids may conceive before they have their Terms. Page 29 Chap. 11. The Soul
comes not from the Parents Seed, but is infused by God, and can neither dye nor
corrupt: What day of Child bearing it is infused. Page 32 Chap. 12. The Soul
though it be incorporeal, not made of matter, or Elements, yet is it subject to
passions and perturbations, and such affections as redound upon the Body. Page
36 Chap. 13. That the Souls of Men are not equal in all things, nor of the same
condition and dignity, but one is better than another. Page 42 Chap. 14. Of the
immortality of the Soul, and certainty of the Resurrection; Also how that may
be done; Lastly how much our minds are raised toward God from so great a
benefit, and what great confidence we may have when we die, that we shall be
saved. Page 47 Chap. 15. Whether there be a reasonable Soul infused into
monstrous births, and to abortives, and whether they shall rise again to life;
And, by the way, from whence Monsters proceed? Page 57 Chap. 16. The humors
and food do change the habit of the body, and state of the mind apparently; And
hence arise the affections, and stings of conscience: And, by the by, what
Melancholy can do, and how it may be cured. Page 59 Chap. 17. Herbs are subject
to change, and will lose their forces and form, unless they be dressed
continually. Page 67 Chap. 18. How manifold difference and variety there is in
the nature of grounds, Page 79 Chap. 19. Clusters of Grapes augment, but grow
not ripe by the Moon beams. Page 81 Chap. 20. Why Hesiod dislikes soyling? Page
81 Chap. 21. How Weezels and other Creatures that hurt Corn may be driven away,
or killed. Page 82 Chap. 22. The cunningnesse of Worms in Man's body, and what
it portends, when they come forth by the Mouth and Nostrils, Page 83
The Contents of the Chapters contained in the Second Book.
Chap. 1. THat humors and not bad Angels cause diseases, yet the aereal
spirits do mix themselves therewith, and increase the diseases, by adding fire
unto them. Page 86 Chap. 2. Melancholique; Med, and Frenzy people, and such as
are furious from other causes; will sometimes speak strange Tongues they never
learned, and yet not be possessed with the Devil. Page 91 Chap. 3. Of the
Epilepsie's viol^nce; which disease the common people both now and formerly
ascribe to certain Saints; lastly, how it may be cured. And by the way, that
such are not to be buried presently, that die of the Falling Sickness,
Lethargy, or Apoplex. Page 93 Chap. 4. Whence comes it that diseases are long
and Chronical, and will not easily be cured: Whence come Fevers to revive
again, and to be with intermission and truce for a time; which all men ought to
know, that they may not easily fall into a disease; or being fallen, may soon
cure it. Page 97 Chap. 5. Of those that come forth of their Beds, and walk in
their sleep, and go over tops of Towrs, and roofs of houses, and do many things
in their sleep, which men that are awake can hardly do by the greatest cage and
industry. Page 99 Chap. 6. Of those that are drowned, men's bodies will flote on
their backs, and women's will flote on their faces; and if their lungs be taken
forth, they will not swim, Page 102 Chap. 7. The bodies of those that are
drowned when they swim up and come to be seen; as of those that are murdered,
when their friends are present, or the murderers, they bleed at the nose, and
other parts of their body. Page 102 Chap. 8. Of the Helmets of Children newly
born, or of the thin and soft caul, wherewith the face is covered as with a
vizard, or covering, when they come first into the world. Page 105 Chap. 9. Why
in Holland they say, that such as have unconstant and weak brains, have been
conversant amongst beans. Page 106 Chap. 10. Every strong filthy smell is not
hurtful to man: For some of these will discuss contagions, and resist corrupt
diseases. By the way, whence came the Proverb, that horns are burnt there. Page
108 Chap. 11. The excellency of the finger of the Left hand that is next the
little finger which is last of all troubled with the Gout, and when that comes
to be affected with it, death is not far off. By the way, wherefore it deserves
to wear a Gold Ring better than the rest. Page 109 Chap. 12. Some things will
not burn, but are invincible in the midst of flames; and how that comes to
pass. Page 110 Chap. 13. The native heat of Man is fostered and increases, by
the heat of other Creatures, but esp^cially by the heat of children, if they be
laid to that part of the body that is weak. For this fomentation does not only
help concoction, but eases all joint pains; but amongst whelps which do it
most effectually. Page 112 Chap. 14. Why the French Pox is more gentle now than
it was formerly, and rages not so much, and into what disease it degenerates.
Page 113 Chap. 15. How it is that Men dying, though they have their mind and
understanding firm, yet they make a hoarse noise, and a sound that returns
back, which the Low Dutch vulgarly call Den rotel. Page 114 Chap. 16. The death
of man, and destruction of things that are, is against Nature; and is very
improperly, called natural. Yet the mind must be resolved not to fear death;
though, not without cause, all men are afraid of it. Page 115 Chap. 17. The
Inconveniences of Tippling and drunkenness, and what things will resist and
cure it. Page 116 Chap. 18. Intemperance of drink is worse than of meat. Page
118 Chap. 19. Wine makes a man drunk otherwise than Beer or Ale does. Page 119
Chap. 20. Men that are tall and gross bodied, are sometimes not so long-lived
as those that are slender, and cannot so stoutly struggle with diseases. But
commonly little men will drink more wine, than gross men, and will be longer
before they be drunk. Page 120 Chap. 21. They that eat a moderate breakfast in
the morning, will eat more freely at dinner; and if they drink much wine it
will offend them less. By the way, whether it be wholesome to eat much bread.
Page 121 Chap. 22. A Nutmeg and a Coral-stone, carried about a man, will grow
the better; but about a woman the worse. Page 123 Chap. 23. For the most part
such are barren and unfruitful, whose seed runs from them of its own accord,
and they pollute themselves, and how that comes to pass, Page 124 Chap. 24.
When men are sick they grow tall though they eat less, but they lose in
breadth, Page 127 Chap. 25. Whether it is best to open a Vein when one is
fasting, or after meat; and whether it be lawful to sleep presently after
blood-letting. Page 129 Chap. 26. Physiognomy, that is, the reason how to look
into the Nature and manners of men, and with which by the marks and signs of
the body we may judge of the motion and propension of the mind, is not to be
disliked. Moreover, I shall prove by Testimony of Scripture what is most
convenient to be observed hereby. Page 130 Chap. 27. Whether it be more
wholesome to sleep with open mouth, or with the mouth and lips shut close. Page
132 Chap. 28. That the curses of Parents, and the ill wishes that they wish
against their Children, and ban them withal, do sometimes take effect and fall
out so; and their good wishes whereby they desire all good to happen to them,
are a means to make them prosper, and to obtain what their Parents desired
might happen to them. Page 133 Chap. 29. How comes it, that according to the
common Proverb, scarce any man returns better from his long travels, or from a
long disease, and to lead a better life afterward. Page 134 Chap. 30. Stones
or Jewels dug forth of the Earth, or taken out of the Sea, or out of the bodies
of living Creatures, what virtue they have, and by what means they perform
their operations. Page 138 Chap. 31. Of the events of dreams, and how far they
ought to be observed, and believed, Page 140 Chap. 32. Of the Climacterick or
graduall year, namely the 7. and 9. in which years the bodies of men suffer
manifest changes; and of old Men especially, 63. is the most dangerous.
Likewise of the reason of Critical days, that is, of the judgments of
diseases, whereby Physicians undoubtedly foreshew whether the sick will live or
die. Page 142 Chap. 33. How a Looking-glass represents objects, and what good
the polished smoothness, of a Looking-glass, can do to Students and such tire
their eyes in reading, and how it may restore a dull sight. Page 144 Chap. 34.
What force and virtue Aqua-vitae has, or the spirit of Wine distilled, and who
may safely drink it: by the way, some admirable effects of this made-wine, are
set down. Page 146 Chap. 35. The prodigious force of Quicksilver, and the
nature of it: the Dutchmen call it so from its quick motion. Page 148 Chap. 36.
How, when we want Salt, may flesh and other meats be preserved from corruption.
By the way, Of the wonderful force of Salt and Vinegar. Page 150 Chap. 27. Pale
Women are more lascivious than such as are of a ruddy complexion, and lean
Women than fat, and do more lust after men. Page 152 Chap. 38. Whether a man
should drink greedily and plentifully, or by little and little, and sparingly
at several times, when he is thirsty, or is sat at Table. Page 153 Chap. 39.
All such things as hastily come to maturity, or rise to their full length, do
the sooner fail, and cannot last long: as we see it in children, and some kind
of plants, Page 155 Chap. 40. Sometimes our meats are hurt, and contract a
venomous quality, by the siting of some venomous creatures upon them; Likewise
in men's bodies from filth abounding in them, some things are bred, as Frogs,
Toads, Mice, Rats, Bats; and an example of this is set down. Page 156 Chap. 41.
The force and Nature of the Sun and Moon in causing and raising tempests: And
next to that, what change may be made in the Bodies, Minds and Spirits of men,
by the outward Air. By the way, whence proceeds the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, that is interchangeably twice in the space of a natural day, Page 158
Chap. 42. Of the force and nature of Lettice, and whom it is good or ill for.
Page 163 Chap. 43. Of Patience commonly called; or, the great Dock. Page 164
Chap. 44. Of the operation of Man's spittle, Page 164 Chap. 45. Of the use of
Milk, Beestings, and Cream. The dutch call the first Be, the latter Room:
also what will keep these from cloddering in the Stomach. Page 166 Chap. 46.
Why Gouty people are Lascivious and Prone to venery, and as many as lie on
their backs, and on hard beds, Page 166 Chap. 47. Whether the Smallpox and
Measils may be cured with red Wine, or with Milk, that women use to administer,
when such Pushes show themselves, Page 168 Chap. 48. Wine is spoiled by Thunder
and Lightning, and so is Ale and Beer, and how this may be hindered, and the
force of them restored. Page 168 Chap. 49. Predictions of Tempests by the touch
of Seawater, and what Winter Thunders fore-shew. Page 170 Chap. 50. Children
are delighted with beautiful things, and cannot away with the sight of old
wrinkled women, and therefore they are not to be put to lie with old women in
their beds, and much less to lie at their feet in the bed. Page 171 Chap. 51.
How it comes to pass, that children, women with child, Priests, and such as
lead a solitary and sedentary life, are of all people first infected with
popular diseases, and with the Plague. Page 171 Chap. 52 Diverse documents of
Nature, and a fit conjunction of several matters, which because I purposed to
handle them with a convenient brevity; I have bound them up together in one
bundle. Page 172
The Contents of the Chapters contained in the Third Book.
Chap. 1. HOw children are forced to endure the reproaches and disgraces of
their Parents; and the faults and wicked actions of their Progenitors, are so
far imputed unto these, that by reason of them, they lose their reputation or
substance, and goods of fortune, or sustain some damages in their bodies or
minds. Page 180 Chap. 2. Wherefore when men grow well after a disease, do their
genitall parts swell, and they naturally desire copulation: and of this matter
here is a safe admonition, and wholesome counsel set down. Page 184 Chap. 3. Of
the effect of the Air, and gentle blasts, and of the names of the winds, with
their forces and natures to cause diseases, and to stir the humors, which
being agitated sometimes move the mind and molest it. Page 187 Chap. 4. Of the
Mariners Compass, which Plautus calls Versoria, by observation whereof
Mariners sail to Sea; and by what virtue, and for what reason, it always
points to the North. Page 198 Chap. 5. What it is makes Dogs mad, and at what
time of the year chiefly, and what are the best remedies to cure them. Page 201
Chap. 6. Of the Nature, and force of Gold, and what effect it has, if it be at
any time used for the health and defense of Man's Body, Page 205 Chap. 7. Of the
Meazels of Hogs, and other diseases of this Creature, that are next kin to the
Leprosy, and are commonly called Orighans; or contagions from the unwholesome
and sickly habit of the body. And how this disease may be cured in Men. Page
207 Chap. 8. Wherefore do the Low Dutch, when they have had a tumbling and
unquiet night that likes them not, say they have had Saint John Baptist's
night, Page 211 Chap. 9. Of a singular new way how to make Salt, and of the
Nature, Effects, Force, Use, and differences of it. By the way, a consideration
of some herbs growing by the Sea, that are full of Salt juice, and out of which
Salt is made. Page 213
The Contents of the Chapters contained in the Fourth Book.
Chap. 1. OF the force and effect of the Moon, by whose motion the Sea is
driven, and what uses to happen to men that are dying, or desperately sick,
when they are in their agony, and are beginning to dye, by the flowing and
ebbing of the Sea, and motion of the Moon; whose forces, such as live near the
Sea, perceive more effectually then other men. Page 221 Chap. 2. Of the Islands
in Zealand, and of the nature of people there, and their Conditions, Manners,
Original; and what great benefits the land of this fruitful Country affords
to strangers, in a short and clear description: wherein, by the way, the memory
of things done is rubbed up, and many natural causes are explained. Page 225
Chap. 3. How comes it that such as are old Men, or far in years, do beget
Children not so strong, and oft-times such as are froward, and of a sad and
sour Countenance, and such as are seldom merry? Page 229 Chap. 4. How comes it
that the Bay Tree, which some say will not grow in Zealand, grows no where more
beautifully than in this place? and what you must do to make it endure the
Winter frost and cold. Page 242 Chap. 5. Of a neutrall body, that is, one that
can be said neither sound nor sick, but is of a tottering and doubtful
condition, floting between both. Page 243 Chap. 6. Of the reason of seeing, and
quickness of the eyes, and why some will see clearly things a great way off,
and yet are blind close by; others will see the smallest things near them
exactly, but things afar off, though they be high mountains, they cannot
discern easily; and why commonly the right eye is duller than the left, and
sees not so clear. By the way, concerning the colors of the eyes, and many
other things, which are arguments of the mind: also some remedies for a dull
eye. Page 247 Chap. 7. A reason why some Men are born without some parts, or
are maimed; others have two bodies, or some superfluous parts that are
useless. Page 253 Chap. 8. Whether people in Fevers should change their
shirts, or waste-coats, or sheets; and whether it be convenient so soon as a
man is recovered of a disease to shave his beard, and cut his hair: also in
what diseases it is good to wash ones feet. Page 255 Chap. 9. That by a
wonderful force of nature, and incredible efficacy, several herbs are
appointed for several parts of the body, to help them, and they do severally
help several parts by their imbred qualities and quanities. Page 259 Chap. 10.
That Planets are of both sexes, and that some are affected with one thing, some
with another. Page 262 Chap. 11. That Lampreys which the Hollanders commonly
call Pricken, if they be dried in a Chimney, they will burn like Torches and
Links, if they be lighted. Page 265 Chap. 12. Of an Egg laid by a Cock, and at
what age he uses to lay it, then what is bred out of it; also concerning the
Cock-stone, and the Jewel Aelites. Page 266 Chap. 13. Of the nature, condition,
and manners of Women; and why that sex being angry is more violent than men
are, and will scold more outragiously, and is overborn by many other affections
and passions; and, by the way, what is the meaning of that saying of the wise
Hebrew, The iniquity of a man is better than a woman that does well. Page 272
Chap. 14. Wherefore an Egg at both ends, whereby, at the long and narrower end
it will stand (like the Pole-artick and antartick) cannot be broken between
your fingers, or both hands closed together, although you press it: and
wherefore steeped in sharp Vinegar, it will grow soft like a tractable and soft
membrane; lastly, why the same Egg steeped in Aqua-vitae, that is, in spirits
of Wine, it will be consumed like Iron by Aquafortis. Page 278 Chap. 15. The
Moon by a wonderful force of Nature, every Month, otherwise than the rest of
the Stars do, searches all the sound parts of Man's body secretly, and
undiscovered, but the sick parts manifestly, and not without sense or pain, and
stays in them sometimes two, sometimes three days. By the way, whether a Vein
may safely be opened in that part that the Planet governs at that time. Page
279 Chap. 16. The counsel wherewith I use to gratify young men, that they may
have Beards betimes, and that a comely Down may grow upon their chins: By the
way, a fit comparison of Grass and Corn, with the Hair and Locks of Man. Page
282 Chap. 17. How and for what reason, preserving Physic ought to be given in
the time of the Plague and contagious diseases: and what things are best for
their force, and virtues for this. Page 283 Chap. 18. To what we ought to
ascribe, amongst such multitudes of men, the great dissimilitude of form, and
the manifold difference that is between man and man in their faces,
countenances, eyes, and other parts, so that sometimes Brothers and Sisters are
not one like the other. Page 285 Chap. 19. Many kinds of Animals, Fishes,
Birds, Insects are bred without Seed, as also Plants: and many Animals, and
small Birds, by an unusual way, without the copulation of Male and Female, do
conceive. Page 287 Chap. 20. The hand or other parts of the body that are
frozen, and grown stiff with cold and frost, how they may be thawed, and
recover their former heat. Page 289 Chap. 21. Whence arise and grow stings of
Conscience in Man, and whether as passions and perturbations of the mind they
are to be ascribed to the humors: or whether they consist in the mind and the
will. Page 291 Chap. 22. How many months does a Woman go with Child; and which
must be accounted a seasonable birth. By the way, of the framing of the body of
Man, and in how many days or months the Child is made perfect, and comes to
live. In which narration, all things are handled more accurately, because from
hence bitter quarrels arise, not only betwixt married people, but others also
that use unlawful copulation. Page 299 Chap. 23. A profitable and pleasant
Narration of the Procreation of Man, wherein is illustrated the other part of
the Argument. Page 301 Chap. 24. At what age Maids desire to be married, and
are fit to conceive. Again, when women in years grow barren, and their courses
ceasing, they cease to be longer fruitful. In which Narration, the condition
of Man is examined also. Page 308 Chap. 25. Who chiefly take diseases from
others; And how it comes about, that Children grow well, when Physic is given
to the Nurse. Page 310 Chap. 26. Of the skin or feather covering of the
Vulture, that is of great force in strengthening the Ventricle, and in getting
of a stomach, something more effectual than Ginger, whose nature is here set
down also, that every man has not observed. Page 312
A Table of all the Chapters contained in the Exhortation.
Chap. 1. WE must chiefly lift up our Eyes and Minds to God by by Christ. Page
315 Chap. 2. How great things, God, the Maker of all things, has done for Man.
Page 316 Chap. 3. There is nothing more dear to God than Man; and all things
were created for Man's use. Page 316 Chap. 4. How great Man's thankfulness
should be unto God. Page 317 Chap. 5. What Baptism adds to Man, and what it
minds him of. Page 318 Chap. 6. Next unto God we must love our neighbors. Page
318 Chap. 7. How great should be the piety of Children toward their Parents.
Page 319 Chap. 8. How every man ought to behave himself toward his Master. Page
319 Chap. 9. To whom chiefly amongst men, must we give honor and reverence.
Page 320 Chap. 10. What good teaching does for a man, and what kind of teaching
it must be. Page 321 Chap. 11. Whence we must fetch Integrity of manners, and
the best Precepts of life. Page 323 Chap. 12. What Authors are fit to be read
to learn Eloquence of speech, and soundness of Judgment, and what Arts are
principally to be learned. Page 325 Chap. 13. A Censure upon the Heathen
Writers, Page 325 Chap. 14. The office of a Poet, and what helps he brings to
studious youth, and to those that are of ripe years. Page 326 Chap. 15. Of the
use and profit of Histories. Page 327 Chap. 16. Of Comedy. Page 328 Chap. 17.
Of the Art of Eloquent speaking, which is necessary for any man of what
Language soever he be. Page 328 Chap. 18. To what Sciences do the studies of
Humanity make way for us. Page 329 Chap. 19. We must stand fast to some certain
kind of study. Page 330 Chap. 20. What studies and employments are laboursome,
and less profitable; what are hurtful and pernicious. Page 331 Chap. 21. We
must not less take care for our Minds than for our bodies. Page 332 Chap. 22.
How we must help the body, that it may subsist in perfect health. Page 333
Chap. 23. Meats that God has liberally and munisicently bestowed upon us, must
be received with great gratitude and thankfulness. Page 335 Chap. 24. How we
must take care for Hospitality. Page 336 Chap. 25. Of the care of our Families
and private estates, and the administration thereof. Page 338 Chap. 26.
Moderation in sleeping and waking. Page 341 Chap. 27. What profit or disprofit
comes by fulness or emptiness; or when the belly is bound too much, or is
too loose. Page 342 Chap. 28. Students and Magistrates must often purge the
passages of their Excrements. Page 343 Chap. 29. Wholesome Precepts are no
less proper for the mind, than they are for the body. Page 344 Chap. 30. We
must take care of our credit and reputation. Page 346 Chap. 31. It is
commendable to pacify dissentions. Page 349 Chap. 32. Let no man grow insolent
by prosperity, nor be dejected by adversity, but let every man support himself
by Gods providence. Page 351 Chap. 33. We must avoid curiosity. Page 351 Chap.
34. We must use moderation in our garments. Page 352 Chap. 35. Let no man
despise the Lot which is designed for him. Page 353 Chap. 36. We must avoid the
company and familiarity of wicked men. Page 356 Chap. 37. We must bridle our
Tongues, not only from obscene words, but also from idle speeches. Page 357
Chap. 38. Hypocrisy and dissimulation in words, and in any action of a man's
life, is odious and detestable. Page 359 Chap. 39. Philautia, that is, a blind
love of a man's self, must be laid aside, and an empty persuasion of knowledge.
Page 359 Chap. 40. We must make a choice and difference of our friends, and
familiar companions. Page 362 Chap. 41. Do not rashly become surety for any
man. Page 363 Chap. 42. Flatterers, which the Dutch commonly call
Pluymstrijckers, must be avoided. Page 363 Chap. 43. Some commodious Precepts
to teach a Man how to live well and happily. Page 364 Chap. 44. Of Exercise
wherewith the forces wearied are restored, both of the Mind and of the Body.
Page 365 Chap. 45. In all business we must call Reason into Counsel. Page 371
Chap. 46. Do nothing which you doubt of. Page 372 Chap. 47. The rewards of
Virtue and Vice. Page 372 Chap. 48. We must take the beginnings of all our
actions from God. Page 373 Chap. 49. The morning early is the best time to fit
our minds, and to lift them up unto God. Page 374 Chap. 50. When the day is
ended, we must examine our mind, for an account of the actions we have done
that day. Page 374 Chap. 51. Let no man flatter himself in his faults, or
extenuate his evil deeds. Page 375 Chap. 52. We must refer unto God all the
good that befalls us. Page 376 Chap. 53. There must be consideration had in
making choice of what course of life we are determined to lead. Page 377 Chap.
54. Of lawful society in Matrimony. Page 378 Chap. 55. All society which
consists not within the bounds of Wedlock, is faulty and is not lawful
Matrimony. Page 380 Chap. 56. How it may be obtained, that death may not prove
fearful to a Man that naturally fears it. Page 381 Chap. 57. Concerning the
amplitude, Majesty, and power of the name Jesus, by which only we may resist
all Magical Charms, and all deceits of the Devils are to be conquered, and all
mischiefs or dangers that may happen to the Soul or body, Page 585 Chap. 58.
Whether herbs and precious stones have any force to drive away Devils, and to
put to flight things hurtful. Page 390 Chap. 59. Of the Majesty and Power of
the Supreme Deity, and how various appellations the one Essence of God
distinguished into three Persons, has: by the contemplation whereof the mind
of man receives comfort and tranquillity, and conceives the highest confidence
in God. Page 393
Laevinus Lemnius, a Physician of Zirizea, CONCERNING The Secret Miracles of
Nature.
The First Book.
CHAP. I.
Of Nature, Gods Instrument.
NAture, in which the prints of Divinity do shine forth apparently, is the
beginning of every thing, whereby all things consist.

What Nature is.
Nature is the Mind or Divine Reason, the Efficient of natural works, and the
preserver of things that be. Which power can be ascribed to none else but God,
and to Christ who is inseparably united with him. For, He is the brightness of
his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1. John 1. God contains in himself the cause of all
things.
and the express Image of his substance; and he is the Maker of Nature, and of
all the Universe; and at his beck, without any matter, he created all things,
and in him is the life and vigor of things created, and from him is there a
living quality infused into all things; That is, by him every thing subsists in
its natural force, Colos. 1. Nature is neither feeble nor idle.
by an inset faculty propagates and maintains it self: there is nothing in so
great an Universe that is barren or idle, nothing was made rashly, or by
chance, or in vain. Every Plant has its imbred virtue; there is given to every
living creature its own disposition, and natural inclination. In a word,
whatsoever is contained within the compass of the world and of the Heavens, is
endued with an imbred force for its peculiar operations, and all things are
disposed in their places and times, and by an admirable viciscitude, they all
perform their offices and courses. Wherefore when God the Efficient and
Moderator of so great a gift, had viewed all things that he had made in six
days, they seemed to him exceeding good: That is, Genesis 1.
so wrought as art could require, as the order and series of things could
demand, that all things might serve for use, and tend to that end they were
ordained. Whereof Aristotle seems to speak wisely in these very words: De part.
Any. l. 1. c. 5.
There is nothing in Nature so small or contemptible, that may not make men in
some things to wonder at it. And what men report that Hieraclitus Tarentinus
said, when he turned aside into a Bakers house; Enter, here are the Gods also;
the same must we suppose of Natures works. For in the smallest works of Nature
the Diety shines forth, and all things are good and beautiful. For this is an
adjunct to the works of Nature, that nothing is done rashly or by chance, but
for a certain end. And as when we talk of Houses magnificently built, we speak
not of the Lime, or of Bricks, or Wood, and the other materials, but of the
form and shape, and structure of the Edifices, and for what purpose they were
built; An Example from Buildings.
so he that searches into the works of Nature, he discourses not of the
matter, but of the form and of the whole substance, and finally the use and
profit. So the body was made for the Soul, but the limbs for the offices they
are to perform conveniently, and to fulfill their functions.

For what use and End Man was Created.
But Man was brought upon the stage of this world for Gods cause, who ought to
take pleasure in him, and acknowledge his bounty, may repose himself in God,
trust in him, and rest upon him. In therefore so great multitude and variety of
Things existing, we must not only admire the force of Nature and Efficience,
but his Majesty and Immensity from whom all things are produced and do proceed,
and by whose bounty the works of Nature subsist, and are kept from corruption.
Which consideration does somewhat raise our minds, otherwise too much fastened
to the ground, and brings us to know and acknowledge God. Natures force must be
referred to God. Romans 1. Tusc. 1.
For though God be invisible, yet by the things created, as St. Paul
testifies, and from the world so wonderfully created, and so wisely governed,
he may be both perceived and understood. And, as Cicero says, By the memory of
things, subtilty of Invention, and quickness of motion, and by the exceeding
beauty of Virtue we know the force of the Mind, though we cannot see it with
our eyes; so we perceive God, and that eternal Mind clearly by the works he
has made, How God is known to Man.
and effectually do we apprehend his force and influence; for his virtue is
diffused through all things, Act. 17.
and gives heat, spirit and life to all things. St. Paul preached learnedly at
Athens of this matter, from the sentences of Aratus, which Lucan expressed
elegantly, lib. 9.

We all are held in God, and though no noise
Be heard we do his will, he needs no voice.
God is in Sea and Land and Air and Sky,
What would we more, all is the Diety.
What ere we see, or where so ere we go,
We must see God whether we will or no.
Who then would not love him, whose forces he manifestly perceives, with whose
benefits he is abundantly replenished?

If we do most justly honor and admire Emperors and Princes, and we esteem
them highly, and present them with great presents, A similitude from the works
of Emperors.
because they do govern those Kingdoms they got without blood in great equity,
because they have Magistrates unblameable, who in executing their offices and
public charges, take great care and pains, whereby they may hold all men in
their duties, and all things may be kept peaceably, and the Commonwealth not
rent by any Civil broils or seditions; how much more ought we to admire and
adore God, who without any care or business, or pains, Governs so vast and
large an Empire of the World by his will? Of the world.
To this belongs that of Apuleius, a man that was far from our Religion, but he
drew it from the Hebrew Fountains; A Simile from many offices.
That which the Pilot and Steer-man is in a Galley, a Coachman in his Coach,
the Choragus in acting Comedies, the Precentor in Dances, the master of Games
at all Games, a Consul amongst Citizens, a Captain in an Army, a Companion in
undertaking or repelling dangers; that, is God, in the world: but that it seems
to be a toilsome thing, and full of innumerable cares, to be the chief in any
office; but the care of his Empire is neither troublesome nor burdensome unto
God. All Natur's works must be referred to God.
Yet I would not have Physicians my adversaries, or that Philosophers should be
offended, that in asserting the dignity of Nature, I refer her to the Fountain,
and her first original, for by this means all things are reduced to their first
being, and to the Archetype of all Nature. And though the word Nature be of
large extent, and every man at his pleasure may invent secundary definitions;
yet they are all reduced to one: So, by the Physicians,

Nature is the imbred and inset quality in things.
Nature is the mixture and temper of the four Elements.
Nature is the force and propension of every ones mind.
Nature with Philosophers is the beginning of motion and rest.
Nature is that which gives the form to every thing with its specificall
difference.
The proper definition of Nature.
Nature is the force and efficient cause, and the conserving imbred cause of the
whole World, and the parts thereof; Nature (to speak more nearly) is the order
and serious of Gods works which obeys his power, his words and commands, and
borrows forces from him: The principal cause and original of all these
descriptions, and as many as learned men may invent, proceeds from that
eternal mind, as from a most plentiful Fountain. It behooves all men to know
this, and much concerns them to observe, and to fasten it well in their minds,
that so the chief Work-master may be better known to us all, and his majesty
and immensity may be seen by us. For the sight of things and contemplation of
nature will draw brutish men that are far from the knowledge of God into a very
great admiration of his divinity, Contemplation of Nature raises men's minds to
God.
if they have any spark of sound understanding. For the nature of things which
is vast and diffused all over, far and near, when it does every where present
it self to our eye and mind, it does wonderfully affect a man, and directs him
into an exceeding great love and adoration of the maker of it. For if a man
would mind and consider seriously what beauty and comeliness there is of
things created proceeding one from the other, and how artificially, and
skillfully, all things are made and builded, and shall see that all things were
created for the necessary uses, All was created for man's use.
and pleasure, and commodity of man, who would not be affected with them, or
not honor and adore their maker, who would have all things be only for man's
sake, and to continue in a perpetual order and series; not without admirable
succession in their propagation? The excellency of nature made these things; As
besides others, that Antony, he (that by reason of those fierce laws of
proscription against Christians, and rage of persecution, which in all ages
increases, and grows new in fierceness, He went into the wilderness, and
dwelt in solitary, vast, inaccessible deserts, where Tyrants could not pursue
him) who delighted himself only in the contemplation of Nature, and natural
things. That when one asked him (for he was courteous to all, and would refuse
to answer none, as some testy people do) wherefore he had so few, and almost no
books: He is said to have answered; that the spectacles of this world did so
much satisfy his mind and refresh him, that they afforded him such documents
and precepts how to lead his life, that they were in the place of many books,
and he did not much stand in need of them, sometimes the most pleasant reading
of Books will glut a man, that the mind grows weary with tediousness of
reading; Proverb. c. ult.
but the contemplation of nature brings such ^riety of delights and pleasures,
that there arises from thence no loathing or tediousness. Curious Writers
will adorn their books and Commentaries with the Colors and paintings of
Rhetoriques and gallant words: But Nature the Instrument and Minister of the
greatest Work-master, which is effectual and opposite to work any thing, does
feed and refresh our minds and eyes, not with any borrowed, but with natural
variety. For who is able to express or unsold the cunning of Nature, her work
and industry, and the species of Plants, Flowers, Animals, Creeping things,
Fishes, Birds, and all their conditions, forces and effects? What Artificer or
Work-master though he be excellent, can by imitating, attain to those forms and
shapes which are every where evident, and men behold every moment? Art imitates
Nature, and the industry of man can draw and carve to the life: So Conrade
Gesner, a man of hidden learning, and unwearied pains, took so much care in
writing the History of all living Creatures, The praise of Conrade Gesner.
and things that breathe, to whom I give the Garland before all others: So many
more in their descriptions of Plants, and expressing their forms, have deserved
very well; But as all this is plausible and popular, and to imitate Nature is
praise worthy, so it does represent all living creatures in dumb shows without
life, taft, savor or smell, and void of all virtue. For the inanimate nature
of things, is not silent or without a tongue, but lively, cheerful, upright,
that will set forth it self, and sweetly allure the senses, so that it will
much move him that contemplates of it, it will teach him many things, and will
draw him on with her invitations, so that the beholder will never be idle, or
rest in that alone, but will from hence elevate his mind to him, by whose force
all these things stand and consist. So that in the things we plainly see, we
must not only look upon the Excellent workmanship of Nature that is to be
imitated, The Nature of things brings us to God.
but we must behold the Majesty, Amplitude, Glory, Splendour, Magnificence of
God, and the good will of a most bountiful Father unto Mankind. The Elements,
Heavens, rising and setting of the Stars, changes of day and night, What we are
taught by the viciscitude of things.
the four parts of the years that comprehend the two Equinoxes, in Spring and
Autumn; and the two Solstices in Summer and Winter, by the revolution whereof
plants fade and fail, and at their times come forth and revive again, as they
show and point at many things, so they show the resurrection from death to
life, whereby bodies in their appointed time shall be perfectly restored to
life again.

David, that most admired the works of God, did wonderfully extol this
admirable face of Nature, and ascribes it, as we ought, to the Work-master, and
he does with exceeding praises adorn his works that are seen both in Heaven
above, and in the Earth beneath, and follows them with just commendations; so
that by his intent and fixed contemplation of them, he was compelled to cry
out, Psalm. 103.
How wonderful are thy Works, O Lord! thou have made all things in wisdom,
the Earth is filled with the plenty thereof. This consideration of Nature
seemed profitable to the very Heathens, and pleasant to their minds, who had a
very small knowledge of Divine things: L. 4.
so Tully in Academicis: I think not fit, that natural questions are ever to be
banished; for it is the very food of our Souls and Mind to contemplate the
works of Nature: for we are made more attentive, and we despise transitory
fading things, fastening our minds on heavenly things. The very searching out of
things begets delight, and the mind is filled and affected with great delight.
Tuscul. 5.
But whatsoever Nature has produced, not only of living creatures, but of
plants that grow on the Earth, is the most perfect in its own kind. Whereof
some are very low, and grow not high above ground; some rise very high, others
are always green; others again in winter are spoiled of their beautiful leafs,
Diversity of Plants.
but with the Spring's heat they bud forth again, and grow into branches. Nor
is there any thing that has not such an imbred property of reviving, but that
from the seed swelling forth it will produce flowers or fruit or berries, and
will bring them to perfect maturity by the Suns heat, and endow them with some
healthful effect. Also in Animals who want reason, yet have sense, Living
creatures led by Instinct of Nature.
the force and Inclination of Nature may be perceived, for some are water
Creatures that can swim, some are Birds to fly in the open Air, some creep,
others go; some wander alone, others fly in flocks, as the Stares do, Linnets,
Chafinches, Sparrows, Pigeons; some are by nature fierce and savge, others are
gentle and tame, as all kinds hens and birds fed up at house. Psalm. 8. Heb. 1.
But Man to whom all these things are made subject, has obtained something far
beyond them; for beside his gift of speaking, he has reason, a Mind and soul
partaking of a heavenly and a divine nature. For the mind of Man was taken out
of the divine Mind, and can be compared to nothing but God, nor referred to any
natural being. Wherefore Man must strive to come as near to his Maker as he
can, and to make himself like unto him. For since God has exposed all other
living Creatures to feed and eat downward; he has made Man only with his
Countenance upwards from the ground to behold the Heavens, the house of his
habitation, both with his Mind and Eye; whereof we shall treat more at large in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Man's Worth and Excellency.
Man Gods chief workmanship.
WHen as our most great and good God is to be highly admired in the things
created that are obvious unto us in every place, and are beheld both with our
minds and eyes, yet chiefly his Wisdom appears in Man. For nothing in the
world though it be comely and excellently made, can be compared with the
Excellency of Man; so that from Man God would have the valuation of his own
Excellence to be made, and that mortals should thus have a character of his
Divinity: That is, he would have us all brought to know and adore him the great
Work-master, by the contemplation of Men's own Minds, and knowledge of
themselves. For nothing more clearly represents God than the mind of Man.
Whereby man was made like unto Gods Image and similitude. Man's mind is the
Image of God.
For Man is the most express representation of God: wherefore by reason of his
outward and inward beauty, and vaste Endowments, he well deserved to be called,
A little World; because that God the most bountiful Father, and Maker of all
things, did abundantly pour forth into Man all their virtues; for, for his sake
all things were brought to light, and all things obey his use, and are set
forth for that end. Psalm. 8.
The Kingly Psalmist confesses the same, and, uttering arguments of a grateful
mind, Thou have made him (says he) but little lower than the Angels, and as it
were a God thou have clothed him with glory and honor, and have set him over
the works of thy hands. He obtained this prerogative even from the beginning of
the world, Man is Ruler of the world.
so that all things when they flourish, and are in being, do dutifully obey and
serve man's use. So Genesis the first, God confirmed the Principality and chief
Government of all the rest unto Man: Be fruitful, and increase, fill the earth
and subdue it, and rule over all; Fishes in the waters, Birds in the Air, and
all beasts that move upon the face of the Earth. But of that divine mind in
man, whereby he comes next unto God, and of the internal gifts of his Mind,
Reason, and Understanding, whereby he excells Beasts, other Writers have spoken
at large, and because it belongs not to this place, I shall leave off to speak
more of it.

The comeliness of Man's body.
But I will mention a few things concerning his body, and what are of kin to
that, and depend of it. For the excellent and beautiful form thereof is very
fit and agreeable to the manners of his mind. The fashion of his body is tall,
and lifted up toward Heaven, his countenance is high, and looks upward, the
symmetry of all the parts, and of the whole, or the exact proportion of it, is
much spread abroad by Heathens, and such as are far from our Religion. So that
I cannot but wonder at the negligence of our Men; who either seek nothing at
all, or else they do coldly and carelessly seek into themselves and the works of
Nature; David the only admirer of Nature.
whereas David a Magnificent King, contemplating more closely and carefully the
nature of man, began to be elevated, and to burn with the Love and admiration
of so great a Work-master: For thus he writes his praises, with such and such
like Testimonials: I will praise thee, Psalm. 138.
O Lord, because I am wonderfully made, thy works are wonderful, my soul
searches and knows it right well; thou knew all my bones when I was
fashioned in the secret place, and when I was wonderfully formed in my Mothers
womb. Thy eyes beheld me being yet unmade, David's Exclamation upon his
admiring of God.
and in thy bock were all my members written, which day by day were fashioned.
Thy knowledge is wonderful unto me, whereby I was made, I cannot understand
it. For when (says he) I thoroughly search out my self, and when I diligently
consider the structure of my body, the excellency of my Soul, and the force of
my Mind, and I cannot by Reason and Judgment attain thereunto, I both adore thy
Majesty, and embrace thy bounty.

Now let us a little set that most comely form aside, and the other parts of
the Body visible, and we will consider of the situation of the internal
Bowels, the powers of the natural faculties, the nerves arising originally from
the brain, the arterial pipes from the heart, and the propagation of the veins
from the Liver, also the faculties and powers of the Soul, whereby she does
produce and perfect her functions.

Three spirits in Man.
To these may be added that etherial spirit, that is the seat or natural heat,
and the vehiculum thereof, which is divided into 3. divisions, and is
distinguished by so many places; as the animal to the Brain, the vital to the
Heart, and the natural to the Liver: This, being that it nourishes and
quickens the body by its natural heat and moisture, that are both instead of
fuel, and affords forces to perform Action, What things uphold the Spirits?
therefore these three parts are carefully to be refreshed and restored with
sleep, wine, nourishments, exercise. Yet these must be used moderately; for if
they be immoderate or unseasonable, they may put a man from his right Mind, and
bring him to many ill diseases and affects.

Man's Mind is full of fiery vigor, Aenead. 6.
and
His first beginning was not from the Land,
But Heavenly; yet, if his body be
Faulty, and earthly gross, dead limbs, not free
From sad diseases, fears and pains and grief,
Distempers and great cares do rule in chief.
Then is this fiery spirit shut within
The dark prison of's body --
The Tyranny of the Passions.
Wherein the Poet comprehends the four Passions of the mind, which rising from
Intemperance, do trouble the mind of man, and make it by many ways wonderfully
unquiet. Lastly, let us direct our eyes to those things that give the species
to all these; that is, let us examine the workmanship of forming and figuring
the Child, which is such a one, and so great, that every one, though he be
stranger in Physical business, is bound to stretch his wits soundly to
understand it. The consent of Soul and Body.
For it concerns every man to know and search out these things, because a man
is conversant in himself, and may rest in the contemplation of himself. For
since a man consists of Soul and Body, and the body is the Instrument of the
soul whereby she does her actions, who ought not to have care, and to observe
both these parts? who would not wish that both might be preserved the best he
could? since one cannot subsist without the other, and perform its office and
functions without offense.

For both do ask each others help we see, Horat. in Art. Poet.

And by this means most friendly they agree.
The body for a time is transitory and mortal; but since it is the vessel and
receptacle of the Soul, and uses its Ministry, God has also designed that
for eternity; and by the mystery of the resurrection it shall be made partaker
of the same gift, that is, of immortality, as it is the will of God.

CHAP. III.
It is most natural to procreate one like himself, and men ought to use it
reverently as a divine gift, and Ordinance of God.
WHen God had made the Heavens and this sublunary world, and framed them with
so admirable wisdom and skill, that there was nothing wanting for necessary
uses, commodity and pleasure: it seemed good to him to make One that might have
the use of them, and that might delight in these things and enjoy them:
Wherefore when all the ornaments of nature were complete and perfected, he
brought man into the world, as into his own possession, and that he might not
lead a disconsolate life, he gave a woman for an helper and companion, Marriage
Gods Ordinance.
and he put into them both force to love, and a greedy desire of procreating
their like, having prepared for that purpose a swelling humor and spirit, and
organical parts: and that the one should not be afraid or decline the society
of the other: he added allurements and a desire of mutual Embracing, that when
they did use procreation, they should be sweetly affected, and pacified
wonderful ways. For unless this were natural to all kind of Creatures, that
they should care for posterity, and propagate their like; mankind would quickly
be lost, nor could the affairs of mortals long endure.

All men on earth, and Beasts and Birds above, Georg. 3.

And Fishes of the Sea are mad with love.
What will a young man do whom Cupid burns?
He swims in the dark and tempestous night,
Ore the rough boiling Seas, and nere returns.
Though Parents cry, and billous would one fright.
Diverse spurs to Venery.
Since this Passion is so forcible and so unruly that it can hardly be subdued
(and but a few can bridle their passions) God granted unto man the use of the
matrimonial bed, that he might be bounded thereby, and not defile themselves
with wandering lust, Wherefore God appointed Marriage.
who want the gift of Continency, wherefore so soon as copulation is done, and
the Woman happens to prove with child, great is natures cunning in fostering,
coagulating, and framing the seed of both sexes, that at the set time, when
nine months are run over, Man that Ruler, and Ornament of the whole world may
come forth, Job expressed this doubtful hope and first beginning of Nature,
Chap. 10.
now going about to form a man, by a most apposite similitude. Have thou not
poured me forth as Milk, and Crudled me as Cheese? Thou have compassed me about
with skin and flesh, thou have made me with bones and sinews, and my life is
from thee, and thy force has upheld my breath? Like to this is that saying of
the wise Hebrew, who describes the beginnings of his birth thus. Wisd. 7.
I am also a mortal man like to other men, the off spring of the first man on
earth, and I was made flesh in my mothers womb, that came from coagulated blood
in ten Months, from the seed of man, and the pleasure that comes with sleep.
And when I was born, I drew in the common Air, What are Man's beginnings.
and fell upon the earth which is of like nature, and the first voice I uttered
was crying as all others do. By which we understand that in all other things,
as also in propagation of Children, that all things must be done according to
Natures order moderately: All things must be done moderately.
As by the opinion of Hippocrates and Galen, let motion or exercise precede
meat, after meat use venery, after Venus sleep, which being done, the natural
faculties do their parts in forming the child, and the weariness that came by
venery is abated by sleep, which also helps concoction, for sleep is a great
help to facilitate concoction. But as for that concerns the principles of
Generation; there is a great question controverted whether a woman afford seed
to the generation of the child? or whether manly force make any thing to the
similitude of the form or difference of the f^x? I shall first handle that
concerning the form, and similitude of it, and afterward of the female seed,
and what help it affords for procreation of the child. And I shall do this the
more accurately, because there are some Bawds in our Country that would
persuade women that Mothers afford very little to the generation of the child,
but only are at the trouble to carry it, and must endure the tedious time of
nine Months, Women do much in procteation of Children.
as if the womb were hired by men, as Merchants ships are to be fraited by
them; and to discharge their burden. By this persuasion, women grow lukewarm,
and lose all humane affections toward their children, and Love, that was wont
to be almost peculiar to this sex, is quite banished. But I think that such
deserved to be held infamous, and are not fit for honest women's company. And
would we punish them, it should be done openly with all scorn and contempt. For
these are the cause that some are so cruel and barbarous to their children, as
to cast them forth and forsake them. These are more cruel and savage than
Tigers, Lions, Bears, Panthers, and other bruit beasts, who bestow much labor
to feed and bring up their young ones: Math. 19. Force of Nature seen by
Animals.
which our Savior showed by a Hen, a domestic bird; for all creatures will
fight for their young ones, and will venture their lives boldly for them. I saw
in these spring Months a Flock of 300. sheep, which followed their bleating
young ones that were carried away in a Ship from Land, and were pulled from
their Dams Udders. Their Dams were not frighted with the Seas violence, but
with incredible desire followed, till the Sea flowing up drowned them all. An
exhortation to humanity from the love of dumb beasts.
By this example I would have wicked unnatural Parents take heed and be
admonished, who love their children very little, or but from the lips outward,
when as poor dumb creatures ordained for the slaughter, show such great love
toward their young.

CHAP. IV.
Of the likeness of Parents and Children; whence it is that outward accidents
are communicated to the Children and the Mothers Imagination is the cause of
the production of many Forms:
The force of the Seed is a reason of similitude.
IT is a constant opinion amongst Physicians, and confirmed by many reasons,
that if the Woman afford most seed, the child will be like the Mother; but if
the man afford most, then it will be like the Father; but if they both afford
alike for quantity and force, then will the child be like to them both; or one
part will resemble the Father, another part the Mother. Lastly if it fall on
the right side of the Womb, and proceed from the right Testicle, by reason of
heat it will be a Manchild, but if it proceed from the left, and incline to the
left side by reason of cold and moisture, it will be a Girl.

Libro de opifice, Lactantius his mind, of the likeness of the seed.
Lactantius says, that sometime when the man's seed falls on the left side of
the womb, a male child is begotten: But because the conception is perfected in
that part of the womb that is ordained for the procreation of females, there
will be something in it that is but half man, and will be fairer, and whiter or
smoother and less hairy than is convenient for a man to be, or the voice will
be small, and sharp, or the chin will be bare and bald, and the courage will be
less. Whence is the name Virago?
Again, if the seed be cast into the right side of the womb, it may be a girl
may be begotten; but because she is conceived in the place ordained for the
male, she will be more viraginous than ordinary women, as having strong limbs,
very tall, a swart countenance, What woman is most imperious.
a hairy chin, a ruder face, a strong voice, and a bold and man-like courage:
whence it falls out, that such women will cast off the yoke, and rule over men,
and will take so much power to themselves in governing, that men dare not speak
or stir for them. Though these things and many more might be alleged for the
similitude of the form, which are very probable, and for the most part they so
fall out; yet the principal cause of this effect seems to me to consist in the
tacit Imagination of the woman. For if she conceive in her mind, or do by
chance fasten her eyes upon any object, and imprint that in her Mind, the child
commonly does represent that in the outward parts. The woman's Imagination what
it does.
So whilst the Man and Woman Embrace, if the woman think of the man's
countenance, and look upon him, or thinks of any one else, that likeness will
the child represent. For such is the power of Imagination, that when the woman
does intentively behold any thing, she will produce something like that she
beheld, so it falls out, that children have the forms of diverse things upon
them, as Warts, Spots, Moles, Dashes, which cannot easily be wiped off, or
taken away. So some of our women seeing a Hare, bring forth a child with a
Hare-lip; Hare-lip.
so some children are born with flat Noses, wry mouths, great bubber lips, and
ill shaped of all the body, because the woman when she conceived the child, and
in the time she was big of it, had her eyes and mind busied upon some monstrous
creature. Art can change the shape and color of Animals.
Men use to effect the like by art in other creatures, setting before them when
they are to conceive the colors of diverse things.

Jacob used that stratagem, who was afterward called Israel, laying rods he
had pilled off the rinds from; before them every where, Genesis 30.
and so he made the greatest part of the flock spotted and party-colored. So
we make painted birds, dogs and horses dapled, and with diverse spots. Which
Artifice of Nature, and all the reasons and causes of similitude, Pliny exactly
comprehended almost in these words. Similitude in the mind is a diligent
thinking of a thing, L. 7. c. 12. Pliny his opinion of the cause of similitude.
wherein many accidents have great force; as sight, hearing, memory, forms
taken up at the very instant of conception, and a sudden thought rising of any
thing is supposed to give the form and similitude; hence some are like their
Grandfathers, others like their Fathers, or some other kindred. Hence there are
more differences in Man than in other Creatures, because the quickness of his
thought, and nimblenesse of his mind, and variety of his wit, imprint diverse
marks, because other creatures have their minds fixed almost and unmoved, and
all of the same kind are alike. Hence it is, that a woman may cause her Child
to have a strange form, and nothing like to the father. So a woman that had
layn with another besides her husband, fearing lest her husband should come in
the mean time, after 9. months she brought forth a Child not like the party
that she lay with, but like her husband that was absent. There is a very witty
Epigram written of this, Sir Tho: More's witty Epigram.
by that most ingenious Man Sir Thomas More.

Those four boys, Sabine,
Which thy Wife brought forth,
Thou think are not thine,
Unlike thee, naught-worth.
But that Boy alone
That she lately bore,
Like thee, for thine own
Thou take, and no more.
Four as bastards born
Rejected are in scorn,
Yet wise men suppose,
That the Mothers mind
Does the Child dispose
For likeness in's kind.
Four were begot
When that many miles
From home, thou were not
Feared, nor thy wiles.
This last like to thee,
Was begot in fear,
Thy Wife was not free
Thou were then too near.
This I think was it,
That thy likeness hit.
Hence it follows, that the argument is vain, to assign the Father from the
likeness of the Child. Likeness can confi^m no child to be the Fathers own.
For neither the Law of Nature, nor the public consent of Mankind will suffer
a child to be laid to any man because it is like him. But what concerns Wit and
Manners, and propensions of the mind, daily examples teach us, that Children
which have all force and vital spirits from the faculty of the Seed, are
commonly of the same condition with their progenitors, and of the same nature.
But there is much in this, whether Venery be used with great or weak desire.
For many are less venereous, and not so hot, and do not with any great desire
use copulation, but rather decline from it; and that they may pacify their
wives, they pay their due benevolence (as St. Paul calls it) very faintly and
drowsily; 3 Cor. 7.
whence it happens, that the Child falls short of the Parents nature, manners,
and imbred generosity; and hence it is, that wise men sometimes beget stupid
slothful Children, Why wise men sometimes beget fools.
and that are of a feeble mind, because they are not much given to these
delights. But when the Progenitors are hot in venereous actions, and do
liberally and abundantly employ themselves therein, it oft-times happens, that
the children are of the same manners, desires, and actions of mind that their
Parents are. A Simile from Birds.
For as Birds are of the same Nature with those they are bred from, and are of
the same colored Feathers, so Children exactly imitate the manners of their
Progenitors, and are essentially the same in nature with them. And the same
native signs that are printed on the Parents, are found also commonly upon the
Children. For Horace, Carmin. l. 4. od. 4. speaks thus:

Good and strong beget the same,
Calves and Colts their Sires 'present,
From stout Eagles never came
Birds like Pigeons impotent.
And because Education perfects the gifts of nature, corrects errors, and
frees from vice, he added very fitly,

Art amends what Nature is,
Good Manners mend what is amiss.
Chremes in Terence concludes from the Mothers Manners, what the son is: for
thus he brawls with Sostrata. Heauton-timerum. Act. 4. Scen. 3.

His manners show him born of thee,
In that in all he does agree;
He has thy vices to a hair,
None but thee then could him bear.
Ill Crows, ill Eggs.
And truly it is so by nature, and we see it fall out most commonly, that
Children will imitate their Parents conditions, and tread upon their heels,
following dicing, whoring, tippling; yet some by their Parents care and benefit
of education, come to good manners; wherefore every man ought to strive so to
moderate his passions, and so order his course of life and diet, that he may
not hurt himself, or infect his posterity. For from the fathers seed and the
mothers blood many things use to descend to posterity; for the same force and
virtue that is in the Parents sperm is poured forth into the children, as from
one vessel into another. So says Catullus;

Cat will ever follow kind,
And Children are of Parents mind.
Parents diseases and faults descend to their children.
Seeing that the seed flows from the principal parts, and contains in it the
force and nature of all the members, it comes to pass, that what disease is in
any part, descends by right of succession to the Children. So the Leprosy,
Epilepsie, feet-gowt, hand-gowt, and other diseases and defects are hereditary.
And because the Mothers blood is the chief nutriment for the Child, Women
derive most part of mischief to the children.
and the secondary beginning of procreation, it oft-times happens, that
Children take more mischief from the Mother, whether you consider their bodies
or minds. So wicked drunken foolish women commonly with us bring forth just
such Children, and that are subject to the same vices. The Mothers fault does
more wrong to Children, if she be unchaste, and play the whore, than the
Fathers fault does; so likewise if she be given to drunkenness or any other
vice. For if a man of ripe years, or when he is young and unmarried should get
a Maid with child, he deserves almost to be commended for it, and not to be
disgraced. For it is commonly said, that one may safely marry his daughter to
such a man, who is not unfruitful and barren, but has proof of his Manhood
already in getting of a child. But if a woman or a maid that is marriageable
should do the like, or suffer any such matter to be done, when she begins to
fall in love, she would so lose her reputation and honor, that no Cobbler nor
any mean fellow whatsoever but would scorn to marry her; and if one should
marry her, he would quickly hit her in the teeth with her whoredom. So as soon
as any maid is overcome, and has lost her maidenhead, and those cloisters of
Virginity are entered, that fault can never be washed away, nor can those closets
be ever locked again. For so the Poet describes it, Virginity once stained
Can never be regained.
So Plautus in Amphitruo. I do not think that to be the dowry which people call
so, but chastity and bashfulnesse, and a moderate desire, a fear of the Gods,
love of Parents, and concord with kindred. Wherefore besides others, Ecclus.
that wise Hebrew does earnestly warn Parents, that they should be very careful
to look to their daughters chastity and honesty, that they may not be polluted
with wicked company, or be stained by them. For women-kind are naturally frail,
and more subject to be abused. Since therefore there are many things that
hinder manners and good life, as also there are many things that defile the
body and the decent frame thereof, care must be had that nothing may pollute
the mind with ill manners, or disgrace the body by any monstrous deformity. And
because the beauty and decent form of the body is very acceptacle to all Men,
we should observe exactly by the progress of natural causes, what things will
make one beautiful, or deformed and ugly, since these things principally
consist in women's Imagination, and in such things as proceed from without, care
must be had, that that Sex may see nothing, A woman with child is subject to
passions.
that may move their mind to think absurdly, which in framing the child may
bring any hurt. For if any mischief happen from without, if any fear or
trembling fall on them when they meet any terrible thing, presently all this
fright falls upon the child, the natural spirits and humors being turned
thither, and all the faculties of the woman are busied in framing such a thing.
For a vehement and fixed cogitation whilst it does toss the vehement species
of things, and turns them often over, it does imprint that form and figure
which it so often thinks on, upon the Child. For the confluence of the internal
spirit and humors paints out the Image of the thing thought on. Whence comes
deformity of body.
It is not for nothing, and for no cause, that some have such ill shapen
bodies, ill and uncomely cruel countenances, swollen blabber'd cheeks, wry
mouths, wide chaps, for these things come to pass because their mothers being
great with them, thought on such deformed shapes, and representations, or
fastened their eyes too much upon them. So I dislike nothing more than
lascivious women, that use to delight themselves beyond measure with Whelps and
Apes, and to carry them in their bosoms, to foster them, to kiss and hug them.
For by the company and sight of these creatures, the imperfect Nature of women
may take some strange impressions, and they may frame in their minds such
forms, as may make their children deformed. Maka Dogs.
So the great women of the Low-Countroys love Malta dogs, they are commonly
called Camusii from their crooked nostrils, their bodies are but small, they
are white as snow, their noses are flat in the middle, and pressed down, they
have a cresti^urining upward, their tail does not turn under their belly, as we
see it does in mungrels, but it stands upright and bends like a sickle, he has
very great eyes, and that stick forth, and they are both blear eyes, weak legs,
and that are crooked about the joints, but the hinder part of his body is
smooth, without any hair, and their tail is seen very uncomely by those that
are present, and they will turn their tails on purpose for people to look on.
This small creature because it is ridiculous for its parts, and manners, and
has many things that may hurt a woman when she is with child, and cause the
child within her to be ill formed, I think not fit to keep, least Women with
child should be wronged thereby. But this monstrous form and limbs so crooked
are not natural, but artificial. Women love dog^ too well.
For men shut them up in small Cages, and taking their food away, they make
them grow small; as in Terence they took away meat from maids to make them grow
small as bulrushes, least if any of them should grow corpulent, she should seem
to be a Champion. See your Juglers that pass the Countries, use to wrest the
limbs of young boys, that they may leap and dance the better. Lately, A
History.
there was a notable Knave who carried a child to be seen from Town to Town
which had a very great head, all the other limbs bore no proportion with it.
(This deformity when it is natural, and not by art, Physicians call
Hydrocephalon, Very great heed what disease.
by reason of the head swollen with a watery humor.) When a woman great with
child had looked on this picture, she was so frighted with this unusual sight,
that when her ^^^e came to be delivered, she brought forth a child with a
spongy vast bead, and it had like to have cost her her life. And this mischief
followed it, that it grew greater in the Nurses arms, till it became monstrous
great. The woman a ^e to me, and made this complaint, bringing the child with
hot, and when I pressed the head of it with my fingers, it would sink down like
to a cushions, and come forth again. These spectacles are not only to be a
^oided by Women with child, but also by all those that may be^^roubled and
frighted in their sleep by such frights, as it commonly happens to children,
sick, weak, old melancholique people, Whence Children have ill marks.
yet monstrous sights will hurt them less that they will women with child; For
they by the sights of such things will frame (...) like in their Children.

For since all their forces and natural faculties are wholly employed to form
the child, it happens that when the woman is any way offended, all the humors
and spirits run downwards to the womb. And when the imagination of a thing that
sticks fast in the mind joins with these, it frames the like fashion on the
child that the mind conceives. A Proverb from Imagination.
For it is not said in vain, Imagination makes fashion. For by the same reason,
if a Mouse, a Cat, a Weasel, leap suddenly on a Woman, or Strawberries,
Cornel-berries, Cherries, Grapestones, fall on any part of the body, When a
Woman does remove marks from the Face to the Thighs or hinder parts.
they presently leave their mark, and the print of this thing will be printed
on that limb: unless the woman at the same time that these things happen to
her body, do presently wipe the part, and put her hand behind her back, or on
some remoter part of her body. For so the mischief is suddenly cured, or the
mark is made on that part she touched, all her Imagination and natural faculty
being turned thither.

CHAP. V.
Of the strange longing of Women with child, and their insatiable desire of
things; And if they cannot get them they are in danger of life.
THe order of the former narration seems to require me to speak something
concerning the longing of Women. Longing a Disease.
For they are both all most from the same cause. About three Months after
conception, a disease troubles Women which the Greeks call (...) the Latins
Pica, when by reason of cold vicious humors, and sharp ^^^gm that lies in
their stomachs, they earnestly desire, coals, parings, chalk, shells, and other
things unfit to eat; this mischief prevails most, when the child's hair first
begins to grow, and they are with child of a Girl. For by reason of want of
heat, flegmatique humors are less concocted. Hence it is that winds and often
belchings frequently trouble Women. Of kin to this is the daintiness of Women,
wherewith men and Feavourish people are often troubled. But childbearing Women
that are tempted with this disease, are so insatiable in their desire, that if
they cannot obtain what they long for, they bring both themselves and their
Child in danger of death. May Women long for strong things.
This disease for the most part troubles the Low Country Women, because they
are of moist cold constitutions, and feed on ill Nourishment. There have been
some in our days that when they saw a corpulent well ^^d man, they desired to
bite at this shoulders, A History.
and there was a man who that he might satisfy a woman's longing, granted her
leave to bite, least she might take any hurt: whereupon she b^t out a part with
her teeth, and chewd it a little, and then she swallowed it raw. When she was
not yet satisfied, she desired to bite again, but the man would not endure her.
But she presently began to languish, and to be delivered. She brought forth
Twins, the one living, and the other dead for want of a second bite. I can see
no other reason for it, than that the woman grieving in her mind, the vital
spirits are lessned, A Woman with child suffers if her longing be demed her.
and the humors appointed to nourish the child, turn another way, and are not
carried to the womb; so the child wanting the food which the mother longed for,
grows feeble and dies. For when the passages and receptacles whereby food uses
to be derived to the Matrix, are stopped, it must needs follow that the child
will want nutriment and die. But if the teeming woman be strong of nature, and
knows how to moderate her passions, the child does not die, but grows sickly.
By these you may see abundantly what a woman's Imagination can do, and what
outward objects conceived in the mind can print upon the child that is then to
be formed. When we must please sick people with diet.
Wherefore I suppose they do not much transgress the bounds of Art that are
not so rigid, but do sometimes indulge to sick people such meat as they long
for, though they are not so proper for them, in case they are such as will
bring no great hurt to their bodies, for sometimes by such manner of diet we
dispell Chronical and long diseases: So when sick people are vexed with lasting
diseases, I do not use to be very obstinate or refractory against them, in
granting to them such meats as they greedily desire and earnestly entreat for,
when they earnestly ask for them, and eat them with a great Appetite. For by
this means it comes to pass that natural heat is stirred up, and the imbred
faculties are moved, humors that stick in the body are concocted, and
dissipated, the passages being opened. And by Hippocrates example sometimes, I
study to gratify my Patients, and to be silent and wink at them, if they take
what may not greatly hurt their bodies. For as he says; Something worse meat
and drink, so it please, L. 2. Aph. 38.
is better than that which is better and pleases not so well. For all those
things that relish best in the Palate, and are most pleasing to the taste, are
more easily concocted, and nourish more, because the stomach takes them in
greedily, and likes them best. Desire makes all sweet.
So I know some that have cured Quartans, and wandering Agues, by eating raw
Herrings new taken out of the Sea: So in desperate diseases that are come to
the height of their danger, I do not much fear that greedy appetite, nor do I
contend with or deny to them that desire such things, what they would have; but
using choice, and prescribing them the way and manner how to dress them, I let
them use their own desire so far as I am confident it will not hurt them, and I
conjecture the disease may be battered by it. For by this acrimony and
greediness of eating them, the force of nature is sharpened and set forward,
that was before asleep, and so regaining strength, it sets upon the disease
afresh. So we drive forth one disease with another, as one nail with another,
and for an ill knot we apply an ill wedge, Diseases are driven out with desire
of some meats.
which no man may think to be absurd, since in some diseases, we willingly
raise a Fever, for otherwise there were no cure for them. So I know some that
by the sudden coming on of the enemy, and by a great fright have been cured of
a quartan Ague. So there was an Epidemicall disease amongst us that had
destroyed some thousands that by a sudden inundation of the Sea presently
ceased; for by some outward trouble arising, the collections of humors are
dissipated, and diseases abate and cease by critical evacuation. One disease is
sometimes cured by another.
Hence it is that such as are bit by mad-dogs, and fear the water, we cast them
unawares into the deep water, and drive away fear by fear. When some are
troubled with cold diseases, we put them into hot Fevers: for so natural heat
being raised, cold raw humors are concocted, and nature is excited to cast out
the disease.

CHAP. VI.
That a Woman does afford seed, and is a Companion in the whole Generation.
It is proved by reason, that a woman wants not Seed.
THough the Seed of Man be the chief efficient, and the beginning of action,
motion, and generation; yet that a woman affords seed, and does effectually
lend help to the procreation of the Child is evinced by strong reasons. First,
seminary vessels had been given them in vain, and genital testicles; if a woman
wanted seminal excrement, she should afford very little to the child, and
should have no part in it. But since that nature does nothing in vain, it must
needs be, that they were made for use of seed and for procreation, and placed
in their proper places, both the Testicles and the receptacles of seed, whose
nature and force is to afford fruitful virtue to the seed. And to prove this,
there needs no stronger Argument than this, that if women do not use copulation
to cast out their seed they oft-times fall into great diseases and cruel
symptoms. The danger of seed retained.
For you shall see many Widows for want of husbands, and Virgins ready for
Marriage, when they do not marry in time, though their terms keep their orderly
seasons, yet are they cruelly tormented with fainting fits, and strangling of
the Mother. For all are of opinion, that more harm comes to them by the seed
being corrupted, than by their courses being stopped. For the seed grows to be
of a venomous quality, hence arises that swarth weasil color in Maids when
they begin to be in love: hence comes their short breathings, tremblings, and
pantings of the heart, the expulsive faculty being moved to cast out the
swelling humor. Maids to be married in time.
If such lusty Widows or Maids in years happen to be married, that their seed
by the use of man may be ejected, you shall presently see them look fresh as a
Rose, and to be very amiable and pleasant, and not so crabbid and testy,
especially if their husbands be men for their turn, and can give them their
due. Maids by Marriage gr^w fresh.
And though the Society of the lawful bed consists not in these things, yet you
shall find that this Sex is by no means better won, than when the husband often
satisfies them this way. Woman is greedy of copulation.
For so are all things more peaceable in the House, and there fall out no
wranglings or janglings between them. But if the man lie but seldom with his
wife, or the man be slow in doing his office, you shall see the house turned
upside down; for some of this Sex are so greedy of copulation, that you may
weary them, but never satisfy them: which seems to me the chief cause why a
woman in copulation does afford seed, and has more pleasure than a man has:
For since by nature infinite delight accompanies the ejecting of the seed by
the breaking forth of the swelling spirits, and the stiffnesse of the nerves,
and the woman performs a double office, The woman desires man as the matter
does the form. Why children are most like the Mother.
and suffers both ways, (for she draws forth the man's seed, and casts her own
in with it); It is very likely that she takes more delight, and is more
recreated by it. Hence it is that the Child is commonly more like the mother
than the Father, because the Mothers confer most in generation; and it is
proved, because women love the Children best. For besides their ejecting of
seed, all the time they are great with child, they nourish the Child with their
purest blood. I find Galen to be of that mind, for he thinks that the child
receives something more from the Mother than from the Father; Lib. 2. de sem.
and he refers the difference of Sex to the affluence of menstruall blood; but
the reason of likeness to the force of the seed. A Simile from Plants and the
industrious husbandman.
For as plants receive more from fruitful ground, than they do from the
Industry of the Husbandman; so the Infant receives all things more plentifully
from the Mother: For first, the seed of them both is fostered and heaped
together in the womb, then it grows up with the Mothers blood, and increases
by degrees secretly. Hence it is, that by sympathy Children love their Mothers
most, Why Children love their Mothers best.
for it proceeds from hea^nesse of Nature, and because the Mothers forces were
most employed about them. Also Mothers are full of love to their C^ildren, and
more indulgent to their young ones than the Far^ers be, who are oft-times more
rigid. I think the Evangelist meant so, Math. 2.
when he brings in Rachel lamenting for her Children, who was so wounded in her
mind with grief for being deprived of them, Jer. 32.
that she would by no means be comforted. For there is nothing ^y^ the opinion
of Esaias more repugnant to Natures Laws, than for a woman to forget her child,
Chapter 49.
and to be cruel against the fruit of her womb, laying aside natural affection.
We see that Fathers have their natural propension to their Children also, but
it is la^er before it appears. For Fathers love them best when they are grown
up, and then they take most care for them, when they begin to see some hopes of
them: But Mothers take more care of them in their I^fancy, and because that age
stands in need of other's help most, they are then the most loving and careful
over them, and not so cursed as the Fathers be. Math. 23. Sto^ks love their d^ms.
For this cause the Scriptures do so often invi^er us to gratitude, which by the
example of Storks, children do low to their Patents, and we are commanded to
requite them. The like love we see in a Hen, which loves the chickens, A Hens
siting.
she hate bed* more dearly; and though the Cock was the cause that the Eggs
breed chickens, yet he takes no care for them when they are hatched. But that
both yield seed, we may prove in hen-eggs; A Hen lays eggs without a Cock.
for a Hen will lay eggs without the Cock, but if she sit on them, they will
sooner corrupt than hatch: but the eggs the Hen laid when a Cock ^od her, will
after 19 days be hatched, put under a Hen; so that the Chickens will peep
before the shell break. This tedious C^ild-bearing time of the Mother in which
for 9. months she feeds the Child with her purest blood, and then her love
toward her Child newly born, and the usual likeness of the Child to the
Mother, do clearly prove, Women are not idle in making the child.
that women afford seed, and that women do more toward making the Child, than
men do, who only injecting their seed are gone, and neither further the woman,
nor help the child any more. Yet in so many months the woman must do much to
frame the child and nourish it. Aeneid. 6.
For it cannot be, that it should grow up from that congealed lump, but by a
wonderful way.

CHAP. VII.
Whence grows the Sex and Kind; that is, whether of the two Man or Woman is
the cause of a male or female Child.
God the chief cause of fruitfulness.
THough all things are justly ascribed to God that made all, yet many things go
in order by Natures rules, and are carried by their imbred motion. God being
the Author of all these things he uses to alter many of them, and to change
the order of things, and to bring forth some things in other forms and orders
contrary to Natures Laws. For example, a woman desiring a Man-child, prays
unto God earnestly for it, and God hears her prayers. For example, Sarah being
past children, Genesis 27.
and her courses long since stayed, yet she conceived Isaac by Abraham that was
a very old man; in which child God would have to be placed all hopes of his
posterity, and that hence all Nations should take the beginning of their
happiness. Also A^na being much afflicted with her long barrenness, 1 Reg. 1.
by earnest and constant prayer she obtained Samuel from God. Also Elisha's
officious Landlady, 4 Kings 4.
by the prayers of the Prophet had a Child given her from God, and afterward
he raised this Child that was dead to life again. Luc. 1.
So Zacharias being old, by Gods dispensation had a Child by Elizabeth, that
was stricken in years, and uncurably barren, which was John the forerunner of
Christ. So many others have prayed to God for a Child to be their Heir in their
Estates, and God has granted them their request. None can doubt but this is
Gods work, and these things have a peculiar effect from the divine Will. But we
shall speak of things that proceed from natural causes, and that nature uses
to work by her imbred force. For she prepares a body fit for the Souls
condition, and gives every thing its temper. But since there are two principles
out of which the body of man is made, and which make the Child like the
progenitors, The force of seed.
and to be of this or that Sex; Seed, common to both sexes; and Menstrual
blood, proper to the woman: The similitude consists in the force of the male or
female feed, so that it proves like to the one or the other, as the seed is
more plentifully afforded by one or the other. The force of the menstruall
blood.
which belongs only to the woman. For, were that force in the seed, since the
man's seed is always stronger and hotter than the woman's, children would be all
boys. Wherefore the kind of the creature is attributed to the Temperament of
the active qualities, which consist in heat and cold, and to the substance or
nature of the matter under them; that is, to the flowing of the menstrual
blood. Now the seed affords both force to beget and form the child, and matter
for its generation: also in the menstrual blood there is both matter and force.
For as the seed most helps to the material principle, so does the menstrual
blood to the potential. Seed is, says Galen, L. 2. de sem.
blood well concocted by the vessels that contain it, so that blood is not
only the matter of generating the child, but it is also seed in possi^ility.
Now that menstrual blood has both principles, that is, both matter, and
faculty of effecting any thing, is confessed by all. But seed is the strongest
efficient, the matter of it being very small in quantity; but the menstrual
blood is much in quantity; Menstrual blood affords matter to feed the child.
but the potential or efficient faculty of it is very feeble. Now if the
material principle of generation, according to which the sex is made, were
only in the menstrual blood, then should all children be girls; as if all the
efficient force were in the seed, they would all be boys. But since both have
both principles, and in menstrual blood, matter predominates in quantity, and
in the seed force and virtue; deservedly* says Galen, the child receives its
sex rather from the Mother than from the Father, though his seed do afford
something to the material principles, but more weakly. But similitude, though
Imagination be of great force therein, is referred rather to the Father than
the Mother; for there is more force in the man's seed. But the woman's seed
receiving faculty from the menstruall blood for 9. months, does as much exceed
the man's, as the man's did the woman at first copulation. For it is proper to
the woman's seed, to strengthen and increase her own substance more than the
man's. So the woman not only affords matter to make the Child, but force and
virtue to perfect the conception, though the woman's seed be fit nutriment for
the man's feed by reason of the moisture and thinness of it, and is more fit to
frame and make up the conception thereby. For as of soft running wax, and moist
clay, A Similitude from wax and moist clay.
the workman can work what he will with his hand; so the man's feed mixed with
the woman's seed, and the menstruall blood, helps effectually to make the form,
and perfects the parts of a man. Or if you would have a comparison of these
things from Natural things; as the Earth is to plants, so is the womb for
conception. A comparison of the Earth and the Womb.
For as the seeds of Plants need the Earth, to nourish and increase them; so
the seed of man requires the womb, which is affected with a desire of an off
spring. For by the moisture thereof, and by blood running forth at the veins to
water the child, it does grow and increase. Hence you may conjecture what art
nature uses in conceiving and framing a child, which by an innate force grows
up by degrees, and secretly increasing comes to its full strength; wherein I
think that worth the Enquiry, by what force the nature of the woman makes a man
or a woman; what faculty seems to be ascribed rather to the woman than to the
man, by reason of more matter coming from her, which consists in the blood and
seed of the woman; whereby the Child all the time it is in the womb is
nourished and increased. For as man's seed is the chief cause of motion, and the
Instrument and Artificer, whereby Man is made; yet the woman's seed with the
plenty of her menstrual blood affords more matter than the man does, and by
help thereof the child is perfected, and is distinguished for its sex; for that
is it makes a child a male or a female.

CHAP. VIII.
Of prodigious and Monstrous Births, and by the way what is the meaning of the
Proverb, Those that are born in the fourth Moon.
THe Nature of Man and his parts destinated to the Generation of man, if they
be rightly disposed, and there be no defect in them, will beget a perfect man.
But if they be defective, or faulty, or the feed be confusedly mixed, Whence
come Monsters.
or the principles of Generation be otherwise involved than they should be, it
falls out that prodigious and monstrous births are made. Some fay that these
things happen from the influence and aspects of the Stars, and as just
judgments for sins. And I think it very consonant to truth. For they commonly
happen from a faulty constitution of the Womb, from filthy corrupt seed, A
simile from Founders.
and disorderly copulation. For, as in the art of melting me^^als, if the
matter be not pure and well cleansed, if the vessel or receiver be oblique,
full of windings, ill joynted, has conners, is set awry, or is full of chinks
or plains, is unloosed, or holds ill together, we see that men cast ridiculous
and improper figures: so if the places be ill appointed, if the womb inclines
to one side, or the matter be unfit, or ill tempered, nature shall never make a
fit and decent form: So the Low Country Women, chiefly those that live near
the Seaside, being restless and troubled in copulation, A Mola of the Matrix.
they have strange misshapen Embrio's, and do not only bring forth rude and
deformed burdens, not made up, that no sword will cut, but also something
deformed that pants and is alive, and is like the imperfect draught of a figure
that Artists use to draw with a rude Pensil. For Mariners, which they commonly
marry, when they come from long voyages, run mad upon their wives with full
sail, Intemperance of Venery burts the child.
never regarding their menstrual courses, nor the Conjunction or new Moon, at
which time by reason of their terms copulation uses to be hurtful, for the
seed cannot stick together, nor be fitly united with the woman's blond, whence
it comes to pass, that the seed either runs forth, or if it chance to stick
together, nature cannot make up any thing rightly of a confused matter that
sticks not so as it should do. And not only the men's incontinence is to be
found fault with; but also of the women, who having waited so long in their
absence, do voluntarily put themselves upon their husbands, and snatch the seed
from them as hungry dogs do a bone, or Cerberus his bait. Whence it comes that
the faculty of the Womb loses its force to generation and success of breeding
a child. Or if it try to do any thing, it makes some monstrous form that is
nothing like to the shape of a man: sometimes after three Months space, that
filthy matter runs forth, and an undigested heap comes out by pieces, as filthy
water out of a Ship by the Pump. Not unlike to this is an efflux that troubles
women with many heavy torments: our women, because this conception begins in
the fourth Moon, when she is in Conjunction, by whose force the terms flow
down, call it a Moon birth, or Manekinds. A birth not natural is cast forth.
Sometimes this false conception is made without the help of man, by
Imagination only in those that are very lascivious, so as by often seeing
their Husbands, and but touching them, the woman's seed will mix together with
the blood, and the neat of the Womb will begin to frame something like to a
living Creature; But the formal cause, the man's seed being wanting, that is
like the Work-master, the matter the woman affords, Man's seed is the former of
the child.
obtains a strange deformed shape: sometimes the like is made by the help of
the man, when in the sourth and silent Moon he copulates with his wife, and on
the fourth day after the Moons Conjunction, when her courses run, not observing
natures rules; for he strives against the flux, and sails against the stream. A
common proverb to piss against the Moon.
Our people by a Proverb call it pissing against the Moon, the Latins call
them, Born in the fourth Moon. Because they have unhappy beginnings of their
life, and had their first entrance by generation contrary to natures order,
whence it happens that they are very unlucky in business they undertake. For
when a man lies with his wife that has her courses, he stops her flux, and
the blood is forced back again, you may see the same in vessels, and Cask of
Wine, and by blood running from your nose, in which we stop the liquor running
forth by thrusting in a stople, or some rag that is wound together. Yet it is
not necessary nor fit to stop the blood running forth, when as the man's seed
mingled with such filthy moisture, cannot make a perfect man. For the matter is
naught and unfit to receive a decent and proper figure. And therefore Moses had
good reason, by Gods command to forbid men to lie with women during their
uncleanness. Touch not a woman that is unclean of her blood.
For it can hardly be expressed what contagion and mischief comes thereupon,
when men do not refrain from women that are impure. For this contagion will by
degrees seize upon the whole habit of the body, and secretly breeds the
Leprosy and the Pox. And it does this the sooner, if the woman be diseased of
some contagious disease, as whores commonly are. For then she will presently
communicate her infection. Whence are monstrous shapes in the body and mind.
Wherefore no man need much admire that there are so many monstrous births, or
from whence come so many strange shapes, that there are so many scald heads,
maimed and crooked people, with bowed and bent legs, that there are so many
swellings about the fundament and the groins, so many Bube's, so many swollen
Emrods: and as for the mind, Bube's in the groins
that there are so many dull, stupid, forgetful, foolish, mad, and unreasonable
people; for all proceeds from disorderly and unseasonable venery, or, from the
corrupt faulty seed of the Parents, are derived on their posterity.

Therefore let every man Consider how Cruel they are to their children, that
bring such mischiefs upon them, and chiefly they are here understood that are
conceived in the fourth Moon, Born in the fourth Moon, called commonly, Pist
against the Moon.
that is when women's courses are upon them, at what time they should not dare
to copulate with men; For the children they then conceive want all those gifts
and properties, that children, begot at seasonable times, are endowed with.
They are fit for nothing that is good and virtuous; or to perform any noble
actions. And if they do any thing well, they have no success in what they
undertake, and never see any prosperous end. For they are by Nature imperfect,
and their natural faculties are short, which help men in their business, not
by their own, but their Parents faults, who undecently in procreation violated
natures laws. Whence it is that many things are wanting in them, or else given
them sparingly and with some ill qualities, that others obtain bountifully; and
they suffer no less loss in their minds; For they want almost their common
senses, and are extreme dull, without that sharpness of wit, quickness of
Invention, counsel and prudence that others have. Informer years a woman that
was an Islander took Physic of me, she married a Seaman, A history of a thing
done.
and conceived by him, her belly began to swell to such a vast magnitude, that
one would think it would never hold to carry the burden. When nine Months
were past, that makes three quarters of a year, the Midwife was called; first
with much a do she was delivered of a rude lump, which I conceive was a
superfaetation after a lawful conception, there were fastened to it on both
sides two handles, like to arms for the length and the fashion of them; It
panted and seemed to be alive, as sponges and Seafish called Viticae in Dutch
Elschowe, Sea sponges.
which flote in the Sea in Summer in infinite numbers, and being taken out of
the Sea, they run abroad, and being long handled they melt, with a burning and
pricking left behind them; whence they had their name. After this a Monster
came forth of the Womb with a crooked beck, and a long round neck, with
brandishing eyes, and a pointed tail, and it was very nimble footed. So soon as
it came to the light, it made a fearful noise in the room, and ran here and
there to find some secret place to hide it self: at last the women with
cushions fell upon it and strangled it. Leeches in a Woman's body.
This kind of Monster, because like a Leech it sucks the blood from the child,
they call it a Leech, commonly a Sucker. At last this woman extremely tired and
almost ready to die, brought forth a Man-child, of which the Monster had so
eaten up the flesh; that so soon as it was christened, it had very little life
remaining in it. But the woman hardly restored to her strength, reported the
whole truth to me, of all the pains she endured; and I prescribed unto her a
wholesome course of life, and to restore her forces, for she was grown very
feeble and lean. These and many such like things should teach all men and women
to use all decency, and orderly proceedings in their mutual embracings,
Lecherous people are marked.
lest Nature should be wronged thereby. In which respect some lascivious people
are much to be condemned, who think they may do what they list when they use
copulation, and will no ways have their pleasure bounded. For taking no care
whether their stomachs be full or empty, or the meat be raw or digested,
whether it be day or night, regarding no opportunity of time, obey nothing but
their own lusts, and boast themselves to be so lusty, that they will never be
weary with copulation; but these insatiable Lechers seem to me to be ignorant
for what end the genital parts were given to man, since they use them not to
get children, and propagate their kind, but for obscene purposes, for barren
pleasure; but at last they pay for their unruly lust, when their parts and
joints are tormented with Gowts and Aches.

CHAP. IX.
By what means he that will, may get a Boy or a Girl; and by the by, whence
Hermaphrodites are bred, and people of both Sexes.
God is the first cause of conception.
IF any one would have a Boy or a Girl, he must first know for certain, that
the success and happy beginnings of those things are to be obtained by Prayer
from God, who is the principal cause of every effect. For sometimes though the
natural faculties of Man be as they should be, yet are men and women barren,
and want Children, which God threateneth by Hosea, Chapter 9. barrenness from God.
to those that defile themselves with unlawful copulation, or seek for to be
fruitful from any other but from God. Because (says he) they went to
Beelphegor, that is, the Idol of Priapus, and were addicted to filthiness,
they shall not conceive; their glory shall fly away as a bird from the womb,
from the birth, and from the conception. I will give them a barren womb, and
dry breasts, their root shall wither, and they shall bring forth no fruit; and
if they do bring forth, I will destroy the most dear of their Children. Which
must teach us all, that if God be offended, all means are vain, and the
success will be unprofitable. Chapter 8. Idolatry and super stition causes of
barrenness.
God threatens the like in Ezekiel to superstitious women, because they wept
for Adonis, Venus's Lover, who was rent by a Boar about the privities, and his
Statue was set up, and they adored him. But if God be not angry with men, and
lets Nature have her ordinary course, we may use outward means, and help
Natures weakness, if from any secret cause one be hindered from Children.

What perfects genetion.
Wherefore there are two things especially that perfect copulation, and that
help to beget Children: First, the genital humor which proceeds partly from
the brain and the whole body, and partly from the Liver, the fountain of blood.
Then the spirit that comes by the Arteries from the Heart, by force whereof the
yard is erected, and grows stiff, and by the force whereof the seed is
ejected. To this may be added the appetite and desire of copulation, which is
excited either by Imagination, or by sight and feeling of handsome women.
Whosoever wants these helps, or has them feeble, must so soon as may be use
means to restore nature, and to correct this error, and repair the forces, as
when there is a luxation or disjoynting in any part. A Similitude from
Husbandry.
For as we see barren fields grow fruitful by tilling and man's industry, and
unfruitful Trees and Plants by pruning and dunging grow very plentiful in
fruit; So in dressing this ground the Physical art is much to be observed, that
with great skill cures the defects of Nature, and restores this barren field to
bring forth fruit again, as it were, by dunging it, when the heart of it was
almost quite worn out. So it restores the faint heat, and the weak spirits,
coldness and dryness of the genital parts, and reduces the weakness of the
nerves to their temperament: and it does farther do all things that may serve
to remove all impediments of procreation of Children. But since that diet may
change the Elementary qualities, and may alter the unhappy state of the body to
a better, it is necessary that such people should eat only such meat as will
make them fruitful for propagation; What meats cause seed, and stir up venery.
Amongst such things as stir up venery, and breed seed for generation, are all
meats of good juice, that nourish well, and make the body lively and full of
sap, of which faculty are all hot and moist meats. For the substance of seed,
as Galen says, is made of the pure concocted, and windy superfluity of blood.
Matter of heaping up seed.
There is in many things a power to heap up seed and augment it, other things
are of force to cause erection, and drive forth the humor. Meats that afford
matter, are Hen-eggs, Pheasants, Thrushes, Blackbirds, Gnat-sappers,
Wood-cocks, young Pigeons, Sparrows, Partridges, Capons, Pullets, Almonds,
Pine-Nuts, Raisins, Currants, all strong Wines, that are sweet and pleasant,
especially made of grapes of Italy, which they call Muscadel. But the genitals
are erected and provoked, by Satyrium, Eryngo's, Cresses, Erysimum, Parsnips,
Hartichokes, Onions, Turnips, Rapes, Asparagus, candid Ginger, Galanga, Acorns,
Scallions, Sea shelfish.

And Rocket that is next Priapus set, Colum. l. 10.

That makes the man his Wife with Child beget.
A sit Similitude from Guns.
These, as many more, will make men lusty. For as we see Guns first charged with
powder, and then with bullets, and lastly, some fine powder is put in the pan,
and fire is given with a Linstock, and the bullet is forced out with a violent
noise; so in this work two things must needs concur, that our labor be not
lost, namely, that there be plenty of seed, and a force of a flatulent spirit,
whereby the seed may be driven forth into the Matrix. But if these Engines be
broken, or nothing worth, or the Gunpowder be adulterated and naught, they can
have no force to break down walls and Trenches, and Ramparts, not do they roar
horribly, but make a small hissing, and empty noise, as bladders of boys at
play do, when they are blown up. Hence some of our lascivious women will say,
that such men that trouble their wives to no purpose, do thunder, The Woman's
Proverb.
but there follows no rain, they do not water the inward ground of the matrix.
They have their veins puffed up with wind, but there wants seed. Wherefore if
husbands will win their wives love by especial service, they must be well
prepared to enter this conflict; for if they fall short, How Wives are pleased.
they shall find their wives so crabbed and touchy, that there will be no
quiet. But when they are well provided, they must take the opportunity of doing
their business well. And that is when the monthly terms are over; For that
sink hinders their seed from coagulating and fermenting, and makes the womb
unfit to conceive. When therefore the Terms are over, and the womb is well
cleansed, they must use no unlawful copulation, or violent concussions in
begetting children, and when the work is over, the woman must gently and softly
lie down on her right side, with her head lying low, and her body sinking down,
and so fall to sleep. When a Boy is begot.
For by this means the seed will fall to the right side, and a boy will be
made. Yet the time of the year, the Climate, the age of both parties, the
heating diet, are of great concernment here. For the Summer, if it be not too
hot, is fittest for the conceiving of boys, because the seed and menstruall
blood receive more heat from the Air about them. Also a hot Country, ripe
years, and lusty, and hairy bodies are fittest to beget boys. Also there are
many things that by a special and hidden quality are fit for this purpose. So
Mercury, What herb- Mercury can do.
that is divided into male and female, is held to be most effectual in
producing Children of the same kind with it, so that the decoction of juice of
the Male drank four days from the first day of purgation, will give force to
the womb to procreate a male Child: but the juice of the Female drank for so
many days, and in the same manner, will cause a female to be born, especially
if the man lie with his wife when the Terms are newly over. I think it is,
because the one purges the right side of the matrix, and the other the left,
and fosters it with heat. So it comes to pass, that the cold humor being
taken away, the woman is made fit for conception. A Similitude from the Earth.
For as in boggy and watery grounds the seeds of Plants are drowned, nor do they
easily grow forth, so by the superfluity of a cold humor the seeds of men are
choked, that the force and faculty of the womb can make no sex nor form of
them. Seseli of Marsilea is of the like effect, Sage, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cassia
Lignea, Zedoary, Lignum Aloes, Masterwort, Calamint, Clary, Dittany,
Elecampane, Orris root, juice of Motherwort, and innumerable things of this
kind, that discuss winds, What things purge the watrinesse of the womb.
and wipe away superfluous moisture, and prepare the womb as tilled grounds for
to sow the seeds on. So other things by other forces cause that the matrix be
not so slippery, that the seed may stick the faster. Of this kind are Amber,
shavings of Ivory, Storax Calamita, Hartshorn, Sumach, Blatta Byzantina,
Myrtil seed, Witwalls, Cypress Nuts, Frankincense, with the bark, Mastick,
Spoonwort, Avens, Cinquefoil, red Roses: whereof some applied outwardly, others
taken inwardly, strengthen the womb, and consume superfluous moisture, bind
close the gaping of the matrix, and make it hold the Seed; and because the
women on this side the Alps for the most part are subject to fits of the
mother, and such diseases of the womb, they had need use these things before
others. But if the parts be overdryed and burnt, they must use moderately
moystning means, both Meats and Physic. A dry matrix what is good for it.
But they that would be commended for their wedlock actions, and not be without
Children, they must observe this rule, to lie with their Wives at distance of
time, not too often, nor yet too seldom, for both these hurt fruitfulness
alike. For to eject immoderately weakens a man, and spends his spirits; and to
forbear longer than it is convenient, makes the seed ineffectuall and not manly
enough. Also we must consider the opportunity of this matter, when it is best
to copulate, and what sex you conceive in your mind to beget.

Avicenna his Counsel for Copulation.
Avicenna, no base fellow, nor an Author of the lowest rank, describes the
time and manner of procreating a sex: When (says he) the terms are spent, and
the womb is cleansed, which is commonly in five days, or 7. at most; if a man
lie with his Wife from the first day she is purged to the fifth, she will
conceive a Male; but from the fifth to the eighth day, a female; Again, from
the eighth day to the twelfth, a male again; but after that number of days, an
Hermaphrodite. Though he brings no probable cause of these effects, yet
methinks it seems to be very probable. Avicenna his opinion explan'd.
For the first days the womb being cleansed, and the fordid humor perfectly
purged forth, the matrix has more heat, whereby the man and the woman's seed
stick faster together, and is directed to the right side of the womb, by the
attractive force of the Liver and the right Kidney, from which also in those
days hot blood is derived for nutriment of the Child that shall be. For the
left parts, as being cold and benumbed, and void of blood, cannot contribute
any thing so soon as the terms are purged; but blood is drawn later, and more
sparingly from the veins of the left side, which are called the Emulgent veins,
Emulgent veins.
that creep about the Milt, and the left Kidney; so that at length after the
first day until the eighth day some blood comes forth of them, whereby the
Child is to be nourished. So that when those parts perform their office, and
the right side parts do cease, by reason of the situation, and cold nutriment,
a female is begot. After the eighth day the parts on the right side do their
office again, and blood comes from them to nourish a male. After this circuit
of days, because the menstrual blood flows, without distinction from all
parts, and the matrix is made too moist with cold humors flowing unto it, and
the seed joins to neither side, but flotes in the midst of the womb betwixt
both: What begus Hermaphrodites.
The seed of both Sexes confounded make an Hermaphrodite, which conception
takes its form and forces sometimes from the left, sometimes from the right
side, and uses the help of them both. Hence Hermaphrodites are begot; which
name is so called from Mercury and Venus. Irregular copulation is detestable.
Sometimes this vicious and infamous conception is begot by undecent
copulation, when the woman besides Natures custom lies uppermost, and the man
under her, sometimes times to the great hurt of their health; for by that
copulation turned the wrong way, they become subject to Ruptures, and Herniaes,
especially if they be full with meats.

CHAP. X.
Whether the Child be nourished with the menstrual excrement, and whether Maids
may conceive before they have their Terms.
DAily Experience proves, that some have been married at 12. years old, and
some to their great hurt, and damage of their health have had no terms at 19.
years old. The Courses is an argument of conception.
Whence many ask, Whether, when a Maid is fit for a Man, and she never had her
courses, she can conceive? some are of opinion it cannot be, that one can
conceive but after her terms are over: and this seems to me to be the truth.
For when the helps be wanting that further conception, and the matrix wants the
humor should feed the Child, how can a woman conceive? A Similitude from
flourishishing shrubs.
But our Matrons especially Midwives, reason thus from Trees: as no Plant wants
fruit that bears flowers; and no Tree is barren that yields blossoms, but every
Tree is unfruitful that wants flowers: so young Maids that have no courses
conceive not, nor do their wombs swell, though they receive the seed. When the
courses stay, then stays fruitfulness.
But women in years bear Children no longer after their terms are stopped. For
since the flux of this excrement affords matter to generation of Mankind, the
seed of man, like runnet and leaven, heaping this up within it self, it
follows, that a woman cannot conceive either before that humor begins to run,
nor after that it leaves off to run any longer, because the nutriment for the
Child is wanting.

What use of the terms.
But here arises another question: whether the menstrual blood be a profitable
Excrement, and fit to seed the child? or only a filthy matter, which at set
times is voided as a sink. I know that Pliny and many more think so, who
suppose that the menstruall blood is venomous and monstrous, and they do
wonderfully raise this opinion. So Juvenal taking an argument from hence to
speak against women, stirs up men to hate them, Sat, 6.
and does purposely write a whole Satyr against them, that despising them, they
should never marry. I know indeed that the flux of the Terms is a fowl thing,
and what harm may come by it, if this sink be stopped longer then it should be,
and that Moses did well, Levit. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 29.
as God commanded him, to forbid all men to lie with women that time that they
were defiled with this Excrement. So he drives from the company of men, those
that have Gonorrheas, that is fluxes of blood, and commands them to be
purified. And Esaias to express extreme foulness to be abhorred, All our
righteousness (says he) is as a menstruous rag, etc. Which though it be true,
We must abstain from menstruous Women.
and and the great Lawgiver, by Gods order, did most justly forbid it, that no
man should defile himself with fowl copulation, or be polluted thereby; yet
this proves not that this flux is superfluous, and does not serve for the
child's nutriment.

For Hippocrates the Author of Physic, and Galen a great lover of it, do
rightly profess in many places that the menstrual blood feeds the child, and
that the child grows by receiving that flowing out of the veins. De tuenda
valetudine.
So Galen: Blood, says he, and genital seed are the beginnings of our
Generation, which arise from the very principles, as from a root. The blood is
as fit matter that obeys the Artificer, the seed is as the Workmaster. Again,
in comment. Aphoris. The menstruall blood is one principle of our Generation,
and is by nature moist. L. 1. Aph. 14.
Hitherto belongs that Aphorism of Hippocrates. If a Woman with child have her
courses, the child cannot be well, For the blood is taken thus from her, that
is directed to the womb from all the body, to feed the child. If therefore the
courses running away, weaken the child, and defraud him of his nourishment, it
must needs be that they do good when they are stopped, and serve to feed the
child all the while it is in the womb. The Breasts fill with milk when the
terms stop.
If they do no good, and the child has no nutriment from them, I pray what is
the cause that the courses are stopped in women with child, and such as give
suck, and that without any hurt to them? There can be no other cause given but
that they are consumed to make plenty of milk, or to feed the child. But to
explain this question the more fully. I shall set down this dilemma; If the
courses confer nothing to feed the child, The Authors dilemma of the monthly
terms.
then women may conceive though they want their courses, for nature can draw
blood from the veins to feed the child: But if they do help to feed and
increase the child, they cannot conceive unless they do run: Aristotle
excellently unties this knot; Hist. Animal.
Women (says he) conceive naturally after their terms are over, and they that
want their terms are commonly barren: Yet it may be that some may conceive that
have them not, namely as many as have so much humor collected in their wombs,
as uses to remain with those that are purged. For some have the humor
remaining in the womb, but not so much as to break forth and run out, yet
enough to feed the child. For many when the courses run do conceive, but they
cannot conceive afterward, for their Matrix presently after purgation closes,
and the places are no longer open. De vul. se.
Galen clearly explains the same in these words. The vessels of the Matrix that
penetrate into the inmost part, from whence flow the terms, when the woman is
about to conceive open their orifices; But the time of conception is when the
terms begin, or at least end. For though the rest of the time of purging these
orifices are open, yet the woman can by no means conceive, because the seed
cannot stay in the womb, but is washed away by the blood that runs in so
plentifully. But when the terms end or begin, the orifices are open, and the
menstrual blood runs not by streams, but gently forth, by little and little, as
by a dewy humor sweating in, whereby the Matrix is moistened; whence it is that
the seed sticks to the roughness of the womb, and nourishment enough follows
by the dropping of blood that flows thither For before the Terms flow,
conception cannot be made, because the nourishment is wanting, nor does the
seed stick fast; for at that time the vessels being shut, the matrix is smooth,
and the seed by reason of smoothness like glass polished, runs away, and
cannot stick and unite; for roughed things are fitter than smooth things to
sodder together.

Why Whores conceive not.
Hence it is, that whores by frequent lying with men do not conceive. To which
appertains that sentence of Hippocrates; Those that have moist wombs do not
conceive, L. 5. Aphor. 62.
for the seed is drowned in these as corn is in wet grounds. Likewise they that
have overdry matrixes are unfit to bear children; for it is necessary, that the
parts should be wet with the dropping of the menstrua. I do not now discuss
the matter, what strong arguments they insist upon who think the terms not
needful to nourish the Child. Let them hold their opinion; but I can never
believe that this humor is unprofitable, and does not serve toward the Child's
generation. For since all women that are in perfect health have their courses
at set times, what can we think but that this humor runs forth for some end,
and is not venomous, unless it stay beyond Natures time in the body, or it be
restrained by some disease or accident. So in plethorick bodies, that is,
Continual Fevers.
such as are full of humors, pure blood if it be not ventilated corrupts, and
causes a putrid fever, and other next to contagious diseases, as the small Pox
and Measels; A Simile from houses shut up.
so we see houses long shut and not cleansed by the wind, to grow musty, and
smell filthily. Since therefore the terms are an excretion of superfluous
blood, which the weakness of that sex can neither concoct by heat, nor
discuss by exercise, it must needs break forth by the Moons urging of it at a
set time; and by the running out thereof the body is cleansed; and if it chance
to be stopped longer; it grows venomous by corrupting. But it is not so in
Nurses, or women with child: What menstrua are venomous.
for it is a strong argument, because that humor is useful in its time, and
fit to nourish the Child; but that is not so, that by long stay corrupts in the
body: But because after conception it drops from the veins into the womb, and
feeds the Child all the time the Woman is great with child, if the womb should
lie open, or the terms any way run from it, the Child cannot live, or would
grow very weak.

CHAP. XI.
The Soul comes not from the Parents Seed, but is infused by God, and can
neither dye nor corrupt, what day of Childbearing it is infused.
How the mind raises it self toward God.
THe Soul of Man is by no means more invited to love God, nor can know it self
better, than by searching into it self, and when it does narrowly consider the
excellency of its own mind. For so it comes to pass, that a man lifts up his
mind toward God, and comes to know him, and despising all filthy vice,
bethinks himself, Man is Gods Image.
that he has fellowship with the Divine Nature. And truly it is not idly to be
passed over, that man has the breath of life from God, and is made after Gods
Image. The dignity and prerogative of which gift let no man think to consist in
the outward form of the body, but in the internal part, that is, the rational
Soul of man; which since it is an heavenly spirit and incorporeal substance,
taken from the pattern of the divine mind, this is it that makes a man excel
other creatures, because he is like God, and partakes of the divine essence.
But because God made the body of Earth, it is mortal, and endures but for a
time; but the Soul that God breathed from himself is immortal and
incorruptible. For since Gods essence is eternal, and the Soul of Man proceeded
from it, it must needs be eternal and immortal, as its original is. And though
the forces of the soul are much weakened, and do not so exactly represent the
Makers Image, yet it is not quite lost, for the wound the Devil gave it is
cured by our Saviors mercy, and his munificence and virtue has restored that
which was foully defaced by the fall of our first Parents. God the restorer of
decayed Nature.
If any man would make trial of this Divine gift, and see the Excellency
thereof, let him descend into himself, and search diligently into his own mind;
he shall be sure to find there admirable gifts, and excellent ornaments in
abundance, The Gifts and Ornaments of the Soul.
with which every ones mind is richly endowed; as Reason, Understanding,
Judgment, true choice, agility of Wit, Memory, and many more, that absolutely
prove the Soul to be more admirable, than that we should think it to be
corporeal or subject to corruption. The force and excellency of the Mind.
This only enliveneth and rules the body, and instructs it with various
actions, exercising it with many offices. Whence it is, that from the
multiplicity of Effects it has diverse appellations: For as Augustine says, De
Spir. et anim. c. 35.
when it enliveneth the body it is called the Soul; when it gives it knowledge
and Judgment, the Mind; when it recalls things past, Memory; whilst it
discourses and discerns, Reason; whilst it contemplates, the Spirit;
whilst it is in the sensitive parts, Seat of the Mind.
All these are the offices of the Soul, whereby it declares its power, and
performs its actions. This is placed in the highest part of the body, and next
to Heaven, pouring forth effectually its forces on the parts of the body. It is
not drowned in the blood, it comes not ex traduce from our Parents, or from the
seminal faculty, but it is free from all gross matter, and all corporeal
corruption, and being new created by God, The Mind and Soul are incorporeal.
is infused into the body newly made, not borrowed and fetched from some other
place, as the Pythagorean Philosophers maintain in their absurd transmigration
of Souls, holding, Transmigration of Souls is absurd.
that when one man dies his soul goes into another body, not only of men, but
sometimes of beasts. Ovid in his 15. Metamorphos. has thus rendered it: Souls
cannot dye; when they their bodies leave,
Then other Bodies do the same receave;
All things are changed, but nothing quite decays,
Nature is flitting, one state never stays.
Souls wander here and there, from Beasts to Men,
They come, and then to beasts return again.
Hence these superstitious Philosophers forbad the eating of flesh, thinking it
abominable to taste the flesh of any creature, lest one might cnance to eat his
Grandfather in a calf, Tertullian his witty Sarcasm.
as Tertullian very facetiously derides them. Christians must reject such
opinions; for Orthodox Divines conclude for certain, that the Soul is given to
every Infant, and infused into it, when the Child is perfect in all parts of
the body, When the reasonable Soul comes into Man.
which happens about the 45. day commonly after conception, especially for
males that are like to come forth to see the light in 9. months. But females
that are of a weaker constitution, receive not their Souls till about the 50
day. And though this day cannot be certainly set down, yet Hippocrates has
exactly reckoned it, at what time the Child has its perfect form, when it
begins to move, and when it shall be born. For in his Book of the Nature of the
Infant, If a Male (says he) be perfect on the 30 day, he will move on the 60
day, and he will be born in the seventh month: But if he be perfectly formed
on the 35 day, he will move on the 70 day, and begin to come forth in the
eighth month: But if he be perfectly formed on the 45 day, he moves the 90
day, and is. born in nine months. Out of which passing of days and months it
appears clearly, that the day of forming being doubled, makes up the day of
moving; and the day of moving, 3. times reckoned, makes up the time of being
born. For example, where 35 perfects' the form, if you double that, it will
make 70, the day of motion; and that, 3. times taken, makes 206 days or 7.
months, giving every month 30 days, so you must consider of the rest. But a
Female is made perfect in longer time than a Male, A female is perfect later
than a male.
and the mother goes longer of a girl, so that there is some difference in the
account. For a female formed on the 30 day, moves not till the 70 day, and is
born in the seventh month. When she is formed on the 40 day, she moves on the
80 day, and is born in the eighth month. But if she be perfectly formed on the
45 day, she moves on the 90 day, and is born in the ninth month. But she that
is formed on the 50 day, moves on the 100 day, and is born in the tenth month.
I have spoke the more largely hereof whereby every man may understand that the
reasonable soul is then infused, when the child has its perfect form, and is
exactly distinguished in his lineaments. For the soul is not present in the
first Month the child begins to be formed, but the faculty of the Matrix, and
the force of the seed perform that work very cunningly, and by degrees
distinguish the parts, and make the form perfect. For the first six days the
seed lies like an Egg, The rudiments of Man's form.
and represents Creme or Milk, and thin fibers woven like cobwebs are produced,
the nine days following, the Navel veins and the Cups, do administer blood and
spirit, from whence are framed the organicall parts, and such as serve for
nutrition, as the Liver, Heart, Spleen, Lungs, brain, which from the first
moment of Conception are perfected the eighteenth day: then till the forty
fourth day the other parts are perfected, and the child begins to live and
feel, though it move not being weak, or it moves so weakly that the Mother
cannot perceive it. At this time the rational soul is thought to enter, and to
add force to the natural faculties, and to perfect the whole work which
Augustine proves by the testimony of Moses. Quaest. 32. Exodus 20.
If anyone (says he) strike a woman great with child, and she miscarry, if the
child were formed, he shall pay life for life, but if the child were not alive,
he shall pay a sum of money for it. Whereby he proves that the soul is not in
the child, nor can it be called Man, unless all the members be perfected, that
it have the perfect form of a man. Since therefore it is infused into the body
made, no man may think it comes in with the seed. For if the rational immortal
Soul were in the seed, or should fly out with it, many souls (says he) would
vanish with the daily running forth of the Seed.

Wherefore it is not fit to think that the Soul was propagated by Adam, or any
of our progenitors, but that God does every moment create and infuse them.
Which I think may be confirmed by this saying of our Savior; John 5.
My Father works unto this time, and I do work. Whereby he implies that the
great and good God the Father; and the Son also that is equal to him, and of
the same essence, are still working in creating and saving the souls of men,
and are busied in producing them, and of other Creatures souls also, whereby
they live and have their being. To which belongs that of the Psalmist. God
saves both man and beast, and feeds and fills them with his plenty. Psalm 35.
David's words explained.
Who being peculiarly affected toward man, he has bestowed more rare gifts on
his soul. For man is in a more excellent condition by far than the beasts are.
For God has given to man reason, and a mind which other creatures have not,
and has taught him to know his maked, and has breathed into him a divine
soul; which bounty Job confesses; He teaches us more than the beasts of the
Earth, Job 35.
he instructs us above the Fouls of the Air, whereby he shows that men
excel other creatures, and that God has given man better parts in abundance.
But imperfect births and Monsters want these singular gifts of God: For though
some of them pan^ and seem to be alive, yet they have not that from a rational
soul, but from the forming faculty, and the generative spirit, that are in the
seed and blood; An Embrio in the first Month deserves not a Man's name.
for these for the first forty days nourish the conception, and enliven it,
and form it like a man. Also the other creatures have a vital spirit, and
other powers of the soul, to live and perceive, which they have from the
faculty of the soul, and the flowing of blood, and by these they grow in the
belly, and receive life. For which that of Leviticus may be alleged; Levit.
c. 17.
For the life of every Creature is in the blood thereof: For the life and
spirit of every living creature is in the blood, and fed by it, as the Lamp is
by the oil. Which force of the soul, as Galen knew very well, so he
ingenuously confesses that he is ignorant what is the substance of Man's soul,
and whence it comes. But had he been learned in better Philosophy, What the
Soul is.
he would not have doubted to say that the soul is a spark of the divine mind,
and a blast of God that distinguishes man from beasts, and makes us immortal.
But that every man has a particular soul, as it is proved by many things, so
especially the vast difference between the manners, wits, judgments, opinions,
and affections of men does confirm this. So Horace writes,

So many Men, so many minds, L. 2. Ser. Satyr. 1. Pers. Sat. 5.

As shapes, so thoughts are of all kinds:
Each Man's will's his own. --
Which I think proceeds only from the diverse conditions of their souls. For
God, says David, Psalm 33.15.
has in particular fashioned the hearts and minds of all men, and has given
to every one its proper being, and a soul of its own nature. Hence Solomon
rejoices that God had given him a happy soul, and a pure body agreeing with
the manners of his soul. Many of the Ancients question in what part of the body
the soul has its seat. Philosophers say, in the middle of the heart, which the
Wiseman seems to point at, Keep thy heart with all diligence, because life
proceeds therefrom. Prove. 4.
But Physicians that have searched the works of nature more narrowly; The house
of the soul.
place the soul in the Brain, from whence all the senses and faculties of the
soul and the actions proceed. Yet the force of it is diffused through all the
parts of the body; it fosters and enlivens all the parts with heat, and gives
them force. But it does give peculiar force to the heart, the fountain of life,
Apoplectick-veins.
by the Arteries carotides, or sleepy Arteries that pats upon the throat, which
being cut, men grow barren, or if they be stopped, they become apoplectick; for
there must necessarily be some ways and passages of the veins, and Arteries,
through which the humors and spirits animal and vital may pass to and fro,
and receive native heat from the soul. For as a Parlour, though it be large,
grows hot with a good fire, and a Dining room is warmed all over with a hot
Stove; A simile from a hot fire.
so the body receives effectually the forces of the soul spread all over, and
by the help thereof performs its operations. For though the soul is said to
reside in one place, yet the force of it passes far and near, and is seen in
every part of the body, and exercises every member. So the eyes, ears,
nostrils, tongue, the joints of hands and feet are the Souls Instruments that
she uses. The parts are the Soul's Instruments.
But if the Instruments and Organs that serve the Soul be unfit or out of tune,
or hindered, they perform the operations of the Soul the more imperfectly. As we
see in fools, old men, children, and madmen, in some of them the faculties of
the Soul show themselves after a long time, and in others they are lost. A
Simile from fire raked up.
For as fire under ashes does not shine forth, and the Sun under a thick cloud
affords but little light; so the Soul drowned in moist or faulty matter is
darkened, and reason is overclouded by it.

The Soul in Children is imperfect by reason of the Organs.
And though reason shines less in Children than in grown people, yet no man
must think that the Soul is an Infant, and that it grows by degrees, for then
it should decrease again and grow old. For the Soul has its force and
endowments from the first being of it, for the substance of it can receive no
loss; but the unfitness of the Instrument and Organ makes the difference,
that it cannot so well perform all her functions and offices, of which I
purpose to speak more at large in the next Chapter, whereby the faculties of
the Soul and Body may appear more fully, and that every one may know how they
agree and are affected mutually with diseases.

CHAP. XII.
The Soul though it be incorporeal, not made of matter, or Elements, yet is it
subject to passions and perturbations, and such affections as redound upon the
Body.
SInce the Soul performs her functions by the body, and carries that house
about with her, A Simile from a Snail and her shell.
as a Snail does her shell, it falls out most commonly, that when the body is
affected, the Soul is affected also, not with a primary passion, as some
believe, but only secondarily by reason of company; for so great is the
sympathy and affinity between them, that some faults of the body fall upon the
Mind, and some of the Mind upon the body. For being that the Soul uses the
Organs of the body, which are many ways oft-times affected with ill humors or
perverted, it falls out, that the Instruments being hurt or hindered, the Soul
cannot perform her actions as she should.

So the Body hurt does ill affect the Mind, Hor. sermon. l. 2.

And presses down the Soul, as often we find.
The wise Hebrew who saw that before Horace, says, That the corruptible body
presses down the Soul, Sap. 9.
and overcomes the Mind that meditates on many things. And though the substance
of the Soul is thought to contract no stain or fault from the body; yet as a
thick cloud darkneth the Sun beams, A Simile from the Suns light.
and as the eye by looking through a glass of diverse, colors, sees things
otherwise than they are, as red, yellow, green, blue; A Similitude from
Spectacles of diverse colors.
so intem perance of the body shadows and darkens the light of reason and the
Mind, and causes the actions of the Soul to be worse performed. So mad and
doting and drunken people think they see two objects, when there is but one. So
melancholique people imagine strange things, Humors that offend the Mind.
and invent dreams; choleric people are rash and strangely angry, when the
brain is oppressed with the smoke of hurtful vapors. And besides many small
inconveniences formidable diseases do confirm what hurt comes to the Mind from
the humors of the body, as the Apoplex, Lethargy, Palsy, Convulsions,
Madness, Frenzy, Epilepsie, all which do so forcibly offend the forces of
the Body and Soul, that a Man is quite besides himself; and his mind is
altogether overwhelmed. Also if the Mind be held with any hurtful matter, and
be given to hatred, anger, jealousy, aemulation, envy, or detraction, it
brings the body to the same temper, and poisons it with the like mischief. To
say nothing of the other Passions of the Mind, whose weak cogitations trouble
our rest, and disturb our sleep. For there is nothing, says Fabius, so
employed, L. 1. c. 1.
so various and unquiet and torn with so many cogitations as an ill mind, so
that it has no leisure to take care of health, or of any honest employments.
For neither sleep, that is most pleasing to those that are weary, nor speech
that is a Physician to a sick mind, An ill mind unquiet.
nor meat, nor drink that nourish the body, are sweet unto it; what quietness
of mind can they have? what content or constancy in their cogitations?

They that a guilty Mind torments within, Juven. Sat. 14.

A secret whip of conscience lash for sin,
Do suffer more than all the Fiends of Hell
Can do, their witness in their breasts does dwell.
To this may be referred that of Isaiah, The heart of the wicked is as the
foaming Sea, whose waves cast up mire and dirt, Chap. 17.
for they have no rest, there is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord. An ill
Mind may be merry oft-times, but is never secure.

The Countenance shows the Mind.
Now these affections of the Mind are so violent and cruel, that what the Mind
feels, appears outwardly by the countenance. And as the clearness of the mind
is seen in the eyes, color, face, and the whole habit of the body; so a deadly
mind full of vices breaks forth by the outward appearance: which Isaiah
shows, Isaiah 3.9. explained.
The show of their countenance does witness against them, that is, their face
and outward habit of their body, does argue them to be wicked, and that they
meditate nothing but deceits and mischiefs. To which agrees that saying of
Solomon, The fools eyes wander every way. Eccle. 8. Prove. 27.
In the face of the wise wisdom shines: for the countenance of a man is a
certain sign of his mind, and brings forth what lies secretly within. So
Catiline's pale face, says Tully, filthy eyes, sometimes quick, sometimes slow
gate, did clearly bewray his wicked heart: he had an impure mind, hateful to
God and Man, that could be quieted with nothing, his conscience did so wound
him with fear and restlesnesse. There is never so small a fault of the Mind,
but will appear somewhat in the outward lineaments of the body. For hatred,
anger, fear, sorrow, love, envy, treason, a desire to rob and steal, will
presently be seen in the face. Diogenes his opinion of a pale young man.
Diogenes seeing a pale wan-faced young Man, said he was either in love, or was
malicious: For envious persons are vexed with the good success of other men,
wax lean, and their marrow and bones corrupt within them. When he saw another
that was pale with love, Prove. 14.
said, He was dead in his own body, Lovers are pale.
and living in another. All which confirm, that vices go and come from one
part to another, and that one partakes of the others hurt, and that they
mutually suffer one the others ill.

In prolog. de virtu. Christi.
But Cyprian excuses the body, and will have no fault laid upon that. For he
says, All vices in Man grow up in the Soul, for that only lives, feels, and
moves. The body is the souls instrument.
But the Soul (as he maintains) so uses the body, as the Smith uses a Hammer
or an Anvil, wherein it forgeth all the Idols of obscenenesse and filthiness,
and makes all Images of ill desires. The body is driven by the soul to act.
For (says he) the flesh dictates no sins, nor invents any mischiefs, nor does
it frame thoughts, or dispose of what must be done, but the body is the Soul's
shop, and what the Soul affects, it performs by the body. But where it is said,
that the flesh contends against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
he thinks it spoken figuratively; because all that contention is of the Mind
against it self, striving with its own will. For the Mind, being drunk with the
venom of its own desire, applies the body in acting such contumelies, and so
they jointly sink down into deadly pleasures, and fall asleep in them. Gal. 5.
Yet, though Cyprian speak very wittily, herein I think it fitter to believe
St. Paul, who faith that the weight of the body presses down the soul, and
hinders the good endeavors of it: For the spirit does lust against the flesh,
and the flesh against the spirit; they are his own words; and these two are
enemies, so that a man cannot do what he would. For the earthly mansion is a
burden to the soul, and stops the mind from doing what it intends. A Simile
from a restive horse.
And as a restive horse will not endure his rider, and labors to throw him
off; so the body strives against the mind that spurs the body on to noble
actions, and hinders it, and by an imbred wickedness this slave is always
disobedient to its ruler, and will not be drawn on by it. Math. 21.
Which Christ inculcates to the Apostles when they were drowsy, saying, The
spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. For the flesh is deaf when the spirit
directs it, and admonishes it, and is unwilling to hearken to it. As a man
going a Journey, A Simile from a loaded Porter.
goes on merrily to the place he intends, but if he be overloaded, he goes on
more heavily, and against his will, is longer on his way, before he can come to
his journeys end; so the soul oppressed with the burden of the body, goes on
very heavily, and with great difficulty attains the end it aims at. Wherefore
let no man think that the body is wholly idle, but that the natural powers and
faculties of the body, and the humors in it, either hurt or help the actions
of the soul; and that they yield mutual aid unto the other. For in vain and
undeservedly should the body partake of eternal pain or joy with the body, if
it were not in many things a companion and helper with it. Let the body be the
vessel and house of the soul, let it be the receptacle, shop, organ, or place
for it to reside in, yet it contracts some smack from it, A Simile from a Cask
that is tainted.
as good Wine from a fusty Cask. But if all that belongs to Man, and all his
functions must be attributed to the soul, it is necessary that it be subject to
passions, The Soul subject to passions.
and that the body should not be blamed at all, or but very little. Augustine
strives by such Arguments to prove that the soul is not free from passions:
Whatsoever is affected with grief, fear, sorrow, indignation, desire of revenge
is passible; the soul when it cannot have what it desires, is grieved, etc.
Therefore the soul is subject to passions.

He seems to me to argue very wittily. For if the soul bound to the body were
free of all grief or passions, it could feel no pain or torments in hell. But
that is not so, Luke 16.
as the History of the rich glutton in the Gospel confirms, who when he was in
torments, desired to have his burning tongue cooled with a drop of water, to
ease his torments; Which is spoken figuratively and parabolically, that no man
may think that incorporeal substances have use of corporeal organs. For the
Scripture applies it self to man's capacity, Gods parts in Scripture are
figurative. How parts are ascribed to GOD.
with proper words fetched from the likeness of things that are, and so
declares Gods love to those that are good, and his revenge against the wicked.
By the like figure, in speech, the Bible sets forth gods anger, zeal, sorrow,
repentance, the face, eyes, countenance, hands, arms of God, for the weakness
of man's mind could not any other ways apprehend the mighty force and power of
God, unless they were delivered to us in such a common expression. Since
therefore it is clear from Scripture, that the fouls of men, freed from their
bodies, and ordained for torments, are tormented, how can it be that being in
the bodies, and hindered by their union with them, they should not suffer also?
For I am persuaded that souls, as coming from heaven cannot be annihilated or
feel corruption; but that they are cruelly tormented, and feel the pricks and
wounds of a biting conscience: which Christ shows as Esaias did, their worn
dies not, and their fire is not quenched. Chapter 66. Mark 9. A Simile From rotten
Wood.
For as rottenness and worms corrupt the hardest wood, and as fire consumes
all it meets with, so the pricks of a guilty mind wound the soul, and internal
furies burn and torment it. When the mind burns with covetousness, is kindled
with revenge, is inflamed with anger, consumes with envy, burns in love, is
contracted with grief, Rackings of the mind are worse than of the body.
I think there is no man but is ready to do or suffer any thing, than to suffer
such rackings in his very soul, and to be so grievously tormented at the very
heart. The Tortures of the soul are far more intolerable then the pains of the
body. Which by a figure of Interrogation, that he might strike deeper into the
mind, Persius thus set forth.

Did ere the Bull of Brass so fiercely roar,
Or the Sword hanging down, tormented more
The heart of Damocles?
Wherefore the soul is afflicted an other way, by feeling and touching, than
the body is when it is tormented by whipping and scourging, whilst it is
wounded, or racked, or burnt. For the rational soul being a spirit incorporeal,
has inward tortures, griefs, fears, jealousies, envies, hatred, indignation,
and rackings of conscience. Which affections, are more properly perturbations,
if they stay longer in the mind, and cannot be discussed by reason, nor by
divine help, they not only afflict the mind most cruelly, but the body also.
Wherefore they are both subject to one the others laws, and bound mutually
together. Yet the soul has this prerogative, for her honor and dignity, The
soul does many things without the body.
that she does many things of her self, but the body can do nothing without her
direction.

Wherefore the soul does two ways perfect her faculties; some of them by
organs, some without them, and with no help of the body. So, what actions are
done by reason and understanding, and judgment of the mind are the offices of
the soul alone; But manual actions cannot be done without the Ministry of the
body. For a man conceives in his mind the arts of Architecture, plaistring,
painting, and other arts useful for man, but he works them with his hands,
When the soul uses the help of the body.
and uses other organs of the body. But when the soul is bent on the
contemplation of things, when it remembers things past, and meditates of
things to come, and joins things present with them, when it discourses and
searches out hidden things, when it is ravished, and carried aloft, as Paul
was, is made partaker of hidden mysteries, 2 Cor. 12.
it uses its imbred force, received from God, and needs no bodily help,
unless it would act something thereby. For then the body assists the soul as a
sure undivided partner, and colleague, and by the help thereof the soul does her
actions. Thoughts of the mind weaken the body.
But if the thoughts be overlong, and too intent upon any business, it falls
out that the body for want of the souls help, faints, and dies. Which we may
observe in them that over study themselves at unseasonable times, and are too
much given to their books, their body wastes by degrees, and their vital forces
decay. Whosoever therefore thinks that the mind is moved with no passions, but
that the mind and soul are entire, and is only affected by reason of the
object, and the organ, do not seem to me to speak what agrees with the truth.
Christ's fear shows he was a Man.
For what is the meaning of that Agony and perplexity our Savior endured when
he conceived in his mind the horridness of the punishment he should undergo,
and the great ingratitude and forgetfulness of Man for his rich bounty: by his
humane frailty, a while before his death he brake forth into this speech, Math.
16.
My Soul is sorrowful unto death; and he prays against it unto his Father. And
though the Soldiers insolence did not as yet lay hold of him, or insult over
him; yet his whole mind and thoughts were bent upon the danger that was at
hand, and he was stricken with so much terror and horror, Christ felt pains
in his Soul and body.
that he sweat drops of blood, that ran down his whole body in abundance, so
that the bitterness of the pain was communicated to both parts, and from his
Soul passed upon his body. And let no man think that in this great astonishment
and sufferings, his vital and vegitable soul endured tortures, and his natural
spirits only suffered, but the best part of man was in conflict, and upon the
soul lay the whole force of the mischief. Yet the soul grew mindful of her
first original, and recollects her self, and being supported by heavenly aid,
she without fear manfully went through all the dangers by divine assistance
that relieved her.

Mary tormented with grief.
With these passions also was the Mind of the blessed Virgin many ways
troubled. For her spirit and soul was sometimes full of joy, then full of
sorrow; that, when the Angel brought the Message of her conception and
wonderful childbearing, when the Shepherds came to see what was done, and the
wisemen adored; but, this, was foretold by Simeon, and she found it to be true
when her Son was crucified.

I could reckon up a large Catalogue of those that being in great calamities
were sorely wounded in their souls. The multitude of Prophets will serve for
examples, as Helias, Helizeus, The Prophets exposed to calamities.
David, Hieremias, Moses, Esaias, Jonas, Zacharias, and besides some thousands
of Martyrs, that indefatigable maintainer of our Faith, St. Paul, who all
served God, the rewarder of their pains, faithfully, who besides the sufferings
of their bodies, and their losses and straights they sustained, had their Souls
galled with most bitter pangs. Whosoever shall consider with himself what
griefs seized upon their souls, what tortures of mind they endured, what
trembling: when as they were driven out of their Countries, wanting the comfort
of their friends and kindred, exposed to scorns, whippings, reproaches,
afflicted, pressed down, trod under feet, proscribed, and they were forced to
pass through deserts where no men could follow them, to escape the fury of
their Enemies, and to save their lives. The Soul though into poreal is tossed
with pains.
But if the Soul that distinguishes men from beasts, be free from all
passions, and can neither joy nor grieve, what is the meaning of these
sorrowful speeches, Why art thou troubled, O my Soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? my Soul fainted within me, my Mind refused comfort.
Again, when he is refreshed, and finds Gods favor, Enter my Soul into thy
rest, for the Lord has done good unto thee; Praise the Lord, O my soul, and
all that is within me, praise his holy Name. My soul longed after thee, thy
right hand has sustained me. Infinite more Examples might be alleged, whereby
I think the natural faculties of the Soul only are not to be understood, and
the powers that shall quickly dye, but the reasonable Soul, which partakes of a
Divine Nature, from which all actions of the body proceed, and all the
functions are perfected. In this part God has set Synteresis, that is, Romans 1.
What Synteresis is.
the love and knowledge of keeping and performing the Law of Nature, and the
difference of virtues and vices: which force as Paul says, effects this in the
minds of those that are strangers from God, that by the light of Nature they
embrace virtue, and abhor vice. For that part of the Soul wherein the Image of
God shines forth, Instinct of Nature.
and the integrity of Nature appears, detests and condemns what is ill done,
and strives to keep her self clear from wickedness. Though this force of
Nature be somewhat weakened, that what the Mind conceives, the Will refuses
readily and faithfully to perform. What Conscience can do in the Mind.
Akin to this is Conscience, which accuses and condemns with in the mind of
Man that is pricked by God; and by terror upon the remembrance of past sins, a
man falls to detest his former life, and purposing to amend, repents of what he
has done. So, revenging-Conscience admonishes a man, setting his sins long
past before his eyes; whence we may easily prove, that the Soul is exposed to
passions, and is disquieted by them. For she perceives sweet and bitter, she is
enlarged and rejoices in prosperity, and is grieved with adversity. And not
only Men, but Angels have their affections, after a sort; for they are
sorrowful for Man's miseries and punishments when they forsake good ways;
Esaias 33. Evil Angels hurtful to men.
but they rejoice when wicked men repent. On the contrary, the wicked Angels
are offended with men, and scandalize them, and follow them with mortal hatred;
and if Passions fall upon Angelical spirits, how should Man be free from them?

CHAP. XIII.
That the Souls of Men are not equal in all things, nor of the same condition
and dignity, but one is better than another.
THough I mentioned some things a little before that concern this Argument, and
that may establish this Paradox, yet I believe it will be worth my Labor, if I
enlarge this in a particular treaty. Many are of that opinion, that the Souls
of Men are of the same worth and dignity, Differente in Souls.
and that there is no odds between the Soul of a wise man and good; and of a
fool, or wicked man; and that the organs of the body only hinder the actions,
and the faculties of the Soul are ill performed by reason thereof. But I, out
of no desire of contention or contradiction, am persuaded that it is otherwise.
For though I know that the mind grows dull by a sharp disease, or by a blow on
the head, by some fall or bruise, and that a man may so forget all things; yet
it follows not, that all Souls are equal, and that all men had Souls alike to
judge or reason with. For every man's Soul, be it never so well adorned, and the
like pains be taken to make it skillful in Arts and Sciences, cannot attain to
the same Excellency, nor is alike capable of the same Learning and Knowledge,
that another man's Soul is. For some are not at all disposed to learn Arts, and
it is against nature to bend their minds that way. For as Torches and Lights,
some shine more than others do, and give more light: and as some burning
matters, A Simile from lighted Torches.
burn fiercer than others do; so the Souls of men are of a different light, and
the minds of men are far distant in gifts one from the other. And as Angels
differ in order, dignity, office, Ministry, one from the other, Angels are of
different excellencies.
as Seraphims, Cherubins, Thrones, Powers, Virtues, Archangels, and the whole
Hierarchy of Angels demonstrate; so I see that there may be a difference set
between men's Souls: They all agree in this, that they dwell in a mortal body,
that has the shape of a man, though some look more like savage beasts, and are
next unto them: That all men are given to procreation; that the same Laws of
Nature should govern them all; That the same force of reason urges them; That
the essence of their Soul, and form of their substance is created by God; That
they are all immortal, and all endowed with one spirit. But because the force
of the Divine Nature does not so strongly show it self in all, nor are all
equally capable of his gift, Disparity of Souls.
and some make themselves unworthy of so great a Benefit, it comes to pass,
that the Souls produce their actions by another force and effect; nor are they
in their present condition, state, dignity, and order, equal; nor shall they be
equal in glory in ^he next life. For so the Prophet Daniel clears this point,
Chap. 12. As many as sleep in the dust shall awake, some to life eternal, some
to disgrace and punishment and condemnation. And they that are learned shall
shine as the Firmament, and they that have taught many righteousness, shall
shine as Stars for ever and ever. I find St. Paul observed the same difference
between incorporeal substances, taking a similitude from the Stars. For as one
Star is brighter than another, and their bodies are very diverse, so great is
the difference in the souls of men, and in the resurrection one Soul shall be
far more glorious than another. 2. de Anima.
But God (as Gregory Nyssen testifies) has appointed, according to the several
species of Animals, that their Souls should be different one from another, and
for every body he has assigned a convenient soul. So to Bruit beasts God has
not given a reasonable understanding, but natural industry, whereby they shun
all snares and dangers. Wherefore every kind of Animals is moved by the same
Inclination. For every Hare is fearful, every dog smells well, Bruits are
governed by Nature, not by Reason.
and will hunt after wild Beasts, all Foxes are crafty, all Wolves cruel and
greedy of their prey. Every Ape will imitate men's manners. But this is not so
in Man; For there are infinite reasons and ways of men's Actions; nor are all
men inclined to one operation, or to one thing, as Bruits are that are ruled by
nature only, and their actions tend all one way. But the act of reason which
belongs only to man, is diverse in diverse men; and as the condition of their
soul is different, so are their actions. Hence arise so many sundry opinions in
men. As therefore, St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 12.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal; and
men have several offices appointed to them, which God dristributes to every one
as he pleases, dividing to every man his Spirit as he will; so every man has
his own proper soul made by the same God, but not of the same dignity, not
endowed with the same understanding of things, yet so as it is capable both of
vice and virtue, and by its imbred force it may embrace the best things; and
avoid what is evil, though she can do all but weakly where she wants Divine
assistance: The Mind is a white paper.
wherefore methinks that comparison of Aristotle is not absurd, who makes the
mind of Man like a clean table, whereon are no pictures drawn, but yet is fit
to receive any whatsoever, be they Monsters of Vices, or Images of Virtue. To
this belongs that comparison of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2. A Simile from large Houses.
As in great Houses there are vessels, not only of gold and silver, but of
wood and earth, whereof some are for honorable, others for inferior uses; So
God has sent many differences of bodies and souls of men upon this Stage of
the world, and has provided them with diversity of persons and ornaments, yet
not without hope of attaining a more excellent gift. For care and endeavors
are taken from no man, whereby they may contend after that which is best, and
attain felicity; but God helps those that strive, and drives them on when they
faint in their industry. Let no man accuse God.
So he that is wicked by his own wickedness, may purge himself, and become a
vessel of honor fit for the Masters use. For the great an^ good God has
assigned to every one a particular habit of body, and a soul agreeing to his
Nature, which yet are subject to be altered many ways. For sometimes a man
falls off, and degenerates from his Integrity and excellency; whether you
consider his Soul or his body; and forgetting his original, he wallowes in the
mud of vices. But sometimes being secretly prompted by God, he breaks out from
the sins he was entangled with, and endeavors to do that which is good and
honest in the sight of God and Men. We may see examples hereof in Saul and the
prodigal Child. Luke ^5.
Every man therefore has his own mind, and his own soul, but by Gods donation
they have several gifts and endowments, and the Divine Spirit does not equally
fill every mind. All receive of his plentiful fountain, but some more, What is
meant by the distributing of the pounds and talents. Matthew. 25.
some less; as we may understand by the distributing of the Talents, which may
sharpen and help our weak Industry in the way to Heaven, and set us forward,
and command us to increase and augment the gifts of God. For one had 5.
Talents, another but two, and a third but one Talent given him, every one
according as was fit for him, by God who thought it best so to do, and would in
his due time call every man to give an account of the profit he had gained
thereby. 2 Timothy 1.
So Paul warns Timothy and every one by him, that they take care of their
charge, that they stir up the gift of God that is within them, A Simile from
fire under ashes.
as fire under ashes ready to go out, that they shake off sluggishnesse, and
endeavor to perform what is committed to them. For God requires of every man
to better what he has bestowed upon them, that he restore him his talent with
increase. And because he will not have us idle, nor faint in our Labor, but to
watch always, and indefatigably to employ our selves to advantage, Luke 19.
Occupy (says he) till I come; Which when Paul an instrument of Election did
diligently teach unto others, he studied by all means to do that, Evangelical
Merchandising.
so that he was more zealous in his Embassage than the rest of the Apostles,
and more industrious in doing his office. As therefore in Jewels, Animals,
Plants, Stars, there is a difference, A Simile from the nature of things.
one flower is sweeter then another, one Jewel sparkleth more then another; so
it is in the Souls of men, which being enriched with peculiar forces and
faculties, perform different effects and operations. For as the Apostle St.
Paul says, A Simile from the Stars and Seed. 1 Cor. 15.
every seed has its imbred force, and there is one flesh of beasts, another of
Men, and there is one glory of celestial bodies, and another glory of earthly
bodies; one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another of the
Stars; so one man's body is of better and more generous temper than another is;
Also one soul both in this life, and in the Resurrection, as the lot and
deserts of it are, (which every one must ascribe to God, and have no opinion or
confidence in themselves) is more worthy and more glorious than another.

There is a great disproportion between the souls of good and wicked men both
in this world and in the world to come, Psalm 1.
and their condition is ^^ch different; for the wicked shall not stand amongst
the just, but shall be scattered as chaff and dust before the wind. Wherefore
St. Paul from the nature of things, A Simile from sweet smells. 2 Cor. 2.
sets many things before our eyes, by looking into which the secrets of God are
made manifest to us. So in the business of Christ he makes his comparison with
the sweet and fragrant smells of natural things: for as the smell and fragrancy
of plants is known by the effects, and they either refresh or offend the heart;
so that soul that sends forth a sweet odor, or stinking smell, either pleases
or displeases Christ. Aeneid. 6.


All Souls are spritefull, and from Heaven come.

A Similitude from burning things.
But as one fire is hotter then another, and burns hotter as the nature of the
fuel is, for in Oil, Pitch, Brimstone, Bitumen, Naphtha (which men call oil of
Peter) it burns more vehemently. So the Soul for the faculty and force of it,
and for the powers it has received, works upon the body, and is either more
active or remiss in performing its actions; yet so that the temper and mixture
of the body, its constitution and organs are subservient to the Soul. The same
reason serves in evil Angels, Difference of ill spirits. Math. 11.
whereof one does man more hurt then another does. So in the Gospel, Beelzebub
is called the Prince of the Devils, one that is powerful to do mischief. So the
Gospel distinguishes the evil angels by their desire of doing mischief, and
their malignity. For that Devil that had but small force to torment the mind of
man, gets to himself seven others that were worse, and they join together and
possess the man, so that there is no hopes left of a better life, or of
repentance. A Simile from Metals.
And if we may compare corporeal with incorporeal things: as lead, Tin, Copper,
Silver, Gold, Brass, and all metals have their Excrements, and will rust and
Canker; and as untild fields grow over with bushes and brambles, and cockle and
unlucky darnel grow up in them, Esaias 1. A Simile from untilled fields.
so the substance of the Soul contracts many vices, and being adorned she
shines with virtues, but neglected is obscured with the rubbish of vice. Yet
there is no cause why any man should speak or murmur against his maker, Let all
men submit to God. Romans 2.
as that idle companion that hid his Talent in the ground, since the virtue of
our savior extends to all men, and God has set marks of his divinity in every
man, so that the Law of God is written in the heart of the Gentiles also that
know not God, and by that law they are brought to the knowledge of him, and
their conscience testifies, and reason teaches them what to follow, and what
to shun, and what great difference there is, between what is honest, and what
is dishonest. Natures law is imprinted in all men.
Let therefore every man be careful to live so, that this gift may not seem
ill bestowed upon him, and not to murmur against God, by whose will all things
are governed, that his Soul is not so good as another man's; but let him adorn
that Soul he has, A Simile from tilling of grounds.
and till it as he would a barren field, and soil it with hearing the word of
God, that will prepare it; Let him not be wanting to his weak endeavors, and
his will that is ready. And there is nothing better for the Soul than to
meditate continually on Gods word. An exhortation to embrace the Scriptures.
For this heals our sores, drives (...) our vices, comforts our hearts,
enlightens our dark minds. There is no remedy more effectual, nor more sudden
to cure our sick souls; there is no wound so venomous, and deadly, that the
Scriptures cannot cure.

Art thou tormented with a greedy mind?
Words for to heal this sore thou wilt easily find. Horal. l. 1. Epist.

Do thou love praises, and to be commended?
By reading Books this fault may be mended.
Froward, fond, angry, Drunkard, slothful, may,
If they take heed be cured all this way.
Philosophy can do all these things, but not that Philosophy Horace dreamt of,
The profit of Gods word.
but heavenly Philosophy, which restores nature that is disjoynted and out of
frame to her former integrity, which stirs up in us confidence toward God, and
reconciles God and Man, which procures quietness and constancy in our minds,
and there is nothing more to be desired in the troublesome Ocean of this life.
To which that of Paul may be applied, than whom there was no man better skilled
in this School. Every Scripture is inspired by God, 2 Timothy 3.
and is profitable for learning, reproof, correction, Institution, that will
make a man perfect, that the man of God may be complete and fitted for all
works of Piety.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the immortality of the Soul, and certainty of the Resurrection; Also how
that may be done; Lastly how much our minds are raised toward God from so great
a benefit, and what great confidence we may have when we die that we shall be
saved.
What the meditating of another life can do.
THere is nothing that can bring more profit, to a Man in misery, and subject to
many diseases in this mortal life, or give him more comfort against the fear of
death, than to contemplate of the felicity of a better life, and to be
certainly persuaded we shall enjoy it. Which consists in the immortality of the
Soul, In what consists man's safety.
and resurrection of the body, which is the sure ground and foundation of all
our faith; for all our labors and endeavors are in vain, and all the course
of our life, Religion, Devotion, is idle and next to deceit, if we should want
so great a blessing as this, and lose the hopes of a better life. Some stupid
people wonder at this, The condition of Man is diverse from the condition of
beasts.
who think that men and beasts have but one breath, and that the Soul dies
with the body, and when man is dead, all is ended. But these men are blind in
the very works of nature, and know not Gods power by the things he has
created, hence it is that their minds cannot conceive how the Soul can be
eternal, and never die, and that the body shall rise again, and be restored to
its integrity: But God that would have man immortal, Genes. 1.
created him after his own Image; Man is Gods Image.
And if man be made after Gods Image and likeness, he must needs be of the
same nature with his Maker, and participate of eternity. Other creatures have
not obtained so great an honor from God: ^rutes want reason.
and no prints of the divine nature appear in them, they have no Mind, Reason,
Memory, Understanding, Judgment, Arts, Sciences, or cunning in the knowledge of
things, which God has bestowed on Man abundantly. Wherefore it is a wicked
thing, to say, that is mortal and perishing, that came forth of Gods substance,
and which the Divine mind breathed into Man. As therefore God is eternal, and
free from decay, so the soul of Man, as partaking of the divine essence, Man's
soul partakes of the divine nature.
is eternal and free from all corruption.

But since God created all things for man's sake, God created only Man for
himself, and like unto him, and therefore God loved man wonderfully from the
beginning of the world, and delighted to hold familiarity, and to keep company
with man; so that for man's sake he was pleased to be united to the humane
nature, and the immortal God was inseparably joined to mortal Man; and thereby
the Divine Nature is fast with the humane Nature, God is wonderfully delighted
with Man.
and the humane Nature with the Divine. The truth of this is confirmed unto us
by Christ who is the Wisdom of the Father, Prover. 3.
who procured this blessing for us: I was with God in the beginning before any
thing was made, I was with him from eternity; Gods love toward Man.
when he made the Heavens I was there, when he compassed in the depths by a Law
I was present, when he fastened the Heavens above, and the earth beneath, I was
with him ordering all things, and was continually delighting before him,
recreating my self in the earth, and my delight was with the sons of men. Which
Love and good will of God toward Man, as St. Paul calls it, 1 Timothy 3.
has effected so much, that all things are communicated unto us by Christ;
that our condition is like to his, and we are coheirs with him: whence it is
that what is expressed in Christ, Heb. 3.
shall be expressed in Man. He is eternal, and subsists eternally, and man by
him obtains the same. He first rose and conquered death, he being the Author,
Prince and first fruits of so great a Triumph; by the virtue of him all the
rest are to be raised. Wherefore let no man be so unjust to himself, or so
ungrateful to the giver of so great a gift, that he should envy or cast off
from himself the honor of this Name. For who is so stupid that he would not
desire to keep himself from destruction, Let no man deny immortality of the
Soul.
and desire to live always rather than to sleep eternally, and without hopes
of ever coming forth, to lie hid in eternal death? I know some think this
persuasion of the immortality of the Soul to be a very plausible doctrine, but
they wholly deny that the body shall ever be raised again, or have any part in
this happiness. But these men do not exactly seek into the Nature of Man, Many
grant the Souls immortality, but few grant a resurrection.
and the reason of the making of the World; nor do ^^ey look upon him who is
the Author of this gift unto Man, and by whose virtue he has obtained the
benefits of life. For since Soul and Body joined together make a man, it must
needs be, that the whole Man, that is, the Soul should have immortality, and
the Body should rise again to participate of the same felicity. For the reason
of framing Man will never suffer, that one part shall enjoy the end it is
designed for, without the other, or that half a man, or one part should be
immortal, and blessed: wherefore it is necessary, and the reason that man was
made confirms it, that the body should rise again at length, and should be
united again to the Soul to par^ake in the same condition with it. For when God
went about to make Man; A strong Argument of the Resurrection.
Let us make (says he) Man after our own Image. In which words he did not
mention one part only, but the whole Man, Soul and Body; for both these joined
together make a man: for when these are divided a man dies, and is called a man
no longer. Wherefore Reason evinceth, that both parts shall have the same end,
either blessedness if they live well, or misery if ill.

Nor were it reasonable, that the body should fail of this hope of happiness,
The Body is in danger for the Soul.
that partakes in the miseries of this life. For sometimes for Conscience sake
the body is scourged and tortured, is grieved, and hazards its life, so that at
those faculties of the Soul that are common to man with beasts as the
vegetative and sensitive parts are beaten and rent. For in opinions, sayings,
persuasions, and Judgments, sometimes the body yields to the Soul, to its great
disadvantage, and is in all things a companion and minister unto it: wherefore
the body must suffer wrong if it should not bear a share in the same reward.
The body is the Souls organ, whereby she performs her functions and operations;
How the Body is the Souls Instrument.
but the Soul uses the animate and sensitive body, otherwise than a Smith or
Carpenter uses a Saw or a Hammer, or an Ax^; for all the parts are most fitly
distinguished for their Offices, and may be applied to many duties. A fit
comparison from the Sun and Moon.
The same difference may be made between the Soul and the Body, as there is
between the Sun and Moon. For though the Moon borrow light from the Sun, yet
she does not wholly want force other own, for she has her proper motion, and
runs her own circuit: but she borrows light from the Sun as a Looking-glass, A
Simile from polished glass.
and as Caldrons and Basins polished shine by the opposite light, but she gives
no light unless she be enlightened by the Sun, yet she is not idle, for she
holds on her monthly course, and goes her circuit without the Suns help. So
the soul affords forces to the body, yet the body is not without imbred
faculties of its own, and natural powers, the qualities of the four humors,
whence it becomes capable of all functions, and fit to perform all actions.
Eclipses of Sun and Moon compared to Soul and Body.
And as the Sun it eclipsed and hidden by the interposition of the Moon, so the
Moon is eclipsed by interposition of the Earth. The Sun when he is in the same
degree of the Ecliptic, the Moon when she is in the opposite degree. So the
Soul and Body have their failings and Eclipses; and one part oft-times either
profits or hurts the other. Since therefore there is so great union and
faithful society between these two, and so long as they keep sentinel in this
life, they mutually assist one the other, it is fit that the body should rise
again to partake of the same glory, and be admitted into the same liberty.
Consent of Soul and Body.
If any man like Thomas and Nicodemus are so dull, they cannot understand how
this shall come to pass, let him not deny Gods power, or distrust him, but let
him raise his heart and eyes unto him who is the Maker of all things, and in
the works of Creation he shall find enough to let him understand that God wants
no power, not only to restore Man again, but to do whatsoever he has
determined. Let us behold the Heavens adorned with Stars, Nature proves a
Resurrection.
and the Earth that is under it, out of which there spring so many beautiful
and pleasant flowers, so many healthful plants for Food and Physic, so various
kinds of fish in the Sea, so many kinds of Birds in the Air, so many Cartel for
meat, or to till the grounds, and Man the Lord of all these. All which were at
first made by Gods Word, The Majesty and Greatness of the Creator.
of nothing, there being no former matter to make them of, yet they continue
fast, having their vicissitudes, risings, progress and increase. Since
therefore God the Creator is so omnipotent in power, who can say he wants
power to restore the dead, who made all things of nothing? And if the Creator
made man's body of nothing without any labor: how much more easy is it for him
to raise the dead to life again; not of nothing, but from the same matter,
turned to ashes, or resolved into the Air, and scattered with the winds. A
Simile from Founders of Metals.
But as an Artificer when a vessel is broken or spoiled, makes it up again by
casting it of the same metal, and makes it better than it was: so God will in
his good time raise to life bodies dissolved into Earth, of the same form they
were, but freed from all spots and earthly errors: God is Omnipotent in what
he pleases.
Let us therefore ascribe so much honor to God, and Omnipotency, that he can
do what he please; and let no man measure Gods power by his own weakness or
ignorance, since we cannot comprehend the smallest things, 4 Esd. 4.
for they exceed our capacity. And if this worlds wonders, and the order of
Nature be not sufficient to elevate men's Minds, and no reasons will serve to
declare unto us the power of God, yet let every man look into himself, and
consider diligently the excellency of his own Mind, and then of how great power
he is that gave such gifts unto men. The Mind compared with Jewels.
Methinks man's mind is like to Jewels, which besides their pleasant aspect, and
that the eyes are delighted with them, have inward virtues, and operations that
are excellent, which lie hid, yet they are discovered by rubbing them as Amber,
Jet, the Lodestone, which being rubbed and healed, A Simile from the force of
Jewels.
draw Strawes, Flocks, Chat, Iron, and that with great force, unto them. So the
force of the soul raised and moved puts forth it self, and as fire under ashes
raked open, shines and sparkles. And though Gods power be seen in all things,
and all men may be behold it in this great work of Nature, so that the Soul of
man can never be filled and satisfied therewith, yet Gods great power shines in
nothing more, or is more eminent, than in the Soul and Mind of Man, which was
taken forth of the Divine essence. Man's Mind is God's Image.
Wherefore let no man dare to think that shall ever dye that came from Gods
essence, and is adorned with so admirable endowments. In Phaedro.
Wherefore Plato reasons well; What consists not of Elements is immortal, and
can never dye; the Soul is not made of the Elements, nor of concrete matter,
but came from God; therefore it cannot dye. Not could there be so great force
in the Souls of men, such sharpness of wit, such excellency of Learning, such
subtilty of Invention, such knowledge of things, or love or knowledge of God,
unless the Soul were separated from earthly dross, and did partake of
Divinity, and were ordained for Eternity. Which persuasion also was held by the
Ancients, Tusc. 1. Heathens believe Immortality.
who as Tully witnesses, did believe that there was a living after death, and
that man was not so extinguished by death, as to be quite lost. Which may be
understood by many things else, as also by their funeral Ceremonies. For they
had not taken so much care of the dead, nor been so extremely ceremonious in
their burials, unless they had thought that death did not abolish all, but
that there was a kind of passing and change unto a better life. Ci^. de divin.
For no man can be so rude, and so inhumane of conditions, who lifting his eyes
to Heaven, though he be ignorant what God it is that by his providence rules
all we behold, yet he will understand there is a God, by the greatness of the
World, the motion, disposition, order, profit, constancy thereof, Man is the
chief of all the rest.
who governs and directs all things. Since therefore the great and good God,
who does nothing rashly or in vain, has given Man the principality over all
the rest, it is absurd to think that man shall be annihilated and come to
nothing. Natures Maker has far better provided for Mankind, than to make that
and to provide for it, which after enduring hard labors, should dye eternally,
but he rather has showed the Haven, and safe harbor wherein man may rest,
after he has endured the sore travels of this life. Hence Paul would have all
our business and cares to be concerning heavenly matters, Colos. 3. Hebr. 2.
and that we should lift up our Minds, and meditate of heavenly things. But if
this life be the utmost bounds of our life, and it lasts no longer; there is
nothing more miserable and contemptible than Man is, and the condition between
the rich and poor were very unequal. For the rich have abundance of all things
to rejoice in here, and the poor being full of miseries, should have no comfort
after this life. Wherefore Paul reasons excellently well, 1 Cor. 15. Paul's
sound reasons to prove Immortality.
If we have hopes in Christ in this life only, we were of all men the most
miserable: and they were in a far better condition, who are strangers to
Christ, and live pleasantly, and take their ease, than Christians, who being
deluded with vain hopes, suffer themselves to be vexed, and to be the laughing
stock and refuse of the whole world. But if all that is Man, and all man's hopes
end in death, Torment of the Mind reads the Thoughts.
what is the meaning of that anxiety and torment of the mind? what makes
Conscience the revenger of wickedness? what makes fear and trembling when any
trouble arises? again, whence arises tranquillity, constancy, and security of
the mind? Are not the former the effects of those Souls that fear punishment
after this life? and these the rewards of those that hope to be comforted after
they have endured sorrow here, and to be rewarded for walking after Gods Law,
of which they had a certain hope? Whereupon Paul exhorts Timothy his disciple,
to fulfill the function of an Apostolical Employment whereunto he was to be
admitted, pronouncing confidently concerning himself, by an example borrowed
from Runners and Fencers; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, 2 Timothy 4.
I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which God the just Judge shall give unto me; and not to me
only, but to as many as believe in him, and trust in his promise. Wherefore no
man ought to cast aside this hope, or let his mind fall off from an expectation
of so great felicity. For every man's mind dictates to him the truth of this
matter, his understanding perceives it, his reason confirms it, Nature it self
speaks it. Add to this, that all men have a rational desire of Immortality, and
every man desires to preserve the memory of himself so long as he can, and
would have it continued to posterity, never to be forgotten by Age. De cognit.
verae vitae. Tusc. l. 1.
Which reason was held most forcible by Augustine and Cicero, whereby it may be
proved, that the Soul is immortal and shall never die. For this persuasion does
much put a man forward, and incite a man to virtue, and makes him endeavor to
do most noble actions, considering the reward. And though this point and many
more cannot be proved sufficiently by reason, not do divine things (as Paul
says) consist in words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.
yet their industry and endeavor is not to be disallowed, who bring sober
reasons, whereby they may root out of some men's minds that error, who despise
the testimony of Scripture, and will not believe the Immortality of the Soul,
and the Resurrection of the Body. How far we may seek into Gods secrets.
I think it not good in other things to seek too curiously into Gods Secrets;
and the Scriptures do restrain humane rashness, that would venture to search
out such things God has concealed, and to enter so deep, from whence they
cannot easily return. Job, Esdras, and chiefly Paul, have given us rules
concerning this, Romans 11.
who was gone so far, that he was forced to cry out; O the depth of the riches
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and
his ways past finding out! for who has known the mind of the Lord? or who
has been his Counselor? for by him, and through him, and to him are all
things.

Moreover that no man might suffer himself to be drawn off from this solid
foundation, on which all man's hope rests, and the strength of his salvation
turns upon it, Paul does stiffly urge and inculcate the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.
which both comprehends the immortality of the Soul, and expresses the
belief, certainty, reason, and manner of it, borrowing a similitude from the
nature of things. For Nature, the Artificer of all things, which cannot be
imitated, and that no man can exactly express or resemble the force of it, How
Men shall be raised.
does bring forth, and make many things which show Gods omnipotence in all
things, and declare his virtue and power in framing and fashioning the images
of things. And if men admire a man for some rare picture drawn by him, A simile
from painting.
or some curious piece of work, as he of Gades did, when he had ended Livy his
History: how much more reason is there to admire and adore him, who has set
such wonderful rarities before our eyes, which we can neither number, nor
understand? For that the resurrection of man's body may be proved by the
smallest things in Nature; who has not observed that when a Grasshopper is
grown old, and has cast his skin, A Simile from the nature of things.
a lively new shril insect will come forth of it, from a dying and sluggish
Caterpillar comes out a painted and flying Butterfly, from Ants a winged fly?
What does the Silkworm that weaves Silk, does it not give us to understand the
Resurrection, when as being dead it revives again?

A Phoenix is a type of the resurrection.
The Phoenix, that Lactantius writes in praise of, does it not by reviving, show
us an example of our rising again? Does not the pleasantness of the Spring,
and the acceptable return of the year, represent the Resurrection? and raise
our minds to hope for immortality? Who is not delighted to see the nature of
the Earth? Which when she has received the seed sown, and the rain has
softened it, first it most be harrowed, then it grows warm, and by the vapors
and fostering of the ground, it grows up into a green blade, which being fed by
the fibers of the roots, grows up by degrees, and lifting up a knotted stalk,
begins to be shut up in the cods, as growing nearer to be ripe, and when it
comes forth of them, it sends forth corn in full ears, which is defended from
small birds with a fence of ears. I pass over the force of all things that
grow out of the earth, for from a little kernel of a Fig, Plants renewing, show
a resurrection.
from a Grapestone, and from the smallest seeds of other plants, we see huge
Trees, and boughs, and roots, to grow: Do not sprigs, plants, roots, branches,
sciences, buds, do that which will make the Resurrection of man's body seem to
be no absurdity? Chrysostom after Tully does wonderfully enlarge upon this
admirable force of Nature, and highly commends the Earth, 1 These. 4. Hom. 7.
that is the Mother of all things. The earth next after God the Parent of
things.
For the life of all things is from the moisture of the Earth: Herbs, Trees,
all sorts of flowers, admirable in their kinds, for smell, and sight, proceed
only, and are nourished by the fruitfulness of the ground. Thick Air turns
to water, which falling upon the Earth from above, waters the earth, the Suns
hear again rarifies it, and turns it to Air; and there are many mutations of
that kind that will make a man admire as much as the resurr^ction does. For
example, Natures work.
the Vine out of the moisture of the Earth brings forth not only branches and
tendrels that are of sour taste, but also sweet juice, and pleasant Grapes. The
Date tree is a rugged barky tree, and produces sweet dates full of juice and
liquor like Wine. An example from the structure of Man.
Also the seed from whence a man is made, how comes it to produce and frame
ears, arms, hands, heart, lungs, nervs, arteries, flesh, bones, grisles,
membranes, what man can understand this? there are so many differences and
varieties in man's body or qualities, humors, forces, virtues, functions, all
proceeding from the seed only. Do you not think it strange how a soft and
moist humor should congeal to be a hard cold bone? how meats should be changed
into fresh red blood? and the food should turn into veins, arteries, nerves,
muscles, ligaments, tendons; Since therefore nature daily does so many things
that the mind of man cannot comprehend; who can deny but that the God of nature
can do as much in raising dead bodies; Nature Gods Instrument.
as nature that is but Gods instrument does daily in fostering and preparing of
the seed that is corruptible. You may see the corn when it is moistened grow up
again, into a seemly plant, and to bring forth thick leaves; Examples of the
Re^urrection out of Ciprian.
and will you not believe that a man buried in the earth may rise again, and
return to his former luster? Therefore Cyprian, who is said to have made the
Creed, by Paul's example illustrates our Creed by the nature of seed: For says
he if any man mingle diverse kinds of seeds together, and sows them unparted, or
casts them every where into the earth, will not every seed after its kind
spring up again in its proper season, and have a stalk proper to its own form
and kind? So the substance of flesh, though it be diversely scattered here and
there when God pleases, shall revive again in the same shape it was when it
died: and so it comes to pass that not any confused or strange body shall be
restored to the several souls, but to every soul the same body it had before,
that by consequent, according as they lead their lives here a good body may be
crowned, or an ill body be tormented with its own soul. Wherefore I think that
Paul could not better set forth the type of the resurrection than by the
similitude of seed sown in furrows of the earth. A Simile from Seed sown.
For what it is in nature to hide seed in the earth, the same it is in the
resurrection to bury a dead body; and what it is for seed to grow again, and
become a plant, is same with man's rising again; A body subject to corruption is
committed to the ground: but that shall revive, all feebleness of nature being
taken from it: That is buried in the earth which was subject to many
Infirmities calamities diseases; it shall rise again lively, An Example from a
body wasted.
quick, free from all infirmities and weaknesses. An example will make it
clearer. A sick man that is spent with a strong disease, grows pale, and looks
wan, sad, swart, ill favored, earthly: and his whole body grows so lean, and
consumed, that his lively juice being spent, you cannot know him: But this man
by good Physic and wholesome diet recovers, and grows fat and well liking, and
his skin grows so fine, that you would think he were painted. So in the
resurrection the same body comes up again, but more glorious, and there will
appear in it no marks of the old corruption.

An example of this was first begun in Christ, who by nothing did more
effectually declare his Divinity, than by his triumphant Resurrection. That
example of his must be showed forth in all by his virtue; who, as Paul says,
shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body, according
to his power, whereby he can subject all things unto himself. Phil. 2. 1 Thessalonians.
4.
Wherefore the Apostle would not have us to be tormented with fear of death, or
to grieve overmuch for it. For they that sleep in Christ, shall be raised by
the Word of God, and shall live everlastingly with him. Which our Savior
foretold that it should so come to pass; John 5.
The hour shall come, that all that are in their graves shall hear his voice,
and they that have done well shall come forth to the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done evil to the resurrection of condemnation. By which words he
comforts dejected minds, Distrust and confidence, what they can do.
that they should not faint under dangers; but to wicked and unpenitent men
they strike terror and amazement, who would never make an end of sinning,
unless they considered, that after this life the rewards of sin and godliness
shall be paid unto men. Chap. 14. and 19.
Wherefore Job in his worst condition, when nothing was wanting to make him
miserable, comforts himself with this certain hope; I know that my Redeemer
lives, and I shall rise out of the Earth in the last day, and I shall see God
my Savior in my flesh, whom I shall behold my self, and not another for me:
This hope is laid up in my breast, that is, no man shall take from me this
confidence and assurance. Since therefore all hopes of obtaining salvation, The
Resurrection strengthens feeble minds.
and all comfort in the greatest dangers is in the faith of the Resurrection,
let us set this faith against all the terrors and temptations wherewith the
Devil endeavors to overthrow and weaken our minds; and let us hope assuredly
in him who is the Author unto us of so great advantage and liberty. What
Christ's Birth did.
The long expected birth of our Savior did exceedingly raise the Souls of men
to a high hope of salvation and confidence of it. His conversation amongst men,
his upright life, his doctrine, and lastly, his death which he suffered for us,
to free us from destruction, did confer much thereunto: What Christ's
Resurrection did.
But the truth of his resurrection did effect this, that when he had got the
victory over death, no man need to doubt of his salvation, but ought to hold a
firm hope, that what has been done already in Christ their head, shall be
perfected in them also. Wherefore all our hope depends on our Saviors
Resurrection, whereby he vanquished death, and thereby he pulled out the sting
of death, that is, sin, that bred the Enmity between God and us. Wherefore
since we have obtained so great felicity by the death and resurrection of
Christ, Peter. 1.
let us not be removed from the truth, but let us endeavor to partake of the
fruit of so much good works, and look steadfastly upon him, who by his singular
favor and mercy has regenerated us unto a lively hope by Christ's rising from
the dead, and has restored us to life that shall never end, and has assigned
unto us an immortal Inheritance, pardoning all our offenses, Colos. 2.
and blotting out the handwriting that was against us. The memory of this
benefit should be always before our eyes; especially at our last conflict, The
Resurrection should still be in our minds.
when detesting all the wickedness of our former life, we must oppose against
Satan, sin, death, and hell, the immense mercy of God the Father, by out full
assurance in Christ, by whom there is provided certainly for us salvation, and
remission of all our sins and reconciliation by his blood; By him we have
admission and entrance unto the Father. He is the propitiation for our sins.
Considence in Christ gives us courage.
For so God loved the world, that he gave his only Son to redeem us, that
every one that believes in him, trusts in him, and relyeth on his promises, may
not perish, but have everlasting life. Which confidence raises our minds to
bring forth good fruits by works of charity, whereby we love God above all
things, and our neighbor for his sake. Mat^h. 25.
What Faith dictates, Charity performs; For a working Faith begets charity, and
charity nourishes faith. Faith joined to Love.
So in the foolish Virgins lamps, the light of faith went out because there
wanted oil of charity. Wherefore this faith and confidence of promised mercy
that is infused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost, must be stirred up and
nourished in us, that by the merit of Christ our Mediator we may cry, Abba
Father. For the Spirit of Adoption, Gal. 4.
and the earnest of our Inheritance, raises up our hearts, and comforts us
with the redemption and possession purchased for us, and takes from our minds
all fear and trembling, and terror of Conscience, and makes us acknowledge
Gods favor, presence, and mercy, and that we may attain Redemption and
Reconciliation by the help of Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be our
peacemaker through faith in his blood. Wherefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, and a settled Conscience, and a quiet mind, so that all
distrust and desperation is discussed, and we apprehend certain hopes of the
Resurrection and Immortality, and doubt nothing of our salvation; so that we
depart from hence cheerfully to our heavenly Country and place of rest, to
enjoy everlasting comfort with our Redeemer. And that these things may never
slip out of our minds, and so great a benefit may never be forgot, Christ
instituted his holy Supper; The Communion.
whereby we may remember and recollect what he has done for us, that our mind
may be elevated and grow hot with the frequent meditation of the new Covenant
to adore him, and receiving his body and blood, we may be united to him, and
may conceive certain hope and trust of his great love and mercy to us, whereby
he was willing to dye for us. Which wonderful work we ought daily, but
especially to meditate on at our end when death approaches, The Lords Supper.
that our minds may be settled, and we may firmly believe in him; and we may
give him continual thanks for that inestimable gift of our salvation, by the
shedding of his blood, whereby he wiped away all spots of sin from us, and
freed us from dear of death, and from the cruel tyranny of our great Enemy the
devil, so setting us at liberty. Therefore by this mystical Bread and holy
Sacrament we are assured that Christ is in us, and we in him, and that we are
joined to him by the most firm bond of love. Heb. 8.
Whence it is, that being born up with certain hope as with a staff, we are
confident to receive those things that faith infused into us by the Spirit,
prompts us with, and persuades us unto; for from faith as the root spring forth
the branches of charity, James 2.
that yield plentifully the fruits of good works: For works testify that faith
is alive, and safe and sound in all parts of it. There must be choice of works.
For saving faith is never without good works that are pleasing to God, but, as
a good Tree, brings forth both leaves and fruit.

Since therefore those heroic and divine virtues inspired by God, which are so
joined together, that they can never be asunder, are so necessary to salvation,
the mind must be daily busied in them, that after the troubles of this life are
past, after that we have approved the profession of our faith, and showed it
openly, which God requires we should do, Sinners are Justified by Faith in God.
and exercises us therein, we may come to those riches, that Inheritance,
those rewards, that God has appointed for them, who in the conflict of this
life have employed their Talent as they ought to do; Ezekiel. 18.
wherein if they have erred, the next way to salvation is to lift up their
souls to God, and to commit themselves wholly to his great mercy. Wherefore
depending on his clemency in hopes of mercy, which he denies to none that
repent, Heb. 4.
Let us come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, that we may find mercy in
time of need. And let us continually from our very heart speak in the ears of
our merciful and placable Judge, those words of the Prophet; Psalm. 148.
Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, Psalm. 119.
O Lord, because in thy sight no man living shall be justified. If thou Lord
should observe what is done amiss, who might abide it? but with thee there
is mercy and plenteous redemption. Despair must be cast away.


CHAP. XV.
Whether there be a reasonable Soul infused into monstrous births, and to
abortives, and whether they shall rise again to life; And, by the way, from
whence Monsters proceeed?
ALl those that are like men, and, according to the order of being born
received from our first Parents, by that way and means proceed from both Sexes,
though they are monstrous in shape, and deformed in body, Deformity unmans no
man.
have notwithstanding a reasonable soul, and when they have run the race of
this short life, they shall be made at last partakers of the Resurrection; But
those that are not from man, but by mixing with other Creatures, and exercise
their Actions otherwise than men do, shall neither be immortal, nor rise again:
So the wood-gods, Satyrs, household gods, Centaurs, Fairies, Tritons, Sirens,
Harpies, and if fabulous antiquity has invented any other things of this
nature, they have neither rational souls, nor enjoy the benefit of the
Resurrection. There are indeed, amongst so many millions of men, many that are
deformed in body, and are of an horrid aspect, with hogs snowt, and uncomely
Jaws; yet all these though they are far from the natural shape of Man are
referred to the number of men: For they speak, discourse, judge, remember, and
perform other offices of the Soul, and perfect their actions after the manner
of men, though they somewhat degenerate from man's dignity, and his imbred force
of Nature.

Whence monstrous shapes proceed.
Now a Monstrous habit of body is contracted diverse ways. For fear, frights,
influence of the Stars, too much or too little seed, Imagination of women with
child, and diverse phantasms which the mind conceives, deform the body, and
cause Children to be of a shape not proper to the Sex. Sometimes the whole
course of Nature is changed, either when the seeds are vitiated, or the
Instruments be unfit, so that the natural faculties to propagate and form the
Child cannot perform their offices exactly. A Simile from the Industry of an
Artificer.
For as the most Industrious Artist cannot bring to perfection a work happily
begun, where the matter is naught, or the Instruments are dull; so Nature
wanting the forces of her faculties, or not having a fit matter, does all
things ill, and fails of her end. Some there are that by their operation, do
make some parts of the body otherwise than Nature made them. So in Asia, as
Hippocrates testifies, Of Air and places.
there were great heads, that the Nurses made their heads to be long figured:
for that they thought was a sign of a noble and generous spirit, as a Hawk nose
was amongst the Persians; whereby at length it came to pass, that though the
Midwives ceased to press the childrens heads, yet nature whilst she was
forming the child, agreed with the ancient custom, and what they did by great
Industry, Nature did of her own accord. Also nutriments, and the qualities of
the outward Air make some parts deformed. So they that dwell in cold moist
Countries, have great heads, great bellies, fat bodies, Countries change the
conditions of Soul and Body.
babber lips, swollen cheeks. Many Countries produce Pigmies, and little men,
very short. Other Countries produce people with great throats, and scrophulous
tumors, with flat noses, crooked legs. Yet though many things be wanting in
these people, and the parts be either ill framed or wrested amiss; yet because
they are born of women, and some force of reason shines in them, and they are
led by the same Laws of Nature, Orthodox Divines say, There is a rational soul
in them, and that they shall rise again. The Resurrection will restore bodies
deformed to their right shape.
And by rising again they shall lay aside all deformities of their bodies that
were ill favored to behold, and be well formed like as men are, and all lame
crooked imperfect limbs shall be made perfect. And though in some the force of
reason shines less, because of the unaptnesse of the organ, as in children,
old men, drunkards, madmen, in whom the force of the Soul is hindered, or
oppressed. Yet every one of them has a reasonable soul; and what is defective
shall be made up at the resurrection. But imperfect and abortive births, and
all mischances where the limbs are not fashioned, or very imperfectly, because
these want the reasonable soul they cannot be called men, nor shall they rise
again. Difference between abortion and a mischance.
Physicians make a difference between abortion and a mischance. For a running
forth of a mischance is, when the seeds were for some days joined in the womb,
but by the slipperinesse and smoothness of it, they run forth again before
they come to make a perfect shape, so that a rude unframed mass runs out, that
was the rudiments of a Child that should have been, and a shadow of what was
begun, but it was cast out untimely, as seeds and buds from trees that bear not
fruit to maturity. But Abortion oft-times shows the parts of the Infant
perfectly made up, which when it is 42 days old, is endowed with a rational
Soul, and is alive. Whence, if it chance to be cast forth by some sudden
accident, it shall one day rise again. For though many things be wanting in it,
and it is not come to its full magnitude, yet in the Resurrection all shall be
made up, that time would have produced. A Simile from children increasing.
And as children have many things in possibility, that with progress of time,
and increase of years do show themselves, as teeth, nails, hair, and full
stature of body, which by faculty of the seed increases by degrees, and come to
perfection; so in the Resurrection all things wanting in the body, and parts
that are imperfect, shall be made perfect. Whosoever therefore is born of the
seed of man, and not from some foul matter or vicious humors concurring,
though he be of a monstrous body and ill favored shape, yet shall he rise
again from death to life, all faults being repaired by virtue of the
Resurrection, and framed decently; for that Omnipotent Work-master of all
things,

Makes nothing weak, Prudentius.
who does the body raise,
For were there fault, it were not for his praise.
What is by chance, or sickness, or by care,
Or otherwise decayed, he will repair.
Nothing is impossible to God.
For that is easy for him, who made all things of nothing. For as Augustine
says, It is more easy to create men, than to raise them when they are dead.
It is more to give that a being that never was, than to repair what was before:
And the earthly matter never is perished in respect of God, who can easily
restore to its former nature what is vanished into the Air and other Elements,
or what leanness or hunger has consumed, or diseases have wasted, or what is
burnt to ashes, or is passed into the first principles, or into the substance
of some other body. For the flesh shall be restored to that man it was taken
from, as his Due, A Simile from borrowed money.
that was borrowed from him. They that are men shall find this to be true, and
those mousters that are bred from them, and have the same nature with them,
shall be partakers of this divine gift.

CHAP. XVI.
The humors and food do change the habit of the body, and state of the mind
apparently; And hence arise the affections, and stings of conscience: And, by
the by, what Melancholy can do, and how it may be cured.
THere is no mortal Man that is not led by his passions, and perturbations, but
one is more driven by them than another, and is more easily forced by the
motions of his mind. All men led by Passions. Why Socrates was less subject to
them.
For they that are of a good bodily temper, and lead a temperate life, and
sober diet, are less wont to be troubled with passions. So Socrates is
reported to have been of that constancy and calmnesse of mind, that both at
home and abroad he was always of the same countenance and alacrity of mind,
though he had a very scolding Wife to vex him, which he obtained no otherwise
than by his frugall life, and great temperance. Hence it is that Cicero says,
that Intemperance is the fountain of all the passions, Tusc. 4.
which is a departing from the mind, and from right reason. So that the desires
of the mind cannot be ruled or kept in order. Temperance.
As therefore Temperance abates all disorderly desires, and makes them submit
to right reason, and preserves the judgment of the Mind entire; so Intemperance
that is contrary thereunto, inflames and disturbs every condition of the Mind,
and urges it. Whence it comes that all diseases of the body, and errors of
the Mind spring from thence. For as when blood and phlegm abound, or both
cholers are increased, sicknesses arise in the body; so the disturbance of ill
opinions, and the jarring between them, spoils the Soul of her health, The
difference of passions amongst themselves.
and draws the body into mutual destruction: For so anger, rashness, fear,
envy, forrow, emulation, when they seize upon the veins and marrow, and are
possessed of the inward parts of the mind, are hurtful also to the body, and
cause many terrible diseases thereof; Also the diseases of the body by sympathy
and way of company affect the Soul.

And though objects, and many outward causes, stir up many troublesome motions
in man, yet the principal cause, and original is from the heart, and from the
humors and spirits, which if they be moderate, and not infected with some
strange quality, the mind is not so hot, The original of Passions.
and is more calm: So if the blood be clean and pure, if the temper be equal,
and the body be well, men are slower to be moved, nor are they so exceedingly
vexed with fear, anger, or revenge, and if they be somewhat in passion, as no
man is without all passions, presently reason being called to counsel, and
Judgment of the mind admitted, all heat of stomach abates, and is assuaged.
Examples of moderation are David and Pericies.
We have examples of this in David and Pericles, who when a naughty fellow
reviled them, and upbraded them, they did not revenge or hate him for it, but
used him with great humanity. The heart receives diverse motions of the mind
from outward objects; Yet oftimes when there are no outward objects presented,
it breaks forth into violent passions, and some secret thought entering the mind
of a contumely offered, or by indignation by reason of some inconvenience
received, the mind it self grows hot and is disturbed within. Wherefore it is
of great concernment in the difference of passions, to know what temper every
man is of, what humors are abounding in his body, and what is the quality of
the spirits that arise from those humors; For those that are of a hot and dry
temper of them bodies are soonest angry, especially short little men, who are
presently enraged upon some trivial business of no value. Which anger by
reason of the narrowness of the place, w^y little men are so^^ angry.
and the small distance of the organs presently seiseth on the mind, and fires
and burns them, as low cottages and sheep coats. For the same reason, these
little men exceed others for wit and judgment of mind, because the spirits are
gathered together, and not so much dispersed, and so perform their forces more
closely, A Simile from fuel on fire.
and sharply. But as some fuel takes fire sooner than other combustible matters
do, and some are sooner put out than others are, so it uses to happen in
spirits and humors, whereof some breed long and during passions, others sudden
passions and fading presently, whence it falls out that choleric men are hot
and presently angry: The (...) of choleric men.
and as straw and stubble presently takes fire; so they by the thinness of a
hot humor, and sudden inflammation are more weakly angry, for their anger
suddenly grows cold, and they are pacified; But me lancholique people are
slower before they grow angry; Melancholique natures.
but when they are provoked, they are ill to be calmed again, and they are so
mindful of in juries, that they will hardly be friends any more. Flegmatique.
But flegmatique people as they are cold and moist, are scarce ever moved with
passions of the mind, and are never greatly troubled with any thing; whence it
is that they are slothful and sluggish, and not fit for any noble actions, on
them the Proverb may be verified, He has no mind that has no anger. A proverb
against sluggards Sanguin complexions.
But sanguin people are of hot and moist constitutions, and are held with no
weighty or serious business of cares, but are wholly taken upon with sports,
tales, songs, and jears, and complements, and take care for nothing but
pleasures, and delights, which conditions and differences of men alter
according to the quality, and mixture of the humors, according to the climate
and Air they live in; and they do variously affect the minds of men, and
therefore I am persuaded, that the humors are the causes of Passions. For the
heart being affected the spirits are raised, and the humors boil, and the
minds of men by their agitation are more inflamed, as if a torch or fire brand
were put under. For as when the General or Prince is moved in an Army, his
guard of Soldiers, A Simile from a Captain of an Army.
and all that are to defend him presently make themselves ready to fall on upon
the enemy: So when any passion arises, all the humors are suddenly stirred
with the heart, and the spirits break forth, as in anger, shame, bashfulnesse,
immoderate joy; but in grief, sorrow, fear, they draw themselves in, not
without great detriment to ones health, so that the blood sometimes forsakes
the heart, and sometimes by coming too much unto it, it strangles it. So many
have died suddenly by overmuch joy, and others by sudden frights and fears, Who
are fearful and faint-hearted.
which happens chiefly to such as cannot regulate their passions, by reason, as
are commonly weak men, women, infants, old men, Anchorites, who in their youth
go from the company of men, and lead a solitary life, who have but weak heat,
and a thin slender animal spirit, and therefore they have but small courage,
and are fearful and faint hearted, and cannot be valiant in resisting of
dangers. Moreover each man's age, the temper of the climate, influence of the
stars, education and course of life, Many things change the s^ate of the body.
and course of the Country are of great concernment in the differences of the
passions and manners. For if you regard all nations, and their several natures
studies, and inclinations; you shall find their ways of living to be diverse,
as also their wits, affections and manners are. Wherefore it is much to be
considered what age a man is of, of what education, under what climate he was
born and bred, what temper and constitution his body is of, lastly whose
company he keeps, what diet he uses, and what is the abundance and quality of
the humors, The manners arise from the humors.
at that time. For these generally cause men's manners, and fashions of their
minds. So they whose blood is thick, are commonly fierce, cruel, inhospitable,
unhumane, and never regard the stings of Conscience, never fear, and are
without all Religion; they care not for godliness, or humanity: of which kind
are Mariners, Pipers Carters, Potters, Carriers, and Soldiers, who by reason
of the thickness of their blood, and their gross troublesome spirits, have
their Consciences ruff-cast, What men are inhumane.
and their minds darkened with most gross vices. And if any spark of a better
mind chance to shine forth, or if they have any virtues that are given to these
courses of life, they either overwhelm them, or stain them with great faults.
For when they have spent their whole time upon all mischief, L. 1. Belli Punici.
their wicked course of life becomes a second nature to them. So Livy says,
that inhumane cruelty, and more than Carthagenian perfidiousnesse was to
Hannibal, he made no reckoning of truth and holiness, he feared no God, made
nothing of perjury, or Religion. For as Lucan has it.

Soldiers neither Faith nor truth regard: L. 4.

All Is venal; that is right where is most reward.
By which variety of wits, manners and affections, it seems to me that the
passions and propensions of every man's mind, are to be referred to many causes.
For though the objects, and the heart it self, and the parts ordained for
nutriment, and to engender spirits, are the organs, and receptacles of the
affections, yet the humors within the body, What things sharpen the passions.
immoderate heat, influence of the Stars, faculties of the Alements, qualities
of the Air about them, immoderate use of Wine kindle the fire, and are the
Seminaries of troubling the mind, and stirring the passions. Hence consider
what hurt may come to reason, and to the mind of man, where the organs,
spirits, and humors, have contracted any vice. For so a man falls from his
dignity, and becomes a beast. Which the kingly Prophet complains of; Man being
in honor, is like the beasts that perish. Psalm 48.
For his reason is extinguished, and the light of his mind is overwhelmed with
vicious affections. For as lights and Candles give less light, A Simile from a
Torch.
when they are set in a Candlestick that is fowl and dirty: so the mind of man
darkened by the grossness of the body, shines less, and is more slow in
putting forth her self; It is indeed natural for sanguin people to be merry,
for melancholique to be sad, for flegmatique to be dull and drowsy, for
cholerique men to be angry: When passions are mildest.
But all these passions are moderate, and less faulty where the humors are
moderate, and are vitiated with no strange quality. But if their quality or
abundance be augmented, or overpasse moderation, a man is affected many ways,
and turned off from the use of reason. And though the Elementary qualities, The
Stars and humors are violent, yet cause no necessity.
and humors, and spirits impose no necessity upon any man to do this or that,
nor yet do the aspects of the Stars: Yet they have so much force in moving the
passions, that men, though reason strive against it, are run upon rocks by the
tempests of their passions. For as is the distemper of the Air and of the Sea,
and as the violence of Wine drank overmuch is great; such is the violence of a
melancholique or choleric humor, if it be overmuch augmented. All men are
subject to passions.
And what man, if he look nearly into himself and search his own nature, will
not presently perceive turbulent motions, and passions? so that sometimes he
will be more angry, more froward, more envious, more lascivious, or more
inclined to one or another passion according to the distemper of the humors.
And if the mind of man endure such changes, where the humors do but a little
degenerate from their natural tempers, that in a moment the mind is hurrried
with diverse affections, what shall we think will become of it, when they are
proceeded to the height of mischief, and have seized forcibly on the principal
parts? Examples and sad spectacles of these things, are madmen, lunatic,
frantic, enraged, Soul and body are affected with mutual diseases.
melancholique people, and such, as their minds are alienated, or do dote or
are in a delirium, for the diseases of their bodies seizing upon their minds do
torment them with terrible and fearful torments. Wherefore they that desire to
live in good health, and to be free from such mischiefs, must live temperately,
least their minds be darkened with the thick smoke of the humors, and so
disquiered with strange and absurd Imaginations, That all Scholars must shake
off melancholy.
and removed from their proper places. But this lesson most concerns those that
manage public employments, and such as are much given to their studies,
because these men commonly are troubled with melancholy, which humor though it
sharpen the mind, as Wine does that is drank moderately, yet if it be overmuch
increased, or vitiated, it much offends the mind. That Cicero chose rather to
be dull of wit, than to be witty and melancholique. Tusc. 1.
Some are by nature melancholique, and most men have contracted it from diverse
causes, that were by nature free from it. Melanch^^y whence it breeds.
Many have come to this temper by long continued studies, and unseasonable
watchings. Others fall into it by fear, care, sorrow, sadness: Many from the
stoppings of their Emrods and monthly terms, or from some usual evacuation
restrained; who, when as their brain is filled with a black and dark smoke,
their mind is vexed with absurd Imaginations, and is so changed and forced,
that sometimes men of good lives and of great esteem have been brought to
fearful ends thereby. That a man would wonder there should be such great force
and violence in a melancholique humor, that it should overwhelm reason, and
take away a man's understanding. A simile from a dark Cloud.
But as a thick dark cloud shadows the Suns light, so a melancholique humor
darkneth the mind, and drives it on to many mischiefs.

The evil spirits also mingle themselves with ill humors, and especially with
black choler, Evil spirits mix with melancholy.
because that humor when it exceeds Natures bounds, is most fit to move us to
any wickedness. For men of this constitution conceive grievous and sharp
passions, and that last long, for the contumacy of the humor, that will hardly
melt and be dissolved. Whence it follows, that evil thoughts and
apprehensions stay long in their minds, Whence melancholique people Imagine
absurd things.
which sometimes break forth into action, that they fall foul upon those they
know, and those they know not, making no difference, and do mischief both to
others, and sometimes to themselves. So the humors do afford firebrarnds to
choleric men, but when they are angry they hurt others, and not themselves.
But that the cause of these things consists in the humors, and not in the
wicked spirits, though they help to trouble the humors, may be collected from
hence, for that mad, melancholique, and frantique persons are wont to be cured
by opening the emrods that are stopped, and so are reduced to better minds,
those fuliginous smokes of the humors being removed that did vitiate the
imagination, and animal spirits, L. 6. Aph. 21.
as may appear by Hippocrates, his Aphorism: If the melancholique veins or
emrods run in those that are mad, they are thereby cured, nature deriving the
ill humors from the principal part to the parts more ignoble.

Again, II. Aph. Ill vapors hurt the brain.
the Emrods are healthful for mad people, and such as are troubled with
diseases of the kidneys. For when that humor, whether it be in the
Hypochondres, or the Spleen, or be heaped up in the whole body, or in any part,
fills the brain with an ill and filthy exhalation, it causes fear, sadness,
sorrow, heavy groans, astriction of the heart, ringings in the ears; and reason
being oppressed, and the light of the mind extinguished, they begin to despair,
sometimes desiring death, sometimes fearing and abhorring it. How Melancholy
may be driven out.
Wherefore, as Galen says, when the Spring and Autumn begin, that humor must
be gently and by degrees purged out, by vomit, belching, purging downward,
breaking of wind, by opening a vein, and by causing the Emrods, and courses to
run. And whosoever is subject to this disease, he must earnestly and with great
care resist it, and must by no means entertain Imaginations that falsely creep
into his mind, at first pleasing and amiable, but afterward as they grow
strong, they can hardly be resisted.

A fault by hiding will the stronger grow. Virg. 3. Georg.

Physic can cure that only which we know.
But if adversities and misfortunes have brought on this mischief, you must
oppose against it an undaunted courage of your mind, and support your self with
Gods Word, and with confidence in him, and so with the less labor you shall
overthrow those terrible phantasms and representations that assault you. The
Mind must be underpropt by Gods Word.
For by these helps the most noble Heroes have stood firm, who when all was
come to be almost past recovery, and they desired to put an end to their
miseries by death, yet the greatness of their griefs could not overcome them.
3 Kings c. 19.
So Helias in his afflictions desired to die. So David so often assaulted by
his enemies began to distrust. So Job even in despair chose rather to die, Chapter
7.
and to end his life any way, We must not do violence to our life.
than longer to endure so great miseries. Lastly, Christ like one in despair,
and taking our cause upon him, complains, that he was forsaken by his Father.
But all these by the hope and assurance of better things cast away all
trembling and distrust, looking unto God with a steadfast mind. In Some. Scip.
But this, as Cicero says, all men should be persuaded of, that the Soul must
be kept in the custody and watchfulness of the body, nor must it leave its
station until God command that gave it, lest we should seem to reject so great
a gift of God. Bell Judaic. l. 3.
Wherefore Josephus seems to speak excellently, that what evil soever comes to
us, we should bear it with a cheerful and undaunted courage. And let no man
think it lawful for him, to end his life basely and beneath the worthy
condition of Man, and appointment of nature. Melancholique people worthy to be
pitied.
But if any man by reason of a disease, or alienation of his mind do come to an
unhappy end, let no man trample on men of such a condition, or censure them too
severely; but let every one rather pity their case, and grieve for their
mishap; for since they were not well in their wits and had lost their reason
and understanding, their mind was turned upside down, and they were deceived
and blind in the choice of things. For when the virtue of imagination is
corrupted, absurd things present themselves to our minds, and we judge
confusedly of things, and discourse erroneously. For the like happens to our
minds, as does to our eyes, A simile from Glass.
where glasses are looked through that are of many colors, for through them
all things seem to be blew or green, or red, or yellow, or of the same color
always as the Glass is, so that the objects appear in their species otherwise
then they are in themselves. Why feavourish and drunken men dote.
Hence men that are drunk or angry think they see double objects, when there is
but one. So those that are doting in Fevers, think they see diverse Hobgoblins,
and the corrupt Imagination and organs vitiated, present strange fantasmes to
the mind, by reason of the agitation of ill humors, and the spirits that pass
here and there, and wander up and down in the brain; Corporeal spirits stir the
mind.
wherefore the spirits and humors are of great efficacy in troubling the mind,
and moving the affections, and wounding the conscience. But if they be sincere,
and no way defiled, men are of a pleasing disposition, and not complaining and
touchy. But if they be once stained and troublesome, many passions of the mind
arise, and turbulent affections. Since therefore both Soul and body are
affected together; first care must be taken, to sweeten and abate the troubles
of the mind with pleasing words. For as the Proverb says; A good speech is a
Physician for a sick mind: A simile from Wild beasts enraged.
and such men must be dealt withal as the occasion serves, as the habit of
their body is, and the qualities of the humors require. For as wild beasts are
tamed by man's industry, so their minds must be pleasingly drawn, that will be
enraged with harsh and ruff words. Yet sometimes, as for the diseases of the
body, incisions, causticks, and burnings are useful: so sometimes we must be
more violent, and bridle such wicked actions by wholesome correcting speeches,
unto which at sometimes when the noxious humor boyls over, they are wont to be
tempted. And there must be no less care taken for the body. But let him
remember that undertakes the cure, that he do not raise that humor with
violent medicaments, but by degrees and easily, and with as great dexterity as
possibly he can, for it is not good to exhaust that sink all at once. For that
humor stirred, breaths forth a kind of ach in the back, and ill savor that
disturbs the brain incredibly, that the mind conceives strange things. But
first the spirits must be raised with sweet smells and nose-gays, and the body
must be fed with juice of the best meats, and they must sleep on soft beds. But
wine nourishes the soonest of all things, and does least offense to nature.
Yet in giving wine, though it be the chief help to discuss sorrow, there must
be choice used, and care must be had to prescribe it seasonably, and as each
man's age, Choice of Wine.
custom of life, and the Country requires. For wine does not always drive
sorrow from Melancholique people, but sometime it increases it, and
exasperates the disease, especially where the body is full of ill humors.
Wherefore the body must be first emptied and purged with fit remedies, before
any manner of diet be prescribed. Aphor.
For impure bodies the more you nourish them, the more you hurt them. For since
the nature of wine is various, Ill Wines trouble the Mind.
and there be many kinds, nor are all wines alike strong, you must observe to
give the best wine to drink, and that as is seasoned with no offensive thing;
for in Taverns and other such places where wine is sold, they are
sophisticated, to the great disadvantage of men's health, with quick Lime, Gyp,
Bitumen, Clary, Rocket, and wild Myrtils. So some kind of wines are so far from
^uting melancholy, that they make it grow more, and be worse than it was. Hence
our Country people by drinking wines from Pigic^^^, that send sharp vapors to
the brain, become wayward, sto^ard, angry, implacable, that they will be
always angry, and will oft-times beat their Wives: which when they have drank
Rhenish wine, or some strong wines, they hold it Religion not to do, for then
they are more pleasant, and more ready to kiss than to fight with them.
Wherefore Melancholique weary thirsty people, that are dry of bodies, by Horace
his Rule,

L. 1. Ep. 15.
Must drink what is good and pleasant for to drink,
That may abate all cares whereon they think.
And entering in the veins, may raise their mind
To lofty thoughts, and make their speech so kind,
That they may, among Virgins, Lovers find.
To which may be added that of Pliny, L. 22. Chapter 25.
all sharpness of mind is abated by some sweet juice, it softneth the passage
of the spirit, and makes the way more easy. Every man may make experiment upon
himself: For there is no man but sometimes he is much troubled with sorrow,
anger, grief. So when a man is weary, thirsty, hungry, or has watched too
long, he is more prone to anger. In Cur.
So hunger and delay, as Plautus writes, makes a man take pepper in the nose,
but so soon as he has eaten his meat, he grows quiet and is still. Hunger
kindles ^nger.
Hence it is, that men that are full, are less subject to anger than those
that are empty. Because the body moystned with meat and drink is not so dry,
and the native heat being warmed, the body is less subject to wax angry. For
the natural faculties are busy about concoction, and yellow choler that uses
to boil over where men are fasting, is qualified by the humors mingled with
it. So Cauldrons, Frying-pans, and such utensils grow more hot, and smell more
offensively when the liquor, or fat that swims on the top, is consumed by
immoderate heat. For all things that want moisture or oil, will stick to the
pot, or send form offensive vapors, so that men say usually, Roast and boiled
are taken out of the same pot. A common proverb w^e^e meat is ill digested.
Wherefore lean people, and such as are of dry tempers should do well not to
fast overlong, but eat something to refresh natural heat. For the body grows
dry with unseasonable fasting, which consumes the radical moisture, Fasting,
ill for lean folks.
of which we spoke elsewhere.

CHAP. XVII.
Herbs are subject to change, and will lose their forces and form, Herbs will
degenerate and change.
unless they be dressed continually.
MAny Physicians complain, that the descriptions of Plants are false, and their
virtues are uneffectual; and that there were many Plants obvious and common in
former times, that if we compare them with these of our times, ours will answer
to them neither in name nor descriptions; and therefore they say they are other
plants, though we call them still by the same names. So our Hyssop, Beans,
Cinquefoil, Valerian, Tyf, wheat, Provender, Rye, Amelcorn, they think not to
be the same, because they do not exactly agree with the descriptions of the
Ancients. For as I would defend no men's errors that are deceived in the choice
and knowledge of Plants: so I think that some men do not sufficiently measure
all things by the squre of reason. For though in so great a change and variety
of herbs all of them cannot be ranged into a certain Classis, nor can we give
them a fit name that may answer the description of the Ancients; yet we must
not think that they are other plants than what were described by the Ancients,
or of other operations than such as they set down. For Nature it self gave a
cause for this Variety, if there be any* which daily changes the form, Natures
arifice in Plants.
and is luxuriant in producing new manner of plants, that they seem to differ
from those they come from. To this may be added, the cunning of Herbarists and
Gardeners, that by mingling feeds, and by using art about them, have learned to
make them grow more fair, and lovely to sight. Hence comes that variety of
colors in Plants, and Flowers, Gelliflowers in the lo^^ co^atrey^ (...) v^^y
beautiful.
which is especially seen in Clove-gelliflowers, that by the Gardners art grow
so full of variety, that they are nothing like to the descriptions of the
Ancients, and therefore some think they know them not. So Calathiana in Autumn,
Erauthemum, blew-B^ttles that grow in corn, appear not only of a blew color,
but also white, red, purple, diverse colored; so that yellow Marigold Virgil
describes on the several Calends of each month with a double row of flowers
growing thick together, delights our eyes, growing in a roundle. So Jove's
flower, and Rose Campion is with a sparkling scarlet color, and died with a
thin purple sometimes, Oculu^ Christi.
and sometimes it recreates our sight with a color white as snow, growing
round with a various heap of leaves: after the same manner do stock
Gelliflowers, Daisies, Hesperis, and all the Winter Gelliflowers bring forth
their flowers. Virgil shows, that in former Ages Gardners did take pains in
them. Some I have seen their seeds to sow prepare
With Nitre and oil lees, Georg. l. 1.
for they by care
Will grow far greater, and be sooner ripe.
And though the Industry of the Gardner cease, and the art how to sow them,
the herbs themselves do naturally change their fashion, if you consider their
colors, form, stature, forces. And that is partly done by the secret force of
the Stars, partly by length of time, that such things as appeared as though
they would last always, De ration. Concionand.
are turned to another habit, as if, as Erasmus says, Natures curiosity would
not have the fashion of herbs truly known that might pass current to
posterity, but would have a continual search to be made for them, that we see
are changed or renewed daily. So Nature sharpens man's Industry, and shakes off
drowsinesse.

For the first cause and spring of Husbandry
Would not that this Art without Industry
Should ere be learnt, Virg. l. 2. Georg.
thus sharpning mortal hearts,
And with great pains teaching to find out arts:
And within furrows for Plants to enquire,
And hid in flints for to discover fire.
To this we may add the state of the climate, and nature of the Air, Places
changes Plants.
and Country, that will change even the hairs, colors, and habits of men's
bodies. For Plants, according to the nature and quality of the place, and for
variety. of the ambient air, grow sometimes more tall, sometimes less; some
have many branches, others come forth without any stalks at all; some as the
earth is, are watery or milky white, (...) from (...) ^^a^h of A Simil the stom
Children.
others are very green tending to black. For as children that the Nurses keep
the breasts from, or seldom feed them, do grow lean and starved, and look
pale, or not very lively; so plants that grow in lean hungry barren ground, are
ill-favored and not so pleasant to behold. Whence you may see plants that grow
on walls and stony grounds, scarce a hands breadth in height; and if the same
be set in a fruitful ground they will grow a cubit and a half high, and will
send forth their branches long and broad. So Bugloss and great Comfrey, are
oft-times seen with white flowers; so Clove-gelliflowers either by art, or
fruitfulness of the ground, will yield a white, red, various colored flower,
upon the same stem and stalk. So the purple violet color decays sometimes and
turns blew. The flowers of herbs are changed into diverse colors.
By the same reason some leafs of Plants are not so jagged and nicked: and
prickly plants grow more gentle and smooth, according as the ground is higher
or lower they grow on. To this refer what daily experience teaches, that herbs
and fruits of Trees do not only change their shapes, if they grow in a place
and climate fit for them, but will also grow better, and be more wholesome;
when as before they were deadly, and not edible. 2. de Aliment et 3. de Sympto,
cause.
Which Pliny and Galen speak of the Persian plant transplanted into an Egypt:
and Columella has writ the Experiment thereof in these words:

With Damask Prunes their Cups are compassed round,
And such as in Armenia are found.
And Apples which in rude Persia grow,
Full of their imbred poison, but we know
That now they yield a wholesome nourishment:
And all their venom is consumed and spent,
And of their Country they the name retain
Peaches, that on small Trees do grow amain.
For this kind of Apple unless it be exposed to the Sun beams, over against
the South, and is of a cold and moist juice, and therefore corrupts quickly,
and offends the stomach, Gal^de Alimen. facult.
unless it be eaten before meat. Wherefore Nature attempts many things which
the art of Man perfects and directs. For grapes will grow without stones, if
you cleave the stalk and take out the pith; yet so, that in taking it forth you
hurt not the bud. For the sides will quickly grow together again if they be
accurately joined. How some grow without kernels.
So Medlars, Peaches, Dates, Cherries, Prunes, and Cornelion berries that are
full of stones, grow without stones by the care and Industry of Man; if you cut
off the young Tree two foot above the ground, and then cleave it to the root,
and take out with a rasp the pith of both parts, then straightwayes bind both
the parts fast together with a band, and cover the top and the partitions of
both sides with loam, clay, or wax, and put a wet paper about it; when the year
is over, you shall find that a scar is come upon it, and that all is grown fast
together; graft this Tree with grafts that never bore fruit, and they will
bring fruit without stones: which by Theophrastus's direction I tried upon a
vine, and it proved true; Also Inoculation, Insition, Emplastrisation, do show
the cunning of Nature, and the Industry of Men. For by these means Plants will
put off their own nature, and get another form and fashion, and one will easily
change into another. Three kinds of Insition. A Simile from the Nature of Man,
and education.
For as we see men for the variety of their wits, and care of their education,
not only to grow different in their knowledge, and to follow other manners and
studies, and to obtain other inclinations of mind, and one body is more slender
than another, or taller, or more pale and bloodlesse, or more rough or hairy,
yet all of them have the shapes of men, though some look more rudely; so it
uses to fall out in herbs, which for the same causes are not of the same shape
and vigor always, though they be not so changed, that their whole kind and
species perishes. For they always are like the thing they are called by in
some part; and they have the effects peculiar to the earth they grow in, and
fit for the nature of the people of that Country. For many plants are brought
forth of the fortunate Islands, which Men call the Canaries, which being used
in our climate, do not hold the same forces in all things, nor do they grow of
the same form and magnitude; yet they do not wholly lose their natural force
and former Being, though they depart something from their first original
nature, and vigor. As we see in Spondylium, Angelica, and herbs of kin to it.
which the vulgar call Angelica, in Masterwort, or Silphium of Lombardy, which
though by reason of the malignity of the earth, and the coldness of the
climate, they something differ from the descriptions of Theophrastus and
Dioscorides, yet we find them to be the same plants, and to work the like
effects; though by the distemper of the Air their forces are something weaker:
All herbs delight in their own Climates.
For since every Country has certain kinds of herbs proper for the climate,
and every one prospers in their proper soil; it cannot be, that being
transplanted they can retain their vigor. For some delight in shady valleys
and close places, some in open places where the Sun may shine upon them: some
delight in marshy and wet grounds, some in sandy, dry, and gravelly earth;
which if you transplant and make them grow in contrary places, What Herbs
delight in the Seacoasts.
you take away great part of their virtues. So Orris grows in Illyricum,
Hellebore in Anticyra, Wormwood in Pontus, and amongst the Santones; so Sea
Purslane, Sampire, Sea coal, called Soldanella delight in creeks of the Sea,
and Sea coasts, and salt waters. So some others grow better in some places, and
more happily in their native soils. So Virgil writes from the nature of things,
and confirms it to us: L. 2. Geor.
All grounds do not all herbs yield,
Some grow in Gardens, some in field,
Willowes by Rivers, Alders in Marshes grow,
Elms that are barren, stony Mountains know.
Myrtills do love Seacoasts, but the vine
Delights to grow on hills, the Sunshine
Is best for that, the Yew loves the North,
Each Climate does some Trees bring forth.
Black Ebony in India only found,
And Frankincense loves the Sabaean ground
No Land affords all sorts --
Many of these if you transplant them into another Country they will decay,
faint, or dye, or grow very hardly, and can scarce hold their Names and
Virtues. Wherefore he that will plant any thing, let him observe Virgil's Rule,

L. 1. Geor.
Learn for to know the climate and the winds,
And for to know the Plants all in their kinds
What every Land will bear, for in one ground
Corn prospers, in another grapes are found;
Elsewhere grow Apples, and the grass full green,
Pastures and pleasant Meadows to be seen.
Tmolus yields Saffron, and India does
Afford us plenty of Elephants Tooth.
The soft Sabaeans Frankincense present,
The naked Chalybs Iron, for strong sent
Pontus Castoreum yields. --
Duynen are to the Low Countries sandy Mountains.
Hence it is, that the Low Country Mountains that run along the Sea side to
keep the Sea from entering, and by a long crooked passage from Britany in France
run Northward, bring forth all sorts of Plants, which naturally come forth in
those sandy places, (for those hills are white with sand, and not with Snow,)
and there needs no Industry of man to make them grow. This is effected partly
by the Nature of the ground, and partly by the Influence of the Stars that
incline toward that Coast of the Earth, and exercise their forces there. And
hence it is that every Country has its Mines, Whence Mines come.
out of which according to the nature of the ground, and operation of the
Planets, brass, silver, gold Ore are dug forth, and pieces of metal, gravel
stone, marble, chalk, ocre, cinnaber, marking stone, etc. The like nature have
the morish grounds in Zealand, out of which they dig Turf, that are of a
bituminous quality, and when they burn they smell like Naphtha, with a filthy
ill savor. Hence the fields and lakes are called Mores. And formerly the
Britains that are next the Sea in France were called Mordui, and their County
Turwane, Terravana.
because it is exhausted by digging forth black Turf. So that there are many
great empty pits, where they cannot sow corn. Also in Brabant that matter is
dug forth; but because the Country is not so salt, Turf and Darry, are fuel in
Zealand, as bituminous clods.
and is farther from the Sea, it smells not so strong. They call these clods
Thurs, but those by the Sea Coasts Darry; which have such force, that they
being burnt often in their houses, they consume their iron, copper, Tin, silver
and brass vessels, and make all things that are in their houses worse, except
Gold. For that is not smoked or soiled by the fume, but shines the more, and
swells out, Gold is made bright by the smoke there of.
especially that is pure and not mixed, or sophisticated. This comes from the
rarity and softness of the gold, whence it drinks in the smoky vapor, and
swells and shines thereby. Gold drinks liquor.
For though gold be heavy and ponderous, yet is it soft, ductil and porous;
which may be proved by a cup filled with water, than will receive some crowns
of gold and not run over. For besides the spirits that go forth of it, it
drinks in some part of the water, and so swells with it. Wherefore a smoke of
Turf made often where this metal is, will give it a gallant luster. For since
that smoke defiles all things near it with foot, and makes them look yellow, a
simile from yellow (...).
or like the yelk of an egg, as yellow choler does such as have the Jaundies;
gold grows yellow by it, which is its natural and proper color. For no other
color can be put upon gold but yellow, or like the yelk of an Egg, or like our
Marigold flowers, or Saffron. There are some learned Professors in the
Low Countries, What is Voer in Dutch.
who think that this matter underground, that is dug out of the bowels of the
Earth, as a child taken from its Mothers womb, is made of the stocks and roots
of Trees, when Woods were overthrown by the Seas inundation, and the earth by
degrees driven over them, but their argument is weak, because sticks, and
twigs, and reeds, and Morish canes are found in the turf. But I see they have
not well observed the mines and bowels of the earth in all places, since in
Brass, Gold, Silver, and other metals, we may see a kind of boughs, and veins
run along in them, which they get in the bottom of the Earth by a vegetable
force, and influence of the Stars.

For nature is never negligent or idle, but does attempt many and great things,
and it does form and beautify not only the superficies of the earth, but all
the secret and hidden parts of it. Hence it is that the Jasper, ^^^^s Artifice.
Pophyr-stone, and Marble, are naturally wrought with diverse lines, and are
checkered with diverse colors. So the Nutmeg is chamfered wit lines running
betwixt. Which also we may observe in citron Tables, and in our Oaks, and other
kinds of wood cut into shingles, that with many veins running up and down in
them, and with many strikes and turnings are very beautifully chamfered, as
garments made of Goat Skins, and Noblemens Robes that are wrought, Camelot
damast.
variously woven. And many such things that are dug forth of the bowels of the
earth, wrought so curiously, as if some Graver or Carver had wrought them into
that form. Coral is a shrub.
So Coral in the bottom of the Ligurian Sea, bears leaves and fruit, and being
drawn forth with nets, it presently hardneth like a stone, and becomes black or
red, or if the moisture be less digested, white; So in that part of Gallia,
Belgica, where the Eburones, Menapii, and Sicambri lived, there are stonecole
dug forth, Stone-cole.
that are of the Nature of hardened bitumen, with which the inhabitants not
only melt Iron, but make good fires in their houses, and if they be quenched
once, and again, they will revive if they be put near the fire. And whereas all
other fires are inflamed with oil, Pit-cole is quenched with Oil, but burnt
with water.
these cole burn more if you cast water on, but are quenched with oil. Other
Countries have also their mines and minerals under ground, some afford
Brimstone, Lime, Gyose, Ocre, Alum, pieces and clods of Gold and Silver,
through which fountains tun in the secret passages of the Earth, and they
impart their qualities to the waters, and so are made fit to cure diseases. So
Mines near the Sea, are of a bituminous nature. For the clods dug forth thence,
smell so much of brimstone, that those that fit by, faint, and swound away, and
pit coals, and such as are made, breed the same inconvenience, unless you
sprinkle salt upon the fire. Salt strewed on Fi^^ coals abates the stench.
For by this means, the venom that offends the brain is discussed.

The venom, and offensive humor boyleth forth. Li. Georg.
Some ascribe this generative force of the Earth to the Stars (which doubtless
do effectually operate upon inferior bodies) because we see many things decay,
The effects of the Stars upon inferior bodies.
and new things come in their places, never seen before, that are far better.
But as I deny not this, so I believe, especially concerning plants, that many
of them fail and degenerate, chiefly by reason of the negligence or ignorance
of Gardners. So Wheat, as Theophrastus says, Of the causes plants.
is changed into Darnel, Basil into wild Marjorum, water-Mints into Mints in
smell, but in form into Calamint, and many kinds of herbs, if care be not
taken, do commonly, not only change their form, but lose also their imbred
virtues. Which as in many herbs. All things better by dressing.
So I have observed in the Violet called Altilis, a most beautiful flower,
which unless it be yearly transplanted, it degenerates into a mean low flower
that is not so sweet. Virgill confirms this:

I see the best plants will degenerate,
If not transplanted, L. 1. Georg.
for all things by fate,
Decline, and fall unto a lower rate.
On the contrary if you dress wild Plants, they will grow like those of the
Gardens, and lay aside their wild natures, as Virgill also observed.

All Plants by Nature, rise up strong and fair,
Though barren from the ground, L. 2. Georg.
yet these by care;
Transplanted, and manured, will grow mild,
And better for our use, than they are wild.
Wherefore Nature brings forth continually new plants, unheard of before, A
simile from base animals and their proceedings.
and the influence of the Stars produces many also, but the Art of Gardning
produces most of all. And as Rats, Dormice, Eels, Lampreys, Shellfish,
Snails, Earthworms, do not always breed from seed, but oft-times from slime
of the earth, and from filth and corruption. So in sandy grounds, such as are
the sandy Mountains in Zealand, Theod. de cause. plant. L.c. 1.
which the people call the Dunen, many shrubs come forth naturally by the
confluence of nutriment, and because that place lies open to the Sun, and is
fit to breed plants, which once bred from the moisture of the Earth, do
afterward grow up from their own seed, and increase abundantly. Wherefore let
no man admire that plants are subject to be changed, and to lose their forces
and figure, when as that, unless it chance that they be confounded by affinity
one with another, may proceed from the situation of the place, the quality of
the ambient Air, and the Art of the Gardner. So Pepper, Cardamon, large
Cummin, Rhapontick, sowed in our climate, are changed something, and are not so
hot, yet let no man say they are other plants. Herbs change both their force
and form.
For it is the faint heat of the Sun, and the distemper of the climate that
makes them weaker, and that they grow not so great, and come not to so much
maturity. Wherefore it is clear that plants have a double change. For sometimes
they change their native forces, and keep the same form; sometimes their form
is changed, and their native qualities remain.

That comes to pass partly by the influence of the Stars, and partly by the
nature of the ground, and the ambient Air. For since the earth is of diverse
qualities, it happens by reason of the Air, and the nutriment of the earth
that plants are changed, and receive other qualities. So Hasel-Nut-Trees,
Cherry Trees, Wild-Cherry Trees, if they grow near banks, that stinking Waters
run by, or Salt waters wet, their fruit will taste salt. So men as their food
is, and the Air they live in, obtain another temperament of their body, other
manners and qualities. So Danes by long constance and comerce, change into
Spaniards; Germans, into Frenchmen, or Italians; so you shall see a pleasant
and delightsome, tree set on salt ground, to degenerate by reason of the
nutriment it sucks in.

For Salt and bitter ground is ill for Trees.
Virgil. Georg.
Fruit will grow worse on them, and by degrees,
Decay, though dressed, for Vines and Apples change
Their former goodness, cause the ground is strange.
If you add to this that there is a fatal change, and vicissitude of things;
you shall find that plants though you do manure them, will grow old and feeble,
Old age makes all things worse.
or barren, and will only live, unless you graft and inoculate them, or pull
of their slips and branches, and set them again. Which variety of Plants and
vicissitude makes many think that this part of Physic is unfruitful, and that
Di^scorides, and many more Herbarists have lost their labor, who have studied
to write the descriptions of Plants. Truly I think that no man has adorned
this art yet, as it ought to be, and the largeness of it deserves, who has
not known the Plants themselves Iresh as they grow, and seen with his eyes
their native delineations. For there are some men amongst us, that having
scarce seen the herbs, will pronounce at random strange things of them; De
simp. Medic. l. 5.
As Pamphilus Galen spoke of, who never so much as dreamt of such Plants as he
undertook to write of, and to describe their virtues. Which kind of men,
Heraclides Terentinus likened to Criers, An elegant comparison taken from
Criers.
who for reward cry all things in the Market places, and speak of such things
elegantly, which they never saw nor knew, and sometimes commend some slave or
foolish fellow ignorantly. Tully reports the same of one Phormio a Philosopher,
De orator.
who spoke some hours largely before Hannibal of the duty of a General, and of
all military business; and when all the standers by much admired him, they
asked Hannibal what his opinion was of him; he said that this man spoke not the
best Greek, but he spoke freely. I have seen (says he) many old men dote,
Hannibals jear upon Phormio.
but none that ever doted more than Phormio. And he said true. For what could
be done more vainly and idly, than that a foolish Greek who never knew what
wars meant, nor ever bore any public office, should prescribe military
precepts to Hannibal, who had strove so many years with the Romans that
Conquered all nations? Who will not reckon these men amongst those, who boast
that they know the virtues of Comfrey, Licoris, Hore-hound, savoury,
Pennyroyal, and that only from books, and yet cannot tell if the plant be
brought to them, what that is that has such virtues, they so much speak of?
For since we cure diseases by medicaments and effectual herbs, who is so mad to
endure a Physician that is ignorant of these things? Who will not condemn such
a Man's ignorance and neglect, that is so dangerous for the Patient? For in my
Judgment, no man is a perfect Artist that wants this knowledge. For as in the
Marriner's Art, A simile from the Marriner's Art.
there is not only required the use of the oars to drive forward the vessel,
but the Seaman must know all the tackling, least he should mistake a shove for
an oar. So a Physician must be principally well versed in the knowledge of
Plants. For they, when you know the nature of the disease are like an
Instrument to go readily, and knowingly about your work. Who would not be
ridiculous that should go about a business and knows not the instruments he
must use? I cannot but admire partly their idleness, partly their neglect, who
despise this part of Physic, so that they have turned off this office to most
illiterate Mountebanks: When as it is apparent that of old time not only
Physicians, Kings of old studious in plants.
but also Kings and great men were versed in this part of Physic. And they
desired nothing more, and thought nothing more Kingly

Than for to know the force and use of Plants. Virg. 11. Aeneid.


And the best recreation they could use. Indeed the fame and Names of the
greatest kings had been lost, and forgot, and no memorial of them had remaind,
unless some herbs growing up new every year, that bear their names, should rub
up their memorial, and keep them from being forgotten. A Lover of Physic must
go in the same way, and not only try the dubious forms of Plants, but examine
the forces of them also, and use them to drive out diseases, and preserve the
health of mankind. Hippocrates and Galen the best Physicians did so with great
diligence, who by experience in Physic came to knowledge, and have laid down
certain rules approved from reason and experience, and set an exact method to
practice by. For these things being amplified with large descriptions, and
solid traditions, will make men Artists, Oal. 2. Aliment.
and so furnish them with remedies, that they may easily cure the greatest
diseases. For so we shall find great fruit of our studies, and others shall
reap considerable profit by us. But they that run another course in their
studies, and direct all things to their pleasures, rather than for the use and
good of others, deserve very ill by their studies, and do not well advise for
the good of the people. All things must be referred to use.
Cicero says, that all Arts are handled one way by those that direct them, for
use, and to serve others therewith; and otherwise by those who delight only to
contemplate, and aim at nothing else, but that they may know them for their
pleasures. For as all virtue, so all arts are to be commended for the action
only. Since therefore the Art of Physic requires such diligence, and
unwearied pains, we must never give over, but we must diligently search out the
nature of diseases, and try how to drive them out. A Simile from Military
affairs.
And as in war we see new stratagems and designs are invented, and strange
Engines, Guns, and Ordnance are found out; so, as new diseases continually
rise, we must find out new remedies. The Scurvy from a filthy stomach infects
the gums and feet.
As we have done lately in the Pox, the contagious Ephemera, or English Sweat,
in the black Jaundice, the symptoms whereof are sore gums, and Scurvey. Some
complain, that the Earth is exhausted in former days, and will not yield the
same abundance and vigorous plants as formerly for the good of men. Keirus l. 1.
Which Columella so overthrowes, that he retorts it on men's faults and
idleness, because they do not till the ground as formerly.

I say the same of the wits of our men: for our Mother Nature has denied them
nothing, nor did she give all things to Men of former Ages, but she gave a
portion to posterity, and would not leave them barren. Wherefore we in our
days want not wit, if we have but a desire ready to learn Arts, and take as
much pains as they did formerly. Witis prevalent where it is used.
For, as the Proverb is, Use can do all things. You shall see some at first
very industrious to learn; but so soon as they grow famous amongst the people,
they grow idle, and do their business carelessly being hard, refractory,
intractable, inhumane, and not so diligent as they were; and from an empty
conceit of their own worth, they despise others, and will endure no man to
advise with them. Some of these presently begin to practice Physic, wanting
those helps a Physician ought to have, and which they should have learned
before, and not begin now to learn; so that they are called Doctors before they
deserve it. For then they begin to study Physic when they are called to give
Physic to their Patients. In Ingurth.
For as Marius says in Salust, It is last in time to wage war, but first in
use; so is it in curing diseases, we must know how to cure them before they
come. Scynth. 1.
Demosthenes says, the Athenians were of this condition, who did not act as
other men do after Counsel, but first they act, and then advise. So many Men
amongst us, they enquire what to do, when diseases are pressing and will give
no time to consult. L. 1. offic.
What therefore Cicere requires in Military matters a Physician must do, to
have all his business ready by praemeditation; that he may maturely perform
his work, and never depart from Reason. Also he must consider and know what
will follow, In Physic it is folly to say, I did not think.
and so determine of the event both ways; and he must not say afterward, I
did not think: Sometimes a Physician in a doubtful disease that soon hastneth
to the state, as a Fencer on the Stage, takes advice as the present occasion
will suffer him. Which I remember I formerly did sometime. For when I
considered the disease and the symptoms of it, and was well informed by the
series of words, and by the order of the Medicaments, yet the matter as I said
before, being changed, I was forced to alter the whole scene. So Terence speaks
learnedly and wisely; No man ever knew so well, Adelph. act. 5. Scen. 9.

But Age and Time will more tell,
And use makes perfect, you know
Not all what you think you do:
And what you now respect,
A second thought will reject.
The Comedian could never speak truer for the whole course of a man's life, and
chiefly in curing diseases. In Physic all must be done seriously.
For though a man long premeditate before he enters upon a business, and has
examined all things by rule, how to go to work, what to give first, what last,
at that very moment he goes about the business, he is forced to reject his
former thoughts, and take a new course as the matter directs him. Wherefore by
use and practice, and long experience, Men gain prudence, and to do their work
as they should, and so come to their desired end with good success. For
Patients that are sick, easily oft-times, recover their longed for health, and
quickly, if they make use of a skillful Physician, and are obedient to his
prescriptions. For I hold fit, that all Mountebanks and Quacksal verse should be
banished from this Art, who are not afraid to venture on men's lives and bodies;
and as the Proverb is, to try the Porters Art, by breaking of Pots, as Pliny
says, to learn by others dangers, and by false experiments and conjectures, to
kill their Patients. By whose rashness and error it comes to pass, that the
Art of healing, 1 Cor. 12.
(which St. Paul reckons amongst the gifts of the Spirit, and which next the
sacred Oracles is the most excellent thing amongst men, and most needful)
together with the Artists, is despised and neglected. Not to join to these the
Impudence of old wives, that dare turn Physicians, whom not only the universal
consent of Nations, and Authority of the Ancients has rejected from practicing
Physic: or to speak more lowly, from giving Physic, but also from all
practice of the Law, and whom St. Paul has excluded from preaching, and from
bearing office in the Church. For as Persius faith, Nature and Laws of Men
forbid us then
To practice, 1 Timothy 2. Sat. 5.
which we know not how nor when
Reason is clear against it, lest we spill
What we should save, and not cure but kill.
One steeps Hellebore, who does not know
Whether it will do good or no.


To which agrees that of Horace,

L. 1. ^ist. 1.
He that is no Seaman a Ship dares not steer,
And Hellebore to give all Quacks must fear.
Let none but Learned Doctors Physic give,
Let Smiths and Carpenters by their Trades live.
The Proverb speaks this in brief, Let every man practice what he knows.
Wherefore Pliny says, Arts would be happy, if only Artists might judge of
them, and practice them.

A Simile from Architecture and other Trades.
For since we choose a cunning Artist, and one that is careful to build our
houses, and the most expert Pilate to govern a Ship; the best Generals and
Soldiers to manage a War; the best Rhetoricians to teach us oratory, and the
best Moderator to instruct and direct our Minds: wherefore in curing diseases,
and preserving our healths do we admit of trivial Mountebanks, and doting old
Wives? To whom we give our bodies over to be killed, and the House or Soul to
be pulled down, for now every one practices Physic, A History of this
business.
and brags of skill they have. So at Ferrara, as Pontanus relates, there was a
contestation amongst the Lords of the Court, of what Profession most men were;
and when one said one thing, and another another thing, as there are in that
Commonwealth many Bakers, Butchers, Cooks, Weavers, Carpenters, Carters,
Fullers, Bankers, Usurers, Tailors, Mariners, Bawds that make the greatest
gain; there was one replied, that there was no greater number, than of those
that profess Physic, and boast of that Art, and he said, he would soon make
it appear: wherefore the next day he brought one to act this part very
cunningly, who was wrapped up with napkins all about his face, and counterfeited
himself sick of the Toothache, and then complaining he stood in the way, and
asked alms of all that past by, or some remedy for his pain. Every one that
passed by (as there were great companies) prescribed him a remedy, and said
confidently, that such a thing would presently cure him: wherefore they all
yielded upon this, That of all Trades Physicians were most numerous. And he was
not mistaken; For all people almost never so illiterate and unskilful, profess
their knowledge in Physic confidently, and practice it as boldly, when they
understand nothing of it at all.

CHAP. XVIII.
How manifold difference and variety there is in the nature of grounds.
TO add something that is next to the former Argument, I think Physicians
ought to consider the nature and qualities of all grounds. For from hence arise
diverse kinds of Plants, and of diverse faculties and virtues. In Epist.
Hence Hippocrates prescribes to Cratera, to gather herbs that grow on hills
and high Mountains. In what places Plants are best.
For they are stronger and firmer, and more effectual than those that grow near
waters, by reason of the density of the Earth, and the thinness of the Air:
but to gather the flowers of them that grow near Rivers and watery places, which
are weaker, and not very forcible, and of a sweeter juice. Since therefore we
know the force and temperament of Plants, by duly considering the nature of the
ground, and some plants delight in one ground, some in another, and all require
such Land as is proper to their natures, I will set down the differences of
them by the way, as in a Table which Virgil exactly describes, 2. Georg.
that so all plants may be fitted to their own soil, and not fail in their
forces by reason of the malignity of nutriment. For hence it is, that they do
not answer our expectation, but deceive us with vain hopes.

All ground is either or Slender, Tough. Barren, Glutinous, Lean, Gravelly,
Spare, Sandy, Fat, Pibly, Oily, Stony, Bituminous, Shelly, Plaistry, Full of
little stones, Clayie, Rare, Full of great stones, Thick, Full of Rubbish,
Strong, Chalky, Porous, or hard, from Ash-colored, Porous stone. Bitter,
Crumbly, Sweet, Thin, Sour. Hungry, Meadowie, Barren, Good for Corn, Dry,
Bearing yearly, Forced, New dug a little, Starved, Dug deep, Ill-favored, New
broken, Fertile. Turned in the Spring, in Fruitful, Dutch, Bracklandt, Salt,
Rotten, Brackish, Weak, Wheat Land.

Some places are Rugged, Clifty, Steip, Watery, Impassible, Moist, Deserts,
Morish, Untilled, Wet, Tilled, Full of streams, Dry, Moystned, Withered,
Enclosed, Course, Open, Empty, Sunny, Thirsty, Daak, Copsie, Thick, Grovy,
Shadowie, Woody, Open to the winds, Plain, Free from winds, Champion, Open to
the Air, Garden Land, Open to the Sun, Shrubby, Under ground, Near the Sea,
Burnt, Far from the Sea, Juicelesse, High, Juicy, Clifty upwards, Hot,
Downwards, Cold, Chil, Full of dew, Freesing, Wholesome, Hot, Unhealthfull,
Warm, Fenny, Thamed, Laky, Frozen, Unseemly, Mountainous, Wet, Clowdy,
Easterly, Dark, Southerly, Hot, Westerly, Dewy, Northerly.

CHAP. XIX.
Clusters of Grapes augment, but grow not ripe by the Moon beams.
The Moons operation in producing Plants.
THe Moon gives augmentation, but the Sun ripeneth. For she moves moisture, and
makes things swell, but is too weak to ripen them: so we see plants in the day
to draw nutriment moved by the Suns heat, and in the night they power it forth
again, and by the moisture they draw they grow up and increase. A Simile from
natural faculties.
For as watching and moderate exercise digest meat, and sends it into the body,
but the concoction is perfected in the night when we sleep. As we see in
drunkards, that their drunkenness is discussed by sleep: so when the Sun
enlightens the day, all things grow ripe; but they grow great when the Moon
does her office in the night, and they swell forth with juice. So we see that
Roses, Lillies, and all flowers do not open and spread in the daytime, but in
the night, and before Sunrising.

Virg. l. 1. Georg.
When the Sun sets, and evening cold does calm,
The Air, and dewy Moon does Woods Embalm.
CHAP. XX.
Why Hesiod dislikes soyling?
Dunging is unwholesome.
HEsiod that writ diligently of Husbandry, is opposed by many, because he
neglected foiling of the ground: For he was not ignorant what he said, but
rather gives counsel for health than for fruitfulness. For he thought the
Earth should be soiled with other soil than with dung-hills; and judged that
fields would be made abundantly fruitful, if men would seasonably turn up with
the plough-share the stalks of Lupins, Ciches, Peason, Beans. For all things
that grow on grounds that are dunged, Whence grain becomes subject to
corruption.
yield more-unhealthful juice; so Wheat and other corn are sooner spoiled with
Weezels, and all sorts of pulse growing in those fields, can neither last long,
nor be preserved well, but they will either be moldy, or worm-eaten. Also Ale
and Beer in the Low Countries boiled from such Corn, will not last a whit, but
grows sour. Wherefore I think Hesiod said well, That those fields are fit for
tillage, that calm winds ventilate, and the sweet Sun beams cherish, where are
no standing waters, and the fields are not fatted with dung, but only come to
maturity by their clean native moisture and heat. For what grows from thence
will last long uncorrupted, and yield more healthful nourishment. And it cannot
be that men should live long healthful in these Countries, where the Air or
their food are naught and subject to corruption, Air and food hurt or help our
health.
The one comes to pass where Lakes and bogs send forth ill sents: the other
where the ground grows not fat by its native goodness, but by dung and soil.

CHAP. XXI.
How Weezels and other Creatures that hurt Corn may be driven away or killed.
Nothing is blessed in every respect.
THere is nothing in this mortal life but has its inconveniences, and is not
subject to many mischances. For as men are subject to infinite mischiefs, and
many things are as snares to their lives round about them; so corn have their
enemies that destroy them, as Smut, Gnats, Pismires, Snails, shell-snails,
Locusts, Moths, Caterpillars, Worms, Teredines, and the Weezel that destroys
whole granaries: for this kind of Worm with a sharp pointed proboscis and
snout, Calanders Weezels.
eats into the Wheat on one side, and so devours all flowr, leaving nothing but
the bran and empty shell. Many of these Teredines breed forth in the Spring,
where corn are new mowed, Whence Corn corrupts.
when the Moon is in the full, and they are mowed and laid up wet before they
grow hard; and where windows of granaries stand against the South winds, and
not toward the North. For dryness makes all things less subject to
corruption. Some are persuaded, and I think they are in the right, that the
good and great God does sometimes send this calamity to them that are greedy
and covetous of gain, who hide their corn, or keep it up too long, to the great
damage of poor people, who cannot live without it. For Gods good providence
has plentifully given us this food, that if all other food fail, men can live
with bread only. Engrossers of Corn hateful.
Wherefore Corn-Engrossers are highly to be blamed, who hurt the poor by
raising the price of Corn, and in the greatest famins will not open their
granaries, Corenbyters.
that they make the more profit. These are injurious to the Commonwealth, and
false to the poor, whose curse are poured out against them continually. For as
Solomon says, He that hides his Corn shall have the peoples curse; Pro. 11.
buc he that brings it forth, shall be blessed by them. But God oft-times
suffers us to be thus afflicted, when we are ungrateful to him for the great
abundance we have received. For by Ezekiel he threateneth to send four
Calamities to those that forsake him, Chapter 37.
Famine, Pestilence, War, and wild Beasts; that being afflicted with these, God
sends four Calamities on men.
they might come to a better mind and repent. But if Natural causes, and nor
Gods wrath do send this mischief, we must consider, how little creatures that
destroy the Corn may be driven away, or else killed.

How Weazels are driven away.
There is nothing better to kill Weezels than brine in which Garlic is boiled,
if the pavements and walls be moystned with it; for they presently creep out of
those granaries, and dye with the very vapor of it.

Also Sagapenum, Oil lees, Castorium, Savin, Brimstone, Hartshorn, Ivy,
Galbanum, and all things that smell strong; for neither will Serpents, Snakes,
nor Bats endure the smell of them. Which Virgil the Father of all Learning
affirms,

Burn in your Stalls the smelling Cedar, L. 3. Geor.
and
The smoke of Galbanum does Snakes withstand.
So they flee from the strong smelling flowers of Hops, which also are
offensive to men's brains, and cause heaviness and drunkenness in the head.
Also the flowers of Elders, the smell where of drives away Caterpillars, and it
kills Moths and cloathflies, as Wormwood, Rue, wild Mints, Southernwood,
Savory, Walnut-leafs, Fern, Lavender, Gith, Coriander being green, Fleawort,
Bean trifoly kills fleas and Wiglice, either put under the beds, or sprinkled
upon the bedsteads with the decoction of the vinegar of Squils.

It is observed, that in our times, and also in our Ancestors days, the seed of
Navews, that the Low Country factors make so great profit of, has a wonderful
force in killing Weezels, not by any venomous quality, but by the sweetness of
it. For it is sweet and oily, and the Weezels will leave the Corn and eat
greedily on this till they be killed with. Sweet things sometimes kill Worms.
And the same thing happens to them when they get into frails of Raisins. So I
know by experience, that eating many Raisins will kill the Worms in Children,
if they eat them fasting, without any thing else eaten with them. For as
bitter, so sweet things taken abundantly will kill worms: For they swell and
burst with eating too much sweet meats. So the stomach of a man will swell, and
be tortured, if he cram in too much sweet things.

CHAP. XXII.
The cunningnesse of Worms in Man's body, and what it portends, when they come
forth by the Mouth and Nostrils.
IT has been seen sometimes miraculously, that long and round Worms
especially, have crambled upwards, and crept forth at the mouth and the
nostrils: and they do this by an imbred natural motion, if a man be long
fasting. For then they bite the stomach, Worms creeping out at the Nostrils.
and seek for meat, and when they find none to satisfy them and preserve their
lives, they creep upwards, and hunt for meat as far as the very throat. For
they by their natural instinct perceive, that the food comes in that way, and
the nostrils being open to the very throat almost, they creep thither, and
tickle the part, or else they are cast forth by sneesing, or are pulled forth
with ones forefingers: I have oft-times observed this in sound people, and when
I showed them the cause of it, I gave them content.

I have seen this also happen in sick people, but not without some imminent
danger foreshew'd by it: For so great is the putrefaction and inflammation of
humors in such bodies, that the Worms cannot endure the deadly force of the
disease: wherefore they break forth of themselves, not urged by any Crisis, or
naturally, but from the malignity of the disease. But when the violence of the
disease abates, and they are carried downwards with other excrements,
Hippocrates holds that to be healthful; but to come forth of their own accord,
L. 2. Aph. 18.
and not forced by any faculty, as we see in people that are dying, is ill for
the patient, for by a sagacity of nature they find the body ready to fail, and
that they shall want their food, and therefore they leave their habitation.

Mice forsake old houses.
So it is observed, that Rats and Mice will forsake ruinous houses, three
months before they fall. For they naturally perceive that the frame of the
house begins to part, and that the house will shortly fall So Lice and Fleas,
where they find men's bodies decay, and that the blood fails in every part, they
either leave the body, or lay hold on those parts that the blood and natural
heat stay longest in. Experience from the sagacity of Lice.
For it is approved by those that search and bury the dead, that they will hide
themselves in that pit of the stomach where the breast blade ends, or in that
grisle that lies upon the vocal artery. For those parts being next the heart,
are hot until the last breath: which when some related unto me that were
employed about sick people, I said presently, That it was a certain sign of
death, and that the Soul was ready to breathe forth. But since we formerly made
mention of Worms, I thought fit to add this, That many things will kill all
worms and drive them forth. But nothing is better than Worms dried upon a tile
at the fire, and the powder given to those that are full of worms, will
presently drive forth all within the body: As Pliny and other searchers of
Natural things assert, that a man being stung by a Scorpion, L. 10. c. 2.
the remedy is to drink in oil or wine, the ashes of Scorpions.

So our Contrymen say, that the biting of a mad-dog is cured by the burnt
hairs of the same creature, drank in wine. For it drives forth the venom, and
keeps off all the danger of it, and makes the body that is bit, that it is of
force to attract, and overcome the venom. So sometimes two contrary poisons
mingled, do cure and not kill: As Ausonius wittily sets down in an Epigram,
concerning a woman that would have poisoned her husband with Wolfs-bane:

A whorish Wife her jealous Husband to
Gave poison, yet she feared it would not do;
Wherefore Quicksilver intermingled she,
Thought for to hasten death, which set him free.
For if apart these poisons you shall give,
They kill; but joined together, make him live.
Laevinus Lemnius, a Physician of Zirizea, CONCERNING Hidden and Natural
Questions.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
That humors and not bad Angels cause diseases, yet the aereal spirits do mix
themselves therewith, and increase the diseases, by adding fire unto them.
THere are some amongst us that are but moderately versed in the Works of
Nature, and know not the causes of diseases, their original, progress, and
symptoms that follow, or accidents, and because they cannot attain to the
reason of them, they refer all to evil Angels, and say they are bewitched, since
the Devils do constantly employ themselves to hurt us. Plenty and malignity of
humors is the beginning of diseases.
So they that are sick of a Tertian Ague, the humors entering the veins every
third day, are said to be troubled with an evil spirit; and the like is said
for quartans, and continent fevers, as quotidians, diurnals, and all burning
Fevers. But how unreasonable and absurd this is, any man can tell that is
moderately versed in the Secrets of Nature. For since man's body consists of
the mixture of the four Elements, and has as many humors which from the
faculty of the seed partake of four qualities, hot, moist, cold, dry; what can
be said more, than that diseases arise from the distemper of these, by defect,
or excess, and from thence they take their original? It is proved, because we
see they grow mild and quiet by vomit, sweat, opening a vein, cupping-glasses
set to the part affected, by the opening of the Terms and Emrods, also by the
giving of Glysters and Suppositaries. But God for his inestimable Wisdom has
appointed orderly motions in the nature of things, and would have nothing done
rashly or by chance, but all things in a decent order and continued series. So
the Stars, the Elements, the Sea, the times of the year, Natures order and
progress.
and the Skies of Heaven have their motions, and changes, and move by a certain
order. The humors are under the like law, for they have certain motions, and
effects and periods in man's body, that every humor keeps its turn according to
the variety of the four parts of the year, and exercises it faculties and
forces on man's body, so it is that the blood in the spring is in force, and
breeds fever and diseases of its own nature; so choler every other day in
summer with choleric burning causes a tertian Phlegm, The humors keep their
times.
corrupting in the winter quarter, causes a quotidian intermitting, and
melancholy when Autumn comes, makes a quartan. So a diary ends in one day or a
little more, because that consists not in the putrefaction of humors, but with
an aereal spirit enflamed. And all these are effected by the same law as the
rising and setting of Stars are, as also is the flux and reflux of the Sea, and
the pleasant change of herbs and plants springing forth. But that is admirable
that the four humors make choice of certain hours and times of the day, The
motion of the four humors in the body.
and divide the artificial day, and night amongst them by twelve temporal
hours, which to be true I have found by experience; for by observing them; I
use to pronounce certainly when the fever will come. For the blood is
vigorous, as Soranus Ephesius testifies, Math. 20.
which like the Evangelists measure the times and spaces of day and night by
equal hours, from nine at night, till three in the morning, Man's mind more
lively in the morning from the vapor of blood.
in which time the blood is concocted and elaborated in the Liver, Hence it is
that the mind before day break is more cheerful, and all people both sound and
sick, are more light-hearted by reason of the sweet vapor of the blood, but
yellow choler has its turn from three in the morning, till nine in the
morning, in which time the natural faculty does part the choler from the
blood, and sends it to the Gall bladder, hence it is that a man is then more
prone to anger, and will be easily offended, but black choler, or melancholique
juice does its office from nine in the morning till three in the afternoon, and
sits at helm. In this time the Liver is cleansed of this gross humor which is
sent to the Milt by nature; hence it is that in those hours the understanding
of man is clowded, and his mind is sad, All the humors are vigorous at certain
hours.
by the dark gross fumes that arise from thence; Phlegm moves from three at
night, till nine at night; for then supper being ended, concoction begins in
the stomach to be perfected, and the meat to be boiled and turned to juice.
Hence it is that phlegm swimming on the stomach, and carried to the brain,
makes a man sleepy. Now if you exactly count the manner of all these, you shall
find that the very hours that the several humors take their turns. Fevers
begin to assault the sick, and as the spaces are ended that serve for the
several humors, if they be simple and without mixture, the diseases are
terminated also. So continent Fevers, and as many as proceed from blood, come
upon us in the morning: tertians about nout noon, that is, at the sixth hour,
which is to us the twelfth hour, both of day and night. Quartans come about the
ninth hour, which is to us three in the afternoon. The quotidian comes from
phlegm, about the first watch of the night. But if the humors overflow, and
are mingled one with another, as they are wont to be, then they keep not their
lawful times and orders, for they are more sharp, A simile from the concours
of the Winds.
and continue longer. For as winds coming together, raise more grievous
tempests.

When East and West, Aeneid. 1.
and rainy South do roar,
Roling the mighty billows to the shore.
So a disease is more violent by concours of humors, and diseases joined to,
cruelly torture man's body.

For in one body, Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
cold, hot, moist, and dry;
Soft, hard, light, heavy, strive for victory.
It is frivolous to refer the causes of these things to ill spirits. For all
these things consist in the corruption or inflammation, quality or quantity of
the humors. For it is these things that make the fits shorter or longer. Why
blood causes continual fevers.
But when blood much abounds in the body, it causes but one continual fit,
because that putrefaction, and inflammation is in the receptacles of the veins,
in which the blood runs, as through Conduit Pipes. Wherefore nature like a wise
and faithful consul, in a Civil and intestine war, is always at work, and
without intermission, to cast forth the disease. But phlegm, A simile from the
Wisdom of a Consul.
yellow choler, and black, because they are not in so great quantities, and
are without the straightness of the veins, they do not constantly molest, but
with intermission, and diseases that arise from these humors are not so
deadly, because they have not so open a passage to the heart, and principal
parts, and therefore cannot easily do so much hurt. Yet some of these Feavours
last long, partly, because the humor abounds, and, partly because of the
clamminesse thereof, that it can hardly be melted and concocted. Wherefore
Melancholiqe men are seldom merry, Melancholique people not easily drunk.
unless they drink deep, and of strong wine; for that humor is wonderful
cold and dry. Men of this constitution are like Iron, that must have a great
strong fire to make it hot, A simile fit for melancholique people from burning
Iron.
that it may be hammered. For they want much strong Wine, and they can well
endure it, and when they are well whittled, they will play the mimicks, and
make sport, and dance like Camels. For being crabbed by nature, when they are
in drink they desire to seem very merry, Melancholique Natures, when they are
hot with wine.
and pleasant. And as they are hardly overcome with drink, so they can as
hardly be recovered of drunkenness. For when they drink abundantly, and eat
excessively; it falls out that the thick gross vapors stick faster to the
brain, so that the day following, melancholique Imaginations grow more upon
them: For from the Wine the day before not digested, and discussed, their whole
body sends up stinking vapors. For it happens to them as it is with houses set
on fire, which though they are not wholly consumed by fire, nor quite burnt up,
yet a burnt smell affects our nostrils and brain: A good Simile from houses on
fire.
so making ill favored sents and vapors arising from the drink the day
before, are very offensive unto them; and trouble their brain and minds, and
when they cannot discuss these, and that they perceive their phantasms to
increase, they fall to drinking again, to expel those vapors of the former
wine, Crudity hurts Melancholique people.
and imagination rising from thence, as one nail with another: since therefore
the causes and original of diseases are so, and the nature and condition of the
humors is such, that no reason can be thought on for the access, and coming
on of fevers, than from the quantity or quality of the humors; Let no man
think that evil spirits do raise these tempests, or distempers. I know, Ill
spirits offend our minds and bodies, and raise winds also.
and shall easily grant that the Devils, or aereal spirits are very knowing,
and find out all things for their purposes, and do not only mix themselves
with the humors, but also they entice and urge the minds of men to all
wickedness: and that the good Angels help men in all good things, and are
companions and assistants unto them. So Raphael traveled with Tobias his Son.
So the spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson, and he rent the Lion like a Kid.
Tob. 14.
Also a divine spirit came upon Saul, 1 King 10.
and he Prophesied with the other Prophets. But after wards an evil spirit
troubled his mind and stirred him up against David. So they thrust themselves
into tempests, and cause thundrings and lightnings. So that with their help we
see Towers and Mountains are rent in pieces; Corn, Cattle, and flocks of Sheep
are destroyed; yet the violence of the winds can do this without them. So those
winds Saint Luke speaks of, are very violent upon Sea and Land, Act. 27.
and by the breaking and clashing of clouds fire is cast forth, that sail-yards
and sails are burnt with it. A simile from the violence of Guns and Ordinance.
The like violence is wrought by great Guns upon Ramparts, be they never so
strong, that not only the ball strikes those that are near, but the very wind
and noise of them hurts some that are farther off: These and many such like
things, though they may be done by natural reason, Job 12.
yet the Devil by Gods permission or grant may intermingle with them, and make
all worse. So Satan exasperated Saul's melancholy, and provoked him to commit
many murders, and to lie in wait, and to commit many horrible things. But
because this affect of the mind, and error may be referred to natural causes,
therefore it appears that the Music of the Harp took away the fury of him, and
his mind grew more calm. For as when strong winds blow upon the Sea, A simile
from the flowing of the Sea.
the waves are more frequent and the Sea rages, and as melancholique men grow
more sad, by loss of their estates and other casualties, and choleric people
grow angry by drinking Wine, or by being jear'd, and mocked: So evil spirits,
or witches, drive on such men headlong to wicked actions, that though the will
be ready and desires it, yet can it not moderate the actions, and force of
counsels. Which our Savior seems to intimate when he said to Peter, by way of
reprehension: Math. 16.
Get thee behind me Satan. For Christ called him so because he was against him,
and strove to divert him from our redemption that he was about. And unless the
great good God by his singular favor should bridle the fury of the adversary
against us, 1 Pet. 5.
man could not subsist or defend himself against the fury of this Monster. For
he tryes all ways, and searches all passages, that he may set upon us, and
winnow us as Wheat. Wherefore as Job says, God sets a sword against him, that
is, Luke 22. chapter 40. A place of Job explained.
sets him his bounds that he cannot pass, and limits Satan's rage, for he can
go no further then God will give him leave, and God will let no man be
afflicted beyond his strength. By which Antidote St. Paul comforts all that are
in danger, 1 Cor. 10.
or in calamity, but shows a way to escape from the tentation, that the
affliction may be no more then we can suffer, or that we may be suddenly
delivered. I have been the longer in this that the Reader may understand that
the humors are the cause of diseases principally. But the devils, the Stars,
and the quality of the ambient Air, and other external causes are but
accidental. For since all passions of the mind are quieted by reason, but the
diseases of the body are cured by fit remedies; who can refer the causes of
diseases better than to the quantity and quality of the humors? And if a man
please to examine the humors of the body, What manners come from bodily
humors?
and what force they have, he shall find that they do not only constitute the
habit of the body but the manners also of the mind, yet so that manners and
Religion are set above them in the uppermost place. For blood, or if you regard
the qualities, heat and moisture produce men of a flourishing constitution; but
as for the mind, they are lascivious, merry, truly honest without dissembling,
and they are something above Fools. But yellow chollerbrings forth men of a dry
and swartish color, but they are hot, deceitful, ingenious, of a fierce angry
constitution, wise, industrious, cunning, inconstant, false.

Who naught but a fair countenance reveal,
Pers. sat.
In a false heart a crafty Fox conceal.
Melancholy juice makes men stable and constant, and that will not easily
depart from what they once undertake, or forsake their opinion, that if they
happen to addict themselves to any sect, they will hold it tooth and nail, and
not be easily drawn off. This affect is milder in choleric people, for they by
reason of their unstable floting humors, and thin spirits are quickly
transported, and though they be very hot and clamorous, yet they are soon
pleased, and not so obstinate. Phlegm is unprofitable to form men's manners, and
therefore flegmatique people are dull and unfit for any great matters.

CHAP. II.
Melancholique, Mad, and Frenzy people, and such as are furious from other
causes; will sometimes speak strange Tongues they never learned, and yet not be
possessed with the Devil.
The wonderful force of the humors in stirring the mind.
A Great force troubles the humors, and a great heat troubles the mind: for
those that are in strong fevers, will speak some tongue they never learned;
sometimes elegantly, sometimes im perfectly and confusedly, which I do not much
wonder to be done by those that are possessed with the Devil; because they
have the knowledge of all natural things. As Wine so humors trouble the mind.
Now the humors are so violent and forcible where they are inflamed or
corrupted, that the dark smoke of them ascending unto the brain, as we see when
men drink too much strong Wine, will make men speak languages they understand
not: should this come from the Devil, these diseases would not be cured with
purging medicaments, nor opiats by procuring of sleep. For by these and many
more, wherewith the Art of Physic abounds, being rightly administered, we see
such persons restored, and to be the same they formerly were. When therefore
the humors very frequently boil, and the spirits are much troubled thereby,
and the exceeding swift motion of the mind brings forth some language not known
before, as we see sparks fall from striking of a flint. A simile from striking
sire with a flint.
Now it is natural to man's mind to be fit and ready to learn, and it is endowed
with Arts before it has the use of them; so that Plato's saying is not
unlikely, that all our knowledge is but remembrance. The mind is endowed with
Arts before we learn them. In Phaed.
For the mind of man contains in it self the knowledge of all things; but it
being oppressed with the weight of the body, and thick humors cannot easily
illustrate it self, and as fire raked up in ashes, it must be stirred and
fostered, A simile from fire racked up in ashes.
though imbred sparks and light of nature may shine forth When therefore this
diviner part of man the Soul is shaken with diseases, she brings forth such
things as lay hid within her, and uses her imbred forces. An excellent simile
from the sweetness of plants.
For as some plants smell not at all till you crush them in your hand: so the
imbred faculties will not show themselves unless they be tried like Gold on a
Touchstone. By the same reason Jet Amber, will not always draw chaff and
straws, and such other things as are driven with the wind, A simile from the
effect of stones and plants.
but only when they are rubbed and heated. So when you whet daggers often, and
swiftly, you make sparks fly forth. Also the force of nature may be known in
plants and Jewels. For Piony, Misseltoe, Fruticulus, Vervain, Coral,
bloudstone, Pearls* Emrods, Whence there is force in raising spirits.
and other Amulets, that is, such things as drive away things hurtful, applied
to the body, or hanged about the neck, by a present force, either discuss
diseases, or stop blood, and do other things according as their natural quality
is; But all these are of more force taken inwardly.

A simile from the efficacy of wine.
You may make experience by strong wine, that if you smell to it, it refreshes
the mind and spirits and heart; but when you drink it down into the body, (for
it does nothing in the vessel, but when it comes into the veins) then it shows
its force, and will make dull fellows very eloquent in speech. For the heat of
the wine sharpens the mind, and brings forth what lies hid in the brain. Just
so do the humors affect men, when the whole force of the disease has filled
the cranies of the brain, and the mind and spirits both vital and animal begin
to be stirred. We see some in burning Fevers, that are most vigorous commonly
in Summer, who will discourse very well, and speak very eloquently, and in that
dialect, which when they are recovered, they cannot perform; which I said were
not troubled with the devil, and that they did not this by the devils
instigation, but from the force of the disease, and violence of the humors,
whereby the mind of man is inflamed as if a firebrand were put under it. I have
recovered some of these by Opiates in potion, and fomentations applied to their
heads, and so brought them to their right minds; when the disease was gone,
they forgot all they spoke or did; and when I told them of some things, they
were ashamed of them, and wondered they had so much forgot themselves. So those
that are dying, because there is an ardent force of the mind raised in them,
and some divine Inspiration comes into them before their Souls depart, use to
prophecy, and to foretell certainly what shall follow hereafter, and that so
considerately and handsomely, that the standers by admire at it. Why a Soul
departing will foretell things to come.
But that the Soul, as it partakes of a heavenly original, can foreknow things
to come, especially when death is near, shall be showed by me in its proper
place.

CHAP. III.
Of the Epilepsie's violence; which disease the common people both now and
formerly ascribe to certain Saints; lastly, how it may be cured. And by the
way, that such are not to be buried presently, that die of the
Falling Sickness, Lethargy, or Apoplex.
WE have showed elsewhere what effects the humors work in the bodies of men;
but since they do diversely affect us according to the diversity of places, I
thought good to speak of those also that are inherent in the brain. For those
diseases that are in the highest part of the body, do not only afflict us with
pain, but also take away sense and motion, and hurt the mind; as we may see in
the Apoplex, Lethargy, and the Epilepsie that is weaker in children and women.
To whom the Epilepsie must be ascribed.
The Falling Sickness, against Hippocrates mind, was ascribed by the Ancients
to some special Saints; for when those that stood next saw the diseased so
suddenly tortured and pulled, We must not ascribe to Saints the torments of
diseases.
they thought some Saints that were their Enemies, or some ill spirits must be
the cause thereof, and sent such mischief; wherefore they made vows to them,
and set up Tables for their deliverance. Hence our Age has distinguished the
Epilepsie into many sorts, and one they ascribe to St. John the Baptist,
another to Cornelius and Hubert; but as no man should deride the folly of these
men; so I think by degrees we should persuade them better, to understand that
these things should be referred to natural causes. For they are of diverse sorts
in respect of the habit of the body, or largeness of the passages, or
abundance of clammy humors: hence some howl and bark like dogs, some hiss and
gnash their teeth; some cry loud and terribly: Differences of
Falling-sicknesses.
some are wholly mute, especially their brain being stuffed with gross
humors, and their midriff oppressed, and the conduits of breathing stopped.
Whence it comes that they cannot freely draw their breath, and these are most
tormented of all men in my opinion. But the symptoms increase most at the full
and new Moon, or when she is in those signs that respect the brain or heart.
For then the humors abound most, especially when after North winds the South
winds begin to blow; for as these winds are turbulent and unwholesome, so are
they cold and moist. The Moon exasperates moist diseases.
For moist bodies that use moist meats, and are in a moist climate, are more
fit and subject to this disease: which is evident, because children, and women
are most subject unto this, and if it cease not about the 25th year, when the
natural heat is augmented, Aphor. 7. Com. 5.
and causes a dryer temper, and if it continue beyond that age, it uses to
accompany one until Death, that is, it never ends till death put an end
thereto. Since therefore the cause of the Falling Sickness is so Evident, The
habit of Epileptick persons terrible.
I would persuade the ignorant people to think of no other cause of this
disease, than the motion of the humors, that men may not fear so much, when
they see their mouths draw awry, their cheeks swollen, and strutting forth with a
frothy humor: and should not be dismayed to come near them, and lend them their
help. For so are all those that stand by and are fearful, amazed, when they see
them rending themselves, and beating their heads and bodies against posts, that
they think there is no hopes of them, and so cause them to be buried before
their Souls are departed from them. For I have found it in our own days, and
in former Ages also, that some have broken the Coffin, and lived again.
Wherefore it is fit a Law should be made, that those who are to take care of
the dead bodies should not presently put them into their coffins, whom they
think to be dead, Apoplecticks are not to be presently buried.
especially those that are strangled by the Apoplex, Epilepsie, or rising of
the Mother; for oft-times their soul lies within them, and they live again. But
when the Plague and pestilent Fevers rule, Men dead of the Plague must be
presently enterred.
I think it not necessary nor fit to observe this so strictly, because the
contagion will presently spread when they are dead, and infect those that are
near. For there is less danger to stand by those that have the Plague, and to
attend upon them when they are alive, than to stand by them when they are dead,
A fit Simile from Candles put out.
for then the contagion spreads and infects as it goes. For it is with bodies
newly dead, as with Torches and Candles, that whilst they are lighted they do
not stink, but when they are put out, they fill the room with a stinking
savor. Wherefore the danger is greater to be present when a man dies of the
plague, than when he is yet alive, or dead and grown cold and stiff. But if you
keep these bodies a little too long unburied, they become stinking Carcasses,
and they do by little and little send forth filthy exhalations, and corrupt
filthy matter runs from them, which happens but seldom in the Apoplex and
other cold diseases of the brain, The motion and revolution of humors in such
as are dead.
unless it be very hot weather, or the bodies be very fat. And if there be no
such matter to hinder, they need not be buried till three days be over. For
when seventy two hours are over, the humors cease to move, and stir not,
because in that time the Moon has passed one sign in the Zodiac, by force
whereof the humors run in the body: which some say was the reason, that Christ
took occasion to raise Lazarus miraculously that was dead four days, John 11.
lest any man should say he was not dead, but only in a trance, and come to
himself again. Why Christ raised Lazarus no sooner.
Also when he by his Death and Resurrection wrought man's salvation, he took the
same occasion. For besider that he had a mortal wound on his side, he lay three
days in the Sepulcher, to take away all objections from them who would speak
irreverently, and not as they ought concerning his Death and Resurrection, but
calumniate all he said or did. In which error and madness the Jews continue
even to this day. But since those diseases are so formidable that bereave a man
of his understanding, that all the standers by are frighted at it, I shall do a
considerable work, to add some present remedies, and those not ordinary,
whereby every one that is unskilful in Physic, may preserve himself and his
family from them. And because all diseases of the brain, especially such as
proceed from a cold humor, are near of kin, these remedies may be used to them
all indifferently, as to loss of memory, vertigo's, panting of the heart,
trembling, Epilepsies, Lethargies, Apoplexies, and for the hag and night mare,
and other diseases of the night, which disease is called by the Greeks (...).
Amongst innumerable remedies against these diseases, I have found four
especially to be most effectual, Remedies for the Nightmare.
not so much approved by experience as by reason. The round black Piony seed;
for the cornered and red colored seed is useless herein: the round bulbous
root of Squils, the shavings of man's skull; and Misseltoe. I should show
severally how they perform these effects, The force of Pionie.
and by what reason they perform it.

Galen eryes up Pionie as much as Cato did Coleworts, which not only by an
Elementary quality but from the whole substance of it and secret property
resists this disease. And it will raise children that fall, because it is not
so strong in them, if it be but banged about their necks. For it discusseth and
consumes the flegmatique humor that is the seminary of this disease. Also the
seeds of this given inwardly will do it more effectually in such as are of
years. For it drinks up the windy venomous miosture, and brings the body to a
hotter and dryer temper. Some say, this seed is the best, that comes from the
first increase of the male Pionie. For a long time it brings forth unprofitable
shoots without seed. But when it is of perfect growth, the husks cleave, and in
one part you shall see berries very smooth and black; in another, kernels of a
shining scarlet red color. The black seed must be kept for use. Yet not so
superstitiously, as to hold, that the seed of the next year is uneffectual; for
that seed that comes after ten years, is a present remedy if it be not rotten
and decayed.

What sorce Squills have in the Epilepsie.
Squills are better than Pionie, and have a wonderful force and faculty, not
only for the Epilepsie, but also for all diseases that proceed of a clammy
viscous humor, in what part soever of the body. For it has an abstergent
force to dissolve all clammy things. For which use I use to give a spoonful of
an oxymel that I make of it, which because it is exceeding bitter, I use to
mingle it with syrup of French Lavender, and I put in a little Nutmeg to it;
also I command them to wash their mouths with vinegar of Squills, so as to
swallow it down by degrees.

Also I find, that the shavings of man's skull are a present remedy to dry up
those humors that cause those diseases, if some part of a man's skull scraped
off be given to a man, or of a woman's skull to a woman, and that in wine, or
Oxymel of Squills, not by any hidden quality, but because it dryes exceedingly:
for which cause the runner and blood of a Hare stays the bloody flux, and
other fluxes of the belly; so I find by experience, that man's bones grated
given for the dysentery in red wine, will stop it, by a binding quality, and
drying force, which also is excellently performed by artificial Pissaphaltum,
that is, Arabian Mummie, if you mingle but a little; sea-Amber, which is called
Sperma Coeti. Misselto a Plant, what force it has against the Epilepsie.
Misselto is next to these if not before them; and it is called viscus, because
there is a clammy humor in the berries, which if you rub it with your fingers
is like birdlime; for by that word is not meant venomous glue, and snotty
matter called Ixia, that will inflame the tongue, and glue all the Entrals
together: But a shrubby plant, that the Priests and Druides of France, as
Caesar calls them, held most sacred. Comment. l. 6.
It never grows on the earth, but is always green, upon the Oak and Holm
Tree; nor of any seed, but from the excrement of the wood pigeon and blackbird.
I have often seen that shrub a cubit in height, green as a leek within,
brownish without, and the leaf like box leafs, almost Saffron colored, Which
Virgil the Father of all Learning, and who was as well versed in the knowledge
of all things as any man, sets down in elegant verse;

Talis erat species auri frondentis opaca ^^^id. ^.

Ilice: sit leni crepitabant bractea vento:
Quale solet silvis brumali tempore Viscum
Fronde virere nova, quod non sua seminat arbos,
Et croceo foetu teretes circundare truncos.
-- Latet arbore opaca
Aureus, and foliis and lento vimine ramus
Auricomos generans acinos, atque arbore soetus.
Whereby the Poet intimates, that the deadly assaults and terrible diseases of
the brain, will yield to nothing sooner than to the use and medicament made of
this golden colored shrub. For it discusses, extenuates, and dryes clammy
humors, and by a wonderful force it cures the Falling Sickness, if sand or
the powder of it be drank in wine. The Elk.
Now we shall speak of the force of the Elk. Cajus Caesar in his Commentary
says, it is a Creature of a Goat kind, but greater in bulk. Bell. Gal. 6. Deuteronomy.
14.
In the Bible it is called a stone buck, like to the wild Goats that the Jews
might seed on. The claw of this Beast is a present remedy against the
Epilepsie, as I have proved by many Experiments, though the reason seem hard to
me. In the Low Countries there are many subject to this disease, because this
Country is cold and moist, The South wind raises the Epilepsie.
and the South Wind blows most commonly, which is the most unhealthful of all
winds, so that you shall see them in the public ways and streets miserable
spectacles, and they fly to this remedy as the cure of it. It chanced, that in
my Entry twice a woman fell down suddenly as if she had been thunder-stricken;
A true History.
which when I saw I came near, and I put a Ring on her finger next her little
finger, that had a piece of an Elks claw set in it; She presently arose, and
drank and went merrily on her way. Another woman when I was not at home, cried
out strangely, and fell down on the earth, and knocked her head against the
ground: One of my family laid a piece of the Elks claw on the palm of her hand,
and so shutting her hand, because it was not set in a ring, How things applied
outwardly can abate diseases.
the disease presently left her. I think this is done by some special hidden
property, or because it dryes and discusseth mightily. Were it not a solid
substance, some might say, a vapor goes forth of it, as from flowers and
herbs, which yet I think may be done, though the spirits that come forth be
very thin, and dry, and not windy, so that they are not so sensible, and cannot
be perceived but by a secret operation. So Stones, Jewels, Gold, Iron, and all
brazen metals, breathe forth a hidden force, but they must be heated by
rubbing, for when they are on fire, they smell more manifestly, and insinuate
themselves into the body. A Simile from Wheels heated and spakling flints.
As we see when wheels grow hot with a quick motion, or when a horses shoes
strike fire on the pavement. For presently a smoky burnt sent is raised into
the Air. And if the cause of this Effect is not evident enough, and no probable
reason can be thought on; yet we may say, that these things are effected by
that force by which the Unicorns horn put into wine or water dispels the
poison, Unicorns horn resists venom.
and kills spiders by touching them. I shall speak of stones taken out of the
mawes of Swallows, and by what virtue they cure the Falling Sickness, in
another place.

CHAP. IV.
Whence comes it that diseases are long and Chronical, and will not easily be
cured: Whence come Fevers to revive again, and to be with intermission and
truce for a time; which all men ought to know, that they may not easily fall
into a disease; or being fallen may soon cure it.
LOng diseases may be well compared to long and tedious voyages, that a weak
man, A simile from a journey that is difficult.
or one that carries a great burden is forced to go, on his feet. He by reason
of the difficulty of the way, and weight of his burden goes forward the more
slowly, and is more pressed than if he were carried in a Chariot, or had some
loving partner to help him carry his pack. But since there are many causes that
lengthen out diseases, amongst the rest, this seems to me to be the chief,
because so soon as diseases take hold, Withstand in the beginning.
they neglect to call a skillful Physician, who by prescribing a wholesome
diet, and fit remedies in time, may help nature, and by his Art, may underprop
her when she fails. For the Physician is Natures servant and takes care for her
preservation with all his might. The Physician is Natures servant.
Whence it comes that they that know not what may do them good or ill, feed on
naughty meats, even when diseases are seizing upon them, and make no choice of
diet, and so stoppings and corruption is augmented, and the disease gathers
strength, and all force of the body fails. But if diseases fall in Autumn,

For diseases are like unto the year,
Turning about the same way like a sphere.
Now there rises together a double cause of duration, partly from the
abundance of cold clammy matter, and partly from the toughness and clamminesse
of it. For Autumn, and Winter parts of the year, cool, and thicken the humors,
and cause a continuance, that diseases are longer, for the diseases cannot be
discussed because the humors are thick and fast together, and the skin is not
so full of transpiration. For as Wax, Pitch, Tallow, Rosin, and all fluxible
matter grows hard in winter season, and will not be so easily handled and made
pliable: A Simile from a fluxible thing.
so when the weather is cold, the humors are hardly mel^ed and dissolved: and
it is proved because in winter men sweat less, wherefore we must give such
medicaments as will wipe away forcibly, and open the pores. For the filth and
rubbish of the humors stick no less to these men's bodies, than the lees and
dregs do to vessels, which must be soked with salt water or pickle, A simile
from rubbing of vessels.
and rubbed with beesoms to make them clean, and take away all ill smells from
them. Otherwise whatsoever is put into them will grow sour and be spoiled.
Wherefore Hippocrates seems to me to have spoken very right; Impure bodies the
more you feed them, the more you hurt them. L. 2. Aphor. 12.
For the food corrupts being mingled with vicious humors, and so the disease
lasts the longer, or if at any time by the Physicians skill or force of nature
the disease begins to abate, it will grow again by the least occasion. For new
corruption is bred in the body, and a filthy smell accompanies it, as we may
perceive by the breath, and this diffused in the body vitiates the spirits, and
extinguisheth natural heat, for want of transpiration. To this belongs that
sentence of Hippocrates: If there be any remainders in the body or relics, L.
2. Aph. 12.
the diseases will grow again; for the nutriment taken in does not strengthen
the sick, but corrupts by mingling with ill Juice, and increases the disease,
as we see in quartans, and bastard tertians, when the Patients will not be
ruled by the Physician, not use a good diet. Now these Fevers are with
Intermission because the humor is without the veins and farther from the
heart. Whence comes intermission in Peavers.
But in continual fevers men are tormented constantly, by reason of the sharp
biting vapors of blood and choler inflamed within the veins, which when they
cannot freely get forth and breathe out, they immediately offend the heart and
liver, and do more hurt by their corruption arising from stopping, Blood
subject to corruption.
than if they were without the veins. For when there is great plenty of
humors, and the corruption is vehement, and the proportion of this is great
for putrefaction (for blood is of a hot and moist quality, and soon corrupts)
it falls out that these fevers always rage, and soon come to their state.
Whence Hippocrates maintains that such diseases dure not above fourteen days;
L. 2. Aph. 23.
and sometimes where the matter is surious and swells, they end on the fifth,
seventh, ninth, or eleventh day. The causes of Fevers that come by circuits,
and at set times are contrary, for they come from some force bred in the
humor, and by reason of place and time, whence it happens that they come with
intermission, that they anted are the time, or come slower and later, that they
are unstable and unconstant, and the fits last longer sometimes. Fevers grow
stronger and come sooner where the humors are increased and more inflamed,
Anticipating Fevers.
or where some error has been committed, or there has been some intemperance
in meat and drink. Fevers that come later.
But Fevers come later and more gently, when the matter decreaseth, and the
stopping and corruption being discussed, it abates and decays sensibly.
Instable wandering fevers.
But when one humor takes upon it another nature, or changes its place, or
is mingled and confounded with another, the fits come in no order but with
uncertain motion, and no certain time is observed by them. Long Fevers
A long fit is made by a plentiful humor and vapor, and that is diffused all
through the body, and that which is clammy and gross. For as moist green wood
is long a lighting and burning; A simile from green wood and old flesh.
and as Ox beef, if it be old requires long seething: so a clammy humor must
be longer a steeping, and grow soft by concoction, and made fluxible that it
may be fit for excretion. But since we showed before that humors corrupting
without the veins, and when they are inflamed in any other part of the body,
Intermitting Fevers.
cause intermitting fevers than give us time to breathe; yet of times we
observe that these will more continually though they be without the veins, both
by reason of plenty of humors, and from the sharpness of them. As we see in
parts that are inflamed, as in carbuncles, bubo's, Carbuncles without the body
cause continual fevers.
and all contagious and pestilent Impostumes, In which a continual fever and
not an intermitting is kindled; though the venom break forth without the
veins, and be far from the heart, for the pestilent venomous force penetrates
to the heart, and hurts the principal parts, infecting both the natural and
viral spirits. Whence it is that these diseases are numbered amongst acute
diseases, because they soon come to their state, and the change to health or
death is very sudden. For the like befalls those bodies as happens to a City
besieged, A simile taken from a City besieged.
which is so stormed without intermission by the Enemy with Guns, and other
engines of war, that it can hardly stand out any longer against the violence of
the enemy, and looks every moment to be subdued: unless it can with Ordnance
and Engines make opposition, or can sally out and beat the enemy away. For to
yield and to make an agreement for life and safety, as they do that fight
faintly against an enemy or a disease were ignoble, and commonly very hurtful,
for the Conquerours of times will not stand to agreements, but will break their
words: so in acute diseases it used to fall out that the sick cannot endure
violence of the disease, and cannot live above fourteen days, if they can hold
out so long, unless nature be strong and well assisted by the Physicians art,
and can conquer the disease, which being obtained, she can hardly recollect her
forces, As the assaults of enemies, so diseases must be driven off.
and cannot presently recover what she has lost by violence, but recovers her
forces by degrees, and to reedifie and fortify her battered walls.

CHAP. V.
Of those that come forth of their Beds, and walk in their sleep, and go over
tops of Towrs, and roofs of houses, and do many things in their sleep, which
men that are awake can hardly do by the greatest care and industry.
IT happens that some in their youth and flourishing years (for old men want
vital spirits, and are to weak too undertake such things, Whence it comes that
some men walk and cry out in their sleep.
and are slow in venerious actions) will leap out of their beds at mid night,
or about break of day, and do such things that men that are awake can hardly
do, and to do it with so little danger that all that see it admire it: Which if
you do not hinder them, and call them back, they will by degrees go to bed
again. But when they do these things, if you speak to them in a known voice, or
call them by their christian names, You must not call night walkers by their
proper names.
they will fall being frighted thus; their spirits being dissipated, and their
natural force discussed whereby they perform these things. Wherefore you must
let them go as they will, and to retire again at pleasure. But they that are
troubled with the nightmare, The night mare.
and are toiled in their sleep, which happens when smoky fuliginous gross
vapors offend the heart and brain, they must be pulled and called by their
proper names, for they are presently wakened if you speak but low, and they
come to themselves, the fumes being discussed, and the blood sinking down,
which is diffused through the conduits of the veins. But for the most part this
disease comes at beginning of the spring upon those that have always a crudity
on their stomachs, Ill to ly upon the back.
and that lie often on their backs. Whence it comes that they ly with open eyes
and mouths, which is great inconvenience to their health. For suddenly as if
some great weight came upon them they feel that straightness, that they cannot
cry out, but mourn and lament, but so soon as one calls them by their names,
they will presently turn on their side, and shake of those hags they thought
oppressed them. But our night walkers are clean contrary to these: for they
with their eyes shut, walk in the dark and make a great noise every where, and
sometimes they are silent, and go upward and downward, and clamber up to the
tops of houses without any help; which I believe is done by them, by their
swelling and frothing blood, and by their hot fiery spirit, which being carried
into the seat of the mind, drives on the force and faculties of the soul
whereby she perfects her functions, and the instrumental parts to these
actions, and moves them to these effects. Hot spirits cause of motion in sleep.
Whence it comes that the body by the force of the animal spirit which contains
the strength of the nervs and muscles, that is the office of feeling and moving
in the brain, and maintains it, is carried upwards, and by the force thereof in
sleep, is provoked to such actions. Such conditioned men are of fine and loose
woven bodies, and of little stature, but full of active spirits, and hot minds:
whence it is that if they lay hold of any thing with the outmost joints of
their hands or feet, they will balance and stay themselves, and stick fast to
the planks. For it falls out with these bodies as it is with those boys, A
simile from vessels of boys the sea.
that are cast into the mouth of the Sea in the Low Countries, whereby
Marrieners know how to ride safely, and sail to their Ports, avoiding fords and
rocks they cannot see. For these though they be covered with plates of Iron,
and bound with chains, and fastened to a mighty great stone: yet they flote and
swim in the Sea, nor do they fall to the bottom unless they come asunder:
because they are filled with winds and blasts, bellows being joined to them for
that purpose. So they because they are swollen with wind, and are full of aereal
spirit, are carried upward, A simile from Snails with horns.
and with a slow pace, like snails that want their eyes, they try their way
their horns thrust forth, and creep upon all high places, and walk in the
night. But they do this without danger or hurt to their bodies, and fall not,
because they do it leasurely, and without fear or respect unto danger, which
will sometimes drive men that are awake from earnest business, and dangerous
attemps. For they go about these things no otherwise than men that are drunk or
mad, who inconsiderately, and with great rashness and boldness fear not to
adventure upon any danger which if the next day, or when they come to
themselves they think upon, and what danger they were in, they will really
profess they have forgot all, and be much frighted at the relation they hear
from others. And if the humors be not so not in such kind of bodies, and the
spirits are not so much stirred and troubled, they will only cry out and leap
a little, but they will stay in their beds, for the spirits are not so violent
as to raise the body. Lib. de Commit. morb.
For whosoever as Hippocrates says, has a hot brain, as choleric and not
phlegmatic persons have, these will cry and brawl in the night, especially if
they do unquietly perform their days labor, and have care of their business,
having much to do. As are some busybodies, unquiet boasting people, that
thrust themselves into all businesses, and run here and there, and use strange
gestures, and you may know them by their eyes, countenance, gate, clothing,
and whole habit of their bodies, all which they compose diverse ways, and
change them, taking upon them another person, as of a Player, Fencer, or
Mountebank, that runs up and down; and calls the people together to see idle
sports. Men quiet in the day, are clamorous in the night.
Hence it comes that they rise in their sleep, and make a great noise and
clapping of their hands, by reason of phantasms that are represented to their
sense, and that agree with their wills and diurnal actions. So all of us when
we do any thing seriously in the daytime, the species and representations of
such things will trouble our minds in the night, and make is cry out and toss
up and down. Which Lucretius sets down in verse thus:

We see that many in their sleep will walk,
Will do what they did waking, Lawyers talk
And plead their causes strongly, and Laws write:
And Generals wage war, and fiercely fight.
Sailors will strive with winds, and every man
Uses the same profession that he can.
Or what he has long used, or that kind
That is most pleasing to his troubled mind.
For what has tried us and employed us all the day, when the day is at an end
flies to the brain, and causes distempers in the night, or at least holds the
mind with Employments, that the sleep is not sweet but interrupted by dreams.

CHAP. VI.
Of those that are drowned, men's bodies will flote on their backs, and women's
will flote on their faces; and if their lungs be taken forth they will not swim.
IT is found by experience in the Low Countries, L. 7. c. 17.
which Pliny also testifies, that men's bodies when they are drowned lie on
their backs with their faces upwards toward Heaven; but women lie with their
faces grovelling downwards, and flote with their faces toward the ground. In
which Nature is thought to take care of their chastity, that their secrets may
not be seen, but be decently concealed. But I think it is because a woman has
a great belly sticking forth, and larger receptacles, and her belly,
intestines, urinary passages are more open, and her breasts more spungy and
swollen; which because they are filled with abundance of humors, the belly is
made heavy, and being thus stretched with the water, inclines downwards.

A Simile from floting bladders.
Which thing we see in bladders and vessels that are stopped, that part of them
which contains the Air flotes upward; but where the water is contained, that
part is downwards. The same you may see in an Egg, An Egg and Ambergreece put
into brine will swim.
that cast upon salt brine will flote, but that part where the weight is, will
sink: but the part filled with Air, namely, that which when the shell is broken
is empty, when they grow old and rotten it will swim a top. But unless nature
had given larger passages and receptacles to this fex, A woman has larger
passages than a man.
I pray how could copulation be done? what could help conception and carrying
the child in the womb, for secretly by reason of this the matrix swells, and
the child grows? what remedy were there for painful labor in childbirth,
where the parts must be stretched forth and dilated, that the child may come
forth with more ease? what lastly would serve for the child's nourishment?
unless the womb and entrance of it were so made; unless the curious and so
handsomely swelling forth breasts that are so full of millk were made for that
use? Since therefore a woman has all her passages and cavities larger, and
drinks in much moisture; it must be that that part should sink downward that is
most loaded with water. But a man has narrow guts, straight urinary passages;
and is more endangered by the stone than a woman is, has his abdomen not so
much stretched out, his hip bones are strong and weighty, his arms are strong,
and his shoulders large; his back bone is fast with the spondils joined
together; his Lungs are hollow and large; whence it is that men have a loud and
deep voice, Why men have a strong voice, and women a shrill voice.
but women have a small shrill voice, because their breast is narrow. All these
things undoubtedly cause a man to swim on his back, and a woman on her belly.
For by nature all heavy things fall downwards, and light things upwards. And I
think that is the cause that men that are drowned cannot come above water
presently. For when their bodies are full of water, and kept down by the weight
of the water, they cannot come up, because there is no air in them, Why men
drowned do not rise presently.
and all the spirit is driven forth by the abundance of water. But in 7. or 9.
days the body will flote, for it is dissolved and corrupts, and the lungs
gather much Air. Hence it is, What day men drowned will swim.
that our common people use to say, that on the 9th day when a man's gall is
broken he will rise above water; not that his gall bladder is broken, but
because the humors run forth of that and other moist parts that are flagging,
whence the body when the flesh is rarefied flotes; and the lungs that are
hollow like a sponge, taking in a great deal of Air, raise the body above the
water: For this part balances and sustains bodies floting on the water; and
the larger lungs a man has, and the more holes are in them, the longer a man
can hold his breath, and stay at the bottom of the water a longer time. I heard
Dr. Vesalius, a man of excellent wit and learning, relate, A memorable thing of
a Moor.
that a Moor that was a urinator, was brought to Ferrat out of a galley, that
could alone continue his voice longer, and hollow without taking breath, than
any four of the strongest Men: Again he would stop his breath and his nostrils,
and hold his mouth close, and not breathe at all longer than all they could: By
which gift of nature he won thus much, that being often times taken, he still
escaped, and like a Dydapper he would for half an hour lie at the bottom of the
Sea, and shake off his yoke of captivity that was more bitter than death. Large
capacious Lungs will do thus much for a man, that he shall soon run a Journey;
What good comes from large Lungs.
that if he can swim, he can lie longer upon the waters; and if he fall into
any deep River he will not be so soon drowned; and when he is drowned he will
flote in a few days. And if these bellows of breath be taken out when a man is
dead, as I hear some Pirates have done; he will stay at bottom and never swim up
again, because he wants the benefit of the Air.

CHAP. VII.
The bodies of those that are drowned when they swim up and come to be seen; as
of those that are murdered, when their friends are present, or the murderers,
they bleed at the nose and other parts of their body.
The dead will bleed.
SInce there are many things in Nature that will make us to wonder: I think this
is one of the chief, that blood will run out of the wounds of one that is
slain, if he be present that gave the wound, and is guilty of the murder: and
that drowned bodies taken out of the waters, will bleed at some parts, if any
of their friends be nigh, and the blood is commonly so red and lively, as
though the faculties and vital spirits that agitate the humors were not yet
defunct. For that is observed by the Magistrates and the Rulers of all the
Low Countries, who are wont to be present to take notice of dead bodies,
however they came to die, before they be buried. But how this should be, it is
no easy matter for any man to resolve. I know that in dead people for a time
there remains a vegetable force, whereby their hair and nails increase, imbred
moisture affording nutriment to outward heat. So Plants and shrubs cut off,
will grow green for some days, and bear flowers if they chance to be moystned
with water. Plants cut up growing for a time.
For there is an imbred force in stalks, which they have from the root, and
when that is gone, the leafs wither and grow dry and fall off. So it may be
that the blood lying hid in the veins may break forth when the body is stirred.
For we see such men carried up and down by Porters, and to be set with their
faces sometimes upwards, sometimes downwards, and tossed to and fro. Whence it
may be the veins mouths are opened, and the blood that has not yet put off its
natural color may run out: But from those that are long dead, and late found,
not red blood, but bloody corrupt matter runs forth of the wound of him that is
slain. But if they dyed by a fall, or were lilled by something falling on them,
at that part where the passages of the body are open, a bloody liquor will run
out, namely by the eyes, nostrils, ears, or nether parts. So commonly we see in
a fluxible and loose body, when it has layn unburied two or three days, that
a liquor will run forth mingled with blood, when the bearers with much motion
carry the bier on their shoulders. Also Oxen and Bulls when they are slain and
hanged up to the beams in houses, make the pavement bloody with drops of blood;
wherefore I conjecture it comes from some such cause. But this seems to be most
likely, A man will bleed suddenly from a fright.
that the friends of the party slain, or he that killed him will bleed at the
nose, by a sudden fright, when they behold the dead carcass, because the
natural faculties and mind happen to be vehemently moved and shaken, and the
humors do not stand still, but flote here and there. For we see them strangely
affected, and troubled both in their speech and thoughts, and sometimes they
blush, sometimes look pale, and tremble for fear; whence it comes to pass,
that by long looking on, and being troubled, the blood will break out of their
nostrils whether they will or no. As we see the same will happen to those who
suddenly chance to see and think on some sad objects, or lamentable things. If
any man say, that sympathy, that is, mutual consent of Nature draws blood from
kindred, and Antipathy and secret disagreement makes the murderers bleed, I am
not against that. Blood will wax hot again in dead bodies.
But I shall more easily grant this, that blood will run forth of the wound,
though it be bound over with swathbands, if he that did the murder stand by.
For so great is the force of secret Nature, and so powerful is Imagination,
that if there be any life left, or the dead body be warm, the blood will boil,
and wax hot by choler kindled in the dead body.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Helmets of Children newly born, or of the thin and soft caul, wherewith
the face is covered as with a vizard, or covering, when they come first into
the world.
An old Wives opinion of the caul of children.
THere is an old opinion, not only prevalent amongst the common and ignorant
people, but also amongst men of great note, and Physicians also, how that
children born with a caul over their faces, are born with an omen, or sign of
good or bad luck: when as they know not that this is common to all, and that
the child in the womb was defended by these membranes. Three Membranes defend
the child.
For there are three coverings or membranes that involve the Infant in the
Mothers womb: The outmost is called by the Greeks (...), or in Latin the
Secondine, because it comes forth presently after the birth: there are two
other membranes under this; the first whereof from the figure of a pudding-gut
is called Alantorides, and it is bred of the woman's seed that is put upon the
head, buttocks and feet, and lies upon the eminent parts, and the use of it is
to receive the urine of the child formed. The last is a very thin skin or
membrane, that drinks up the sweet and vapors that come forth of the child
when it grows up, and compasses the child round about, it is called Amnios,
from its thin lamb-like tenderness. Which fences and helps in childbearing,
provident nature has provided, lest the Infant should suffer any inconvenience
by bruising, or be hurt outwardly. The last of these sometimes come forth with
the child, being fastened to the parts they are appointed for, especially when
the passages are open, and the secrets of the woman and genital parts are
loose, and open wide in bearing. But if the child can hardly with great
struggling get forth of these streights, and the woman be of a narrow passage,
When the child comes with a helmet.
those membranes stick by the way, and those: kins are wiped off, as any small
skin is wiped from the face, or other parts of the body, when we creep through
some cranny or narrow hole. What signifies a black covering of the child.
Wherefore old Wives say, this skin when it covers the face, is a helmet, of
which they speak many fabulous things, and frig^t or cheer the childbearing
woman. If this cover be black, they speak as from an Oracle (when as they do
but dote, and know not what they say) that such children shall suffer many sad
accidents, and that many misfortunes hang over their heads, and that ill
spirits will haunt them, and shall be vexed with dreams and night visions,
unless this be broken and given in drink, which against my will many have done
to the great hurt of the child. The red helmet what that signifies.
But if this cover be red, or the skin that is fast to the crown of the head,
they prophecy that he will be a notable child, and shall have great success
in all his affairs. And this superstitious old opinion was held also by the
Ancients. Antoninus had a Diadem on his head.
For Aelius Lampridius in the life of Antoninus Diadumenus, whose head was
crowned with a Diadem and a Garland, that children were wont when they were
born, as a sign of good fortune to have a cap on their heads by nature, which
the midwives catch away and sell to their credulous Advocates; For Lawyers
think they shall find great help from them. The superstition of Lawyers in
keeping childrens Helmets.
But since those membranes are seen of diverse colors, I think that only comes
from the humors that flote about in the matrix, for those vary the color of
them.

When therefore the Womb is wet with a fowl and vicious moisture, which grows
together with the seed of both Parents, the membrane is of a dark brown color,
and the child's skin of a smoky dark color also. But if the seed and blood be
pure, clean, and subject to no fault; the cover is red, and the child is of a
pleasant and lively color. And these membranes are not only different in
color, but in shape also, either by reason of some internal or external
effect, or from some object of the eyes or mind. For when some men are so
lascivious and given to pleasure, that without choice, taking no heed of the
flowing of the terms, they will use copulation with women; it falls out
sometimes that when the terms have run three days or thereabout, and there is
not much behind, only a day or two that they have to run more, the natural
time is hindered, and some part of the excremental flux is kept back by
unseasonable copulation but yet sometimes this perfects the conception. When
therefore a woman is in the act of generation, and knows that her terms are not
yet quite staid, and that she should not yet copulate, the parts being still
wet, she secretly blusheth at it, and her eyes are covered with blood: which
affect when it passes to the child that membrane becomes of diverse colors and
fashions.

Whence comes beauty or foulness.
This also makes children to have chins and cheeks red as a rose. Which then
uses to happen when the great bellied women blush, or are angry, their blood
being raised by natural heat, and carried aloft. For such as are frighted, or
suddenly put into fear, they are the cause of a pale color, and frame the
child with an austere and sad countenance.

CHAP. IX.
Why in Holland they say that such as have unconstant and weak brains, have
been conversant amongst beans.
IF at any time the Low Country people will set forth a man of an unconstant
brain, The Proverb to wander amongst beans.
and unsettled mind, who in his manners gestures, words, and deeds, and all his
actions is like a madman, they will say he has been amongst the beans, and it
is their common Proverb, the beans flourish, he wandreth amongst beans: and
this is applied to weak brained men that want judgment and reason. For we see
in the spring-months when bean-stalks begin to flower, that some men will grow
mad and speak many ridiculous, and absurd things; and sometimes they grow so
mad that they must be bound in chains. For at the beginning of the spring the
humors begin to overflow, and to choke the brain with gross fumes and
vapors, which when bean flowrs do exasperate if they smell to them, the mind
begins to rave, and to be troubled with furies. For though bean flowrs smell
sweet and pleasant: Why bean flowers hurt the brain.
yet they offend the head, and will at great distance send forth an offensive
smell, especially to those that have weak brains, and are filled with a
choleric and melancholiqve humor. Whereupon some of these are disquieted, and
wander, then they grow clamorous and full of words, and others again are
pensive and always musing.

Their head stands stiff, Pers. sat. 3.
their eyes sixth on the ground:
They mumble silently, and eat the sound:
Their lips thrust forth, their words they do confound.
And as some things dissipate fumes, and discuss what is hurtful to the
brain, and raise the fainting soul and spirits that are sleepy as Vinegar,
Rose Water wherein Cloves are steeped, new bread wet in well sented wine, for
these breath forth a thin and pleasant air; so other things cause pain, and
make the head heavy, as Garlic, Onions, Leeks, Elder, Wormwood, Rue, Southern
wood, What things cause the headac^^e.
and many spices that send forth strong heavy fumes, and offend the brain,
violently affecting the Nostrils. Which Hippocrates showed in this Aphorism. The
smell of spices draws the secrets of women, L. 5. Aph. 28.
and it is good for many other things, but that it offends the head, and makes
it heavy. For all things very odoriferous hurt the head, and draw the heat and
moisture to the upper parts, even the very smells that evaporate from cold
plants, especially in those that are lean, and decayed in their flesh. For they
cannot endure the smells of their meats, and of boiled flesh, and when they
faint and swound they will suffer nothing to be put to their nostrils that is
of a sharp and piercing nature, so that they seem to be suffocated by a gross
thick vapor, as those that sit down in a dinining room that is filled with
smoke, whose breath is stopped and intercepted, An example from smoaky houses.
unless the doors be set open, and fresh Air be let in the windows, that the
house may be Ayr'd, and the wind may pass in and our. Those that dwell near
lakes are of another temper than these tender bodies, and such as are made to
empty Jakes, and make clean sinks. For these men reject all sweet smells as
offensive unto them. So Strabo writes that amongst the Sabaeans, L. 6.
those that are offended with sweet odours are refreshed with bitumen, and the
smell of Goats hair on their beards, when it is burnt. Aridiculous thing of a
Countryman.
A certain Countryman at Antwerp was an example of this, who when he came into
a shop of sweet smells be began to faint, but one presently clapped some fresh
smoking warm hors-dung to his nose, and fetched him again.

CHAP. X.
Every strong filthy smell is not hurtful to man: For some of these will
discuss contagions, and resist corrupt diseases. By the way, whence came the
Proverb, that horns are burnt there.
MAny things are of a most filthy smell which yet do no ways hurt the body, nor
cause any corruption in it; and they will resist some diseases, and discuss
the faulty troublesome Air and vapors, as Castoreum, Galbanum, Sagapenum, the
dregs of Masterwort, called Asafaetida, Bean, Trifoly, Brimstone, Gunpowder,
the fumes of burnt horns and skins. Ill smells sometimes useful.
For these are of a strong filthy sent, but they cause no contagion, but they
repress and strike back the filthy sents and pestilent vapors, which lakes
and standing waters, and the herb Camarina, and stinking earth send forth.
Also by the smell of these they raise young maids that are in a swound, when
they are troubled with the strangling of the mother, when being fit for
marriage, they are forced to stay for Husbands. But filthy smells that rise from
dead carcases, and muddy waters, cause corrupt diseases, and infect the Air,
by reason of heat and moisture, but not the vapors of those that tend to
dryness. Hence our Country people cast snips of leather, horns, and wet bones
into the fire, Ill smells sometime resist the Plague.
and with those sents they Air their houses to dispell the contagion of
diseases, and keep themselves and their cottages free from pestilent Airs.
Hence came the Proverb that Horns are burnt there. A Proverb that horns are
burnt.
Whereby they signify that places infected with contagious diseases must be
avoided. Such a kind of remedy in former times was used about Tourney, when the
Plague cruelly raged all the Town over. A history that is true, done about
Tournay.
For the Soldiers of the Garrison in the Fort, filled their Guns with
Gunpowder without bullets, and shot against the Town, and they shot them off
with a lighted match about the evening and morning: whence it happened that by
the great noise and strong smell, the contagion of the Air was removed, Fire
dispells contagions of the Air.
and the City delivered from the Plague. For this is as powerful to dispell
contagions of the Air, as Hippocrates remedy by making bon-fires, and burning
many fagots in the streets could be.

CHAP. XI.
The excellency of the finger of the Left hand that is next the little finger,
which is last of all troubled with the Gout, and when that comes to be affected
with it, death is not far off. By the way, wherefore it deserves to wear a Gold
Ring better than the rest.
Physicians grant that all parts of the body that are affected with any disease
that comes primarily or by consent, and law of company, since a disease does
not consist in a disease, but the disease is impacted by another to it. As the
Proverb is, some hurt comes by reason of the hurt that is near. But provident
nature always defends the principal parts, Nature fences the princpal parts
from the disease.
and sends the mischief to the more ignoble parts; which is done critically and
by the force of nature, when the collections of humors and diseases, are
driven to the remotest parts. But if the disease and its symptoms, that is, the
affect that succeeds it, be strong and violent, and nature be weak and cannot
resist it, and bridle the force of it as she would, the humors fall upon the
principal parts, as we see in the Inflammation of the Lungs, the Pleurisy,
Quinsey, Lethargy, and many more acute diseases, but in the joint and Hip gowt,
that is prevalent in the Spring and Autumn, the force and natural faculty
drives the humors heaped up in the body from the stronger parts to the weaker.
So I observed in Gallia Belgica, that very many were subject to the gowt of
their hands and feet, all whose joints were swollen and in bitter pains, The ring
finger.
only the ring finger of the left hand, that is next the little finger, was
free from it: for that by the nearness and consent of the heart felt no harm.
And no man need fear death from this disease, (for they are free from other
diseases, if so be they be not troubled with the pox, and sores that arise from
that) unless a confluence of humors fall upon the left side of the breast,
under which part lies the round point of the heart, and the ring finger begin
to be knotty and swell: For so soon as this comes, the vital force is weakened,
and the vigor fails, and all power of the mind and body sinks down. Hence the
Ancients had a custom, to wear a ring of gold on that finger, and to adorn it
so above the rest: Because a small branch of the Artery, and not of the
Nerves, as Gellius thought, L. 10. c. 10.
is stretched forth from the heart unto this finger, the motion whereof you
shall perceive evidently in women with child and wearied in travel, and all
affects of the heart, by the touch of your for finger. And this may seem absurd
to no man; for I use to raise such as are fallen in a swoond, by pinching this
joint, and by rubbing the ring of gold with a little Saffron, for by this a
restoring force that is in it, passes to the heart, and refreshes the
fountain of life, The Physic finger.
unto which this finger is joined: wherefore it deserved that honor above the
rest, and Antiquity thought fit to compass it about with gold. Also the worth
of this finger, that it receives from the heart, procured thus much, that the
old Physicians, from whence also it has the name of Medicus. would mingle
their medicaments and potions with this finger, for no venom can stick upon the
very outmost part of it, but it will offend a man, and communicate it self to
his heart. Jerem. 12.
And besides others, Jeremias testifies, that they were wont of old to wear
gold rings on their fore finger. For so you read in him, that God expostulates
with the King: Also if Jeconias were a ring on my right hand, I would pull him
off from thence. Jeremias explained in that place.
Whereby he intimates, that though he had been very gracious a little before
with him, and well beloved, and of great repute, that he delighted in him, as
in a gold ring with a precious stone set in it; yet now he was fallen from that
favor and grace, and was become hateful and odious unto him, because he was
fallen from his integrity of Life to wickedness: by which Argument he would
have all men know, that the goodness of our former actions will do us no good,
if we fall away from them, and follow wicked ways: And again, our former
wickedness shall never hurt us, Chapter 18.
as Ezekiel testifies, where men repent and forsake their ungodly practices.

CHAP. XII.
Some things will not burn, but are invincible in the midst of flames; and how
that comes to pass.
I Have seen napkins made and woven of a certain kind of flax that will not
burn, nor ever be consumed by fire: when therefore they are foul and should be
made clean, men use no Soap or Lie, or Wash-balls to take out the spots, but
they cast them into the fire, and they will flame, as earthen pots that are
very greasy, and become very clean and extreme white. This kind grows in the
deserts of India, and dry grounds burnt with the Sun: from whence some plants
by reason of the nature of the ground, and the qualities of the outward air,
become to be of that temper, that they may be wrought and woven into shee^s.
For if in the Sea and Rivers Crabs can grow up with hard shells, also Crafish,
Loosters, Scallops, and other shellfish, in which, as Pliny says, L. 9. c.
33. Coral is taken in the Ligurian Sea.
Nature has varied and sported her self, making them of different colors and
shapes: and if the Coral shrub in the bottom of the Ligurian Sea, can grow with
boughs, and when it is taken out of the Sea it hardneth to a stone; no man can
think it improbable, that some shrubs from the heat of the ground by the Sun,
become to be of such a nature, that being bruised with clubs, Ropes made of
herbs.
and softened with the Workman's hammer, may become ductile, and so drawn into
threads that fire will not burn. Also who will not wonder, that from Hemp,
Nettles, Broom, and Flax rinds, Ropes and Cables are made, and also Sails and
Sheets? for their rinds being tough and tenacious, they may be drawn into small
threads, as also the pieces and plates of silver and gold are. So from these
twigs (and not from the hair of the Salamander, as some foolishly imagine) are
napkins and linen clothes made, as from the Silkworm and woollen-trees Silks
are made, but with greater labor: for the matter is stiff, and is not so
ductil. That kind of Linen is called Asbestinum, from the likeness and nature
of Lime that is purged by fire, and is not consumed, nor suffers any loss.
Like unto this is the stone called Amiantus, and it resembles Scissil Alum,
commonly called feathery Alum, of which, as Dioscorides says, the Indians
make sheets; L. 5. c. 99. Volater. l. 22.
which cast into the fire will flame, but taken out they shine, and lose
nothing, nor become they ere the worse. Alum resists fire.
So wood and planks besmeared with Alum will not burn, nor posts, doors, beams
that are wet with a green color; so it be laid on thick, Things anointed with
a green color will hardly burn.
and alum and the ashes of white lead be abundantly mingled with the paint:
for the force of the fire cannot penetrate it, because the wood is thickened and
pressed together, and is hardened against fire and water.

Archilaus the General of Mithridates made proof of this in a wooden Tower,
which when Sylla strove to fire, he could not do it, and was forced to depart,
leaving the business undone, because it was all over anointed with Alum that
binds exceedingly. So C. Caesar lost his labor, Vitruv. l. 2. c. 8. l. 8. c. 1.
when about Po he put fire to a Castle made of the Larch-tree wood: For the
Larch-Tree like the Pitch-Tree will neither burn nor flame, and will not only
remain free from worms and rottenness, but it will not become coals, or turn
to ashes in the fire, being it is harder and more solid than horn, which no
fire can hurt, or overcome. Lastly, it is so weighty, that it will not flote,
but sink down under water presently, like to Box and Ebeny, that in the native
tongue is called Guaicum, a wood that is excellent to cure venereal sores, and
the French pox. Yet a man may well wonder that it should not burn and flame,
when it sends forth Rosin of a color like honey. For as many Trees as sweat
forth Rosin and Pitch, quickly take fire. But the solid and compacted hardness
of the wood is the cause of it, which has no pores for the fire to get in to
burn it by; though Matthiolus asserts, that the Larch-Tree about Poe that grows
there plentifully, will suddenly take fire.

CHAP. XIII.
The native heat of Man is fostered and increases, by the heat of other
Creatures, but especially by the heat of children, if they be laid to that part
of the body that is weak. For this fomentation does not only help concoction,
but eases all joyntpains; but amongst whelps which do it most effectually.
TWo things there be that strengthen our body, and preserve our life, native
heat, and moisture that is the substance of imbred heat, and these stand both
in need one of the other. Moisture is the food and fuel of heat, and heat
subsists by it; which two, By beat, moisture, spirit, the body subsists.
being full of spirit, and united together, do pass into the whole body. These
must be carefully looked to, that they may last as long as may be possible. For
the body once deprived of their help, decays, and all natural forces and
faculties come to ruin. But since many things are to be observed, concerning
these, and they are obvious amongst Physicians every where: I shall let pass
all superfluous things, and speak only of such things as being applied
outwardly do lend help unto a man. Amongst those things that stir up and
augment natural heat, and ease pains, I place Whelps, Whelps of one color.
not all, but those especially that are of one colored hair, and not spotted
with many diverse spots on their skins, for these not only foster imbred heat,
but ease pains also. So in all sorts of joint Gowts, of the hands or feet, or
elsewhere, there is nothing more ready to assuage all pains be they never so
sharp, than such whelps laid to the parts affected. Whelps laid to the parts
ease pains.
For by a sweet and warm heat, they stir up the faint and decaid native heat in
man, and by a continual fostering, they either attract to themselves the humor
that causes the pains, or by a digesting and discussing faculty they cut and
consume it. For you shall find, that when they are taken away and released,
that their joints will be weak and feeble, and they can hardly stand on their
legs, the greatest part of the pain being drawn upon themselves. But that the
skin of one color all alike is the cause of it, and those skins that are of
various colors cause not the same effect; the reason is, the equality of their
temper, and the uniformity of heat: For the diversity of colors, is a sign of
the distemper, and diverse mixture of heat and moysturo. A simile from grafting.
For as grafting must answer the nature of the Trees; so a man in cherishing
his limbs, must apply a temperate heat that is all alike; wherefore if you
would strengthen your stomach, or any other part, you must necessarily defend
the natural temper of it, and not increase the heat too much, or bring any
strange heat into it. Thera. l. 7.
But as Galen says, amongst those things that are outwardly applied, a little
boy of a good constitution is best to lie in the bed, so that he may always
lie near the abdomen. There are some (says he) that keep young fat whelps for
the same purpose, not only when they are sick, but when they are well also.
Such therefore are fit for those that have a weak stomach by reason of
dryness, and above all, care must be had, that the little boy have not a moist
skin. For those that sweat much in the night cool more than they heat: 3 Kings
1. David got heat by a young Maid lying in his bosom.
So David when he was old and cold had this remedy, that a young Maid lay in
his bosom to cherish him; not that he desired to lie with her, as the
Scripture testifies, but to recover heat in his limbs by her.

CHAP. XIV.
Why the French Pox is more gentle now than it was formerly, and rages not so
much, and into what disease it degenerates.
French Pox, Leprosy, Scurvy.
THere are three diseases of kin one to the other, yet are not so mortal, as
foul and contagious, and these change one into the other, viz. the French Pox,
the Leprosy, in hogs called the Meazels, and the Scurvy. The black Jaundice is
a kind of them. These diseases in former years did cruelly torment men; now
they are grown gentle, and not so troublesome: This happens, Diseases grow
gentle by custom.
partly, because the force of the mischief is subdued by the Physician, and the
cruelty of the humors is assuaged; and partly, because Nature by custom is
hardened against these pains. So I have observed some in their flourishing
vigorous youth to have been cruelly tortured; but when they grew old they were
not so much afflicted with it. For either the heating and boiling grows
colder, and the humors flow not so much together: or Nature in time accustomed
to the disease, and being made familiar, and domestic to her, she no longer
contends with it; or else she is nourished with those vicious humors, and is
not offended: For as Sows that wallow in the mud, and Cobblers, A Simile from
hogs in the mud.
and such as cleanse Jakes and public vaults, smell no ill smell; so diseased
people are fed with filth. And because they are hardened against the vices and
diseases of their bodies, that I may not say it of their minds, they no longer
perceive the detriment that Nature suffers: For the disease being inveterate
and fastened in the very bottom of the marrow, has taken from them all sense
thereof. But at first when any strange quality seizes on the body, whereby it
corrupts and is changed, what parts soever receive sharp biting humors, they
feel pain. But when the disease grows old, and is grown up with Nature, they
feel not much pain, because they agree together, and the humors wax faint by
commerce with the body, and keeping company with it, and by the mixture of
other humors, they are weakened, as strong Wine is with Water. Yet the
footsteps of the old disease and relics of it always remain; which if they
fall down upon the Lungs they make the sick hoarse, and short winded; if it
fall on the joints it makes them subject to the Gowt in the feet, hands,
hucklebone, and it returns at certain times. So all that have pocky sores are
gowty: But all that have the Gowt in their feet or hips, All that have pocky
sores have the Gowt, but not contrarily.
have not the symptoms of the Pox. And if the flux of humors is sent to the
outward skin, their skin is made rugged and crusty, their face is deformed with
tetters, scabs, foul sores and scurf, and their hair falls.

For it falls out with them as it does with Trees and Twigs, on which piss, A
Simile from Trees that are corrupted.
or some salt water or filth is cast. For when the root is hurt the leafs fall
off, and the branches wither: yet the Tree dies not at the root, but it
decays, and is hardly restored.

CHAP. XV.
How it is that Men dying, though they have their mind and understanding firm,
yet they make a hoarse noise, and a sound that returns back, which the Low
Dutch vulgarly call Den rotel.
IN the Low Countries, and in all the Countries toward the North, those that
are dying show certain arguments of their departure, by making a murmuring
noise, and none of them die, but have this mark before. How those that dye make
a murmuring noise.
For as death is at hand, they make a noise, as the water does when it falls
through rough winding crooked places, they will sound and murmur like to the
noise that Pipes make in Conduits. For when the vocal artery happens to be
stoped, the breath that would fain break forth at once, finding a narrow
passage, and the pipe sunk down, comes forth by a certain gargling, and makes a
hoarse sound in smooth places, and springing forth forsakes the dry limbs.
Wherefore the breath being heaped together, and mingled with swelling froth,
causes a noise like the ebbing of the Sea; which also comes so to pass in
some by reason of their pannicles and membranes drawn into wrinkles, so that
the breath comes forth by a crooked and winding revolution. But they that have
a strong and great bodies, and die of violent deaths, sound more, and strive
longer with death, by reason of plenty of humor, and gross and thick spirits.
But in those that are wasted in their bodies, Who dye gently, and who with
great trouble.
and that die easily by degrees, the breath runs not so violently, nor with so
great a noise, so that they dye by little and little very gently, and do even
as it were fall asleep.

CHAP. XVI.
The death of man and destruction of things that are, is against Nature, and is
very improperly, called natural. Yet the mind must be resolved not to fear
death; though, not without cause, all men are afraid of it.
THough it be so ordained by nature, since that man's rebellion has drawn this
upon him deservedly, that we must all tend to destruction, and dye. Yet I see
that by reason this may be proved, that death is not natural but contrary to
nature. In the beginning this was given by nature to all kinds of Creatures to
defend themselves, their life and body; Cic. l. 1. off^^.
and to decline that may seem to be hurtful unto them; and to be very careful
to look to their own preservation and safety. For who does not observe what
great care and diligence men use, by the light of reason, and brute beasts by
the light of nature, to defend and keep themselves from danger? All men fear
death, every one strives to keep himself from it, for when death comes, Nature
is extinguished, No man but trembles at the fear of death.
and cease to be any longer. So Christ who would show the imbred weakness of
man's nature, who except sin and diseases was like to us in all things, feared
death, and prayed against it. John 21.
Also in Peter is expressed the affect of nature and infirmity of the flesh,
when Christ thrice asked him if he loved him, and that he should take great
care to feed his flock, showing unto him what should befall him, and what death
he should die. When thou were young (says he) thou wandredst whither thou
would, and did gird thy self, but when thou growest old, another shall
gird thee about, and lead the whether thou would not. Whereby he shows the
desire and weakness of man's nature, that is stricken with the terror of
death, and is very unwilling to come to it, yet the mind is willing and ready.
John 22.
Since therefore death is the deprivation and abolition of Nature, how can it
be said that it is natural; and agreeing unto nature, that is violent, and
wholly extinguisheth Nature? I know that man by his fall deserved so much and
in that he degenerated from the dignity he was created with, being disobedient
to his creator, to be punished with all pains and vexations, diseases, hunger
and thirst, and unquietness of mind, and at last to undergo the punishment of
death. Sin brought in diseases and death.
But it was not the fault of nature that brought in these miseries, but sin.
For since the fall of the first man all things are changed, and become
contrary: so the stars, diseases, Elements, Wild-beasts, and Devils are become
enemies to man. And, as Paul says, the whole creation is made subject to
vanity and corruption for man's cause, Romans 8.
and the whole series of Creatures, the Angels not excepted desire an end of
their labors. But the certain hopes of a better life does recreate our minds
in so great miseries, and our confidence in Christ who restores the decayed
Nature of man to his former dignity, takes away from us all terror and fear of
death also out of our souls. Faith in Christ takes from man the fear of death.
For the remembrance of his death and resurrection, does wholly confirm and
strengthen us, for we believe that man shall not be annihilated, but changed to
a better condition, and that death is not our ruin, but the door and entrance
to a more happy life. 2 Cor. 5. A simise from the structure of houses.
For we know, as Paul says, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, as houses use to be taken down and disjoynted, that we have a
building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Which
God provided for this end; that by rising again we might enjoy the glory of
immortality, and God has given us his spirit, Gal. 4.
as an earnest and pledge thereof, who does by his presence confirm to us our
hope and highest confidence of things to come. Colos. 2.
For by his spirit alone we are certified that he who raised the Lord Jesus,
from death, will by the power of him raise us also, and make us partakers of
his glorious Resurrection.

CHAP. XVII.
The Inconveniences of Tippling and drunkenness, and what things will resist
and cure it.
THere is an old custom of force, amongst the High and low Dutch, that they
care for no man's friendship or familiarity, but such as can drink strongly with
them, In Curcul.
and piss stoutly. Wherefore I thought I should do something considerable, to
relate some things that will resist drunkenness: that every man in that
contest may look to himself, either not to be overcome with Wine, or to be
offended but little by it. At first let no man drink too much, and be too ready
to take up his cups, but let him civily refuse and draw back, pretending that
he is not very well. Sometimes you must find out some stratagems to deceive
those that aim at you to make you drunk, and that most endeavor to prevail
over you. And you must take occasion cunningly to steal forth to make water, or
to take away the cup, but you must be very crafty and subtle in doing it and
with great dexterity. For if the company find your cunning, they will ply you
the more abundantly. Yet every man may easily find out some shifts to avoid,
and wittily to cosen his fellow drinkers. In the mean while let every man
consider well the reward of this inveterate and unworthy custom and error,
and he shall see as clear as day what hurt it does to his body and soul and
spirits, to be given to much drinking. For first, it not only hurts memory the
most precious faculty of the mind, Intemperance in Wine hurts the memory.
and makes it weak, but totally ruins it, making the eyes dark, and causing
blindness, the cheeks are blabber'd, and the limbs tremble and reel, and many
other inconveniences accompany immoderate drinking of wine, and they are all
cold distempers. Nor, as Galen says, De Temp. l. 3.
does it always heat a man; but when he drinks more than he can conquer, it
causes cold diseases. For the natural heat is extinguished and choked, just as
when you power abundance of oil at once upon a little flame. I do premise this
that no man should faslly judge that do give occasion, or open the door for
such wickedness. For it is my chiefest desire, that men would either drink
moderately, or if there fall out an extraordinary occasion to drink much (for
as the Proverb is, A Proverb at bankets.
these solemnities cannot stand without it) that they may not want helps to
drive away drunkenness: amongst which I set down bitter things, and as many
such means as will purge away watery humors by urine. For by this way the fumes
are derived from the head, and the Wine is hindered from going into the veins,
Bitter things hinder drunkenness.
also by their bitterness they dry up moisture. So five or six bitter Almonds
taken before supper will perform it effectually. Peach kernels have the like
quality with them, and the juice of Peach-leaves pressed forth, and a little
taster full thereof drank fasting, has the same virtue, also the infusion of
Roman-Worm-wood, and nutmeg; For all these open the passages, and make them
wide and loose, as also oil pressed forth of Olives, or two ounces of oil
pressed forth of the seeds of Sesamum drank in the morning before Sunrising:
for it makes the belly slippery, and extends the urinary passages, so that
drink stays not in the body but passes away continually, if so be a man do
not burden his stomach too much with eating. It Is naught for drinkers to eat
overmuch.
For he that is forced to drink, must eat meat but sparingly: but if he shall
eat a morsel of bread dipped in honey, he shall do well. For honey takes away the
force of wine, and blunts the sharpness of the fumes. Cabbage is better than
them all, Cabbage hinders Drunkenness.
which Cato commended exceedingly, it is vulgarly called Caulis, because no
plant has a greater stalk. But of this there are many kinds, and the red cole
is best to resist drunkenness, if you chew the leaves in your mouth and
swallow down the juice, or eat them boiled for the first dish at table. Yet the
sea-cole, Sea-cole-worts.
and sea-purslane that grow plentiful by the sea in Zealand are far more
effectual; which we use in sallets and sauces to sharpen appetite. For they
make a man very hungry and thirsty by their imbred faculty. Hence it comes that
no fumes or vapors of the wine can rise to the head, for they are purged out
by siege and urine. There are many other things of this kind that resist
drunkenness, that a man may not be overcome, but I cannot reckon all. But if
any man chance to be drunk that is not provided with these helps (For wine as
Habakkuk says, Chapter 1. Eccl. 31.
deceives the wise) he must be helped by vomit, which the wise man also gave
counsel for. If thou art compelled to gorge thy self, go forth and vomit. Vomit
is good.
After this the testicles and genitall parts must be soked in cold water, and
wrapped up in a wet napkin: but women's breasts must be so wetted. For presently
the vapors being turned away, all drunkenness is discussed. In the mean time
sharp and sowrish things, and good juicy Apples must be eaten. As Oranges,
Citrons, Cherries, Peaches, Barberries, Verjuice, Cornels, and all things that
are of a cooling and repercussive quality, and have some cutting and abstergent
faculty. For though drunkenness cease either by sleep or vomiting, Headache
from yesterdays wine.
yet the head will ache the next day, and is offended by vapors. Festus
Pompeius calls this effect Helucus, which word signifies as much as half a
sleep, and a gaping from yesterdayes wine. Helucus is the headache from
drunkenness.
Tertullian uses this word for that affection, whereby men are made sleepy by
the drinking much the day before: when he says, The virtue of Ivy is to defend
the head from this drowsinesse, The force of Ivy in dispelling drunkenness.
by its discussing and drying quality; whereby also it is thought to keep men
from being drunk, if it be applied outwardly to the head, or by taking
beforehand some of its berries that are yellow-colour'd.

CHAP. XVIII.
Intemperance of drink is worse than of meat.
SOme say, that men are less hurt by drinking than eating, if a man do take
either immoderately, and above the strength of Nature. L. 2. Aph. 11. Moist
things soonest nourish.
And this they would maintain by an Aphorism of Hippocrates. It is more easy
to be filled with drink than with meat; but I think they are foully mistaken.
For he meant, that moist liquid things are the best remedy to restore strength
lost. For liquid things soon refresh those that are consumed, which though they
nourish not so much as solid meats; yet they are much sooner distributed into
the body. Wherefore the opinion of Cornelius Celsus is most true, and is not
contrary to Hippocrates. When you eat meat, L. 1. Celsus explained.
it is never good to eat too much; and oft-times too much abstinence is ill.
But if a man be intemperate, it is worse in drink than meat. Whereby he
intimates, that immoderate drinking of wine does a man more harm, than to glut
himself with meat. For drink presently penetrates into all the parts, and goes
into the veins undigested, and pricks the nerves and brain: But meat sticks in
the stomach till it be concocted, and if it be burdensome, it is easily cast
forth by vomit; which is not so easy and ready for Nature after drink. Liquid
poisons most hurtful.
This is proved by Cats, Dogs, Dormice, Rats, if they eat any morsels that are
mingled with poison, they easily vomit them up, by Natures faculty provoked,
which in moist things is very hard for them to do; wherefore poisons given in
drink are more dangerous than given in meat, for the venom is suddenly carried
to all parts of the body and corrupts the vital parts; and if it be drank in
wine it destroys the sooner. But immoderate meat is a dangerous thing to choke
a man, and the stomach so swells, and is extended by it, that you would think
it would break, Fat things resist poison.
especially in those that are hard to vomit. Therefore it is good to use
moderation in both. But there is nothing more dangerous than a venomous potion,
if there be no fat under it: for if there be, the venom passes slower into the
veins, and does not altogether lay hold of the vital parts, and it may be cast
forth by Vomit sooner. So when we would prevent venomous potions, we must eat
butter, oil, and all fat things; for so the venom will not stick so fast to
the body, and penetrates not so soon into the veins, and it is soon carried
forth again by vomit: and so they are good against drunkenness also; but if it
stay long in the body it corrodes and exulcerates the internal parts, and makes
a passage to the heart the fountain of life. Wherefore so soon as one has
taken venom of some dangerous meat, repercussives, sour, sharp, astringent
things that bind and shut the pores, must be avoided, and abovs all things,
sleep. Sleep is dangerous after poison taken, or when one has the Plague.
For as they that are stricken with the plague, when they grow sleepy, if they
do sleep, they are sooner dead, and Nature is more sluggish in resisting the
contagion: so in venomous bitings and poisoned potions, if men fall asleep,
they are in worse case, and the venom sooner takes hold of the vital parts.
Wherefore they must be pulled and kept waking, lest the venom run inwardly
toward the principal parts. An elegant Simile from the Incursion of an Enemy.
For as enemies with little labor and without any trouble almost enter Cities
and Forts without any resistance, when the Citizens and Watchmen are drunk and
dead asleep; so the body of Man when diseases come upon him, or when venomous
potions are drank in, can hardly hold out and escape, but must needs be
subdued, when the faculties and powers of nature are oppressed with sleep, and
are sluggish and idle, and not cheerful to make opposition against diseases.
Whence it comes that they are forced to yield to the Conqueror, not only with
the loss of health, but of life also.

CHAP. XIX.
Wine makes a man drunk otherwise than Beer or Ale does.
How the nerves are produced from the brain.
THough the brain be naturally moist and soft, yet the nerves proceed it, as
threads from the distaff of Wool or Flax, whose paces are distributed into all
parts of the body. For from this principal as from a fountain nerves are
dispersed into all the parts, as boughs from the root of a Tree, A Simile from
the branches of a Tree.
which are distributed into many branches. The whole body partakes of sense and
motion by the nerves, and when these are affected, and the principal part is
hurt, it is deprived of its gifts, or faintly performs its office. Hence it is,
that drunkards dote, reel and stumble, Drunkards look ridiculously.
because their brains are clowded with gross and thick vapors. But since all
men that are drunk with wine do appear more ridiculous in their customs and
manners, for none play the fools more (and make all that see them laugh, when
they look upon their faces, eyes, and behavior) than such as drink themselves
drunk with beer: For these fall not every way, but only backward, and lie on
their backs; but such as are drunk with wine fall forwards, and ly upon their
faces: So that these hurt their cheeks, forehead, noses, and faces, by falling;
but those, their shoulders and hinder part of their head. And the same you may
behold when they fall fast asleep in their cups. For they that are whittled
with Ale or Beer, sleep open mouthed, with their head leaning on their
shoulders; but such as are whittled with wine sleep with their face and chin
leaning upon their breast. The reason is, because the fumes and vapors of wine
rise to the forepart of the head, and possess themselves of the forepart of
the body; but the vapors of Ale and Beer fly to the hinder part of the head
and body. Hence it is that these are sleepy and forgetful, and not so full of
prate, and clamorous.

CHAP. XX.
Men that are tall and gross bodied, are sometimes not so long-lived as those
that are slender, and cannot so stoutly struggle with diseases. But commonly
little men will drink more wine, than gross men, and will be longer before
they be drunk.
DAily examples show, that men with gross fat-bodies are spungy, A great body
body hurts the wit.
and cannot so well resist diseases. For they are loaded with their body, that
their spirits are not so lively, merry, and ready. Whereupon when any little
disease comes upon them, or light inconvenience, they are faint-hearted, and
complain very much. For they are cast down with the very first brush, and their
mind fails them. And if any dangers by Sea or Land be to be undergone, or any
thing falls out amiss, they presently tremble and are pale with fear. That is
so, because their native heat is feeble, and their spirits small, and their
blood colder; and farther, because the natural virtue is sent far and a great
way, which being compacted and united in a small body, is better than that
which is dispersed. L. 2. Aph. 44.
To which relates that Sentence of Hippocrates, Men naturally very gross
bodied, are shorter-lived than slender-bodied-men: and again, Aph. 54.
A tall man is comely and good in youth: but in old age it is an unprofitable
burden, and worse than a little body. For old men's bodies grow crooked, The
Inconveniences of Tall bodies.
and become heavy and unweildy. Wherefore though these exceed the other for
large limbs and greatness: yet little men have imbred natural forces stronger
than they, and there are many gifts and ornaments of body and mind that appear
in them, and they are very quick-witted, and have nimble minds: and they not
only exceed the others or equal them in the cheerfulness of their minds, but
for strength, swiftness, eating and drinking.

I have seen sometimes dwarfs almost, and very little men (but their beard was
long, and their whole body hairy, which is an argument of exceeding heat) enter
the lists of drinking with very strong men, who were not for all this the least
moved by the force of the wine, (though no man in these conflicts deserves to
be commended, and the victory is not praiseworthy:) whereas the others were so
drunk, that they were grown stupid, and neither their foot, hand or tongue
could do their office. The cause of these things consists not only in the
capaciousnesse of the veins and receptacles, but in the native heat that is
very large, that quickly conquers and consumes all, and in a strong brain that
will not easily admit the vapors. A simile from Glowing iron.
For it falls out almost with them as with burnt bricks, and glowing hot iron,
that is sometimes sprinkled with water; or else to dry thirsty land. For
presently it drinks in all the moisture, or it vanishes into a very thin
vapor, so that they have no need to piss often, for their imbred heat
consumes all. Now that which the intensive heat does in men, the spunginesse of
the body, looseness and softness of it, does in women: For women once given
to wine will drink beyond reason, How a woman can endure much wine.
and almost miraculously, and it will be long ere they be drunk; but by reason
of the large and loose passages they are forced to make water now and then:
wherefore they are justly infamous to men that know of their drunkenness. But
old people can least of all endure to drink much wine: For they are dry of
body, Old men soon drunk.
and without moisture, and their heat is feeble; so that much plenty of wine
hurts them, but a little does refresh them, and makes them merry. Wherefore it
concerns old men above all others to preserve their natural heat, wherein is
comprehended primogenial moisture, which is the subject of vital heat and
spirit, and comes from the substance of the seed; with fit and moderate meats
and drinks. For these are the Forts of health and sickness, and the Seminaries
of long life.

CHAP. XXI.
They that eat a moderate breakfast in the morning, will eat more freely at
dinner; and if they drink much wine it will offend them less. By the way,
whether it be wholesome to eat much bread.
SOme there are that use to fast till noon; which as I mislike not, so I think
it not always expedient, that any man should eat nothing till dinner,
especially one that has a hot stomach: as every choleric person, or one that
is forced to labor has, and Students that study much. Scholars cannot endure
hunger.
For their vital spirits are extenuated, and the forces of their body will
fail. But in this business custom is to be kept, and we must observe what
every ones age, time, the climate, and the habit and use of the body requires.
For youth and cold weather, and a Northern climate require much meat, and to
eat often, otherwise the body wastes and consumes. But old people and such as
are come to their decrepid age, can fast longer, and have no appetite, not do
they hunger after meat much; yet they desire meat at times to preserve them,
though not in such abundance. Gal. l. 1. Aph. 14.
For as the flame in Lamps is extinguished by much oil, so is the heat of old
men by much eating and craming themselves. Old men are under propped with meats.
But because old age is under propped by feeding, the Proverb grew, that the
Mandible is the old man's staff. For what old age impaires, and what fails of
the natural moisture of the body, meat and drink make up again. Wherefore they
and all sedentary people and Students and Magistrates that serve for the
public good, may in the morning eat Raisins, Dates, Figs, Currants, Pine
kernels, Fistick nuts, Orange and Citron pills candied with Sugar, Myrobalans
conserved with honey when they are green, or some other liquid corroboratives
that less weary the stomach, and trouble it not to digest them. In the mean
time every one must measure his own strength, and consider his condition, and
nature, and see what it will bear, and what it refuses and cannot away with.

Wine drank early in the morning is pernicious.
But chiefly observe this, that no man drink Wine early in the morning, for it
is very much contrary to Nature: for it dulls the vigor of the mind, clouds
the understanding, and hurts the nerves. Wherefore let every man wholly deny
himself the use of wine in the morning; but eating a little food, let him drink
sparingly, and what is well alayd. For Nature in the morning requires very
little food, and a little will serve to nourish it, lest natural heat should
fail.

A simile from the Kitchen.
Wherefore it is good to follow their example, who when they mean to make a
clear fire some hours after, to roast or boil with, first they make the fire
with some fuel and dry matter, lest the fire should quite go out, and when it
is time they make a great fire to boil with: so when the stomach a little
before is made hot with some small food, as to light the fire by, at dinner it
will desire meat more greedily, and the veins being dilated, it will better
digest it: It is not good to fast long.
For many that fast until dinner, lose their appetite, the heat of their
stomach being very feeble, and almost quite gone out. Add to this, that the
passages being fallen down and shut whereby the nutriment should pass, it
sticks in the midway, and is long before it can come into the veins.

Moreover, by reason of long hunger, the stomach is filled with ill humors
that it sucks from the parts that are near, and so refuses meat, We are sooner
drunk at dinner than at Supper.
and is soon satisfied. Wherefore by reason hereof men are sooner drunk at
dinner, and fore-noon drinkings, than if they should drink much at supper. For
to pass over other considerations for this, half the danger is taken off by
the night, as Pliny says, L. 13. c. 1.
when men drink in expectation of sleep. For sleep helps to discuss, and to
take off the fumes of the wine.

The use of Bread.
But since bread is a great part of man's nourishment, and all meats without it
are unsavory, and not very healthful, I think fit to speak something of the
use thereof. For some maintain, that to eat much bread is hurtful to the
stomach, and that eating of it immoderately and to repletion does as much harm,
as wine drank in too great abundance, I think their reason is, because it
stays long in the stomach, and binds the belly. But my opinion is, that choice
and a difference should be made. For wheaten bread well molded and made with
leaven, and well baked is the most commendable and healthful food for sound
bodies. Wherefore I would have all men persuaded, that it is not good to join
too little bread with their meat. They that eat little bread their breath
stinks.
For they that eat bread too sparingly, and flesh or fish plentifully, their
body grows spungy, and their flesh loose, and their breath stinks and
corrupts. Wherefore eating of fish because they soonest corrupt, requires most
bread with them.

We see that all meats will suddenly corrupt and stink, in three days or a
little more unless you salt them. And Eggs, Fish, Flesh, and all such meats
will be unsavory. But bread never corrupts, or smells amiss. Being over long
kept it will grow moldy, but it putrifies not. Wherefore such as cram
themselves with meats. and eat little or no bread, send a stinking smell from
their very entralls, and offend all that are near them.

Wherefore those that desire to be of strong and firm constitution of body, let
them eat bread with moderation at least, chiefly when they must exercise and
labor hard. For unless Ditchers, Porters, Mariners, Charriers, Fencers,
Wrestlers, should eat bread in abundance, they could not subsist, and endure
such labors. But I prescribe the use of bread more sparingly to tender weak
sickly constitutions, and to such whose stomachs are faint, and the passages
narrow; It is best to refresh them with liquid meats, and to restore their
strength, for these will soon enter the veins. For such bodies are too tender
and delicate for to receive hard meats. And the kingly Prophet David seems to
me to have observed and considered all these things very exactly. Psalm 103.
God the maker of all things, causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle, and
herbs for the service of man, both sick and well. So that his body anointed
with oil may shine, and anointed with ointment may be refreshed. That the
heart of man may be cheered with Wine, and sadness being driven away may be
made merry, and that bread the staff of life may confirm and strengthen him.

CHAP. XXII.
A Nutmeg and a Coral-stone, carried about a man will grow the better, but
about a woman the worse.
A man excels a woman.
THat a man excels a woman, and that his condition is fat better than hers,
besides the noble gifts and endowments of his soul and body, whereby he
abundantly goes beyond her, inanimate creatures, and such as have left growing
and increasing do testify, and prove by experience. For a Nutmeg if a man carry
it about him, does not only keep its force, but will swell and become more
full of juice. For since among these the best weighs most, and is most full of
juice, and being pressed or pricked with a needle, How to try Nutmegs.
will sweat forth an oily substance, with an excellent sweet smell: the heat of
man preserves these properties, and which is wonderful will make it more
pleasant to behold, and to swell more with this oily juice, especially if young
lusty men carry it about with them. For so pleasant and sweet smell comes forth
of such bodies, Comment l. 2. Aph. 14.
and such excellent vapors, by reason of the temper of their natural heat, and
so gentile and pleasing, that the Nutmeg will draw them to it, and so it being
soked with them grows more clear, and sweet sented. For it is fed and delights
in an aereal vapor, and a warmayre inclining to heat, and such youthful
bodies do breath it forth as a thing that is most familiar and agreeing with
it. Why the cloths of Alexander the great, smelt sweet.
So it is written that Alexander the great King of Macedonia, had his cloths
perfumed, not by any external perfume put upon them, but from the natural
breathing forth of his imbred heat. But a woman abounding with excrements, and
sending out ill smells by reason of her terms; makes all things worse, and
spoils their natural forces and imbred qualities. Hence it is that a Nutmeg by
her touching of it will grow dry, light, rotten, pale, and blackish, and so she
will corrupt and spoil herbs, destroy seed, and take off the Luster from a
Looking Glass. The like reason serves for Coral: Coral grows redder if a man
wear it.
for this made into round pieces, and polished smooth, if a man carry it, it
will grow more red, than if a woman should wear it about her. For by being long
with a woman it will grow pale and wan, A woman makes Coral worse.
and lose its natural heat, partly by reason of the fuliginous thick vapors
that breath from her, and partly because she has but a weak heat, and is cold
and moist of constitution; What makes Coral led.
which qualities can keep and preserve nothing: but a man has a gentle sweet
vapor that proceeds from his substance by natural heat, and he is almost
aromatised by it. To make mustard seed or Coral red.
For which cause Mustard Seed will make Coral more red if it be covered with
it, namely by reason of its heat, whereby it grows hot as by a thing that is on
fire.

CHAP. XXIII.
For the most part such are barren and unfruitful whose seed runs from them of
its own accord, and they pollute themselves, and how that comes to pass.
IT is so foul a mischief, that amongst the Jews those that were polluted with
it, Levit. 19.
were driven out from the Temple, and all men's company. The Greeks call it
Gonorrhaea, the Latins Seminis profluvium, both men and women are troubled
with it. For their seed runs from them against their wills, almost without any
pleasure or desire, or erection, and it is watery and thin. Wherefore it is
unfruitful and unfit to beget children. For as a Willow that loses its fruit,
A Simile from unfruitful Trees.
casts off his seed for lack of heat before it be ripe.

So these have their generative humor too cold and moist, and it runs away
from them. For the natural faculties are not able to perfect the seed, and make
it prolifical. Whence it comes that the humor is altogether excremental; and
is the rudiment of seed newly begun and imperfect, and wants the power of
generation. But since this disease arises from the weakness of the spermatick
vessels, so there is also another vice contracted by venery and contagious
copulation when men lie with whores. For a corrupt filthy matter distill's from
the secrets, sometimes of a wan color, and sometimes green as Copras or Leeks
that smell most filthily. Whence it comes that the vessels are sometimes
corroded, The Dutch call this the fowl dropping.
and the secrets are hurt. But that moisture and dropping of a moist fowl
humor is more virulent in women, and when it is corrupted it is like the
whites of Eggs, whereby the guts are vexed with an intolerable pricking, as if
they were wet with Alum or salt, They that have the French Pox are always
leacherous.
and by this means all that are diseased with the Pox are extreme letcherous by
reason of the acrimony of the corrupt humor, and they think to abate it and
hinder it by copulation, and to ease themselves of the greatest part of the
disease. Wherefore when they desire to rub rheir scabby matter upon all, yet
the bawdy Letchers chiefly seek and hunt after such as they know to be of a
wholesome and sound constitution. For they power forth their filthy matter upon
these, and corrupt them with their polluted seed, for they can contract to
themselves no contagion by such copulation. For since they are troubled with
the flux of seed contracted by whoring, Sharpness of urine is proper to this
disease.
and filthy copulation with Harlots. It is not a seminal and fruitful
excreement that runs from them, but a contagious filthy matter flows from their
groins, that stinks ill favouredly, not of a white but green wan color that
causes ulcers in the secrets, and in the forepart of the yard, so that their
urine can hardly come forth, and is now and then stopped by the purulent matter.
Who have their urine stopped.
And if at any time they begin to lust and tickle and their yard to have
erection, they suffer intolerable pains. For this part seems to be stretched
as it were with a cord, by reason of the nerves that are wet with a biting
acrimonious humor, whence it comes that they have now and than a dropping of
their urine, that comes not forth upon heaps and freely, but by little and
little with intolerable pain. This disease is taken from pocky sick people,
and by lying with whores whose privities are infected with bubo's, and other
contagions. Which disease being it consists about the privities and secret
parts, Swellings of the groins not to be repressed.
and from putrid humors causes filthy tumors: it is called the gowt of the
secrets, or a Winchester-Goose. But if the contagion does spread it self, as it
uses to do, when the body is not presently purged after the disease
contracted, and where outwardly discussive cataplasms that may repress the
matter, and not such as may ripen it are applied to draw it forth, the whole
mass of the body, together with the blood and spirits is infected, and the
whole collection of humors is carried to the nerves, panicles, membranes
muscles, Whence pains of the Nerves.
and causes intolerable pains. The Dutch call this disease in their language,
Pocken met de Lempten: because all the parts are rent and pierced with cruel
pains, and the symptoms that accompany the disease, and come from the
fierceness of it, cause as great anguish as the disease it self. For they are
not racked with one kind of pain only, but with many kinds of torments, that
rend and tear and prick the nervous parts that are of most exquisite sense and
motion, placce="marg" Those that have the Pox feel all sorts of pains.
as if they were wounded with bodkins, pincers, and other Instruments. And
since they wander all over the body, and possess all parts none excepted, from
the continual pain without any Intermission, our Countrymen call this disease
de Mieren, a name that signifies an Ant, that is an active and unquiet
Creature, that runs continually to new places, and from that the Physicians
call one kind of pulse, the Ant pulse, The Ant-pulse.
for the slender motion of it, when the forces are spent and cast down, so that
a man has but a little of life left when such a pulse is felt: like to this is
the worm-creeping pulse, because it moves as a worm does, A Worm-creeping-pulse.
and this promises but little hopes of recovery. And as there is a disease,
where men seem to be rent as it were, What disease is Verminatio, and what
formicatio.
and eaten with worms; so is there a disease wherein men seem to be stung with
Ants, for the body is deformed outwardly with filthy bloches, and pushes, and
inwardly they feel as it were Ants that bite them, and vex them, so that they
are still forced to scratch and rub to find some ease: So those that have the
French Pox, can be no where at rest, but must always scrub themselves.

Fornication coming upon the French Pox.
Wherefore our Countrymen do fitly apply Formication to this diseased body, not
that this disease should be so called, but because it affects the body, as that
disease does. Hence Plautus, because many in that time were polluted with most
foul diseases, as filthy running sores on the face, scabs, leprosy, and many
more, that show themselves in the most comely part of the body, calls such
Ant-bitten, Ant-bitten men
moldy, lither, putrid, ulcerated men, and these as our Country men say, if
you do but shake them they will come in pieces, and their flesh will part from
their bones, and they commonly deride them with this jeer, Vanden grate
Schudden. The comparison is taken from stinking fish, The common proverb comes
from stinking Fish.
and rotten salt fish, that with the least shaking will fall off from the back
bone. Wherefore they that have contracted pocky swellings about their secrets
and groins, either from venerous copulation, or by keeping company with one
that has the Pox, and lay in bed with him (for of former times this contagion
was easily taken from others, either from their breath, The incredible
contagion of diseases.
or eating or drinking in the same cup with them, though now it grows feeble by
degrees.) I advise such first to wash their privities with sharp Wine or
Vinegar, and all parts near, putting a little salt thereto, then if it be
requisite, bring the swelling or apostume to maturity, and when the corrupt
matter is come forth, The cure of swellings in the groins.
to wash the hollow ulcer with abstergent remedies, before they close it up.
And as for the biting of a mad dog, that is sometimes more gentle than to be
bit with a whore, men keep the wound along time open, least the virulent matter
kept within, the disease should increase again, and grow worse: yet before you
open the Impostume you must purge the body well: and for this use Epithym,
Fumitory, Polypod, Sena, A short cure of the Pox.
and Confectio Hamech are good: or because their urin must be qualified,
Benedicta Laxativa, is good with the decoction of Guaicum, which I hold to be a
sort of Ebony. And unless care be had to help the body with such remedies, the
humors will scatter over all, and the Pox will infect the whole body. For
these two diseases are of kin and near one to the other, as a Cancer and the
Leprosy. For what a Cancer is in one part of the body, that is the Leprosy
over all. So that contagious affection when it is in all the body, and spread
into all parts, causes that fowl disease, which men call the French Pox, some
the Pox of Naples, or that those disgraceful names may be laid aside in favor
of such famous countries, let it be called the fowl or contagious Pox. But that
which is in the groin and secrets may be called pudendagra. But since it is the
nature of man to be shameless and reproachful in respect of other men's
miseries, and will insolently insult over those that are oppressed with such
calamities, the common people when this disease is spread all over the body,
call it the Mothers Pox, A proverb upon those that are sick of the Pox.
but if it be but in one part they call it the daughters Pox. And because one
grows from the other, they speak in a common jeer, that, The common jeer
against those that have sores in their Groin.
that comely Husband, or rather fowl and filthy, has married the mother and
her two daughters, when as besides the swellings of the groins, the body is
full of ulcers and boyls.

CHAP. XXIV.
When men are sick they grow tall though they ea^ less, but they lose in
breadth.
What hinders tallnesse.
YOung people that eat much, do not grow up so comely, and so tall and handsome
as they should, as we find by daily experience. For the natural heat is choked
and overwhelmed with too much moisture, that the bodies cannot grow decently
tall. But such as feed moderately, and sparingly, and keep a set time and form
of diet, do not grow exceeding fat, nor does their fat or flesh increase; but
the bones grow long and augment.

So we see that young people and children in long and chronical diseases, do
grow more slender and lean, Why some grow long and others bro^ll.
but they shoot forth in length and tallness. Which I should think comes to
pass by reason of dryness. For the bones are dry, and are nourished by such
like nutriment. For since the humors, and aliments sick people take in, grow
dry by the heat and dryness of the body: the bones wax long, and by reason of
dry nutriment they shoot forth in length, especially when a man is in that age,
when his body is moist and ductil like clay, and may be drawn forth in length.
A Simile from clay that is ductill.
Yet every one has a certain bounds of his growth, and the limits are set for
our just stature, and the means and ways whereby by degrees we secretly grow to
be handsomely tall, or ill favored: and that force of growing in length is
seldom extended beyond twenty five years of age, How long time men grow in
tallnesse.
and commonly cease under nineteen years old. Whence it is that teeth struck
out will not come again after that date of years, nor will bones broken, and
cartilages consolidate, because they are made of the seed of the Parents. But
to grow fat and gross is not limited to certain times, but as we eat or drink
in abundance. Which may be done when a man is in his standing or declining age.
For though a man eat abundantly he will not grow tall, One force causes
tallnesse, another breadth
but square and gross. For there is one faculty that nourishes the body, and
another that augments it: For that consists in the plenty of of nutriment: but
that about the solid part of the body, namely the bones, nerves, cartilages,
etc. Which if they increase and grow long, the body increases also, though it
consume and wast away.

Wherefore nature in producing of bones, whence length comes uses the force of
heat, whereby she dries the humors a little, and fits the aliments to feed the
bones. For augmentation cannot be made without plenty of nutriment. For when a
Creature is generated it requires to be augmented till it comes to its full
growth, and to spread in length and breadth.

Then, to make it continue and last the rest of its life to come, nutrition
does its office, that what decays may be restored, and what the qualities of
the ambient Air consume may be repaired, yet the body growing nothing bigger
thereby, or longer. Wherefore the augmenting faculty is that that draws forth
the bones of men in Fevers like Wax, by the heat and virtue of the seminal
excrement, which in the vigor of years is very forcible and effectual to do
this. But if children and young men use to eat milk from their Cradles, and to
use exercise, they grow longer, What things make the body increase.
and more personable; For by using to drink Milk, the bones are fed, because it
is very like to seed, and good blood well concocted: by the use of fruits; the
Nerves; of water, the flesh; as we may see in Oxen that grow fat where much
water is, and in moist grounds they augment and grow greater.

And again, in the Low Countries, especially those of Holland who become so fat
by their natural beer, that their chins will lie upon their breasts.

Their bellies fat, Pers. Sat. 2.
a foot and half stick out. CHAP. XXV.
Whether it is best to open a Vein when one is fasting, or after meat; and
whether it be lawful to sleep presently after bloodletting.
IT is needless to relate here what profit it is to man to have a vein opened,
and what good, men find by it in health or sickness, and who must be let
blood, and when. For every one may learn this from a faithful and honest
Physician; not from that common and trivial custom that some trifling fellows
have invented, who too rigidly observe the Stars more than the humors. But
since there use to be infinite questions moved concerning this matter, I shall
determine all in a few words; whether it is expedient to open a vein, When men
are fasting or full. For since I see many tremble and fear when a vein must be
opened, lest they should swound or faint, I think it fit to give them some
meat, and a little strong wine. For I have often observed some frequently to
fall down in a swound, and not to move, and could hardly with smells and pulling
them be recovered. Meat and drink feed the spirits.
Add to this that blood runs not together, and plentifully when people are
fasting, but faintly and by degrees, and sometimes it will not come forth.
Because nature greedily keeps back the treasure of life, and will not easily
let it go, because that she finds the greatest force of spirits to be in it:
which being exhausted the whole body pines away, and the works of nature are
performed worse than they were. But when some nutriment is given, Meat to be
offered before blood letting.
it will run forth more readily. For the spirits are quickened by eating, and
much cheered by drinking and moderate exercise, and the blood runs all over the
body, and makes it more ruddy and well colored. But it is a question whether
it be fit to sleep presently after bloodletting. Whether we may sleep after a
vein opened.
I, unless one be used to it, or be weary with heat and long travel do not
think it fit or good for ones health in the spring and summer to sleep at noon,
nor do I think it good for to sleep presently after opening a vein, especially
if ones belly be full, or his body fat. After blood-letting be temperate.
For some of these are of opinion that after blood-letting they should restore
their strength by cramming themselves with meat and drink. Who become sleepy
and drowsy, and fall asleep with no small loss to their health, and danger:
For their brains are so filled with thick vapors, and the veins do so swell
thereby ofttimes, that the orifice opens, and the blood runs forth again to the
great inconvenience of their health. I remember that this fell out upon one of
our Magistrates, who in the Ides of May, An example of one that died by
sleeping.
when prayers unto God, and abstaining from ^abour are commanded for three
days, he had a vein opened at that time, and as the custom is, at dinner he
eat green garlic, and drank wine plentifully: about noon his head being filled
with fumes, he first slept, then died. Wherefore he that would do best for his
health, the day a vein is opened, should live on a sparing diet, and abstain
from sleep so long as he can, but if it come upon him against his will, and he
cannot hold open his eyes: yet let him keep from sleeping so long, till the
force and motion of the blood be settled; which is done after one hour and half.
Then he may quietly repose himself, and taking care not to hurt that part of
his body that was cut, let him lie half down, and lean his head on a pillow, if
he cannot sleep upright in a chair. But if he sleep above two hours, he must be
pulled that he may awake, lest the spirits should grow dull, and the body
should be oppressed by a general dark vapor, whereby the party falls to
vomiting, and loathing, and can hardly shake off his yawning.

CHAP. XXVI.
Physiognomy, that is, the reason how to look into the Nature and manners of
men, and with which by the marks and signs of the body we may judge of the
motion and propension of the mind, is not to be disliked. Moreover I shall
prove by Testimony of Scripture what is most convenient to be observed hereby.
The countenance and eyes are the Tables of the mind.
SOme Arts are held unlawful and not fit to be used, because they are near of
kin to false Imposture, and because they have some curious and neat
observations. But Physiognomy, which by the face, eyes, countenance,
lineaments, and the whole habit discovers the propension of the mind and body,
is in no part of it to be referred to unlawful arts, for the most excellent
men were very studious in it, and careful to adorn it. But since there is no
part of the body, though never so small, base, and ignoble, that offords not
some argument of the imbred nature, and to what the mind is inclined, yet the
chief marks and tokens appear in the face and countenance, and which is the
most certain discoverer of the mind, in the volubility and aspect of the eyes.
For in them do shine, hate, anger, Indignation, fear, hope, joy, modesty,
arrogance, jealousy, covetousness, aemulation, and all internal affections of
the mind, in the outward habit of the body. So when God saw Cain sad, and his
countenance cast down; he said unto him, Genesis 4.
Why art thou sad? and why is thy countenance fallen? Also Joseph when he saw,
his fellow Prisoners sad, he asked them, why is your face more sad than
ordinary? Genesis 40.
for he observed that there was some ill apprehension in their minds, and the
certain notes of it were seen in their Countenance. To which appertains that of
Isaias, Cap. 3. A place of Esaias explained.
The show of their Countenance does witness against them.

Whereby he shows, ^^at wicked men may be caught by their looks. For their
countenance shows what malice they are filled with, what they meditate, what
they desire to undertake, and whither their wicked intentions are bent. There
are many things to prove this, that we may read in David and Solomon's lives,
Psalm. 34.
whereby they do condemn the wickedness of some men, and express it by their
forehead, eyebrows, eyes rolling up and down, biting of their lips, their
nostrils wrinkled, their cheeks swollen, their proud gate, unseemly behavior,
their nodding and fierce countenance. Whence says the Wise man; Prove. 6.
A wicked and ungodly man goes with a proud lock, he winketh with his eyes,
speaks with his feet, teaches with his fingers, frowardness is in his
heart, he devises mischief, and continually sows discord. But in those that
are of a pleasing and mild spirit, all things appear well in their
countenances. Their standing, going, lying down, their countenance, eyes,
hands, motion, serve all to express an honest and comely mind; as also in the
face, wisdom, honor, honesty and other virtues appear.

But though all things do not exactly answer the praedictions of this art, and
many things fall out contrary to the marks that are outwardly on the body, and
that either by reason of education, or the Industry of Parents, or else by the
grace of God: yet for the most part they are true, and the event is certain.
For in such as are marked with some visible note, Art finds out the truth.
Notes of the body show the condition of the Mind
For where there is an error about some principal part, there the mind
partakes of some inconvenience, and cannot perfectly perform her offices. So
they that are deformed with a bunch-back, so it be a natural Infirmity, and not
accidental, nor come by any fall or blow, are commonly wicked and malicious;
because the depravation is communicated to the heart, that is the fountain and
beginning of life. Next to these are squint, blind, blear-eyed people, and such
as have rolling eyes, and such as cast their eyes aside; because Nature failed
about the brains. But deaf, mute, stuttering, stammering people, and such as
cannot speak plain by reason of the weakness of the nerves and muscles, are
not free from vice, yet they do not deserve to be much blamed for it. For the
less noble and generous the part is, that is subject to error, the principle
parts are the less affected thereby. But if any default of the body be near
the heart or the brain, The heart and brain are affected by the remote parts.
and partake with them, some error is communicated thereby to the mind and
reason; so that they are not sound in all their perfections, and sometimes the
rule of Judgment fails and is carried obliquely; so that the animal faculties
cannot perform their functions and offices as they should. Yet it is not
always necessary, nor does it follow, that the condition of man's nature, his
manners, studies, purposes, propensions of his mind and agitation thereof
should be fitted to the outward marks, and to be measured by the external
lineaments and signs of his body. For men do act and meditate, and conceive
many things in their minds, and perform the same in their actions, whereof
there is no print or note at all to be seen on their bodies, or any thing to
conjecture by. For a man may be deformed in his body and his limbs stand awry,
and yet he may be upright and inclined to noble arts. And on the contrary a man
may have a very comely body, and yet be of wicked manners, and lead a vicious
life. We must not despise Natures Error.
Wherefore we must not insult over any man's failings that are natural, for
neither bunch-backt, nor squint-eyed, nor lame, or such as have crooked legs,
are to be reproached or scorned: when they desire that these errors of Nature
were rectified, and that their bodies had been better formed; yet there are
some of these that urge men to speak ill of them: for some of them are cunning
Impostors, Marked Syc^phants.
false, deceitful, and not only given to obscene jests, but are abundantly
provided with biting and cutting taunts and scoffs: as almost all those are
that have their nervous and musculous parts ill formed. So that from thence the
brain that is the beginning of sense and motion, and the heart which is the
fountain of life and spirits are diversely affected by consent; for the external
defaults change the internal faculties, and frame and guide them to diverse
actions that are naught.

From these therefore that are marked with any outward mark, came the Proverb,
Take heed of such as are marked.
Take heed of those that Nature has marked. Whereby such as are skilful in
humane affairs, do note unto us, that we must avoid the company and society of
wicked people; because they find by daily experience and practice, that such
people are deceitful, and full of crafty and cunning practices. But that Iame
people are extreme letcherous, and have their secrets exceeding great, the
Proverb from thence declares. A lame man is the most letcherous. The Proverb of
lame people.
For all the nutriment that should support the weak foot, stays about the
generative parts, and is converted into seed, the force and plenty whereof
causes erection, and causes the obscene parts to be all ways itching.

CHAP. XXVII.
Whether it be more wholesome to sleep with open mouth, or with the mouth and
lips shut close.
MAny think it is best to sleep with their mouths wide open; For so the fumes
and fuliginous vapors can breathe forth the better, and that the breath can
more freely pass out and in, and will not smell so strong; for they that sleep
with their mouths shut, have an ill sented and stinking breath. But I am other
wise persuaded. For as lying on the back is hurtful to the Lungs and midriff,
so that they will swell with humors powered on them; so to sleep with open
mouth is naught for ones health. For the Lungs being full of holes, draw in
abundantly by the vocal artery, the obvious Air, which in the night is
commonly impure and troubled: wherewith the passages of breathing being
stuffed, More wholesome to sleep with the mouth shut.
makes the voice hoarse or blunt. But when the mouth is shut, the breath and
outward Air, comes in and goes out not by heaps but by degrees by the windings
of the nostrills, and by a turning revolution, and so passes to the lungs, and
tempers the heat of the heart. And hence it is that such as sleep with their
mouths shut are not so thirsty. Whence comes thirst in the night.
For they that sleep with their Jaws extended, by reason of their breath, and
the Air tossed to and fro, have their tongues and palates dry, and desire to
be moistened by drinking in the night. But since this opinion may be confirmed
by many solid reasons, yet there is none more prevalent, than that the
concoction in the stomach is far better performed by it, if any man sleep with
his mouth shut: for the natural heat is more preserved and concocts more
strongly. A simile taken from the Kitchen.
For as pots and kettles that are to boil meat in, will sooner boil it, if they
be covered, because no heat of vapor comes forth: so heat in man's body kept in
and covered will sooner digest the meat. Wherefore such as have weak and feeble
stomachs, I would advise them to shut their mouths, and hold their breath,
Breath covered helps digestion.
and such also as are troubled with coughs and hickops. For thus heat is
stirred up, and the disease is discussed. But when they have slept all night
with their mouths shut, and their meat is digested, than I counsel them that
they smack with their mouths, and hem aloud to purge away the fuliginous
vapors that stick in the passages.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That the curses of Parents and the ill wishes that they wish against their
Children, and ban them withal, do sometimes take effect and fall out so; and
their good wishes whereby they desire all good to happen to them, are a means
to make them prosper, and to obtain what their Parents desired might happen to
them.
THe Nature of mortal men is fallen into so great cruelty, all humanity being
laid aside, that they are not only barbarous to strangers, but they are cruel
to their own children, to whom they should wish all prosperity. For who does
not hear daily in the streets and villages their terrible and execrable curses:
whereby they most inhumanely curse their children to the pit of hell, and pray
for all mischiefs to fall upon them: and I remember that many of them have
taken effect, and come to a miserable and lamentable end. L. 7 de Leg.
Wherefore Plato thinks nothing more dangerous than for Parents to curse their
children. For children when they see their Parents thus enraged, Children not
to be exasperated with cruel words.
and to heap such horrid wishes upon them, they are amazed, tremble, and are
troubled, and being shaken with terror and fear, they fall either into
convulsions or epilepsies, or fall into rage and fury, and are changed both in
their minds and intentions. For so great a concourse and agitation of the
humors and spirits are made in such bodies, and such a distemper that the
instruments of the senses fall into convulsions, and all the faculties of the
soul are inverted. Whereby it comes to pass, that not only young children,
but such as are of riper years, which reverence and honor their Parents, are
shaken with sudden fear and sudden consternation of mind, as with thunder, and
suffer great damage in their reason and understanding, Genesis c. 49. Children
must be taught by the Parents.
and no less mischief in their bodies. Wherefore me thinks the old Hebrews
had an excellent way of teaching their children, that were indeed exceeding
well bred; For they were wont to pray and wish all good luck and happiness to
their children, both at home and abroad, not from fortune, but from God. Also
their children were wont with great devotion and godliness to obey and honor
their Parents, and with their best entreaties, observances, and well-beseeming
words, to procure from them their blessings, and prosperous wishes. For thus
they thought they should be freed from future dangers, and by the help of the
great God, to whom both they and their Parents made their vows, they believed
they should escape the casualties and inconveniences of humane affairs, and
live securely and happily all their days.

CHAP. XXIX.
How comes it, that according to the common Proverb, scarce any man returns
better from his long travels, or from a long disease, and to lead a better life
afterward.
THere is an upinion that is of long continuance, and a persuasion in the
Low Countries, that is commonly objected against such as recover of a long
disease. No man is better after a disease.
That no man is made better for a dangerous disease, or a long journey. And it
commonly falls out so. For such is the nature of mortal men, that though they
be vexed with long diseases, and are tossed with dangerous and hazardous
voyages both by Sea and Land, and wandering up and down, when they chance to
escape, they soon forget all, and they begin to live more loosely and
licentiously, that they are worse than they were before, and the time past was
better than what comes after. Math. 12. Doctrine inspired by God, makes the
best manners.
This I suppose happens because the mind of man is much neglected, and the
inward man is not manured as it should be, for good education would root out
imbred errors and vicious affections, namely the love and confidence in God,
and the knowledge of his word, unto which the will and reason are made
subjects, and so all his actions are framed by that rule. For these things
would effect and bring to pass, that we should forsake those sins, which when
we were sick and in danger, we so much renounced: otherwise all the fair
promises we made, and our purposes of amendment of life, and many more vows
that we then made, become void and of no moment. For when we are restored to
our former strength, nature falls back to her damnable customs, and will not
alter. Wherefore and honest course of life and a purpose of doing as we should,
The heavenly word is the food of our souls.
that we had in our minds, can by no other means be brought to perfection, but
by the word of God, and the influence of his spirit, which if when the disease
is gone, it stay fast in our minds, we shall not easily fall away from our
purpose of amendment of life, which pain extorted from us not without some
secret inspiration: but we shall stick constantly unto it, though many things
do solicit us to fall from it. There is a famous Epistle extant of Pliny the
younger, L. 7.
wherein he says he was advertised by the sickness of a friend; that we are
best when we are fastened by diseases to our beds. For he that is sick, if he be
tempted by lust or covetousness, he will not be amorous or covetous, he
neglects honors and riches, he is lowly and not so fierce, and lastly, he
resolves to lead a harmless happy honest sober life, That the purpose of the
mind may come to a happy issue.
if he chance to escape. Wherefore he took occasion from hence to admonish both
his friend and himself, that when they are well they should persevere to be
such, as they promised to be when they were sick. This exhortation was good and
commendable. But he knew not, nor could he show, by whose conduct help and
inspiration this was to be effected. For unless we are sustained by the power
of God and his word, upon every light occasion we shall fall back to our former
errors, and the flood of humane affairs will carry us another way, and not to
an honest and innocent life, and good and unblameable manners. For it was he
infirmity of man that wrested from us the promises of leading a better life,
Why is it that some are made better.
and not faith or any solid doctrine founded on Gods word. But if any man ask
for a natural reason, there is none that seems to me more probable, than that
when men recover of their disease many witty merry companions come to see them,
and they invite them to rejoice, and make merry, and to fall into all kinds of
Luxury and deceitfulness of pleasures and dalliances.

Hence they eat, and drink healths one after another round about, and so they
gratify them that are restored to their former health; and commonly there they
sing bawdy songs; and such things, that are not fit to be seen or heard, are
represented. These things and many such like do easily draw a sick and dubious
mind that has quickly forgot its deliverance, to embrace what is worse. To
this I add the delicate and voluptuous meats, which the humors being augmented
by, do stimulate and prick the obscene parts with, Delicate meats foment lust.
and cause erection. Hence it is that they return to luxury and gluttony, and
profuse lusts, and whorings, and unbridled pleasures; so,

Unchanged nature without delay, Juven. Sat. 24.

Will still return the same way.
For so great is the inclination and pronenesse of man's nature to that which is
worst, that unless God were very desirous of our salvation, and did
continually warn us, and send us some great afflictions, all would run to utter
oblivion. So as it is in Esaias, Chap. 29.
only trouble gives so much understanding to the ear. That is, no man but when
troubles come near, and calamities arise, does awake and give attention: nor
does a man ever think to live frugally and moderately, or thinks of leading a
better life, but when he is afflicted, or when we chance to be sick of fevers
and other cruel diseases, and are tormented with most terrible pains. Now there
is nothing that turns a man more from God, and alienates him from his maker,
than prosperous success and abundance of all things: Prosperity makes us
sluggish and negligent.
only affliction calls us to repentance and mourning, and to a purpose of a
better life. And no man can be persuaded that God is displeased with his way of
living or that his manners and customs and studies are not approved by him,
unless his mind be afflicted with some grief and sadness, and his body with
some diseases. For the mind is so deaf to all wholesome admonitions and
counsels, and the understanding is so hardened with the custom of sin, that it
will either reject milder corrections, or not be much moved by them, and there
appears no hopes of amendment unless more sharp remedies be applied. Hence was
it that God threatens by Esaias, Chap. 5. and 9.
because this people returns not to him that smites them, therefore is not his
fury turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, and lifted up again to
smite them. The like is said in Jeremiah, and complained of: Chap. 2.
In vain have I smitten your children, and they have not received instruction.
Hierem. 5.
Again, I smote them and they lame^^d not, I bruised them but they refused to
be instructed; they made their ^^ces harder than a stone, and they would not
return, they are grown rich, great, and fat, and they foulely passed over my
words. Wherefore God sometimes chastises us more bitterly, to recall us to an
honest and more pious life. So Alexander King of Macedo, who suffered men to
honor him as a God, Alexander wounded, confessed he was mortal.
when he was wounded with an arrow, and when he saw the blood run out
abundantly, he forthwith remembered that he was but a man, and laid aside all
his cruelty and Arrogance. Psalm 88.
To which may be referred that of the Psalmist, Thou have humbled the proud as
one that is wounded, thou have broken all his strength. Wherefore when things
are at the height of prosperity, and all goes according to our minds, and as we
would have it: let no man too much elevated by his good success, pride himself
too much, or bray immoderately, but let every man duly consider himself, and
think on adversities, losses, crosses, dangers, calamities, diseases, mishaps
that hang continually over our heads; and that God sometimes sends these upon
man, for a remedy and cure to correct his errors and cause him to repent, and
may have a certain confidence of his salvation, elevating his heart unto God
which God would have every man to know and observe diligently, when he says:
Psalm 88.
If his sons offend and obey not my laws, and keep not my Commandments, I will
visit their iniquities with the rod, and their sins with scourges, but I will
not take my mercy from them, nor suffer my truths to fail, whereby he openly
declares, that he corrects us for our amendment, God corrects us to make us
better.
and not for our destruction. That so our carnal desires being subdued, and our
licentiousness in sinning restrained, every man might turn to lead an honest
and innocent life, and to sober and good manners. For it is Gods correction on
us which proceeds from his fatherly affection, a great argument of his
exceeding love, and a Testimony of his good will toward us. For whom the Lord
loves, them he chasteneth, Prove. 1.
and corrects them as a man does the son whom he loves. But such as God
suffers to wander licentiously, and to live loosly, and to be involved in all
corruptions, Heb. 12.
and does not by his secret spirit call them back from their errors, it is
because God has given them over, and forsaken them. I will not, says he,
Hosea 4.
visit nor correct your sons and daughters when they commit fornication, nor
your wives when they pollute themselves with adulteries: as there are some
women, whereof our age can show examples, that have layn with other men,
Adulteries noted.
before they lay with their husbands to whom they were before contracted, so
that another man had their Maidenhead, before the nuptial feast was ended, and
that they came to bed to their husbands. So God, provoked by the continuance of
sin and daily custom of doing wickedly, holds back his hand from smiting them,
and suffers them to fall, and run to all disgrace, infamy, reproach, and to
obey their lusts. By which erroneous life, they first get a troublesome and
restless mind, than which nothing can befall a man more lamentable and
miserable, then besides their unhappy end and bitter death, wherein they have
nothing to support them, they pass to eternal punishment, and intolerable
torments.

When therefore God gives a man abundance of all things, as riches, Gold,
Silver, gallant houses, stately furniture, brave garments, in a large measure,
We should be thankful to God.
we should never forget that God by whose bounty we have obtained all this
abundance freely. For there is no vice in magnificent houses, and Manors, in
money, Lands, possessions, if we look how to use and employ them well. Rches
are not ill, but the abuse of them.
Lastly, if, what is the principal and is chiefly required at out hands, we
have a thankful heart toward God, and are bountiful to our neighbors and
poor people. Deuteronomy. 8.
Moses the Lawgiver amongst the Jews by the Commandment of God, and by what he
received from God, did admonish them of this matter, and often inculcated it
unto them, that no man should ever forget him, to whom we owe our selves and
all we have. When (says he) thou have eaten and art full, and have built
goodly houses, and when thy herds and they flocks, thy Silver and thy Gold are
multiplied, and all that thou have, take heed that thine heart be not then
lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God the giver of all these things. And
least that should be objected to them for their ingratitude and forgetfulness,
that God gave them butter from the heard, and milk of sheep, with the far of
Lambs and Rams, with the flower of Wheat, and delicate Wines in abundance, but
when Israel was fat and full, he kicked backwards, and forgot the Lord that
made him, and was unthankful to the Author of his salvation. Wherefore to
such backfliders Moses threatens terrible threatenings and punishments, and
lays it down that many sad and miserable calamities shall befall them; whereby,
Let their posterity learn an be warned, as God speaks in Jeremias; Deuteronomy. 32.
If they continue in the same fault, Chap. 2.
what a sad and bitter thing it is to forsake the Lord our God, and not to fear
and reverence him, who is the Lord God of hosts.

CHAP. XXX.
Stones or Jewels dug forth of the Earth, or taken out of the Sea, or out of
the bodies of living Creatures, what virtue they have, and by what means they
perform their operations.
BOth reason and experience prove that stones and Jewels have great virtues, so
they be not counterfeit, and artificial stones. Wherefore to wear a ring or a
Jewel that has a handsome and effectual stone set in it, is good for the eyes
to look on, and is healthful for the body by the virtue that proceeds from it,
and that not only by a hidden and secret faculty, which it has from the
stars, as Marsilius thinks, but from a virtue that proceeds out of it, A
similitude from Jewels.
that recreates the vital spirit. For as Jewels are clowded by the ambient
air, and receive in a gross vapor, and abundance of fumes; so they do send
out of them a thin and invisible virtue. For though a Jewel be a solid body,
yet natural heat, and touching and rubbing it, draws forth the force within it,
and communicates it to the brain and heart: For a Jewel called Erananos,
vulgarly a Turquois, does change often, and wax pale and lose its natural
color, as I have often seen it; where he that wears it is sick or not in good
health, and as the body grows well, so will this stone revive, and will
represent a most amiable sky-colour, as in the clearest day, from the
temperament of its native heat. Polluted people desile Jewels.
And there is scarce any Jewel but will change color, if a man be intemperate,
or not continent as he ought to be. For their inward virtue perishes, and all
their beauty and luster is defiled. Whence it is that he that commits adultery
or defiles the marriage bed, and all that run a whoring, can never keep their
Jewels beautiful and perfect, but they are clowdy, and dark by the foul vapors
they contract from those that wear them, and from whores whose company they
frequent. For they draw some venomous qualities to them from corrupt bodies
that exhale such virulent vapors, and infect them: as women when they have
their courses will foul a clean looking-glass. But if Jewels were ineffectual
and of no virtue, Exodus 28.
Moses would not so accurately, and diligently have commanded to adorn the
Priests vestment, which they call Rationale, with twelve Jewels, whereof both
Ezechiel, and St. John in the Apocalypse make mention: wherein he would not have
men to observe the beauty, and alluring rarities of the colors, but the
wonderful force and effects of them also, concerning which, because other men
have spoken so largely, I shall speak of stones that are taken out of the
bodies of Animals, birds and fishes, whereof many of them stick in the stomach,
and some in the head of them. When Autumn begins, and the Moon increases,
there is a stone taken out of the belly of a Swallow, The Swallow-stone.
called a Swallow-Stone, or Chelidonius from the bird it comes from, this is a
present remedy against the falling sickness: for it dryes exceedingly and
drinks up the viscous and clammy moisture that is the root of this disease. For
the swallow, whose dung blinded Tobias's eyes, Tob. 2.
is of a hot and dry nature, whence it is that they make their nests so
artificially of moist and soft mud, and hang them up in arched and vaulted
places. For by touching of it they consume the moisture and make the mud hard.
Hence it is that Physicians make Cataplasms of them, and find the powder of
burnt swallows to be most effectual in dissolving the quinsey, and other
swellings of the throat. Also snails that are very great, yield unto white,
something long, rough, The Snail-stone what virtue it has.
and hollow stones in their lower part, which I use to take out of their heads,
and to keep them for many uses. For they cause one to make water that has the
strangullion, and being bruised, and their powder given in wine, they make the
urinary passages slippery and give ease. That kind of stone grows of a clammy
matter, and slippery humor, which makes an easy passage for the humors: and
so do these stones help in childbirth, for they dilate and loosen the places,
and cause the matrix to open wider: but one or two of them put under the
tongue, has a strange force to cause salivation. Wherefore I advise such as
are thirsty and dry to role one of them in their mouths. For it will make the
tongue moist and run with humor, and stay both heat and dries. Crystal is of
the same virtue, if a while steeped in cold water it be put into the mouth.
Amongst herbs, Purslane, Cucumbers, Housleek, commonly called Jupiters beard,
do the same. Also Toads yield a stone, that sometimes represents the picture of
that Creature, but they are very old, A Toad-stone.
and have layn hid a long time amongst reeds, or amongst thorns and bushes,
before the stone grows in their head, or comes to any magnitude. And there is a
Toad stone kept and preserved in the family of the Lemnians, that is bigger
than a small nut, which I have often proved, that it will discuss swellings
and tumors arising from venomous beasts, if you often rub the places with it.
For it has the same nature the toad has, that it will draw forth and consume
all venom. For if a Rat, Spider, Wasp, black Betle, or rere-mouse, fasten upon
the part and hurt it, our country folks presently run to this remedy, and by
rubbing the place with this stone, the pain is abated, and the swelling
allayed. There are also many kinds of Fish that have exceeding hard stones in
their heads, as the Sea-wolf, the Coracinus, Umbrae, the river-Pike, the
Muller, and Haddock, whereof there is great plenty in winter. The Low Countries
call them Schelvisch from the rough scaly skin it has. For those that are
called from the form of their body and ash color, Asells, or Coo-fish, are for
the most part without these stones, especially the females* for out of the head
of a male I took a white stone, that was like the keel of a ship on the lower
side. All these kinds bruised and given in wine, ease the cholick, and break
the stone of the reins, not only by their weight and heaviness, as some
think, but by an imbred property, whereby they discuss and dissipate the
collection of humors. A stone is taken out of the head of a Carp.
The triangular stone of a Carp powdered, will stop the blood that runs out of
the nostrills, by its great astriction, which you may perceive also by taste.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the events of dreams, and how far they ought to be observed, and believed.
SInce of old time men were wont to observe dreams with incredible vanity and
superstition, and to credit and believe them; The great and good God that would
have no man troubled in undoubtfull and uncertain things, that disturb the
tranquillity of the mind, forbad that no man should be curious in observing
them, and make rash interpretations upon them, Levit. 19. Deuteronomy. 13.
and fain doubtful events. For by these impostures, many have fallen from God,
and turned to false worships. And if God when we are asleep, does warn our
minds that are dull to seek out what his will is, and does put into our souls
such things as were good for the salvation of them, and are agreeable to his
word and doctrine; these things must needs be of great concernment, and to be
received with great reverence: for by them he shows unto us what he requires,
and what he would have us do concerning his glory or our own profit, and the
good of our neighbor. God sometime sends dreams.
But it is fit to examine and observe them, and no law forbids such things as
are within the compass of natural reason, yet so that we must not fasten and
rest firmly upon them; for oft-times our conjectures have not the desired end.
For Imaginations and such representations as we see in dreams, Natural dreams
to be observed.
are raised from the concourse of the spirits and motion of vapors, which if
they be gross, thick, and many, either we dream not at all, or the mind
discerns and perceives them very confusedly, and darkly. As we see in men that
are drunk, or such as sleep deeply after they have been much wearied. Hence it
is that dreams are often troublesome and obscure. For when, as Cicero argues from
the opinion of Plato, that part of the mind that partakes of reason is faint
and fast asleep, De divinat.
and the other part is stupefied with immoderate drinking or eating: we see in
our sleep filthy terrible and horrid visions, as if we were at copulation, or
killing beasts or men, or to be wickedly defiled with blood, and to do many
impure, rash, and impudent actions. But they that lie down after moderate
eating, that part of the mind wherein reason consists, and counsel, being
cheerful and ready, and the body not being dejected with too little meat, nor
oppressed with too much, then will it come to pass that the mind will shine
forth, be lively and sharp in dreams, and peaceable and true dreams are
represented unto it. For what work soever man is busied about in the day, when
his body falls asleep, that the mind will be intent upon and run over again;
which Claudian in an elegant copy of verses expressed. L. 3. praefat.


On what by day our senses chance to light,
When that we sleep, we see the same by night.
The Hunts-man when he rests, his mind then roves
Of Hills and Dales, of shady Woods and Groves.
Lawyers plead causes, Coach-men Coaches drive,
And the night Horses seem to be alive.
The Seaman loads his wares, the Lover comes by stealth.
And as by day the miser hunts for wealth.
And he that thirsts as standing on the brink
Of Rivers, then believes that he does drink.
And I in silent night am wont to muse,
Of diverse Arts that in the day I use.
And indeed when the body is in a good temper, we see in out sleep no other
visions and apparitions, then such actions and things that we are busied about
in the day time. But if our sleep be interrupted, and not quiet, but unequal
and troublesome, we are then perplexed with such dreams and visions that are
troublesome and unusual; and this shows that our bodies abound with gross
humors, as Plutarch says, or the spirits with in are troubled. Di tuend.
valetud.


So drunken and feavourish people use to be disquieted with absurd dreams, so
that many think they see terrible visions, Dreams of sick men and drunkards.
hobgoblins, Ghosts, scritch-Owls, Harpies, and what is peculiar to
melancholique people, dead men, and sorrowful and sour faces. But they that
abound with yellow choler conceive they see firebrands, slaughters, burnings,
fightings, brawlings, and scolding, Dreams are various as the humors are.
as sanguin people dream of dancing, singing, sporting, laughing, and all
lascivious matters; and flegmatique people dream of abundance of water.

Wherefore Physicians shall not lose their labor, if they enquire now and then
of sick people how they slept in the night; and what they dreamt of. For dreams
show the diseases and affects of the body. For if any man dream that he roles
in filth and dirt, it shows that his body is full of corrupt naughty humors;
but if he dream he has been in gardens amongst sweet flowers and herbs, it is
a sign that the humors of his body are very pure and clean.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Climacterick or graduall year, namely the 7. and 9. in which years the
bodies of men suffer manifest changes; and of old Men especially, 63 is the
most dangerous. Likewise of the reason of Critical days, that is, of the
judgments of diseases, whereby Physicians undoubtedly foreshew whether the sick
will live or die.
AUgustus Caesar, L. 15. c. 7.
as Gellius says, was glad, and hoped that he was like to live long, because
he had passed his 63 year. For Old Men seldom pass that year, but they are in
danger of their lives, and I have observed in the Low Countries almost infinite
examples thereof. The year 63. is dangerous for old Men.
Now there are two years, the 7th, and 9th, that commonly bring great changes
in a Man's Life, and great dangers; wherefore 63, that contains both these
numbers multiplied together, comes not without heaps of dangers, for 9, times
7, or 7, times, 9, are 63. And thereupon that is called the Climactericall
year, because beginning from 7, it does as it were by steps finish a man's Life.
And therefore all those years that arise by 7, or 9, are called decretory or
judicial, wherein men undergo great mutations, for either they use to be
calumniated, or vexed with grievous diseases, or be in great dangers, or do
suffer some detriment or loss, either of their goods or health: wherefore I
use to observe the revolutions of these years in all ages, so that I have found
young Boys and Children to be in danger about the fourth year, 7, year, 9, or
14, year. For all Children as C. Celsus says, are in danger about the 14, L.
2. c. 1.
day, and then at 7, years, and afterward about 14. years, when hair begins
to come forth on the secrets. I know many that were in danger at 21, and after
that at 28. and were never free from some dangerous disease after the
revolution of 7, or 9, years: which revolution of years, though it be not to be
observed too strictly or superstitiously by Christians, or to be feared, yet we
are not forbid about those times to be moderate and sparing in our diet, and
course of Life, lest humors should be heaped up in our bodies, Years not to
be superstitiously observed. Why Climactericall years are dangerous.
that may in these years prove to be the fuel, and matter of diseases. But no
man as yet has explained the reason, why diseases in these revolutions of
years should commonly be more fierce. I think it comes so to pass, because the
body of Man in certain periods of years heaps up a great heap and collection of
humors, by the motion and agitation whereof diseases are caused. For when
Nature comes to immoderate repletion, and the Vessels cannot endure the plenty
of humors, they must needs break out into a disease. How to avoid the danger
of the climactericall year.
Wherefore we must do all we can to evacuate the peccant matter that abounds,
which always in the Spring or Autumn, is to be done either by opening a Vein
or Purging. For thus you shall not need to fear any disease after 7 years, or
any other year that the climactericall year falls upon, or to be endangered by
any mutation arising thence. From this observation of years there has been a
long custom in many Countries, that the Lord of the Manor makes new Agreements
with his Tenant every 7, year. A simile from lopping of Trees
For the same cause woods of Willow, Birch, Alder, white and Black Poplar, and
all Trees that are of soft moist wood, are wont to be cut down every fourth
year: but such as are of hard wood, as Oaks, Holm, Timber, Elms, Ash, are to be
lopt and cut every 7, or 9, years.

Judicial days.
In like manner Physicians observe critical days, which, if a man shall exactly
observe the account as Hippocrates has set it down, he shall seldom miss or
fail in his praedictions. The Crisis or judgment of diseases.
A Crisis is a sudden change in the disease, either to Life or Death, which is
wont to be terminated either on the 4th, or 7th, or 9th, or 11th, or 14th, day.
Some referr the decretory days to the operation of the Moon, so Astrologers
judge of diseases. When the Moon is in the degrees that are remote a quarter or
half a great Circle that she was in when the disease first began. But she
comes to these Radii, Stars do conferr to the judgment of diseases.
sometimes sooner, sometimes later, as her course is swifter or flower. The
Crisis is not to all men alike, because men's Natures are different, and their
ages, and the constitutions of their bodies, and the Aspects of the other Stars
to the Moon. If on the judicial day, the Moon be in her House, or Exaltation
with Jupiter and Venus, that are gentle and heathfull Planets, it foreshews a
good Crisis. If the disease consists in plenty of humors; it is good if the
Moon decrease in a quartile or opposite Aspect. But if at the same times the
Moon be in Conjunction with the Sun, or Saturn, it is no good omen, and shows
the disease will be dangerous or Chronicall. But if the Moon decreasing
accompany Saturn, when the disease begins, it shows it will be Chronicall or
Mortal: But if that happen when the Moon increases, it is a sign the disease
will soon begone, and is not dangerous. But as I would not have the healthful
and hurtful signs of the Stars, to be neglected, so I think it not good to be
superstitiously tied unto them; but rather to build on Hippocrates his
observations, which seemed to me to be always more certain, and not so
doubtful and deceitful, if so be a man exactly consider all things. Therefore
I referr this reason of critical days, not so much to the Stars, as to the
nature of the diseases and bodies, with the qualities and plenty of humors.
For Nature wrestles with the disease, and labors to cast it off: And if she be
dull or weak in resisting the fury of it, the conflict ends the first time,
either on the 7th, or 9th, or at the utmost on the 14th, day. For the like
happens to those bodies, A simile from a City besieged.
as does to a City that is most straightly besieged, which being not well
provided with all things needful, and such things as should serve to keep off
the Enemies, cannot endure the least opposition, but after one or two
batterings, fails, and is taken by the adversary. And as sometimes the battering
of it is staid, by a parley or time to breathe in, and then the enemy comes on
again with greater force, so it falls out commonly in acute diseases, wherein
we observe the force of the disease, like tempests and great winds to be still
a while, A simile from Tempests.
but it comes again with such violence, that Nature can hardly endure, nor life
continue until 7 days be expired.

But since the force of the 7th, number is observed in many natural things,
and Divines are persuaded of the great virtue of it: Physicians have principal
cause accurately to observe it, for daily experience shows that in health and
sickness, in the revolution of days, The 7th, number Sacred.
months and years, and for the judgment of diseases, it is of great
concernment. So that such as dye of hunger, dye the 7th day, or if they do lick
or swallow down something, they can hardly hold out till the 9th day; their
Spirits, their heat and moisture being extinguished and put out.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How a Looking-glass represents objects, and what good the polished
smoothness, of a Looking-glass, can do to Students and such as tire their
eyes in reading, and how it may restore a dull sight.
Women very careful to dress themselves.
LOoking-glasses that in our days are abused for luxury, und by which some
women strive to make themselves beautiful, when they kemb and dress
themselves by them, and paint their cheeks and eyes with Stibium and other
paints; the industry of wise nature invented for better uses, namely that we
might deligently contemplate the dignity of the form of Man, Drnnkards and
angry people should look into Looking glasses.
and the excellency of the Divine workmanship; wherefore Plato gave good
Counsel that Drunkards and angry-people should look upon the glass; for when
they saw their ill favor, there, they would the sooner leave off their solace.
And Socrates was wont to advise young men to do the like, that if they were of
a beautiful and noble countenance they should not defile it with vices: but if
they were ugly, and not so comely of stature, they should recompense that with
good Ornaments of wit and honest behavior. Wherefore Seneca says that
Glasses were invented, Nature. quaest. l. 1.
that by them, a man might know himself. For many from these came to know
themselves, and how to lead an excellent course of Life. A beautiful Man, The
chief use of a Looking glass.
to avoid infamy; an ill favored man, to learn to recompense the defects of
his body by virtues: A young man, to know that by age his beauty will decay, and
therefore he should provide himself with such things that old age cannot wast,
but augment. An old man and wrinkled woman, to leave off the allurements of the
flesh, and remember that death is near. Wherefore from a Glass Nature has
obtained a faculty, to see and to contemplate her self, and that by looking on
a Man's face, and countenance in a Glass, which are the signs of many things,
a man might contemplate himself and consider his own inclinations. We discern
our own condition in a Glass.
For so we become Physiognomers, and lookers into our own conditions, and to
see what vices we are given to, by what we discern on our bodies lineaments,
and we may endeavor to amend them. So Plautus speaks wisely in Epidicus.

Men have not Glasses for to see their faces,
But rather for to see their minds graces:
And when their Heart they behold,
To think what they did of old,
Also this is the profit, the use of a Glass may make unto us, that it may
sharpen our eyes, that are grown dull by continual poring, and help to recover
and refresh our weary sight. For the visuall Spirits are gathered together, and
are recreated by new Spirits that result from the brain; What good a Glass may
do the eyes.
But many doubt how it is that a Glass should represent the image of that
stands over against it. For some think the images are in the Glass, that is,
the figures of our bodies sent forth from our bodies: others think the images
are not in the glass, but that we see them in the reflected sight, that is
beat back again upon it self. Wherefore Glasses show many things by reflected
beams. For reflection is from thick bodies, Why a Glass resents the form of
what is over against it.
therefore Glasses are foild on the backside, that the light may not penetrate
directly through them. But the opposite body appears, because that part of the
radius that moves the eye, is directed to the opposite body; wherefore the
whole radius is received as stretched out unto that part, and thence it
follows, that the thing is received by the eye. But they represent the Images
with that part that is against one, and not with that which is turned from us;
because the species which passes from a solid body to the superficies of the
Glass through the Air, is pure and simple: wherefore the images shine in the
Glass, when as light radii are regenerated from it; for they being beat back,
come home to the eye, in which it sees it self, and every one does behold his
image clearly. For we do not see through the Glass, nor is the image formed in
the Glass, but in the eye, but the Glass helps by striking back the sight.
And this is the reason why, when we rise in the night, we behold the light at
first looking on it, as if the rays went from us, and looked toward
themselves, and reflecting upon themselves. Hence you may collect why the right
parts of the body are made the left in the Glass, A simile from Seals.
and the left the right; For it falls out as it does with Tables of Wax or
Clay, upon which, if you stamp the print of your Seal, in the taking off, the
parts stand contrary. A simile from the Printers letters.
The same we see in Printing-Presses, and in places that are cast with raw
pictures, without distinction of colors or painting, for there the right parts
always answer to the left of the mole. But how it should be that the Sun
should appear double, being seen in a Glass under the water, which also is
wont to be seen in the Clouds, as a sign of some future ill as some ignorant
people judge, many have not observed, some think that the dogg-Starr or some
other Starr near it is seen, when as the Suns brightness so darkneth all the
stars, that they cannot be seen in the day. A double Sun seen in a glass under
water.
But the Suns Image appears double, first by reason of the water, and then by
reason of the Glass; For that clown in Virgill testifies, besides our own
experience, that water may serve instead of a glass, and makes all things show
larger.

I am not so deformed, I lately saw my face,
When that the Sea was calm, Eclog. 2.
--
Wherefore first the brightness of the glass, by reflection shows the Suns
form, and next the water, from the superficies whereof the Sunbeams are beaten
back. The like reason serves for a Candle, Torch, or the Moon being over
against a Glass put under the water, for it will by reflection return the
object double. Also concave Glasses are invented for another use, that being
held against the Sun, by reflection will burn and make some combustible matter
flame, setting on fire straw, Chaff, and other dry fuel. So Archimedes fired
the enemies galleys with burning glasses, Burning-glasses.
as Histories report: for all the Sunbeams are reflected by them without the
point of Incidents, The memorable act of Archimedes.
and running all to one point, they set all things in the way on fire.

CHAP. XXXIV.
What force and virtue Aqua-vitae has, or the spirit of Wine distilled, and
who may safely drink it: by the way, some admirable effects of this made-wine,
are set down.
THere was invented in the memory of former ages, an art of distilling, for the
use and preservation of man's health, and to drive away sickness, whereby we
distill from herbs, juices, and Physical liquors, which, though it be certain
that they have not so much virtue and force as the Infusion and decoction of
the herbs themselves, or the juice pressed forth, yet are they not wholly to
be rejected, as they are by some men. Nor must we judge them to be altogether
uneffectual and vain; for the quality and force of them is not totally lost and
abolished, which may be proved, as by many things, so by Aquavitae, or as some
commonly call it spirit of wine, A Limbeck or Still.
or sublimed, which sometimes is drawn from the best wines, but oft-times, from
the lees of any small dead sour wines by a Still in a furnace, with a gentle
fire. For oft-times I made trial of the wonderful force of it. The force of
Aqua-vitae.
For let the frost be never so cold and sharp that liquor will never freeze,
nor become Ice, so that writing Ink and many more things that have some drops
of this mingled with them will never be frozen, and this come from the
exceeding heat and thinness that it has. And if you would try whether this
quintessence be pure and without mixture, How to try Aqua-vitae.
wet a Table-cloath or linen Towel with that liquor, and put it to the flame;
if it burn presently and do not touch nor hurt the linen, it is pure and
unmixed. For linen wet in this water will flame and not be consumed. For the
flame will but gently lie upon the finest linen, and not take hold of it, but
licks up all that is next of kind to it, namely that liquor that is like it,
and of a fiery nature. And if you put a little of it into the hollow of your
hand, and put flame to it with a burning paper, the palm will be hot, but the
hand will not burn. How melted lead shall not burn you.
But if you wash your hands with the juice of Mallows or Mercury, you may
without any hurt handle scalding lead, so you do it with a speedy motion. And
yet there is nothing in the world that burns more then melted lead or boiling
oil; so that if you put a Tin or lead spoon into scalding oil or melted lead,
it will presently melt, which you shall never be able to do in the most boiling
water. For oil and all fat things become most hot, and are extremely inflamed,
so that lead will soon melt and run being mingled with fat: whereas water
hinders that the heat cannot penetrate into the lead, and therefore it is that
the Eels roasted on a Gridiron, will burn a man's fingers vehemently, if you do
not take heed when you turn then: for the fat will stick to your fingers, and
ulcerate the skin, and raise blisters with the heat. But since there are four
things that contend for gravity and levity, The four lightest liquors.
namely, Wine, Water, Honey, and Oil. The lightest of all these and that
weighs least, is spirit of Wine, that being mingled with Oil will flote on the
top, and swim above the Oil: for all terrene matter is taken from it by
concoction, and all the substance of it is fire and Air.

Next to this in lightness is the Oil pressed forth of Linseed and Sesame,
which never, contrary to the nature of other Oils, Oil of Linseed and Sesama
will not freeze.
grows hard with cold, by reason of its softness and inward heat.

Next to this is the liquor distilled from green herbs by force of the fire,
and cleansed Wine that has no sweetness mingled with it. For that Foreign
Wine, which they call bastard, and we call Serope or Zerape, is heavier than
all liquors, so that vessels filled with that liquor will sink in the water.
Dew of Heaven, if it be not troubled, is of the same weight with Wine, namely
that which falls from the Air in the Month of May, and is kept many years. But
honey is a third part heavier than they.

Wherefore there is no liquor, that is used any ways for man's body that is
lighter or more penetrating than Aquavitae, as it is called, because it
sustains man's life, and retards old age, or that better preserves all things
from putrefaction and corruption.

The use whereof is grown so common amongst the Dutch, that they drink more of
it than is good for their health; Aquavitae who it is good for.
For the drinking of it is not healthful for all people, and at all times;
namely, for such as are lean and dry of nature. Again, in Summer the use of it
is most pernicious; for it burns their bodies, and feeds on the natural
moisture. But for fat bodies and moist, and such as are full of flegmatique
humors, it does them no hurt. For it concocts the excrementall humors, and it
defends their bodies from Lethargies, Apoplexies, and all cold diseases,
wherefore in Winter I grant they may use it moderately, that is a dram and
half, which is a spoonful very well sweetened with Sugar, and a piece of white
bread put into it that it may not penetrate and fly up to the Nostrills and the
Brain, or hurt the Liver with its piercing heat. But being used outwardly to
the Nerves and Muscles, and to parts chil'd with cold, it will help them, and
by its heating, and quick penetrating qualities, restrains and discusses all
painful effects that consist in cold humors. Also it restores speech to
Apoplectick people, if you mingle with it a little Rocket seed and some Vinegar
of squills. And if that kind of wine be put into a Still, and drawn off twice
or thrice with the fire, it will have an increadible piercing force.

CHAP. XXXV.
The prodigious force of Quicksilver, and the nature of it: the Dutchmen call
it so from its quick motion.
THere are two principles in the nature of things, out of which in the deep
bowels of the earth all metals are made of, The one is Brimstone as the Father
that effects and acts all: Brimstone and Quicksilver are the principles of
Metals.
But Quicksilver is in stead of the Mother, which suffers all those to be
elaborated and produced out of it. First Gold, then Silver, then all kind of
baser metals, as Tin, Lead, Brass, Copper, Iron, and all these with their
principles hold affinity and agreement. For they will all melt in the fire, and
may be made ductile for any work.

But for Quicksilver, that is that watery and running silver, what quality and
force it has, and whether it be cold or hot, Physicians cannot agree. Some say
it is cold and moist, because if you touch it, it will feel exceeding cold, and
will astonish them, and cause the Palsy: others say it is hot and dry from the
effect, because they see the penetratious nature it is of, for if you open a
vein of those that have been once or twice anointed with it, for the Pox, the
Quicksilver has been seen sometimes to come forth; which I think proceeds not
from any imbred natural heat of it, but because it is extinguished with some
burning materials or else mingled, whereby the cold and moist quality of it is
blunted and made dull, and a fiery quality comes in the place of them. For
there is a kind of powder that Mountebank, Chirurgions use, called
praecipitate, Powder pracipitate.
because it performs its operation suddenly and hastily, not without very
grievous inconvenience of the body, for by the mixture of Vitriol, Saltpeter,
and Alum, it acquires a fiery caustic quality by this way of preparation. But
since this Silver colored liquid substance dissipated and pulled assunder, will
come together again as it was, and run on heaps, that you cannot handle it, or
frame it, or mingle it with any medicaments, unless the motion of it be
hindered, the Industry and reason of man has thought on some ways how to do
that, and to stop the quickness thereof.

Amongst which the safest and with least danger is, to do it with man's spittle,
to which there is mixed a little ashes or powder of cuttle-bone. Now a cuttle is
a sea-cat, whose white crumbly bone the Goldsmiths use, the flesh is stirring,
A Sea-cat.
and the blood serves for Ink. But this is worthy admiration, that since all
things that are dug out of the earth, though never so heavy will swim upon this
metal, as Steel, Iron, Lead, and all sorts of Brass, only Gold sinks below
it, and is swallowed in, and becomes silver colored, that can be got off only
by fire, for so it evaporates into fumes into the Air, with a most filthy
smell, not without great hurt to the standers by, for it will cause their limbs
to be astonished, and will soften their nerves: as we commonly see in such as
are busied in guilding Silver vessels, for Silver cannot be gilded with gold,
but with the help of Quicsilver, for by that alone it becomes tractible and
obedient, for it refuses all other metals and is affected with none but Gold,
and will mingle with it, and be framed by it. So I have often tried that on a
pound and half of Quicksilver, Nothing is gilded without Quicksilver.
two pound of Lead would swim, but a penny weight or scruple of Gold which is
but the third part of a dram would sink to the bottom. But of all metals it is
worst to stick to Silver, bad to lead, very hardly to Iron, and somewhat
difficult to stick to Brass. Melted lead in some respects is like to this
Silver colored liquid substance. For all things will swim on the top thereof,
Iron, flints, Potsheards, and many other things that will not melt in the fire,
and will naturally run; for since nothing is more hot than melted Lead, Gold,
Silver, Tin, will swim on the top thereof, but they presently melt and run like
wax. Also it is like Quicksilver for this, that being powered forth on a plain
table, and the drops of it sprinkled here and there, it does not make it moist,
and slippery, nor does it stick to the Tables but with increadible swiftness
and unstable motion it comes together again, and the drops run upon heaps with
themselves, because they are of a condensed matter, compact and solid and
continued, and so condensed that it will admit of no Air. Whence it happens,
that not only by reason of its weight it descends to the bottom, but because
it contains no aereal substance in it. So Agallocha or Lignum Aloes, Lignum
Aloes though light sinks to the bottom of the water.
though it be light, and of no weight almost, sinks down to the bottom if you
put it into water because it is compacted, and there are no pores in it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How, when we want Salt, may flesh and other meats be preserved from
corruption. By the way; Of the wonderful force of Salt and Vinegar.
Lignum Aloes though light sinks to the bottom of the water. What kind of Salt
is the best.
NO man but knows the great use and necessity we have of Salt. For besides that,
that Salt makes all meats savoury, and most pleasant to our taste and Pallats,
and procures an appetite to our meat, it preserves all things from corruption,
especially that which is boyld, till all the muddy dreggs be taken from it: for
it will shine of a bright color, and all things may be safely seasoned
therewith, and kept all the Summer; for it will drink up and consume all
excrementitious humors, and thickneth and condenseth all flesh and fish, that
the ambient air cannot make them putrify. Salt makes fruitful.
Yet all men must needs wonder that Salt should cause fruitfullnesse, and cure
barrennes: and that some fields have been made fruitful by Salt strewed upon
them, which experience has proved to be true. For far women that are commonly
barren, become fruitful and fit to conceive by eating Salt moderately with
their meats, for it wipes away all foul moisture, and dries the overwet
matrix, and causes the genitall seed to stick more easily to the womb that is
not so slippery as before: But to dry women, whose matrix is scorched, like to
ground that is thirsty, moystning things must be given, for Salt and sharp
things are naught for them. Also the Low Countries show that it will provoke
the reins, and cause erection, who using Salt meats much, are exceeding
salacious. So the frequent eating of Sea fish, and all shell fish, as Oysters,
Crabs, Lobsters, Cockels, Periwinkles, make people lustful, and are of a hot
biting nature. For which cause the Aegptians, Sin sympos.
as Plutarch says, abstained from Salt, and all Salt meats, because they were
persuaded that Salt caused venery. Wherefore they though fit rather to eat
unsavory meats, than to use the most savoury sauce, but I think they were too
superstitious in observing that, nor did they sufficiently take care of their
health: for Salt drives away corruption from man's body, and consumes all
strange and accidental humors. Add to this that it has an imbred force for
generation of Children, whereby the conjugall covenant is confirmed. For the
moderate use of it raises the vigor of the mind, and not only for embracing
and kissing, but for all actions we take in hand, it will make us more
cheerful and ready. But that it helps fruitfullnesse, it is proved because a
wonderful number of Rats and Mice are bred in Ships at Sea, and that women
that deal in Salt are always itching, and have many Children: who are commonly
helped by Seamen and Fishermen that come into the Havens, Salt makes field
and Mares fruitful.
and these are lusty fellows to do their business. For this reason in some
Countries, Husbandmen use to strew some Salt amongst the Mares Fodder, that
they may eat their meat the more greedily; and endure their Labor, and be more
ready and fit to bring Colts. Also it makes grounds fruitful, where they are
too moist and wet.

But if Towns and Forts besieged straightly should stand in need of this, they
must make Salt of Seawater, Salt Water.
which you shall find then to be effectual, when the Salt liquor will bear an
Egg or Ambergreece. Next to this, to preserve meats, is Vinegar, but it will
not last so long, for unless after some months you pour off the former, and
pour on fresh Vinegar, on the seasoned meats, The force of Vinegar.
they will be moldy and finnoed. But what force and faculty it has, as by
many things, so also it may be tried by this, that an egg steeped three days
in Vinegar, that is very sharp, or a little more, the shell will grow so
tender, that you may draw it through a ring like a thin membrane. Vinegar
consumes an egg and dissolves a Whet-stone.
Also a Whet-stone or a Flint steeped 7 days in Vinegar, may be crumbled with
your finger into powder. Hence when Hanniball was to pass the Alps, to go into
Italy, He made the Rocks dissolve with boiling Vinegar, with the loss of one
of his eyes. For so great and penetrating is the force of Vinegar, that it will
eat and break stones. I o^ce made experience of it in a Jewel, and a Pearl,
but it was not so precious as that of Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt; Pearls will
dissolve in Vinegar.
which she steeped in Vinegar, and dissolved and drank it up; for the
sharpness of the Vinegar will consume Pearls. By the same reason it resists
Venomes, and drives away the Contagion of Pestilent diseases: Therefore
methinks, they do well who, when any public disease is spread in a Country,
do moderately use Vinegar: For this will disperse and scatter the faulty Air,
and if you eat any of it will keep the humors from infection and corruption.
So those that suck out venom with their mouths, and any stinking wounds, do
wash their mouths with sharp Vinegar. But great care must be taken that we do
not use Vinegar too much and immoderately; for it dryes the brain, and hinders
sleep, wherefore I Counsel you to mingle some Rose Water with it, and a little
Rhenish-wine, and Saffron a small quantity. For so it will do the head less
hurt. Of the same nature almost, and of the same efficiency, are all very sour
and sharp things, as Pome Citrons, Oranges, Lemmons: The juice of Lemmon,
corrodes.
for the Lemmon that is commonly Ovall has a juice so sharp and corroding
naturally, that if you put a piece of Gold some hours in a Lemmon, you shall
find it lighter and not so ponderous when you take it out. But as it does that
by its excessive and penetrating cold, which burns as well as fire: So Spirit
of Wine is most effectual to preserve things, Aquavitae.
for flesh and fish wet in it are safe from putrefaction and will never breed
Worms. But Commin if there be plenty of it, Commin Carway-seed.
and carway seed, next Salt, are present remedies to preserve meats, if you rub
the meats with them, and lay them up, by reason of their drying quality, so
that such as use them often, wax pale and wan for want of blood, because they
eat up all the natural moisture. Honey Syrup.
Also Honey, and Strope as they call it from its last like honey, though it
look somewhat black, and sod Wine which the Spaniards call Aroba, have a virtue
to preserve, especially Cherries, Prunes, Peaches, Grapes and all wild fruices:
Verjuyce.
which I have tried in sour Grapes; But most effectually, if you place in
order any kinds of fruits in an earthenpot, and cover the pot well with a
cover, and smeer the same with Pitch, that no Air nor Water can enter it; and
so let it down into the bottom of a Well: Fruits laid in a pot, and sunk in a
Well, will last very long.
after a year is over, you shall find them all fresh, and of an excellent
taste; For when they are so far removed from the ambient Air, and all corrupt
vapors, they cannot corrupt. For moisture makes all things subject to
corruption, which being removed, and dryness put in the place, things will not
easily consume. So stock fish, as we call them, in Latin Merlucae, Stock Fish.
(for Salpa is another kind) and many more hardened and dried in the wind, may
be kept many years, as also bisquit, that will never mold, because all the
moisture is baked out of it: Wherefore extreme heat or cold because they both
equally cause dryness will keep things from Corruption.

Hence you may collect whence it comes to pass, that in Winter; and hard
frosts, Frost is apt to break ones legs
a man's leg will break with the least touch almost; For the bone will easily
grow brittle and break, by reaon of the dryness of the outward Air, whereas
when it is a moist season it is more tough and flexible: the which thing also
we observe in Candles and such things are made of fat.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Pale Women are more lascivious than such as are of a ruddy complexion, and
lean Women than fat, and do more lust after men.
THose Women are more hot, and prone to venery, and more mad after pleasure,
that have more imbred heat, which is commonly found in pale and lean Women, and
such as are of a brown color, for their genital parts are full of a sharp salt
biting humor, and therefore they require to be more moistened; and hence it
comes to pass that women are more lustful in Summer, and more desire men's
company, Women more salacious in Summer.
because at that time heat increases in them, but in men it flags and grows
more weak. Wherefore Rue and Thime, and many very hot things extinguish lust in
men, and sharpen it in Women. For in men they consume and dry up the natural
moisture, but they heat the Matrix of Women by consuming the superfluous
mixture, and so make them Lustful. Wherefore it is, that that Sex desires to
be filled with strong Wine, but fat and ruddy Women, that are full of moisture,
and that have their generative seed very wet, are of a faint and very sedate
appetite in their Lust. Wherefore men must make a good choice and not presently
take what comes next to hand rashly. For he that has got a lean slender woman
of declining years, has such a one as is always itching, and will never be
satisfied; let him know that he has got a perpetual torment, that is
continually lusting, and is daily more and more exasperated: she will stick to
her Husband like a Horseleach, and she will never let him rest, though he be
tired out quite, nor give him so much respite as to recover his strength.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Whether a man should drink greedily and plentifully, or by little and little
and sparingly at several times, when he is thirsty, or is sat at Table.
THe principal way of preserving a man's health, consists in his temperance and
moderation in eating and drinking. But because I have spoken elsewhere
abundantly, of eating dry food and of bread, I shall here speak of drink, and
in what manner and measure it ought to be used. First it cannot be prescribed
certainly and absolutely to those that are in Health. Because some are
accustomed to diverse ways or doctrine, which no man may presently break off,
but he will be in danger to fall into some sickness. The best and safest way
of drinking is to be judged of, according to the age of people, and difference
of times, as also the customs they have long used, and as their strength is,
and as the Wine is strong or weak. So Beer or Wine, or other drink must be
prescribed to quench a man's thirst, and that the meat may not be dry nor flote,
but be moderately wet. Wherefore the body must be refreshed by times, and at
moderate distances, and the meat must be now and then steeped with moisture,
that it may the more commodiously go into the veins by concoction, and be
digested into the body. But all drunkenness, Dioscorides detests drunkenness.
L. 50. c. 7.
especially continual, as Dioscorides says, is pernicious, because the nerves
being soked continually with much Wine, are softened, and the whole frame of the
body is dissolved. Wherefore a man ought to drink moderately all drinks that
cause drunkenness, and in that we ought to imitate all Fishmongers and
Butchers, A simile from Butchers.
who when they store up their fish or flesh cut into pieces they pour in brine
upon every row as they lay it, and season it with Salt in order. So we, if we
will take care of our health, must water our meat in order as we eat it, by
drinking moderately. When digestion begins we must not drink.
But it is hurtful to tire the stomach with drink when concoction is begun,
for it hinders and stops the faculties and functions of Nature, that she is
about, and will not let the meat boil and concoct. A simile from the Kitchen.
For as pots leave off boiling and cool by pouring in cold water: So the
stomach hindered by drink powered in, cease to digest what it has begun, and
is longer about it, nor does it concoct it so well; for so the meat is driven
into the narrow veins undigested, or into the capacity of the bowels before its
due time. Whereby the use and fruit that a man should have of his meat is lost,
and by obstructing the bowels causes putrefaction of humors, and becomes the
seminary of Fevers and other diseases; And the same Inconvenience befalls
them, who before meat when they go to meals, drink abundantly. For the meats
are presently washed away, and cannot stay long in the stomach. We must drink
by degrees and not greedily.
Wherefore I think it is good counsel for people not to drink greedily and
great draughts when they eat, but by little and little, that so both may mingle
as they should, and be concected alike, especially those that have large
passages, and wide veins. But those that use to eat so, that they do not drink
in the middle of their meat, must drink great draughts, that the beer may
penetrate, and be mingled with their meat: Also they that are in hot fevers,
Who must drink largely.
and desire to be refreshed with drink, must drink abundantly, but not suddenly
and in haste; but leasurely and drinking long. For so it will moisten the
stomach very abundantly, nor does the drink presently run away to the bladder.
For a little drink neither quenches thirst, nor abates the heat, but augments
it the more; A simile from a Smiths shop.
For as Sea-coles in Smiths forges wetted with wet brushes, sometimes will
flame and burn the more, so the heat of a Fever is kindled the more, and not
quenched with a little drink and makes the sick the more thirsty. But they that
are thirsty from weariness and heat of the weather, they must quench their
thirst gently and sweetly. For so the liquor will stay the better, and moisten
all the dry parts. It is sometimes better to eat than to drink.
But I thought fit to join to this argument such as consume by a hectic Fever
or consumption, and are grown exceeding lean by diseases, it is better for them
to eat some solid meat, than to drink any drink. For the weight of the m^at
dilates the jugular passages, and makes the ways of the throat passable, that
it may fall down more easily, which drink cannot do. For since the parts and
passages of the throat destinated for this use are sunk down, that the sides
lie one upon the other, drink being thin and not weighty cannot open them
easily and pass down inoffensively, unless they drink abundantly: for so the
throat will give away, and the drink run down. The like to this befalls those
that have the Palsy, The spirits cannot so well pass to the nerves as the meat.
or the Apoplex. For the spirits being thin and subtle do not easily pass
from the brain to the nerves. Whence it is that sense and motion are taken from
them, but the humors that feed the parts, make a way for themselves by their
weight, and find a passage to the parts of the body which they open. A simile
from the sun and hail.
So the sun beams cannot part a thick and dark cloud, whereas hail can do it
easily. Wherefore let not any man wonder how it is that paralytick limbs are
nourished when they want both feeling and motion: for the parts receive
nutriment by the broad passages, and by their thickness make themselves a way
which the spirits are too thin to do; wherefore the nerves being deprived of
the animal spirit, The nerves have sense and motion.
deprive the parts of sense and motion, but they are fed by other ways than by
the nerves, namely by the rivers and receptacles of blood which are the veins.

CHAP. XXXIX.
All such things as hastily come to maturity, or rise to their full length, do
the sooner fail, and cannot last long: as we see it in children, and some kind
of plants.
A simile from Trees.
AS in trees and all plants that grow up to their full growth, and come to their
full maturity before their due time, and course of nature, they soon decay and
fail suddenly: so in the wits and bodies of men, if any endowments and parts do
show themselves sooner than ordinary, and they grow ripe before they should,
they use to continue the shorter time, and to fall to decay the sooner. For
there is no solid force in them, nor do they depend on a firm foundation, and
so do not easily come to perfection. So children that soonest breed teeth, It
is ominous to be born with teeth.
as some are born with teeth in their heads, soonest cast their teeth. For
their first teeth by reason of the softness of the binding nerves are not so
fast, nor do they stick so firmly. So they that soon stand on their feet and
go, use to have weaker legs: but such as are long before they go, go stronger,
and fall not so often. Which is also observed in those that speak very soon,
they will afterward speak more stammeringly, and will not bring forth their
words so articulately and significantly. Wherefore it is better that things
should proceed more leasurely, and increase more slowly. Rare fruits soon decay.
For when nature heaps up her forces on the parts more abundantly than is fit,
it falls out that as they grow elder she wants to supply them withal. Whence
it is that those parts perform their offices worst, as not being supported by
any forces, or nutriment flowing to them. And we observe in all kind of plants
and fruits, Late fruit lasts longest.
that those that come late to be ripe, last longest, but those that are soon
ripe, are spongy and lither and soon rotten. For ripeness that comes in haste
decays first. Those that are soon ripe are not so solid.
Wherefore we like in young boys a soon ripe and hasty wit the worst, as also
many gifts of nature, or endowments of body or mind, that come on more hastily
than ordinarily they use to do, or is fit for that age. For such are found not
to be so long lived, and to dye in a short time. Hence the Hollanders have a
proverb. A common Proverb on children that are active too soon.
They make too much have; whereby they mean that contrary to the common course
of nature and usual time and order of things, and contrary to reason, many
things come to perfection, the similitude being taken from children that will
stand and go before they be a year old, and stay by nothing to hold them up,
which afterward they perform very weakly, and will hardly go at all.

CHAP. XL.
Sometimes our meats are hurt, and contract a venomous quality, by the sitting
of some venomous creatures upon them; Likewise in men's bodies from filth
abounding in them, some things are bred, as Frogs, Toads, Mice, Rats, Bats; and
an example of this is set down.
NOt only faulty and virulent humors breed from corrupt nutriments of the
body; but besides some sorts of Worms, diverse sorts of living creatures breed
in the secret cavities of the bowels. The beginning of living Creatures in the
body.
For it has been observed in our days, that a certain woman being dissected,
some beasts were taken out like to rats and mice, that it seems were bred from
some foul excrements that came from the food she are. For natural heat being
busied in digesting that matter, could make no other shape of it, than such as
the matter would bear it had to work upon: wherefore the inward force of nature
frames a living creature of that kind, and endeavors it; that moist substance
being fit and ready to obey the efficient cause. For it is found by experience
that house-creatures as whelps, cats, mice, rats, flitter-mice, toads, and
frogs, when they wander up and down in Cellars and Butteries, do sometimes
leave upon meats an excremental seed, Creatures bred of filth.
which when men do not wash clean from filth, or do not wipe clean the outsides
of fruits or pare them, from that moist foul matter that pollutes the meats,
some such things are bred. And if snails and mice breed from corruption, and
beetles, drones, and wasps from dung, and from dew, and moist Air,
caterpillars, butterflies, ants, locusts, grasshoppers; who can think it strange
that in the bodies of men from such like causes such things should be bred?
Since here is a more effectual reason, that yields a seminary cause for this
business. For those breed of corruption and not from seed, though it be
answerable thereto for force and vigor, and next kind in faculty. But those
things that are bred alive in the secret parts of man's body, Animals bred of
their own accord from no seed.
proceed from a vital humor and a living Creature. Therefore this must not
seem against reason or a Paradox of some old women, when as we see so many
things bred spontaneously, without any copulation or incubation of living
creatures, and that from a humor enlivened by the heat of the outward Air.
For besides those creatures that are bred on the wide earth, what an infinite
number of fish are thus produced in the vast Seas and waters for man's use and
commodity? For there is nothing more fruitful than the Sea; Why the sea is
fruitfulll with fish.
because the substance of it is gross, and is full of a vital heat in all
parts. In which, as many things are bred from seed; so a great many, of
themselves without seed or help of any living creature.

So all Shellfish are first bred from some muddy and slimy moisture, and all
glib fish, as Eels in special, which afterward by copulation breed whole
sholes. Spearing or Groundlins.
Groundlins, very small fish in Holland are bred abundantly from the froth of
the Sea, when after long drouth, rain falls in great quantity. For when the
Mouths of the Rhine and the Mare are very Salt by the Seas continual
influence, especially in Summer, those Rivers being supplied with a great deal
of rain, and watered very much, abound excedingly with these small fish, who
when they grow great do procreate and breed exceedingly. Since therefore Nature
attempts many strange things, whose force by the gift of God is spread every
where: let no man think it an old Wives dream, that some prodigious Creatures
are framed in men's bodies, since in corrupt rotten wood, and many dead things,
Teredines and many nimble Worms are bred, as we see them in Cheese, and many
other meats in Summer season, where Worms breed in abundance. Add to this,
that from filthy Ulcers and Impostumes, pieces of Nails, Hair, Shells, Bones,
Stones, are taken forth, that grew from the concretion of putrid humors,
Impostums send forth rubbish and hair.
and I have known Worms with tails, and little Creatures of strange forms cast
up by vomit, especially from such as were sick of contagious diseases, in whose
Urines I have often seen small Creatures to swim, like to Ants, or especially
like to those that in Summer use to role in the dew, Goat-worms in Summer bred
in dew.
and none of these persons, but was foully peppered with the French Pox. The
intent therefore of this discourse is to this purpose, that no man should
without care cram in foul meats, and not well washed and cleansed from outward
accidents, which when Country people neglect, they use to be scabby and full of
Pushes that itch, and to be deformed with many fores and vices of their skins.
For they are not of so good habit of body, and sound constitution, nor so
comely and ingenious, and of such excellent natural parts, nor yet so
healthful, generally, as some Noble men and Gentlemen are, that will suffer no
meat to come to their Tables, no not the purest White-bread, until the outside
and crust of it be finely chipt off, and the rest of their provision must be
curiously and accurately provided with all decency and cleanliness.
Cleanliness in diet is joined to health.
And this I find no fault with, so long as all is done, far from luxury,
frugally and temperately in respect of diet. For great men and Courtiers should
have such a manner of diet and Life, that all may tend to health, comeliness,
honesty and unblamable Manners, that the splendor of their fortune, and
prosperity and abundance that God has given them, may not serve for luxury and
prodigality, but for moderation and temperance. The most illustrious Phillip;
the most powerful King of Spain, and England, The praise of King Phillip.
and Prince of the Netherlands, gives us an example of this, who for his most
large endowments of Nature, does represent a divine pattern unto mortals, who
has so many valiant Peers to assist him, by whose authority and counsel, so
many flourishing Kingdoms, and so many large Dominions that came to him by
succession from his renowned Father Charles the Emperor, are governd and
preserved.

CHAP. XLI.
The force and Nature of the Sun and Moon in causing and raising tempests: And
next to that, what change may be made in the bodies, minds and Spirits of men,
by the outward Air. By the way, whence proceeds the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, that is interchangeably twice in the space of a natural day.
The effects of the Sun and Moon upon inferior bodies.
THe Beams of the Sun and Moon do afford us certain and notdoubtfull signs of
fair weather, rain and winds; and they thereupon represent unto us diverse
colors, either from the situation of the place, and the compass of the
Heavens they are wont to pass, or from the Nature of the object, or some other
matter that stains them: which if they would observe well that write
Almanacks, and deceive the common people, and foolish old women with their
predictions, they would not mistake so often, and be deceived, nor deceive the
credulous people with false hopes. For tempests and winds may be undoubtedly
foretold by these, when they are not far off, and what shall be the condition
of the Air, whereby we shall have a plentiful or penurious year, and many
more rare things which Virgil comprehended in excellent verse: Virgils praise
for his great knowledge.
who being he was most versed in the knowledge of things, and had so exactly
sought out all the works of Nature, he did also in some measure subject the
(...) of men to their forces and effects. For men are diversely (...), and
otherwise constituted, according as the time is, according as the Stars set,
or the Air varies, The condition of the sky changes men's minds.
and the four seasons of the year differ. So when the sky is clowdy and dark,
and the air gross and thick, men are sad and sour countenanced, and sleepy;
but when the sky is clear and in the springtime, when all things flourish, men
are cheerful, and lightsome, and very much given to mirth. For the pleasant
air dissipates all foulness of humors, and gross vapors that darken our
minds, and makes our Spirits cheerful, and our minds quick and lively, which
Virgil expressed in this elegant verse.

But when the season and the flitting Air.
Grow moist, L. 1. Georg.
and Southern-winds begin to blow,
Things are then thickened, that before were rare,
And a great change is made in things below.
Men's minds do alter as the times go round.
When Tempests are, they do not hold the same,
As in fair weather sometimes birds abound,
And sing, beasts skip, Crows a hoarse note do frame.
For the Spirits that were before kept in, break forth when the air is calm
and pleasant, A simile from smoky houses.
and when they are recreated with the West-wind. For as Smoke and vapors, when
the houses are unlockt and the doors set open, the air and wind entering, use
to be dissipated and blown away, and all Galleries and Chambers that were full
of filth, begin to be more lightsome; so in men's bodies, all soul vapors, and
all stinking sents that were in them, and all dullness of Spirits are
discussed and ventilated. Wherefore not only internal causes, and imbred
humors are helps to health or diseases, but the outward conjunction of the
Stars, and constitution of the outward air and breathings, and qualities of
the winds, breed diverse and sudden mutations in the bodies of men, The body is
subject to the constitution of the air.
which every man may find true in himself every moment almost of time. For who
is there, to pass over the affections of the mind, who when some tempest is at
hand, or distemper of the Air, three days also before it comes, does not
perceive some pricking in his limbs, and some beating pains, contractions of
the nerves, palpitations, or some other sensible pains? For Watts, Corns, Horny
substances, Cicatrices, Knots, Kernells, or if any thing be strained or
disjoynted or broken, torn or dissolved in any part of the body, all these will
foreshew a tempest coming, which does not use to come but with most bitter
torments to such that have any secret touch of the Whores Pox. For these when
cold winds begin to blow, are soonest sensible of their pains, for their Nervs
are stretched, and their Muscles grow stiff, Sick people perceive the change
of the air.
and the vicious humors in their bodies, being agitated, do trouble them
grievously. For there is under those parts a kind of distemper like to the
weather, that tortures them strangely in their inward parts. But such as are of
a sound habit of body, and in good health, feel no inconvenience or distemper
by it. For as patcht, broken, leaking ships, are sooner swallowed up in a
tempest; A simile from Ships that are shaken.
so diseased people and such as are of a decai'd and uncertain health, are
expossed to all injuries, and subject to all inconveniences: for upon the least
distemper of the Air arising, they use to feel most terrible pains, or when
the Sun or Moon cause any mutation in the inferior bodies. For these Planets
put forth their forces, The force of the Sun and Moon upon inferior bodies.
not only upon men's bodies, but upon all terrestrial things, the force whereof
is so great, and is extended so wide, that all things contained in the
circumference of the Heavens, have their order, Ornament and Glory from them;
and the whole course of things and times of the year are governed by them. And
though the power of the upper Stars be not ineffectuall, yet by the help of
the Sun all things of greatest concernment are brought to pass. For the Sun
chiefly adorns this World, and disposes and guides all things very decently.
For by the Suns operation seeds are propagated, and corn grows ripe, and all
things increase and proceed.

And thus the year does trace it self about. Georg. 2.
Also the works of the Moon appear very great in the Nature of things, but not
so great as the effects of the Sun. For she enjoyes the benefit of the Sun, and
borrows her light from him, Opposition makes a full^ Moon, Conjunction a new
Moon.
that so much of the Moon is light as the Sun shines upon: but she fails and
has no light, when the earth comes between and causes an ecclips, But then
especially she shows her forces upon earthly things, when she is full, the Sun
being right over against her, and makes her round, or when she is in
Conjunction with him, for at these times Corn grows and augments, shellfish
swell, the veins are full of blood and the bones full of marrow; whence it is
that copulation at those times offends least. And because she moisteneth all
things, flesh that are subjected and exposed to the Moon-beames corrupt, and
men that are drunk and dead asleep almost, Wax pale, and are troubled with the
Headache, and are affected with Epilepsie: for it looseneth the Nerves, She
causes the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.
and moisteneth the brain overmuch, and by its chilling force, it stupefies
the mind. Also no man may doubt but that she is the cause of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea. For being that we fee, that when the Moon is dark and
silent, or a half Moon, or crooked with Horns, or increases or diminishes,
the waters do not run much together, nor are there any high tides, The Moon
moves the Sea
upon any shores whatsoever: but again when she is in Conjunction with the Sun,
and begins to be a new Moon, or to be round and a full Moon, the tides are very
great, and the waves rise exceedingly: who then can ascribe the flowing and
ebbing of the Sea to any thing than to the motion of the Moon? For as the
Loadstone draws Iron, A simile from the Load-stones forces.
so this Planet being next the earth, moves and draws the Sea. For when the
Moon rises, the Sea roules about those parts, namely the Eastern parts, and
leaves the Western parts: but when she goes to the West and sets, the floods
increase in those parts, and abate in the Eastern parts; and this more
abundantly or sparingly, as the Moon increases or decreaseth in her light,
that is conveyed by the Moon-beams. And if any man please to consider the
Countries and places, and Coasts thereof in the French Sea, and our Northern
Sea, and what flood is made upon every shore there, he shall see as clear as
the day, that all this is governed by the light of the-Moon. For where the Moon
rising illuminates diverse Countries and Climates, and runs her course through
the passage of the Heavens, the flood and lifting up of the Sea, is carried
directly thither, whither the Moons beams are directed, and to such parts of
the earth, and shores, she most then respects, as being over against her. For
as the Sun draws out moisture out of the moist herbs, and drinks abundance of
water out of the Sea, and Bogs, A simile from the ^^tr^ctive force of the Sun
and Bogs, and Lakes, whence is the original of rain: and again, as many
herbs, which from hence are called Turnsols, are turned about by the force and
heat of the Sun that sucks out their moisture, and they follow his motion from
East to West, with their flowers laid wide open: so by the force of the Moon,
the Sea is sometimes driven to this Coast, sometimes to that and inclines and
falls upon that shore where the Moon moves next to. Of which things I shall
give some instances, and produce some examples, of place, Cities and Coasts
that the Sea washes. Before all these things can be perfectly understood, I
thought fit to lay down this maxim: that the Moon, if she increase, has her
horns turned from the Sun, looking toward the East: if she decrease toward the
West, which staying oft-times three days in conjunction, at length shines
again, and is seen with horns. But every day as she increases, she removes
farther from the Sun, and augmenting until the seventh day she appears a half
Moon; and that part of her is enlightened that is opposed to the Sun going to
the West; and that part of the Moon that looks toward the East is dark; for the
Moon increasing allwaies follows the Sunsetting, and is seen above our
Horizon. But when she decreaseth she goes before the Sun, and rises before him
and is seen in the morning above the Horizon, being allwaies enlightened on that
part which regards the Sun: whereby it comes to pass, that the crooked and
horny part is allwaies turned away from the Sun, but the round and bunchy part
is against the Sun and turned toward it. But on the fourteenth day when she is
diametrically opposite to the Sun, she is at full, and she rises as the Sun
sets in the West. Whence it comes to pass that she is totally enlightened, and
receives the Suns light every way. On the seventeenth day when the Sun rises,
the Moon sets in the West, but on the one and twentieth day, when the Sun
rises the Moon is almost past the middle of the heavens, and that part that
looks toward the Sun is light, and all the other parts are dark. Then as she
perfects her course every day, in the twenty eighth day, and the third part of
a day, that is eight hours, she finisheth her whole course through the Zodiac:
and as the Sun makes the year, so the Moon makes a Month, changing somewhat
every week: for both those times; namely after he first apparition that she
increases to be a half Moon, and from thence become round and to be a full
Moon, are finished by feven days, that is for both times fourteen days.
Likewise from that time when she becomes a half Moon again, if you reckon the
same way, by the same proportion, and so from thence till she is quite taken
from our sight and is in conjunction with the Sun, you shall find seven days.
Wherefore it is clear that the Moon changes the month, The Low Countries call
a Month from the Moon.
which force she receives by the Suns aspect, and has of her self no force or
power. But when she comes to join with the Sun, or to be in opposition with him
and in the full, then are there very great changes made both by Sea and Land:
for it is proved, because then she raises boisterous winds, and great tides
that flow up to the shores.

When the Moon raises tempests.
It is observed in our memory in a very few years, that the Sea has mightily
overflowed the Low Countries four times, and miserably wasted the Land,
breaking down all the banks and mounds, and that in the winter time, when the
moon has greater force to raise tides and cause tempests than in Summer
season, yet so that the flood and overflowing of the waters ever fell upon a
new or full Moon. Inundations are most at beginning of Winter.
And those Countries and climates suffered most harm that were next to the
Moons aspect and influence: but when the Moons course tended to other coasts
then they were more subject to inundations, and violence of the waters. Hence
it is that in Flanders they first feel the inconvenience of great floods, and
are in danger by them, next to them the Mattiaci, that live in the Islands of
Zeland; next to them those of Brabant, and sometimes these, sometimes those
ports and good harbors for ships to ride in, are endammaged by the force of
the waters, as the Moon moves to one country or to another. North-West.
Also West and North-west winds exasperate the rage of the Sea, that from the
Sunsetting do violently blow upon the earth; and drive the waves of the Sea
far and wide into the continent, yet so that the billows are forced sometimes
to one part, and sometimes to another part of the earth, and every country
takes its turn, as the distance of the places are, and the Sea flows up to them
sooner or later for the same cause. And that every man may perfectly understand
this, I will speak more at large concerning it. The East is against the West.
The day that the new Moon appears, which is always toward the West, because
the Sun inclines that way, by whose light she begins to shine, and whereby she
comes to be full, we see that the same day the floods begin to rise and flow
forth, and the next ports are filled to a certain height, and thence forward
they are carried to all places in the way Eastward, so that the days
following, the sea moves one hour later than it did, because the moon is daily
removed farther from it, and carried toward the South, and the East departs
farther from the Sun. For example, Calis-rode, and the Sluice that is situate
in the confines of Flanders, being a small City there, near to Bruges, a new
and full Moon makes full water at them both, about eleven of the clock when she
is light on that side, which is bent back toward the South. But at Arnemuse and
Middlebourgh, at two of the clock be it night or day; at Zirick-Sea, at three
of the Clock, the Moon being turned toward the West in Winter, South-West.
when the South-West wind blows, and the Sun is in Capricorn: at Berg an hour
and half or two hours later; at Antwerp and Dort, when the Moon inclines to the
Equinoctial Westward, when the West-winds blow gently about six of the Clock:
at Mechlin about eight of the clock, yet so that the Sea flows in sometimes
sooner, sometimes later, when the weather is calm, or the wind blows strongly.
And when in the space of six hours she moves toward the West, she causes the
Sea to ebb and sink down as many hours, until the Moon being gone out of our
sight rises to those that are Antipodes to us: for then the Sea flows again:
but when the Moon comes to midnight and comes to our hemisphere, the floods
fall back again. Wherefore the situation of places must be observed, and to
what part of the heavens they are inclined, and the coasts of the Countries
must be regarded, and we must fit the course of the Moon rising and setting
thereunto. For thus it will be easy to know the ebbing and flowing of the water
at all places. But let no man think the horns of the Moon are to be taken
notice of, for on that side it has no operation, but we must regard the bunchy
and unequal part of it which is enlightened by the Sun. The aspects of the Moon
cause the flood in all places.
For that part of the Moon that is against the Sun and toward the earth draws
the water, and fills those Ports and Havens with a flowing water which she
directly respects with her beams. For the Sea runs that way the light of the
Moon drives them. Yet let them that are Sailers take notice of this, that when
the Moon rises and shows her self first in our hemisphere, if the part of the
Moon that is enlightened by the Sun, send her beams Eastward, that in those
parts that are Eastward the waters have risen to their height; again if the
Moon look Southward or Westward, in those places the floods rise, and fall in
the Eastern parts. Wherefore if any man sail from the East, or Winter
aequinoctial from whence the South-East, or East winds blow, toward the West
countries; it will be the time to sail forth at high water when the floods are
greatest, to pass into the Lower-Countries. As for example: From Mechlin,
Antwerp, Dort, Berg, Breda, Bolduc, Delph, Gand, and other places that are
situate farther off, it is good to set forth when it is full Sea, and the
waters begin to fall. Again if any man sail from the West Southward or
Eastward, he must set forth and Sail into the deep at low water, when the Sea
is coming in, and the floods begin to come back; So that he must always take
notice of the Moons motion, and to what part of the Heaven she enclines, and
what Coasts and Ports she respects.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the force and nature of Lettice, and whom it is good or ill for.
THose that eat Lettice in sallets often, unless they eat Rocket, or Cresses,
or Tarragon, which is next kind to Snees-wort, What corrects the coldness of
Lettice.
it will hurt their sight, and make them blind, for it thickneth and condenseth
the visive spirits, and troubles the Crystalline humor, unless you drink wine
to correct the force of it. The Ancients did not eat this at beginning of
supper or for the first course, but last of all, as Martial shows.

Tell me why Lettice is our first repast;
In our forefathers days it was the Last.
Which I think they did it not without good reason: for since it is of a cold
and moist nature, taken after supper it causes sleep more effectually, and
restrains the heat of Wine, and hinders drunkenness by moistning the brain:
Whether Lettice should be eaten before or after supper.
But in our days it is thought best to eat it first at supper. For since after
a long dinner, we have no great stomach to our supper, the custom is so soon
as we sit down to supper, to whet our stomachs with Lettice seasoned with Oil
and Vinegar. Also Lettice is good, for that if it be carried into the veins
before all other meat, it cools the heat of the blood, and abates the hot
distemper of the Liver and of the Heart, so that the immoderate use of it will
bridle venereous actions, and extinguish the desire of lust, as Cucumbers,
Pompions, Purslane, and Camphor do. Wherefore it must be used more largely by
them that would lead a single life, and live chastely, for this will take away
their venereous desires: but such as are bound in the bonds of Matrimony, may
nor totally refuse the use of it: because sometimes their brains are dried by
too much venery. But the coldness of it must be corrected with heating herbs,
Lettice who it is good for.
least it weaken the generative seed too much, and make it uneffectuall to
beget children, and altogether unfit for it.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Patience commonly called, or, the great Dock.
Of the herb Patience or Monks Rheubarb.
SInce there are many kinds of Sorrel, or Dock, two of them specially are fit to
be eaten, that which is commonly called Sorrel, that in Sallets whets the
appetite and takes off loathing, and that which from its greatness is called
Horse-dock. It is a Pothearb with a great top with long broad leaves, and the
stalk when it is ripe is red, and the root is yellow: I find this herb to be
of such faculty that if you boil any flesh or meat with it, be they never so
old they will be tender and fit to eat; For being it is of a slippery moist
nature, it will soften and temper the hardest Oxeflesh, or old Hens. Wherefore
the Ancients used it often, because it will make meats easy of digestion, and
it loosneth the belly. Orage is of the same faculty with it, which from the
prickly seed is called Spinach, and is like to Lampsana Dioscorides speaks of,
which I think Martial meant, when he said,

Use Lettice and the Mallows soft. And Horace,

Epod. L. od. 3.
Fat Olives pulled from the boughs of'th Tree;
Or sour Docks that Meadows love,
Or Mallows that with costive bodies best agree.
CHAP. XLIV.
Of the operation of Man's spittle.
The force and effects of fasting spittle.
Diverse experiments show what power and quality there is in Man's fasting
spittle, when he has neither eat nor drunk before the use of it; For it cures
all tetters, itch, scabs, pushes, and creeping sores. And if venomous little
beasts have fastened on any part of the body, as hornets, beetles, toads,
spiders, and such like, that by their venom cause tumors and great pains and
inflammations, do but rub the places with fasting spittle and all those effects
will be gone and discussed, moreover it kills Scorpions and other venomous
creatures, or at least hurts them exceedingly. For it has in it a venomous
quality, and secret poison, that it contracts from the foulness of the teeth
in part, and partly from vicious humors. For to the mouth and Jaws fumes rise
from these and infect the spittle with a contrary quality. Whence it is that
sometimes we perceive a salt, sour, sweet, Sweat and spittle have their forces
from the humors.
or sharp taste in our spittle, as there is in sweat also. Hence it is that
when men are fasting their breath stinks exceedingly, and the unsavourinesse of
the breath offends all near us that talk with us. For some foggy ill smells
evaporate and boil forth of the body, as out of some muddy lake, and these
being of a venomous nature infect the fountains of spittle. And this moisture
that swims in the mouth and moystneth the tongue, and waters our meat, is
nothing else, What spittle is.
than a flegmatique excrement, that arises from the stomach, from the
nutrimental juice received in and flees to the brain, and so is sent down to
the tongue and Jaws.

Hence it is that those whose stomachs abound with phlegm, are always full of
spittle in their mouths, and is overwet with immoderate moisture: but such as
are hot about the entrals and dry with a feavorous heat, their tongues are not
wet at all, Who have a dry or moist mouth.
but crack as the earth does, when it is over-dried and parched by the heat of
the Sun.

Since therefore the qualities and effects of Spittle come from the humors
(for out of them is it drawn by the faculty of nature as fire draws distilled
water from herbs) the reason may be easily understood, A simile from distilled
herbs.
why spittle should do such strange things, and destroy some creatures. And if
the spittle of a sound man be effectual for many uses, that it will not only
destroy many creatures, but kills Quicksilver also, and fixes it; what shall
we think of such that are sick of the Leprosy, the Pox, and many other
contagious diseases?

I know many that have caught the small Pox and measils by only putting their
mouths to the cups whereon the spittle of those that were infected did stick,
by reason of the clamminesse of it, and venomous mud that fastneth to the
teeth; so that for the same cause the bitings of all creatures are dangerous,
by reason of the contagiousnesse of their spittle, except the nerves and
muscles be not hurt by it.

CHAP. XLV.
Of the use of Milk, Beestings, Cream. The dutch call the first Be, the
latter Room: also what will keep these from cloddering in the Stomach.
Milk Who it is good for.
THe use of Milk is not alike wholesome for all people: for those that have cold
Stomachs, it grows sour in them, and fills the body with wind; and those that
are very hot of temper, in them it burns, and sends forth stinking vapors, and
offends the Head. And since the nature of Milk is so, that it will thicken and
be condensed by heat, Milk is thickened by heat, and melts by cold.
and melted by cold: it follows that it is soonest clottered in a hot Stomach,
and nothing will hinder this more than Honey, and Sugar, adding a little Salt
to it. But since I have known many strangled by clottered Milk coagulated in
their Stomachs, their breath being stopped when they began to vomit, I think
some wanton young men, and lascivious suitors do very ill; who at their
afternoon meetings, use to stuff themselves with Cream and Biestings, and
other Milk-meats, and drink Wine abundantly with them, to the great detriment
of their health. For Wine makes Milk curdle, Wine and milk mingled are naught.
and become like to Cheese; wherewith the Stomach being offended, and is not
able to concoct it, all turns to corruption, and these are the foundations and
seminaries of great diseases. Milk corrupts Fish.
So fish and Milk, and all sour things mingled with Milk, and drenched with
Wine, cause Scabs and the Leprosy. For all things cramb'd in thus
promiscuously, corrupt, and are made subject to putrefaction. Those gluttons,
that when a Cow has new Calved love Beestings, Beestings.
shall find nothing more hurtful to man, so that Children, that within three
days after they are born, do suck their Mothers Milk, are very ill by it, and
only escape Death. For it coagulates and clotters in their bodies, and stops
the Channells of the blood, and the Veins, so that nutriments cannot pass
fitly and without hurt. But these things dissolve Milk and Clottered blood
also; Cummin-seed, Oyxmel and Vinegar of Squils, Angelica, Master-wort.

CHAP. XLVI.
Why Gouty people are Lascivious and Prone to venery, and as many as lie on
their backs, and on hard beds.
Gowty people are very lascivious.
SUch as have the Joynt-Gout are most commonly Lascivious, and lust exceedingly,
partly because they have been used to it by long custom, by the immoderate use
whereof they came to have that disease: partly because their Nerves are grown
stiff, and stretched out by it, and by lying often on their backs, the humors
flow to the generative parts. They also that ride much, or lie along on
Ship-boards, and lie hard on their backs, are very Prone and given much to
Venery. For the Nerves destinated for man's generation that run to the genitall
parts grow hot: so that by the agitation and influence of humors, the loins
are provoked; and there is erection made thereby. By the same reason, if any
man hurt or bruise his great Toe of his foot, immediately from this effect the
groin and cods swell, that is, that wrinkled cover of the Testicles is in pain
by it, arising from consent; and by reason of the interweaving of Nervs and
Veins. As if any man puts into a fire that is very hot, a pair of Tongues, or
other iron, A simile from Smiths.
not only the part put into the fire will be red hot, but also that part which
is far from the fire, grows so hot that it cannot be handled: so pain is
communicated to the parts that are on the same side, and the sickly affect is
conveyed to the neighboring part. So from the Stomach, Intestins, Matrix,
Spleen, Liver, the head is affected; and when the brain is hurt or troubled
with any distemper, the mischief is derived from thence to the parts that are
under it. And therefore Mid-wives, though they know not the cause of it, The
generative parts are signs of good health or sickness.
use to search and see the Testicles of Children, when they are sick, and their
privy member, by the observation whereof, they can judge: young men also, may
perceive certain signs of recovery of death, of health or sickness. For if
the cases of the Testicles be loose and feeble, and the Cods fall down, it is a
sign that the natural faculties are fallen, The Testicles hanging down or
close up, what signs they are.
and the vital Spirits that are the props of Life. But if these secret parts
be wrinkled and raised up, and the yard stands stiff, it is a sign all will
be well. But that the event may exactly answer the praediction, we must mark in
what part of the body the disease lies. For if in diseases of the brain, and
such as are above the Diaphragma; and the Septum Transversum, the generative
parts hang down and flag, it is healthful, as on the contrary it is an ill
sign to have them drawn upward; for the vital faculty dies, and the nerves are
contracted to their first original.

Prediction of the Brain and Liver affected from the Testicles.
I have observed this in many that were of sound mind, and their reason good,
that their Testicles and Yard were so run in, that they could not feel it to
make water by. But in all diseases that affect the lower parts, it is a good
sign to have their Testicles wrinkled, and their yard stiff, for these are
signs that those parts revive that are inservient to the natural faculties, and
are made fit again to perform their natural actions; for no parts of the body
sooner recover, and become lively after a disease, The Genitals after a disease
first recover.
than those that dame nature has placed in secret.

CHAP. XLVII.
Whether the Smallpox and Measils may be cured with red Wine, or with Milk,
that women use to administer, when such Pushes show themselves.
IN diseases that proceed from the boiling and inflammation of blood,
diaphoretiques and discussive remedies should be administered, and such as
attenuate the humors, that they may the better be vented through the pores and
passages of the body to breathe them forth, and none may doubt of this.
Wherefore I wonder how our Matrons, when such pushes break forth, give
Claret Wine to drink, which is commonly of a binding quality and thickneth and
restrains the humor. Wherefore I bid them make a decoction of Marigold flowrs,
Marigolds.
Dill, Hysop, Balm, Savoury, Figs, Anniseed, and Fennel-seed, this loosneth the
skin and dispells collection of humors. But I see a reason how it may be
safely given without danger, so it be done seasonably, namely when all the
force of the humors is brought to the skin, Whether Claret Wine cause urine
and sweat.
for then it drives them forth by the same reason as things that loosen the
belly by pressing it, as Mirobolans, Rhaponticum, or that is called Rheubarb,
in all which there is contained a manifest binding quality; wherefore by way of
astriction red wine drives forth the smoky vapors, and fumes that stay in the
middle passages are forced out thereby at the outward skin. So I find by some
that the black Spa^ish wine, called Tint from its deep die, will loosen the
belly; yet it is given in dysenteries to stay the flux of it. It does it;
partly because by reason of its thickness it cannot enter the veins, and
partly by its binding and pressing quality wherewith it moistneth inwardly the
Intestines. Likewise red wine because it heats, has a discussing quality and
provokes swear. But I wholly disapprove of giving them milk, for it is very ill
for feavourish people, Milk subject to corrupt.
and soon corrupts, and is subject to contagion: for I know by experience, that
when any one dies the milk will corrupt and look wan, and all the ill airs
fly thither.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Wine is spoiled by thunder and lightning, and so is Ale and beer, and how this
may be hindered and the force of them restored.
EVery Master of a Family knows by his own loss, that thunder and lightning
will do great hurt in wine and beer Cellars; Thunder and lightning spoil dri^k.
For wine grows sour by thunder, and turns red, and its natural r^ste is
spoiled by that fiery penctrating heat. Beer by that horrid noise and violent
motion is made sour also and not fit to drink. And though the summer heat be
the chief cause that drinks grow sour, yet thunder and lightning do suddenly
change them though it be winter, whereas heat does it by degrees. But if
Cellars be underground and vaulted, and arched, the drinks receive the less
hurt, and not so much as when they are plain* with planks alone. For the
distemper of the Air and weather sooner pierces into the places, and falls
upon the vessels of Wine and Beer. Wherefore I use to fence them before the
tempests come, How Iron drives off thunder from drinks.
by laying on the vessels a bar of Iron with Salt, or Flints: for the Lightning
strives with the hardest substance, and therein spends most of its force. For
it leaves thin and tender substances untouched, because it finds passage
through them and cannot stay there: and hence we see it is that Oaks and Holms,
that are very high and hard trees, are most exposed to the injuryes of thunder;
whereas the Bay Tree that yields to it, and resists it not, is never touched by
it. So we see it proved by experience rather than by reason, Sea-Calves.
that the skin of a Sea Calf is never touched with thunder, I think it is
because it is soft, and very fine, and not very solid; also an Eagle and the
skin thereof. Yet this belongs to all men to know for their health, that
nutriments spoiled by thunder are naught and dangerous to eat or drink, so that
the dogs will not touch them. For there is in thunder a pestilent force that is
communicated to those things it falls upon. Whence it is that such as are burnt
by thunder, stink exceedingly and filthily, Blasted-Corn.
as we may perceive in rubbing the blasted ears of corn that the lightning has
fallen upon, they will smell like Brimstone. And now having showed what these
natural tempests can do, and what mischiefs they can bring unto us: it remains
to show how things spoiled by lightning may be restored to their former
goodness. This you shall not easily do, unless you pour out the liquor into
some other vessel, which must first be made clean, and then seasoned with the
decoction of the leaves of Savoury, wild-Time, Bays, Walnuts, myrtils, both
wild and of the Garden, which the Brabanders call Gagel; Fennel,
Juniper Berries, Clary; and when the vessel is dried, set it up, then when you
have occasion to use it, it will have a very gallant color, smell, and taste.
Also Beer when it degenerates from its native goodness or grows dead, is
restored with sweet sented Physical drugs, How to restore drinks corrupted.
and recovers its savoury taste; namely by the roots of Orris, Ginger, Nutmegs,
Cloves, Bay Berries, and with the dry leaves of it, with sweet Calamus,
Origanum, Betes. For as the Coleworts corrupt the nature of wine, so Beets
restore, it, Cole-worts corrupt wine, Beets restore it.
because they have a nitrous faculty, whereby they hinder that wine cannot
thicken and grow clammy as honey, which Rocket-seed will do also, but not
without great hurt to ones health: for it hurts the nerves by its caustic
burning quality, and causes the joint pains, as some rosiny wines, and such as
are seasoned with strange Ingredients. For our Vintners use to smoke their Cask
with Brimstone, and they pour in Seawater boiled with Honey, With what things
Wines use to be seasoned.
some mingle Cows Milk with it, others strew Quicklime, Sand, Powdered Stones
that are brought into these parts from Bentimary, with some handfulls of Salt
added to it, or six or seven Eggs; and thus they use to correct all the faults
of the wine and to restore the taste and color as they were at first. And
though some of these are not very hurtful; yet artificial wines are always
worse than natural wines, and are not so wholesome.

CHAP. XLIX.
Predictions of Tempests by the touch of Seawater, and what Winter Thunders
fore-shew.
I Often observed as I passed in a Ship to the farther Shores; by putting my hand
into the Salt Water, that the Seawater was lukewarm, which shows three days
beforehand that a Tempest is coming, with strong winds and storms. For when
in the deep Sea that is far from us, whence the flood comes to us, there has
been a tempest, the Seawater shaken and tossed grows hot, as our hands do
clapped together, and so the tempests come roling along unto us, and the waves
rise to a mighty height.

So when the Spring comes, Southern tempests bring forth herbs and grass, by
the motion and agitation of the Air that causes heat. Likewise if in Winter
it Thunders and Lightens, and the Air be hot with frequent coruscations, it
shows that a tempest will follow, and Whirl-winds will arise and cause great
floods in the Ocean. Winter Thunders foreshew Tempests. (...) Thun^^^ ^^^^shew
^^^^sts.


For when that distemper of the Air is tossed besides the season, and contrary
to natures order, there must needs be some violent cause that moves those
tempests; for I never observed any such thing but the next day grievous
tempests arose and inundations in many places. For thunder and lightning are
ordinary in Summer, as also burning Fevers, which if they come in Winter, it
must proceed from some vehement cause, which the contrariety of the season
could not hinder. To which purpose is that of Hippocrates. Those are not so
dangerously sick that fall sick of a disease that is suitable to their nature,
L. ^.
age, custom, or to the season of the year, as those are that are sick without
any of these circumstances.

CHAP. L.
Children are delighted with beautiful things, and cannot away with the sight
of old wrinkled women, and therefore they are not to be put to lie with old
women in their beds, and much less to lie at their feet in the bed.
THere is no mortal wight, that is not allured with beautiful and pleasant
things; but above all others, children and young people, who being lively and
waggish, All men love pleasant things.
do greedily look on fire-torches, lights, squibs, and all flaming things; and
catch at all alluring speeches that cheer the mind, and make the spirits more
active. Wherefore froward children are never better made quiet, than with
songs, or when delightful spectacles are presented unto their eyes, which
their fiery vigor, and aereal, and clear substance effects, whereupon they
fear the dark, and cannot away with deformed and horrid spectacles. Children
cannot endure old Women.
So when some wrinkled or warty old wife carries a young child in her arms,
and fosters it in her bosom, at the very sight of her the child will cry and
fly back, and if any women that are more beautiful and well adorned stand by,
the child will lean toward one of them, and reach out its arms unto her.
Wherefore they do unadvisedly that hire crabbed and testy nurses to tend their
children, or put them forth to old women to bring up, who will chew the meat
and put it into the child's mouth. The breath of old women ill for children.
For when they commonly have an ill-sented and corrupt stinking breath, all
this ill savor that comes from them the children partake of; and thence they
are of a wan dark color and Weesill color, and contract many ill things from
them, especially if they lie on the lower side of the bed with them, or at
their feet.

CAAP. LI.
How it comes to pass that children, women with child, Priests, and such as
lead a solitary and sedentary life, are of all people first infected with
popular diseases, and with the Plague.
I Find by experience that when popular and contagious diseases spread abroad,
Who first fall sick of contagious diseases.
such as are wont to wander here and there in Summer and Autumn, that those are
soonest sick that are very young, and weak and of moist constitution. As
children, young people and females, and such as live idly and sleep much, and
so heap up much excrements. For these are soonest exposed to danger, and
soonest take hold of the contagion of diseases. For as a very fine
well-polished Looking-glass, A simile taken from a glass.
and all clean things are soonest clouded and stained with gross vapors, and
as fire soonest takes hold of light straw and chaff, and dry fuel; for what is
solid is longer a burning. So tender bodies, when popular diseases first begin
to reign, A simile from Soldiers that are unarmed.
like Soldiers unarmed, are soon slain in war; and next of all, women with
child cannot easily stand out against it, because they can hardly bear the
burden they carry about them, and are ready to faint already: whereupon when
any light disease invades them, not so fierce as the Plague, they presently
sink under it. But Priests and Monks because they are given to sleep and
idleness, and never use exercise or to labor, can very hardly resist these
diseases. But Porters and Carriers, and other common people, that are deficient
in their diet, and all the course of their life is irregular, and because they
live sordidly, they are not freed from these diseases, though many of them
whose bodies are hardened by labor are longer before they fall into them. But
since children in acute diseases cannot endure the violence of them, yet in
more mild diseases they can struggle with them as long as lusty young people
can, and can hold out as long in lingering and wasting sicknesses, for Children
have in possibility what young men have actually. For there is an imbred force
and vigor in this age that must be continued to last many years. Hence St.
Augustine says children have a kind of perfection, De civitat, Dei c. 14.
for they are conceived and born with it, yet they have it in possibility, and
in their reasonable soul, and not in bigness of their bodies. For all the
parts are in the seed, and they grow forth by degrees, and come to their full
magnitude and beauty: For in time as they grow up, the force of reason and
other gifts of Nature do show themselves. Whence our Country people use to say
when they commend young children, and bring them up in hopes, This child has a
man within him.

CHAP. LII.
Diverse documents of Nature, and a fit conjunction of several matters, which
because I purposed to handle them with a convenient brevity; I have bound them
up together in one bundle.
DIstilled water that we draw from green and fresh herbs never corrupts,
because all earthly matter is concocted in them, and wasted, and there is in it
a kind of aereall substance, whence it comes that it will endure no boiling.
For if you set it to the fire to boil, it loses all its virtue: for it being
pure and purged, there is nothing that can be taken from it; and thence it is
that it putrefies sooner, and grows moldy on the top, than fountain water
boiled does. So Ale boiled, or fountain or pond-water, though it be thick and
muddy, is of a better taste, and not so sour, as that which is made of rain
and clear water. For troubled water being boiled, if there be any corruption in
it, it is boiled away and grows better. In Corol. Diosc^r.
It is a memorable thing that Hermolaus Barbarus speaks off, that water that
has been corrupted seven times, and purged again, will never corrupt more.
Because, as I think, all the earthly substance is taken from it, and voided
away, and it is wholly purged of all its dregs that were the cause of its
corrupting. So it is observed that that kind of drink the people call spruse
Beer, at a certain time of the year will grow sour, and afterward strangely
come to its former vigor: the same happens in that outlandish wine called
Bastard, and black Spanish-wine, that stains ones hands and napkins, and makes
all linen of a deep red color, as the Actian Cherries do, which we commonly
call Morellen.

There are two liquours no less delightful than healthful for men's bodies,
that is wine within, oil without: Wine. Oil.
the use whereof if it be moderate, keeps men in sound health, and makes them
green in old age. But as hard Boots and skins that grow stiff, A simile from a
skin oyled.
and are moldy, will grow soft being oiled; So men's bodies, chiefly old men
liquoured with wine, are made more gentle, and not so rigid and froward. But
oyling and anointing, though they are out of use almost with most Nations, and
the custom is lost, yet is it healthful for the bodies of both young and old
people, for they will condense bodies that the outward air and winds cannot
penetrate into them, or else they serve to loosen them, that they may not be
smothered by fumes within. Also the skin anointed with oil resists poison, that
if any man set on causticks to eat the skin, Oil resists poison.
and first anoint it with oil, he shall lose his labor, for corroding
medicaments applied will not stick nor penetrate. Also taken inwardly it dulls
the acrimony of poison, and will not let it enter the veins, but casts it forth
by vomit. Oil powered on any liquor preserves it.
Oil powered on wine or any other liquor, does preserve it: that it shall
neither grow dead nor corrupt, for it drives away the Air and shuts out all
vapors that might corrupt it.

Amber draws unto it, straw and all dry light matter, but if they be anointed
with oil it will not touch them, Amber.
whereupon it does drive off Basil from it. So a Loadstone smeered with Garlic
will not draw Iron, because there is a fat substance in Garlic, that blunts
the virtue of it, that it will not cleave so much to it.

Cucumbers desire water, but refuse Oil.
Cucumbers and Gourds, being they are full of moisture, and are fed by it, they
do so avoid and refuse oil, that being put to it they will fall back, and
contract themselves. For all plants sprinkled with oil will corrupt.

To make a Vine fruitful.
If Vines grow barren, and bring forth nothing but leaves and unprofitable
boughs, if you water it with sharp old urin, it will grow fruitful; for being
choked with too much moisture, it being thus heated and the superfluous
moisture consumed, it will bear fruit abundantly; the same is performed by
wine-lees powered to the root of it. But our Countrymen do very ill who make a
great pit about the root of the Vine, Soot is very hurtful.
and fill it with soot of a Chimney to make it bear fruit; for though soot
seems to have a fat substance in it, yet by its hot burning quality it
destroys the vine, and makes it wither by its corroding quality.

The Apothecaries call Clary Centrum Galli, Clary.
the seed of it has an attractive virtue, and draws forth chaff, dust, and
other things that fall into peoples eyes. For that put into the eyes, is roled
about in them every way, and draws the humor to it, and discusseth blindness,
and comes out swollen, and covered as it were with a thin membrane. But the plant
it self bruised will draw forth thorns and splinters, and will hasten hard and
difficult childbearing, when women cannot be delivered in time: put into wine
it rejoices the mind, and drives away sorrow, and provokes lust; yet taken too
much, by its strong sent it makes the head ache. The decoction of Mallows, and
marsh Mallows will make chapt rugged hands smooth; To make the hands smooth.
but the seeds of fenigreec, and Linseed will do it better by their oily
substance. With us men make lees of oil, by bruising the Linseed, and pressing
forth the oil, they are made apiece Cakes, that are fit to make Cattle
fat; and if you steep a piece of this in rainwater, and wash your hands with
it, it will take away sensibly all scabs of the skin, and make the parts smooth
and delicate; also the dregs of Linseed, and Lees of oil will make smooth and
comely the flagging breasts and wrinkled forehead, To make the forehead and
wrinkled breasts smooth and white.
if you add to it a little Gum Arabic, and Tragacanthum, and Mastick, with a
little Camphir, that will help also red eyes, and such eye lids as are bleared
with dryness, and such as are chapt, and will restore them to their former
comeliness.

Why some do not thirst in Fevers.
It seems a very strange matter to some people, to see some men in hot fevers
and their whole bodies almost burnt up with them, which yet are not thirsty at
all: but the cause is because the heat diffuseth it self to the external parts,
and sticks not in the heart, nor in any principal part: whereby sweat breaking
forth, and the heart being ventilated, and that vapourous heat being discussed
which did possess the internal bowels, they cease to be thirsty: but
contrarily, they whose heat does not break forth to the outward skin, but lies
inward secretly, they are extreme thirsty, though outwardly no signs of heat
appear, and these kind of Fevers are the most dangerous of all.

The white of an Egg beaten, and mingled with quicklime, will sodder broken
glasses, To sodder.
and will so glue together all earthen ware, that they cannot come assunder, by
reason of their clammy and gluttinous substance. For since quicklime mingled
with any liquor will harden into a stone, so especially when it is mingled with
the white of an Egg that is like snot or bird-lime.

Some plants are contrary to others.
He that is given to gardning, and would fain get profit by it, he must observe
what plants agree and what are at enmity one with the other. For one plant will
hinder the growth of another, So a vine if it grow near Cabbage, will either
decay or die. For the Vine being full of juice, and the colewort greedy of
moisture, it draws away all the juice and robs the vine. The Bay Tree enemy to
the Vine.
Also the Bay Tree and the Ivy are enemies to the Vine, and dry it up by their
hot drying qualities; which Lavander also does to many herbs by its great
heat, as also Radish-root that by its acrimony burns up all plants near it;
wherefore it is good against drunkenness, Radish good against drunkenness.
and takes off the force of wine.

Garlic set near Roses makes them smell the more sweet, because the acrimony
and heat of Garlic draws forth their natural forces and stirs them up; for
what is faint with cold, Roses grow more sweet near Garlic.
is recreated by heat.

The nature of the Olive.
The Olive Tree is a remedy for Chich-Peason, for it drives away Caterpillars
that eat and spoil them, and that by reason of its strong smell, and therefore
worms will not breed in it. But the Olive Tree being bitter, it makes Cabbage
and other moist herbs to wither, which also Origanum does, and Rue, The reason
of many things is in-explicable.
and Sow-bread by their hot drying faculty. I know that many things of this
kind are done by a secret imbred force, and from the property of the whole
substance, so that a man cannot always give a reason or show the cause of such
an effect. Yet it delights a lover of Physic, and one that is industrious to
seek out natural causes exquisitely, to find out probable causes: which if he
cannot exactly obtain, yet he will not derogate from the truth of things
manifest, nor calumniate the effects, but will always admire God in the works
of nature made by him.

There are a multitude of things, whereof we may render a probable reason; As
for example, Purslane cures teeth astonished, Purslane cures the teeth set on
edge.
which disease comes by eating sharp and sour things, because it is a
glutinous clammy plant, whereby it asswageth and eases the teeth that are
affected by sour things, and suppleth the nerves that are bound by them, and
so repairs the inconvenience by its glewy moisture. But to rub them with Salt
will do it by reason of its heat and astriction, or if we do but chew a little
green cheese made of sheeps milk. For it dryes and makes the astonished teeth
firm, and fastneth those that are loose by reason of a cold moist or sour
humor.

Those that have dull noses, and have lost their smells or impared them; How to
restore smelling.
are effectually restored by the seed of Melanthium which Hierom on Esaias
translates Gith, by Southernwood and Rue, and as many things as are of a sharp
and piercing smell. For these open the passages, and dissolve and discuss the
humors and hurtful vapors. But I have found that nothing will sooner do it,
even for old people, than to put Mints into their nostrils, Mints restore
smelling.
whose fragrancy they manifestly perceive, and it serves for all whose sense of
smelling is hardened against the most stinking sents, and have wholly lost that
faculty of smelling. Radish-roots must be eaten first of all, for so it
provokes the appetite to meat, Radish.
and less offends the stomach.

Therefore our Countrymen are to be blamed that eat it when supper or dinner
is almost at an end, for they think it will help them the better to concoct
their meat; but it is an enemy to the stomach, unless it be eaten before meat
with water and Salt, for otherwise it causes ill vapors, and stinking
belchings to rise up. And if you cut a little piece of it, and put it into
wine, it will presently contract a filthy stinking smell.

Tartar oil will presently take off Iron rust, Tartar.
and make it shine, and it will also take spots and freckles from the face, and
all deformed fowl pushes that are disgraceful to the countenance, by its
abs^ergent quality.

Camphir hinders liquors from corrupting.
Camphir mingled with rainwater keeps it from corrupting, and preserves it in
its perfect sweetness: so also does Myrrh, and Lignum Aloes called Agallochum.

So the Cyrenean juice called Benzoin, and Storax Calamites, are very
effectual to keep away putrefaction. For they drive off all ill vapors and
corrupt Airs; and make the ambient Air that is commonly the cause of
corruption, more pure by their sweet and pleasant vapors proceeding from their
dry and hot qualities.

The force of Tithymals.
The Tithymals, that are of seven sorts, do by the caustic and burning quality
of their milky juice take off all warts and callous substances, for by the
intense heat of it and penetrating force it dries them at the roots, and when
this is done they fall as some rough-cast. How Warts and Corns are cured.
Likewise Hermodactyls, and Savin, powdered and mingled with Oximel of Squils or
juice of Marigolds, will take away all Corns and callous matter, even upon the
secrets, when they are contracted by foul copulation.

In Summer, that wine in Cask may not soon grow sour, and wax hot, That Wine
may not corrupt.
but may be cool to drink, place your pots in a vessel filled with cold water:
and then put in Saltpeter, and it will so cool the wine that your teeth can
hardly endure it. Nitre makes liquors cold.
It is the quality of this, which makes such a noise in Guns; for, take this
out, and the powder will make no noise, nor will it drive the bullet so far.

If any man desires to mix water with his wine because it is too strong to
drink, How wine must be mingled with water.
he must not do that when he eats his meat; but an hour and half before he sits
down to eat: for so these liquors will mingle, and not hinder concoction by
their repugnant qualities. For as they are commonly mingled they trouble the
head and cause belchings and wind. Also sharp wines are not to be mingled with
sweet, nor white with red; For nutriments of diverse qualities trouble the
stomach, because one digests sooner than the other, and goes into the substance
of the body. Wherefore I would wish men to drink white wine at dinner, and red
at supper. For white wine runs down quickly, and opens the veins and urinary
passages. But red wine if it be strong, nourishes more, and is binding. But if
you drink both at the same meal, ever drink white wine first. But because I
think we should not wholly neglect the mingling of wine with water, that of
Plutarch was ever my delight: I had rather drink wine moderately in its time,
Plutarch his opinion of mingling wine with water.
than to mingle it with water: for it is spoiled by putting water to it.

If any one would keep Chestnuts from corrupting, let him mingle Walnuts with
them for they will drink up all filthy excrementicious moisture from them, How
to keep Chest-nuts.
that makes them rotten, and will not let them corrupt. For the nature of the
Walnut is drying, and drinks up moisture, wherefore it is good for the Tonsils
and all diseases of the throat, for which use there is a confection made called
Diacarion, that is made of Walnuts, Dianucum.
that stops all defluxions from the head; and because they resist poison, and
discuss all contagions of the Air, the composition Diatessaron that is made
of four Ingredients, was invented by the Ancients: An Antidote against the
Plague.
which has in it two Nuts, as many Figs, twenty leaves of Rue, and some grains
of Salt, if any one eat these bruised together fasting, he shall be that day
free from venomes and contagious diseases.

Onions differ from other plants by nature.
Onions contrary to the nature of all other Plants, increase when the Moon
decreaseth, and decrease when the Moon increases. The reason is because the
Moon choaks it with too much moisture. For it being by nature full of juice, as
all Bulbate plants are, the Moon increasing, augments the humor of it, but it
abates the heat, which is the principal cause that plants increase: For the
same cause such as are over fat, are barren, Fat women are barren.
and produce no children because they want heat, which makes the seminal
excrement fruitful. And this is the cause that Onions, Aloes, Venus navel,
Saffron roots. Squils, Leeks, and many more that are full of natural moisture,
if they be hanged up in the larder to the roof of the place, they will sprowt
forth and grow. For being full of juice, they want nothing but heat to make
them shoot out.

Those that are hungry when a Fever comes.
Fevers that make men hungry use to last long; and therefore I always held it
better that the feavourish Patient should be thirsty than hungry. For since
their Fever proceeds from yellow choler, good store of drink powered on, and
sweat being dried up, those Fevers will abate with ease: but those that are
greedy after meat in a Fever, are sick of a melancholique humor, and of a
sharp Salt phlegm that kindles the Fever, and the stomach being full of those
humors, they will desire meat exceedingly: whence it is that such as are so
affected do feed their disease, and give it fuel, whereby they must longer be
afflicted by it. De plenit.
But there are three kinds of phlegm, sweet, sour, salt, and the first makes
one sleepy, the second hungry, the third thirsty. That only makes the disease
long that makes a man hungry: wherefore if you would have the disease sooner
end, give them little meat at the beginning.

How to keep wine from sowring.
Wines in Summer as we see will grow sour by reason of the heat of the Air.
Wherefore they must be set in cold Cellars and places underground, and be well
stopped. But if you want that convenience, put into the vessel a pound and half
of Lard and Hogsflesh salted, or as the vessel is great, a greater quantity
wrapped in linen; so hanged, that as the Wine is drawn forth you may let it
sink still until you come to the bottom, that all the wine be drawn forth: and
the wine will neither dead nor sour. For all that would make the wine faulty,
goes to the Hogs flesh. But the mouth of the vessel must be very close stopped
that no Air may enter, and a bag filled with Salt or sand must be laid on the
top of it: so will it neither grow sour nor corrupt. But that wine may grow
sour like Vinegar, you may do it with Leek-seeds, or by casting in some
tendrels and leaves of the Vine.

To restore clammy wine.
Corrupt clammy wine is restored with Cows milk moderately salted: Some attempt
to do it with Brimstone, Quicklime, and Alum; but that they may do men no
hurt, I could wish they would add Orris root and Juniper Berries to them.

That wine may please the pallat, and be well liked for taste and smell; put an
Orange or Pom-citron, stuck with cloves, into the vessel, that it may touch the
wine and swim in it, for it would rot by being wet; it will contract no dead or
musty taste, but will have an excellent relish.

Rue is an Antidote to poison.
Since Hearb-grace is fit for many diseases, and has many excellent properties;
yet this shows the wonderful force of it, because a Weesil by biting Rue
beforehand will destroy a Basilisk that is a most venomous serpent: whence we
may easily guess what force it has against venom, and contagious diseases.

The Physicians in Italy do beg of the Governors that they may have such men
as are condemned for wicked actions, How the Italians dissect an Anatomy.
to dissect their bodies, that such as are studious in Physic may be exercised
in Anatomy. Wherefore that no humors may be dissipated, or their grosser
spirits vanish, Thefoe reof Opium.
and that all things may appear plainly, they kill such as deserve to dye, with
Opium, that is the juice of black Poppy, to the quantity of two or three drams
given in the strongest wine, when they have drank this potion, they first begin
to be merry, and have as it were a Sardinian laughter, then they fall fast
asleep and die, for it so suddenly runs into the veins and vital parts, that
their bodies that died of Opium being dissected, it is found to stick to the
heart. If Wine or Ale, set in the Sun and wind are long before they grow sour,
That Wine or other drink may soon sour.
Salt pounded and mingled with Pepper and sour leaven will soon do it. But if
you would have it done sooner yet; cast a piece of Steel, or a brick made red
hot again, and again, into the vessel, or infuse radish roots in it; and they
will soon sour. Also Medlars, and Cornels unripe, Mulberries or Blackberries,
Sloes, cut in pieces, Actian Cherries, that look black without, Morellen
Cherries.
and are red within as blood, will make any liquor sour, and exceeding red:
also the flower of Meadow Wind-flowre will do as much, and the berries of both
Elders, and the most beautiful flower of Clove-gilliflowers. For that field
poppy that commonly grows amongst Wheat, Wild Poppy is hurtful.
colors drinks of a very red Scarlet color: but the use of it is hurtful and
dangerous so that their error is to be abandoned, that in the Quinsey, or pain
of the side, do give either the decoction or infusion, or distilled liquor of
it, for it is of an astringent nature, and an opiat, and stupefies, and does
not cause expectoration. Elephantiasis commonly called the Leprosy, is a fowl
abominable disease, and such as are infected with it are shut without the City
walls. To try the Leprosy.
And because sometimes it is hard to know it, the Low Dutch appoint men to
judge and censure it. I try it by their urine, into which I strew the Ashes of
burnt Lead: and if they sink to the bottom of the glass they are not any ways
infected in their bodies with this disease. But if they flote and stick on the
top of the urine, I judge them to be infected. For it shows a grossness of
the humors, and that a burnt corrupted melancholy is diffused all over their
bodies.

The effects of Quicksilver.
When Goldsmiths will gild cups with gold, they do it with Quicksilver, which
being put into the hot fire, will fly away into smoke and offensive vapors.
And if you spread a cover over, and receive the fume, that will come again to
Quicksilver, and congeal, as the smoke from Coals turns to a gross and thick
soot. Quicksilver loves Gold.
But how much that mineral body is affected with Gold, I spoke before. Yet this
is wonderful that one who is anointed with it for the French Pox, if he carry
a Gold ring in his mouth, Gold good for such as have the Pox.
and turn it up and down with his Tongue and Teeth, the Quicksilver that swims
in the body from the anointing, will come to the ring, that it will seem to be
but Silver, and will not be made like gold again, but by putting it into the
fire. Wherefore I advise all those that are anointed with this ointment, that
they do this often, A strange wonder of Quicksilver.
for great quantity of Quicksilver will stick in their bodies, for it has been
observed when a vein was opened that some drams of it have run forth: and hence
it is that such men are always pale and tremble so long as any part of the
Quicksilver remains in their bodies. And therefore I wonder at some that will
give a scruple weight to women in childbirth to make them to be the sooner
delivered, a doubtful and uncertain experiment, as also for children to kill
the worms; yet I say that pure Quicksilver is more harmless than the rest, and
then that which is killed with spittle or some other liquor. For sublimate that
is extracted by the heat of the fire from Vitriol, Alum, Salt, Nitre,
Ammoniac, and Arsenick is most pernicious, and next to this is red and yellow
precipitate, which some Empiricks give to swallow down half a scruple for those
that have the pox, but it exulcerates both their Gums and Jaws: but outwardly
it is good for rebellious Ulcers. Also Aquafortis that the Goldsmiths part
Gold from Silver with, is as bad. Though some of our Matrons are not afraid to
make their locks yellow with it; with great hurt to, and sometimes the loss of
their hair, for the roots of their hair thus dried wither, and they become bald
and ugly, without all hopes of their hair growing again: And if you put this
into a rotten tooth it will eat the gums.

Laevinus Lemnius, a Physician of Zirizee, OF THE Dignity and Excellency of
Nature.
The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
How children are forced to endure the reproaches and disgraces of their
Parents; and the faults and wicked actions of their Progenitors, are so far
imputed unto these, that by reason of them, they lose their reputation or
substance, and goods of fortune, or sustain some damages in their bodies or
minds.
THere is an excellent Sermon in Ezechiel, or rather a severe and reprehensive
expostulation of God with them who complained that they suffered for their
Parents faults, Chap. 13.
and that it was unjust that children should be censured by reason of their
Parents wickedness. What is it, says the Lord, that you turn this Parable
into a Proverb, saying every where: The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and
the Childrens Teeth are set on edge? As I live says the Lord, you shall no
more use this Proverb, for all souls are mine, as the soul of the Fathers, so
of the Children also; the soul that sins, that shall dye. Wherefore God taking
away this Proverb pronounced that every man should dye for his own sin; and
that the wickedness of the Progenitors, nor any of their disgraces should be
derived to their posterity, unless they go in the same way their Parents did,
or follow their vicious footsteps. For whoever, as he speaks at large in this
whole Chapter, despising and forsaking God, and imitating and following his
forefathers sins, uses the same ungodly practices his Ancestors did, and
contaminates and pollutes himself with rapins, usuries, calumnies, adulteries,
frauds, deceits, cavillings, idolatries, filthy lusts, and other ungodly ways,
and will not obey Gods precepts and Commandments, but rejects his wholesome
instructions, as he is in the same fault with his progenitors so shall he
partake of the same punishment; Children do not suffer for their Parents faults.
Wherefore God will not suffer it that the Parents sins shall be imputed to the
children, or that any children shall be punished for their progenitors
oftences; unless they do as bad as they did, but every one shall be guilty for
his own transgression, so that as St. Cyprian says, Since the brightness of
the Gospel has subdued the Law, God in his divine Justice does not judge the
Race but the person; What guilt came by original sin.
if any man object that original sin was brought upon all mankind by Adam,
whereby all men's minds are grown blind for want of divine light, and their will
is made contrary unto Gods will, that is easily answered.

For being that he was the common Parent of all mankind, and from him the
nature of man being traduced, was thereby vitiated this guilt and corruption
and depravation of nature was spread by propagation into all his posterity, as
it falls out with them that are born of sickly Parents from faulty humors and
corrupt seed, An example from a corrupt body.
an hereditary disease will stick to these children so long as they live.
Wherefore we are chiefly subject to that sin but not to sins of another kind,
whereof some are proper and peculiar to other humors, and these are called
actual sins, or are learned by custom or imitation by keeping company with
wicked men, and are not bred and born with us, and part of our nature; yet for
the most part these sins sprowt, and come forth of the former sin.

Sometimes the Parents and Children are of diverse tempers and conditions.
Wherefore sometime neither the faults, nor yet the virtues of the Parents are
translated to the children. For the Father may be an Idolater, a Spend-thrift,
Lustful, a bawd, a Gamester; yet the son may be a thriving man, and free from
all these vices. But as we received this spot from Adam, so we have the same
principles of our birth, with great pain and labor in travail, and the same
kind of end and death with great fear and trembling. Wherefore as we were begot
by him, so were we made of the same earth, and become guilty of the same crime.
And no man of so many thousands but had done the like, All men ^^e born, and
^ye after the same manner.
if the same occasion had been presented, and he had stood in Adams room, he
would have been baited and allured with the same baits and allurements and
promises, and any of us would have fallen into the same snare, and stuck in the
same mud, if the same fraud had been used unto us, to entrap our minds with.
But as, besides Kings and Princes, the Governors and chief officers of Towns
and Cities, A simile from such as are oppressed by usury.
which is now a common thing in the Low Countries, with a desire to help the
Commonwealth, do burden it with debt, and bind themselves and Citizens in
strong obligations, and for the money received bind themselves and the Cities
to yearly payments, and their heirs also, so that if they keep not the days of
payments or do not pay as they should, they may be arrested by strangers, and
imprisoned, that they cannot freely go forth, or remove but they must pay their
penalty, either by laying down money, or putting in good security: even so
almost are we bound to the Devil, and like bank-rupts for Adams transgression
are we entangled in most grievous damage, for by his fault we are fallen into
the same inexpiable error and wickedness, that no man could possibly get
forth of it, or untangle himself, unless our most merciful father having
conquered the tyranny of the Devil by his son Jesus Christ, had redeemed us
into liberty, blotting out the handwriting that was against us, Colos. 2. How
original sin is blotted out.
as St. Paul says, for he took that away, that the enemy pressed us with, and
fastened it unto his Cross, and he spoiled principalities and powers, making a
show of them, openly triumphing over them, that he had wholly divested and cast
down, and pardoning all our offenses, that there is no danger, that what any
man has formerly done amiss should be imputed unto him, so that he henceforth
by a firm faith rely on God, and truly repent himself of his former misdoings.
Gods Judgment in misfortunes that come to posterity.
But to proceed in what I began. It falls out sometimes that children are
plagued and suffer loss for their Parents faults, when they chance to possess
an inheritance purchased by fraud and wickedness, which oft-times are ruined
by a secret Judgment of God, When Children suffer for their Parents faults.
and come to nothing, either by fire, or water, or some other sad mischances;
So that God will not suffer their innocent children to grow rich by their
wicked rapins, and frauds of their parents, or long to enjoy those possessions
that were heaped of injuries and injustice.

Likewise some dye suddenly before their time, when the Parents for the
Childrens cause indulge unto themselves overmuch: and do nothing but gripe and
plot for wealth, possessions honors, dignities, and lofty titles: and they
make their way unto them by right and wrong, and without any firm trust in God,
do all they can to mount to high preferments; whereas God oft-times soon takes
their children from this life, Whence comes death before the time.
and will not let them live long, and the empty hopes of the Parents perish.
Which is confirmed by that saying of the Wise man: He pleased God and was
beloved of him, Wisdom 4.
so that living amongst sinners he was translated, yea speedily was he taken
away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguil
his soul, It is from God that Parents are deprived of children.
therefore hasted he to take him away from the midst of the wicked. And when
men see this, says he, they understand not the cause of it, nor can they tell
why they dye so soon, and come so suddenly to an end.

So sometimes it falls out by the providence of God, that the heir dies, and
all hopes of posterity and the very pillar of the family falls. Also Hoseas
professes that God takes away some men's children for their Parents
wickedness. Chap. 7.
For so God threatens wicked men there. Their glory shall fly away like a
Bird, from the birth and from the Womb and from the conception: that is, they
shall be barren and unfruitful, Barrenness and want of Children from God.
nor shall they beget or conceive any children, and if they get any I will slay
them, and take them away from the earth. There are in all ages innumerable
examples of this matter: For we see the chief Nobility and Lords in Court not
only to want and be deprived of their children, but to run in debt
exceedingly. But that David was deprived of the child he had by sheba the wife
of Uriah, there was great reason for it in the Judgments of God. 2 King. 12.
For a grievous revenge from God followed that Tragedy and wickedness
committed, Gods anger being kindled both against David and the child. For God
stroke the child with an incurable sickness, that it died on the seventh day,
as it uses to be in very acute diseases. For the provident justice of God
would have none remain that was so begotten: though David as the Scripture
relates, fell down upon the ground, and wept and prayed continually that God
would have mercy on the child. This History affords every man a wholesome
lesson, that so far as man's frailty will permit, he should keep himself from
all dishonesty, Adultery to be avoided.
and especially from embracing those that are lawfully married according to
Gods institution to other men.

We must not grieve too much for loss of children.
And again if God take away a man's children he ought not to vex, toil, and
perplex himself, and destroy or hurt himself with immoderate sorrow: For what a
madness is it to afflict a man's self for those things that cannot be restored,
or possibly live again? Wherefore David's courage deserves praise, and his great
moderation of his passions in so sad a condition. For as soon the child was
dead, whereas a little before he was in a very sad case, David was not
sorrowful for the child's death.
lying in dust and ashes, as the custom of that country is, and could possibly
lament no more than he did; he presently shook off all sorrow, and sat down to
eat in his Kingly majesty. But as for the other part of the Tragedy which had
as lamentable an end as the former: God offended with David's wickedness,
denounces terrible threats against him by Nathan the Prophet, Adultery not
unpunished. 2 Kings 12.
for that having ravished so chaste a Matron, and killed so faithful a Captain
Uriah, he had given occasion to the Enemies of God to blaspheme, and not only
to insult over Gods people, but to revile and speak hardly of God himself. But
to pass to the other part of the Argument: It falls out sometimes that
children for the Parents faults undergo some marks and notes of Infamy and
Ignominy, and some disgrace comes unto them thereby. For example, if the Mother
commit adultery, When children are forced to carry their Parents faults.
if she be a drunken sot, or noted for any notorious crime, part of this
disgrace is derived to her children. So if any one be born by incest, or
unlawful copulation, or by natural conjunction, but before marriage (whence by
custom such children are called natural) the people will commonly scoff at
such children, What children are natural.
and deride them, as the nature of mortal men is, to be rash, petulant,
reproachful, Man's reproachfulnesse.
and injurious: but this reproach proceeds commonly from men of depraved
manners and affections, since the children are in no fault. For the writers of
the Gospel were not ashamed in setting down our Saviors Genealogy, to reckon
up many that were not lawfully begotten in the state of Matrimony; Homil. 3. in
Math.
which Chrysostom thinks was done purposely, and so do many more, that no man
might grow proud by the dignity of his progenitors, nor be dejected if he were
born of mean Parents, or that were not famous for their virtues, so they
themselves endeavor and contend to do what is worthy to be commended: For
every man is ennobled by his own worth and not by that nobility he derived from
his Predecessors by his birth. Let no man be proud of the nobility of his
Parents.
And as an idle worthless man is not made glorious by his Parents virtues or
glorious country he was born in, so a noble minded man is not to be dishonored
for his Parents faults.

For race and birth are not our works,
Nor ours can be said. Metamor. L. 13.
--
To which purpose speaks the Satyrist. Juvenal Satyr. 8.


If thou be noble as Achilles stout, What is true nobility.

Born from Thersites base, I had rather,
Than thou should like Thersites prove a lowt,
And boast that Achilles was thy Father.
All which shows that true nobility and honor are not to be so much measured
by the stock and noble descent men come from, as by their own virtue, integrity
of life, and sincerity of manners. And, Lastly that men of good parts are not
to be despised, though they be of mean place or Parentage, if they aim and
endeavor themselves to perform noble actions. Which is showed in that whole
narration of Ezechiel where this matter is fully amplified, and the rash
Judgments of men and their inconsiderate and reproachful speeches against
God, are strongly convinced and reprehended.

CHAP. II.
Wherefore when men grow well after a disease, do their genitall parts swell,
and they naturally desire copulation: and of this matter here is a safe
admonition, and wholesome counselset down.
WHen people that were sick recover of their diseases, they do not presently
grow well and regain the strength they had; but they are restored by good diet
and wholesome nutriment; for though the disease be shaken off, and the
Feavourish heat extinguished, yet there remain in the body still some prints
and impressions, of the health dejected and cast down; so that by reason of
feebleness no part almost can well perform its office, when we should use
them; Venery ill for such as are newly recovered.
only the genital parts ordained for procreation of children recover first and
get strength to do their business, and are very prone thereunto and lusty, yet
it is very pernicious to use venerious actions in this case. But these are
certain and undoubted arguments that health is restored, and that no relics
of the disease stay in the body, when the genital parts swell, and stand stiff,
though all the other parts are weak and feeble, and can do nothing in conjugal
matters, nor can endure ^he labor of it. I think the reason is, because the
obstructions of the veins are taken away, and the passages are opened, and the
Liver and Reins, Why such as recover are prone to venery.
and other parts destinated to distribute the nutriment, do first enjoy the
benefit of the nourishment from meats, and therefore are restored before the
rest: whence it follows that they grow strong, and are abundantly filled with
natural and vital spirits, by the motion and agitation whereof the obscene and
secret parts swell, and are frothy and lustful; when the remotest parts, as
the feet, arms, shoulders, ankles, hips, thighs, neck, cheeks, are later watered
with alimental and vital juice. When therefore the secrets by the office of
the Liver, are filled and fatted with exquisite and wholesome nutriment, they
first of all recover and get strength, that upon the least lustful thought,
the Cods swell, and show what force they have. Signs of health in boys.
Also young Boys show some tokens of this, for though those parts be weak in
them, and want the faculty of generation, yet the spirits stretch them out and
cause erection, and they grow stiff by their lying on their backs, which is a
sign they are well and in good health. So though men newly recovered be weak
and feeble, and being wasted with the disease, Erection of the genitals sign of
health.
their body is lean and starved: yet that secret part which Tully calls
Mentula, first gives signs of health restored. For in regard of nearness, the
nutriments are first carried thither, and because that part^ is joined to the
principal parts, and produced from one stock of veins, nerves and arteries.
Venery hurtful for men that are sickly.
If then those that are freed of their disease, and upon growing to be well,
fall to venery before it is fit, and the strength of their bodies will allow,
the vital spirit and purer juice being exhausted, they are mortally afflicted,
and all grows worse and worse with them. For the more sincere and pure part of
the nutriment, and the dewy humor wherewith the dry and decayed parts are wet
and moistened, is drank up, and cast forth like to Cream, whence it falls out
that the forces that began a little to increase fall again, and are cast down.
But as for women the reason is otherwise, for they are not so much wearied by
copulation as men are, but rather they get strength by it, so that some who are
extreme letcherous, sometimes fain themselves sick for this very cause, that
they may allure their husbands to embrace them, and to lie with them.
Lascivious women.
Hence the Low Dutch have a Proverb, The Wife that is sick would always have
something. Whereby they mean that when their wives are sick, it is not always
for sweet wines and delicate meats, but for something else, that men can better
please them with, then by presenting them with the greatest presents you can
give them: Whence Solomon compares their yawning, and wide open doors, to the
Jaws of hell and the grave, that are never satisfied. Proverb. 30.
Wherefore if they that are married will take good counsel, when they recover
of a disease and begin to be well, let them not presently fall to lying with
their wives, to be milked by them, but let them moderate their affecti^^s, and
put reigns on their pleasures that are exorbitant, for they have then nothing
to spare; as young tender trees, that must not be lopt nor have their branches
cut off from them. An example from young Trees.
For if the disease thus chance to revive, and a man fall into a relapse: they
either dye suddenly, or very hardly recover.

And if lusty and stout men when they first marry can hardly hold out, when
they too frequently use venerious actions, and, to speak in Tullyes language,
enter their wives too often, how much more must weak and sickly men be dejected
and cast down? Immoderate venery spoils beauty.
And such as are uxorious will make this appear, by their Weesil-colour, for
being too much given to venery they look yellow, burnt, or like Box, or
bloudlesse, Lead-colour'd, their limbs and joints are feeble and weak, whereas
others that use this action moderately, all fuliginous vapors are discussed by
it, and they appear fresh in their countenances, and lively, and their faces so
comely red as if they were painted.

There is indeed in every part an imbred force and virtue, as sight to the
eyes, Eath part has its imbred faculty.
hearing to the ears, smelling to the Nose, to the Tongue taste and savor,
which is of all the senses the most voluptuous: the bladder and its muscles
serve to make water, and the Intestins to void other excrements: the genitals
to procreate children, and for copulation; so other parts have other offices
they are designed for, and in all of these there must be temperance, and
moderation used.

For the eyes with continual poring are toyled and grow dim. The Ears with too
great noise grow deaf, What is to much is always naught.
as we see that Smiths are thick of hearing. The Taste is abolished with
immoderate eating or drinking, Why Smiths are half deaf.
and all things become unsavory and unpleasant, so that the stomach loathes and
refuses the meat. The Nostrils that have a smelling faculty, when they are
full of snot, cannot swell the most fragrant sents. All parts have their
distinct offices.
Also the generative parts, that all the parts do service to, and if by chance
they fail or be exhausted, other parts will assist them in their courses (for
from the whole body, humors and spirits flow thither, and are derived unto
them,) and if they be tired with immoderate and profuse lust, not so much they,
as the whole body decays and suffers.

Wherefore in preserving the forces of nature, and corroborating the state of
the body, all things must be used temperately and with moderation, that every
man may seasonably and maturely grow old without trouble; for lustful youth
will when old age comes, leave a froward and peevish mind, and a decayed and
feeble body.

CHAP. III.
Of the effect of the Air, and gentle blasts, and of the names of the winds,
with their forces and natures to cause diseases, and to stir the humors, which
being agitated sometimes move the mind and molest it.
THere are two external accidental things, that are no less hurtful than they
are healthful to our bodies. Which do support our health, and sometimes make
us sick: The Air and winds sometimes make us well, and sometimes sick.
namely nourishments, and the Air that surrounds us, by the agitation and
motion whereof, there arises wind and blasts, to which our bodies are exposed
every moment, and thereby suffer manifest changes. But winds and windy vapors
breed in our bodies, Whence come winds in the body.
partly by reason of the external beating of the Air, and partly from meats
and drinks that being taken in, cause winds, and stretch the belly: as are
Beans, Peason, raw herbs, Rapes, Radishes, fruits of Trees, sweet wine, new
beer and Ale; and Winds rising from these trouble the stomach, and are
offensive to the Intestines, and the hypochondres and Middriff. These, To drink
greedily fills the body with winds.
as also those blasts that use to enter when we feed greedily, or drink in
haste abundantly either come forth by belching or by breaking wind backwards.
But if they stay over long in the body, or fasten upon any part, they cause
pains, and must be excluded by applying hot remedies outwardly, and inwardly by
such things as dispell winds: as Cummin, What things expel winds.
Bay Berries, Anniseed, Fennel-seed, Carway-seed; strong Wines, as Malmsey and
Candey Wine.

For these will force and make the winds to rore, Aeneid.

And to fly out where they can find a door.
But since outward winds are commonly offensive to us, and by their penetrating
force do us much hurt, I shall chiefly speak of them here. For they sometimes
get secretly into our bodies, and sometimes openly, and by violence they rush
in, and do great hurt to men, herds of cattle, Corn, herbs, Trees. The
original of winds.
The wind proceeds from the Air and small blasts moved and tossed, whence it
is, that sometimes it is gentle, easy and pleasant; sometimes strong, violent
and vehement, as the Air is calm or moved. What the wind is.
Wherefore the wind is nothing else, then an effusion and flowing form of the
forces of the Air troubled, which receives strength and nutriment from the
exhalations and vapors of the earth: Or as Vitruvius says, The wind is the
flowing sourge of the Air, moved by uncertain and unstable motion. John 3. A
place of the Gospel explained.
Which when our Savior speaks of, he says, The wind blows where it lists,
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes nor
whither it goes. For taking a similitude from the outward blasts, he instructs
Nicodemus by what force and what secret operation the spirit of God affects the
minds of men. For as the aereal blast is not quiet nor obedient to any man's
command, but is restless and unquiet, and is carried by its own violence, and
driven here and there: so that being diffused all over, it shows it self by the
effect and noise of it, and not by sight; sometimes wholesome for the earth,
Gods spirit compared with the winds.
and sometimes hurtful: so the Spirit of God by a secret and unspeakable blast
beats upon the minds of men, drives, forces, inflames, stirs up, transforms,
and makes spiritual of carnal men. But as the mind of man subsists and is
supported by the spirit of God; so this animal living body of ours is no less
refreshed with the whole some outward Air, than with meat and drink. For the
use of Air and breath that we draw into our bodies is as needful for us as
our nourishments, for without them man's nature can subsist a while, Hunger when
hurtful.
for some have pined away seven or nine days for hunger, but without the
outward Air, and gentle blasts, no man can subsist one moment but he would be
strangled. Now the purer and the less contagious the Air is, Ill Air worse
than ill dies.
the more wholesome it is for the body. For if the Air be pestilent and
contagious, it is more hurtful than venomous and faulty meats, for such meats
may be vomited up again or digested by the heat of the stomach: but pestilent
and contagious Air, cannot be easily conquered or altered, when it is once
taken into the body; for it presently infects the heart and vital spirits:
Wherefore this common Air that serves us to live in, and by help whereof we
draw out and put in our breath, must be carefully regarded. And no less
respect must be had in preservation of our health, unto the winds that proceed
and are diffused from the Air, and that not only in regard to an open and
free Air, that we are exposed unto, but also in building of our Houses,
Observation in making our doors.
Galleries, Porches, Windows, Doors, and all prospects, by which the Winds
without may enter into our Chambers and Dining-rooms, that we may be refreshed
with wholesome blasts, and great and unwholesome winds may not offend us.
Hippocrates counsel in the Plague.
Which Hippocrates carefully observed in the Plaguetime that wasted almost all
Asia and Greece, and thereby he freed many thousands of them from it. Also
Marcus Varro when he was at Corcyra, Varro's Counsel in the Plague-time.
and the sick people generally lay to sleep in all sorts of houses, he caused
them to stop up their Windows that looked toward the South, and to make new
ones looking to the North and to change their doors, and by that means he
secured his company and family. So in the Low Countries near the Sea, because
many Cities, and Towns are exposed to the South and South-west, Men are sick
the greatest part of the year, and subject to flegmatique defluxions. To this
belongs that of Victruvius. In the Island of Lesbos there is a Town called
Mytilene, L. 1. chap. 5.
built most sumptuously and bravely, but not prudently situated, in which City
when the South wind blows, the men fall sick; for that wind causes corruption
when the North-west that is neighbor to the South-west blows from the Western
solstice, men are subject to Coughs, but when the North Wind blows they are
well again. Whereby it appears plainly that the unstable moving of the winds
bring sicknesses to men's bodies, and makes them have their health worse: which
if we could avoid and shut out, every man would less fall into diseases; or if
by any cause a man do fall sick, if you bar out ill winds he will recover the
sooner. Cardinal Winds are sour.
The Ancients because there are four quarters of the world divided the winds
into as many, and Ovid elegantly described them. Metam, L. 1.


The East wind went where first the morning Sun
Does shine, the West where the Sun sets, the North
Invaded Scythia, when they begun,
The Cloudy South from Southern parts came forth.
Others that thought to do it more exactly number twelve winds. But in our
days the Art of Navigation, by reason of the vast and spacious circumference
of the Ocean, and the long voiages in the Mediterranean Sea, has found out
thirty two winds, The Mariners Compass shows 32. winds.
and the Pilot and Steerman do continually behold them in Mariners Compass,
and in the darkest and most tempestuous night they steer their course by it,
and come to their desired Haven. And this compass is no new invention, for
Plautus makes mention of it.

But do you think that it is lost? Trinum. act. 4. scen. 3.

Take the compass --
But Politic men that are not used to the Sea, do not so much regard the
number of the winds as the nature of them. Of the Air and places.
For every man that would take care of his health, by Hippocrates rule must
observe the four quarters of the year; and also cold and hot winds that we are
exposed to. The Air and winds change our bodies.
For the concourse of winds and Air have great force to preserve health, and
drive away diseases. For not so much the bodies as the minds of men are changed
by reason of the Air and winds. The mind troubled by distemper of the Air.
So that men in health are otherwise affected when the Air is tempestuous and
troubled, and otherwise when the weather is calm and the sky clear, otherwise
when the West-wind blows, otherwise when the South or South-west, that not
only men's bodies are more active, but their minds are more ready and more
tractable, all fullennesse and frowardness being cast off, when the Air is
pleasant, and the calm gentle winds blow as in the Spring of the year. But that
all things may be done by rule, I shall set down the conditions, effects,
forces, and Names of all the winds that are known both to learned and ignorant
men. Whereby every man may decline what seems to be hurtful, and may safely
expose himself to such winds that seem to be healthful and harmless. The
East Wind, the High Dutch call it Oost, The effect of the East wind that comes
from the East.
the Italians Levante, is most commonly wholesome, and drives away sorrow of
mind, but it is cold in the morning before the Sun rise, at noon when the Sun
is Southward it is moderately warm, we call it Lukewarm, when our bodies are
not troubled with overgreat heat, but saint with a mean heat, that makes them
to nauseat, L. 1.
Cor. Celsus, and Ovid call it neither hot nor cold,

The cold North, the Lukewarm South. But at Midsummer, when the Sun is hot, the
Eastern wind causes heat, and kindles yellow choler, and from the
inflammation thereof burning Fevers spring up: But in the winter it is
somewhat milder, and not so sharp and cold as the North Wind. The East Wind
called Eurus is kind to the true East Wind, The place of the East wind and
effects.
and declines a little on the left hand toward the South, it is called Eurus
from Aura, because when the Sun first rises, it causes gentle blasts, they
commonly call it East South-East; East South-East causes the Plague sometimes.
for it is in that point of the world, next to the East. In Summer it is very
hot, and causes burning Fevers: And I have often observed it in the
Low Countries, that when any popular disease spreads, as it does when that wind
blows, it causes Carbuncles and contagious swellings to rise in the groin, and
under the Armpits, and the Measils and small Pox that boil forth to the
outmost skin. For this wind partaking of a warm beat, namely some moisture
being mingled with it, it affords some cause of corruption, and inflammation to
the blood. But in Winter it causes extreme cold weather, East South-East is
most cold in Winter.
that is commonly attended with snow, and bitter frosts, so that such as go
forth when this wind blows, can hardly defend their noses, faces, eyes, cheeks,
from the piercing and deadly cold of it: and the same force is ascribed by some
to North-East wind, The nature of the North-East wind.
that is a very fierce blast, and differs something from the East South-East.
The South-East wind is next the South, which in Summer for the most part is
calm, though sometime it not only troubles the Air with clouds, but the minds
of men also. For this wind being turbulent makes the mind melancholy; but it
lasts not long, for it is no sharp bitter wind to stir the humors as some
winds are. But as the waves of the sea by the violence of the winds, A simile
from the waves of the Sea tossed with the winds.
swell and are lifted up, so in man's body the humors are moved and rage, by
the same force, the vapors and sumes whereof carried upwards, trouble the mind
and make it peevish, froward, angry, hard, and untractable, The winds distemper
man's mind also.
that whilst that distemper of the affections last, you shall hardly obtain any
petition from those men, especially from women, or covetous old men: who as
they are jealous, and suspicious, they think that men craftily come to delude
them, Opportunity to be taken.
and therefore they will repel them with great incivility and give them ill
language, unless they come very seasonably and in good time that is the
chiefest of all things. For those, that take opportunity by the forelock,

Do prove their passage, Virgil Aeneid. L. 4.
and consider when
It Is time to speak, and hold their peace again.
Since therefore there are many things that are apt to change man's condition,
especially the concourse of the winds and unstable motions of the Air can do
it, by whose violence not only our bodies but our animal spirits suffer wrong,
and the mind it self is somewhat distempered that as the Air and winds vary,
so is it calm or troubled; though the diet and Intemperance in meats and drinks
is of great concernment, to constitute the habit of the body, and to foster our
affections. The South Wind is unstable.
The South wind amongst them all is most hurtful and offensive to man's health,
being by nature and operation hot and moist. For when that wind blows, the rain
wets the earth abundantly, What diseases the South wind causes.
whence it is that our bodies and humors are soon corrupted, and Catarrhs and
defluxions fall upon our throats, vocal artery, and Lungs. Whence arise Poses,
hoarsnesse, Coughs, Epilepsies, Vertigoes, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Blear-eyes,
deafness, noise in the Ears, and many more diseases, that scatter every where
when the South Wind blows. I have observed often that when the South Wind blew
long, The South wind causes abortion.
great bellied women did miscarry, and by an immoderate flux arising, to have
been in danger of their lives. For when the parts of the body that serve to
carry the burden, begin to flag, namely the ligaments Nerves, Muscles,
Membranes, Flaps, Cauls, and the Matrix from too great moisture, begins to grow
slippery and to be dilated by degrees; it cannot be that nature should carry
the burden to the full time, especially when after a dry time moist weather
falls in, which as it is not hurtful for dry and choleric people, The South
wind not ill for choleric people.
so is it extreme ill for women and children and flegmatique constitutions, and
such as dwell in boggy and fenny lands. The South wind naught for flegmatique
people.
Hence Infants and children are troubled with an implacable cough, the Lowdutch
call it Kindthoest that comes forth with a kind of Hiccop, and will give them
no time so much as to take their breath. For when they cough continually and
painfully, and never stop at all: A cough ill from liquid humor.
yet all their straining is in vain, nor do they prevail a whit, so that their
breath is stopped, and they are ready to be strangled, and all their Pipes of
breathing being shut, A cough that strangleth children.
their breath that goes and comes will come forth behind and break out, not
without great danger of their lives, if you do not hold their buttocks close
pressed together with both your knees; that so the breath that strives to come
out behind the wrong way, may be forced to return back, and come forth at the
wind pipes as it should. This kind of cough comes by a thin fluxible humor
that does not clot, and grow together but falls into the receptacles of the
Lungs; so that the faculty and power of nature cannot cast up so moist an
excrement that is not compacted together. A simile from a moist running matter.
For as a drop of water or any other liquor powered on a table does not cleave
together, but runs all abroad, so that you cannot take it up with the tops of
your fingers; so the humors falling from the head upon the throat, the vocal
artery and Lungs, and fibers, cannot be taken away, though nature by a
continual cough strives to drive it forth, yet all in vain, and yet it is so
thin that it cannot be touched but it will slip away; also gross phlegm that
sticks to the Lungs like Birdlime, troubles men as much as thin matter does,
but it does not endanger to strangle us. Wherefore it is the South winds that
are the cause of these diseases, and inconveniences in our health, and are the
seminary of many more infirmities. For the humors being melted and flowing up
and down, The South wind causes the joynt-Gout to move.
the Gout and joint aches are stirred up, whereby all the parts of our bodies
being afflicted, they become unapt to perform their duties. But as for the
internal forces and offices of the mind, the mind when the South wind blows,
The South wind hurts the mind.
is feeble, stupid, dull, dejected, and cast down, and sleepy, that she goes
drowsily about all her business. And this force puts forth it self in
inanimate and dead things. For we see that when the South wind blows, all
things in the house are moist and flagging, Linen Clothes, Sheets, cover-lids,
blankets, Paper, skins, pictures Geographical, The South wind overclouds all,
and the North clears all up.
and the rest of the household stuff. Also Lakes and Moorish places, Rivers,
Ponds, Seas, are muddy and troubled, and dark: But when the Northwinds blow,
all things are clear, lightsome, pure, and cleansed, that you may see the
bottom and all things that are on the ground under water. The like happens in
our blood and humors, the dregs whereof swim up when the South wind blows, and
darken the mind: but when the East wind or West blow they hide themselves
again, and sink down, and so it is when other pleasing winds do blow, hence it
is that men's minds are very cheerful, Clear Air rejoices the mind.
and ready, when the Sun shines fair: but there is a great contraction,
sadness, and dejection of the mind, when the Air is clowdy and the winds
boisterous. For the same reason, when it begins to be rainy weather, and when
the South, or South-west wind blows, Sinks, Lakes, Ponds, When the South wind
blows the Lakes stink.
Jakes, Privies, Common-shores, and other places appointed to cleanse away
filth, do send forth stinking vapors, and make our meats naught, that they
will not keep so long.

Collateral and middle winds, which decline somewhat from the South, and bend
somewhat toward the West in winter, have the same force that the South and
South-West winds have, South South-West winds nature.
to which is referred South South-West. For from that part of heaven there
rusheth forth a turbulent clowdy wind, not less hurtful to the body than to
the mind. For violent blasts have such force, that they move the humors within
the body, like to the Pump in ships: and the mind being stirred with the
vapors and fumes thereof, is distempered, falls into passions, grows angry,
tumultuous, unquiet, and rages, and overflows like to the Ocean; and evil
spirits and Devils do sometimes join with the tempests, and administer fuel,
Evil spirits are ready to do mischief. Weak minds soon offended by the Air.
secretly thrusting themselves into the mind of man, and do vex and tear and
torment it. It is common in the Low Countries for many whose minds are
troubled, and their senses diminished, or their animal spirits tainted with any
vicious quality, three days before any tempests or winds appear, to grow
tumultuous, and to run up and down all villages, public places, common
streets, and corners, and by-ways, sometimes very silent, and sometimes with
great noise and howlings, that the common people will say, there is a tempest
in the Air not far off, and as it usually falls out, some great commotions and
tossings of the Air, and Tempests are hard by. But again, when the Air is
calm and clear, and free from violent winds; these people will be courteous to
all, pleasing, gentle, astable, merry, jesting; yet so as they will not leave
off to express some ridiculous customs, whereby you may easily guess what
habit of body they are of, and what is the constitution of their minds.

The nature of the South-West wind.
But for winds that belong to the South-point, and blow from the West in winter,
no wind is more vehement that the South-West wind, or more causing rain; for in
summer it produces Thunder and Lightning, and raises cruel tempests, that it
will throw down Towrs, beat down corn, and drive ships upon rocks and fords,
that they suffer Shipwreck, but in Summer it lasts not so long as it does in
Winter: for as it rises suddenly and is furious, so it presently ends and
grows quiet, but the force of this wind is augmented by that Wind Horace calls
Iapiga, West South-West wind.
West South-West, and it makes all more sharp and bitter: and this holds its
station constantly for a great part of the year; and driving out other winds,
when Winter comes on, it blows constantly, to the great discommodity of
Seamen. But in the midst of Summer, it is more, and not so boisterous. But the
wind that proceeds from the equinoctial setting, namely the West wind, West
winds nature.
which the Italians call Ponente, when the spring comes on, and the first
Swallow appears, is very gentle and calm, pleasant, and delightsome, that
fosters and recreates all things: for being made warm by the Suns moderate
heat, it draws forth plants and flowers, and makes all things revive, and
renews them, so that it brings forth blood and humors, that lay close in the
winter; and discussing sorrow, and all clouds of the mind, it cheers it with
joy and alacrity. But when Autumn ends, and the course of the year inclines to
Winter, Western winds do rage fiercely and shake the Earch and the Sea with
great tempests; and they are no less hurtful and pernicious in causing cold
flegmatique diseases, than the Southern winds are. North-West winds and others
near to it, what is their nature.
But winds near the West and North are reckned to be three, West North-West,
North-West that blows from the Western solstice, North North-West; and all
these are violent winds, that fiercely shake the Sea-waves, and breaking down
rocks and shores, drive the Seas far into the Land. Two parts of the year
especially do these winds domineer, at the end of Autumn, and the beginning of
the Spring, chiefly in March, in which times they cast down, Hail, Clouds,
Storms, Thunder, and Lightnings from above, so that at one moment of time, or
very little difference between, those three winds will join together in one,
and rushing forth will do great mischiefs to man and beast and corn. There come
forth of these and many more, sudden hasty winds, that in so great distemper of
the Air, cast forth site-balls, and burning Torches, a^ Prester Ecnephias;
Acts 27.
and that whirlwind that was so dangerous to Saint Paul the Apostle. In former
Ages, these were taken notice of by others, but chiefly by Virgil, who set them
down in verse; all which at several times of the year, happen to us with great
mischief, and detriment to Corn.

What should I speak of Autumns storms and lights; Georg. L. 2.

And when the days grow short, and heat abates,
Or men should mark when rainy spring delights,
In harvest I have seen the deadly hates
Of Winds that fought, and made stormy weather,
Whilst the Reaper bound his sheaves together,
Rending the Corn byth' roots out of the ground:
Wh^rlwinds and rain men's works and Corn confound.
Also they cause many diseases to men's bodies, and shake them no less than
they do stubble. For in Spring and Autumn, especially in the Month of March,
they heap upon the joints, nerves, muscles, membranes, tendons, prickings,
colds, contractions, palpitations, ulcerated weariness, so that they who are
so affected, do show signs of some tempests at hand, and can undoubtedly
foresay and certify what weather we shall have: we call them weatherwise, that
is, Weak people obnoxious to the injuries of the Air.
such as can know beforehand what weather we shall have, and such people are
commonly those that are sickly and troubled with the Pox or some such diseases.
And as these winds cause diseases and Fevers, and many inconveniences to man's
health, so also they are hurtful to fruitful land and tilled grounds,
hindering the seed time, and a plentiful crop. For the Earth when it is blowed
upon by chill winds, A chill Air ill enough.
will no less bring forth unwholesome herbs, then it does when it is over-wet
with cold unpleasing rain, also it sends up Darnel, Cockle, wild-Tares, Briers,
Bushes, Thorns, Docks, all which choke the seed and Plants, if they be not
carefully pulled up by the roots. Next to these is the North wind, Italians
call it Tramontano, bending a little toward the East, North North-East, and
North-East holds the middle place between the Summer or Solstitial Sunrising.
But East North-East is environed by the North-East. The nature of the Northern
Wind.
The North wind is by nature and effect cold and dry, commonly clear, yet
sometimes rainy, but it abates the violence of North-West, and of vehement
Southern winds. For when they have raged as much as they can, and are almost
weary, they commonly conclude in a North Wind, so that presently the Air grows
calm, and the tempest ends; wherefore the Inhabitants desire only that those
winds might be changed into this, for if they turn toward the South, the
Tempest grows more raging, and collects new forces: whence it is that many
great Ships and vessels are endangered, The North and South winds cause
Catarrhs by a diverse reason.
and almost in the very havens entrance, and fall upon shelves and Quicksands
and fords, where they are broken in pieces, to the Merchants incredible damage
and loss of his Merchandise. Wherefore the North wind is not only more
healthful, than the North-West, or South-West; but also more calm, and more
mild in raising of tempests: though in winter sometimes it be fierce, and blow
violently, whence it causes Catarrhs, Pleuresies, The North and South winds
cause Catarrhs by a diverse reason.
Quinses, but by a different reason from the South wind. For when the
South Wind blows, the humors are melted, and dissolve of themselves, and so
run from the head to the parts that are under it. But when the North wind
blows, because the Muscles are thereby bound, and so are the Membranes, phlegm
is pressed forth, as when we crush a sponge of water between our fingers; A
simile from pressing of a Sponge.
clinching our hand together to wring it our. But what time soever of the year
these winds blow, they make the body cold, they stop the pores, they dissipate
contagions of the Air, and keeping in natural heat they help concoction. The
Southern winds by dissolving the frame of the body, and affecting the limbs
with faintness and idleness, make men sleepy, dull, slothful, nauseating,
and unfit to perform any duties or function. But the North winds, as
Hippocrates says, L. 3. Aph.
make men active, lightsome, merry, lively, stirring, and fit for all
employments, especially such as are of a more moist temper, for they better
fulfill the gifts and functions of Nature, and all things proceed more
healthfully with them, as a moist state and condition of the Air is most
wholesome for dry withered bodies. South and North winds the chief in moving
the Air.
For so they are the less chilled with cold, or burnt with heat. Since
therefore these two winds, North and South, and those that border upon them, do
constitute almost in all Europe the yearly changes, I think that these two
should be chiefly regarded. For no wind through the whole course of the year
blows more constantly: For one of them having done blowing the other begins,
and keeps its station; yet the other winds I spoke of before keep their turns,
but they sooner leave off, and give out. Wherefore we must have respect to
these two winds, not only for preservation of our health, and driving away
inconveniences, but when we undertake a voyage by Sea or land exposed to the
open Air. For I have found this by long experience, that the North Wind rising
in the night will not last long and stand, nor keep that point for three days
together, which Aristotle confirms, and Homer shows, whilst he taxed the
errors of Ulisses.

The North Wind for three nights does never blow. When the North wind lasts not
very long.
The reason is, because it has but a few exhalations, and little plenty of
matter for to subsist by, and to blow longer. For the motion and agitation of
the Air that makes the wind, and receives from it force and augmentation, is
feeble, weak, thin, small, that it wants forces, by help whereof it might
proceed and endure. For as in diseases, and Fevers, A simile from the fit of
an Ague.
the abundance of humors makes the disease longer, and the fit more violent,
and lasting; so a violent agitation of the Air, and a frequent and thick
concourse of exhalations and vapors that come forth of the earth, exasperate
the winds, and make them both violent and long lasting. A simile from the fires
fuel.
And as the fire is presently put out where there wants dry i^^l, and wood to
feed it. So the North wind, rising in a dark tempestuous night, or about the
twilight of the evening, vanish^th presently and leaves its station: and thence
it is that experienced Mariners will not easily trust the North wind at the
first rising, and will attempt nothing till three days be over; Pilots and
Ship-Masters are most observant of the winds.
and yet they will trust the South wind the first day it rises, that it will
continue and blow a long time: and this the Italian Pilots, and Masters of
ships, make a Proverb of, The first South wind, the third days North wind.

Andreas ab Aurea an expert Pilot.
Andreas ab Aurea being addicted to that opinion, who was Admiral of the
Caesarian Fleet, amongst the Genuenses, gave this counsel to Charles the fist,
who was Emperor, to take notice of that. For when he intended an expedition
into Africa, and the Emperor thought at the first appearance of the North wind
to go against the Morts, Andreas ab Aurea his counsel to Charles the Emperor.
Andreas admonished them, that the Galleys must not stir, nor the Fleet
adventure to Sea, unless the North wind had continued blowing three days, but
if the South wind blew, to Launch forth presently, at the first sight, without
any delay, if all things were ready, and the Navy fitted to set to sail; for
there was no fear that the South wind would presently give over, and not last
long; being commonly supported by thick clouds and vapors, and compassed with
gross darkness, that give hopes that it will be constant and continue a long
time.

The North-East wind and its nature.
The North-East is next the East, at very little distance, on the right hand; it
is not so violent as the North wind, or so loud, nor is the cold so piercing
and extreme, because it is nearer the Sun, but it heaps and wraps up the
Clouds, How the North-East draws clouds.
and draws them to it, because they being driven by meeting with some mountains
or clouds they fly back again; which I have often observed in Rivers and floods,
and flowing of the Ocean it self; wherein the flood runs not in a constant
channel, but on both sides of the shores and banks it turns back and is
retorted, the course of it being diverted and turned on the right and left hand
the contrary way, nor can I see any other reason for it. From the nature of
this wind, the Proverb is raised concerning wicked people; A Proverb against
wicked people.
Wicked things attract unto them as the North-East wind draws clouds. As now
night-oppressours do in all quarters, who meet in tempestuous nights, and break
open houses, and kill or torture the Master and compel the servants to show
where the treasure lies, which they trusse up and carry away. They are
commonly now called Knevelaers Robbers, from the violence they do, and from
wresting the limbs of men's bodies. But to draw some wholesome instruction from
natural things. I would have all men know that all these effects of the Air
and nature, depend on the free will of God the Supreme work-Master, and are all
at his command, and done by his power. For Fire, Hail, Snow, Frost, Ice,
Whirl-winds, and Tempests obey his word. Psalm. 148.
For he sends Snow like Wool, and scatters his Frost like Ashes. Who casts
out his Ice like Morsels, and makes all things to be overlaid with Ice, as with
a plain: who is able to abide his frost? He sends out his word and melts
them, and presently the waters flow. He takes away the East wind, and by his
word does the South-West wind blow. Psalm. 77. Psalm. 68. H^ggae. 1. and 2.
He rules by his power over the Sea, and withholds the violence of its waves,
he brings forth the scorching wind, and dries up the buds of the Earth: God
indeed suffers this world and the nature of all things to be carried along by
the order and manner of it, as he first appointed it. The Elements, Stars,
Seas, forces of winds, God uses the Elements to Punisis us.
and times of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter are disti^guished, yet so as
he holds the reins in his hands to rule them all by. For when he thinks it fit
and good, he exasperates some of them for to punish man's wickedness, and makes
them more fierce, and by them he brings many losses and miseries upon man,
that so he may rowse our minds and awake us that are fast asleep in pleasures
and delights; and thus he threatens to all those that forsake his worship. But
if you will not obey all my Commandments, Levit. 26.
I will appoint over you terror and consumptions, and the burning Ague, and
cause sorrow of heart and mind. I will make the Heaven above you to be Iron,
and the Earth Brass, that after all your labors taken in vain, the Earth may
bring forth no Corn, nor the Trees any fruit. So elsewhere he expostulates with
his people. I have raised over you a scorching wind; I have smit^en you with
blasting and Mildew, when your Gardens, Amos 4.
and your Vine-yards and your Figtrees, and your Olive Trees increased, the
Palmer-Worm devoured them, and yet you have not returned unto me, says the
Lord. Whence it came to pass, as another Prophet testifies, Hag. 1. and 2.
that the earth withholds dew, rain and showers, and all plants are spoiled
with hail, blasting, and mildews, which are a lesson to teach every man that,
Tempests, Clouds, Hail, Thunder, Lightnings, Whirl-winds, do proceed from
natural causes, but they grow more cruel, and vex men the more, when God will
punish men to make them to amend their lives. Who, when man repents is more
pleasing and his anger abates, whereby he takes off the rod, and punishments
and calamities, and miseries from us, and makes all things to proceed more
happily with us, promising a fruitful increase of Corn, and that the fields
shall bring forth abundantly, that the rain shall fall down in its season,
Deuter. 28.
and an increase of all things shall follow, Harvest, threshing flower,
Vintage, flocks and herds of cattle should answer our desires, we should enjoy
health of body, and be strong and lusty, all our substance and good should
continue sound and firm, and our minds should be void of all fear, peaceable,
quiet, and at ease and rest, and having a fast confidence in God, Plasm 90.
whence we have our courage, we shall not easily be shaken, or be afraid with
any fear or terror.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Mariners Compass, which Plautus calls Versoria, by observation
whereof Mariners sail to Sea; and by what virtue, and for what reason, it
always points to the North.
SInce I spoke of the winds before, and that somewhat largely; It is requisite
I should say something of the Mariners Compass; because Mariners, by the use
and benefit of this, make their voyages to Sea; and do thereby pass over the
long and vast distances of the Ocean, and come to places that are situate very
far off; and they can exactly tell hereby how much of their voyage is over, The
Needle shows the North point by virtue of the Loadstone.
and how much more they have to sail, and they bring all things to the compass
as to a certain rule: And the needle obtains this virtue, by being rubbed with
the Lodestone, which has a singular virtue in drawing Iron, unless it be
greased with Oil, or some fat matter, Oil takes from the Loadstone its
attracting force.
for then it will not attract. Our men call this the Zeylsteen, because they
sail by it, and Mariners direct their course as this guids them. Under this
Box there is a little turning compass, made of Paper, plain, as round as a pair
of Compasses can make it, that is supported with a thin Iron divided into two
parts. Description of the Compass and its parts.
In the Center ormiddle of this, there is a little brass sharp pointed Box like
a Tower fastened (for Iron in that place would hinder the operation of it) which
lies upon a very sharp pin or point, and upon that it plays here and there
equally balanced, and when it stands still, that part that has the
Flowre-de-Luce painted upon it, and where the needle touched with the Loadstone
ends, turns constantly to the North, and regards the North Pole, whithersoever
the Ship turns about by the turning of the Rudder; in the Circle of this rundle
there are drawn from the Center to the circumference thirty two lines, that
represent the winds and the points in the heavens, and show the spaces of Sea
and Land distinctly by their Ports, Mariners use hour-Glasses.
and by the running forth of so many glasses with Sand now, but formerly made
with water, the Mariners can tell exactly how many leagues they have sailed,
and how many more they have to Sail, and how great is the distance from the
place they set forth. How the Loadstone attracts Iron.
But by what virtue the Loadstone in the Compass does perform this, always
turning to the North, and looking to that coast, it is not easy to assign a
reason: yet the search of this thing has sadly disquieted the brains of many
men. Some refer this to sympathy and mutual agreement, whereby the one is by
similitude wonderfully affected with the other, and thence comes the
attraction; as if the Loadstone did scent the Iron in the Northern Mountains,
out of which the Loadstone was dug; even as vultures do by quickness of smell,
A simile from the sagacity of Vultures.
by nature discern dead carcases at huge distances, and that two days, as many
think, before any battle is fought or men slain. It is evident that many things
are done by secret and hidden properties, that it will be hard for us to give
reasons for; we see the effects of things, but we know not the causes, So
R^eubarb and Scammony purge out yellow choler: Epithyme, Polypod, Senna, the
Melancholique humor; Agarick, Phlegm; Amber, Jet, the Diamond, draw chaff and
straws; Quicksilver loves Gold, and will delight to join with it. Whence herbs
have their purgative virtue.
Which virtues we see also in herbs, for some desire to grow together and
embrace one another, some again disagree and cannot endure to be near. By the
same affection and inclination does the Loadstone do these things in the
Mariners Compass, and Solar minutes, A Sun-dial because it shows the Sun.
by which, when we enter upon our volage, we try these hours by the Sun, where
the utmost end of the needle is polished, and not rusty, being rubbed with this
stone, and it ever turns to the North, and shows the pole. Seamen call this,
Leyt, which is a word borrowed from conducting, for Leydtsman is a conductor, A
Mariner.
or companion in the journey, by whose help we steer our course; The little
Bear called commonly by Mariners Leye.
The little Bear, as the Ancients called it, is by long use and experience
observed by those that go to Sea, because it is fixed and unmovable; but the
great Bear is called Helice, which Cicero speaks of in his Academicks, almost
in these words. L. 4.
"I do not direct my thoughts to that little Bear, but the great Bear, called
Helice, or Charls-Wain, those famous seven North Stars, that is; These reasons
are larger and not so narrow, and therefore I must wander and exspatiate a
great deal farther: whereby he intimates that he cannot be bounded in so small
a compass, but must have leave to proceed and go farther out; yet the more
certain course, and not so wandering, is, that is performed by looking upon the
little Bear. As Aratus declared. In Phaenom.


Here shines Joves nurses, Great and Little Bear,
By the great Stars the Grecians ruled are.
But the Phoenicians do the least respect,
And Seamen on those Stars do most reflect:
Their course is short, and certain, and perfect.
Cicero his simile from the Pole.
This figure Cicero borrowed in speaking, from Mariners, whereof some that are
exact in their observations, have respect to the little Bear, but others that
are not so curious, nor in any danger, look on the great Bear. A place of
Cicero in his Academicks explained.
So Cicero who would not follow narrow and straight ways, but walk over the
large and broad fields of Rhetoricians, takes the great Bear for his Pole Star,
for so he has room to wander in at pleasure, and is not shut up in any certain
bounds; but the safer and more certain sailing is, and the Ship takes not so
great a compass, where the lesser Bear, (which is called the Pole, and by our
men the Leye, that is the guide) is regarded. But our Mariners besides the
Pole which they do not carelessely regard, look to the Compass constantly, by
the use and commodity whereof, in the darkest and most tempestuou's night, they
stand at the helm and steer the Ship. Whether the Compass were a new Invention.
I dare not certainly say whether this be a new invention of our age, or that
this instrument was of Ancient use. Yet I persuade my self that Mariners
compass Plautus speaks of, was the same with ours, or very like it. And yet I
think that our Compass is more complete, and brought to a greater perfection,
and shows things more exactly. But since the Carthagenians, The Carthagenians
well skilled in Sailing.
very skillfull in sailing, for above two thousand years did not only frequent
the Ports and havens of the Mediterranean Seas, but went farther into the
Ocean, and with a very great fleet sailed into Mauritania, round about; It is
very likely that they wanted not this invention; to say nothing of the Tyrians
and Sidonians, Chap. 27.
who as Ezechiel speaks, had great skill in Navigation, and used much
Merchandise: and besides these, Solomon's Mariners sailed with a great fleet by
the Red Sea, 3 Kings c. 10.
and the Persian Gulf, whereby there lies an open passage into India (the Jews
call it Ophir) and brought a vast treasure of Gold, Apes, Peacocks, Elephants,
Jewels, from thence as the Portingals do now, and can hardly make their voyage
in the space of a year. Wherefore I think no man ought rashly to believe that
in those times they wanted these helps for sailing, Many things in nature grow
out of use.
especially in so happy an age, that was abundant in wise and painful
Artificers. But it may be by reason of the incursions of the Barbarians, who
wasted, killed, destroyed, and depopulated all, such a noble instrument might
be lost, and the Artificers all slain and dead: but when peace grew on again,
and all wars ceased, by the care and industry of man (whose wits are ready to
find out things) it was brought into use again strangely. So some say that in
former years many things were in use, that we think to be new Inventions, which
Solomon constantly affirms. What was, Eccles. 1.
says he, afore-time is now, and what is past shall be renewed: and there is
no new thing under the Sun, and if any thing seem to be new, Solomon held
nothing to be new.
it was in the days that were before us: and the things that now are shall be
forgotten, because they shall perish and decay with age. So some think there
was some Art of Printing formerly used, as they conjecture from some Ancient
pictures, Whether the Art of Printing be old.
seals, rings, medals, in which there are seen some Characters of Letters, as
though they were printed: for in that age they wanted not Seal-cutters and
Engravers, and such Artificers: yet if any of the Ancients had invented any
such matter, as no man ought to lose his deserved commendation, we must
confess it was not so perfect, exact and complete, nor were the Letters so
artificially set and directed. Also Guns and Ordinance of Brass and Iron,
Whether Guns were of old.
and Pistols, and Muskets that are more tractible than the great Guns, because
by putting the hand to the trigger, as to the helm of a ship, and by the snap
of the flint with the sparks of fire they are discharged against the Enemy, are
thought to be inventions of former ages, as appears by these Verses of Virgil.
Aeneid. L. 6.


I saw Salmoneus tortured cruelly,
Whilst he Joves flames and Thunder did present:
He rode with Horses four, his Coach did fly,
Amongst the Greeks, through Elis City went.
He shook his Torch, and boasted that by right,
As Gods, adored he should be for his might.
Mad fool, to think that Air and Horses can,
Make Clouds and Thunder, are too high for man.
Though all these things are doubtful, and we can pronounce nothing certainly
from them; for, it may be, some other thing is meant thereby, yet of the Needle
there is another reason. For when the Pole and little Bear by interposition of
Clouds and darkness cannot be seen by the Mariners, they are in eminent
danger on all sides, and therefore we may certainly determine, that since
Navigation was then so common, in that age they did not want these helps of
Sailing. L. 10. c. 14.
Nor am I ignorant that Philander who has written excellently learned
Commentaries upon Vitruvius, was in this opinion, Philanders opinion of the
Compass.
that he believes this Compass which by the Loadstone and Needle shows the
Pole, was made not many ages past at Amalphis a Town of Campania: but I think
this Instrument was not invented there nor in that time, nor yet invented in
our days, but it is new dressed and renewed from former ages; and that the
Artificers then, did exactly and perfectly without any defect or declination of
the Needle make this Instrument to point out the Poles with both ends; that so
their ships might Sail more artificially and successefully to the place they
desired. Wherefore Plautus seems in these words to intimate that the Ancients
wanted not the use of it, and that they sailed by its direction over the Seas
at great distances; and to take occasion from this to hasten their voyages when
need was.

If you make haste, to do it better, take
The Compass whilst the wind is good; De Market. Scen. 5.
forsake
Delays, the West winds clear, the South brings rain
That drives clouds off, this brings them back again.
Wherefore no man can doubt but the Ancients had the use and benefit of the
Mariners Chart.

CHAP. V.
What it is makes Dogs mad, and at what time of the year chiefly, and what are
the best remedies to cure them.
DOgs that are men's faithful servants, and familiar house-companions, and
warders of them, are mad, Dogs run mad in very hot or very cold weather.
either when the Sun is very hot in the Dog-dayes, or in winter when it is
extreme cold; because at that time of the year black choler is exasperated and
sharpened, and the venom of it is powered forth, which by the aspersion and
touch of it is deadly and destructive: In Summer it is so when the blood is
burnt by the heat of the Sun, which is infected by a contagious vapor
conceived by it: but in Winter because the blood is congealed and heaped
together, and almost curded and frozen, and so corrupts, because being shut up
in the body it cannot be ventilated: whence it is that deadly vapors, and
contagion proceed from it, which contaminate and infect the vital Spirits;
wherefore at such times of the year water must be allwaies given to this
Creature, Dogs desire water.
which he will all times lap, especially when he goes a journey in company with
a man through very hot or cold Countries, and has his tongue hanging out of
his mouth, and gapes for thirst, for thus his blood would be moystned and not
be burnt so much by heat. Columella which Pliny in his name concealed not, L.
7. c. 12. L. 8. c. 41. If Dogs tayls be cut off they will not run mad.
thinks, that whelps tayls after they have been littred 40 days, should be cut
off, for so they would never run mad; for this cause: There is a Nerve that
passes through the joints of the backbone, to the very tip of his tail; that
being laid fast hold on with the last joint of the tail together (which I see
our Countrymen do) being drawn forth a little at length, will break off, which
being done, the tail is of a seemly length, and yet grows not too long and ill
favored; and lastly, as many Sheepherds maintain, madness is prevented, and
they will be safe from it. There is another caution and prevention, that a Dog
shall never run mad.

How a Dog is preserved from being mad. A Worm taken out of a Dogs tongue.
There is a Nerve under a dogs tongue, like to a Worm, round and long, as also
in a man's Head, whose hinder part of the brain, ends in a shape like to a Worm
that breeds in wood; this Worm taken from under the tongue, keeps dogs safe
from ever running mad. The like compacted substance grows in the former and
hinder feet of sheep, in the very part they tread on the earth with, and it is
round fashioned like to a Worm, being inwardly full of down, like hairs, such
as we find in the little sponges, and buttons of Roses, that the seed is shut
up in, folded in with a soft and tender down: I have often times taken such a
thing out of the boyld sheeps-feet, that was like a round Worm that breeds in
rotten wood, or small-nuts. And if any man eating sheeps-feet, should be
ignorant or careless of it, and not take out that substance, he will presently
loath after eating it, and be ready to vomit every moment, and to break wind
upward. The people generally think that this matter is venomous; but as I
cannot certainly say that, or consent with them: So I should easily think that
hairy substance, and downy matter, that sticks in the divided claws, does
hinder digestion, and troubles the stomach. Yet Shepherds and such as keep
sheep, are of that opinion that no creature could run swifter than a sheep, or
out-goe him, but that he would outrun them all, unless there were some such
substance under his joints, that he treads upon. I can say nothing certainly of
that; The nature of sheep when they run away.
thus much I can testify, that I have observed these sheep running away, when
Dogs and Wolves that hunt after the prey ran after them, to run away with
great swiftness, but not to run far, but presently to stand still and look
back, I suppose for that reason, that there was something else, besides their
faint fearful heart, that stopped them, which is under their feet, and because
they are short-winded, and subject to diseases of the Lungs, as we see it by
their dry cough they are often times troubled with: so that they are not able to
hold out a long course. Therefore as these Cattle have something under their
feet that stops their running, so under a dogs tongue there lies secret a
Nervous, and as I may so call it, a Wormlike substance, which from the shape of
a Worm, and the effect of madness, that it produces is called (...), which
word signifies a Worm and madness. Lyssa a little Worm under a Dogs tongue.
Hence is that Plant called (...), that drives away this madness, and
restrains furious and Lunatic people, that are as mad as dogs, though they
chance to be bitten by them. But if you cut that Worm from whelps tongues,
they will never run mad, nor will they ever bite any man, that the biting shall
prove mortal, and they will trouble us but seldom with barking: but this
creature has his melancholique blood inflamed and kindled, and the other
humors of his body all about, When Dogs run mad.
especially when the Dogg-days cause great heat, and contagion bred from
corruption, makes him rage and run mad: so that his tongue will swell, and the
Nerve that is under it, and so his mouth is full of venomous froth and moisture
that is contagious, that will infect one if it do but touch him. For if this
creature meet those he knows, The foam of a mad Dog is dangerous.
or whether he knows them not, he will hurt them all alike, and if any foam or
froth stick upon any part, it will endanger a man, though the dog bite him not:
unless you presently wash it off with Salt Water. But since many remedies have
been invented to cure this biting, none is more ready at hand, and certain,
than presently to dilate the wound, and to scarify the skin, fastening
cupping-glasses to the part affected with a great flame; then to lay on a
Cataplasm of Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Rocket, Remedies for a Dogs madnesss.
Centory the less, Wormwood and Salt-Butter, made up with honey. Also the
Urine of a young boy applied to bathe the part, draws forth the Venom, also
Opopanax, Rue, Salt, Figgs, red Colewort-leaves, pounded in a Mortar with Honey
and Butter, and applied to the place hurt are good. But a vein must not be
opened by any means, for by that unseasonable remedy, The biting of a Dog
needs no Vein to be opened
the venom is drawn inwardly, and presently runs to the vitals, and infects
the humors and Spirits; wherefore such means as will discuss and dissipate
venomous vapors must be given inwardly, What things drive forth madness.
as Theriac, Mithridate, Garlic, Scordium, Masterwort, and Angelica which is
in virtue next to Masterwort, Zedoary root, Rue, Marigolds, Balm, Orris roots
dried, Elecampane, Figs, Decoction of Pock-wood, Basil, Cunula, Hysop, wild
Thime, Origanum, each of them has a discussing virtue, and is Diaphoretick,
that by opening the pores of the body, and provoking sweat dispells the Poison,
and will not let it pass into the Veins. The force of the Sea for the biting
of a Dog.
Our Contrymen that live near to the Sea, take such as are bitten by a mad
dog, to the Sea, and also bruit Beasts, and plunge them seven times in, not
superstitiously observing that number, but that the venom may be washed out
the better, whereby they get thus much, Mad people fear the Water.
that all fear of the water, called Hydrophobia, which is that troubles them
extremely, is wholly taken away. For those that are so affected, both thirst
after water, and are frighted by reason of the alienation of their minds, and
because they want reason, whence it comes to pass, that without making any
difference or choice of things that are good, they refuse what is wholesome for
them, Drink, not to be withheld from roaring people.
and choose things hurtful; for if they drink abundantly they are cured:
Wherefore, though they abhor water, and all liquid matter, yet they must be
forced to drink, that so the venom may be washed away, and not have
opportunity to run so fast to the internal parts. But it is wonderful that
poisons, not only given inwardly will prove deadly, but bitings and stingings
of venomous Creatures outwardly, do insensibly by degrees lay hold on the vital
parts, and will make way to the heart the Fountain of Life, The danger of
spittle.
and other principal parts. So the spittle of those that are sick of the
Elephantiasis or Leprosy, and the foam also of a mad Dog, being but
sprinkled, the skin will penetrate and become pernicious, unless they be
presently wiped off, and the part rubbed with Salt, so that if the nervous
parts, or those through which the Arteries are derived, chance to be bit or
torn, or infected with such foul filthy moisture and froth, the venom is
communicated to the Heart and Brain, so that the Heart, the vital Spirit being
infected, How the Venom is drawn to the internalls
falls into swounings, and deliquiums, also the brain by reason of the Nerves
affected that proceed from it, is laid hold on, from whence arises fury and
madness, and alienation of the mind. But if it happen that the fleshy parts
are affected, which are nourished by the blood out of the veins, or are bitten,
the mortal venom passes through the Channels of the Veins to the Heart and
Liver, and other principal parts, and about the 40th day, or a little before,
the sick grow mad and abhor the water. But remember, that you may rightly and
with good success undertake the cure, Those that are bit are mad about the 40
day
that you do not rashly suffer the wound to close together, and come to
cicatrice, which also must be accurately observed in Carbuncles and Bubos, and
other pestilentiall tumors, for if the least spark of the contagion stay
within, the disease will grow again, and come on with more violence. The place
bit not to be closed up presently: Synapisms and precipitate powder good for
the bite.
Wherefore you must purge the venom with a synapisme or powder of precipitate;
for that will keep the wound that lies open from closing, and effectually
draws forth the venom. In the mean time by intervals and gently, melancholy
humors must be purged away, that the madness may be driven out, or grow more
mild: for which purpose you may conveniently give in a decoction or infusion,
Sena, Polypod, Epithym, Hellebour, Hart's-tongue, Walfern, Fumetory, buglosse,
and especially confectio Hamech, with syrup of Epithym and Fumetory, which also
may be given for the bitings of other Creatures, whereof some are more
dangerous than others are.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Nature, and force of Gold, and what effect it has, if it be at any
time used for the health and defense of Man's Body.
Man is affected with transitory things. The great hunger after Gold.
AMongst all those things that by Man's care and industry are dug forth of the
bowels of the earth, Man's mind desires nothing more greedily, which seeks not
solid matters but frail, uncertain, fugitive transitory things, than Gold: yet
with Gold can he never be filled nor satisfied, though he do obtain it by heaps
in abundance. The use and necessity of Money
Now the principal use of Gold and Silver consists in this, (for the
Commonwealth is held together by the benefit of Money, as the body is by the
Nerves, and with it are all contracts, Bargains, Fairs, Meetings, agreements
and negotiations accomplished) to serve for necessity, and that by it we may
provide such things for our selves, that the nature of Mortal men subsists by,
and may want none of them; namely cloths, Houses, whereby we defend our selves
from the winds and injuries of the Air, all things belonging to housholding,
moderate diet, and many such like things, whereby we live not less
conveniently, than healthfully. Horace recalls men to this tranquillity of
mind, L. 1. Sermon: Sat. 1.
and moderate use of things, for he was an excellent corrector of vice, and he
warnes us what specially we should take care for, who commonly hide the fault
of covetousness under the cover of necessity.

What will it profit thee for fear of Dearth,
Or Thieves, to hide great Treasure in the Earth,
Thou know no worth nor use of Money, buy
Bread, herbs, and Wine and what may satisfy
Nature, which craves but for necessity.
The use of things to be regarded.
Whereby he shows that all should be referred to necessary uses, and convenience
of living; and if to this, we have sufficient to adorn our bodies handsomely,
and to go decently and cleanly, as men ought to do, and women likewise may be
gracefully decked according to their sex; I shall not be against it, so it
exceed not and our apparel be not too costly, and incline too much to Luxury
and voluptuousness; Frugalnes must be regarded in all things.
but that all things may be bounded by frugality and temperance, and serve for
honesty and decency. For men for the most part are so given that they delight
in nothing but sumptuous and magnificent things, Nature is content with a
little.
whereas nature can be contented with small matters easily to be had and that
cost but little. But to let pass these things, I shall discourse of the nature
of this metal, that is endowed with many and great virtues. For Gold is one of
the most effectual things, and has the most present virtue to drive forth the
most cruel diseases, and to restore health, where it is decayed, and needs
repairing. For such as are tainted with the venerious disease from foul
copulation, and have any contagion in their secrets, are manifestly helped by
the use of it.

Also it purges the Elephantiasis which is held to be the common Leprosy, Gold
purges the Leprosy.
or at least it asswageth it; It fastneth loose teeth and such as are weak, or
vitiated by filthy moisture, and it corrects all ulcers and pushes in the
mouth: Also those that have a stinking breath that smells filthily; I use to
give them counsel that they should commonly carry in their mouths, Rings made
of the purest and unmixed Gold; especially those that have been anointed for
the French Pox, and have ulcers in their lips and Gums. For this purges the
venom and dries up the sores. use of Gold in meat.
And if you please to boil with your meats, Plates, or pieces of leaves of
Gold, and such as are sick to drink the broth, it can hardly be said what
refreshment their vital spirits shall receive thereby. Wherefore I use to
restore and recreate such as are consumed and wasted in their flesh, or
exhausted and wearied by immoderate venery with such decoctions: and the Gold
is never the worse for it, nor does it lose any part, Gold loses nothing by
boiling.
or is in the least diminished thereby. Sometimes I bid them cast into a round
topt vessel which men call an Alembeck set upon a hot fire, a Capon chopped in
small pieces, or calves flesh, and some yelks of Eggs, pouring thereon three or
four sextaries of Cows Milk, A Sextarius is 1 pound and 8. ounces.
mingling therewith some raspings of the most pure Gold, called Obrisum, or a
Gold Chain, and the most effectual herbs, as Eringo roots, Hartichokes,
Parsnips, Skirrots, Carlinum, Garden-Thistle, and that herb which shoots forth
with a Mossy concretion, and from its yellow glittering color, and golden
specks that stick upon it, is called Sun-dew, or Ros-solis, also Dates, and
Raysins taking out the stones, and sweet Apples, with all these things together
at a gentle fire, a liquor drawn forth by drops, and set in the Sun for three
days, may be kept for many uses: for it will restore such as are fallen into a
swound, and whose spirits faint, and it will repair those that are bloudlesse,
lean, A remedy for the disease of the heart.
consumed, but in the pain of the heart, and Brititish sweat it is a present
remedy, and in restoring the forces of the heart, it is very effectual and
healthful, if a spoonful or more be given at a time to those that are in that
case; nor is Gold applied outwardly with less profit and convenience, where
the heart is endangered by any outward or inward disease growing on. Gold
cheers the heart.
For besides the aspect of Golden pieces, and rings, which oft-times are set
with some precious stone, that delights the eyes, if the finger of the left
hand which is next to the little finger, be rubbed with Gold and a little
Saffron for diseases of the heart, it will recover a man; though he be fallen
down, and his animal and vital spirits be stopped, so that he is speech-lesse
and almost dead, and no signs of life appear; The effects of Gold red hot.
also red hot Gold plunged into wine to quench will procure great force to the
parts, and corroborats the natural faculties. For if any ill matter cleave to
the internal parts, it purges it away, consumes and devoures, and it gives
vigor to the affected part, and fills it with vital spirit. Also this liquor
applied outwardly, will kill Tetters, Ring-worms, Leprosies, Scabs, Scurf,
Ozena, Polypus, and all filthy sores of the Nose, Morphew, and all freckles
that deform the skin, and will restrain, and correct them, especially if you
mingle with this liquid painting stuff, a little Tartar which is a stony matter
that grows together from the wine in the vessels. What Tartar is.
For this will take away all spots though never so fowl, and will adorn and
beautify, red warty Nostrills, Chin, Cheeks, Face, forehead (in which parts
such eruptions are seen to come forth oft-times very ill-favouredly and ugly.)

CHAP. VII.
Of the Measils of Hogs, and other diseases of this creature, that are next kin
to the Leprosy, and are commonly called Orighans; or contagions from the
unwholesome and sickly habit of the body. And how this disease may be cured in
men.
What meats are made of Hogs flesh.
BEcause Gentlemen also do commonly eat Hogs flesh, and there is scarce any
Family but Bacon is brought sometimes to the Table, and flitches and Gammons
that sometimes come from far Countries, and other meats that are made of them,
as puddings, Sausages, and the like; I thought fit to set down something here
concerning the nature of this creature. Since therefore a Hog delights in mud
and filth, and to wallow in dirt; the first care must be to provide for him a
clean sty and wholesome food, if you would have the meat of him to be wholesome
for you to eat; for if you feed this creature with husks, and fat him with
beastly food, he will grow Measly, and full of kernels, and hard swellings, so
that his flesh will be unwholesome, and naught and infectious to the whole
body. And this was the principal cause the Jews were forbidden to eat Hogs
flesh, Levit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
and it was a great wickedness for them to taste thereof. But these hard
swellings and kernells come chiefly about their necks, because they are greedy
and devouring, and eat all things upon Dung-hills without making any
difference. By the name of Measils is meant that disease that pollutes the
whole body with a foul matter, What is the Measils i^ Hogs.
because the flesh and inward parts are tainted with little white knots like
hailstones. For some kind of whitish swellings are in all parts scattered here
and there, and the certain tokens thereof are seen under the tongue, when
Hogheards put Irons into their mouths, that they may try whether they be sound
to be killed, and cut forth for meat. Those that have the Leprosy do show forth
some such matter in their faces, and all their bodies: for the pushes that
break forth in the ourward skin grow white from melancholique burnt to ashes.
The flesh indeed of this creature when it is Measly is sweet and well relished
to the taste; but it is very unwholesome, and next kind to the Leprosy, Flesh
that partakes of melancholy juice is savoury.
by reason of the mixture of melancholy juice. So flesh next the bones is not
unsavory, or of ill taste to the Palate, because it partakes of Melancholy
juice, for bones are made of such juice, and grow together of it. But what the
Leprosy and the French Pox does to a man, the same does the Measils and
scrophulous tumors, to a hog: for these diseases are of kin, and very near
allied one to the other; their names only are different but the matter is the
same, What Aetius says of diseased Hogs.
as also Aetius the Physician observed in his chapter de Elephantiasi.
Wherefore that men might suffer no hurt by the use of eating this unclean
creature, with us there is a wholesome Law provided by the Senate, that no Sow
nor Hog shall be killed unless his Tongue be first pulled forth and searched
whether he be sick of this disease, for if warty pushes show themselves in his
Tongue and Jaws, and the veins are of a wan color, and blackish, these are
signs that the internalls are of an ill constitution, and therefore it is
thought fit not to kill them; or if they be killed ignorantly, that they must
be buried under ground. And if no such thing appear, they that are appointed
Judges of this business, do pronounce that the Hog is sound and fit for to be
eaten. But because oft-times this creature may be faulty though he be sound in
that respect; Wherefore our Country people when they kill a Hog, The brisly
skin of the Hog is to be burnt.
cover him with straw, and burn the hide, rather than scald it with water. For
if there be any defect or ill matter under the skin, the fire will draw forth
the contagion and consume it, which hot water cannot do so well, and to purge
away all filth. This way are polluted Sows cured, if the styes wherein they lie
be daily made clean, and that they may walk up and down in them. For those that
wander up and down in woods and Copses, Hogs wandering in Woods are the most
wholesome.
and feed on Acorns for the most part, are more wholesome than those that use
no exercise, but are shut up in their styes, for they are less exposed to
diseases. Moreover they must have abundance of water given them to wash
themselves withal, and some Salt mingled therewith, and when they eat Barley or
any solid meat Bay Berries bruised must be put thereto. And that kind of
shellfish, the Dutch call Mosselen, whereof there are abundance on our shores,
and Seacoasts, Hogs are wonderfully refreshed with, if you give them the
decoction of them in great quantity. Also the Lees and dregs of Wine, and the
feculent swillings that are left when the juice is pressed forth of the Grapes,
are a present remedy to expel this disease, especially if Bran and the lump
fermented commonly called Mout be mingled therewith. But our country people
neither take care of these creatures, nor for the health of those that must eat
them: for they give their hogs, the sour corrupt Lees of Beer and Ale, and
stinking wash that is at the bottom of their Tubs, and all filthy things, as
rotten and moldy Apples and Pears; whereby those kernels, and Measils, and
inward contagion is not dissolved, but rather increases, and gathers force.
For all very sour things, Vinegar naught for melancholy people, sour things
good for Choleric people.
by reason of their cooling and thickning force, and because they compact and
thicken the humors more, and for choleric people they are as much commended.
So Vinegar will augment a quartan Ague, but it appeaseth and corrects a
Tertian, because it tempers the heat of choler, and, as water, allays Wine.

The low Dutch fat their Hoggs with fish.
In the Low Countries, some live where there is abundance of fish, and
water-Creatures, and they feed their Hoggs with fish; and as they will grow
wonderful fat with them, so is their fat and flesh more flashy and not so
firm; yet with this food, The eating (...) Frogs for wh^^^ good.
Hoggs will grow great and tall; yet the meat of these Hoggs is unwholesome, and
the taste very strange and loathsome. I know that for men that are sick of the
Leprosy, that the eating often of Frogs that are in fens has cured them, for
this water-Creature mitigates the heat of their blood, and tempers the adust
melancholy: But those that creep on the ground and nest amongst shrubs, and
bushes, and do not leap, but go slowly are venomous, our men call these
Padden, but the Froggs that have green backs and white bellies, Toads venomous.
are called Puyen often Vorschen, they use to cry in the Spring; but Toads that
creep, make very little noise. They therefore that are active and leap
frequently, are proper for these diseases: Things that have shells are
healthful for consumptions.
and to use them with Capon-broth is principally approved for lean decaid
consumed hectic people, as also the broth of Turtles; which from the form of
their shells are called Schelt Padden, and crevis Lobsters, Shrimps, Sea Crabs,
Mussels, Oysters, Shellfish, Cockles, and all those that have an outward crust,
do cool and assuage hot adust humors, but River-Muscles, and Crevish, are more
effectual than Sea Shellfish are, River Crabs who good for.
because these are saltish, whereby they cause appetite, and please the palate,
but they dry more: wherefore Sea shellfish is better for some people, but for
sick people, those that are caught in Brooks and Rivers. But amongst those that
have shells or a crusty cover, River Crabs are chiefly to be commended, The
description and virtue of Crabs.
which differ not in kind, but in effect from Sea Crabs, with a larger and
rounder back, having on both sides, four joynted feet, that have six joints or
knots upon each to distinguish them, and are sharp at the lower end, which they
strike into the hands and feet of those that hunt after them, as if it were a
spear with a flexible agility* for by help hereof, they will turn themselves to
the right and left, when they perceive any snares laid for them, with a
wonderful sagacity; I suppose this is, because they are wonderful quick of
seeing or hearing; for go into the water never so softly and hunt after them,
they will presently perceive it, and immediately cover themselves in the mud,
and hide themselves out of sight. But besides those four feet, or arms
stretched forth on both sides, in the former part where their eyes shine and
stick forth, there are two toothed Pincers wherewith they take fast hold of all
things they meet with, and bite the hands of those that catch them most
cruelly, so that having but once taken hold, they can hardly be pulled off. But
since this water-creature is so wonderfully subtle and crafty, his cunning is
chiefly observed when he lies in wait for Oysters, The craft of the Crab fish.
and seeks to get out their meat, for he will cast in little stones when their
shells gape, so that they cannot shut them again; then with his toothed
pinsers, he takes out the fish to eat, and seeds on it sweetly and securely,
not fearing any danger or revenge, which also the fish Polypus does. These
kinds of Crabs, are a present remedy for those that are in consumptions and
decaid, when they are well washed and boild in Barley-water, Crabs cure the
bitings of a mad Dog.
and they are as good and forcible to cure the bitings of a mad Dog; the Crabs
being so burnt to ashes in a pan that they may be powdered fine; and a spoonful
thereof given with the root of Gentian, and a little Frank insence: which
Antidote must be frequently reiterated, and be taken continually for six weeks,
that the madness and fear of the water, may be driven off. Thus much for
shellfish and such as are included in a crusty substance, which I have set
down more at large, that every man may know that not only the diseases of
Hoggs are cured thereby, but that they are most fitly given for melancholy,
and for adust humors, and for many more diseases. But amongst Crab-fish and
others that have shells, Of shellfish which are better for sound than for sick
people.
there must be a difference set; for those that belong to Rivers, do
exceedingly help such as are lean and wasted, because they moysten, and augment
the natural humor, whereby the body is nourished, and subsists, and which the
imbred heat has obedient unto it; using with them sweet warming Wines by the
help whereof concoction is made, Effects of Sea-Crabs.
and all things are well digested. But Sea-Crabs that creep up and down, near
the shores of the Ocean, or Mediterranean Sea, and lie near the banks, are
more fit, both for such as are sound, and for those that are sickly, and have
their bodies filled with ill humors. For being they have a saltness in them,
as they cause an appetite to eat, so they dry superfluous excrements, and
resist corruption of humors, which we may observe in flesh, and fish that are
salted, that they will keep longer and not so soon putrify, wherefore the
Hollanders and many Low Country people do not amiss, and great part of the
high Dutch that incline to the North-parts, The high Dutch delight in Salt and
Spices.
to use plentifully Salt and Spices, as Ginger, Pepper, and grains of Paradise
as they call them, that have a burning and caustic quality in them, and are
not Cardamomum, but differ from it: For by reason of this they become less
phlegmatic, and not so full of excrements, and are not so monstrous fat and
corpulent as they use to be; ^^mite from (...) Snailis ^^^d with.
for the fat melts with Salt meats, as the snail does, by strewing on of Salt,

CHAP. VIII.
Wherefore do the Low Dutch, when they have had a tumbling and unquiet night
that likes them not, say they have had Saint John Baptist's night?
THe day of Saint John Baptists birth, whose holy life was highly commended by
Christ, is held sacred and holy, Luke 7. John Baptist's day is memorable.
not only to Jews and Christians, but also to Mores and Barbarians and
Mahumetans, men that are strangers to our religion, and addicted to Mahomet;
though some do pass this night over with strange and superstitious worship,
making great bon-fires and burning great piles of wood, as the Priests of
Cybele did, with great outcries, and furious noises; and young people make
crackers, and squibs, with fire-coles heaped together. Some by a superstition
of the Gentiles fall down before his Image, and hope to be thus freed from the
Epileps; and they are farther persuaded, that if they can but gently go unto
this Saints shrine, and not cry out disorderly, or hollow like mad men when
they go, then they shall be a whole year free from this disease: but if they
attempt to bite with their teeth the Saint's head they go to kiss, and to
revile him; then they shall be troubled with this disease every Month, which
commonly comes with the course of the Moon, yet extreme juglings and frauds are
wont to be concealed under this matter. And since these solemnities of several
Countries are usually performed in the night, by ancient custom, that I may
not say inveterate error, hence grew the Proverb, A Proverb borrowed from
night-tumults.
when men have passed a troublesome nights rest, and could not sleep at all;
they say, We have had Saint John Baptist's night: That is, we have not taken
any sleep, but watched all night; and not only so, but we have been in great
troubles, noyses, clamours, and stirs that have held us waking.

Olaus Magnus, L. 15, c. 10.
who prosecutes the History of the Goths exceeding largely, though not so
curiously, relates that the night Saint John Baptist was born in (who was a
forerunner, and one sent forth, or because he was the voice of one crying in
the Wilderness, and a Herald of Jesus Christ,) is most solemn and sacred to
that Nation, Math. 3.
and that they hold it with great celebrity, and pomp: For men and women of all
sorts, come by troops into the public meetings, and making huge bon-fires,
with faggots and other fuel, they skip and dance, and some sing hymns to the
Harp in praise of noble men, and traduce the faults of husbands, and blame the
incivility of wives openly, and they let none pass without some scoffs, jeers,
nipping and biting speeches, and fall upon all they meet with great obloquies,
using what liberty they please, and abuse them with words at pleasure, as they
were wont to do at Ceres Solemnities of old times: For from the Greeks or
Gentiles vanities, many errors were left, or crept into the Christian
Religion. So the Lords of the Courts, and as many as are addicted to hunting
adore and worship St. Hubert, The Preposterous worship of the Gods.
with loud hollowing, because he loved hunting, so that you would think they
were mad, whilst they imitate the barkings of Dogs, and their mad cries,
whilst the cup walks about filled with wine, or a polished horn, that will hold
a Pint, borrowed from an old heathenish custom used by Germans, as Caesar
testifies, L. 6. Belli Gallici; Thus superstitious men by a preposterous
worship to flatter the Saints, and hope to win their favors, whereas they
neither imitate their holy lives, or strive to be of such manners as they were
of, nor do they in any thing walk in their steps, which kind of worship is the
most acceptable to God and to his Saints. St. Martins Feastivals.
Martin has some that adore him, who are as ridiculous as the former, whose
liberality to poor and indigent people, invites some not to frugality, and
munificence, but to Luxury and Prodigal banquets, and foolish songs. But, that
John Baptists solemnities are performed with such noise and tumults, and
superstition, I think came from hence; because the Evangelicall History
describes the joyful day of this Man's birth; Luke 3.
and that it should be happy and fortunate for many People: whereby he does not
mean the external motions of the mind, when the mind vainly and prodigally
rejoices, and is full of idle mirth; but the internal solid and true joy, that
is conceived from so saving a promise in the Gospel, whereby the Angel
declares the coming of the Messiah and Savior, on whom the salvation of
every man depends, Math. 3.
and that John should be his forerunner, who first began the office of
baptizing, which Christ afterward did bring to perfection and fulfill, who
Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with fire; by virtue of whom men come to be
transformed and brought to heavenly duties: and by apprehending a firm
confidence of salvation, to be united and engrafted into him by the mystery of
his death and resurrection. Which matter, by reason of the light that is given,
Solid joy.
and salvation restored, does affect all men not with ordinary joy, but gives
great cause to make men leap for joy, not so as the ignorant multitude and
common people use to do who every where show forth foolish and ridiculous
pastimes, and plays, yet this superstition which has hitherto seized upon
many men's minds, begins to grow stale, and out of date. For now the wiser sort
of men begin to perceive, and such as are better educated to understand, that
God must be adored and pleased, to whom we have access by Christ, with piety,
true Religion, and holy prayers, not with foul superstition, nor with the
vanities of the Gentiles, Esaias 11.
or with killing of sactifices, and other ceremonies that God requires not, and
are not commanded by him. What is superstition.
For superstition is the Ape that imitates true Religion, and a doting
affection from a faulty imitation, that proceeds from lack of knowledge, and
weakness of understanding, what the will of God is. Whence it comes to pass
that when the mind slotes and is unstable, unconstant, various, and doubtful,
and wants knowledge and confidence in God, it is wholly ignorant, whom it
should chiefly call upon for help, whither to turn, to whom it should addict it
self, and commit its salvation, and from whom it should expect success,
deliverance, and a peaceable mind. The reason is because it is wandered from the
mark; and men do not follow him, who can and will abundantly perform all these
things; that is, God the Father, and Jesus Christ, Math. 28.
to whom all power is given, and unto whom God will have all our thoughts to be
directed, all our hope faith and charity. And God will not suffer, as Esaias
says, Esaias 42. and 48.
that his glory and praise due to him should be given to another, or to any one
whatsoever, not that any worship of Religion should be set up, except in those
things that Christ has taught us from his Fathers mouth: of which matter there
are many examples in the Bible, and no fewer both amongst the Greeks and Latin
Writers that are Orthodox men, that clearly show how God ought to be adored and
worshipped, and how the Saints and those that stood for the Christian Religion,
and asserted it manfully, should be honored, who endured all manner of
contumelies and wrongs for Christ's sake.

CHAP. IX.
Of a singular new way how to make Salt, and of the Nature, effects, force,
use, and differences of it; By the way, a consideration of some herbs growing
by the Sea, that are full of Salt juice, and out of which Salt is made.
THough a little before I treated of the Nature, and necessary use of Salt; yet
it will be worth the while, to speak something more largely of this wholesome
sauce, without which all meats are unsavory, and without taste. First of all I
testify to every one that has care of a Family to provide for, and to all that
have the charge and keeping of Cities, Castles, Forts, and Garrisons exposed to
dangers and incursions, Choice of Salt must be had.
and must victual and store up for them with provision, that Sea Salt new
boiled, and but lately purged from its foulness, is not so convenient to Salt
flesh or fish. It is boiled and prepared at Zirizea, and many other places in
Zealand, in Summer when the Sun is very hot, by force whereof the Sea grows
exceeding Salt, The Seamore salt in Summ^.
and the Salt grows extreme white in the larger vessels that are to make it in,
which are filled with Seawater, Bituminous clots of Earth being put under and
set on fire, we call it Turf, whereby by degrees all things are done somewhat
better in the Salt pits, than by heaping up wood under the kettle, by reason of
the flame that dangerously breaks forth from the mouth of the Furnace. But if
it be presently or after some days, whilst it is yet warm of the fire, taken
for use it will quickly melt, and dissolve into a salt water, so that it will
leave a muddy kind of moisture on things that are salted with it. So Salt that
is first taken out of the hot vessel, or Iron Cauldron, and is not hardened by
age, or grown fast together, whereas it sooner melts into brine than it is fit
it should, New Salt soon melts, but old lasts longer.
otherwise than old Salt does; I hold not so good to salt or season meats with.
Wherefore they that would have all salted meats, fish called Saperdae,
Cod-fish, Sea-calves, What Salt preserves salted meats.
Tunies, Herrings, that are a kind of Thryssae, to last long, that is to be
kept for the next year, or till the Summer be very hot, and would carry into
farther Countries things that should not stink, What kind of fish is Trissae.
let them remember that old Salt is best to season them with. A new way to make
Salt.
Our Ancestors formerly made salt to their great profit, not of Seawater
congealed and hardened into Salt by the heat of the Sun, such as is brought from
Spain and France to us, but of the clods of the Sea, burnt to ashes, which by
pouring in water by degrees, they made Salt of that was very clear and bright:
the people and Inhabitants called it Zel or Zilzout, From Salt comes Silt and
Sold.
from the clods that were full of Salt, from whence it is taken: and all the
Low Countries unto our days used no other kind of Salt. Whence in the German
tongue comes Soldaten.
But when that kind of making Salt grew out of use by another way brought in
from other parts, a new way was invented, that is no less gainful then the
former. For coorse, black, dirty, salt, being brought in from Spain and
Aquitan, our Country men take forth the mud and filth, and make it exceeding
white, How the Zelanders make Salt white.
and fit for use to preserve meats. Also our Salt-makers use another way of
boiling Salt, that differs not much from the former. For every third or fourth
year they break up their hearths and floors, The making Salt of clods.
they call it Den heert, with a fork, and a large vessel being set upon it, and
made hot with fire put under it, they cast the clots and pieces, that are wet
with a briny salt liquor that drops from them abundantly into the vessel, and
these they break small and soke in Seawater, and boil them; after a few hours
the muddy dregs will sink down to the bottom, and most white Salt is drawn
forth. What is Cleynzout in Zeland.
They call this kind Cleyn zout, or Cliync zout, for that the clots of it
struck one against the other like flints for hardness, will make a clanging
noise.

This kind of Salt is fit to bring to the Table to adorn it with, and is
useful for many things: yet is it not so good to preserve things. Wherefore
they rub Cow-hides, and skins with this salt, and cover them with it, as they
do also with coorse Sea Salt. Wherefore the Senate made a Law, that no man
should sell such salt, The Senates Law not to sophisticate Salt.
unless he would testify upon oath, that he sold it not for sincere and
natural Salt, that is made of Sea Salt, and the brine of it, but for fossil
Salt, that is dug up and made by Art, lest there should be any fraud, and
imposture used. For being it is as white as Snow, and has all the marks of the
best Salt, ignorant people cannot easily discern it, or observe the difference
unless they prove it by such things that use to be seasoned with it. For salt
meats and other things seasoned and salted with this salt will sooner stink,
and smell rank, when you think to keep them till Summer be far spent.

Burnt Salt the Dutch call Braedtzout.
That Salt which our Country men call Braedtzout has the same effect and
virtue, because they power in but a little Seawater, and burn and torrefie it
a long time. This Salt is clear, bright, shining, sightly, crumbly, crusty with
large broad, kales, and pieces that blink like Stars, that is wonderfully
desired by those of Flanders and Brabant, both daily, and chiefly for their
domestic use, whenever they make great Feasts and Banquets, to furnish their
Tables with. For being that it shines and is so pleasant to the eye and so hand
some and pleasing to behold, The sorce of Salt against the biting of a mad
Dog.
at a great distance, it does wonderfully adorn great and rich men's Tables. It
is used effectually with honey against the biting of a mad Dog, it cures
Scabs, it breaks humors applied with leaven* Honey, Butter, Hoggs-Crease, even
those swellings that when the Plague spreads, do show themselves under the
Armpits, and in the Groin. But pickle or brine made with Salt and Seawater,
does presently take away the burning beat, from any part that is burnt, and
asswageth the most violent pains, whether they come from Gunpowder, Oil, Pitch.
Scalding-water, or coals of Fire, Brine good against burnings.
especially if a thin linen rag wet in the brine be tapped upon and wrapped
about the burnt parts. For by this moystning of it, is the fiery force washed
away, and the bitter pains are allaid. Parts burnt need no cool things.
But they do ill that apply cold, and repercussive means to those that are so
affected, for so they strike back, but do not draw forth the fiery heat, and by
that means it takes faster hold on the parts, wherefore at first nothing is
better than pickle, either new made, or that which lies upon Butter, if it be
applied. Soap good for burns. Lime with rape water takes out fire.
Soap is as good as this, whereby we wash dirt from our cloths; if we make a
liniment therewith, with Honey and Butter. Also water where-Rape-roots are sod
is safely applied, and it will be the more effectual if you dissolve a little
quicklime in it; for so applied as a Lixivium, it will abate the heat, and dry
without biting. But since I mentioned some kinds of Salt a little before; I
shall debate concerning that artificial Salt, that for want of natural Salt
may supply the place of it. The Arabians call this kind Salt of Kaly, Salt of
Kaly a kind of Salt.
from a certain plant by the Sea wherewith out shores are plentifully stored.
There grow in many places about us, some herbs that have a Salt juice, out of
which, Salt, if otherwise we cannot procure it, may easily be drawn, and used
in our Houses; such is Sea Purslane, next kind to Halimus, as Mathiolus tells
us, Mathiolus his industry.
who was ingenious and painful in discovering of Plants: our people at the end
of Summer gather this and pickle it, and keep it, or covering it with common
Salt, they keep it for to use in Winter, as the Spaniards do Olives, Capers,
Sampire: For it raises appetite, and dispells loathing and vomiting, if at any
time the stomach oppressed with phlegmatic or choleric humors do loath meat.
All the Herb, even to the seed that is small and hangs in clusters, till it
grow ripe, is like to out great garden Purslane; which great men use to pickle
up with gross and Bay Salt, toget them a stomach to their meat. The pickling
of Sea Purslane. The description of the true Halimus.
Yet whether this Purslane of the Sea should be called Halimus, I am not yet
certain, for that causes hunger, this drives it away. But in our sandy
Mountains, a little shrub grows forth, and a twig about two or three Cubits in
length, with leaves like an Olive, and has long twigs Willows, that are
flexible and easy, the boughs being like Olive boughs but the lease is less,
and some what round, green above, but beneath in the part next the earth, it is
white and gray; the fruit is in baggs, not unlike to a whirl that women use;
For whirls are used at the lower part of the distaff, the better to turn all
about: What a Whirl is. Halymus drives away hunger.
This shrub comes near to Pliny and Dicscorides plant called Halimus, being of
great force to repress and drive away hunger, for it drives away the vicious
and unruly appetite of women, that they are commonly molested with about the
third month after their conception; and some also that are well; because their
stomach is full of noxious humors, and sour phlegm: Longing called Picatio or
Citta.
hence are they troubled with a doggs-appetite, and greediness to eat, called
Bulimia, as though they could eat an Ox: as that disease in Women called
Picatio, wherewith like the Mag-pye, they are given to eat Coals, Shells,
Pomegranate-Pills, and other things unfit to be eaten: For these defaults, the
shrub Halimus is good to be used, that has its name from the effects, the
leaves being boiled like Pot Herbs, with fat broth, and no Salt mingled
therewith, for so it corrects those sour humors, that they will less
provoke natural appetite, and it is thought to do the same being chewed in the
mouth, as some things only put to the Nostrills, Sea Orach.
discuss the faintings of the heart, and recreat the Spirits. But Sea-Orach,
that looks wan, and unpleasant is found on all the Banks of Zealand, Sea
Coleworts. called Soldanella.
yet it rises to no height but lies upon the ground, and is very low.
Sea-Cabbage, which is the German Soldanella, which our Country people do
miscall by the name of Sea-Purslane, is rightly called Zoult Nelle, from its
Salt savor: it grows abundantly on the Mountains of Zealand, being neighbout
to Halymus, Sampire, Anthillis and Eringos. It delights in the Sea Air, yet it
is not watered with it, as the Sea weeds are, of which I shall speak
afterward. This herb creeps on the ground, The herb Kali is another from that
of Tragas.
with long branches that are tough and, like* twigs, and the stalks are moist
with Milk, the leaves are red somewhat round, the seed is black in reddish
knobs, shut up in covers, they use this to purge the belly, boyld in fat broth,
that it may less offend the stomach by its acrimony and salt bitter juice. But
that Herb the Arabians call Kali, is exceeding common in Zealand, for with that
our Ancestors formerly, and with salt Turfe, and Clots, that have a kind of
Bitumen in them, did make most whitest Salt, the same way as formerly showed
you. The description of Kali or Sea Sengreen.
It is an herb that grows at the lowest part of our Seas, which the Ocean wets,
and it is most plentiful all Zealand over. I use to call it Stonecrop,
Worm-grasse, Housleek or winter Sengreene: the stalk is a hand long, standing
firmly upright, round and knotted, with joints in their orders to distinguish
it, with many round stalks growing to it on both sides, which are very smooth,
and compacted together, and seem as though they would be pulled out one of the
other, as Horse-tayls are, with leaves proceeding from a single stalk, and
they are guarded about with it, they are barwny, thick, full of juice, and as
thick as reeds, we call it Riet, they hang about Passengers feet to stop them,
and hinder their going, and they make a noise and crackling when we walk upon
them, the root is small, thin, and with slender hairs. The whole herb from its
bottom unto the top of it, The herb Kali stops Crabs.
is very cleaf and of a bright shining green color, and it does not decay or
dye in Winter, so that hanged upon the roofs of Houses, it will grow green a
long time without any other moisture, as Aloes; for it is very full of juice,
and wet with its natural moisture abundantly. Our people because it hurts and
hinders Crabs, call it Crabbequel; For being it grows very thick, it stops
their courses, that they can hardly pass, Kali is an herb sheep love
exceedingly.
and with great trouble do they wind themselves out of it, when men hunt after
them, and desire them for food. This herb is the most pleasant and wholesome
fodder for sheep. For since these Cattle in moist weather, Salt herbs cure
sheeps diseases.
are subject to the dropsy and strumous tumors, we in our land call it den
Bot, by eating this herb they are recreated and cured. For it is a most Salt
Plant, because allwaies when the Sea comes in, it is watered by it. Hence it
is, that being thus moystned, it grows thick and abundantly. But those that
would keep this for sauce, my Counsel is that they boil it moderately, and
pickle it with Vinegar not too sharp, rather than with Salt pickle, or to cover
it with Bay Salt, as they do Purslane. The use of it is more wholesome for
flegmatique and fat people, than for such as are lean and spare. There lies
under the earth where this herb grows, and almost under all Sea costs, first a
clay that is clammy and glutinous, and being handled will stick to ones hands,
and it will not easily be shaken off. Georg. 1.


But like a fish that cleaves unto your hands, if that you handle it. And if it
spot your cloths, it can hardly be washed off. We call it Cley because it
Cleves, the Brabanders call it Leem; Cley called of Cleven because it sticks.
The Bitumen in Zeeland called Darri.
next to this follows a ceartain bituminous matter, and concretion under the
earth, which, as I said elsewhere is called Darri: out of which as out of Mines
they digg Turffe, that are very fat, which being kindled as dry turve, make a
vehement heat, and being turned to ashes, and wet with Salt water, did formerly
afford matter to our Country men to make Salt with. But that way is now left,
by reason of the abundance that is brought to us from France and Spain; yet
might it easily by recalled again, if there should be any hostility that should
keep foreign Salt from us, or plenty thereof should be wanting to us from any
other cause whatsoever. Wherefore I think I shall not wholly lose my labor, by
showing this decayed and almost forgotten way of making Salt, that, if ever
need be, it might be restored again. Rembertus Dodonaeus.
But since I am fully upon the mention of Sea plants, I shall speak something
of Sea-weeds* For Rembertus Dodonaeus a Physician of Mechlin, a man that for
illustrating of Plants, and in his practice of Physic, is very knowing and
industrious. Every where near the Sea, there are Forts and Bull warks raised
to resist the Sea-waves, at their very entrance and first coming into the
Haven, made of beams and long poles drove in straight and cross ways, An
artificial description of a Promontory.
which, besides huge mighty stones, that are cast in, to fasten the work, are
propped with bands of Faggots, and cross beams of wood. This Engine is like a
Promontory that sticks forth: and is a safe shelter for Ships to ride under.
Not only our men, but the Italians and Spaniards call this structure the Cape;
whether it be artificial or natural: and in cosmographicall descriptions it
goes under that name. Sea-weed grows abundantly, sticking fast to this, which
though it be vile and base, which besides that it is a Proverb, Virgil also
observed; Baser than Sea weed. Eclog.


Ruder than Kneeholme, than Sea-weed more baser. Yet it has some use in
Physic: for it abateth pains of the Gowt and Joints, the body being first
purged, it discusseth inflammations, it cools and dryes far more effectually
than Ducks meat upon ponds, What is water-Ducks meat. Description of Sea-weed.
which is as it were a mossy excrement of standing waters, that Geese and Ducks
feed on willingly. But since there are many kinds of Sea-weeds, that which is
common amongst us, is with branches, glib, substantial, knotty, with swollen
Bladders and Appendixes, and full of branches, which being pressed with the
tops of your fingers, will crackle and make a noise, like Sena-leaves. This
Sea-weed is with a membranous leaf, and swelling little Bladders, stretched
out by wind, that shine and are smooth as if they were polished, it flotes for
the most part, and swims above the waters, and when the waters are gone, it
sinks down and flags, and lies upon the twigs and poles that prop it up, as if
were good for nothing; the color of it is red, dark, tawny, What is the color
called Ravus.
that consists of a mixture, of brown and black, between a gray and a yellow,
and next to a full dark green; It sticks fast to the rods and stakes, that are
driven into the shore to fence the rampants, like glue or birdlime, (having no
root to help it to fold about) that it can hardly be pulled away. The second
kind of Sea-weed.
Another kind of Sea-weed that is under the Seawater, as grass weed grows in
Lakes and standing waters, it is very thick together and so defends it self,
the leaf of it is like Fennel leaf, and small as hairs, the color is
unpleasant, with a mossy and hairy concression: our Country people call it
Woer, and some Weert, which is drawn out of the Sea, with nets, together with
Crabs and other small fish, and rubbish. But Phycos, or Sea Fucus is next kin
to Sea-weed, and is like it in form and effect, as Aristotle thinks, and Pliny
after him. But Moss must be held to be a thing different from these: L. 6. c.
13. Host. a^imal.
one kind whereof grows not only on the shores, but upon the stems of ships,
when they come home from long Voyages, to which not only Moss and Sea-weeds,
but shellfish, and a little fish called Echineis stick so fast, that they will
stop Snips, and hinder their course, therefore our men use to rub them off with
sharp brushes, and scrape them away with Irons that are crooked for the
purpose, that the ship being tallowed and carined well and smoothly, may sail
the faster. This common kind of moss grows abundantly in the Belgic Ocean, of
a grasse-green color, which yet will degenerate into a yellow or yellowish
color, as, at the end of Summer, Vine-leaves, and leaves of Trees do: it has
no root to grow upon, to support it, yet it cleaves with a tenacious holding
fast to the ground it lies upon, or else being spread over the utmost coasts
of the Sea, and the brinks thereof, it is lifted up by the Sea-rising; and
sinks down when it goes out again; But Sea-mosse that Dioscorides describes, is
wholly different from this, Sea Moss is a stalky concretion.
for that must be judged to be an herb of stalky concretion, and a hairy
growing together, with slender hairs, and small stalks, that are woody below,
with leaves as small as hairs, curled, and nicked, white and Ash-colourd, and
by age waxing red, smelling like Soothernwood, or Sea-wormwood, pleasant, yet
weighty, a good remedy for those that have Worms, and soon helps, the herb
being beaten to powder, and a penny or a dram weight of it, given with Wine;
for it has the same operation with Sea-wormwood, and is near a kin to it, and
like it, if you look upon it when it first comes forth, and shows it self, if
you regard the numerous leaves of it, or the growing stalks, or the crisped and
jagged skirts it has; Corallina is an herb that takes hold on Corral.
Mountebanks call it Corallina, because it is taken hanging fast to, and folded
about, Coral in the Ligurian Sea, and drawn forth with nets.

But there are in Zeland, who are the utmost people of the Belgic nation (whom
Tacitus calls Mattiacos, The Mattiaci in Zealand so called from their sociable
agreeing.
from their sociable agreement, as I shall say more at large, a little after)
Plains that are very long and broad, and from the descent of the Bulwarks,
there are most plentiful pasture-grounds to fat Cattle, wherein do grow
various kinds of herbs, as Sampire Kaly, or Sea-houfleek, Orache, Purslain,
Sea-cole, Halimus, Rest harrow, with a purple flower, and little branches full
of prickles, fit to break the stone, Sea-weed, Corallina a little shrub: but
Buckthorn grows some three Cubits high, and is proper for sandy and brambly
grounds, in some places it grows like a Tree, as Christ's thorn, that is less
fruitful, with boughs that are stubborn, and hard to break, Description of
Buckthorn.
with leaves like the Olive, but narrower, green a top, and white under, next
the earth, the berries are round, and as great as a Roman Pease, and they grow
together in clusters, and the boughs fold close one within the other, and the
fruit hangs by a very small stalk, and is of a yellow color, and when it is
ripe like Saffron, sour and bitter in taste, and it draws forth spittle
abundantly, and quenches the thirst in Fevers, having one kernel within, yet
not hard as stone, as your Corneil-berries, or white Thorn-berries are, that
is, that sharp Thorn, that in the Month of May, when all things flourish, is
very graceful, and smells sweet, or like to Barberries, but it is easily
broken with the Teeth. But that which is peculiar for bushy and downy places,
is called by the Zelanders Down Berries: when Autumn begins they use to dress
up their chambers and houses with this sprowt, when the berries begin to grow
yellow; and they will last till winter be far spent, and refresh the eyes to
see them, and by their sharp taste they are very good for a nauseating and
qualmish Palate. David speaks of this plant, who in many places brings very apt
similitudes to persuade in the point of Religion, fetched handsomely from
natures works. Before, says he, Psalm. 57.
your Thorns be grown, and become hard as white Thorn, the Lord shall break
you, and take you away, and shall make you melt as a Snail, A place of David
explained.
and an abortive child. Whereby he describes the factions and deeds of wicked
men, showing that their Tyranny, threats, power, endeavors, and undertakings,
shall all come to nothing, and shall never do the hurt they intended, taking a
comparison from the Buckthorn, that when it is grown up, is full of hurtful
prickles, but in the spring it is tender, soft, tractable, and not so hurtful.
Now there are in these Seacoasts, many shrubby plants, whereof some growing
far from the shore, yet receive the Sea Air, though they be never wet with
Seawater; others are moistened by the Sea coming in, when the Ocean over-flows,
as it uses to do in winter, at the full or new of the Moon: hence it is that
all Sea plants are of a wan color, Sea herbs are ill colored.
and hoary, and not so beautiful as Garden plants are, nor so graceful to
sight; yet some of them transplanted and made tame by cultivation, become more
beautiful, and grow, and flourish more delightfully. We see the like in
Cobblers, Bakers, that stand by the Oven, A simile from sordid Artificers.
Colliars, Black-Smiths, Goldsmiths, that are gilders; which is performed by
Quicksilver, and in those that forge Pewter, Brass, Copper, Lead,: all these
are discovered by their Countenance, Some works change a man's color.
and have not their natural color, but that which is accidental by reason of
the vapors and fumes that fly about them, so that some of them are
Box-colour'd, Weesil-colour'd, wan like half burnt Brick, brown, smoky; but
should these men use some other trade, and forsaking their vulgar calling,
should live as gentlemen, they would soon look of another hue, far more comely
and beautifully, and their whole body as well as their faces, would be more
graceful to look upon; though some of them would allwaies carry some marks of
their old vocations, that they were before used to, and this we observe in
Country-maids, and men that chance to rise to great fortunes, that they
commonly will discover something of their former rural and servile life.

Laevinus Lemnius, a Physician of Zirizee, CONCERNING Natures Dignity and
Excellence.
The Fourth Book.
CHAP. I.
Of the force and effect of the Moon, by whose motion the Sea is driven, and
what uses to happen to men that are dying, or desperately sick when they are
in their agony, and are beginning to dye, by the flowing and ebbing of the Sea,
and motion of the Moon; whose forces, such as live near the Sea, perceive more
effectually than other men.
I Showed before what power this Planet had, Genesis 1.
which was ordaind to give light by night, and is nearer to us and more
familiar than the other stars, whose force works upon the bodies of Animals,
and stirs the humors. But since it is wonderful effectual not only in
raising, The force of the Moon; what diseases it sharpneth.
and moving of Tempests and inundations of the Sea, but in causing and
sharpning diseases, namely the Apoplex, Lethargy, Astonishment, Epilepsie,
Palsy, Dropsy, Catarhs, and flegmatique distillations. I shall speak a little
more accurately concerning the nature of it, and the rather because the
Inhabitants of the Low Countries do more strongly feel the force of it, by
living so near to the Sea, than others do that live farther from it; for these
being so near, and when the Moon sets in the West, are so nearly shined upon by
her, and no woods or Mountains keep her from them; do manifestly perceive the
power of the Moon, and are more abundantly moistened by the moist beams of it.
For as Pliny says. The Moon is a feminine, soft, and nocturnal light, that
moves humors, L. 2. c. 100.
but it draws none as the Sun does, but fills all things with a moist vapor,
and makes them swell, whence it is, that such as dwell in moist and cold
countries, are full of Phlegm and excrements, and are subject to coughs
hoarsnesse Poses, and to many other defluxions, and Catarhs, especially such as
are idle, Idle persons subject to catarhs. Idl^ people subject to the Moons
effects.
and sit much, and seldom labor or exercise, upon whom, by reason of
abundance of humors, the Moon does more forcibly show her strength. So that
these above other men are exposed to her motions and effects. For Porters,
Seamen, Carriers, Husbandmen, and many more that labor much, and who by native
heat augmented and rowsed, do consume superfluities if there be any, are less
subject to the inconveniences of this Star, and do not greatly feel the force
of it. Yet that I may discover what I have proved and observed by long
experience, I will show what force the God of nature, who makes all things for
our use, has given to the Moon, besides that clear light, she borrows from the
Sun to give light to mortals in the night time. Moreover I will show by the way
what increase she gives to Shel-fish, Oysters, Cockles, Plants, L. 1. Hist. c.
98.
Corn-Trees. Pliny, from Aristotle, maintains that in the French Seas, no
living creature dies but when the Tide goes forth: which opinion as I dare not
contentiously contradict or disallow; yet I do testify to all men, that all
things do not exactly answer that opinion: since I have seen some by the motion
and aspect of the Moon, when the Sea was coming in, to dye; but most men when
the Sea goes out.

For in the low Countries those that live by the Sea, as I have proved it, use
to dye after a diverse manner, according as the humors abound in them. Fat
people are in danger when the Sea flows.
For some by the course of the Moon, by whose motion the Sea is driven, when
the waters flow, others when they ebb, either recover or dye; the humors and
Spirits being either tossed or quieted by the motion and aspect of this Starr;
So in denouncing the Crisis, that is, in giving judgment of life and death upon
all those, that I observed to be troubled with diseases from fulness of
humors, or with inflammation of the Lungs, Pleuresie, Quinseys, Apoplexies,
Lethargies, and Phlegmatic diseases, and Dropsies, whose bodies do swell, and
the moisture chokes them, I pronounce that when the Moon is at the full, and
when the tide comes in, those persons will dye, or else the most of them,
according to the condition and nature of the disease, will suffer some manifest
alteration, by sudden breaking forth of sweat, or blood, or evacuation, and
flux of humors that abound in some part; Dry bodies dye when the Sea goes out.
then I give my judgment, that hectical people, that is, such as are lean and
consumed, and dry for want of nutriment, and old decayed decrepit people will
dye when the tide goes forth, and the Moon is hid. And the greater or less
cause there is in the body of fulness or want of humors, they dye the sooner
or la^er. So they that are swollen with water, or have full and fat bodies, if
they lie sick of a dangerous disease, that comes from fulness of humors,
they dye presently when the floods rise, and the Moon is either new, or in the
full; some when the waters are in the midst between both, Sound people so well
as sick feel the force of the Moon.
and others dye when it is full high water. On the contrary dry bodies, lean,
stravlings, wan, bloodlesse, wasted people dye easily, when the tide goes out,
and the Moon hastes to the West. Some of them, as they fail in strength, dye
about the middle of the tide; others when the flood is gone, and the Haven is
empty. And not only sick men's bodies are affected with these external causes;
but also those that are sound, feel the forces of the Moon's effects: but the
more any man declines from a sound temper, the more is he subject to pains, and
to the change of the Air and of the Moon, especially when in such bodies there
are vicious humors. So when the Moon is in the first quarter, or when she is
full, and a cold wind blows, the Muscles, Membranes, Nerves, Pannicles, tendons
Wax stiff, and being contracted and wrested, they endure sharp pains. Thus
much of the Moon's force and efficacy, and of the motion of the Sea, which let
no man think to be vain, or old Wives Fables, and so reject it; for there is
nothing more certain than this, or more consonant to truth: for experience
confirms this, and reason makes it good, even in things inanimate and that want
sense. For the hairy skins of seal-Calves taken off, The Nature of some skins
in raising up hair.
will grow stiff, and the hair will stand upright, when the Sea comes in; and
when the Sea goes out they fall down again, and this Pliny speaks of. We
observe, the like in some land Creatures that have four feet, whereof most of
them hunt for their food upon trees; for Sabel and Ermins skins, if they be
laid in the bottom of a Chest, and other Clothes laid thick upon them, after
three days, more or less; they will come to the top, especially the Sabel
skins; for that Creature being active, and restless; the like motion up and
down, almost remains in the skin taken off, chiefly when it is pulled off, the
North wind blowing, and it is exceeding cold and dry in Winter. When skins must
be taken off from living Creatures.
For if you take off any living Creatures skin in Summer as from Coneys,
Panthers, Leopards, Lynxes, Hienas, Cats, Foxes, Squirrils, Weesils, Ferrets,
Pole-Cats, and many more, of which we make coverings to use in Winter, for the
most part the hayrs fall off, because the roots of them do not stick fast, the
skins being loose and the pores open: hence it comes that Clothes lined with
such skins, are sooner spoiled with Moths, because they were taken off at an
unseasonable time of the year. Wherefore they do not wisely, who in summer when
the South Wind or South-West-wind blow, lay forth their Mattresses, Coverlids,
Hangings, Tapistry, and their best wearing apparel, laid up for festival days,
and for bravery, which St. Matthew calls marriage garments, to be ayred in a
Southern air, Chapter 21.
and not by the North Wind; and expose them in a moist season. What will hinder
Moths from breeding in Cloths.
For covers and skins, and Clothes grow hard in a cold dry time, and become
better; because this way are Worms, Moths and all Creatures that destroy
Clothes, or that eat and wear them abolished, and consume. For cold and dry is
good to preserve things, and often shaking and beating of them, to shake off
all dust and filth from them. And whatsoever is kept in Chests or Trunks, and
is never moved, nor ventilated and ayr'd, will stink and grow for did and
musty, and suffer wrong, and be much worse continually. Heat of the bed makes
skins the worse.
Also they must not at night be laid upon ones bed; for the sweat that comes
from our warm bodies that are wet with it in the night, when we sleep, is
sucked up by our Cloths and Garments that cover us, so that being moystned by
this warm exhalation coming forth, they receive matter for corruption. For hot
and moist is fit to breed filthy vermin, What quality breeds Worms.
hence in Summer when the air is warm, our Chambers, Houses, Parlours,
Dining-rooms, Kitchins, Chests, Cellars, Butteries, In Summer, houses and
bodies are troubled with vermin.
Gardens, abound with Snails, Worms, Wiglice, Flies, Gnats, Catterpillars,
Hornets, Wasps, Beetls, and our bodies with Lice and Nits and Fleas, which are
less seen in Winter, and do not trouble us so much.

Wherefore all those ruff, and hairy Beasts, and such also as have a tender
and soft skin, whereof rich skins and coverings are made, live rather in cold
than in hot Countries, and thereupon their hair sheds the less, because their
skin is more contracted, and their hide is more condensed and bound up by the
cold: so that it holds the hayrs the faster, that they will not soon fall off,
or fly away.

Zeland full of Conies.
So in Zealand in the very entrance all most of the Ocean, there are abundance
of Coneys to be seen, wherewith all Brabant is furnished after the Winter
solstice, till the beginning of the Spring: and there is no small number of
Hares, of an unusual bigness, the flesh whereof is sweet and wholesome, and
(as some ridiculously triflle) will never take Salt. But they run here and
there in the small mountains, and amongst the sandy hills; some part whereof
lies opposite to the North, or Western Solstice, not by Art, but naturally; so
that by reason of the cold Air, and dryness of the sand, they are most
wholesome, and very nimble, far beyond those that are fed and fatted in coops,
Conies fed with man's blood are not wholesome.
especially if they be fed with man's blood; as I have heard that some
Chirurgions have done in diverse Nations; that when they opened a vein to bleed
the sick; they gave the blood to such creatures: and this will wonderfully feed
them, and fat them, but they are unwholesome, and hurtful to eat.

Wherefore wild ones, that run up and down as they list, wandering here and
there, are the most wholesome to be eaten, and their skins are thicker, and
their hair grows faster and closer to their hides.

CHAP. II.
Of the Islands in Zeland, and of the nature of people there, and their
Conditions, Manners, Original; and what great benefits the land of this
fruitful Country affords to strangers, in a short and clear description:
wherein, by the way, the memory of things done is rubbed up, and many natural
causes are explained.
SInce the Country of Zeland affords so many things that are useful for life,
and for the good of other Nations; I wonder that so many people should so
undervalue this Country, and despise it. For, besides the gallant and huge
high Bay-trees (that I may begin from the fruitfulness of the ground) which
are full of great shining berries, The fruitfulness of Zeland.
of which they have none in Brabant: besides the efficacious and wholesome
herbs, some fit for curing diseases, others to be eaten; besides the most
white Salt, that is made by the industry of the Citizens: besides Madder,
Madder and Alum makes a fast color upon Cloth.
the French call Garansa, and we Meedecrap, that is fit to give a lasting
color to cloth, that will penetrate into it: besides wheat, than which there
is no whiter, nor heavier in the world: besides so much salt fish, and fish
dried in the wind: besides the infinite store of fish that is brought in daily
fresh, and is dispersed through all parts of Europe: there are fair Cities
built, and gallant houses, well furnished with all household ornaments, so that
all things every where, The cleanliness of the Zelanders was very pleasing to
Phillip King of Spain.
are cleanly and beautiful to behold, which the most illustrious King of
Spain, Philip Prince of the Low Countries, did exceedingly wonder at, in
special, and so did his Lords and Courtiers that were about him. To these we
may add the commodity for Havens, and safe places for ships to ride in, where
every Nation comes, and they are most fit for sailing to any part of the world
they please to set forth for, nor do they want able Mariners and Pilots for
that work, who have sailed over all the secret parts of the Sea. But how fat
and rich the ground is, and how fruitful the fields are and what great herds
there are of Cattle and sheep, hardly any man will believe but he that sees it;
as also the most plentiful pasture land to fat cattle with, not only within
the hills and ramparts, but also without near the Sea-shores, in the very
creeks of the Ocean, where there wander up and down some millions of cattle
that are a great profit for Merchants, and vast gain; and they are not only
greater than ordinary, but very dainty meat, by reason of the ground and
grass, which affords them such wholesome fodders, that strangers are
exceedingly taken therewith; so that Pettifoggers, that is such as are given to
follow controversies, Advocates take bribes.
can gratify Advocates and Procurators no better with any bribes (excepting
Gold) than when they present them with a Zeland weather, that has a good
fleece, to store their Kitchen with; for then they take the business to heart,
and follow the cause hard: and if a great sheeps-milk-Cheese that is green, be
joined with it, that weighs many pounds, you cannot please a Lawyer better. A
green cheese Whets the stomach.
For with such sauce are their full stomachs and overcharged with wine, whetted
to drink and feast again. I dare not promise much for the mild Air of Zeland,
for in some places it is very sharp, What Air is in Zeland.
and not so wholesome as their neighbor countries chiefly in Summer, by reason
of the filthy smells of lakes and standing Pools, and because there are but few
trees growing there. Yet this convenience it has, Why the Air of Zeland is
not soon infected.
that it is but little subject to contagions and pestilent diseases, and is
long before it be infected: but once being infected, it will range
unmeasurably, and will not easily abate. A simile from fire in things burning.
For as hard wood will not easily take fire, but being once on fire is hardly
put out; so bodies hardened by Northern blasts and Sea Air, do not easily admit
of the venom, but once seized upon by the Plague, they can hardly get clear of
it. Moreover the pit water that is in Islands, What water there is in Zeland.
not long since won from the Sea, is not very wholesome and savoury, and is
either brackish, or boggish, or tastes filthily. Yet in the City of Zirizea
there are pits, as good for water as any River waters, Zirizea has pits that
are wholesome. Whether the Ancients knew Zeland.
or rain water. We may collect out of Cornelius Tacitus, that this Sea-country
was not unknown to the Ancients; but not known by the name it is now called,
but by the common custom and usual manner of the people speaking one to
another, whereby they called them Mates. For, says he; There is under the same
subjection the Nation of the Mates, like to the Hollanders, Lib. de Morb.
German.
but that they are more fierce, by reason of the Climate they live in; whereby
he shows, that though they are neighbors to the Hollanders, so styled, from
the hollownesse of the earth there, so that they are to be reckoned amongst
them, yet are they distinguished by their common names, and that these being
nearer to the Sea, The people of Zeland are cunning and industrious.
are the more fierce, as they are indeed, and for strength, wit, cunning,
craft, fraud, quarrels, knowledge in traffic and industry of searching out,
do exceed them. Now this name of Mates, Whence are the Zelanders calted Mates.
they have not given them from the place, or some Captain, or otherwise, but
from their vulgar compellation, and manner of speech one with another; for
Mates, which in their ordinary discourse they use together, signifies as much
as a companion of all actions, contracts, dangers, and a partner of all ones
secrets, counsels and labors, that they take together.

So all those that go in companies, or that buy and fell together, and as many
as make an agreement or compact, and with full consent of mind bring their
goods into a common stock, in hopes of gain, by a custom amongst Seamen, of
which there is great plenty in these Countries, are in their native language
called Mates, that is, How the Zelanders call a Colleague.
joined in company together. But such as are joined in confulship, or any
illustrious dignity, be it for Senators, Treasurers, Overseers, Guardians of
children, Executours of wills and Testaments, and other offices are called by
one the other, Veynout, even those that are Consulls amongst us, and it
signifies as much as Colleague. Wherefore of ancient custom, and common manner
of speaking, which the Romans observed amongst these Nations, when they were
conversant amongst them, and had them under tribute, or kept them under their
protection, they call them Mattiacos; So he the Germans call Herman, signifies
Arminius, L. 4. Belli gallici. Who the Zelanders call Ambachi.
and whom Coesar in his Commentaries, calls Abactos, we call Ambachs Heeren.
For the Low Country people thereby mean some great men, who have the whole
power in their hands, and rule within such a Colony, or territory, or
Jurisdiction. The name Zeland is but new, and was not known to the Ancients, it
is derived from Sea and land, as if you would say Land by the Sea: for it is
compassed round with the Sea, and parted into many Islands, Zeland has many
Islands.
in all 15. yet the Sea but few years since did do a world of hurt to these
Lands; by force and inundation whereof, great part of Zeland was overflowed,
all the banks and Ramparts being broken down: yet some famous Islands remain,
whereof three in special are always arming themselves against the Oceans
violence: and with huge expense (which we can hardly persuade the Prince and
his Deputy to believe) scarce defend themselves with great labor against this
unruly element. Amongst these, Whence Wallachria is so caled.
the first haven men come from Sea Harbor at, is Wallachria, either called so
from the Inhabitants, or, as I conjecture, from the French that frequented this
coast, which in the Belgic tongue are now called Walen, and their young men
Waelkens, or from that part of Britanny, The Situation of Wallachria.
wherein toward the West, the Welsh reside, which are the chiefest Ancient
Nobility amongst the English, and they came from the Gauls, as their speech
yet declares. This Island Eastward is over against Brabant, Southward, to
Flanders, Northward to Holland, and from the Western equinoctial to Britanny,
into which is the shortest cut, and from which part is the first entrance into
the Sea, what part soever of the world we please to sail unto. Armude.
At Armude by the free Town of Middlebourgh there is the safest Harbor for
ships to ride in: and here chiefly is the Fleet made ready, be it never so
great; what part soever they are bound for. This Island, besides some parcels
of ground lately laid to it, (which our men call Polders,) is eight miles in
compass, as also Scheld, from which in a hundred years, are three hundred
Acres torn off; is distinguished and adorned with some beautiful villages and
Towns, and there is one principal City in it, Middleburgh the chief Town.
or Mart Town where Merchants frequent. and whereby it is made famous, called
Middleburgh, that is Metellus his Burgh, who was a great Noble man, and a
Consul amongst the Romans, and from him many suppose it borrowed that name: but
I think it had this denomination from its strong fort and Castle, or
unaccessible rock and Tower, What is Burgh in the German congue.
such as was the Tarpeian Rock amongst the Romans, which stands in the very
middle and Center of this Island. Which places Commanders and Governors of
Countries, use to possess, and fortify, from whence as from a high place and
Watchtower, where they keep their guards they can see round about them, and
resist the Incursions of their enemies. Hence amongst the Hollanders came the
dignity of Burghomaster, and Burgrave because in them is the supreme power, and
government of that place. Yet I deny not but it may be referred to the builder
of it, by whom in such a place this fort was raised against hostile Invasions.
There stands from Middlebourgh toward the South-West, or West, 16. furlongs
which make two miles, a City not great in compass about the walls, but well
fenced by nature and Art toward the Sea, which we call Flushing, Flushing City.
a place well furnished with industrious Fishermen, and experienced Seamen,
and Pilots as we call them. Not Ulissea, from Ulisses as some trifling say,
that it was built by him. But rather from a Pitcher or Flagon, A Flagon what
kind of cup.
which earthen kind of Pot is narrow mouthed on the top, that the Liquor may
not flash over but be powered forth handsomely, but the belly or middle part is
wide, and capacious, and toward the bottom it grows slender and less by
degrees, the Hollanders call it even Flessche, the picture whereof is born upon
the Flags and banners of the city, The name Flushing came from even Flessche.
and upon the top masts of ships. But because the Inhabitants of this place
drink sweetly, and the women will do the like, and are sometimes stronger than
men at this sport, from the embracing of a flagon that they so much delight in,
and take such pleasure to drink it off, they got this name, or they took the
name themselves, from their custom of drinking; and it is old with them to do
so, not to make themselves drunk, but to drive away all clouds of their minds,
and to make themselves merry. For there are in this country many touchy, sad,
hawty, melancholique people, who are different from the affects of Brabanders,
and Flemings, who are not guided by the sad Planets of Saturn or Mars, Why the
Zelanders love their Cups.
but by the jovial and merry Planets of Jove and Mercury, hence it is that the
Zelanders desiring to drive away those pensive thoughts, study to be jovial,
and with drink in abundance to drowned these cares and tortures of their-minds.
Toward the East it is opposite to Scheld. There is almost as far from
Middlebourgh, The City Vere.
a City called Campver, very little within the walls, not many years since it
was famous for the Scots being so frequent there. whence is the City Vere so
called.
It borrows its name from the word Fretum, the narrow Sea, because from that
coast unto the farther shore of Campa, which is a narrow turning; whereby it
joins to Northveland, men are used to be transported. For the first haven, or
harbor for ships to ride in, from whence we take ship; to pass over, Scheld
Island so called from the River.
is called by the Hollanders Veer or Vaert; that is faring or passing over, in
Latin Traiectus or Transvectio. Against this Northwards or Eastwards lies
Scheld, so called from the Scheld a River that runs by it, which has many
populous villages and coloneys belonging to it, wherein are many country farms,
many comely manors and Palaces of the Ancient nobility, as Haemstede,
Moermonde, near to Renissa, and Broversaria, besides no ignoble Town. The City
Zirizea, When Zirizea was first built.
having its name from the founder of it, is the chief ornament of this Island,
which in the year of the worlds Redemption, 849. when Lotharius was Emperor,
first began to be built in the form of a City, and to be fenced round with
walls, and from small beginnings was augmented to that splendor, that it is
inferior to none of these famous cities, of which I dare testify thus much
without ambition, or any immoderate love to my country, that it is stored with
many learned men, and fruitful for excellent wits, and full of wise and
provident Merchants, Zirizea. men much given to learning.
who by trading in corn, the choicest Wheat, and Salt as white as Snow, in
Madder, Salt-fish, and plenty of other fish, and abundance of herds of Cattle,
make huge profit. As for their household and ordinary affairs, they are neat and
cleanly, their table is moderate and frugal, never prodigal and luxurious; In
Merchandise there is not one Citizen but is cunning at it, and industrious, and
greedy of gain, and looks close to it, yet they are all liberal and beneficial
to the Inhabitants that are pressed with poverty or are in want, and toward the
rest hospitable, gentle, mild, affable, easy, and without any dissembling or
complemental delusions, they are open and clear to all: For Godliness and
pious worship, Zelanders are cunning.
they are rather religious than superstitious. But as for the people and
dwellers in this country, there is no place of the world are so cunning and
crafty in smelling out and discovering impostors, captious, deceivers,
dissemlers, flatterers, spies, underminers, and dangerous men, though they do
flatter cunningly, and use all skill to tickle their ears, for they cannot
withal their arts and Coggings, and counterfeit behaviors, and false glosses
deceive these men, but they will soon find them out.

-- They are so wise to tell,
What Is sound, and feigned words they know full well, Pers. Sat. 5.

If Brass with Gold be mingled for to sell.
As some use to do who speak one thing and mean another. From this skill of
judging of counterfeits, some common quibs and taunting proverbs have risen
amongst the Hollanders, Some inclinations of the lower Hollanders.
the fool in the Comedy that they publicly acted speaking to them, that no man
must take offense at it. The Brabander is merry, jocant, ridiculous, immoderate
in stage plays and Comedies: the Fleming is lascivious, intemperate, lustful,
wanton: the Hollander simple, improvident, careless, dull, sluggish, sleepy,
foolish, nothing Politic; the Zelander, is crafty, cunning, deceitful, fly,
false. Which affections also grow stronger as they grow old, and show
themselves more for cibly, unless the inclination of nature be conquered, and
men better taught, that they may bear better fruit. For those are the vices of
the baser people and manners of the Nation, Manners of the Nation are peculiar
to the people. Every Nation has its vioes.
and not of the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and such as have liberal education. But
since every Nation has its faults and vices, manners, inclinations, and
studies, that is, customs they all apply themselves unto, so this Nation, that
has the common nature of men, has its imbred and natural affections, that
nature carries them to, partly proceeding from the ambient Air, which
manifestly affects our bodies, partly, to say nothing of men's dier, from the
nature of their Parents, and manners of their Ancestors, and ordinary custom
of life, which with time is so grown up with them and fastened in their minds,
that it can hardly be ever taken out: Noblemens manners differ from the
fashions of the commons.
whence it comes to pass that (if you take away the Nobility or Senators,
that are all Scholars, and adorned with learning) the common people and
promiscuous multitude are inhumane, rude, barbarous, fierce, cruel, unruly, and
far from civility, if you go over any Nations whatsoever. But that inveterate
error, and depraved manners may be removed, which begin from our cradles and
infancy to wax in our minds, and which we seem to suck in with our Mothers
milk: Children to be instructed by their Ancestors.
it is the office and duty of Parents, (which our men now begin to take great
care about) to see their children taught well, and to use so much care for the
manuring of their minds, that laying aside all natural fierceness they may be
inclined to all humanity and courtesy. A simile from wild beasts and Trees.
For as wild trees by transplanting, and by the industry of man become mild,
and grow in Orchards; and cruel wild beasts by man's Art and managing grow tame:
so man's mind which is not altogether so hard as Iron or Adamant, may be bent
and instructed in more humane Arts, to learn honesty, honor, virtue,
godliness, and religion. This is that amongst us that makes our Fishermen a
people rude, and used to the Sea; Zirizea full of Fishermen.
whereof in Zirizea there are above 500. besides young boys not yet of age,
that learn the same vocation, that afterward are to be taken for Mariners,
and experienced Pilots; are of so great integrity of life and manners, that
never any quarrels, contentions, discords, or jars arise amongst them, and they
never go to law one with another; so that the Magistrate never interposeth to
decide any controversies between them, but upon most urgent occasions: for they
use to hold a counsel themselves, The condition of life of the Mariners in
Zeland.
and so to put an end to them all. They suffer none of their vocation to beg,
and they hold it a disgrace for any of their company to ask an Alms at the
door, or any thing by entreaty. But the company of Fishermen, and he that is
the chief amongst them, whom they call their Deacon, appoints an allowance out
of the common stock, for every one that stands in want, and has not sufficient
to keep his family, so that they need nothing whereby they may frugally and
liberally sustain their hunger. The Zelanders Fishermens moderation of their
affections.
But when such a great multitude go to Sea to fish very far off, and it happens
that they speed not well, none of them is vexed or troubled at it, nor wishes
any ill luck to any man, but they all take it quietly and thankfully, in hopes
that they shall have a better voyage for the future. But that moderation of
their mind in such rude men, What the source of nature can do.
is not engrafted by any laws prescribed unto them, or teaching from wise men;
but by the instinct and guiding of Nature, and apprehended by reason, whereby
they find what is honest and decent, and what is not. But to look back to the
Scheld. The original and course of the River Scheld.
This River at Vermandose, is yet well known by its ancient name, it comes
forth of two Fountains, by the Nervii, now called Tornaci, and through Gaunt a
most famous City, Gaunt a nursery for Students.
where I first went to School to learn my Letters, and so through the rest of
the Countries of Flanders, it comes to Antwerp, and runs under the walls of it,
and make a famous harbor, The Scheld an Ornament to Antwerp. Why the Scheld
running by Flanders is called the Houte
and place for Ships to ride safely in. Then running a little farther, it parts
into two, and divides Brabant and Flanders from Zealand: for, winding on the
left hand toward the South, it runs on the coasts of Flanders, and is called by
another name, de Honte, from its barking and noise it makes, where the passage
lies open by South- Vealand and Wallachria into the Western Sea, and again a
passage into these parts; but on the right hand leaving the Coasts of Brabant,
by a continued course, and keeping the old Channel, by the shores of the Island
Scheld, Caesar l. 6. Comment.
it rowls into the Ocean with a violent and vast stream; and from the old name
it is called the Scheld, the Hollanders usually call it Schelt, the French L'
Escault, whence this Island is called Scheld, commonly Schowe, of which River
the chief and main passage and deepest place Mariners usually call the
Channel, that the Ships must sail in, that they stick not upon fords and stay
in shallow places. The skillfull. Seamen of Zealand.
And at this time the people that live thereabouts know it exactly, and call it
by its name, showing the place, where some years past it was wont to fall into
the Ocean, so that not in the most tempestuous night, do our Mariners turn
from it, or sail the wrong way, as sometimes it falls out with those that are
not well skilled in Navigation, When the roarring of the Scheld fore-shews a
Tempest.
to the great loss of their wares and Passengers; But in these places there
are heard terrible noyses and roarings, either when the tide goes out, or else
corns in, and the violence of the Sea exasperated by the winds strives against
the stream of the River: this uses to happen commonly, when after North-winds
South winds blow; so that those that live near, perceiving above a mile off,
the roaring of the Sea and the Scheld, will tell of a tempest to come more than
three days before. But when the mouths of the Sea were formerly narrower and
the passages into the Continent nothing so wide, the Scheld was seen more
plainly running into the Sea; but the Sea floods growing yearly, the mouths and
passages are enlarged thereby, and their creeks are made greater, as it falls
out with gluttons, whose throats are stretched with abundance of drink; A
simile from gluttons that have their throats made greater.
hence it comes that this River is drowned in the larger Salt water, and its
course whereby it runs into the Ocean can hardly be seen.

Shellfish whence so called.
Some, deceived by the affinity of the name, thought that that kind of Fish,
which I once thought was Pliny his Haddock, took his name from this River, and
from Schelt should Schelvish be called so, because in the mouths of the Sea
where this River disembog's and unloads her self, that fish is caught with
hooks or nets: whereas it is, I think, so called rather from its scales, in
Dutch Scellen, (for Scelps are attributed to shellfish and not to fishes)
wherewith it is covered very close all over, and fenced as with a coat of Male:
Therefore when it must be sod, for it will not be broyled, all the scales must
be scraped off with a knife, otherwise than cod fish called Cabbelian commonly,
that is smooth with a soft skin, Cabbelian.
without scales, and is not caught in the mouths of the Sea, it runs into, but
in the deep far within the Sea, though I am not ignorant that some Seafish often
times come into the very mouths of the Sea, allured by fresh water: and they
grow extreme far by it, as Salmons that swim out of the British and Scottish
Seas, against the stream into the Rhein and Mase, Eeles love Saltwater.
as also the Trissae, Alosae, Lacciae commonly called Elft, the Mullets,
Harder, Accipenser or Sturgion. But the Eele contrary to Seafish, swims to the
Sea, and having tasted that grows wonderful nimble, and not so slippery, and
more wholesome for meat: whence it is, that about the floodgates for the
fallings of the waters, (we call them Slusen, from shutting) that in Winter
when the fields are full of water, let this water out violently into the Sea;
Eeles mighty great are taken in nets and weils: but of these I shall speak
sometime more at large when Conrade Gesner a very learned man has received
satisfaction from me, Conrade Gesner commended.
and when by way of recompense I have finished my compendium of lesser fishes
names, which I have dedicated to him. But this River where it comes upon the
borders of Schowe, and from hence falls into the Ocean, it parts the Eastern
Islands of this Country from the Western; whereof those that lie toward the
East are called Beoester Schelt, by the Inhabitants, but those that are toward
the South and Flanders, are called Bewesterchelt, as you would say the upper
and nether, or the nearer and farther Schowe: Some are over the Scheld, Zealand
is divided into two questor-Ships.
others on this side the Scheld. Now by these names are signified two notable
Questorships, to which belongs a Praetorian dignity, and Dictators power: so
that the governors of these places, have power and right all the Country
through, (besides the free Cities, where the Consuls are Presidents and
superintendents) to punish wicked men with Kingly authority, to correct
wanderers and Vagabonds; to imprison Knaves, sturdy Rogues, Beggars, Cutters,
Oppressors, and to examine them by torments, and to cut off their heads,
whereby all things are very quiet and at peace, and no man on his journey need
fear any hostility. The most illustrious, Hieron a Seroskerka.
Hieron. a Seroskerka, a noble Gentleman of the equestrian order, and to be
esteemed highly in many more respects had this Office many years, and he
executed it inoffensively, and worthily to his great honor, Jodocus a Vuervia.
hurting no man. And Jodocus a Vuervia a most magnificent man, the governor of
the Country in all our Island, not without the expectation of the greatest
dignities, does augment his Father in Law's honor and greatness, with an
equal splendor of his descent and nobility. Some years past this River
running between the Zealanders (that are in the same Earldome with the
Hollanders) and the Flemings raised most fierce contentions and bloody battles.
Both these people, calls and honors their Princes by the name of an Earl,
Whence are Counts called.
adding some glorious titles to him; which command arose from this, because the
prime nobility did in Wars and dangerous designs accompany their Emperors
and Cesars, and did help them with all their might: they are called by us
commonly Graven, which power and large title first grew in Justinians days, and
had that name given to it. Then under Berengarius and Ottho that were
competitors it was derived to posterity; it was next in order to the Emperor,
for place and concomitancy. But in the year 863, when Charles the bald was
Emperor, this principality began to be erected in Holland and Zealand, that is
next to the Hollanders, and to be called an Earldome. And the first Earl that
was created and bore this name was Theodoricus Son to Sigisbert, Prince of
Aquitan, and he held that command 38 years, and he made Theodoricus the second,
his Son and Heir successor to him, and so unto our days. From him is this
Kingly power by a long series of noble men devolved, unto the most invincible
Philip, King of Spain, and goes under the title of an Earldome, and the Princes
of the same Province, are called Earls. So in Brabant and many other places,
those that have Kingly power, Whence Dukes are called.
are called Dukes, from leading an Army unto the Enemies Country vulgarly.
Hertoghen, as if you would say, Leaders of Armies. But when Guido Dampetra was
Earl of Flanders, Guido Dampetra Earl of Flanders.
he being greedy to Extend his Dominions, he was minded to take possession of
some Islands in Zealand; wherefore first he thought to conquer Walachria and to
make it tributary, and bringing an Army into this Country, (for the passage
over is very easy,) he wasted it all with Fire and Sword and Plunder, then he
beseiged Middleburgh, Middleburgh wone.
and sent a Herald to bid them yield themselves up: when he found the Citizens
minds not very ready to do it, he brought up the Rams, and with one or two
assaults he wan it. William Earl of Holland and Zealand, the third of that
name, when he came to relieve the City, guarded by the men of Zirizea, that he
put most trust to, being conquered in two Battles in one day, Why the Flags of
Zirezea are red.
his Ensigns being wet with blood (whence it came to pass that the Banners of
Zirizea are blood color) he makes have to Zirizea, than which there was none
more fortified or faithful to their Prince. Guido puffed up with his Victories
hastened thither, leaving a Garrison in Middleburg, he turns all the force of
the War upon Zirizea, and when he had beseiged it 6, weeks, he was very much
damnified: for the Townsmen sallying out continually, did kill abundance of
the Flemings, and took many of them Captives. Lastly, both of them made a
Truce, and a cessation of Arms was granted for 6, weeks. Guido makes his way
against the Hollanders. When the time of Truce was over, they of Zerizea raised
forces, and provided a Fleet, and sail presently to Walachria, The men of
Zirizea restore Middleburg to the Earl.
and killing and forcing away the Flemings, they take the City again, and
having received little hurt, they return home again. The Prince of Holland and
Zealand, William the third of that name, finding so great a victory, honored
the City of Zirizea with great honors, The Zirizeans gaind privileges by
valor.
gifts and large privileges. But Guido Earl of Flanders having ill success
in Holland, and having received a wound departs from Zealand, and being a
little refreshed, he aims at the Zirizeans, by whom he disdains that
Middleburgh was retaken. Wherefore gathering a huge Army, though he was
repulsed by them above 6, weeks, and forced to depart having done nothing, yet
he comes fresh upon them again, and besieging them most closely he never left
to assail them continually. But when the Townsmen were put to great extremity
and were at the lowest ebb, wanting all things yet they could be brought to
yield by no threats nor fair promises, though now 7 months, besides fire and
flames cast into their City, they were beleaguerd by Sea and Land with all
sorts of Engines, Rams, Slings, Darts, Target fences, and other warlike
instruments which that age frequently used. The French King releives the
Zirizeans.
When wherefore they were in narrow straights, and the City had no help, Philip
the Fair, the French King came seasonably to their assistance, and making no
stop nor delay, he sends John Payderosos his Admiral and chief Commander, and
Reginer Grimaldus of Genoa, with a well provided Fleet, and some long Ships,
(which, because they row with Oars more than they sail, Galleys.
are called Galleys) and he wishes them to make speed to relieve the beseiged
in time. They made no stay to fulfill the Kings command, and do what they had
in charge suddenly; whom so soon as the Watch and Senteries perceived from a
high Watchtower, from whence they could look far into the Sea, and gave
warning of it, saying they were not far off, presently William Prince of
Holland and Zealand, kin to the King by his Sister, first seeing the Admiralls
Ships, and then a great Fleet sailing at length, he presently joins the Ships
he had ready for that use with this Fleet, and uniting their forces they had
collected, they resolve to set upon the Flemings and to destroy them; the
Townsmen also that were past all hopes, are raised up with hopes of Victory,
and they recollected their forces that were broken with a long Siege, and take
new courage against the Enemy. But when the Army was ready, and the Fleet so
excellent well provided with all things was to fall on, and began to sail from
the place they rid at; The Flemings, (as they want no military policies and
stratagems) send out a Ship, having the wind and tide with them, against the
whole Fleet, and it was half full of dry wood, Faggots, Laths, Straw, Stubble,
and other dry matter that will soon take fire, all wet with Oil, Pitch,
Brimstone, Tallow, Fat. But when this fire-Ship stuck here and there, and then
being stopped by the Waves, went on slowly, till the Ocean began to come to the
full height, and began to ebb again; behold suddenly, (which we must needs
think was a singular providence of God) the wind turned and was driven to the
North, A Sea Fight.
so the Sea coming back again; the Fire-Ship was forced back, and falls amongst
the Flemings Ships, and sets them on fire in every place; many of them that
they might not be burnt leaped into the Sea, changing one danger with another,
The courage of the Flemings.
and saved their lives by swimming. The Flemings being turmoild by this loss,
our men fall on with Ores and Sails upon them, but they being nothing
discouraged, putting out the fire as they cold, they stoutly oppose the rest of
their forces, and Ships the fire had not hurt, against their Enemy. The battle
was first doubtful from noon till the Morning rise of the Sun, so that the
night it self, which at that time of the year is somewhat clear, namely about
the Ides of August, could not end the contest. Our men, being equal with them,
for place, and the wind being against them, and the Sea ebbing, frighted them
with Fire, Sword, F^re-brands, and Poles lighted, and we cast in many Fire
balls and brands to burn their Ships. In the mean while the Townsmen opening
their gates, and sallying forth did them great spoil, and so beat back and kept
down the violence of the Flemings against our men, the women also flying forth
so violently against the Enemy, that they did as valiantly and stoutly oppose
them, as the men did. There were such crackings, cries, howlings, noyses and
exclamations in that conflict, as many testify, that for above three miles
they might be heard. And let no man think this to be incredible; In the night
all may be heard far. At Sea a noise is heard very far.
for that a noise at Sea, cries of an Army, may be heard very wide, especially
in a silent night. For since nothing hinders, nor Woods, nor Groves, nor
Mountains, nor Rocks as high as Heaven, the noise passes on the plain of the
Sea, as in a wide Champion Land, far and broad, and is scattered through the
Air. But when all night this miserable slaughter and destruction continued, in
the morning the Flemings, past all hopes, became subject to their enemies,
being killed, and scattered by them. In that battle were lost above 8000
Flemings, and there were taken, besides private Soldiers, whose number is not
easy to be had, Guido Earl of Flanders Captivated.
Guido Dampetra Prince of Flanders, and with him innumerable Lords of the
Court; their Ensigns were taken from them, Skins, Tents, spoils, and many rich
booties and gallant things were recovered from them, and with the Prince and
Captives were brought into the City: War is not rashly to be entered on.
and the great Fleet they had, with all things so well appointed, was either
shattered to pieces, or burnt, and what they had came all into the Enemies
hands. Wherefore the Flemings being afflicted with this memorable loss, take
Counsel to compose the business, and to redeem their Captives. Other men's
Countries not to be invaded.
These things should teach Princes, that are covetous of other men's Countries,
and long after their neighbors Lands, that they should not raise Arms against
such as live near unto them, where they have no just cause to make a War, not
sufficient reason to induce them to it. And if there be a cause, they were
better first try all means, and admit of any conditions almost for peace, than
to take up the Sword. But now the siege being raised at Zirizea, and the War
ended, which fell out Anno Domini 1303 about the Ides of August, which was St.
Laurence day, least so fierce a victory obtained after so bloody War, after
some years should be forgotten, or slip out of the minds of the Citizens, they
decreed, that solemn yearly thanksgiving should be rendered unto the immortal
God, and the Senate would have this continued year by year, for perpetual
memory to show how these things were done and how the City was delivered; and
this has never been neglected by their posterity: but also the young boys that
frequent public Schools, What things fall amiss are sometime to be remembered.
and are traind up in learning, keep this day holy day, and rest, having leave
allowed them for to play: so is the remembrance of this deed delivered as it
were by hand from one generation to another, that each Citizen may know, and
hold fast in mind, in what streights and danger of their lives their Ancestors
were, when they fought with all their might, for religion and liberty, for
their Wives and dear Children, and endeavored to serve their Prince to their
utmost power. In the mean while, it affords especially this doctrine to
posterity, and they are warned of it by the yearly commemoration of it, that
when they are afflicted and in great danger, they should lift up their Hearts
unto the great and good God, and seek for safety from him, that their Country
besieged may be releived, that all things may prosper, and that they may obtain
the victory without shedding of blood: which thing alone we read that Abraham,
Moses, David, Ezechias, Judith, and many more did, and by these helps they wonn
the victory. But since the Scheld, and Zirizea situate therein, has been often
set upon by strangers, and shaken with War, Whence is the Island Suythvelandia
so called.
and none of the Islands more than Suythvelandia, which is so called only
because it is opposite to the South, and stretches spatiously, being a very
pleasant Country toward the Coasts of Flanders and Brabant, though some few
years it sufferd damage, Romersvalla a City.
and is become narrower than formerly by half. From this, a City of no small
note called Romersvalla was broken off, which having no Land about it, The City
Gows.
nor ground about the walls, the Sea runs round it, that it subsists alone by
making of Salt. In the Western part of the Island is the City Gows situate,
the walls are but a very small compass, but it is pleasantly and handsomely
built, and the Citizens are very civil, and of laudable manners. There is
besides this another Island joins to Brabant, only a small narrow Sea runs
between, Tole a City of Zeland. Martin^s City.
wherein stands Tole, so called from the tribute and custom. It is an ancient
little Town; from whence the fortress of Martin is not far distant, it is the
free Town that belongs to the Prince of Orange; a delightful place set about
with Trees, wherein there builds a multitude of birds, especially Herons. There
are besides these some small Islands of no great note, as Duveland, so called
from the frequency of Pigions there; Goerede, from the good harbor for Ships;
Platessa, and many more not long since won out of the Sea. I think it needless
to stay to describe them; since a description of Zealand newly set forth, does
exactly represent them all, which the curious may look upon at their leisure.
The original of the Zelanders.
As for the original of the Zealanders the report is constant, and derived to
the Inhabitants by succession, that they are derived from the Goths and
Vandals, especially from that Island of Norway, Zeland in Denmark. Hafnia,
Coopmans Haven.
which the Danes call Zealand, wherein there stands that famous place for
Merchandice called Hafnia, commonly Coopmans-Haven from a Haven much frequented
by Merchants, who first found this Land void of Inhabitants, and reduced it
into Islands, and first setting up Cottages, and small places, made it fit for
pasture and arable Land.

Zeland belongs to Holland.
For in Caesar's time there was a great part of this land, which is no other but
an Appendix to Holland, that is untilled, nor ever was it ploughed to sow upon,
or dug, but full of Lakes and arms of the Sea, that hinders it, as, even to
this day, Holland has many Lakes so that the way by land is cut off every
where by them, and men must pass in boats,; Aestuaria, what.
which is also used in Zeland in the places overflowed, which are nothing else
but places without and within the shores that are exposed to the Sea's floods.
For when the Mediterranean Sea runs into them, they are full of water, so that
in the Winter there is no foot passage, and there is no going to those places
but by boats; But the ground beyond the ramparts, that for many acres, far and
wide, goes as far as the creeks and Seacoasts, is heaped up by the washing of
the water, and is beaten upon with continual flood, and sometimes when the
Ocean swells, as it does at the full or new of the Moon, it is all overflowed;
and when the Sea falls back again, it comes forth, that the places which are
somewhat high bear very good pasture to feed cattle. Young Boys and women
formerly were wont to retreat into these places of retiring, and every one
unfit for the war, In war, these arms of the Sea are places for the Hollanders
retreat.
when the Romans invaded the Low Countries; for it was a very safe Asylum for
them, these places being hard to come to. For these are the places where are
folds for sheep, and stalls for cattle, we call them Stellen, or rather
Stallen, Creeks in Zeland.
and in our days they are so stopped with creeks, and winding ditches, through
which the Ocean-flouds come in, that an armed horseman if he chance to fall
in, may be swallowed up in them, therefore it is dangerous for any man to go
there, that is not acquainted with the way. But there are many places of Zeland
that are grassy plains, and green fields, without any ramparts about them, the
use whereof will never fail in those countries: for what is broken off on one
side, will fall to the other side by the washing of the water, that there can
never want matter in this country to make Islands of. Some of these from the
green grass and pleasant fodder are called by the Inhabitants Garsen, but
those that are not so green nor full of grass and yield no such plenty to feed
their cattle, from feeding and pinching they call Scorren, when some thousands
of Acres are heaped up by these, our men attempt to make Islands of them, and
both old and new Islands were made up of those rudiments by man's labor. Many
formerly invited by the richness of the soil and goodness of the ground,
driving out the old inhabitants, have invaded this land, and gained the
possession of it by force of Arms. There were in the memory of our Great Great
Grandfathers, some that were enemies to Hollanders and Zelanders, who attempted
to bring these Islands under their subjection, Holland and Zeland confederate.
but these two Nations always confederate together, resisted their enemies
manfully, whence it is that to this very day both nations use but one name, and
live by the same laws, and equity, and are of one mind against the common
enemy. We may collect from C. Caesar, besides other things, from these words (
The Mase runs forth of the mountain Vosevus, Com. belli gall. 4. the original
of the Mase.
and being in one part received by the Rhein, it makes the Island of the
Hollanders, and not far from it, within a mile it falls into the Ocean) that
the place called Zeland, is joining and next to Holland, and is an Appendix,
The original and course of the Rhein.
and part of that Country. But the Rhein runs forth from that part of the Alps
where the Lepontii dwell, and is carried swiftly a long way, and when it comes
near to the Sea, it breaks into many parts and making many great Islands, it
runs into the Sea, the greatest part whereof is inhabited by wild and barbarous
people, who are supposed to live on fish and Birds Eggs, from which the Rhein
with many heads falls into the Sea. In which words he seems to me to describe
exactly the Hollanders that are nearest to the North-Sea, as also the Mates or
Zelanders that are joined near unto them; the Islands of them, and of those in
West- Holland, who are in the same nature, and the same condition with them, he
describes a little after in these words: Com. L. 6.
Part ran into the woods, some into the Lakes hard by; they that were next the
Sea, they hid themselves in Islands, which are usually made by the inundation
of the Sea; and these really are no other but the Islands of Zeland, for all
the Islands round as many as are in the Belgic Sea, are made thus, and heaped
together, so that they are first by Nature, and then they are fenced by art,
and by degrees by cultivation and by man's industry they are made fruitful
fields for grass, and for arable also. But there is such a change of things
amongst us, that in few years this country is much enlarged, and in few years
it may be as much diminished and run to loss; nor does any thing better show
the vicissitudes and inconstancy of humane affairs, than the Islands of Zeland,
whose prosperity, and good success by the Inundations of the Sea, Zeland
subject to alteration.
are tossed here and there. There is no corn in any Nation, or more plentiful
harvest, even of the choicest Wheat, than in Zeland; so that two Acres, in
Zeland shall yield the husbandman more profit than four Acres in Brabant, only
our possession is not so fast and firm: since every moment, especially in
Winter, when a Northwest or vehement South wind blows, we stand in danger of
the Seas inundation. Whence came the Proverb, from those that would wish the
best to their own affairs, The Hollanders Proverb of Brabant and Zeland.
and would fain enjoy them safely, that they will commend the good calm Air of
Brabant, and firm land, but they would have the good fruitful land of Zeland,
which they speak commonly thus. Brabant sche Lucht, Zeeusche renten. For in
our, and our Grandfathers memory, above a 100000. Acres that were an Island,
and were fenced in with mounds, all these mighty fences bing broken down and
scattered, by the inundation of the Sea, are swallowed up in it, not without a
great destruction of the Inhabitants. Again the Inhabitants making new Islands
as they often do, when grassy fields present themselves, and they diligently
employ themselves in husbandry, and manuring and sowing the ground; so that in
a few years, they abound with all things, so much that one would hardly believe
it. Yet those in Zeland that are always exposed to the violence of the Sea,
have nothing firm and constant, and on which they may safely rely, for the
havens where ships rode formerly in safety, are now become shallow fords, and
are so full of Sand or mud, that the least ships cannot come into them; Again,
Great alteration in Zeland.
those shores where no havens were, are by the waters washing in, become
harbors for ships to ride in, and are very convenient for great vessels to
Sail out and in, and to be frequented by merchants: whence it falls out that
the negotiation and concourse of people is not always tied to one place. But
sometimes for convenience of the haven, and situation of it, it is carried and
changed to another place. So Zirizea in our memory had a very great number of
ships, not only for burden and Merchandise, but great ships, which Homer
calls, Holcades, a word used frequently by the Dutch for Hulcks, A Hulk is a
great ship.
wherewith they sailed into the borders of Spain, and Mauritania, and
frequented countries lying far North, as Norway, Denmark, Rivalia, Holmia.
Riga, Gedan, commonly Danic, Stockholm, now famous by the illustrious King
Ericus King of Sweden; which navigation, as the vicissitudes of humane affairs
are, is now translated to Amsterdam. Yet the City of Zirizea, abounds
exceedingly well with all things which are useful and commodious for man's
life, and no less than when it was famous, for negotiations with strangers,
and frequented with goers and comers, of all sides: For the concourse and
merchandise of forraigners, and celebrity of a place may sometimes be lost
suddenly, either by the rising of some war from without, or seditions at home,
or popular tumults,; for presently all strangers withdraw themselves, and take
care for their own safety. But that negotiation that is performed amongst the
Citizens and Inhabitants, shutting out all usury and traffic, in a
compendious way made with strangers or the Inhabitants, and is a liberal gain,
is stable, firm, solid, and not so much subject to envy. But if calamity come
from some other place, then the Citizens and natives, Mediocrity of felicity is
commendable.
stand firm and undaunted, and do not easily forsake their Country, their
Churches, their houses, wives and dear children, nor do they go away yield what
they have to strangers to enjoy. Yet the men of Zirizea, All things are
governed by divine providence.
in so great mutation of humane things, and change from one to another, which
is all wrought by Gods providence, seem wisely to have consulted for their own
profit, and to have exchanged uncertain things for certain. For their people
being most skillful Mariners, when their trading at Sea did not succeed very
well in foreign commodities, they altered their course of Trade, and began to
fall to fishing, which is a very great gain, and hurts no body, and here they
fear no shipwreck, nor loss of traffic, no disgrace for usury, or increase
upon money; and the rest of the Citizens follow saving ways of gain, such as
are honest, and envied by none, out of those things that the earth yields
abundantly for man's use, wherewith they recreate themselves liberally, besides
a laudable education, they provide a very large patrimony for their children,
and leave them an inheritance to preserve their Parents names by.

But that strangers may understand in what part of the earth and under what
climate the City Zirizea is, and under what elevation of the Pole: I took the
height of the Pole-artick, or North Pole above Zirizea's Horizon, and I found
the elevation to be 51. degrees, 47. Minutes, and that was the altitude of that
vertical point; the longitude is 25. degrees: whence it comes, that since the
Sun is not far from them, and departs not very far from the Island, but does
moderately shine upon them in the two Equinoctials and two Solstices: the
Inhabitants by the benefit of the Sun, have no dull and stupid wits, but they
are witty, civil, merry, yet many of them by the reason of the Sea that has
its influence upon them, will speak very scurrilous, crabbed and brinish
language, sometimes: of which subject I lately held a pleasant discourse, with
Job Nicolais, a discreet man, and industrious, who carefully labors for the
public good, and does what he can to promote it, and desires that the
Citizens should be men of sound and good manners; and if they have contracted
any fault by the Salt vapors of the Sea that are so near to them, that it
might be mended with good education.

CHAP. III.
How comes it that such as are old men or far in years, do beget children not
so strong, and often times such as are froward, and of a sad and sour
Countenance, and such as are seldom merry.
THey that marry when their age declines, and their youthly heat is abated, for
the most part beget sorrowful children, and such as are froward, sad, not
amiable, silent, and of a sour and frowning countenance: Youth is full of
juice.
because they are not so hot in the act of venery, or so lusty as young people
that are full of juice. For the heat of our age is fittest for to act this
Comedy. Old men being feeble, their spirits small, and their body dry and
exhausted of bloody humors, the natural faculties are weak, and that force
that comes from them to beget a child is uneffectuall and invalid, having very
small ability: so that they cannot perform the marriage duty so manfully, and
there wants many things in those they do beget. Which is intimated in that
dispute that the Angel is said to have had with Esdras. Esdras 4.
Ask, says he, thy Mother, and she will tell thee, why those she bears now,
are not like those she bore before thee, but are less in stature: and she will
say unto thee, that the rest were conceived and born when she was young, but
these when the Womb decayed: hence it is that such as are born in old age, are
slender, small, weak, Why some are not so strong.
feeble, not tall, and have not so much strength, because natures forces are
decayed with age, and the natural and vital spirits are diminished: Why some
are dejected in mind.
whence also the mind is more dejected, is not so nimble, lively, merry and
jocant, because these have obtained all things sparingly, and not so largely,
unless perhaps their Parents were pleasing and merry, and moderately heated
with wine when they were begot.

For sometimes old people will show themselves young and lascivious together,
and to be so well pleased, that in the spring they will one embrace the other; A
Proverb from Horses that are worn out.
For that time of the year serves for Horses also that are decaid, and worn
out, as the Proverb says, for to make them neigh; whereby the Hollanders mean,
that there are none so old, but at that pleasant time of the year; when nature
puts forth all her forces, but they will show some tokens of a mind raised
also; whereby it falls out, that if a woman thus chance to conceive when they
are merry, The affects of Parents go to the Children.
after nine months she will bring forth a mild beautiful, pleasant,
flourishing, lively, generous active Child. And if their Parents in their young
years, were of a clowdy and impleasing disposition, (as many froward people be)
when they get their Children, all falls to the worst, and all those affections,
and tumults that use to arise amongst married people and all their distempers
will be derived to their Children, so that neither the conception, nor time the
woman goes with Child, nor her delivery, not nutrition, can be performed
decently and according to Natures order, and the Children contract many ertours
and faults of bodies and minds from the disturbed motions of their minds, of
all which the fault is to be imputed to the parents, who were the cause and
seed plot of all these imperfections of nature. The faults of Children to be
imputed to the Parents.
Wherefore such as would take the best care for their Childrens good, and would
have them tractable, and pleasant and sweet of behavior: must take especial
care for this, that in matrimonial embracements, all things may be moderately
performed, that nothing happen that may raise distempers, quarrels or troubles
between them; The affections pass to the Child. Which are those the people
call natural Children.
for all these things fall upon the Child that is then begot, and inform it
with the like manners, and the parents conditions are imprinted upon it. I
referr that to the like causes, that Children, which they call natural, (that
is such that are illegitimate, and born without lawful matrimony) are of
different nature, condition and manners, from the other Children: whereof, such
as were begot by noble parents and gentlemen, are often of an high and lofty
behavior, and are adorned with many great and rich endowments, with rare wits,
singular prudence, exact judgments, especially if the parents are a help to
their liberal education, so that sometimes they become the pillar of the family,
and are an Ornament and glory to all that are of their kin, and blood. Why
illegitimate Children are more witty than others.
The reason seems to me to be, because they have received all things abundantly
from their fathers loins and bowels, and in that secret copulation obtaind by
stealth, they received not sparingly and slenderly but abundantly the gifts of
Nature. From when both greedily desire to satisfy their Lusts, and are
prodigal in their embracements, and use all the might they have to propagate
and beget a Child, it comes to pass that all things necessary for conception
are afforded plentifully, and there is no want in this business, and so it
falls out, Whence comes it Parents love their Children, and contrarily.
that since Children represent their parents manners, and have obtained much
from them, there is an incredible love and prosension on both parts, and they
love one the other exceedingly. From which force also there arises
cheerfullnesse and readiness of mind in the Child, and a generous inclination,
whereby they disdain that they were born illegitimate, and out of the laudable
bands of Matrimony, and that they should want any thing that others do not, to
make them incapable of honors and dignities and public employments. A sublime
mind strives for the highest things.
This makes them use all means to bring themselves out of contempt, and by
their good life and sound manners to blot out that mark of infamy, which some
very unwisely impute unto them, who some times were begotten more beastly than
those that were begotten in adultery. But such Children that are born after
this adulterous way, from mean and base parents, and so want the benefit of
education, for want of means, can hardly ever attain to any great matter, or
raise themselves from the Earth, for, as the Poet says;

Juvenal, Satyr. 3.
They hardly can proceed.
Who are at home in need.
Poverty that is wise.
For though a poor man be wise, as the Proverb says, and be the inventor of
many rare Arts, yet it is a very great hindrance to famous wits, that they
cannot rise to any high things.

CHAP. IV.
How comes it that the Bay Tree, which some say will not grow in Zeland, grows
no where more beautifully than in this place; and what you must do to make it
endure the Winter frost and cold.
MAny wonder that in the Seacoasts, and that part of Zeland, which is
denominated from the River Scheld that runs by it; that such stately and large
Bay-Trees grow: being the Country is cold and this Tree abhors cold and frosty
climates. The Bay Tree what ground it loves.
And they wonder the more at this miracle of nature, because they are not only
in every man's Garden, and allwaies green, and very tall with leaves still upon
them, but they bear long fashioned Berries, very black and smooth, no less
effectual and good in discussing winds, and dissipating collections of
humors, than those that are brought from hot Countries. Sometimes the Bay Tree
feels the injury of the Air, Cold, an Enemy to the Bay Tree especially to the
voot.
and in Winter when it is very cold, is in danger by it, so that the leaves,
boughs, stalks, sometimes wither and dye, but the root takes no harm: wherefore
the Bay Tree dead upwards must not be dug up by the roots, but cut off by the
body, for when the spring comes, or somewhat sooner, it will grow green again.
But that it rises so high in this Country, is caused by the fruitfullnesse of
the earth, which is wonderful, and the thick compacted nature of the ground,
that consists of a fat tenacious earth, so that by reason of the Earth's
solidity, The Bay Tree requires a thick ground. Snow melted hurtful to Plants.
the cold cannot in frosty weather penetrate to the root of it. Now nothing is
more hurtful to plants or more destructive, than Snow or Ice melted, if when
they are melted the drops come to wet the roots, especially if after this it
chance to freiz again, and to stick first about the roots in icecles. For so
the earth loosned drinks-in the cold chilly moisture, and the root drenched
with it, withers and dies. But that plants may not be subject to this
inconvenience, nor be obnoxious to the injuries of cold; the superficies of the
ground, wherein they are set, must be fenced with straw and ashes: Ashes keep
herbs from frost. A comparison of Vinegar and Lees with ashes. Why the Bay Tree
grows not in Brabant.
for ashes by their imbred heat foster the ground, and will not let the strong
cold enter. For as Vinegar and Wine-lees: so, coals and ashes are of a fiery
quality. But that the Bay Tree grows not in Brabant and other parts of the Low
Countries, or else grows more sparingly amongst them, it is not to be ascribed
to the Air which is very calm and wholesome, but to the nature of the ground,
which is dry sandy, light, empty, that the cold can easily enter, nor is there
any solid substance to make the Tree fat; and thence it is, that in those
Countries the Bay Tree is low, and shrubby and wanting berries: whereas in the
City of Zirizea, by the benefit of the Earth it grows so tall, that it is above
20 foot high, and full of boughs about the root, with many shoots coming forth,
whereby it defends it self from the cold. Water shoots.
Wherefore that numerous company of suckers about the root must not be taken
away or cut up, for it is defended thereby that it cannot easily take cold, for
if it lose the leaves, yet next Spring it grows again, so the root be kept
untouched by the cold and frost.

CHAP. V.
Of a neutrall body, that is one that can be said neither sound nor sick, but
is of a tottering and doubtful condition floting between both.
IT is confessed that the art of Physic was formerly divided into three parts.
The first is that preserves the present health, and carefully keeps off all
inconveniences of sickness; The second that which contains the reason,
whereby the body may be fenced and defended, that it shall not easily fall into
sickness; The last, that which cures the body of such diseases that it is
fallen into: There are also thee conditions in man's body; Three conditions of
man's body.
though the contentions about these amongst Physicians be needless: one of
good health, when the body enjoyes its perfect health without any
inconvenience; and no print of a disease is upon it: the second of sickness,
when remedies must be given to cure the body. A simile from Hypocrisy.
The third is doubtful and uncertain, in which there be some shows of a sound
man: as wicked men having a counterfeit posture of integrity of life, but there
is some secret affection in it, that makes it subject to fall down. Of which
state I observe two conditions that differ amongst themselves: one of that
which has already discussed the disease and wound it self from it, yet it is
weak, feeble, exhausted, and of little force; which inconveniences of health,
without medicaments, may be restored by sleep, and nourishing diet. For the
like happens to him, Some sick men are bed-ridden others not. A simile from a
Traveller set on by the way. Luc. 10.
as to a Traveller that is got out of Theives hands, he yet pants and trembles,
and is not wholly restored from the great fear and danger of his life he was
in, nor yet fully come to himself; (which our Savior Christ, expressed by an
elegant similitude) but being refreshed by his friends to comfort him, he
begins to revive by degrees, and to cast away fear: so a sick man, though when
his disease is gone, he begins to go abroad, and find all things better with
him, yet some footsteps of the disease stay yet in his body, nor are all the
accidents that use to accompany it, quite taken away and extinct. Another
constitution near to this, yet something worse than this, is, whereby in
outward appearance, a man seems to be well, and not sick at all, but yet his
body is full of vicious naughty humors. Therap. 3.
Wherefore Galen sets a diet for sound men, sick men, and for such as begin to
recover; for the diet of such as are growing well is a mean between those that
are sound and sick. For to these a thin diet is prescribed, sparing, frugal,
moderate, as not to exceed the bounds of temperance for they cannot endure the
leasterrour, whereas strong sound men are not offended with the greatest. So we
give food to Infants and to striplings, but not as we give to men grown and at
full strength, Every man's Nature to be observed.
who feed on Gammons of Bacon and Ox flesh willingly, and all solid meats; as
their age is tender, as clothing to their bodies and shoes to their feet, so
as their body can endure it, must they have food and Physic given them. And
though some new writers are as superstitious in the art of Physic as some are
in Religion, and have taken away the body that is neutrall, Neutrall bodies
taken away.
and will not endure to hear of it: yet I thought fit to speak something of
this. For such a thing is determind by the nature of things, by daily use and
custom, and by the friendly discourses of other men. Hence proceed those
answers of our friends and merry companions, if they ask how any man does,
what health he is in, how his body is disposed, in what case, The forms of
asking concerning a man's health.
place, state he is, whether all be well, prosperous, lucky? to whom we use to
answer in so many words; So so, indifferent, not very well, doubtfully,
inclining, floting between both, instable, not sound, not as we could wish, or
would have it; sometimes, Better, we hope the best, so well as he may, when he
cannot be as he would. And in these kind of discourses do all Nations speak one
with the other if at any time, they taking care of their friends condition,
enquire how they do. And though most of these be quit of their diseases, and
others that are falling down, are not yet fastened to their beds, A simile from
colors and young youth.
yet they ought not to be placed amongst the sound or sick; but, partaking of
both, into a neutrall condition, that is a mean between two extremes: as a
brown color which consists of the mixture of white and black, and as young
youth is a mean between Childhood and Manly-age; For since they do not natures
Offices, and functions as sound men do, nor yet lie in their beds as sick men,
that want the use of their Limbs; they cannot deserve to be called sound or
sick men, but as the vulgar custom is to be called neutralls: some faculties
and works of nature appear in them, but faintly, sparingly, dully: for they
walk and go, but it is slowly, and with a reeling inclining pace, that for want
of forces, they must either lean on a staff, or some bodies shoulder, as some
that cannot swim, A simile from swimming.
use Cork or Rushes to bear them up.

In like manner we may reason of sleep and meat, for they sit down at Table,
and eat to live, but not with that appetite and desire as sound people do,
whose best sauce is hunger: they sleep and are refreshed thereby, but not so
sweet deep long sleep, as some men, who tired with labor, sleep quietly all
the night.

The condition of a sick and a weak man is not the same.
Now the condition of such who recover from such diseases, and are free from
faulty humors, is better and more desirable, than theirs who have some ill
matter lying close, and their body polluted either with the Pox, or from some
other distemper in their lives, inwardly with foul tumors and sores, who in
appearance and at first sight seem to be well, and say they are so, when they
are all full of ill humors, and fowl diseases. The sick desire to infect the
sound.
But these being cruel to themselves, and injurious to others, deny and
dissemble their disease, and thrust themselves into all meetings, and
drinkings, and feasts, and drink boldly with their pocky lips in the Cups that
others do, and obtrude theirs upon other men, and offer them to drink. I
suppose moved to it for this reason, that if all should chance to be full of
the same juice, and they should all be polluted with the same scab, then no man
would forsake their company.

Persius describes, and taxes severely such men who are diseased, and by a
counterfeit health thrust themselves amongst other men's companies, in these
verses.

Within, Sat. 4.
a close disease there does reside;
But that a broad Gold belt from us does hide.
Again in another Satyr assuming the person of a Physician, he marks him, that
counterfeits and dissembles his disease, and will not be reckoned amongst the
sick, but quarrels with the Physician, and rejects his counsel, and reproacheth
him for it, and laughs at him, as if he were sick of a worse disease.

Go to good Sir, Satyr. 3.
to look pale you begin,
That Is naught; Yet more, there creeps a yellow skin.
But you are worse pale, do not tutor me,
I lately buried such a one as thee;
Thou liv'st; go on, I will now say no more,
Swollen with good cheer, and belly white; this poor
Fellow does purge and vomit, what does smell
Like Brimstone, and does make a stink like hell.
He trembles in his wine, and does let fall,
Out of his hands, the cup and wine and all,
His teeth do crash, ly bare, and broth, that is fat,
Drops from his lips.
Such men as these are found almost every where now a days, who, when diseases
show themselves in their faces, countenance, eyes and the whole habit of their
bodies, yet they will not discover them to skillfull Physicians, but they
conceal and foster them to the great detriment of their healths: which when
they have taken deep root and are fast, can hardly be rooted out: wherefore the
wise man gives to every one wholesome counsel, Eccles. 18.
to use remedies against diseases in time, for it is better to take Physic at
first than at last. To which may be applied that of Persius.

You see some ask for Hellebour too late, Sat. 3. Stop at first.

When the skin swells: men should anticipate.
Which should be carefully told to them who carelessely regard not to use means
when their health begins to decline, and neglecting to support it, at last fall
into desperate diseases. Wherefore those that are on the brink of a sickly
constitution, do not presently recover, but have a neutrall body, and are
neither sick nor well, but in the middle between health and sickness, and
therefore they must carefully regard their health: for it is easy for them to
be worse.

But what I say of a neutral body, besides other things, may also be referred
to the condition of the Air and the sky: for sometimes the Air is healthful,
pestilentiall, mean: and the sky is sometimes clear, sometimes cloudy,
sometimes tolerable between both; which also may be seen in the winds and waves
of the Sea; and in men's affections, and motions of their minds the like may be
observed. For they are moderate, vehement, turbulent, moved, mean, remiss,
quiet. So that things are not always at the same pass, nor do they run the
same course.

CHAP. VI.
Of the reason of seeing and quickness of the eyes, and why some will see
clearly things a great way off, and yet are blind close by; others will see the
smallest things near them exactly, but things afar off, though they be high
mountains, they cannot discern easily; and why commonly the right eye is duller
than the left, and sees not so clear. By the way concerning the colors of the
eyes, and many other things, which are arguments of the mind: also some
remedies for a dull eye.
AMongst the many and great gifts of Nature, and most ample endowments, The
excellency of the mind.
wherewith Man is adorned by the best and greatest God abundantly, there is
nothing better and more divine than the mind of man: to which, since all the
senses serve and obey, yet principally the ministry of sight and speaking are
employed by him, when he will explain his mind. The beginning of sight is from
the brain.
For in this we principally excel beasts, that we have power to express the
meaning of our minds, and bring forth our counsels by words: so in the eyes the
virtue of seeing is not wholly placed, but they are as two windows of the soul,
that stand open from the seat of the mind unto the eyes; by the intending and
remitting motion and constancy whereof, the motions and cogitations of our
minds are discovered. The faculty of seeing consists indeed in the eye or that
clear transparent chrystalline humor, which that it may be moist with a watery
humor, which men call the white; A simile from a Jewel set in Gold.
so does it swim and is set within the glassy humor, and it does illustrate
the Apple of the eye, that is the sight we see with, with such a shining
brightness, as a clear and excellent Jewel does a ring. Wherefore sight is
attributed to the eyes, not as to the principal place, but as being the organ
or instrument of it, for the brain by the visual nerves sends spirits to them,
whereby the faculty of seeing is performed. For when the brain is hurt or ill
affected, (though the eyes be well) the sight grows dull, The head hurt hurts
the sight.
and the sharpness of the eyes is darkened, which is proper to drunkards, and
dotards and those that are in fevers. Wherefore by this reason is sight
ascribed to the eyes, that consist of three humors, and four Coats; because
they are guided by the brain and mind that have the chief power; Kingly power
in the brain.
for from them proceed and flow by the optic or visual nerves, pure, clear,
thin, bright spirits: whereby if the dark Air hinder not, or some depraved
constitution of the eyes, sight is performed exactly. But if they be
diminished, obscure, troubled, slender, the sight of the eye is made dim, and
not so sharp: but from the temper of the eyes, there grow diverse manners and
reasons of sight. For he that has plenty of spirits, and perfectly pure, that
are clean, well-polished, as a clear crystal glass, he can see exactly things
that are far remote. For when that humor is perfectly wrought, there flows
from it a thin and sincere vapor, or light spirit, whereby chiefly sight is
performed, and things at a great distance may be discerned. For when the animal
spirit is much, Who has the best sight.
and plentiful, subtle, thin, and heavenly, it carries the sight a great
way, and sees all things clearly, nor is it easily wearied with continual
looking, or a fixed intending of it, The sanguine have strong sights.
and the moist and hot spirit has this faculty, commonly called the sanguine
complexion. But where the spirit is but little, yet pure and not cloudy, he can
see things near at hand clearly and distinctly, and has a certain choice, but
things at a distance or something farther off, he sees not so clearly. For a
little and mean spirit is easily dissolved and vanishes, and cannot carry the
sight so far. Whence it comes that such as have the organ of sight furnished
with a clear, but yet small spirit, will see the smallest characters without
hurting their sight, but great mountains farther off, or rocks that are capes
at Sea, they cannot see so well, which happens to a hot and dry or choleric
complexion. But why some do see things hard by them but meanly, Choleric see
clearly.
and things distant not at all, proceeds from want of spirits, and grossness
of them. What sight a gross spirit makes.
But where the spirits are plentiful and gross, and somewhat thicker than
ordinary, that man can long endure to look on a thing, and not be weary to
behold it long and steadfastly that is obvious to his sight, and he can see at
the first glance, but cannot exactly distinguish things: for grossness
hinders sharp sight; which may be observed in a cold or moist complexion, which
is the flegmatique. A moist and small spirit, what sight it makes.
But he that has a moist and mean animal spirit, to serve the organ or sight,
he can neither see things near hand exactly, nor at all things afar off; for a
few spirits soon vanish, and are dispersed: but gross ones hinder the function
of sight; since the rays that proceed from the sight of the eyes are not
carried to the object, nor do they receive the species of things that come to
the eye from without. A thin and rare spirit binders the sight when spectacles
are good.
But a rare, thin, slender, dark spirit, such as is in old decayed people, and
such as are wasted by sickness, does make a weak sight, and almost none at
all: wherefore they do well to help their dull sight with spectacles, for by
them all things seem bigger, and the visual spirits are restored, and collected
into one, they do not vanish and disperse so much: but I advise no man to use
them too soon, for when they want them, they will be quite blind. For that
these are dark and grow blind, comes from want of spirits. Wherefore spectacles
refresh the sight, because the rays are reflected and retorted by them,
Spectacles refresh the sight.
and the spirits gain strength, new ones continually coming thither from the
brain. But there are besides these things spoken of, many more, that darken the
eyes, and either hurt or hinder the sight. For if the pupil chance to be moved
from its place, How many things hinder the sight.
or be dilated too much, contorted, contracted, or diminished, or from some
stroke or wound, fall or contusion be tumefied or inflamed, the faculty of
seeing is wonderfully offended: Eyes that stick out or sink in are dark.
also eyes that stick out too far, or sink in too deep, do bring some
inconvenience to our sight; for prominent eyes are hurt by the external light,
so that in the clear Air, and Sun shine they see not their objects well; for
the immoderate light hinders them; but if the sky be dark and clowdy, they see
the better; hence it is that they see perfectly what is near them but things
afar off darkly and obscurely; again, such whose eyes lie hid and deep within,
and their balls stick less without their eyelids, are contrary to the former.
For these see things hard by not so distinctly, but they see things afar off
very well; Hid eyes and such as stick forth are contrary to seeing.
wherefore when we would see things afar off we half shut our eyes, and wink
almost, for so the spirits compacted and heaped together do send forth their
rays very far. Hence we use to wink with one eye, and put a vail before it,
which may darken the Air, and hinder the light, whereby we can more forcibly
and fixedly look upon the object; as men do that shoot in Guns and Crosse-bows;
for they shutting their left eye, From Archers a reason for sight is taken.
the spirits run more plentifully to the right, and make the sight stronger:
therefore Archers aim thus, and so come to hit the mark they shoot at. To
which we may apply that Ironical speech in Persius.

He can direct a verse as fine, Sat. 1.

As winking with one eye he would draw a line.
But that some men see two things for one, is caused by the distraction of
their eyes into diverse parts. Why some men see double.
For when the rays of the eyes do not direct themselves to the same point of
the object, but are carried diverse ways; and the spirit that uncertainly
receives the species of things, fluctuates with inordinate and wandering motion,
here and there, we see two for one. Why things seem divided.
But things seem divided, cut in sunder, full of chinks, and holes, when part
of the pupil is blinded with some humor standing before it; also thick fumes
and vapors rising from the stomach to the brain, do present various sights and
images to our eyes; so that sometimes all things seem to run round, and turn
here and there. Some think they see straws, fleas, gnats, flies, Beetles,
spiders, Why we see such absurd things.
Hobgoblins, witches, fairies: and drunkenness, and gluttony cause these
effects; as also a melancholique humor, which cloud the brain with most gross
vapors. But that the right eye is duller than the left, every man may prove in
himself. The right eye duller than the est.
In our perfect age a gross and thick spirit occasioneth this, and because
commonly by lying on our right side, nocturnal vapors rise and flow thither:
but in old age the right eye grows drier, and the heat of the Liver devours the
humors that serve the sight: but the left eye is moyster, and in that the
spirits are not so easily extenuated, nor do the humors grow dry. But the
heart, The heart lives first, and dies last.
the fountain of life begins first to live, and dies last, and being taken
forth of some living creatures, will pant a long time after: yet the eyes which
are thought to be perfected last, first cease to move and show signs of death:
The eyes dye first.
and they dye before the rest, because the spirits being taken from them when
death comes, they must vanish, or the spirits are drawn back from the eyes to
the brain, that is the beginning of motion and sight. But as for the causes of
diverse colors that are seen in the eyes, I shall speak something here to it.
They proceed from the humors that are round about, Whence come diversity of
colors in the eyes.
whose quality, plenty, want, thinness, thickness, mixture, make diverse
colors and species of the eyes; as black, blew, gray, Owl, or Goats eyes, red,
yellow, tawny pale, light-red, clay-colour, green, dark-red, fiery, flaming,
bloud-red, violet-colour, saffron-colour, golden-colour, white as milk,
whitish. But eyes that are all with black color (whose beauty if the eyelids
be of the same color make a man seem comely) proceed from this, Whence come
black eyes.
when the visible spirit is weak, and the humor plentiful, thick, dark, and
shady, so that one cannot see through it, by reason of the abounding humor,
and the profundity of it: for no light that comes from our eyes, is carried
into his eyes that stands over against us, but the rays fly back again, and
are as it were retorted upon us. So in Fountains and cisterns, Why the water
shows black in wells.
and deep pits, the water seems to be black, and serves for a Looking glass,
the sight of the eyes being beaten back by the thickness of the water, and
reflected upon it self; for it forces back our sight upon us. What sight black
eyes have.
But black eyes are of that nature and condition, that they see clearly by day,
because the day light runs into these dark shady eyes, and moves and enlightens
the spirits. But at night they see ill, and not so exactly as others, because
they want the outward light to move the humors and spirits to sharpen their
sight; Gray and blew colored eyes whence and how they see.
but where the humor of a man's eye is transparent and clear, but the spirit is
small slender and weak, they have Owls eyes, or gray and blew colored, that is
tempered with blew and white: of which color are lanthorns that you may see
through, Lanthorns are a light gray.
for with these are made plates for lanthorns, and of this color are the eyes
of Owls, and many other creatures. They that have such eyes see weakly, and
confusedly by day, because the day light, and brightness of the Sun dissolves
and dissipates the visual spirits that are not very strong: but in the night,
because the organs of sight are enlightened with a natural and imbred light, the
spirits being collected and heaped together, they see clearly what is in their
way. These kind of eyes sparkle, What eyes twinkle in the night.
and shine in the dark, and like glittering Stars they send forth their beams,
so that besides men, many living creatures, not so much by their craft in
hunting, as by the faculty of sight they are endued with, find no inconvenience
by the darkness of the night, whereas the bright day hurts them, and blinds
them; as we see in Owls, Creatures that see clear in the night.
night-Crows, Bats, Cats, Rats, Mice, Dormice, who see worse in the day by
reason of the too great light, but the darkness of the night sharpneth their
eyes; for you see that if you hold candles or Torches before them, they can
hardly see: wherefore Seamen when they Sail at night desire not that the Moon
should shine too clear, but a dark kind of sky, that is not covered with too
thick clouds. For so they can see farther, and the rays are less dissipated
by a light object, and do not vanish away so soon. Sea-colourd eyes.
Sea-colourd eyes, are tempered with white and green, it is a moyster color
than the rest, but not so clear and smooth, and neat. Wherefore by reason of
the gross moisture of it, and the small spirits, they that are so affected see
not very clearly, especially in a bright Air, which offends them chiefly; But
if the humor and spirit be of a moderate temper, Eyes and sight moderately
disposed.
the color is between white and black very clear, and thereby is the sight
performed most exactly. The colors of the eyes vary according to age: The
color and sight of the eye by what reason it is varied.
and by reason of the thickness, thinness, plenty, paucity of the humors and
spirits; which thing is also manifest in the leaves of plants, which when they
first shoot forth, are yellow, then as they grow elder they wax green, and
again as the plant grows old, they become yellow or Sea-colour. So when
children are first born, their eyes are gray and blew, Seagreen, green,
Owl-eyes, but as age comes on, they grow black; but in old age, they grow white
as their hairs do, or degenerate into Owl-like eyes. Also Dioscorides has,
from the opinion of other men, L. 1. c.
written that by medicaments, the colors of the eyes may be altered. For the
shells of small nuts burnt to ashes, will make the pupills of young childrens
eyes black, that are gray and blew, being powered in and anointed on the
forehead with Oil. Also the wind, the constitution of the Air, the climate,
diseases, affections, and passions of the mind, immoderate venery, hunger,
immoderate sleep watching, and surfeiting; change both the colors of the eyes,
and the qualities of the humors and spirits. Counsels in restoring the eyes.
Wherefore a moderate diet and course of life must be kept, least the organ of
sight (than which God has given us nothing better in our bodies) should
receive any damage. Emptiness and fulness to be observed in recreating the
eyes.
And if the eyes begin to grow dark for want of humors, or by dryness, or
want of spirits, with grief of mind, weeping, watching, weariness, old age,
immoderate venery, or be extenuated and wasted with immoderate study, we must
use such things as are restorative for our bodies, and foster our eyes: What
things restore eyes that are decayed.
as new rere Eggs, sweet wine, Raysins, sweet Almonds, Pistaches: Chestnuts
either roasted or boiled soft, Turnips, the virtue whereof by reason of the
plenty of their windiness rises to the head, and wonderfully refreshes the
visive spirits that are wasted: also the brains of birds that fly much do the
like, as of Sparrows, Linnets, Spinks; They do unadvisedly who without any
choice, or making any difference, apply to their eyes, Rue, Celandine, Rue
sometimes hurts the eyes.
the galls of Vultures, Kites, Hawks, that are of a burning and biting faculty,
and they waste and devour the spirits and humors that make the sight: they are
indeed fitly applied when the eyes are dark and misty from superfluity of
humors, When Rue and Celandine are good for the eyes. Radish and Rapes good
for the eyes.
and when the pin and web take away the sight, and deform the eyes; for they
dissolve the congealed and collected humors that by their thickness hinder
the spirits to be brought thither: so all things that are abstergent and
extenuating are good in this case, as are common Radish that procures a good
appetite, Fennel-seed, leaves and roots, Eyebright; French-Lavander, and all
things that cleanse the brain of thick vapors. Wherefore let Scholars that
must study by the help of their eyes, avoid Garlic, Leeks, Onions, and all
strong ^^^elling things and that send forth such s^^^king vapors, and are
hurtful for them. Garlic and all strong things are hurtful to the eyes.
For these spoil the eyes, memory, and damnify all the senses. But such as use
hard labor and exercise, none of these things can hurt them. But outwardly we
must look on such things that refresh the sight, Green things delight the eyes.
and are delightful to behold, as are all green things, whereof there are
innumerable kinds and differences in the fields, woods, Gardens, Groves, to be
found: but of stones, Emrods are by their green colors good for the eyes.
the full greenness of the Emrod, and with which the eyes can never be
satisfied, as also the Prasius, the Topaz, the Jasp^r, the Saphir, Eranos
commonly called a Tarquesse, and the Lazul-stone: Whereby the visive spirits
are collected, and do not vanish; so they sharpen the sight of the eyes. But
that some by looking on the eyes do collect the inclination of the mind and
thoughts, The eyes are tokens of the mind.
I am not against it. For they are the Indexes, and do show forth, the inward
affections, thoughts, conceptions, though the tongue be silent. So in some
peoples eyes and countenance there shines, meekness, modesty, placability,
clemency, probity, and many more tokens there are to be seen of a pleasing and
sedate mind. And in others, by looking on their eyes, you may discover pride,
arrogance, hautinesse, cruelty, craft, fraud, anger, envy, hatred, indignation,
fear, elation, joy, sorrow, despair. Also Physicians in diseases do carefully
observe the constitutions of the eyes; For if they be sprinkled with redness,
or streaked with bloody streaks, Arguments of the mind from the eyes. The
diverse disposition of the eyes.
they show a frensy or madness from the inflammation of the brain; but if they
be wan, and dark lead-colour, they show the extinction of natural heat and
loss of life. But instable, winking, moving, unquiet eyes, and unconstant,
signify alienation of the mind and doting, but faint, moist, flagging, full of
tears, dark, trembling, stiff, shaking, swollen, hollow, hid, dull, twinkling
eyes besides the diversity of affections of the mind in sound people; they show
in sick people also, not without danger of life, distemper of the brain, from
plenty or want of humors, from heat or cold. Pore-blind, what condition of
mind they are of.
But pore-blind, goggle eyed, squint-eyed, and such as look obliquely and
a-skew, besides their muscles drawn awry, and pulled diverse ways, they have
this error in their Natures also, which vice because it principally consists
about the Brain, which is the habitation or rather the Court of the mind, as it
does outwardly much deform the eyes, so it enclines the mind to some vicious
affections; for most of these that want good education, are false, crafty,
deceitful, quarrelsome, inconstant, subtle to circumvent, and have wonderful
tricks to gull men with. Wherefore the Hollanders, when they describe a man
that is so marked, call him, A Proverb from sight of the eyes against wicked
people.
a slim gast, even loos end listich schalck, Even boos wicht: that is, an
overthwart, crooked, crafty knave, that you cannot safely trust; for that he
does all his actions with fraud, deceit, fallacy, catching, deceits,
impostures, and dissembling tricks, to do other men mischief, and himself
profit. All those men partake of this nature and condition, who in the
principal and chief part of their bodies have any remarkable sign, namely on
their head, Heart, Liver, whereof I spoke more largely in my Physiognomie, the
second book, Chap. 36.

CHAP. VII.
The Reason why some are born without some parts, and want some Limbs; others
have some parts double and superfluous, and serving for no use.
Redundance of matter brings things double.
DAily examples show that some are born with double limbs, and such as grow to
the rest, as with appendixes to their Feet, Arms, Head, and sometimes they are
distinguished by joints. And as deformed, Whence are depraved Births.
and monstrous shapes proceed from faulty and corrupt seed, and the ill
constitution of the Womb, the Stars also joining their forces in the production
of them: so by redundance of humors, and plenty of seminall excrement, the
parts of the body come forth double, the imagination of the parents being
busied about some such thing in the formation of it. For if at any time that
sex, which is shaken with the smallest affections and prints them upon the
Child, conceives any thing in the mind; or thinks that things are double before
their eyes, by the concourse and Flux of humors, that fall down on those
parts, about which the thoughts are employed, do serve to frame double parts
that are superfluous, or parts of some other kind. For such absurd imaginations
are observed in living Creatures. So lately a Lamb was yeaned, with a Head of a
Sea-Calfe, at the sight of that Sea Monster. So the year before, there was
seen, a Sheep and a Calfe, with double Heads: and I saw and handled a Hen, When
double things are represented.
that had four feet, and four Wings. But since Women in conception, and all the
time they go with Child, have diverse species and things in their imaginations;
and sometimes it falls out, that double representations of things are made to
them, from gross vapors rising from beneath, or with distracted and broken
Spirit, that should be directed to the point of the Apple of the Eye, whereby
their sight is divided and cut into two, all this affection is carried to the
Child that's breeding, What imagination in a woman can do.
and some parts being handsomely formed, imagination fastneth to them other
needless parts.

For the force of imagination is so strong, that if a woman once fasten her
eyes and thoughts upon any object, all the faculties of nature, and that force
that serves to form the Child, the humors running from all parts, which are at
her command, fall down thither, and imagination is wholly intent to do the
business; hence it is that sometimes she frames diverse and unusual shapes,
double parts, and superfluous appendixes, and fastneth strange limbs to the
body. But from defect of humors and penury of nutriment, Whence come parts to
be wanting.
or where the natural faculties in making the parts are too weak, and not
forceable enough, it falls out that men want some parts, or have them
disproportioned and too small, and though Nature sometimes have matter enough
to make the Child of, and has force and strength enough to do it, yet she is
now and then hindered, that she cannot bring all things to perfection, and frame
a comely and well proportioned body; How hands and feet come to be wanting or
maimed.
so that the Infant is born sometimes with some parts cut short or maimed, and
not made up: for sometime a woman may have a narrow Matrix, a hard and callous
Spleen, Hips sticking forth, and turned inward back again, and other Obstacles,
that will not suffer the Infant to grow, and to be perfect in all parts: for
the tender parts of the body by reason of so great impediments cannot be
dilated, nor diffuse themselves, nor enjoy the nourishment comes to it; but is
stopped and stayed, that the parts cannot grow beautifully and well formed. For I
think it falls out here, A simile from Trees planted in stony ground.
as it is with Trees that are set in stony grounds, so that the roots cannot
spread every way, but being hindered, turn back again, and grow crooked, and
being repulsed they return, So in the body of a Woman, when the Child is
framed, either it is hindered by the narrowness of the passage, or for want of
nutriment, or by reason of some hard thing that comes against it, so that the
limbs cannot be framed with joints, and distinctly as they should be. So I saw
a noble man's Daughter, with a maimed and spongy hand, A History related.
which when the Parents ordered me to handle her, I found by touching of her
fingers, that the joints, which by nature should come forth, were turned
inwards and retorted, so that they represented no shape of fingers, for all the
parts of this member, and order of the small bones, wherewith the hands should
be clinched or opened, were hid and folded up within. We call this Stompen.
Hence I pronounced that that error and fault of nature proceeded from this,
that that force and faculty of nature which should be employed in forming the
Child, and strives to perfect a man in all his parts, was hindered by some imped
iment, that it could not make the joints complete, and frame them handsomely as
a hand should be; for the Mother being subject to the hardness of the Spleen,
and female Children inclining to that side that is the left side, from the
affection of that part, on which those parts leaned as against a hard Rock,
they became so ill shapen and deformed.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether Shirts, Sheets, Coverings, Linen, ought to be changed when men lie
sick of Feavors; and whether it be sit presently to shave the Beard, and cut
the Hair of such as are newly rocovered of diseases; also in what diseases it
is good to wash the feet.
IF at any time in contagious and pestilent diseases, Carbuncles or Bubo's and
other, Eruptions or Pushes, show themselves in the outward parts of the body as
they use to do, sometimes eminent like Warts, sometimes flat and plain, as the
humor is thick or thin; sometimes lead colored, wan, black, yellow, green,
diverse colors which are the worst: sometimes red, fresh, white, which are the
best, and safest, ^ll which kinds and differences we see in the Smal-Pox and
Measils, in all th^se kinds of Blisters, Whence Spots come to be of diverse
color.
I advise men to shift their Sheers, Bla^kets, Pillows, Coverlids, Beds,
Shirts, and to lay on fresh, and to hang their foul chothes that are taken from
their bodies in the Air, to be ventilared, whereby the contagion and ill
vapors, that the Coverings are tainted with from the body infected, may be
taken off. For since many foul and pernicious vapors; as smoke come out of
such bodies, which the clothes that the sick is covered withal draw to them;
it will be, that the sick must needs suck in the Air round about them, and be
infected again every moment with a new contagion, for he roles in his
corruption, as a Sow wallows in the mire, In the increase of the disease
nothing to be changed.
which I would have to be observed thus far when the disease abates, and
begins to mend, and the Concoction and Crisis be past, that is, when certain
and undoubted signs of health show themselves, which signify that the forces
of the body are masters of the disease, and that but a few relics of the
disease remain within: for then Sheets or Shirts hung in the Sun, or before a
good fire should be laid under those that are upon recovery; or else I bid one
of the Servants, whose body is well to wear them for two days on his back, or
else to lay them in his bed to keep them warm, and they may not differ from the
heat of a man's body, least the change might bring some inconvenience to the
sick or exasperate the disease in any part: for by this reason or rather
error, the party that was almost recovered may fall to a relaps. Wherefore
both to those, and to others that are sick of lighter diseases, I command
severely, that the disease may forthwith come to the height, and the fit may be
lessened at first, that they be not unquiet tossing and tumbling, nor any way
expose themselves to the cold Air; as there are some, Tossing of the body ill
for the ficst.
who in doubtful and dangerous diseases will lie with their Arms stretched
forth, and their legs displayed, and toss themselves up and down, and so drive
back sweat, Pushes, Impostmes, Swellings and tumors, and other collections in
the body that would break forth. For the cold Air coming to the body, stops
all their course, drives them back, and will not suffer them to ripen: but
hear, and her fomentations, Fire draws forth sweat and contagion.
open the Pores and passages, and make way for the filthy vapors to come
forth; that they may be discussed, wherefore I think they do well, who first
being infected, and taken in a contagious Air, set themselves close to a good
fire, that they may all run down with sweat, yet not beyond their strength, or
that they should faint by it; but that at the same time, their body being
purged downward, and their belly cleansed, they may take such things inwardly,
which shall expel and discuss the venom, they have first drawn in, before it
get root, and has laid fast hold of the body, and possess it self of the
heart and principal parts, for the mischief makes haste to do that. A simile
from a City besieged.
As they that lay siege to a City, do first assault the Castles and Forts, and
Commander of the place, for the rest will yield presently and submit: when
therefore the body begins to be affected with a dangerous and dubious disease;
if the matter require the opening of a Vein or purging, let that be done in
time, so that at first, and before that, the belly be purged; then open a vein,
Let pu^ging b^ bef^^e blood letting.
then give cordialls to corroborate the Heart and the vital parts, as
Theriack, and Mithridate with Wine, or syrup of Fumiterry, Epithime, Violets,
or some other liquor that the nature of the body requires, or a skillfull
Physician shall think fit; wherein it is fit he should be wonderful
clear-sighted, that he miss not the mark. But for a decoction, the present
remedies are Germander; that smells like Garlic, it grows plentiful in
Zealand, Marigolds that cause sweat, Balm, Figs, red Onyons, the root of
Spondylion, that is like to Angelica, and Master wort in forces. Amongst which
the root of Zedoary is singular, that is not rotten, of no value, lost and
without smell, so it be swallowed with Raysins, or Currance, or some Liquorish,
and so chewed and swallowed: For thus they may preserve and defend themselves,
What things preserve from the Plague and cure it. Such as must go to the
diseased. In a contagious disease, sweat must be driven forth.
who are forced to go to those that are infected with a pestilent disease, to
comfort them, and raise up their hopes for what is better, and make them be of
good confidence, as Ministers of the Church, Physicians, Chyrurgions, Midwives.
In case of such Eruptions of tumors, which it is best to be sent forth be
times, I think it not fit, at the beginning to strew the Chambers or floores
with Vine leaves, Sedge, White-Thorn, Roses, Myrtils, Willow Poplar, green
Grass, or to sprinkle Vinegar or Water in them, unless they faint by too much
sweating; for such things will make the humors fall back, and thicken the skin
and passages of the body, When the Chambers must be strewed with boughs.
which should rather be opened, that the contagious vapors of the body may
come out; which is better performed by hot fomentations than by cold; sometimes
we must put such things to their Nostrills as may recreat their Spirits,
Sweat-smell^ r^create the Spirits.
and may restore the Life that is faint with too great hear, as are Roses,
Violets, Clove-Gilliflowers, Camphit, Buglosse Borage, Water Lillies, Wine,
Amber, Lemmons, Quinces, whereof most of them may be given inwardly boiled in
Wine, or strewed with Sugar, or seasoned some otherwise for sauce, adding a
little Saffron and Cinnamon thereto, whereby they may be more pleasing for
smell, and taste the senses, and Heart, and Palate, and may the better restore
the decayed spirits. And though the Physicians do not use rashly to admit any
innovations about the sick, Sometimes Physicians will yield to the sick to
please them.
nor to depart a hairs breadth from what is reason, yet in some things they
will yield to them after the Crisis is over, that is, when certain signs of
recovery appear, and the greatest part of the humors is either discussed by
sweat, or drawn forth by bloodletting, and purging critically; for then we are
not unwilling to let them sometimes drink wine or cold water, then we suffer
them to change their furniture, beds, coverings, and to remove into other
chambers, which if they were suffered to do before the state and vigor of the
disease, before the Crisis and concoction of it, they would bring them
presently in danger of their lives. For the heat of the bed, and fomentations
applied to the body, When sweat comes forth seasonably.
do betimes call forth the Feavourish heat, and help the sweat and pustuls to
break out, so that the bowels that were inwardly oppressed with gross fumes
and vapors, the skin and pores being opened by heat, are refreshed, and
ventilated. For by this means the putrefaction is soon discussed, all stoppings
are broke open, the fever is abated, and all things grow milder. For as in a
dining room filled with smoke, A simile from smoky houses.
the guests are almost strangled, and their eyes like to be put out, unless
the doors and windows, be set wide open, that the smoke and fuliginous vapors
may fly out into the Air and vanish; so in the body of man, the heart is
almost choked by the thick clouds and dark humors, unless the pores and
passages be laid open, that the foul vapors may breathe away. A simile from
skimming the Pot.
And as it is when we boil meat, the filth and skim that rises up must be
skimmed off, we call it Broem, and all be well purged, lest the meat should be
polluted with some excrements and filth: so at first by sweat, vomit,
phlebotomy, purging, the humors heaped in the body must be removed, before
they spread into the veins, A simile from washing out of spots.
and fasten into the Arteries; for then as spots that stick long in garments,
they can hardly be washed out, nor so easily be driven from their places where
they sit fast. But as for the trimming of the beard, for therein consists the
grace and ornament of a man, and the hairs that grow on the head, wherein there
is contained a manlike force, to shave the beard is ill sometimes. Judges 26.
as Sampson makes it good, and in all ages many more have done, who are very
hairy, I would have all men take notice that oft-times it is not good for men
in perfect health to have their Beards and hair shaved close to their skins, or
to have their heads long washed. For too much use of it weakens the forces, and
makes men effeminate and unmanly; also it resolves and extenuates the spirits,
and native heat, and draws from the heart great part of boldness and courage
in undergoing dangers, though sometimes to rub the head with some coorse
cloth, to stroke the beard, To rub the head good for the eyes
and to soke it with some moist abstergent matter, is good to clear the eyes,
and makes the mind more quick; But for men that are sick, or newly recovered
from diseases, I think it not fit, so soon as they are grown well, to be shaved
with a Rasour; for it moves the flowing of humors, and if any relics of the
disease remain yet in the body, it moves and stirs them, and raytern up a new
fever, as a fire that was almost out; for by this innovation, diseases do no
less grow again, or Fevers that are remaining are strangely brought in again,
no otherwise than they are by some distemper of mea^s and drinks, or changing
of shirts or linen. For the same reason I think not good to wash the feet at
the beginning of diseases, When are the seet to be washed.
especially in the decoction of herbs that have an attracting quality, as
Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Marigolds, Fetherfew, Tansey, Bay Leaves. Nor is bathing
good till the body be purged, When are baths good.
and the fury of the disease abate, and signs of concoction appear, and the
floting humors are fit for excretion, otherwise they break forth into some
principal parts, and flote here and there with uncertain motion. Wherefore we
must observe when it is fit to wash the feet, or to desist from this business,
wherein the unskillfull multitude errs to their great danger, who do it without
using choice of difference, and so soon as the disease comes upon them they
fall to washing of their feet; When it is ill to wash the feet.
For if the diseases be above the Midriff, or Rheums fall from the head upon
the Breast, washing the feet exasperates the disease: so if any man be troubled
with a Pleuresy, inflammation of the Lungs, Quinsey, Cough, pain of the side,
Pose, Hoarsnesse, Catarrh, he must altogether cease from washing his feet, and
by no means use this remedy, for the humor falls upon the parts underneath,
and exasperates and enrages all. But in diseases that proceed from the lower
parts under the Midriffe, namely, that are in the Stomach, Ventricle, Spleen,
Liver, Matrix, Bladder, Reins, Guts; it may be done safely, and to great good
purpose, especially if from those parts arise any faintings, or swoundings, or
any other affection, whereto also we may use frictions and ligatures, and set
cupping glasses to the hips, When frictions and ligatures are good.
or if there be need to open a vein, we may do it in the great Toe, or about
the Ankle or Ham, and draw forth blood: for thus as in a sheep,

To turn away the heat it is very good, Georg. 3.

To strike a Vein it^h foot, and let one blood.
But for the trembling of the heart and palpitation, for swoundings and pain of
the heart, When the bands must be pinched.
for shortness of breath, for swellings of the throat and tumors, it is good
to pull the hands and rub the fingers, especially that which is next the little
finger, and uses to wear a Gold ring, the middle vein in the arm must be
opened in that part where the pain comes, cupping glasses must be set on the
arms and shoulders, cutting and scarifying the skin deeply, if the body be full
of blood and humors; Nothing to be taken from lean people.
but lean wasted consumed people, must be restored with fomentations, wine,
sleep, and sweet smells, for nothing can be taken from them.

CHAP. IX.
That by a wonderful force of nature, and incredible efficacy, several herbs
are appointed for several parts of the body, to help them, and they do
severally help several p^^ts by their imbred qualities and virtues.
God is wonderful in his works.
THat every man may be the more in love with God that made him, and by a
singular way has brought forth all things for the use and good of mankind, and
may admire the skill of nature, that she has received from God; I thought good
to show, how commodiously and fitly, and with what wholesome operation, all
herbs, whereof some are fit for meat, others for medicine, and some for both,
are appointed severally for several parts of man's body, wherefore this is
natural to plants, and they are endued with such a force, that by their imbred
faculty they should help some parts, and that leaving other parts they should
repair thither, for which they are ordained, and the parts do not only draw
greedily their nutriment, Plants ordained for several parts.
but also such medicaments that are wholesome for them, and they enjoy that. So
some are applied to the side, to the Midriff, to the Breast, to the vocal
artery, if at any time they are fallen into any distemper: others are laid to
the Milt, Liver, Kidneys, Intestines, Matrix, Bladder, Head, Brains, Eyes,
Nose, Ears, and these are cured by them: The parts draw to them what is good
for them.
other herbs show their forces and effects upon the Nerves, Bones, Marrow,
Muscles, Arms, Chords, Membranes, and are carried to them by a wonderful
virtue, and that which is peculiar and proper to each of them, whereby they are
qualified with power to help and strengthen, or to purge those parts from
excrements, so some herbs respects certain parts, and are ordained for them.
For Liverwort, commonly called Acrimony, is for the Liver, Succory and all its
kinds, amongst which is common Garden Endive, Sowthistle, Sorrel, Haukweed,
that where a hot distemper hurts one, do wonderfully help him. But when a cold
affection offends this part, Anniseed, Pontick-Wormwood, and common Wormwood,
Dodder: For the gall, Rheubarb, Celandine, Scamony, What are good for the Liver.
that drive yellow choler downwards, partly to the guts, partly to the
bladder: For the Spleen that hinders light-armed soldiers, What are good for
the Milt.
and runners when it swells, Milt-wort, Walfern, Hart's-tongue, that is the
common Scolopendra, Polypod, Capers, Tamarisk, bitter Almonds, Peach kernels,
to purge out the excrements, and to corroborate this part are commended. For
the Stomach and Ventricle, Mints, Mace, Mastick, Ginger, and what may be
confected of these. For the Brain, Rosemary-flowers, true Acorns, Virgils, What
are good for the Brain.
sweet Marjorum, Marjorum, Betony, both Lavanders, Nutmegs, Piony roots and
berries, Misseltoe; For the Breast and Lungs are Hysop, Savoury, Wild Time,
Horehound, Coltsfoot, Scabious, Licoris, Friendly to the Breast.
decoction of Barley, Rayfins; For the Heart, Saffron, Cinnamon, Pearls, red
Roses, Citrons, Coral, Jacinth, Gold, Cloves, the bone of a Stags heart, What
are good for the heart.
also the smell of new bread, good wine that refreshes and recreateth the
Heart. For the Reins, Saxifrage, Sampire, Grommel, What are good for the Reins.
Alkakengi, a kind of a nightshade, whose berries are red and round like to
Cherries, Daucas, Garden-Smallage. But for the Matrix, What are good for the
Matrix.
are Motherwo^^ because it purges the womb from foulness, Savin, Calamint,
Penniroyall, Savoury, Clary. So some penetrate into the remotest and farthest
parts, and are carried to the Nerves, What are good for the Nerves.
as Hermodactyls, sweet Mullens, commonly called Palsey-hearb, Madder, that
colors the bones of Cattle red, if they chance to eat it green, though they
touch not the root that is red, which may be seen in the boiled flesh of that
cattle, and in sheep that are painted red with the decoction of it, as Woad
dies them blew; wild Saffron, Saffron, and yellow Ocre. So that they call
Sea-Amber, or Sperma Ceti, Sea Amber.
commonly Walscot, sodders broken, cleft, cut, gaping bones, in which thing I
find such a force, that it will pierce through the solid boxes it is kept in,
and moysten them with dewy drops. Mummy good for fractures.
So artificial Mummy, called Pissaphalsum, the Arabians call it Mummy, is used
with good success for falls, blows, hurts, contusions, fractures, bruises: for
that rosiny mixture, by reason of the Oil of Myrrh, Myrrh, Aloes, Saffron, and
other spices that are in it, that they use to Embalme the bodies of Nobles
with, as we read was done on Christ's body, has a great force to consolidate
and bind. On the other side some things have a diaphoretick, What things move
Urine.
that is a discussive force, to resolve humors, and to provoke sweat. Some by
a natural property move urine, and break the stone; as Parsley, Garden-Smallage,
Daucas, Sosels, Ammi, Jews-stone, Goats blood, Lovage, and many more. Some
sharpen the sight, as Eyebright, Fennel, Celandine, What things drive away
venomes.
Rue; Others by a present remedy resist poison, as Zedoary, Masterwort,
Germander, Garlic, Theriac, Mithridate, and some other things that Galen
commends highly. Some by a specifique, or secret quality and not elementary,
purge forth juice that is familiar to them. Ad Pisonem. What purge the Gall.
So Rhapontick, commonly Rheubarb, and Scammony purge forth yellow choler: So
Sena, Polypod, Epithime, black Hellebour purge out melancholique juice. Wild
Saffron, Agarick, Hurts of Melancholy.
Mercury, Esula, and the seven Tithymals, purge phlegm and watery humors.
Fumitary, Cassia, Cylindrace, commonly called Fistularis, Violets, Damask
Prunes, Buglosse, purge the blood from fowlnesse. But all medicaments that are
purgative, as Galen says, What purge the blood. Smipl. c. 3.
do it by the similitude of the whole substance, and by a secret property, and
their specifique form. For the Elementary virtue that consists in the
temperament of heart, There is one effect of the qualities in Plants and
another of the substance.
cold moist, and dry, does not cause a medicament to make one vomit, or to
purge forth this or that humor; but it is the similitude of the whole
substance, which being stirred by heat and a celestial force, forces the
humor that is peculiar and familiar to it, to be driven forth. Like delights
in like.
So Galen maintains that attraction is made by the similitude of substance,
whereby he intimates that there is a certain similitude and likeness in both
substa^^es both of that which purges, and of that which is purged. Moreover
that which is purged being phlegm, that which purges it out must be of a
flegmatique nature also: whereby he shows, that between the humor and the
medicament there is a similitude and agreement and natural familiarity, which
cannot be ascribed to the first qualities, but to the substance.

Therefore we must use otherwise to try the force of herbs that do any thing
by the force of their qualities, that is of heat, cold moisture or dryness,
and of such as work upon the body by a property of their whole substance, and a
heavenly effect, or sidereall influence. For those that change the quality of
the body, are to be examined by reason and judgment, Reason and experience are
required in arts.
but those that purge out the humors, are to be found out by experience and
daily use. So in the former there must be judgment and choice, in the latter
experience; whereof the one as Hippocrates says is difficult, the other false
and dangerous. So purging medicaments that drive the humors out of the body,
or else venomous things that are pernicious and dangerous to the body,
wherewith some Nations go about to destroy their Enemies, as others do with the
sword, are to be tried by use and experience, for they do it not by reason of
heat; otherwise, Pepper, or Cardamom would do the like, but by an imbred and
native property. Hippocrates seems to subscribe to this opinion, when he says,
Physic when it is come into the body, Lib. de nature. human.
it first attracts and draws unto it self, that which is most familiar and
naturally agreeing with it, and like unto it, then it moves the other humors
also, and forces them out. A simile from the Earth and seed.
For as plants draw to them what is most agreeing with them, by a natural
propinquity, and they live by that moisture, and change it into nutriment; so
medicaments, appointed to drive forth humors, are carried to their like, and
drive them forth either above or beneath. Wherefore let no man reject it as an
old or ridiculous fable, Cantharides exulcerate.
that we now say; that to every part certain herbs are properly appointed:
when Spanish flies that are of a corroding quality, if they be applied
outwardly to the skin, will hurt no internal parts but the bladder, as Galen
says, so that they are carried through the stomach and ventricle without doing
hurt, Ad Pisonem.
and by the passages of the Liver they penetrate to the bladder, and they
exulcerate no part but that. So the juice of black Poppy, and Hemlock hurt the
heart and brain; the Sea hare, the Lungs: though all poisons, unless they be
cast out by vomit, or rebated and kept down by Antidotes, will by degrees come
to the heart if they be applied only outwardly, which is clear by the biting
of a mad dog, and his some that sticks upon the wound; for by a penetrating
force, Persons applied outwardly will come to the Heart.
the skin being first corroded, the venom flies to the principal parts, and
makes a man mad. We must referr it to the same causes, that the Loadstone
attracts Iron; Jet and Amberstraws, and chaff, Force of the Stars lies upon
the humourt.
and other light matter. Also the influence of the Stars works effectually
upon sublunary bodies. So Mars moves yellow choler, Saturn sharpens
melancholy, the Moon increases phlegm, the Sun and Jupiter predominate over
the blood. The Planets make metalls grow.
Also the force of the Planets works upon Metalls, Stones, Jewels, Herbs and
Plants, and all subterrancall things, Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Pewter,
and whatsoever uses to be dugg out of the earth for use, or for Luxury, or for
pleasure, each of which receives its force and increase from some peculiar Star.

CHAP. X.
That Planets are of both sexes, and that some are affected with one thing,
some with another.
Sympathy and Antipathy of things.
AS men are not affected the same way toward all men, nor do they love them
alike, though the order of nature, and common condition of life require it, but
are by sympathy, that is, by a natural inclination affected toward most, and
love them best; but they differ and dissent from others by a secret and hidden
antipathy; and will by no means hold friendship with them: so plants and some
inanimate creatures, by a secret imbred quality of nature, foster and embrace
some things, and fly from others as their enemies, and seem to hate them. And
to mention a few things out of many: Quicksilver, loves Gold.
Quicksilver delights so in Gold, and will so role it self about it, that no
color of that Metal shall appear, that it cannot be taken off but by fire
or Aquafortis, and the Metal restored to its former luster. The nature of
the Loadstone.
The Loadstone suddenly draws the Iron to it, unless it be smeered with oil,
for then by reason of the smoothness it refuses it, nor does the force of it
penetrate into the Iron. The Nature of Amber. The Dolphins love to man.
Amber, Jet, the Diamond will draw Straws, and Chaff, and all things else,
besides Basil. Amongst living Creatures the Dolphin has an incredible love to
mankind, especially young youths, and delights to play and sport with them, and
flatter them. The Lizard, The Lizards love to man.
commonly Ectisse, with a back as green as Leeks, when he sees a man, is very
pleasant and sporting, and moves its tail often, as a dog does, flattering and
fawning on a man, and defends him from a Serpent that lies in ambush. The
Elephant exceedingly desires man's company and obeyes a man in all things, The
Elephants Obedience to man.
so you be not harsh to him, but bespeak him gently, and is ready for any
service; but otherwise he is stubborn and will do nothing. On the contrary the
Woolfe hates a man and all other Creatures. The Crocodile (of whom the Proverb
is, The Crocodiles tears a Proverb.
The Crocodiles tears) lies in wait for man, and bewails him when he is
devoured. The Hyaena is so crafty to entrap a man that he will Counterfeit his
voice, and tear him in pieces. The Cerastes, a Serpent armed with horns,
ascribed to the Tribe of Dan, Genesis 47.
the Dragon, Hydra; Dipsas, whose sting makes a man thirst insatiably, the
Snake, Adder, Viper, Scorpion, God afflicts men with ve^emous beasts.
and many more hurtful Creatures lie in wait for man especially, and bite and
sting him mortally. And God commonly uses these Creatures to correct men's
wickedness when they obey not his word and will, Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 8. Ezech. 5.
Herbs agre^ together. The nature of Cucumbers.
Whereof there are many Histories and lessons in the Bible. Moreover that some
herbs agree naturally, and that others disagree with other things, is very
plain. For Cucumbers desire water, and delight to be very wet therewith, so
that if they be planted too far from it, they will creep and go that way: on
the otherside they refuse Oil and fly from it, and if they be sprinkled with
it, they grow thin and die. The Vine loves the Olive.
But the Vine loves to grow near the Olive, and will be content to have it
engrafted into it, desiring to join with it. The Oak hates the Olive.
But the Oak and Olive Tree are at very great ods, and hate one the other so
much, that if one touch the boughs of the other, they will grow crooked, and
turn to the contrary way; The Baytree an enemy to the Vine.
So the Vine endures not to grow near to the Baytree, because this is shady,
and by its heat hinders the growing of it. So is it affected to Coleworts,
Cabbige hates the Vine.
that suck up the juice of the earth, and the Vine wanting that, dries and
withers; for both these plants cover after moisture. So some plants are
delighted with the affinity, and nearness of some other Plants, and are
refreshed by the mutual embracements of their boughs and tender stalks, others
are averse and withdraw themselves, and will by no means unite. Pitch is taken
out with Oil.
So some things that are rosiny and of a fat substance, agree well, hence it is
that Pitch is washed out with Oil, if the Garments be Silk or Velvet, or
Fluwel, or Skarlet, Purple, or Chamlet, Butter and Oil take out dirt.
or the most precious dies that are stained by it: For all these kinds of
stains and filth are taken off and made clean with butter or Oil so handsomely
that it cannot be perceived. So soap wherewith linen is washed, is made of
Oil, How Soap is made.
fat Soot rant Butter, and the ashes of the Pitch-Tree. And as there is so
great Concord between so many kinds of Plants, that they will embrace one the
other, so amongst herbs of the same species there is observed to be a
difference of the Sex. Sever in plants.
For there is a conjunction between them and a kind of matrimonial society, so
that these plants growing one near the other, will grow the more beautiful,
and both their leaves and fruit will be more graceful; and they will decay and
grow less, and sometimes die when they are taken asunder. And hence it is that
some plants are called the Male, What plant is the Male, and which the Female.
others the Female: the Females are those that have less force and virtue; and
are full of a cold and unfruitful moisture; Whence it comes that they will
bear flowers in their season, but for want of heat, and by reason of their
debility they bear no fruit, Berries, Kernels, or seed. Wherefore they that,
after their flowers are fallen, yield no such thing, Plants bearing no fruit.
but some empty and vain rudiment of fruit, which for want of heat, and
impotency of nature, they cannot bring to perfection, are called Female Plants:
But those are called Males, that are more beautiful and comely, and bear great
leaves and boughs full of them, and grow up very gallantly and bring their
fruit and seed to maturity, whereby they may be propagated and grow again,
which thing is denied to the other sex, unless perhaps by the nearness of the
Male, and gentle embracements it grow fruitful, and being wedded with it,
swells forth into seed and fruit; In plants there is a venereal affection. L. 3.
c. 4. The natural force of the Palm Tree.
which Pliny says, is done in the Palm Tree. For the Female by the vapor and
influence of the Male, conceives and brings forth fruit: the Female bowing down
her top and branches toward the Male, and fawning on it, and when the Male is
cut down, she grows barren, therefore the Arabians say that the Females will
not bear without the Males, the flowers and down of them, and sometimes the
powder and dust, being strewed upon the Females. For the like happens to these
plants, A simile from Hens and Females that want the Male.
as does to hens, that will lay Eggs without the Cock, but these Eggs will never
bring any Chicken, though the Hens sit on them never so long. The reason is not
unlike in women, in whose capacities of the Matrix, Women will bring forth
Lumps without form.
by a mixture of seed and blood flowing thither, sometimes lumps are heaped
together, without any man's cooperation, but because man's help was wanting, and
the efficient cause that affords life and form, and virtue was not used, all
that mass and heap is without form and life. Wherefore plants that have a
vegetative faculty, no less than animals that are bred of a moist and slippery
seed, do send a generative force and vital spirit one into the other, and enjoy
a mutual copulation, and that by a secret consent of nature, and a hidden
inspiration, that they have from the heat of the Air and the Sun, and the
generative spirit of the world, The spirit of the world makes all things
fruitful.
whereby plants do flourish, are fostered, do bud, are quickened and enlivened,
and conceive and bring forth seed and fruit; which virtue is infused into the
world and all the parts of it, whereby all things are continued, and subsist in
a constant order. L. 3. c. 9.
Wherefore Theophrastus and other searchers into the natures of plants, have
wisely divided them into Males and Females, by the reason that some are
fruitful and bear seed, but others are barren and bring forth none. So Piony
called the Male, the crooked bladders and husks opening by degrees, Piony seed
very comely to look on.
is very beautiful, here with black shining seeds, there with red and Scarlet
colored, and it refreshes the eyes with a present efficacy, in curing the
Epilepsie: the Female wants this comeliness. So the Female Mandragora is
either barren or bears very small fruit. But the Male bears a lovely pleasant
and sweet sented Apple, Cantic. 7.
like to the yelk of a Hens Egg, by the enticement whereof, Rachel being
allured, Genesis 30.
suffered Leah to lie with the Patriarch Jacob, whereby, as some Ecclesiastical
writers suppose, she might be made fruitful. Augustine on Genesis.
But I can see no natural reason for it, nor is it likely that Mandragora
should cure barrenness, since it cools extremely, unless it chance to be good
for a hot fiery and torrefied Matrix, Whether Mandrugora cause conception.
which being unfit to conceive, as is also the Matrix that is exceeding moist,
as Hippocrates says, may be helped by, and brought to its due temper, or else
because it is of a sleepy quality it may help the retentive faculty of the womb
to hold the seed. We observe the same distinction of sex in the Bay Tree,
Corneil-tree, Olive, blew Violet, Oak, and many more: whereof such as are
called the Males, are fruitful with flowers, fruit, and seed; but the Females
are barren, and bear nothing. Also amongst wild plants and Garden plants that
are cultivated by man's industry, we always see such a difference, yet so as
that the wild plants which come up of themselves, if they be dressed and
transplanted, will become as Garden plants. A simile from country Clowns.
For as a country clown who is rude and uncivil, if he be brought to the Court,
and put into rich cloths, and used to dainty fare, in time and long custom, he
will become a Courtier, and be like a Gentleman, though sometimes there will be
something observed in him that will smell of his former condition, and rural
behavior, so will plants lay aside their wild condition, and harsh natures by
dressing and manuring them by man's industry. On the contrary, Garden plants
will grow wild and degenerate, unless great care be taken to dress them, A
simile from a Courtier who degenerates into a Clown.
even as some Noblemen, that frequent the company of Clowns in the Country, and
are commonly amongst them, lose their Ancestors Nobility, and ingenuous
behavior, and fall from their liberal education, heroic Majesty, and civility
of life, and become rude and savage as many clowns are. And as Garden plants
and fruits are the more beautiful by man's industry and care about them, Wild
plants before Garden plants.
and are fairer than the wild ones are; yet they came from wild ones at first,
so that they will become like to them again, unless they be manured.

Hence, studious Reader, thou may conjecture, what force there is in
manuring of all things, From plants to men we must consider of education.
and of education especially for man; what care will do to preserve the body in
health, that the safety of both parts and welfare may be preserved, than which
nothing is more to be desired.

CHAP. XI.
That Lampreys which the Hollanders commonly call Pricken, if they be dried in
a Chimney, they will burn like Torches and Links if they be lighted.
Whence they are called Lampreys
LAmpreys that are so called in Latin Lampetrae, from licking and sucking of
Rocks, are like to those called Murae^ae in form and figure of their bodies,
but they are not so great, they are slippery small fish, with a long and round
body, like to those small Eels the Hollanders call Ael (for Palincks are
longer) with seven holes that they are distinguished by, on the left side.

Description of the Lamprey.
There is in those small fish from head to tail, not a backbone, as in the rest,
but a nerve that is foster than a Cartilage, whereby they turn themselves as
they will, exceeding nimbly; for they turn and wind themselves round like a
hoop; they contract, dilate, and stretch themselves, they leap, and play, creep
and go forward as they list. Lampreys have their vital spirit in their tails
For their vital spirit is in the extreme part of their tail, and they are
sooner killed there than by bruising of their heads. The Hollanders call them
Pricken, because with their sharp nose they will stick fast like bloudsuckers
to planks of Ships, Nets, and to men's Bodies, and they bite hard at all things;
prick, crop, and tear them; therefore because they fasten their sharp teeth in
things, they are called Pricken also.

This fish has taught me an experiment that I suppose every man has not
observed, Dried Lampreys will burn.
that has a natural reason for it, and you will find it so, if you try it. For
this kind of fish like to a Candle turned the wrong end upwards, will serve for
a Torch to burn, when it is dried in a Stove or an Oven or Chimney, as the
manner is with the Hollanders to keep Herrings, Salmon, Gammons, and legs of
Bacon, shoulders of Mutton, Flitches, Puddings, Saucidges dried in the Smoke,
or hanged in the cold North Wind, until Summer be almost ended. Wherefore this
fish put to the fire, or lighted with something, as with straw that is dipped in
Brimstone, or Matches, whereby we light Tallow and Wax Candles, Torches, Links,
will presently take fire and flame like to a Torch, and give light to the whole
family to do their work by at night. For it being full of a Rosiny fat, and
very greesy all about it, so that broyled on a Gridiron like to an Ecl, it will
flame suddenly, and burn the fingers of him that touches it, when it is dried
in a smoky Chimney, with Turf burnt there, the flame of it will do as much
service as a Candle will.

The back of a Lamprey is a Nerve and no bone.
For being that the Nerve which runs down his back, serves in stead of a match
or Cord wrapped together, that the flame lies upon, and the congealed fat feeds
it with Oil, when it is put to the fire or flame, it will burn and give a
grear light in a Chamber, though it will soon melt away, and not last very
long, nor continue like a Tallow or Wax Candle of Ox or sheeps far, that will
not so soon be spent and consumed. Yet where all sorts of lights and Candles
are wanting one may use the commodity of this fish, especially if you dry them
at what time they are very fat, When Lampreys grow fat.
which is wont to be at beginning of the Spring in March and April, and then
again in Autumn, that is about the two Equinoctials, when the weather is
neither too hot nor too cold.

CHAP. XII.
Of an Egg laid by a Cock, and at what age he uses to lay it, then what is
bred out of it; also concerning the Cock-stone, and the Jewel Aetites.
THe Cock above others that are tame and house-birds is very courageous, The
Cock is terrible to the Lion.
and has a red comb standing upright on his head to adorn him; he crows, and
claps his wings, and so he terrifies the Lion that is a generous and undaunted
creature: he is full of force that he is not easily tired by treading of Hens,
though he tread them often. And whereas all living creatures after copulation
are sad, and sorrowful, only the Cock is joyful, All creatures except the
Cock are sad after venery.
and he proclaims it by his crowing, that his spirits are cheered: but when he
begins to grow decrepite, and worn out with old age, which happens to some at
seven years, or nine, or at the most in the fourteenth year, as he is strong or
weak, or has trod continually, whereby no living creature but becomes feeble,
he lays an Egg in Summer, about the rising of the Dog Star, When a Cock lays
an Egg.
I suppose it is made from the corrupt excrement of seed, or confluence of ill
humors, it is not very long or oval, as hen Eggs are, but it is round,
sometimes of a yellow color or box-colour, or bright yellow, or diverse
colored, wan, out of which some think the basilisk is bred, Description of the
Basilisk.
the Latins call it Regulus, a venomous beast, of a foot and half in
magnitude, with three tufts on his forehead, as if he were Crowned with a
Kingly Diadem, his body is upright and very dangerous, and his eyes glitter,
wherewith he kills those that come near him, by a contagious vapor. Whether a
Basilisk proceed from a Cocks Egg.
The common people through all Europe are that opinion, that from this Egg
comes a basilisk, if a Toad chance to sit upon it to foster it; whether this be
false and a mere fiction, I dare not say for certain; yet thus much I have had
experience of, that the Cock sits upon it, and brings it to perfection. So in
my memory in the City Zirizea, and within this Island, two old Cocks could
hardly be driven off with sticks, A History of a Cocks Egg.
but they would sit still upon their Eggs: therefore because the Citizens were
so persuaded, that a Basilisk would breed from a Cocks Egg, they thought fit to
break the Egg, and kill the Cock. But it is worth enquiry whether a Cock
conceives an Egg, Whence a Cocks Egg is made.
and in the full time, that is about the nineteenth day, the shell break and
the young one come forth. I imagine that from some putrefaction clotted
together within, and the shell fostered by the heat of the Cock, some such
thing may breed, especially when he cease to tread; for then the excrement
restrained within, is clottered, and becomes hard as an Egg, which if it be
fostered by the Cock himself or any other living creature, a venomous worm, or
some other venomous beast, which men call a Basilisk, is bred of it; which kind
of Serpent is proper to Africa, and other hot thirsty Countries. But as worms
breed in man's body, A simile from the nature of worms.
by the putrefaction of humors, and are animated by the benefit of heat; and
as wasps, beetles, caterpillars, flies, breed from dung of Oxen, and other
corrupt humors, Weevils in Wheat, Worms called Teredines in Oak, Small Nuts,
Cheese, by the warmth and help of the Ambient Air; so from this Egg breeds a
venomous worm, or some other kind of hurtful and monstrous creature not unlike
to a Basilisk, that by touch, or breath, or vapor, and hissing is dangerous
and most hurtful. So it is said that from the Marrow of a man's backbone
corrupted, is bred a Snake. A Snake from a man's backbone.
Many famous writers describe the nature of the Basilisk, and its condition,
which receives a great power to do mischief from venomous nutriment; and they
have done this the more a curately, because he is so dangerous by his sight,
breath, hissing, and so kills men; whereas other Serpents cannot kill but they
must be near to sting or bite, and so is their poison dispersed into the body.
L. 9.
Lucan describing many kinds of Serpents, sets down also the nature of the
Basilisk thus.

The Basilisk does reign alone,
By his hissing he is known,
Besides himself will suffer none,
Admits no venom but his own;
Hurts at a distance --
Whereby he shows that he does mischief by seeing any man, and kills by his
venomed breath, before the poison comes to touch the body. Yet I believe it is
an old wives tale, which the vulgar thinks to be real truth, that in our
country so pernicious and hurtful a creature can be bred by the hatching of a
Toad, and that sometimes in Caves and dens under the ground, Basilisks lie that
kill men if they chance to come into those places, whereas i^^^ the venomous
vapors that stink, and arise from foul nasty p^^ces, that stop men's breath and
kill them, and no man need to doubt but that sometimes poisonous creatures that
lurk in those places do destroy men. A cruel Basilisk.
Some learned writers testify, that in Saxony there is a cruel kind of Basilisk
seen, that has a sharp pointed head, and is of a yellow color; nine inches
long, that is three hands breadth, wonderful thick, with a spotted belly, and
marked with many white points, the back of it is blew, the tail is like a
turban and crooked, his jaws are wide and vast according to the proportion of
his body; I know not certainly to say whether he should be reckoned amongst
Basilisks, or Serpents, for the husbandmen could not meet them and fight with
them without danger, who never fear to set upon them with prongs, or clubs, or
forks, and find no hurt thereby, nor are they infected by their breath. Yet
there are some kinds of Serpents that pollute sheep coats, and stalls, and
poison cattle, as the Hydra, Aspe, Viper, Snake, Adder, that are next kin to
the Basilisk for malice, and fierceness. Which Virgil elegantly expressed thus,

Under old Hedges, Georg. 3.
the Viper dothly,
And fears for to come forth to see the Sky,
Or else the wood-Snake who does love the shade,
A plague to Oxen is his venom made.
Also that Snake that is in Calabrian Groves,
That twist's it is Scaly back under its breast, and roves,
With spotted belly, into banks and lakes,
And fills its gut with all the fish it takes,
And croking frogs, yet when the lakes are dry,
And earth is parched, he does suddenly,
Come forth on dry land, and does look most fierce,
With flaming eyes that very deep can pierce,
Thirst makes him cruel, and the Sun that burns,
Affrights him, unto which himself be turns,
He shines, and out of's mouth his tongue appears,
That is three forked, all as sharp as Spears.
I think that Germany has this and many more kinds of Serpents, and some kind
of Basilisks, Basilisks in Germany.
but they are not endued with such strong and violent poison, as those are that
breed in Africa, and the torrid Countries. From the cruelty of these creatures,
the holy Prophets formerly drew many apt similitudes; Chap. 59.
For Esaias seems to relate to the Vipers bringing forth of its young ones,
when he says, They conceived wickedness, and brought forth iniquity, they
have hatched the Cockatrice Eggs, and spun the spiders web, he that eats of
their Eggs shall dye, and that which is fostered shall break forth into a
Basilisk. The place of Esaias explained.
Whereby he intimates that they shall labor hard in a matter that is nothing
worth, and whatsoever they go about is hurtful and mischievous: and that their
doctrine is full of virulence, and by its stinking savor it destroys the
hearers of it: Moreover whatsoever proceeds or comes from them, is venomous and
deadly, as that is which comes from a Basilisk and venomous beasts. Also
Solomon compares intemperance in wine, Prove. 23.
that makes men's minds mad, and is poison to them, to deadly and dangerous
Serpents. Look not says he on the Wine when it looks red, and when the color
of it shines in the Glass; it goes down pleasantly, but in the end it will
bite like an Adder, and as a Basilisk will it send its Poison forth. And as a
Woolf takes away the voice of those he meets, A simile from a Woolf that takes
away the voice.
or else makes them hoarse by the filthy venomous vapors that proceed from
him, so the Basilisk by his breath and hissing, does wound people afar off; as
if he shot an arrow at them; and he is not only hurtful to man and other
living creatures, but he pollutes the Corn and Plants with but touching them.
And there is no living creature that can stand against the poison of this
Serpent but the Weesil, the Dutch call it Wesel, The Weesil is a deadly enemy
to the Basilisk. Pliny. L. 8. c. 21
which is so fenced and armed by eating of Rue, that he will set on the
Basilisk boldly; and will pull him forth of his lurking holes, and kill him,
and if the Weesil when the Basilisk is dead do not presently run away, and eat
of Rue again to refresh himself, he would be choked by the contagion of the
Air. Wherefore they do wisely, The virtue of Rue.
who in planting their Gardens, assign the principal place unto this herb,
because it has a present virtue to resist poisons, and no kind of Serpent will
hide it self under the shadow of it; So if any man take Mandragora, Hemlock,
Henbane, Cerusse, Opium, and many more things that stupefy by their immoderate
cold quality, Rue subdues cold Poisons.
he is helped with the juice of Rue, or the decoction of it in Wine, which will
discuss the malice of it. Also Hemlock wherewith as we read Socrates was put
to death, or if there be any other Herbs, that are of a cold stupefying
nature, as Poppy, Lettice, Purslane, will rebate the force of Rue, and overcome
it, if it be taken in great quantity; for Rue being of a hot and burning
quality, if it be taken too largely will hurt the body. So I observed that when
any popular disease did spread it self, and in the time of the Plague, as many
as now and then put Rue to their noses dipped in Vinegar, that they might drive
away the contagion of the Air, had pushes above and beneath their lip; for
this does exulcerate applied outwardly; and rubbed on any part it will raise
blisters. Rue burns being laid to the body.
Wherefore for Carbuncles and Bubo's, and other tumors that put forth in the
Plague it is fitly applied, for it draws forth the venom, and will not let the
venomous vapors fly inwardly. So I bid men make a plaster with Rue bruised
with sharp salt leaven, A plaster for Pestilent humours'.
Figs, Cantharides, Onions, and Squils roasted, Quicklime, French-Soap,
Ammoniacum, and a little Theriac, which being timely laid to the part affected,
will soon break through the secret and lurking humors; but inwardly must be
given Antidotes that may drive the fuliginous vapors from the heart and
discuss them, amongst which are Theriac and Mithridate for present remedies,
given a dram, or a dram and half for a dose, as the age and forces will
bear it, in wine or the decoction of Marigold-flowers, What free the heart from
ill vapors.
which the Dutch from the Golden color call Goudt bloemen. But since the
monstrous birth of the Cock, from whose Egg the common people think a Basilisk
is bred, does not a little fright and amaze all men, so the Cock-stone called
Alectorius, is desired by all, and all men are in love with it; For if this be
worn about us, What the Jewel Alectoria will do.
it will augment men's forces, and will make a man both strong and confident to
attempt any business. It is taken forth of the gizard of a Capon, or gelded
Cock, included in a thin memorane, or skin, four years after that his stones
were cut out, this Jewel is of a transparent color, like to Crystal, and as
great as a Bean. How a Jewel breeds in a Capon.
I think this congeals of a seminal excrement, and is heaped together by the
help of natural heat. For since nature cease not to elaborate seed in this
creature, though it be ineffectual and invalid, and forces want to cast forth
the moisture concocted, yet it condenseth into a stone.

Milk grows hard as a stone in the Breast.
So milk when it is not drawn forth grows hard as a stone in the breasts; and in
the collections of Impostumes, a hard stony concretion is sometimes taken
forth. The Jewel Alectoria procures men favor, The force of the stone
Alectorius in man.
and makes them gracious amongst women; lastly in putting forth their manhood,
which is required in the Marriage bed, when they get children, it will make
them strong and lusty. What force the Jewel Aetites has.
So the Jewel called Aetites, found in an Eagles nest, that rings with little
stones within it, makes women that are slippery able to conceive, being bound
to the breast of the left arm, by which from the heart toward the ring-finger,
next to the little finger an artery runs; and if all the time the woman is
great with child, this Jewel be worn on those parts, it strengthens the child,
and there is no fear of abortion, or miscarrying. On the contrary, being
applied to the thigh of one that is in labor, it makes a speedy and easy
delivery, without any difficulty almost or straight in bringing forth. Which
thing I have found true by experiment; for when a Noblewoman wore this at her
neck all the time she went with child, and was in very good health, and when
she was in labor forgot to take off this Jewel from her breast, she found
presently a difficulty in her labor, and that the child was slow to come
forth; Wherefore taking off the Eagle-stone from her neck, and applying it to
her thigh, upon the inward part not far from the privities, An experiment in a
Matron of the Jewel Aetites.
she had an easy and quick delivery. Wherefore I showed to Matrons, that the
use of that Jewel was very good for them, when it was fit to apply it to their
breasts, or to their thighs. If any man should ask, By what virtue it does
this, and is desirous to learn; I believe it does it by an attractive virtue,
as the Loadstone draws Iron; Jet, and Amber, draw straws and chaft.

Which must seem absurd to no man, since the Matrix has an exquisite sense of
feeling, The Nature of the Matrix.
and is so affected with sweet smells, that if they be put to the Nose, it will
strive to come upward, so that women and maids not married will be in danger to
be choked, unless they be presently taken away, and applied to the nethermost
and secret parts, for then it will make haste to run downwards. Wherefore women
with child require the sweetest smells to smell to, whereby their spirits are
recreated, and the child tends upwards; To what parts we must apply stinking
and to what sweet smells.
but such as lust after men, must have stinking things applied to their
nostrills, and sweet things to their Secrets and Thighs, especially when they
are troubled with the strangling of the Mother.

But if the Matrix send downwards, and fall low, stinking things must be bound
to the nether parts, and sweet things to the upper parts; which by their
pleasing vapors may recreate the spirits decayed. But if these things be used
otherwise, and preposterously; it falls out that the disease is exasperated,
and women are grievously affected, if they do not copulate with men, so that
besides the great pains they endure, they faint and swound away.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the nature, condition and manners of women; and why that sex being angry is
more violent than men are, and will scold more outragiously, and is overborn by
many other affections and passions; and, by the way, what is the meaning of
that saying of the wise Hebrew, The iniquity of a man is better than a woman
that does well.
THe wickedness of some women is the cause that not only Stage Players,
Eccle. 25.
and Poets, Orators and Philosophers, who knew not the true Religion, but also
Wise men, Jews, and Prophets, who had abundance of the knowledge of God, do in
many places speak against and condemn women, Women are spoken against by all
Writers.
and that deservedly: though they are not all of them of the same strain, nor
are they alike bitter and unsavory. For there are some Matrons, who by the
benefit of education, are so adorned with many great virtues, that they are not
short of the best men, nor are they inferior unto them: Esdr. 3. c. 4.
though the promiscuous multitude and the multiplicity of women be shameless,
foolish, fierce, and imperious, even toward Kings, slippery, various, mutable;
and as for lust of the flesh, and pleasure they are insatiable, and can never
have enough though they be tired out with it, yet some of these are more prone
and addicted to these affections. But since so many vices of this sex are wont
to be observed every where, and many that are married complain of the nature
and condition of their Wives, and make their pitiful relations unto others of
the indignities they suffer by them, which gives occasion to some to abhor this
kind of life, The inconveniences of Marriage.
and they rather withdraw themselves from the intimate company and society of
women, which others are forced to endure, being tedious, irksome, querulous,
bitter, fierce, and must bear their threatenings, and imperious behavior.

Why God ordained Marriage.
But since the order of nature, and necessity of living, and the love a man
has, and propension to propagate his like to succeed him, that he may provide
for posterity, that he may procure a companion and fellow-helper, they do
wisely that marry, that they may plesantly and with delight pass over this
transitory life, in an undivided society, and mutual consent of souls and
bodies. For the condition of man's life requires it, unless nature be clean
against it, and the constitution and state of the body cannot away with it.
Gel. l. 1. c. 6.


To this, belongs the speech of Metellus of Numidia, which the Romans
commended, Metellus his speech of Marrying a Wife.
wherewith he exhorted the Citizens, lest the Commonwealth should decay, that
every man should presently take him a Wife; For, says he, if we could lead our
lives without a Wife, all men would willingly desire to be freed of that
trouble and inconvenience; but since Nature has so ordained it, that we cannot
live so happily with them, nor can we live by any means without them, we must
take care for the perpetual safety whereby the Commonwealth may subsist, than
for our own short-during pleasure. And if the office of a woman in household
affairs affords great use, and profit for such as are well and strong; truly
the use of a woman is very necessary and more requisite for such as are sick.
For as the Wise man says, Eccle. 36.
Where there is no hedge the possession is taken away: and where there is no
woman, the sick man laments, who wants the help of another, and must be
supported by the Office of one to attend him. A faithful Wife will be very
diligent to take care for him, and for her family, and her whole thoughts are
fastened upon her husband, so that if he sustain any inconvenience, if any
calamity fall upon him, if he be sick, or sad, Profits of Matrimony.
she will desire to take the greatest part of the calamity upon her self, for
she grieves no less for her losses or crosses than she does for her own, Genesis 2.
which proceeds from the mutual consent and agreement of their souls, and
bodies, whereby of two they come to be as it were but one body; Horace writes
knowingly of it.

Lib. Carm. 2. Ode. 13.
Thrice happy they and more,
Who being wedded hold,
Whose love never ends before,
Death, nor do brawl and scold.
Woman's anger like a tempest.
But daily examples testify that women are subject to all passions and
perturbations, and that they will be cruelly angry and mad, when there is
little or no cause for it, and that the distemper and rage of a woman is no
less, than is the distemper of the Air and the Clouds, when they are
exasperated with Thunder and Lightning, which, besides others that were
desirous of wisdom, the Hebrews found true by their daily use and course of
life, as we find it abundantly set down in their writings. For I think that by
their daily familiarity and conversation in the house with them, they had found
and learned, what a wicked and malicious woman will do, if at any time she be
angry or provoked, what Tragedies she will cause, and how violently she will
rage and storm. For so one of them amongst the rest continues his speech,
Lecles. 25. A Woman, what living Creature she is.
taking a similitude from venomous and pernicious beasts. Give me any Plague,
but the Plague of the heart, and any wickedness, but the wickedness of a
woman: there is no head above the head of a Serpent, no anger exceeds the anger
of a woman, I had rather dwell with a Lion and a dragon, than to keep house
with a wicked woman. But since a woman came forth and was made out of man, a
pleasing, gentle, tame, meek, tender, smooth, beardlesse, soft skinned
creature, and that desires to be handled by man, and to be subject to him,
Whence Women become so frail.
one would wonder whence it is that she is become so cruel, and always
scolding and brawling, and is so unbridled in her affections. But I conjecture
that all this proceeds from weakness of mind, and lack of judgment in women,
whence it happens that a woman enraged, is besides her self, and has not
power over her self, so that she cannot rule her passions, or bridle her
disturbed affections, or stand against them with force of reason and judgment,
like to Children, and such as are weak and feeble for age, that want reason and
discretion.

Delights to play with fellows, Horat in Art. Poctic.
and it is strange,
Angry, soon pleased, still consists in change.
For a woman's mind is not so strong as a man's, nor is she so full of
understanding and reason and judgment, and upon every small occasion she casts
off the bridle of reason, Why a woman grows angry suddenly.
and like a mad dog, forgetting all decency, and her self, without choice,
she sets upon all, be they known or unknown. If any man desires a natural
reason for it, I answer him thus, that a woman's flesh is loose, soft and
tender, so that the choler being kindled, presently spreads all the body over,
and causes a sudden boiling of the blood about the heart. A simile from things
on fire. A woman is soon hot, soon cold.
For as fire soonest takes hold of light straw, and makes a great flame, but it
is soon at an end; and quiet; so a woman is quickly angry and flaming hot, and
rages strangely; but this rage and crying out, is soon abated, and grows calm
in a body that is not so strong and valiant, Why a woman will cry when she is
angry. What men are more subject to weep.
and that is more moist; and all her heat and fury is quenched by her shedding
of tears, as if you should throw water upon fire to put it out. Which we see
also in some effeminate men, whose magnanimity and fierceness ends almost as
Childrens do in weeping, when the adversary does strongly oppose himself
against them. If any man would more nearly have the cause of this thing
explained, Whence do women become furious.
and desires a more exact reason; I can find no nearer cause that can be
imagined, than the venim and collection of humors, that she every month heaps
together, and purges forth by the course of the Moon; For when she chances to
be anry; as she will presently be, all that sink of humors being stirred
fumeth, and runs through the body, so that the Heart and Brain are affected
with the smoky vapors of it, and the Spirits both vital and animal, that
serve those parts are inflamed, and thence it is that women stirred up,
especially the younger women, (for the elder that are past childing, are more
quiet and calm, Old women less ^^gry.
because their terms are ended) will bark, and brawle like mad dogs, and clap
their hands and behave themselves very unseemly in their actions and speeches,
and reason being but weak in them, and their judgment feeble, and their mind
not well ordered, they are sharply enraged, and cannot rule their passions. And
the baser any woman is in that sex, the more she scolds and rails, and is
unplacable in her anger, hence the vulgar woman and Whores, (for Noble women
and Gentle women will usually observe a decorum, though often times they will be
silent, and bend their brows, and scarce vouchsafe to give their husbands an
answer, the Dutch call it Proncken) because their Bodies are commonly polluted
with faulty humors, are full of impudence, joined with equal malice, as if
the Devil drove them, and they cannot be persuaded by counsel, reason, shame,
flattery admonition (that will ordinarily make wild beasts quiet) and you
cannot hold them from their cruelty, or make them forbear their mad and loud
exclamations.

They see not right nor good nor just, Terent. Heaut. Scen. 1. Act. 4.

What may help or hurt them, their lust
Does govern all.
So forgetting themselves, they despise their faith, honor, chastity, fame,
honesty, reputation, and hazard all. To which may be applied that enquiry of
Solomon concerning man's condition, Eccles. 7.
I applied my heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and the
reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly, and of foolishness,
and madness: and I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is
snares and nets, and her hands as bands. I have labored to this hour to find a
good and cordial woman, and could find none: one man amongst a thousand have I
found, but a woman amongst all those have I not found. A good woman is rare.
Pro. 36.
And that enquiry, in the Proverbs is not much different from this, Who can
find a virtuous or good woman? as if he should say, you shall not easily in any
Country, no not in the remotest parts of the earth, or any corners of it, find
an honest, and well manner'd woman; and if by chance you should light upon her,
Solomon's place explained.
she may be equaled with the most precious Jewels, and no Merchandise be they
never so costly, can be compared to her. But because I have fallen upon this
argument, and have begun to examine the condition of women, I shall, by the
way, clear the meaning of those words of Solomon the wisest; Eccles. 25.
The iniquity of a man is better than a woman doing good. I interpret that
sentence, thus. That a man, The wise Hebrew his sentence interpreted.
be he never so sluggish, idle, unskillfull and rude in merchandise, will do
his business better than a headlong and rash woman, that undertakes any thing
with a vain persuasion of wisdom, and inconsiderate confidence, and thereupon
does all things more uprightly, than a woman does. For a man, distrusting
himself, does by leisure, and circumspectly, all his actions, using other men's
help that he calls to counsel with him, so that the success is more happy
than when the same things are performed by an arrogant woman that is puffed up
with a proud opinion of her own wisdom, as they commonly are. For such a
woman's endeavors commonly run to the worst, and are unsuccessefull, A Dutch
Proverb against women, why a woman is not so ingenious.
which the Dutch commonly signify by this Proverb. Het quaeste van Even: man is
better dan het best van even vrouwe, that is, If any thing be done and brought
to perfection by a woman, it deserves less praise than what is but yet rude
and imperfect, begun by a man; namely, by reason of a woman's want of mind and
counsel, her dullness and blockishnesse, for want of natural heat, and
because their languishing mind is soked into great moisture, so that the
faculties of their souls come forth more slowly, and are not so fit for action,
and to do noble things. The Roman Law concerning women.
Wherefore the Romans who took great care to order and to confirm the
Commonwealth, would have women, as Tully says, Pro Murena.
to be under Guardians, by reason of the infirmity of their natures, and to
bear no civil office. Also St. Paul, who with indefatigable labor instructed
men's minds in the sound faith, St. Paul's precept concerning Women.
and diligently informs us what is godliness, commands silence unto women in
public solemnities in the Congregation, by reason of the impotency of their
minds, 1 Cor. 14.
and want of moderation in their affections; and will not suffer a woman to
preach, or to ask a question in public meetings; or to be present in voting,
or to give her opinion concerning it. Since therefore so great is the frailty
and weakness, and imperfection of women's nature, Platoes opinion concerning
Women.
that Plato to the disgrace of this sex, says that they have hardly any soul,
and scarce deserve to be called by the name of man, or to be honored with it;
yet St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.
who with a fatherly care, gives counsel concerning oeconomicall government
and peace in Families, will have honor given to the woman that belongs to her,
and that she must not be totally despised, or accounted base and vile, since
she is of almost the same dignity and condition, and partakes of the same
gifts with man, being taken out of man by the operation of God that made them
both. Genes. 2.
Wherefore the man is the Image and Glory of God, as the Apostle says, but the
Woman is the glory of the Man: for the man is not from the Woman, but the Woman
is from the Man. For man was not created for Woman, but Woman for Man, yet the
Man is not witout the Woman, Ephesians. 5.
nor the Woman without the Man in the Lord, who so orders all things, that the
woman must be in subjection to the Man. For as the Woman is from the Man, so
the Man by the Woman begets Children: So that there is a society for help
that is seen on both sides, Colos. 3.
and there is required the mutual succor, love and consent of them both.
Wherefore St. Peter thinks it fit, that Women should obey their husbands: Pet.
3.
and that the men should be gentle and loving to their Wives, forbearing them,
as being the weaker vessels, pardoning small faults in them, and winking at
many things, and not repining at them: for it is not fit that a man should be
too cruel against that sex which is so frail, Adultery in woman is an
indelible spot. Adulterers laugh at adultery, with a proverbiall speech.
or too sharp and bitter, so long as a Woman does her duty; and is not tainted
in her honesty and chastity, which fault when it is known, brings a man more
indignation, than it does him hurt, as Adulterers use to say, yet that spot in
a woman can never be washed out, nor can that wound be healed, though Christian
charity, and matrimonial love must not be too rigid, or implacable: since
there is reconciliation with God, and the divine goodness provoked by our
wickedness, idolatries, and grievous sins, is wont to be pacified by our
prayers and repentance; when we acknowledge the errors of our lives past, when
we are sorrowful for what we have done, and disdain and hate our sins, with
a settled purpose of amendment of life. Moreover great part of molestation in
this sex, comes from the tediousness of their going with Child, and the
trouble they have in suckling and breeding up their Children, whence women are
so froward.
and no small inconvenience from their Terms stopped: which if they run at the
set time for them, the heat of anger and bitterness is driven off, those smoky
vapors being turned from their hearts and brains, and the sad vapor being
discussed, that uses to fly upwards. When a woman is more patient.
But it is best known to them that are married, and I need not enlarge my
discourse upon it, how calm and mild that man shall find his Wife, when the
marriage bed is frequently adorned, and this ground is manured with often
embracings and copulation. And although I may seem to have been something
tedious and fuller of words than it needs, in explaining this Paradox (or
sentence that is besides the common opinion, and vulgar custom) of the Wise
Hebrew, The place of Ecclus explaind.
that the meaning of it might be searched out; That the wickedness of a man is
better, than a good woman, that is, such a one, that is afterward a cause of
Infamy, and by whose society disgrace may arise. The sense is, it is better to
hold commerce with a wicked man, or to deal with him, than to have to do with a
deceitful woman; For though in show, and at first appearence she may seem to
be good, and honorable, and in outward behavior discovers no wickedness, or
deceit, yet afterward you shall find her inconstant, false, captious,
fraudulent, and full of imposture; so that if any man deceive another, the
fraud and imposture of a man, is righteousness, compared with the wickedness
of a woman. The like forms of speech are found frequently in the Scripture. So
God in Ezechiel aggravates the wickedness of Jerusalem very much, Ezech. 16.
and says that she has justified Sodom and Samaria, whereby he condemns her
for to be more wicked, and that she exceeds those nations in impiety, and
wicked actions, that the Sodomites and Samaritans compared to her, The place in
Ezechiel explained.
may seem to be just. So in the wickedness of opinions, and in asserting any
pernicious sect, and maintaining it, one man may be more dangerous and more
impious than another, that some Heretics may be accounted Orthodox, and to
teach the right saving truth compared with others; One man is more wicked than
another.
that establish more absurd impious blasphemous execrable doctrines: which is
grown to a proverb, This man is a godly and holy man in respect of that: as
much as to say, that though they be both Knaves and ungodly, yet if you would
measure them both by the rule of equity, and square of Justice, one may be
accounted innocent, and to be pardoned, in respect of the other's wicked
enormities. So one man is more superstitious than another, and farther from the
true religion and piety, and worship of God.

So want of knowing truth does fools delude, Horat. l. 2. Sermon. Ignorance of
truth begets errors.

And error from the right way does exclude,
All those that doubt; some here do miss some there,
All such by seeming truths seduced are.
So error involvs a man as well as it does a woman, and wickedness lays hold
of them both, but the woman is more detestable and execrable for her
wickedness. Therefore the wickedness of a man is better than a woman doing
good, and as the Dutch proverb runs, De deucht van Even vrouwe is Ergher dan Even
Man's boosheyt. By which proverb they aggravate the malice of that sex, that if
you should compare vices with vices, and examine the frauds, impostures,
fallacies and devices of them both, those that are committed by women are far
more pernicious and heavy, than such as are acted by men.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherefore an Eggat both ends, where by, at the long and narrower end it will
stand, (like the Pole artick and antartick) cannot be broken between your
fingers, or both hands closed together, although you press it: and wherefore
steeped in sharp Vinegar, it will grow soft like a tractable and soft membrane;
lastly, why the same Egg steeped in Aquavitae, that is in spirits of Wine, it
will be consumed like iron by Aquafortis.
An Egg will melt in Vinegar
IF you steep an egg in the sharpest Vinegar four days, or rather seven days, as
the acrimony of the liquor is, you shall find the shell of it grow so like a
tender skin, that you may draw it through a ring a man wears on his finger. By
the same reason and effect, an egg soked in Aquavitae, will be consumed and
come to nothing, as I have proved. As also a flint wet with Vinegar, and the
Gravel-stone called Tophus, The Tophus is next to Gyp-Teras.
wherewith the Masons rough-cast walls, and make Cisterns, which the Dutch call
Teras, will melt in it and be resolved into powder, for both liquors have a
penetrating consuming fiery force, that eats and consumes all solid bodies,
whereby it come to pass, that those who use these things in too great
abundance, as also Salt and Cummin-seed immoderately, What will make men lean.
grow lean and dry, and are wholly consumed, for they hinder the growth of
young people, Ill ^^^^ours eat the bones.
and that they cannot grow tail and comely. They waste the native moisture, by
help whereof the body springs up to a decent proportion. So Salt biting burning
nitrous humors do eat up the membranes in the body, the flesh, Muscles,
Nerves, Solid-bones, and those that are as hard as stones, as the teeth, and
the Ossa Petrosa of the head; A simile from Worms.
and as Catterpillars feed on stalks, and herbs, and as Worms feed on wood,
Rust eats iron, they eat and make them rotten; Moreover a raw egg, is so solid
and firm, longwayes at the two ends, that the strongest man cannot break it:
let any man try it, and he shall find it is no fiction: for unless you bend it
something to one side, it will not yield though you press it never so hard
with your hands, nor will it break by the hardest thrust against it: for that
shelly force will make such resistance, that it cannot be broken, or the frame
of it dissolved, though a man put all the force he has to it, and press his
hands together with all his might. For it is so defended by the sides, that it
supports it self every way, nor does it become pliable, that it may be thrust
or bowed inward: So poles, beams, pieces of wood, iron set an end, upward,
will bear vast weights, and never bend nor be crooked by them.

Country Farmers wives are not ignorant of this that on market days come to
the Cities, and bring victuals to sell to Towns, for they do not set their eggs
in their panniers lying down or inclining, which way they will commonly fall of
themselves, but they set them upright, so that the narrower end, for it is
copped at both ends, stands highest, which they do for this reason, that they
may not break, and may bear a weight lying on them, upon which parts also an
Egg put into Salt water will flote, An Egg will flote in brine.
and so will Ambergreece.

CHAP. XV.
The Moon by a wonderful force of Nature, every Month, otherwise than the
rest of the Stars do, searches all the sound parts of man's body secretly, and
undiscerned, but the sick parts manifestly, and not without sense or pain, and
stays in them sometimes two, sometimes three days. By the way, whether a Vein
may safely be opened in that part that the Planet governs at that time.
The Stars rule inferior things.
THe beginning and increase of things, and the universe do demonstrate that the
Stars do by their influence govern inferior bodies, for the nature of things
is not idle, sluggish, and slothful, but lively, quick, agil, prompt,
effectual, and has great force given unto her by God, by whose word all things
flourish and subsist. Genesis 2. Psalm 31.
Nor is the exceeding beautiful frame of the heavens made only to feed our
eyes, and to gaze upon; as also the motions, continued order, and disposition
of the heavens: but that we might receive some profit, and help thereby. For
God, Earthly bodies are subject to the Stars. The nature of things subject to
the Stars. The mind free from the Stars.
besides delight and contemplation that we enjoy by this great work abundantly,
has created all things for use; and has made all plants, Seas, Rivers,
Metals, Jewels, Stones, and all things else that are dug forth of the earth,
or adorn the superficies of it, and distinguish it with variety, and very
bodies of men, and the humors in them, subject to the Stars: So that from the
Stars they feel some motion, impulsion, and effects. But the Spirit of God
only does move and agitate the minds of men that are loose and free from all
mortal concretion, and were inspired by Him, and they have no commerce or
society with the Stars, unless perhaps sometimes they are drawn aside to
corporeal delights by consent and conspiring with the body (when reason is
against it) whose ministry and help every man's mind and Soul is forced to make
use of. But since the Moon is a Planet that is more conversant, and next unto
man, and most near to the Earth, St. Paul. Romans c. 7.
she more than the rest employs her forces upon man's body, and runs through
every part by a peculiar virtue and effect, sometimes not without most bitter
sense or torment. For if there be any fault that lies hid in any part, that
part is most cruelly shaken and torn with pains, the force of the Moon rending
it, or else by moving the humors that are in it, Wounds deadly from the effect
of the Moon.
and stick close to it. So all diseases and distempers are exasperated, and
grow worse by the Moons forces, when she is in the joints, so that wounds will
hardly grow well, or come to cicatrize, and sometimes become mortal, when they
are made on that part the Moon then rules in. By the same reason the head,
Throat, Lungs, Breast, Liver, Milt, Reins, Bladder, Bowels, also the Nervous
parts feel hurt, or their distemper becomes greater, when the Moon is in those
Bowels. All parts feel the Moons motions.
So the Breast is narrow and short-winded, the Nerves, Membranes, Muscles, are
contracted and grow stiff, when the Moon runs in them. For the humors
wherewith all the parts are moistened and fed, both those that are wholesome and
the rest that are unwholesome and faulty, are exposed and are under the rule of
the Moons motions. But since the course of the Moon for the most part brings
hurt and danger to weak and feeble bodies, Whether that part the Moon is in,
may be cut.
it may be made a disputable question, whether in that part wherein the Moon
stays and governs a Vein may be opened; for in this matter most men are
fearful, and dare not adventure to do it, though the disease be urgent, and
require this help presently. But I think we ought to do it in time, and to go
about it without fear, and with great confidence of bringing help, and driving
away the disease: A simile from outward calamity.
for acute and swift diseases will allow no truce, no delays, or times to
deliberate: but, as enemies in war, as fire in houses, Plague in a City, and as
smoot in Corn, hasten to destroy all. Nor must a man be frighted or leave off
from what he undertook, though he seem to go about it when the Star is
malignant, and is against him; In acute diseases the Stars are to be neglected.
So in the Pleuresy, Quinsey, Inflammation of the Lungs, and Liver, we must
neglect the extreme observation of the Stars, and Aspects of the Planets, and
make haste to open a Vein in time, though it be in that part that the Moon then
governs. A Simile from Natures industry.
For as when a Tempest is coming, and the winds rage, the Pilot though the Tide
be against him, and the wind not prosperous, does maturely provide for his
safety, and strives with Ores and Sails to gain a safe harbor for his Ship to
ride in: lastly as a husbandman at the season of sowing, A simile from the
industry of the Husbandman.
or mowing dispatcheth all in haste for fear of rain, for early sowing
oft-times deceives us, but late sowing always; so the Physician supported by
reason and experience, at the first occasion and opportunity offered, as soon as
he can, endeavors to apply a safe remedy, looking more to the superfluity of
humors and fierceness of the disease, than to the Stars.

The courses of the celestial bodies are indeed to be observed, Genesis 1. How the
Stars are to be observed. Esaias 47. Hier. 10.
which God has appointed for signs and seasons, for years and days, and
months, but excluding all rash vanity and impudence of foretelling events,
which Esaias and many more do blame and speak against, and do utterly, disdain
those that dare speak confidently, and deliver their Judgment concerning any
man's fate, that is of that thing which God has ordered and appointed for him,
and what fortune he shall have, what success and event shall happen to any
man. There are principal men, of greatest respect that I have sometimes argued
with, who refer to the revolutions and aspects of the Stars the progress and
increase of public affairs, as also the defects and decay of them, the mystery
of Religion innovated or restored, and such tumults as arise because of it, and
the persecutions, great part whereof fall upon innocent men, that is such, who
desire to live godly in Christ Jesus; 2 Timothy 3.
whereas the propagation of the Gospel, whereby faith by the spirit of the
Lord, and confidence that we rest upon him by, are kindled in our minds by the
free will of God, does proceed from the eternal will of the Father, which, as
St. Paul says, was hid with God, Ephesians. 3.
who created all things by Jesus Christ, and was revealed in his time to those
which he has made heirs and partakers of the promise by Christ. So truth being
revealed, Religion is not ruled by the Stars, but by Gods spirit.
he thought good by the bright splendor of his word and Gospel at what time he
pleases, to root out errors, superstitions, Idolatries, and beat down
impieties, and to establish his true worship, and to write in men's minds the
knowledge of himself; which was determined and appointed by God before the
world was made, or the heavens adorned with Stars.

Astrologers should lift up their minds to God.
Wherefore let them that depend too much on the Stars, and look no higher, nor
ever think of God that made them, forbear to make celestial things, as their
minds and Souls are, subject to the Star's inclinations. For though the blood
and the other humors, The humors are ruled by the Stars.
and the spirits both vital and natural endure the influences and forces of the
Stars manifestly, yet the mind and Soul were taken from the Antient-pattern of
the divine nature, and cannot be driven by force of the Stars, nor does the
Soul find any hurt or help from them; unless you will say perhaps, that it is
affected by consent with the body. For the mind of man, his reason,
understanding, Man's mind is different from the Stars.
will, knowledge, or Faith, and confidence that we rely upon God by, love of
Religion, and adoration, wherein is contained the chiefest worship of God, and
whereby it subsists, proceeds from that eternal mind that is immutable, nor is
man's mind moved by any other force to do what is best and good for man's
salvation, than by Gods inspiration and instinct of his divine spirit. So when
other living creatures are carried on by force of nature, Man's mind is ruled by
Gods spirit, and not by the Stars.
man alone is guided by reason and counsel, so he keep within the compass of
his condition, and do not wholly degenerate from that dignity and excellency
God has given him.

CHAP. XVI.
The counsel wherewith I use to gratify young men, that they may have beards
betimes, and that a comely Down may grow upon their chins: By the way, a fit
comparison of Grass and Corn, with the Hair and Locks of Man.
MAids that are marriageable, and desire to be married suddenly, wish chiefly
that they may grow comely and decently tall, Maids love to seem beautiful, and
young men to lock manly.
that they may be thought to be ripe and fit for Husbands, and may get them
Suitors. But young men wish that they may have men's forces, and may soon have
hair upon their chins, and comely Beards; Those that want herds, are not
thought to be so manly.
For besides the Dutch, other Nations think, that such as are smooth and want
Beards, are not so strong for Venus-sports, and fit to get children, that many
men are unwilling to marry their daughters to them: though it be sometimes
otherwise, and such as have no beards nor down on their chins show themselves
men in the Marriage Bed; though more frequently for want of heat, their forces
fail, and natural faculties decay, and they want children so much hoped for.
That the beard may grow it must be often shaved.
But those that desire to have Beards, and take care to make it grow, must have
that grass often mowed, that so the pores being loosned, and by often
agitation, the heat being called forth that draws out the humor, the hair may
break forth the more abundantly: which must be practiced chiefly in the Spring,
at what time of the year, heat and moisture increases, The comparison of
Grass and hair.
and is diffused into those parts. For where the beard is often shaved, the
hairs grow thicker as Grass does; for hairs are in some respects like Grass,
and twigs, that being often mowed and cut down, grow the faster, and the more
abundantly. Wherefore young men that have no beard appearing, and look like
boys, if they will hear me, must use the Rasour often; For if the chin and upper
lip be continually wet and soked with warm water, the heat and humor that
flies to those parts will be stirred up, and they will become hairy. But
farther, that Beardlesse and smooth youths may grow full of hairs, L. 1.6.7.
and obtain a comely beard, there is a remedy elsewhere described by me, in the
book of the habit of the body, wherewith young men may sooner have beards
putting forth, to adorn their chins, and their upper and nether lips may spring
forth like a wood, that the Son in law may not displease his father in law,
whose daughter he should marry, who sometimes is as desirous to be married to a
husband, as the man is desirous of her, and looks more oft-times on the
pleasure than the portion. Amongst those things that will make ones beard grow,
What causes a beard.
and are easy to be had, I reckon Honey, fresh Butter without Salt, the juice
of a red Onion, Reed-roots, with joints to distinguish them, that have a white
color, and a Honeyed taste, Badgers grease, called Das, Bears, Lions, Grease,
Bryony-roots, Beets, Radish, Pepperwort, white Lillies, Flour-de-luce: a
liniment may be made of these, for the chin wet with these, first brings forth
a tender down, after that a thick and long beard, which that it may not grow
white too soon, must be watered rather with cold water that has a little wine
mingled with it, if we desire to adorn it. Hot water makes the beard white, and
the face wrinkled.
For warm or hot water makes the face wrinkled, and the hair hoary, so hot
water soon makes young men's beards to grow, but it makes them sooner white as
they grow in years. But Eunuchs by nature, or such whose Testicles are cut
forth, Why Eunuchs want beards.
try all means in vain to make their beards grow, because they want heat, which
cannot raise the humors; therefore they have a small feminine voice, and
smooth body though they were hairy before.

CHAP. XVII.
How and for what reason, preserving Physic ought to be given in the time of
the Plague and contagious diseases: and what things are best for their force,
and virtues for this.
I Observed in Gallia Belgica when the Plague was spreading there, and other
epidemical diseases, that many remained safe and took no harm by the contagion,
by using some antidotes, of which kind are Theriac, Mithridate, Germander,
Zedoary, What things resist the Plague.
Angelica, Laserpitium, to which that which is called Imperatoria, commonly
Meysterwortel, is next kin, or Magistrantia; but when they happened to be
infected, no remedies could be found so effectual that could expel the disease,
for though present remedies were applied, all was in vain, and the cure
succeeded not. Antidotes must be used with great caution.
For the force of the venom being strong and furious, that invaded the body
that was fenced, and defended with Antidotes, and nothing being effected by
those helps, there was none or very small hope left in other medicaments, so
that the matter grew almost desperate, and that of the Poet proved true,

The best help was for to despair of health. Virgil L. 2. Aeneid.
Wherefore when I was called to them, I gave them the choicest remedies and
that in a double dose, that, as the Proverb is, I might use a hard wedge for a
hard knot; and first strengthening the heart, I drove forth all the venom to
the outward parts, never attempting to open a vein in those diseases (unless I
found that it was convenient otherwise, Sometimes in the Plague a Vein is not
to be opened.
and the matter required it) lest the contagion, as in a smoking fire that is
stirred, it usually falls out should spread farther, and a greater smoke and
exhalation of the venom in the body should spread to the principal parts, to
which all the channels of veins and arteries are produced. Wherefore whereas
the ignorant multitude, All men's advice not to be taken in Physic.
and many gentlemen take all men's advice without distinction, be they
Mechanics or unskillfull men to the great hurt to their health: I desire to
persuade all men, that when any pestilent disease invades a country, A plague
from the Air is common to all.
either by contagion of the Air that lays hold on all without difference, be
they gentle or simple, or from faulty diet, or want of food, that vexes the
common people, that no man rashly use himself to those Antidotes, A Plague from
ill nutriment proper to the people.
that they are wont to use and take inwardly, who are infected with the Plague,
least afterward they want remedies that may cure them: but let them use
temperance in diet, frugality, and sedate affections, to fortify themselves
against it. Socrates his temperance.
For we read that Socrates by this means continued sound in the time of a most
raging Pestilence that wasted his country, and destroyed all Greece and Asia,
and killed up the people there; he used such moderation in his life, that he
continued safe and free from the common calamity. Yet I dislike not, which I
use to do often, to take gentle remedies to oppose the disease in coming, How
sound men may resist the Plague.
and to harden and fence the body beforehand, that it may admit no contagion,
that no man may go out of his doors empty, and fasting, so he beware of
intemperance and gluttony; but it is wholesome to wet and moysten the mouth,
ears, eyes, nostrills, hands and face with sweet smelling things, as
Rose Water, Wine, Vinegar, Elder-flowers, and Red Roses that are medicinal, and
to chew Coriander seed, Preservatives in the Plague.
bruised Cinnamon, Zedoary, Cloves, Citron pills. For these drive off the
contagions of the ambient Air, that infect the Heart and vital spirits by the
breath taken in, and driven out, by breathing. But I, when I went every way
fearlesse, with a desire to help the people and Citizens, was wont with these
helps to fortify my self, and chiefly with the Orange, Citron, or Lemmon,
chewing with my teeth the moist pill of one newly cut, The forces of the Orange
or Citron.
and putting all my trust in God, to discuss the pestilent vapors, for there
is no more effectual remedy, than the pill, juice, and seed of this Apple.
Which Virgil also speaks of;

The bitter juice, and slow taste Media brings,
Of the blessed Apple, ^ Georg.
than which there is no things
To be preferred, when cruel step-dames give
Poison in drink, this fruit will make one live.
The flowr's very good, the Medes do make their breath
Sweet by it, and this keep's Ptysick old men from death.
But those strong Antidotes to drive forth the Plague, and prepared to expel
poisons, Luse to take down very seldom, for they change and destroy the habit
of the body and its quality, which consists in the mixture of heat, cold,
moist, and dry, and if there be in the body any superfluity of humors,
(unless a purge be first administered) they inflame it; where it is dispersed
all over, and by kindling choler, raises up burning Fevers.

CHAP. XVIII.
To what we ought to ascribe, amongst such multitudes of men, the great
dissimilitude of form; and the manifold difference that is between man and man
in their faces, countenances, eyes, and other parts, so that sometimes Brothers
and Sisters are not one like the other.
AS there is in Nature a wonderful and gracious variety, so there is the same
in the form and shapes of men, in their colors, contenance, eyes, lineaments,
and in their faces there is found an admitable; and numberless disparity and
dissimilitude. To What must be ascribed dissimilitude in men.
Some refer this to the influence of the Stars, but I think to referr it more
properly and rationally to the nature of the Seed; and the Mothers Imagination.
For being that the woman in the very conception, and all the time she goes with
Child, The Woman's imagination does many things.
even for nine months, has diverse thoughts in her mind, and every moment is
drawn this way, and that way, by thinking on diverse things, and her eyes being
still fixed upon such objects she lights upon, it falls out that those things
she sees, and are fastest rivered in her imagination are communicated to her
Child. For when the Nature of the woman is carefully intent, in framing the
Infant, and thinks on nothing but a fair and well proportioned Child, and all
her forces are bent thereunto, if any shape or Image be represented to the
sight, this soon reflects upon the offspring, who participates of it. Moreover
Mothers, so soon as the Child is born, do the best they can that the Child may
have a decent, comely, well proportioned body, fitly distinguished in all the
parts of it. The faults of Nature may be amended.
For Childrens bodies are ductile and pliable, as Clay or Wax, and may be
bended any way. Wherefore if the mouth stand awry, and is uncomely, they forge
frame and order it into a decent posture; and if the face be frowning and
lowering, they will make it pleasant and amiable, and beautiful: they make the
eyes very handsome and lovely; and of gray eyes or blunket, which Infants
commonly have by reason of moisture, they make them black by abundantly feeding
them with milk, and chiefly if the Nurse be of a hot temper, and the Child be
kept in a dark place. For a light Chamber, where the Sun shines in much, or a
great fire, hurts the render eyes. But squint rolling gogle eyes, and such as
turn the wrong way, That the balls of the eyes may grow black.
are reduced to their right posture, by bending the sight the contrary way, for
the Muscles will be brought to their natural places by wresting them to the
otherside, and being turned about will come right: they raise and set eaven the
nostrills that are crooked and fall down, by a gentle way of handling them: but
they reduce Eagle noses and such as are with beck; by pressing them down to a
decent figure, that the perpendicular of the nose may be stretched forth from
the forehead and eybrows, unto the hollow part in the upper-lip, like a gnomon
or right line, or style that stands upon Sun Dialls, What form of Nose is
comely.
neither set on bending outward or inward. Likewise if the lips be swollen or
fat, which is usual with the Aethiopians, as also if the nose that is crooked
be pressed down, they handle these artificially, and they often press them
that they may grow less, and sink down lower: by the same way they frame into
a comely fashion, a chin that sticks out, or is drawn in, the forehead, head,
cheeks or eybrows that are deformed; and decently order by art, what is not
seemly. So if nature limp on any part, and is gone off from the best form and
proportion, Whence comes deformity of the body.
as some have wry necks, crooked gowty ill favored legs, or bunch backs, that
makes them ugly, all these errors are easily mended in those that are
Children: and such members as are wrested or disjoynted, or out of their
places, are for right by the care and industry of man. So the diligent care of
Nurses makes Children grow up handsomely, and so are obnoxious to no
deformities of their limbs. But the negligence of many Mothers, and great
idleness, makes Children not only to grow up unhandsomely, and ill
favour'dly, but they become bunch-backr, lame, squint eye'd, bull-headed, and
not comely to look on, for they are departed from the dignity and excellency
that is in man's body. Some Nurses are over diligent and too officious, who
bestow some labor also on the Childrens privy parts, that serve them them to
make water with, and in time shall be useful for propagation of Children, that
they may be ripe betimes, and not fail of hopes of getting Children, and when
they come to be married they may not be a shamed, for ill performing the
matrimonial duty, when they observe bitter contentions and quarrels to arise
amongst kindred for this very cause, that they will threaten to divorce their
Sons in Law, unless they can show their manhood, and please their wives the
better, yet I use to dislike and discommend this effeminate and lascivious
office used by Nurses; for young youths, by reason of pulling them thus by
their yards, before their time, or that they come to be of age, or have man's
strength: they are prone to venery, and so consume those helps, and vent out
those humors and vital spirits, wherewith afterward they might be able to
procreate lusty and lively Children; whereas by unseasonable venery, The
discommodities of untimly venery.
they either get no Children, or if they beget any they are lither, and not so
long lived. Therefore I think it is good, not to let young people marry too
soon, until their forces bestrong and confirmed, and that they can endure any
hardness in matrimonial society, which tender years cannot do, for they will
presently wax faint, and effeminate. It is then better that the secret parts
should swell out of their own accord naturally, than that they should be drawn
forth by any allurements.

CHAP. XIX.
Many kinds of Animals, Fishes, Birds, Insects are bred without Seed, as also
Pants: and many Animals, and small Birds, by an unusall way, without the
copulation of Male and Female, do conceive.
DAily examples show, that many things come forth, and are propagated by nature
of their own accord, and without any embracings of others or generation, only
from filth and corruption, as Dormice, Rats, Snails, Shellfish, Carterpillers,
Grass-Worms, Wasps, Hornets, Weevils, Froggs, Moths, Toads, Eels. Many things
breed from corruption.
In men's bodies Worms, though these have seed within them, whereby afterward
they propagate abundantly. Also many plants grow forth from the muddy moisture
of the earth, and fatness of it, no seed being sowed, or plants set in the
ground before, as are Darnel, Cockle, Nettles, wild Olives, Weeds, and grass
that spring up of themselves. Also there are some Crows in the Low Countries
that conceive by their mouth, which they call Rock Jackdaws, What Crows
couceive by the mouth.
because they build in clifts of Rocks, and hollow stones, and not in Trees.
The Dutch call them commonly Steen Cawwe, and these do not tread one the other
as other birds do, as we usually see in Cocks and other foul, that get upon
the backs of the Females, and so copulate with them: but these look steadfastly
with their eyes, one upon another, never winking, so that the Female draws
forth dewy drops from the eyes of the Male, by constant looking upon him, which
she drinks up, and from thence, as some think, she conceives. I dare not
certainly determine, whether they do bring forth by the mouth, as with us the
Cuttle, Shrimps, Calamaries, Lobsters, the Polypus, and the fish Galeus,
commonly called the Hay, do, with a rough skin, that even in the fish-Markets,
will cast forth her young by her mouth. The fish Galens brings forth by her
mouth and what others.
Of the Hay there is nothing more certain, and commonly known, that she does
cast forth her young at her mouth: for lately when a Country man had bought
some Hayes very cheap, and carried them at his back, the Citizens and people
that looked on, saw some of her young ones creeping forth at her mouth; so that
the Country fellow being laughed at by the common people, and disdayning those
kind of fish, threw them all away upon the dunghill. There is also another Hay,
that is smooth, and soft skinned, not rugged, that brings forth her young about
her Navell, her belly opening there and breaking, so that the young one sticks
fast to the bowels of the Female, by a long string. I have heard some
fishermen of credit relate, that they had seen some Hayes newly taken forth of
the Male, his mouth gaping; and that he cast out six or seven small fish by his
mouth, that were wonderful lively, that being immediately cast into the Sea,
would swim at first; as we see Chikens taken forth of their shells to pick at
any thing; and to scratch. But this is admirable, that since the Hay brings
forth at the mouth being open, that young fry should run again often into the
dams belly, and the secret parts there, and hide themselves amongst her bowels;
and then they will come forth again to sport, Of the industry of living
Creatures.
which Plutarch wondered at. The Hayes says he, for their fatherly indulgence
give place to no living Creatures. First they have eggs, then fish very many,
which they do not put forth as other Creatures do, but hatch them within
themselves, and these they breed up and carry in their bellys, as if it were a
second birth; when they grow great, they let them wander at pleasure, and again
receive them in at their mouths, and let them inhabit in their bodies, and
there they allow them a place of refuge, and house to dwell in, and meat, till
they can provide for themselves, and can swim well: and that they may learn
this perfectly, they teach them to sport and to swim, also to tumble
themselves, and to use nimblenesse, that they may the safer escape the danger
of Sea Monsters. In our Seas there are many kinds of Hays, whereof some are
cunning in other arts, diversely. Amongst these the Hay that is gray colored,
which the Dutch call Sprink-Hay, because with incredible agility, he will
spring four Cubits high above the water, and will swiftly run from danger, that
he may not become a prey to others. Also there is a Hay with a spotted skin,
all full of black marks, we call this den Ghespickled Hay, as we see dogs and
horses marked with spots: Our Gesner describes this by the name of the Rock
dog; also there is brought into the fish market, the Hay called Centrina or
Speerhaye, as if you would call them speered or sharp Hays; for they have two
sharp prickles on their backs, wherewith they wound men dangerously, our
Country men keep these pricks in silver cases to pick their teeth with. Thus
much of fish that conceive and bring forth at the mouth, as is well known to
our men. But as for the conception of Chows, that is performed by the mouth as
it is reported, I dare say nothing for certain, yet they seem to me to
represent the Nature of Pigeons that beck one the other, and do as it were
kiss, as lovers do their Sweet-hearts. Wherefore that proverb of Pigeons is
used concerning them, who sport and play, and kiss, and call one the other, and
embrace often. The Dutch call this Duvebecken, It is a Proverb, like to Pigeons.
from the manner is observed in Pigeons, so that about the spring time these
are the preludiums and forerunners of Venery. There are some, as Plutarch
testifies, that maintain Mice to breed without the male, if they but oftentimes
lick of salt. Virgil also mentions something like this, concerning the
conception of Mares.

For above all the lust of Mares is known,
Georg. 3.
When burning heat is in their marrow grown,
Most in the Springtime when as hot as fire,
They stand on tops of Rock^* with strong desire,
Gaping for the West wind, which they draw in,
And by the Air, conceive, that is very thin,
Nor horses need to back them, there is the wonder
They breed alone and do conceive a sunder.
There happens to Mares, the same almost that happens to hungry people that are
filled with the steam of the Kitchen, and for want of nutriment are fed with
smells; or as it fell out with a noble maid, who when she could not enjoy her
sweet heart, A simile from hungry people.
she kept him close in her breast, and thought of him when he was from here, so
that by frequent imagination she formed an ill fashiond lump, What imaginary
venery can do in the womb.
such humors being heaped together in those parts as serve for conception;
which misshapen lump was made by imagination, without any help or copulation
with man.

CHAP. XX.
The hand or other parts of the body that are frozen, and grown stiff with cold
and frost, how they may be thawed, and recover their former heat.
IT happens sometimes when the Air is sharp, and cruel, as when the North
wind blows in Winter, Bodies will frez with cold.
or some other extreme cold wind, whereby all things are frozen and congealed,
men's hands also, and other parts of their bodies, will grow stiff and benumbed
with cold, so that they will be dead and fall off, or else they must be cut
off, and lopt as withered boughs, that the sound parts be not infected by them:
when any such thing happens, as it does to those that travel through cold
Countries, and great Snows, or when a ship is broken, to those that sit on the
planks, and are tossed to and frow by the waves, they who are thus affected
must not be presently brought to the fire, but must be placed at a good
distance from it, least the pain should increase, and grow greater by a sudden
and immoderate heat. In the mean time, the parts affected must be gently rubbed
and chafed with the hand, with oil of Camomile, Dill, sweet Almonds, then wet
with warm water, or with warm milk newly milk't from the Cow, in which are
boy'ld, green Bay Leaves that are oily, Rosemary, Sage, Lavander, Spike of that
part of France called Celtica, or french Lavender, whereby the blood may be
recalled, and the parts that are dead may revive. And all these things must be
done gently by degrees, least pain may be caused thereby. Cold, an enemy to the
Nerves and bones.
I think there is no man but has sometimes proved in himself, what bitter
pains the joints endure by reason of the nerves, that have a most exquitsie
feeling, when they grow stiff with a more intense and peircing cold, the blood
being either extinguished, or running inward into the inmost parts; so that at
the first coming of cold, the hands will wax red, and by and by, as the blood
grows cold, they will grow wan and dead, being deprived of the vital blood and
Spirits. Wherefore the Joints must be chafed easily, and bathed in a decoction
of the Intestines of four footed beasts, What will help lims oppressed with
cold.
with their feet, puddings, and tripes, which is to be commonly had in all
Cities, and to be provided. In which liquor as also in Cows milk, herbs may be
boiled that I mentioned before, wherewith the parts may be heated again with
heat of life, that were almost dead, and restored to their first temper: for
such fomentations do help and strengthen the parts, and ease the pains, as also
baths, stoves, and Baths of sweet waters do. Also the parts thus affected, so
they be not totally benumbed with cold, Snow and cold water raise up heat.
and that some blood be left in them, are to be plunged in cold water and
washed with it, which will restore them to their former vigor, and they will
by degrees regain the heat they had lost: for by antiperistasis or
contrariety, the heat comes in the cold being driven away: which every man may
make proof of, by handling Snow or Ice, for his hands will presently grow hot,
and look very red. So frozen Apples soked in cold water return to their own
nature, and all that is congealed in them, melts and is dissolved. So Ice let
down into a pit, will suddenly melt and run. Wells are cold in Summer, hot in
Winter.
For well-waters are hot in winter, as storehouses, and caves under ground
are; but in Summer they are exceeding cold. Moreover that the heat and vital
spirits may be driven forth from the inward parts to the outward parts, we must
give some things to drink made of wine and other heating things, whereby
natural heat like fire raked up in ashes may be stirred up, and also some of
the best Theriac must be drunk with wine, and outwardly we must apply to the
body bottles of Tin, Bottles applied to the body bring forth sweat.
or Earth, filled with hot water wherein herbs are boiled that draw forth
sweat, and open the pores, as Fennel, Smallage of the Marshes, Lovage, Lovage
with black leaves, Macedonian Parsley, Bay Leaves, Balm, Angelica, Origanum,
Rue, Savoury, etc. Which I use to do also in the Plague, that thereby all the
venom and contagion may be discussed from the heart.

How Seamen must be restored after shipwreck.
And if any man after shipwreck be cast on the shore, and, besides his joints
and limbs benumbed with cold, has drank in much salt water, he must take such
things as provoke urine abundantly, that the salt water may not corrode his
inward parts. I bid them make a drink of barley, Figs, Raysins, Anniseed,
Fennel-seed and roots, and red chiches, putting a little Licoris thereto; for
this takes off from the heat and acrimony of the Seawater, and suppleth and
eases the ulcerated parts. A safe potion for such as have drank Seawater.
And as for their meat, they must eschew all salt, sour, sharp things; water
of Honey, and Cows milk with a little Sugar, is an excellent remedy for them; A
Ptisan drink, and all that is made of Barley, either to sup, or in Pap, or
Creme of Barley, does wonderfully help them. And if the skin outwardly be
corroded (as it uses to be) by salt water, A liniment for the skin worn by
Salt Water.
they must have a Liniment of fresh Butter, Hogs grease without Salt, Goose,
Ducks, Hens, grease, unguent of Roses, and of black Poplars.

CHAP. XXI.
Whence arise and grow stings of Conscience in man, and whether as passions and
perturbations of the mind they are to be ascribed to the humors: or whether
they consist in the mind and the will.
COnscience, that is the testimony of good and bad in every man's mind, which by
a remembering of what is done, What Conscience is.
approves what is praise worthy, and condemns what is naught and ill, is by God
set in every man's heart. So a pure and sound mind that is guilty of no fault,
comes forth by calling to mind the good life that such a man has led; but a
troubled, tumultuous, fearful, The force of Conscience.
unquiet mind rises from the remembrance of an evil life, and will offer it
self whether a man will or no, so that it drives some men into despair and
desperation; as it did Cain, King Saul, Judas, and it raises others into hope
and confidence of obtaining Salvation, as it did, David, Peter, Magdalen.
Therefore a man is affected with some anguish of his mind and torture in his
soul, whenever conscience sets before him the memory of the wickedness he
has committed, When fear is the cause of Repentance and Salvation.
and it terrifies him with fear of revenge and punishment, that he trembles at
it, by which pricks of conscience the mind, sometimes elevated unto God, as it
fell out with the Prodigal Son, is moved to repentance, and dispelling fear
obtains tranquillity, so that the soul is raised again and cheered, and sending
the blood through the body, and elevating the spirits, that a little before
were almost extinguished, the color becomes fresh that was pale and almost
gone, the body pining, and the mind being contracted with sorrow. For being that
the vices and affections of the mind do show themselves in the habit of the
body, and in the Countenance, if at any time any secret mischief or wickedness
lie hid in the Soul, such kind of men upon any light occasion offered, will
commonly look pale, be troubled, and angry, will tremble, be short winded, sad,
complaining, suspicious, half dead, and are distracted with diverse thoughts,
because, as the Psalmist says, their sin is continually before their eyes, so
that they cannot as they would, and as they seek to do, obliterate and deface
the memory of their sins committed, but it will be daily renewed, and be fresh
again. To which that prayer of the Prophet David may be applied, when it was
his condition, and he was tossed with the same tempests and Waves, Psalm 51.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.
Also that expostulation of his with his own Soul, or rather that lamentation:
Psalm 41.
Why art thou disquieted oh my soul, and why art thou so troubled within me?
hope in God, because I will yet praise him. And again, when he had recovered
peace of conscience, and all sadness was dispelled, he says, Enter into thy
rest oh my Soul, because the Lord has rewarded thee, Psalm ^.
thou hat given me joy and gladness of heart: So then if we have done all
things against equity, and an evil will drives a man, contrary to right
understanding, and direction of the mind, and rules of reason; af^erwards the
remembrance of wicked deeds will torture the mind of any man. What will the
confidence of Conscience do.
Whereas others, fenced and supported by a good Conscience, they relying upon
and depending on the testimony of a secure mind, never fear nor fright at it,
no not when miseries come, as the Plague, War, Famine, and want of all things,
nor are they dejected for persecutions, or the rage of Tyrants: for though such
be the frailty of human nature, that there is no man who is not troubled at
sudden assaults, and is afraid of them, an example whereof we have in our
Savior Christ, Math. 26.
when he was to be offered up: yet an honest man, and he that depends on Gods
protection, stands firm and fearlesse against all dangers that are near him,
and sustains himself by that means in despite of them all. So David when he was
straightned on every side, Psalm 26.
opposed a courageous and an undaunted spirit to all dangers. For being guarded
and environed by the power of the Almighty God, he speaks with the greater
confidence, Though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear;
though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

Likewise Job. Though he kill me, Job 13.
yet will I trust in him. But wicked, ungodly, impious, naughty men, though
they be guarded and encompassed with a great retinue, and defended with
abundance of wealth, having great store of Lands and Possessions, and want of
nothing, yet are they racked in their minds, and are afraid of all things;
Prove. 12.
and as the Wise man says, Their Soul is pierced with the Conscience of their
wicked deeds as with a Sword. For when they call to mind the mischief they have
done, they presently tremble, wax pale, look about, and are afraid of the
safest means, as if the furies of hell hurried them along. For there is in
every man an imbred choice of things by nature, What is the Law of nature.
a judgment, and distinction of good and bad, and the knowledge of God is
printed in their Souls, which Saint Paul calls the Law or Instinct or conduct
of nature, Romans 2.
whereby we are carried to what is honest, and we abhor what is ill, every man's
conscience, as he says, bearing him witness, and their thoughts excusing or
accusing one another. Wherefore great is the force and virtue of conscience in
all actions of our lives, so that a Man, though horrid things be objected
against him, will maintain his constancy, and will allwaies persevere in his
counsel and resolution he has undertaken, and will not fear or tremble, or
dread with any threatenings, if he have done nothing amiss. But he that is
guilty of a crime, and his mind is polluted with it, thinks the punishment to
be always before his eyes, and destruction to pursue him continually. For
fear, which makes the blood hide it self, and deads the spirits, rising from
the conscience of sins, takes away a man's courage, Conscience changes the form
of the body.
and changes his countenance, and the habit of all his body: so that in the
midst of all his jollity, in dancings and banquettings, and in Conjugal
embracements, he feels the rack and tortures of Conscience; whereas integrity
of life makes all calm, peaceable, quiet, and no trouble at all: which one
thing may be a forcible argument that the mind of man came from God, and is
moved by his power, A strong argument of immortality.
and guided by his spirit and direction, and that the Soul lives after death,
which, when some years are past, when the Supreme Judge shall please to judge
the world, shall again unite with the body after a wonderful manner. In the
morning early the force and sting of Conscience is most clear, the fumes and
fuliginous vapors being discussed, Conscience, what time of the day it shows
it self.
wherewith the mind from the actions or banquets of the day before, as from
gluttony, drunkenness, revelling, and the like was oppressed, so that about
that time especially the mind recollects what was formerly done, and thinks on
such things that she approves or dislikes. So says the Prophet, Why the
Conscience shows it self in the morning. Psalm 5. Esaias 50.26. Ecclus. 39.
Thou will hear my voice in the morning, Oh Lord, in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look; For thou art not a God that has pleasure
in wickedness, the Lord shall listen unto me in the morning: in the morning
will I attend unto thee. The just shall deliver his Soul, that he may watch
unto God that made him: God, O my God, I watch for thee in the morning: So then
to those that newly wake, Psalm 62.
when they have eaten nothing, nor drank, the affects of the mind and
Conscience do most represent themselves, and God warns men early in the
morning. For what admonishment, or wholesome Instruction can be offered to men
when they are drunk with Wine, or crop-sick with gluttony? So I know many men
who when the memory of their former ill life troubles them often, they
presently drowned themselves with drink, that they may forget all the
wickedness they have committed, and that the remembrance thereof may not
secretly steal upon them: yet the next day the mischief became raw and did more
cruelly torment their minds. For the like happens to these men, as it does to
men that are diseased, A simile from sick men.
who will not disclose but conceal the Ulcers and sores they have about them,
whereby they are more bitterly tortured inwardly; to which the Prophet David
alludes, when he says; Psalm 31. The place of the Psalmist explained.
When I kept silence my bones waxed old through wy roaring all the day long.
The sin and terror of his Soul, and unquietness of his mind, and pressures of
conscience, did so drive him to confess his wickedness, and yet he could not
be drawn to confess his sin, and to purge it away by true repentance. But the
regulating of man's life by institution, the habit of his body, Who want
Conscience.
and imbred humors are of great consequence in moving the mind, and in
raising, or stilling the motions of Conscience. So Mariners, Soldiers,
Porters, Carriers, Hucksters, Victuallers, Hosts, Bankers, Usurers, Bauds, and
many Factors, and petty Merchants, Brokers, Shopkeepers, and Tradesmen, are not
much moved with any motion of conscience, that they have made it large enough,
and it is become like wide nets that let all things through, straining at a
Gnat, as our Savior Christ says, and swallowing down a Camel. A simile from
Nets. Math. 23.
Others that are addicted to a solitary and melancholique life, are too much
troubled about it, and tremble for fear, when there is no cause of fear. So the
force of Conscience drives superstitious people farther than they ought to go,
and they will not be quit of their vain persuasions. So melancholique people
are more anxious than other men, but cholerique people by reason of the
thinness of humors and heat, make no regard of conscience, and they either
cast it off, or extenuate it, or strive to forget it. Sanguine people are not
much affected with any such motion in their souls, nor do they ever think of
their life past: Job. 15.
To this belongs that of Job. Thou writest bitter things against me, and thou will consume me with the sins of my youth. 'Jobes place is explained.
For those things that we did insolently in our youth, and were not much
perplexed with them, the same will in times of diseases calamities danger or
old age, An clegant simile from such as are oppressed by usury.
come fresh to our memory, like to accounts that are crossed and blotted out.
Like to those that have borrowed great sums of other men's moneys, and have
quite forgotten to pay, are called upon for it, and compelled by Law to make
all good. But Phlegmatique people, are slow, sluggish, forgetful, careless,
nor do they ever think what conscience is, nor does their mind ever wax hot, or
can they be stirred up by any means to think of goodness, as being drowned in
too much moisture. Wicked men, who are sunk into the deep, and who are
strangers from the word and knowledge of God, depise, laugh and jeare at all.
Psa. 1.
Some between both will palliat, excuse, deny or charge their faults upon
others, which thing David prays against, and desires not to fall into that
sin. Psa. 140.
Incline not my heart to malicious words, that I should excuse my self in my
sins. Wherefore many things hinder the light of conscience, and overshadow it,
as youth, drunkenness, gluttony, intemperance, love, night, delights,
pleasures, all which cast off the bridle of conscience, shame and modesty, so
Plautus writes,

Night, Amor. L. 1. Eleg. 6.
Woman, Wine are most pernicious things.
For young men, and that most destruction brings.
Ovid is of the same opinion.

Night, Love, and Wine all moderation fly,
Night knows no shame, Wine and Love, fear defy.
For these Counselors are not safe, and carry the mind the wrong way, Youth
neglects conscience.
and turn us from harkning to good counsel and advice, and if Conscience sting
and wound any of these, and would draw any such people to what is good, they
contemn, neglect, deride it, cavil, and cast a Cloud upon all things: they
aggravate, or extenuate and lay it upon their youthful years, that must be
spent jovially and without melancholy, and that all sad thoughts must be
driven far from them, and laid aside for old age to think on. Thus rejecting
the documents of reason, and avoiding the instruction of conscience with mirth,
Eccle. 11.
they frame all their thoughts rather by the rule of pleasure than the square
of moderation. Whence Solomon speaks to the purpose, Youth void of counsel.
Youth is vain, rash, slippery, inconstant, mad, thoughtlesse, improvident,
inconsiderate, and the pleasures that use to accompany it, are transitory and
soon gone; sometimes they are damnable, and have a lamentable and miserable
event. But because commonly the companions of this age, are ignorance, want of
experience, want of counsel, inconsideration, therefore it less apprehends
what is good for it, and may make it prosperous. Also some there are, that are
at their full age, and who have the government of the Commonwealth, and are to
take care for the Church and Religion, whose consciences are blinded with
error and darkness, so that often times they do not measure all things out
exactly, and by rule, or call reason into Counsel, Men are not led by
conscience but by their passions.
with Judgment and election of things, or perform what they do by the right
rule of Gods Word and Spirit; but often times either humane passions drive them,
or else the favor and gratifying of Princes prevails with them, which we read
that Paul did: or else some error of settling some inveterate superstition, or
an old vicious custom that is crept in, not by the consent and authority of
good men, but by the misunderstanding of the ignorant common people, Old
errors are hardly left.
yet as if it were a rule for men to walk by, no man will suffer to be taken
away, or abolished, whence it comes to pass, that in the choice of things, in
the difference of good and bad, in setting up, and restoring, and propagating
true Religion and the worship of God, they are blind and deceived, and wander
from the truth, John. 16.
to the great detriment of conscience. So the Jews were persuaded that they did
God good service, when they raged against those that had given up their names
unto Christ. Paul was stirred up with the same violence, and desire to punish
the Christians, and he persecuted them fiercely, Acts. 9.
with a zeal of godliness, but which was wrapped up in error, and, as he says
being an Apostle, was not according to knowledge, Romans 10.
that is, it was not done with judgment, or reason, and with a right unstanding
of the cause, as Gamaliel did, Acts 5.
not first knowing and observing what the will of God is, not by the
instigation and inspiration of the the spirit of God, which he will have to be
tried and examined by the express word of God, 1 John 4.
whether it proceed from thence: Wherefore there is error committed in the
choice of religion, not by an affection and propension to godliness, because
they wanted the Spirit of God, who puts into men's minds, things that are
certain, and out of all doubt. So the wise man says, There is a way seems good
unto a man, but the last end thereof, Prove. 24.
tends unto death. Paul shows us an example of it, who of a persecutour was
made a Preacher, and a defender and maintainer of the Gospel of Christ; who
professes that he obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.
because he did it ignorantly through unbeleife, and that thereby, in him
Christ Jesus had showed all clemency, to be an example to those that should
believe in him unto eternal life. Some perchance may say that I have used too
many words in treating of the motions of conscience, because this argument be
longs to Preachers and professors of Divinity, whose duty it is, and by virtue
of their office, they are bound to pacify and settle men's consciences, and to
free them from all fears. But since these affections do overthrow man's health,
that proceed from the stings of conscience, and the Spirits and humors
vitiated, do afford nutriments for it: it is the Physicians part also to remove
these perturbations out of men's minds, that, those being taken away, the body
may be in perfect health. For it it a laborious and very difficult matter to
restore the body that is fallen sick, where the conscience is polluted with the
spots of sins, where the Organs of the senses, and the Spirits vital and
animal are vitiated. And it is no less troublesome, for a Churchman to give
comfort to the soul, when the body is full of vicious humors: for by reason of
the narrow consent and union of both parts, the vices of the mind fly upon the
body, and the diseases of the body, The sympathy of the Soul and body.
are carried to the Soul. As we have for example all mad people, and such as
are melancolique or frantique, such as rave or dote, or are drunk, Apoplectick,
paralytick, forgerfull, stupid, Lunatic, and many more, whose sick distempers
proceed from the distemper of the brain; wherefore we must carefully look to
the head, which is the seat of the mind, and use all means to preserve both
parts in health.

CHAP. XXII.
How many months does a Woman go with Child; and which must be accounted a
seasonable birth. By the way, of the framing of the body of man, and in how
many days or months the Child is made perfect, and comes to live. In which
narration, all things are handled more accurately, because from hence bitter
quarrels arise, not only betwixt married people, but others also that use
unlawful copulalation.
SInce there use often times great contentions and quarrels to arise amongst
many people, concerning the time that the woman goes with Child, and some
complain that are jealous of their Wives that they have formerly married to
keep them company, that they have not gone their full time to be delivered, so
that sometimes they suspect that they have played the Whores, and that some
other men have secretly made use of their bodies: I thought it not amiss to
write something to this purpose, and the rather because Lawyers that end
controversies, referr the judgment of this matter to Physicians, and leave the
resolution of it to them to decide. So Paul, The judgment of inspection is
referred to Physicians. Digest: Tit. 2. Of the state of Man.
the Counselor, lib. 19 Respons. It is now a received truth, that a perfect
Child may be born in the seventh month; by the Authority of the most learned
man Hippocrates, and therefore we must believe that one born in lawful
matrimony, in the 7th month, is a lawful Child. Gellius handles this
argument, but rather after men's opinions, than according to the truth of the
business, or from natural reason, who supposes that there is no certain time
set of bearing Children, and that from the Authority of Pliny, who says that a
woman went 13, months with Child. L. 7. c. 5 A Child, at seven months is full
of life.
But as for what concerns the 7th, month, I know many married people in
Holland that had Twins, who lived to extreme old age, their bodies being
lusty, and their minds quick and lively. Wherefore their opinion is foolish and
of no moment, who think that a Child at seven months is imperfect, and not so
long lived, and that a Child cannot be borne perfect in all parts until nine
months be past. So of late, there arose a great conflict amongst us, A History
of a Child born.
and it was cruel and bloody, and a most deadly and desperate fight, by reason
of a Maid, whose chastity was violated, that had no ill Name or doubtful
report, but she had a weak head, and a feeble judgment; and these of all others
are soonest overcome, and do not so valiantly and corragiously resist and stand
against either threats of flattering inticements, other wise than some fierce
clamorous maids use to do, who will bite and scratch, and compel one that
shall assault their chastity to forsake them. But in this Tragedy the conflict
grew again more violent and bitter, because the Father, who was reported to
have gotten her with Child, or to have ravished her, denied the fact, which his
enemies charged upon him, so bitterly, that he might be torturd, and racked
till he should confess it, but he confidently avouched, A denial of a rape
charged upon one.
that he was ready to forswear it upon the Bible, (he himself being wont to be
President, in judgment, and to handle sacred matters, (that he never so much as
entered her, or broke the membrane of her Virginity, nor penetrated into her
body. Wherefore he would by no means be taken for the Father of the Child, or
that it should be accounted his: amongst other arguments he alleged for his
innocence, this was one, that the Child was born in the 7th, month, and hardly
so late; for the month was rather then new begun, than ended, and all the parts
of it were perfect, except the nails, which we observe sometimes to be wanting
in a Child born in nine months, especially where great bellyed women use salt
fish too lavishly, or lick salt, as that sex is most prone to desire salt and
sharp things. When a Child wants nails.
Wherefore he strove to prove it was not a Child of seven months, but nine
months, and that by making that account of the months, and by observing the
reason of time, they must seek for another Father, who had formerly lain with
her, and got her with Child. But when the Judges gave Judgment, that the Infant
should be viewd and searched by the Physicians; a Midwife being called, and
some honest women, one was a noble woman, who was the Mother of 19. Children,
and who several times had been delivered at seven months, and the seven months
not fully ended. They all pronounced, not examining the cause of the fact, nor
respecting the Father, whether they should reckon this man or some other to be
the Father, that this was a Child born in seven months, that was carried in the
Mothers belly 27 weeks, and if the Mother could have gone nine months, the
child's parts and limbs would have been more firm and strong, and the
structure of the body would be more compact and fast, and not so loose, For the
breast bone, that ^yeth as a buckler or fence over the heart, the Dutch call it
Borstplate, and the sword-like gristle that lies over the stomach, were higher
than naturally they should be, and did not lie down plain, but crooked and
sharp pointed, like the breast of young Chickens, that are hatched at the
beginning of Spring, or especially in the month of March. Whence comes the
Nails.
Also this Infant that was a Female wanted her nails upon her fingers, and the
utmost joints of her fingers, upon which, from the musculous or cartilaginous
matter of the skin, nails that are very smooth, do come forth and grow hard,
there appeared hardly any marks or prints of nails, and they were not so hard
as horn, but soft as thin skin. But on the joints of their feet, there were not
resemblance of nails, because those parts are not so hot as the hands, and are
farther from the heart, the Fountain of heat: for the joints of the hands that
are fastened to the breast by the Arms, by the benefit of the heat that is
diffused from the heart, have more apparent signs on the fingers than any
other parts. The judgment of Physicians concerning Child birth with no favor
or disfavour unto any.
Wherefore the Physicians observing many natural causes, and depending on
solid reasons, with favor or disfavour to neither side, but as the matter
would bear it, if he would be so content, that was in question to set his
integrity and honesty upon it, pronounced before the Judges, to whom that
trial was committed by them, that amongst the Dutch are the King of Spains
vicegerents at Brussels, that this Infant was to be taken for a Child, not of
nine but of seven months birth, the time the woman went with Child, being 27
weeks, and such a Child must be accounted born in seven months, though the time
was not quite finished, and one or two weeks were wanting, and some days, to
make the time complete, But in this business the Moons circuit must be
observed, The Moon makes the months for women with Child.
that is perfect in four weeks, that is in less than 28. days: in which space
of her revolution, the blood being agitated by the force of the Moon, the
courses of women flow from them, which being spent, and the matrix cleansed
from the menstruall blood, as it uses to be often times on the fifth or seventh
day, Natural conception is after the courses.
if after that time a man lie with a woman, the conception proves to be most
natural, so that the Infant born after seven or nine months, is most
healthful, and free from diseases, to which Children use to be obnoxious. For
Children use to be troubled with many diseases, by reason of the menstruall
blood, The Epilepsie is Childrens diseases.
that stays in the Matrix at the time of conception, as are the Measils, that
is, lively eruptions, commonly called Measils and Smallpox, in low dutch
Maeselen end Pocken, and other red or wan Pushes that are contracted by the
menstruall foulness, and, in the Spring or Summer, thrust themselves forth
into the outward parts of the body. To this we may add the Epilipsie, or
Falling Sickness, the Dutch call it Vallende Siecte, which disease because it
has many differences, the superstitious Gentiles of old were wont to referr
it, to certain Gods, before the light of the Gospel was revealed to men,
whereas it proceeds from natural causes, and chiefly from clammy and tenacious
phlegm. Moreover in the mouths of young Children, there breed almost so soon as
they are born, some blisters about their throats and Palates, the Ara^^ans call
them Alcolam, the Greeks (...), the Dutch dan Sprowe, What is Alcola.
and under rheir tongues (...), commonly called the Frog, What the Frog is.
in low Dutch Spanare, which either by incision, or with ones nail, or rubbing
with Salt, as I use to do, when they fear the iron instrument, or Oxymel of
Squils, is taken away: to say nothing of Hydrocephalon, A spongy head.
that is a head swollen with a spongy watery humor, and of many other collections
of humors, that come from vicious milk and menstruall blood, which also use to
accompany men in years, and when they seem to be gone, they will come often times
again. Therefore both in tilling and sowing of ground, A simile from tilling of
ground.
as also in copulation with women, and manuring that ground, and pro^reation of
Children, even by Moses law, the Moons motion was to be observed, by force
whereof at set times women's courses run or are stopped. The Moons circuit is
performed through the Zodiac in 27, days, and in one third part of a day,
which days comprehending less than four weeks, make a Lunar month, In how
many days the Moon pe^fects her course.
especially if you take away that time, that this planet lies hid, and is not
seen, for she is three days more or less in conjunction, that is as they say
conmonly the time she is invisible, See Galen of decretory days.
in which time she does not exercise her force upon the earth, and is not fit
to alter them. But when she begins to show her self, and is new, and when she
is full, that is, she is in opposition to the Sun, and shows round, she has
wonderful force in conception and many other things: for she both augments
Corn and fruits, and shellfish, and flesh that hangs to the roofs of houses,
is corrupted by the beams of it shining upon it, and such as sleep or continue
long in the Moon light, she makes pale, and trembling, and heavy headed, brings
the Epilepse to Children, as also stupidnesse, and the Palsy, and many more
things she does, not that she exceeds the other Planets, but she does it by
being so near to us. For she being so placed in the lowest Orb, The Moon is a
Planet next the Earth.
and next to the earth, she does so guide the beginnings, and increase of
things, that by the effect of her, even after conception of the seed, the Child
in the Mothers Womb, by the Mothers blood that nourishes it, is augmented and
made to grow. The time of carrying the Infant is to be referred to the course
of the Moon.
Also all the time a woman goes with Child, whether you please to measure it by
days or months or weeks, as great bellyed women commonly use to reckon, must
be referred and counted by the age of the Moon. But she shows her forces more
effectually upon the body, either when first she meets with the Sun, and begins
to be enlightened by him, or when she is round and full, but when she is but a
half Moon, she has less forces, and least of all when she is crooked, and by
degrees fades and is obscured. For at that time there is no concourse of waters
in the Ocean, no abundance of humors in the bodies of men, no collection of
marrow in the bones, so that then it is fit for tender bodies to leave off
copulation, and to make a League with it. But I often times use to foretell to
women great with Child when their travel shall be easy, When the birth will be
easy.
and so to raise their minds to hope very well if they chance to travel when
the Moon is either new or full, especially when the force of the Moon is about
the Secrets, or Groins, or Thighs; for I said elsewhere that this Planet runs
through all the parts, and stays upon them severally two days, and sometimes
three. And when she stays about those parts, the Womb is wet and slippery and
opens with more ease, and is dilated and makes the passage ready for the child
to come well out by. But if the birth happen when the Moon is old, and
diminished, it commonly uses to be more laborious, and to be thrust forth with
great struggling and endeavors. Because I have often observed these things, and
they seem not strange from reason, I thought fit to set them down to make good
this argument. Moreover since we have in some part mentioned the Moons forces,
it is fit to remember this again, that I spoke of a little before, that in
raising and changing of the temper of the Air, she has no forces, unless the
Sun enlighten her, and that vast Planet shall shine upon her, and illustrate
her with his face toward her: therefore it is that she has so little force,
when she first comes to meet the Sun, but after the third or fourth day that
she shines, she manifestly foreshews either a Tempest or fair weather,
Prognostics from the Moon.
so that the fourth day constitutes the temper or distemper of the whole Month.

Which effects of the Sun and Moon Virgil elegantly expressed in these Verses,
observing the variety of the colors, that she is overspread with, from the
exhalations of the Air and Earth.

When first the Moon does recollect her light, Georg. L. 1.

If that her horns show black and dark as night,
Plowmen and Seamen must great rains expect:
But if a Virgin red she does reflect,
Strong Winds are near, a red Moon does blow,
But the fourth day, which makes the certain show,
If she look bright, and her sharp horns appear,
That day and all that follow will be clear,
Calm and serene, and till that month do end,
No rain shall fall, nor shall the Winds contend.
He comprehends the power of the Sun in as many Verses, which not only changes
all mortal bodies, but also the Souls of men.

CHAP. XXIII.
A profitable and pleasant narration of the Procreation of Man, wherein is
illustrated the other part of the Argument.
SInce many do err and are blind in the knowledge of natural things, and
especially in those things that appertain to the structure of man's body, and
many trifling narrations are used to be delivered concerning the fashioning of
the Infant, and the situation of it, of the time of a woman's going with child,
and of the course of the Moon; and whether the seventh Month may be thought
seasonable for the birth of a child, and whether a child then born be long
lived; I think I shall do well if I shall attempt by the way to explain the
framing of man, for there is an excellent structure of this divine workmanship,
and there is an elegant and curious frame of all the parts that are seen
outwardly, or are inwardly concealed, and serve for man's use.

The Original of man's body. The efficacy of humane seed.
Man consists of the Seed of both Sexes, and for the first seven days, the
Mothers blood running to it, he grows in shape like to an Egg. But there is a
forming faculty and virtue in the Seed, from a divine and heavenly gift, for it
is abundantly endued with a vital and etherial spirit, and is full of it, and
this gives the shape and form to the child; so that all the parts, and the
whole bulk of the body, that is made up in the space of so many Months and is
by degrees framed into a decent and comely figure of a Man, do consist in that,
and are adumbrated thereby, Psalm 138.
which David the greatest King admired and observed, being the only
contemplator of divine works. Physicians that have narrowly contemplated man's
nature, Four times of forming the Infant.
constitute four different times wherein the framing of man is perfected.

The first, when presently after copulation and mutual embracements it has the
nature of Seed, at which time it is called conception or geniture; because the
two Seeds fermented together, do grow up like Creme, or the concretion of Milk;
Job 10.
which Job describes thus; Have thou not poured me forth as milk and crudled me
as Cheese? by these is the conception and conglobation of the seeds of Male and
Female perfected in the first week, if there be no effluxion, as it uses to
fall out when the Matrix is slippery, or stands too wide open.

The second time of forming is constituted when Nature and the force of the
Womb by the use of her own imbred forces and virtue, makes a manifest change in
the Seed, so that all the substance seems rather to be neshy and sanguine than
seminal, and this happens about the 12. or 14. day after the frame began, and
though this concretion and fleshy mass, abounds with hot fiery blood, yet it
is rude and without any form, and there are no lineaments or figure of the
parts distinguished, for the Limbs have yet obtained no certain form; whence it
is that we can see no fashion or portraiture of a man, but only a rudiment and
beginning of man's workmanship, Similitudes from Artificers.
that learns as it were to fashion the child. An example may be fetched from
Potters, (for Art imitates nature) who from moist tenacious tractable Clay,
make Images and Pots, first without any certain form, undigested, but
afterward very artificial figures. A simile from Painters.
We may observe the same in Painters, who first with a more rude pensil, or
with a cole or chalk draw a picture in the groundwork of it, the Dutch call
that bewerpen, then they polish it and finish it; so that those things that
before appeared rough, hid, undressed, dark, obscure, shadowed, do afterward
show neat, pleasant, and clear. We may conceive the like in Image-makers and
Silver-smiths, A simile from Image-makers.
who hew their brass or wood to polish it, and when they have made it hollow
with a tool, they polish it with another Instrument, and so they make their
work exact and perfect. Like unto this in reason is sowing of Seed, and casting
it about upon the ground; A simile from sowing of Seed.
for that being warmed and softened in the bosom of the earth, grows up
continually by the moist vapors, and becomes a plant, bears fruit, and seed
just as that it came from. A simile from the fruitfulness of the Earth.
As therefore the fertile and fruitful earth fosters the Seed by embracing it,
and brings forth a Plant of the same kind, as that was the Seed came from; so
the Womb of a Woman, unless it be wholly barren, frames a child of the Seed
that is hid in it, and at a set time, that is for the most part, when nine
Months are past, produces Mankind, either Male or Female, of the same shape
and form with the progenitors. But to proceed in relating the other parts of
what I have undertaken.

The third time to make up this fabric is set, when those three principal
parts show themselves evidently and perspicuously, namely the Heart, from
whence spring the Arteries; the Brain, from whence, as some threads from a
distaff, the Nerves proceed; and the Liver, from whence the Veins are
propagated. To frame these the faculty of the Womb is busied from the time of
conception, unto the 18. day of the first Month.

But lastly, which time reaches to the 28. or 30. day, the outward parts are
seen exquisitely elaborated and distinguished by their joints; and then the
child begins to grow and to pant; from which progress of days, because all
the Limbs are parted, and the whole artifice is perfect, it is no longer seen
as an imperfect child or Embryo, that is, a concretion that springs forth, but
is held to be a perfect and absolute child. Males for the most part are perfect
by the 30. day, but Females on the 42. or 45. day. It is by reason of heat that
Males are sooner perfected than Females, for heat extends the humor like to
soft Wax, Why Males are so^ner perfected than Females.
diffuseth and dilates it and by its force frames and fashions it. So heat and
vigor of the body, and the alacrity of nature in Men, makes them to move in
three Months, When the child stirs.
but Women in four Months. At which time also his hair and nails come forth,
and the child begins to stir and kick in the Womb, so that great bellied Women
can plainly perceive the motion of them, and are troubled with nauseating and
loathing of their meat, and farther they desire to feed on some absurd meats,
and such as are strange to nature, as Rubbish, Coals, Pots, shells; some have
longed for raw fish, and men's Limbs. I knew some that longed for live Eels, and
Congers, and rent them with their teeth in pieces, and swallowed them down. Yet
there are many Noble women that are not subject to this enormous appetite and
desire; for that they have not much excrementitions or faulty humors heaped up
in their bodies, but it is otherwise with the common people; for those women
are ravenous, and have heaped up much filthy and feculent humors, and blood in
their containing vessels within, from whence about the third Month after
conception proceed nauseating, loathing, sour belchings, and the preternatural
desire and coveting of many things is stirred up in them. I saw at Bridges a
City in Flanders; An example of two twins that suffered abortion.
an abortion of Twins that happened in three Months; they were both boys, and
from this longing desire the woman miscarried because she could not have what
she eagerly longed for. The child was a finger long, or something more, and of
the same thickness, all the Limbs of it were perfect, and no want in any part,
so that you might plainly see the eyes with a black pupil, the Nostrills,
Ears, Fingers, Navell, Privy Member, Thighs, Shanks, Calves, Ankles, Feet, and
Toes. When both these children panted, and appeared to be alive, they were
brought to the font to be Baptized, when that was ended, they appeared no
longer to be alive. The situation of the child in the Womb.
Moreover I shall show by the way how the child lies situate in the Womb. It
is carried in the Mothers Womb, fastened with a long string to her Naver, as the
Apple is fast to the Tree by its stalk, by which, by the help of the umoilical
Vein, it is nourished and drinks at a fountain of pure blood; not by the mouth
and lips; which are of no use yet for to eat by, as the Arse and Bladder, serve
not yet to cast forth the excrements by. For the umbilical vein springing from
the Matrix, enters the Liver, in two parts, and is terminated in vena porta,
from which the most pure blood by the seminary vessels is derived to the
Matrix. Hence it is that the blood and spirits like auxiliaries and a supply of
more forces, are always carried downwards, that none of these may be wanting.
Wherefore by these channells and rivers of Veins and Arteries, that, proceeding
from the Mothers body, are carried to the Womb; and then are presently fastened
in the Navel, is the child fed; and, by the faculty of the seed that is
fostered by the heat of the Womb, and is moistened with blood, is it perfected
in such a time in all its parts. But the Infant is equally balanced in the
middle of the Womb, as it were in the Center of it, lying all of an heap, and
being something long is turned round, so that the head a little inclines, and
he lays his chin on his breast, his heels and ankles upon his buttocks, his
hands on his cheeks and eyes, but his legs and Thighs are carried upwards with
his hams bending, and they touch the bottom of his belly, the former and that
part of the body that is overagainst us, as the Forehead, Nose, Face, is
turned toward the Mothers back, and the head inclining downwards, it has its
eyes and face toward the Coccyx, that is, the rump bone, that is fast to os
sacrum; the Dutch call it destier: this, in the birth, parts together with the
os pubis, and is loosned; whence it is that commonly males come with their
faces downwards, or with their head turned somewhat obliquely, that their faces
may be seen, but Females are commonly situate the contrary way, so that they
come forth with their faces upwards, and look up toward heaven and cry. Births
contrary to Nature.
But these things do not always proceed according to natures order, for many
births are contrary to nature; and many children there are, not born with their
heads foremost, and their bodies longwayes, and with their hands lying on their
hips, but some come to the door with their feet, crooked and wide; some with
their necks bowed, and their heads lying obliquely, with their hands stretched
out, as they have that swim, and with their shoulders downwards, with great
danger to themselves and their mothers, and no less trouble to the Midwives.
But when all things proceed orderly and naturally, the child when the time is
accomplished in the Womb, endeavors to come forth, and inclining himself,
roles downwards. For he can no longer lie hid in these hiding places; than he
can find nutriment by the Navel, and the heat of the heart can subsist without
external respiration. Wherefore being grown great, he is desirous of nutriment,
and of light, and he so desires to take Air, Whence comes pain in Childbirth.
that he breaks the Membranes and coverings, wherewith he was covered, and
fenced against any attrition, and with bitter pangs of his mother he comes
forth to the light, and that not only from the narrow, and straight passages
of the Womb, but because this misery, and pain in travel, was brought in by
God, Genesis 3.
by reason of the fall of Adam and Eve, and this punishment was laid upon her,
the man also being cast into a condition of misery not inferior to it. For the
most part in the ninth Month the Matrix parts, and the os pubis being loosned,
the Woman striving what she can, and desiting to thrush forth what is a burden
to her, and the child breaking forth by an imbred strength, and by the conduct
of nature: which help the Woman lacks when the child is born dead.

For a child that is quick and lively labors no less in this work than the
woman, and strives to come forth to draw in the outward Air. Yet there are
many that when 9 Months are completely ended, Tenth Months births.
are not delivered till the tenth; such births Hippocrates calls births of the
tenth month, namely the tenth Lunar Month being begun, that is perfected in 28.
days to a month, and not fully ended. Wisd. 7.
So the Wiseman says he was ten months formed in the Womb, and coagulated of
the seed of the man and woman, from pleasure that comes by copulation. By like
reason, they that have now passed the sixth Month (in which no child born can
live, because the parts want strength) and are entered upon the seventh, and are
gone two or three weeks in it, are said to be born in the 7th, month. The same
reason serves to reckon weeks and months by, which are terminated in a certain
number of days; for the former week or month being past, and the following
begun, from this is the reason of the time deducted, and the course that the
woman went with Child is ascribed to that, and from that month the great
bellyed woman is in, or the Child is born, is the Account made, as it uses to
fall our in 7 or 9 turns of the Moon. The like reason serves in reckoning of
years, either from Christ's incarnation or passion, so that the inscription is
dated from the following year, as for the beginning of the first month, Why a
child is vital born at seven months.
the precedent month being neglected and defaced. It is not besides reason that
a Child should be vital at seven months, but there is a certain cause for it.
For the Child by an imbred force and order of Nature, does then turn it self
about, and changes its place for larger room; A simile from a Captain in War.
And as a Captain in War, marches to some other place, when the place he is
in, is too narrow or difficult, or he want necessaries for food, yet so that in
pitching his Tents and quarters, the Soldiery allwaies keeps watch, and is
ever ready for all events of war, and sudden force that might fall on, and is
prepared against the assaults of the enemy; so, if in that moment of time,
whereby in the seventh month that motion of nature uses to be stirred, the
time of Childbirth chance to happen, and the Infant come forth with joint
forces of the Mother assisting him, without doubt it will be vital. A simile
from such as cannot sleep in the night.
But the like hapeneth to this Infant, as it does to those that watch in the
night, and turn themselves to the other side, and seek to lie on the softer
part of the bed that is not so much pressed down: and if any thing unlooked for
befall them, or any sudden occasion hinder them that they cannot turn
themselves again in their beds, they presently leave their beds, and shaking
off sleep, though the night be not quite spent, they hasten to do what they are
urged unto: But if any accident unlookt for befalls them that are fast asleep,
they quake and tremble, and if they go about any thing, it is confusedly and
without all order, that the business can have no good or succesfull end: as it
uses to fall out in the eighth month: wherein the Infant being come to rest,
begins to be refreshed again; and to enjoy its lodging in the womb, and
nutriment from the Mother.

Some are born in the 7th, month, whose bodies are loose and not not firm, and
that have but weak natural heat, A simile from ripning of fruits.
but being helped by the care and industry of Nurses, they will last long, and
live many years. For it happens to them as it does to apples and other fruits
of Trees, that fall or are pulled off too soon, which fruiterers and haglers
hide in straw and bury in chafe, that they may grow ripe in time, and fit to be
eat. For such Infants by the labor and care of their Mothers, or Nurses; gain
strength, and by fostering grow strong: and by this help they prolong their
days for many years; which can be obtained by no means, in a Child born the
eighth month, for such a one seldom lives, because that motion of Nature is
quiet, and asleep; which agitation is wont to proceed from a certain cause,
both from the Mother and the Child. Wherefore being tired by that struggling in
the 7th, month, it begins to regain strength, and to be fostered until the set
time, it ought to remain in the Mothers Womb. A Child in the eight month
seldom lives.
Hence if any distemper or perturbation arise, and the Child be driven forth of
its place and habitation; it is deadly, by reason of an external cause, and
that is against natures order, Saturn an enemy to Children.
which is also exasperated by Saturn, a cruel and hurtful Planet to Children,
that by the coldness of it dejects their strength, wherefore it is safe to
stay in the womb till the 9th, month, that they may recollect their forces and
just firmness. For when the ninth month begins to come, the Child sinks down
for want of nutriment, and falls low to the neck of the Matrix, seeking to come
forth to the light, and is desirous to be released. Sometimes in the very heat
of birth, and hastening, it slips through the slippery parts, the Womb giving
way, without the help of any Midwife, suddenly, as a ripe apple falls with the
least touch of it. which is most common to them, whose Matrix is wide, and the
Infant has all helps together, being sufficiently enabled to come forth. For
such as have narrow month'd wombs, bring forth with difficulty and painful
labor, and with all the force they have. From this pressure and hard travel, A
moral from hard labor. John 16.
our Savior draws a most fit comparison, and comforts and encourages mightily
his followers, that they should not faint nor be discouraged, by reason of
calamities and persecutions which they suffer for the Gospel, since by the
example of a woman in Labor, all their sorrow shall be turned to sudden joy,
and solid consolation. Wherefore he shows that danger is at hand, anxiety,
sadness, and trembling: but all these things by joy unexpected arising, and by
the sweet consolation of the blessed comforter shall be suddenly discussed. But
God does every where threaten the wicked, and by an example taken from
Childbearing, that a sudden and unlooked-for destruction shall fall upon them.
Chap. 13.
For so in Isaiah he frights them. Howl because the day of the Lord is at
hand, as desolation, the Hearts of men shall melt, and their hands faint,
terrors and torments and griefs shall possess their minds, Chap. 4.
and they shall be troubled and cry out as Women with Child. So Jeremias
describing the Israelites in the height of their sorrows and extreme
calamities; I hear, says he, the noise as of a Woman in travel, the streights
and pangs of one that bears her first Child, which is wont to be the most
bitter, because they are unaccustomed to it, and they never felt the like, nor
were they ever in Travel before. So God is formidable to Kings, and terrible
when they lift up their heads against him, Chap. 22.
as it is said in the same Prophet, concerning Joachin King of Judah, whom he
cast into those streights, that he endured pain and sorrow, Hier. 48.
as a Woman in Travel. Also he cast such fear on the hearts of the Soldiers
of Moab, (though this kind of men be fierce and fearlesse) as falls on the mind
of a woman in labor, that melts and dissolves, unless she be solaced by those
that stand by her, Chap. 2^.
and the Matrons near her comfort her. There is a very ^^egant and consolatory
speech in Isaiah, that is set forth by an excellent comparison. For the Prophet
compares those, who being afflicted and chastised repent, and fly unto God by
repentance, to a woman in travel, and is in danger of her life in her pangs,
crying for help to those that stand by her, and turning her eyes every way,
with groans and sighs and lamentations entreats for comfort. For so he proceeds
in the order of his speech, that I may touch upon some things by the way, In
the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our
Soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee; with my Soul have I
desired thee in the night, yea with my Spirit within me, I will seek thee
early. Isaiah explained in that place.
Hereby he testifies that he leanes upon God when any calamity comes, and when
the rod is nigh, his hope depends fast upon him, and his eyes are intent toward
him; lastly, that the memory of God is printed upon his soul, and that he
waited on his commandments with all his will and mind, and all times did
meditate on his saving Truth, not only at noon day, but also at midnight full
of tempests and storms, and early in the morning; and he presently after sets
down, what it is that makes forgetful men so hot in their minds, and extorts
from them such firm confidence. O Lord, says he, Affliction maket men Godly.
the majesty and greatness of thy Name came into my mind in trouble and
affliction, when there was no hopes left, and I remembered thee. Troubles and
adversities do lead us to repentance by the Secret influence of thy Spirit; As
she that is with Child, when her time comes to be delivered, she cries out and
calls for help: so we have been, in thy sight O Lord. So St. Paul exhorts
sluggish and lazy people to be industrious and watchful, 2 These. 4.
and by the example of a woman in travel, to be ready and prepared for the
coming of God: For he comes as a Thief that oppresses men in the night, and
as the sudden pangs that fall upon a woman; Studious Reader, 1 Pet. 3. Apoc.
3.16.
I thought good to add thus much, because it is not altogerher from my purpose:
from whence every man may take some documents of life, and may consider, what
clear and apt comparisons the holy Prophets used in their Sermons, taken from
the most known things in Nature; which they observed the rather, because they
penetrate more effectually into the hearts of their Auditors, whereby they
taking up a purpose of a better life, may with a ready mind return to serve
God, and to bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life.

CHAP. XXIV.
At what age Maids desire to he married, and are fit to conceive: Again, when
women in years grow barren and their courses ceasing, they cease to be longer
fruitful. In which narration, the condition of man is axamined also.
THat parents may well take care for their Daughters chastity, they ought
exactly to observe, when it is fit and seasonable for Maids, that they have
care of, or for their daughters to marry, and so to dispose and to provide
husbands for them. For that Sex is frail, and subject to runine, Suitors woing
them on every side to undo them. But the propension and inclination of Maids
to marriage, may be discovered by many arguments. For when their body grows
hairy about the secrets, and their terms flow at the time appointed, as it
uses to be in the 14 or 15 year of their age, their seed increases, in some
sooner, in some later, according to their habits and constitutions, and the
blood which is no longer taken to augment their bodies, abounding, Maids are
studious of adorning themselves.
makes their minds fasten upon venereous imaginations wherefore at that age
they kemb, and adorn themselves, and they do not only continually all most
behold their eyes and cheeks in a Looking-glass, but they desire to be viewed
by young men, and to be made much of by Suitors, Mayds must be married b^^^
times.
and spoken kindly to, casting their eyes obliquely for that purpose, and
looking sweetly on their Lovers. Whence ^^iseth a tickling delight, and itching
in their inward parts, and ^hey begin to burn in love, and are easily allured
to copulation; and hence it is, that often times setting all shame aside, and
disobeying their Parents, who are frequently slow to give them portions, or are
unwilling to part with them, they willingly offer themselves to their Suitors,
and much infringe their own chastity, to the shame and disgrace of all their
family and kindred. Whence our Countrymen have this proverb; Mayds are frail.
A proverb of Mayds.
Riype Dochters zorgheliycke end broosche waere. Though for what belongs to
Chastity in the Low-Countrys, the condition of Mayds is more commendable, than
the condition of Widows. A proverb againt Widows.
For such a Taunting speech is used against Widows. Mayds are steadfast and
calm in their loves, but Widows are trouclesome, slippery, inconstant,
unquiet, and never of one settled mind. De Maechden hebben even zinen: de weduwen
hebben even duvel in. I suppose because they have tasted the delight of love,
which sticking in their minds, makes them more greedy after them, When a woman
becomes first fruitful.
than Mayds are, who never tasted those delights, and are altogether ignorant
of the marriage bed. But Mayds in the 14th. year of their age, or somewhat
later, show some signs of maturity, their courses then running, so that they
are fit to conceive, which force continues with them till 44, years of their
age; and some that are lusty and lively will be fruitful till 55, as I have
observed amongst our Country women; When a woman's courses stop.
I know that the flowing of the terms is extended farther in some women of good
tempers, but that is rare, nor does allwaies that excrementitious humor flow
from a natural cause. Wherefore their opinion must be examined, who say that
as there is no certain time of women's terms to end, so neither of their
conception, nor cannot any set bounds be prefixed for these things. For though
some have their courses at 60 years old, yet that proceeds not from a natural
cause, but from some affect that is contrary to Nature, which also hinders all
conception. For anger, indignation, wrath, and sudden fear may cause the
vessels and passages to open and cleave asunder, so by a violent concourse of
humors such a thing may run out, many by falls and accidents, having the
fibers of the veins pulled asunder. But since women for the most part about the
year 45, or at the most 50 have their terms stopped, and no hopes are to be had
of Children by lying with them, Old wives should not marry young men.
they do contrary to the law of Nature that marry young men, or men that for
greediness of money woe and marry such old women. For the labor is lost on
both sides, just as if a man should cast good seed into dry hungry lean ground.
It is more tolerable for a full bodied lively old man, that he should marry a
very young Maid in her green and tender years; For from that society they may
hope for some benefit for posterity; because a man is never thought to be so
old, and barren, and exhausted, but that he may get a Child. But what is the
Nature of man and how long the force lasts in him to get Children must be
showed, by the way. For since young men as Hippocrates says are full of imbred
heat, about the age of 16. or somewhat more, they have much vital strength,
and their secrets begin to be hairy, How long a man is fruitful.
and their chins begin to shoot forth, with fine decent down, which force and
heat of procreating Children increases daily more and more until 45 years,
or till 50, and ends at 65. For then, for the most part, the manhood begins to
flag, and the seed becomes unfruitful, the natural spirits being
extinguished, and the humors drying up, out of which by the benefit of heat,
the seed is wont to be made. There are indeed some strong lusty old men, who
have spent their younger days continently and moderately, who are fruitful
until 70 years, and subsist very manly in performing nuptial duties;
examples whereof there are sufficient in Brabant, and amongst the Goths and
Sweeds: A History done.
so I heard a trusty Pilate relate, that when he traficked at Stockholme, when
Gustavus the Father of the most invincible Ericus, who now reigns, ruled the
Land, he was called by the King to be at the marriage of a man that was a
hundred years old, who married a Bride of 30 years old, and he professed
sincerely that the old man had many Children by her. For he was a man, as there
are many in that Country, who was very green and fresh in his old age, that one
would hardly think him to be 50 years old. The Brabanders live very ^old.
Also amongst the Tungri and Campania in Brabant, where the Air is wonderful
calm, and the Nation is very temperate and frugall, it is no new thing, but
almost common, that men of 80 years marry young Mayds, and have Children by
them, wherefore Age does nothing hinder a man forgetting of Children, unless
he be wholly exhausted by incontinence in his youngest days, and his genitall
parts be withered and barren; wherefore the Dutch have a scoffing Proverb
against such that are worn out, A Proverb against such as are spent. A simile
from horses exhausted
and quite broken by venery, Vroech hengst Vroech ghuyle; the comparison being
taken from horses, who if they back Mares often, or too soon, they will quickly
grow old, and will never be fit for any warlick service. But what difference
there is between men and women, or what cause or reason there is in it, that a
woman is sooner barren than a man, and cease to eject her seed, if any
perhaps should require to know, I say it is the natural hear, wherein a man
excells. For since a woman is more moist than a man, A man is hotter than a
woman.
as her courses declare, and the softness of her body; a man does exceed her
in native heat.

Now heat is the chief thing that concocts the humors and changes them into
the substance of seed; A man is longer fruitful than a Woman.
which aliment the woman wanting, she grows fat indeed with age, but she grows
barren sooner than a man does, whose fat melts by his heat, and his humors are
dissolved, but by the benefit thereof they are elaborated into seed. Also I
ascribe it to this, that a woman is not so strong as a man, nor so wise and
prudent, nor has so much reason, nor is so ingenious in contriving her affairs
as a man is.

CHAP. XXV.
Who chiefly take diseases from others; And how it comes about that children
grow well, when Physic is given to the Nurse.
SInce contagious diseases infect all that come in the way of them yet they
infect no men sooner, than such whose Natures are of much affinity one with
another; as are Parents and Children, Sisters, Brothers, Cousins, who are in
danger, almost on all hand, and the disease spreads amongst them. And the
nearer any man is of blood and kindred, the sooner he catches this mischief
from others, by reason of Sympathy, that is, consanguinity and agreement in
humors and spirits. Kindred soonest infected.
Wherefore when the Plague is hot, and contagious diseases rage, I use to speak
to people of one blood, to stay one from another, and live something farther
from them, least the pestilent Air should infect them, that will sooner lay
hold of acquaintance and kindred, than strangers, and such as are not allied,
Nurses infect children.
though none be free from danger. The same reason serves for Nurses, and
children sucking at their breasts; for when the Nurse is sick, all the force of
the disease comes to the child, and the Nurse is helped by it, and escapes the
danger. For the force of the disease being diffused through the veins that are
the receptacles of blood (and milk uses to be made exactly from blood) the
child draws forth the worst and impure aliment, whence it falls out that the
whole force of the disease rests upon the child, because the blood which is the
substance of the Milk, is infected, and tainted with a feavourish quality.
Wherefore they must be presently weaned that they suck not in the disease, and
be polluted with the vicious juice. Sick children infect the Nurses.
Also Nurses sometimes take diseases from sucking children, but they are not so
dangerous, because there proceeds not so great force of the Malignity or
contagion from children, as from Nurses, whose blood is hotter, and more
corrupt.

But in curing diseases in children, (because that age cannot away with
Physic) I use this stratagem, that I give the Poysick to the Nurses, to drink,
for the force of the Physic soon runs through the blood that the milk is made
of, comes into the Breasts, and the Milk receives the quality of it: so if it be
a purging medicament, it will purge the child; if it be astringent, it will
stop and bind him. Likewise if they be naturally subject to a Cough, or Asthma,
I give such things as may dilate and cleanse the breast, as Hyfop, Horehound,
Orris root, Elecampane, Licoris, Figs, Savory. Sometimes I command to bind up
in a fine rag, such Medicaments as are proper for the child, and to give the
infusion of them, as it is commonly called, especially where that age has
learned to drink, and can put the cup to the mouth; wherefore I study to find
an art how to handle young children, old men, childing-women, and such as lie
in, sick people, and such as are in labor with child, as the condition of
every body requires, and the nature of the disease, having allwaies in my mind
that saying of Hippocrates, we must yield much to age, to the climate, l. 1.
Aph. 17.
to custom. And as Mariners as the weather serves and the wind, sometimes
fold in their sheets, sometimes hoise up their sails, and make all they can,
and turn the Rudder now this way, now that way: as Shoomakers fit our feet with
Shoes, Some similitudes from common things.
Tailors make our clothes fit for our bodies, as Nurses give children meat
chewed when they are very young, and do not cram them with solid meat: as
Masters deal with Scholars according to their age and wit, and first teach
them their letters, then solid learning. As we read Saint Paul was very
careful to do in delivering the mysteries of our faith, and in teaching the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.
who being not capable of more sublime doctrine, he fed yet, as children with
milk, that is, he let fall his words according to their capacities: so a
skillfull and experienced Physician, handles every man according to his
disposition, and gives such things as may profit and do no hurt at all.

By these reasons and examples I use to stop the mouths of some young
smatterers in learning, who will let no Physic be given to Children, old men,
childbearing women, and to such as are weak by travel in childbirth, of which
there are none but must be strengthened with the greatest care, and a very
convenient diet, and, by a wholesome use of Physic, that can do no hurt, be
brought to their former health. So I doubt not within three days after they
are delivered, to open a vein to women in childbed, if they have the Quinsey
or a Pleuresy, and by giving them a pectoral potion, to ripen the phlegm.

Also about Women with child, if at any time they are infected with an acute
disease, great consideration must be had, least the woman or the child should
be endangered. If there be necessity to open a vein or purge, L. 1. Aph. 4.
I resolve to do it, as Hippocrates bids us, from the fourth Month, until the
seventh Month, and that in the upper parts of her Arms, but by no means about
the Feet, Thighs, Ankles, or Insteps, to which not so much as cupping glasses
must be set, least there should be danger of abortion. Also to young men
infected with the Plague, or taken with an acute disease, I soon apply safe
remedies, and I do all I can to defend the heart, the fountain of life, and to
drive the disease from the principal parts.

Moreover in these tender bodies the forces must be carefully maintained, and
the disease must be vanquished. For it is ill Physic where nature suffers any
loss. Wherefore let the Physician either do good, or else let him do no harm,
but let him study by Art to profit all he can; and this he shall well do, if he
do all by right reason, and rules of Art.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the skin or feather covering of the Vulture, that is of great force in
strengthening the Ventricle, and in getting of a stomach, something more
effectual than Ginger, whose nature is here set down also, that every man has
not observed.
SInce there are many things that laid on outwardly will strengthen the
stomach, and help concoction, nothing is better or more present than a Vultures
skin pulled off, The Nature of the Vulture.
being dressed and fitted as other skins are; This Bird like the Kite is very
greedy, and will eat exceedingly, that the Dutch call this from its desire of
Carrion, and because it is always hungry, and hunting after its prey, Ghier,
from the nature whereof, they call covetous people, and such as are never
satisfied; Ghierich, that is Vulture-like. But since the nature of this bird is
such, that it greedily seeks after all things, and consumes all without any
hurt to it, the skin of it is of that force, that it will corroborate man's
stomach, and will strengthen a weak digestion, to desire and concoct the meat,
and it will stop fluxes of the belly and vomiting, but applied to the stomach
the contrary way. For I know this by experience, that if one take of the skin
of this Bird, and let the same be dressed by the Skinners Art handsomely, and
fitted, if it be laid to a feeble stomach, or belly, it will stop the flux of
it, and help the slipperinesse of the Intestines, especially if it be so
applied, that the feathers may be downwards: as we use in Garments that are
held up, to stroke the skins with the hair, with our hands. For it comforts
and cherishes one by its warmth and heat, and by its astriction, it
corroborates the faculties of natural forces, wherewith nutriments use to be
attracted, retained, concocted, and expelled; also it effects that the three
nervous tunicles of the stomach, and so many fibers, the right ones, as Galen
will have it, whose office is to attract, the oblique, that have the retentive
faculty, the transverse that thrust all things out, shall do their offices.

But that skin applied the contrary way, with the feathers pointing upwards,
and looking aloft, will stay vomiting, the Muscles of the stomach being drawn
downwards, whereby it takes in, and holds the meat. And in these kind of
diseases wherewith the upper or nether parts use to be affected, I practice
something not unlike to this. For in vomiting I bid that the mouth of the
Stomach shall be anointed, stroking the hand downwards toward the Navel; but
when there is a flux of the belly, to stroke it with the hand upward from the
feet: and I use to do the like if the woman be subject to the fits of the
Mother. So, as they call it, in the strangling of the Womb, whereby a woman
seems to be choked, the vapors flying upwards, I either command to open a
Vein about her Ankles, or cupping glasses to be fastened to her Hips, and I am
careful that all things may be carried downwards, either by casting in a
Clyster, or by putting up suppositories into the Fundament, as they ordinarily
call them. But in the falling out of the Womb, where all things are carried
downwards, as if the frame of the body were dissolved, I bid bind the upper
parts with Ligaments, set Cupping glasses to the Breasts, or to open a Vein in
the Arms to make revulsion the contrary way.

Also in the affects now mentioned things may be given inwardly, according as
the disease requires. So for a flaggy nauseating stomach, or where one cannot
well eat his meat, or, when he has eaten, can hardly digest it, besides good
strong heating Wines, as Sack, and Wine of Crete, the succulent root of Ginger,
candyed with Sugar, the Dutch call it Groen Gingiber gheconfyt, Effects of
Ginger.
is an excellent remedy to help concoction, and discusses winds and crudities
contracted from flegmatique humors. Wherefore it clears the dark sight, that
proceeds from gross humors that arise from the stomach to the head. I
prescribe this to some people in their meats and sawces, especially to such
that have moist watery stomachs.

To others who by drinking too much Ale or Beer, have a pain or heaviness in
their stomach, and break wind upwards often, I bid them eat some pieces of it
with a little salt, for it can scarce be said how much this will break wind,
and ease the pains. This root indeed at first taste, burns and bites the
tongue, but it causes no thirst, Ginger makes not a man thirsty.
but by drawing the spittle and watery humor from all parts, as from the Head,
Throat, Stomach, it keeps the Tongue moist, and allwaies wet, and thence it is
that no thirst or dryness is found in the mouth. Wherefore the Dutch to their
great commodity do strengthen their stomachs by using this root.

The end of the secret Miracles of Nature.
THE PARAENESIS, or Exhortation, OF Laevinus Lemnius, a Physician of Zirizea,
How to lead a life that shall be most excellent, that shall be safe for the
greatest or meanest of men, and also very commodious, whether they desire to
take care for their bodies or their minds.
CHAP. I.
We must chiefly lift our eyes and minds to God, by Christ.
Whatsoever man is desirous of his own welfare, Whence we must seek for
salvation.
and would fain have all things go well with him, and wishes that in this
transitory life, he may stand safe and unmoved, and firmly guarded against all
dangers that may come upon him, and to which man is subject every moment; let
him look steadfastly upon God the greatest and best of all, through Christ
Jesus, and let him have his mind that flowed forth of this most plentiful
Fountain allwaies lifted up unto him, God is the Fountain of all good.
nor let him look any other way, or seek for hopes of Salvation, but let him
trust, rely on God only, worship, adore and honor him, and pray unto him, in
confidence of our mediator for all things that are good. Then let him
diligently examine, and consider inentively with himself, Gods magnificence
toward man.
how great magnificence God has used toward man, with what Ornaments and
gifts of Nature he has tendowed man, what dignity and majesty he has
bestowed upon him, into what honor and renown he has raised this workmanship
made of Earth.

CHAP. II.
How great things God, the maker of all things, has done for man.
The form of man is twofold.
THe external form of man, is strait, and upright, looking toward Heaven,
whereby he may learn to look with his eyes to his original, and in respect of
other Creatures, is far more beautiful, Genes. 2.
comely, and artificially made, and that an internal form does wonderfully
adorn him, because he was made after the Image and likeness of God, that is,
he represents and expresses the essence of his Maker, and comes next unto the
nature of Him. Which excellent force infused into him by God, Man is Gods Image.
consists altogether in his soul and mind, being taken forth from the first
example and secret close^ of Divinity, by which divine gift Man obtain^s thus
much, that having reason, judgment, understanding; he is made capable of the
Heavenly doctrine, and by the knowledge of God, he is united to him by the
light of Faith, and is wholly transformed into him. 2. Cor. 3.
But amongst other excellent prerogatives, man obtained this privilege
chiefly, that God having made other Creatures speechless, that is, wanting the
benefit of a voice and way to express their minds in words, yet Man has the
faculty of speech, What distinguishes man from beasts. Speech is a singular
gift of God.
whereby he can communicate unto others the conceits and thoughts of his heart,
and which is the greatest of all, and most pleasing to God, that he may be able
thereby to magnify his Creature, and praise him exceedingly, whom he knows by
faith. For by this means his Majesty and greatness of his name is not only
illustrated, but also according to the capacity of man's understanding, there is
some thanks paid unto God for his benefits received, and there is a testimony
given of our willing and ready minds, God requires thankfulness. Psa. 15.
that we have toward so bountiful a Father. But because God wants nothing that
we enjoy, he asks nothing from us, but Love and Thankfulness.

CHAP. III.
There is nothing more de are to God than man; and all things were created for
man's use.
God loves man wonderfully.
BUt in regard that God is singularly affected toward mankind, and has
illustrated the mind and soul of man, with many Ornaments, wherein his divine
Nature shines forth, as also has provided him plentifully with external
gifts, and most large possession of things, which Nature Gods Minister does
send out in abundance, and has given him the Lieutenant-ship and government of
all the world, All things were made for man's use.
even to the meanest Cobbler, and common Artificer, who do no less enjoy the
great magnificence of God, and the pleasant spectacle of the Universe, that is
so beautiful to look on, than the richest Kings; so that, in this vast Theater
of the world, he lives not as a stranger and Forrainer, who is a stranger from
the possession of worldly matters, but as a chief Citizen and free Inhabitant,
and chief Lord of all things contained in this world. For, for his use benefit
and service, all things were created that are in the compass of the Heavens,
or comprehended in Sea or Land. Which the Prophet David, the chief admirer of
Gods works does testify in these words. O Lord our God, how excellent is thy
name in all the World. For thy magnificence is exalted above the Heavens; What
is man, that thou art mindful of him, Psalm 8.
or the Son of man that thou so regardest him? Thou have made him little lower
than the Angels that thou might crown him with Glory and worship, thou have
set him over the works of thy hands. Thou have put all things under his feet,
etc. In which words he declares, how much God respects man, next unto Christ,
and how great reckoning God makes of man, to whom the world is made subject and
obedient, that not only all things created, are exposed for his use and
profit, but also Christ died for man, by whose favor and merits the Father
gives all things unto us abundantly.

CHAP. IV.
How great Man's thankfulness should be unto God.
BUt this principally should stir up exceeding great love and reverence in man
toward God, that when he was estranged from God, and, for breaking his
Commandments, cast down unto eternal death, Man's reconciliation.
our Heavenly Father by the singular favor we enjoy for Christ's merits,
received us into his mercy. For Christ taking pity of man's misery, reconciled
man to his Father, by shedding his own blood, and conquering death, and
breaking the yoke of the most cruel Tyrant, to whom man was bound and indebled
he brought him back beyond expectation to his former liberty, and restored him
to his Inheritance of his heavenly Kingdom; So that, as St. Paul says, we are
no longer strangers and Forrainers from God, but Citizens and Heirs, and
friends, Ephesians. 2.
and of the household of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, by whom we have
admission and entrance unto the Father in one spirit. Wherefore, since every
one of us is ingrafted by the help of saving doctrine by faith, and the washing
of regeneration into Christ, and, as St. Paul says, have obtained grace and
inheritance, Tit. 3.
by the renovation of the holy spirit that he has powered forth upon us
abundantly, it is fit, and the restoration of our salvation requires it, that
placing all our hope and trust upon so magnificent a Father, and upon his Son
Jesus Christ, who has destroyed death and sin, we should submit our selves to
him, and conform unto him our lives, We must approve our lives to God.
manners and customs, and with all purity of Mind, and holy and unblameable
conversation, with daily and earnest prayer, we should procure his favor to
us, and endeavor to win his love and gracious acceptance.

CHAP. V.
What Baptism adds to Man, and what it minds him of.
What Baptism does.
BEcause Baptism or sacred washing is the first Entrance into the Church and
company of the faithful, and is the very gate and footstep, this is it that
leads us to hope and confidence of Salvation. For by Faith and Repentance, that
is, by detesting our former life, and by mortifying our bodies, and by renewing
of our minds, we are ingrafted into Christ, who has wiped off and cleansed us
from all spots and abolished all faults of our souls, applying this external
Sacrament unto us, and by infusing the holy Ghost into our hearts, whereby
being assured of our Salvation we cry, Abba Father. Which double and
continually ingeminated invocation, is so effectual and present help, that it
will obtain all things from our munificent father, if so be that a man direct
his prayers, and desires, and groans unto God, for Christ his sake. For by this
Leader and Mediator, who has deserved favor for us, 1 John 5. James 1.
with his own blood, we obtain all things that are good for us, and our prayers
are never in vain and useless. For so merciful a Father will never stop his
ears to their requests, Prayers are effectual by Christ Deuteronomy. 6. Levit. 7.
for whose sake and redemption, he gave his only begotten Son to dye.

CHAP. VI.
Next unto God we must love our neighbors.
BUt since we are chiefly to love God, to whom we owe all things, Mark. 12.
Luke 10. Love toward God.
and for whose service man is bound to employ all his force that is in his
heart, mind, and service: so also he must be loving to his neighbor, that is,
to man who is of the same nature and condition with him, and must love him as
himself. So that each man must willingly lend his help unto him, and when there
is need and an opportunity offered, (which also it is fit we should seek for
and take) to assist him with Moneys and counsel. For this is the principal
fruit of our faith, and is a sincere and no counterfeit testimony of our true
Christian profession. Love to our neighbor.


CHAP. VII.
How great should be the piety of children toward their Parents.
MOreover as we owe all to God, much to our country and friends, so it is no
small matter that we owe unto our Patents. But what respect and honor we ought
to show unto them, I need not speak any more, or prescribe, since naturally
every one is inclined to love his own, even the very heathen, as Christ
testifies; so that this love, though we do our duties, Math. 5.
deserves no commendation, but is our duty and must be done if we will be
blameless. But this must from our child hood be daily inculcated unto every
man, that he love heartily and entirely his Parents, by whose means and
ministry he enjoyed his first being and life, Children must love their
Parents. Prove. 28.
that he obey them in all things that equity and reason shall dictate unto him,
as Christ is said to be subject to his Mother Mary, and to Joseph. For Piety is
acceptable to God, Luke 2.
and the service and obedience we show to our Parents is approved by him, which
is also carefully commanded in the Old and New Testaments. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
Math. 25. Ephesians. 5. Math. 7. Mark. 4.
That is is a witty saying of Pittacus the Philosopher. Such duty as you show
to your Parents, expect the same from your children. To which, respects that
speech of Christ that is more large, Such measure as you mete, the same shall
others measure to you again. For from the error and negligence of this it
commonly falls out, that children are unruly and disobedient to their Parents,
that when they come to years they scorn to hear their Parents instructions, and
that sometimes by a deserved and just retaliation and revenge, because their
Parents were not obedient to their Parents before them, but were stubborn and
untoward.

CHAP. VIII.
How every Man ought to behave himself toward his Master.
MAsters that instruct you, and adorn your mind with principles of Learning, We
must honest our Masters.
must have as much honor showed unto them, as to Parents. So Juve^al commends
his Ancostors, Sat. 7.
and wishes good luck to their Souls, because they honored and loved their
Masters, so well as they did their Parents.

To our Forefathers Souls let the Gods grunt
Light earth that may not press, and let them want
No fragrant Saffron, let their Spring abi^^,
Who Masters as their Parents dignified.
So Fabius warns his Scholars, that they should love their Masters as well as
they do their Books, and esteem them as Parents, L. 2. c. 10.
not of their bodies but their minds, They are equal and it is almost all as
one to be born, Teaching adorns the mind.
and to be taught; for one begets the body, the other informs the mind. Now if
the Parents, being liberally bred, bestow their time to instruct their
children; or, if they want that help, they choose a learned Master to teach
them Wisdom and Learning, they can do no greater thing for them, or that shall
more adorn and beautify them. For by this way of breeding children, their minds
are not only gifted with the most excellent virtues, as integrity of life,
honesty, continency, meekness, placability, modesty, humanity, justice,
temperance, civility, but also wealth, dignities, and honors come unto them
whether they will or no, and are freely offered unto them; for learning makes
the way unto all these things.

CHAP. IX.
To whom chiefly amongst men, must we give honor and reverence.
SInce every Man ought to be honored according to his dignity and honor, Romans
13.
as Saint Paul commands, and that especially to old age, and hoary heads, we
are bound to give honor, and to that age we all hasten. Levit. 19. Old men
must be honored.
So by Gods command Moses says, Thou shall rise before the hoary head, and
honor the person of old men. Also Lycurgus the Lacedemonian Lawgiver decreed
that this should be observed, who would have the greatest honor given not to
rich and mighty men but to old men as they were in age, and in no part of the
earth was old age more honorable; To whom honor must be given.
To this rank we must refer Magistrates, and Consuls in Authority, and
Governors and him that is chief, by whose Wisdom, Dignity, and Authority the
Commonwealth subsists in safety, and we enjoy peace and quietness. Romans 13.
The Magistrate must be honored.
To these we must annex all that are noted for honest men, and such as are of
ripe years, or Noblemen that are sprung from ancient Families, and Scholars
that are to be honored for their learning.

But those that are Ministers, and are employed in their sacred functions,
Churchmen are to be honored, 1 Timothy ^.
to direct men's minds, and to correct depraved manners, are to be honored in
the first place above others. So Saint Paul pronounces, that Presbyters, that
is, such that are a light to others by their grave behavior, Wisdom that
favors of old age, and by their integrity of life, and such as by sound
doctrine, which is the pure food of the Gospel, Romans 12.13. Philip. 2.
feed the hungry; are worthy of double honor, and all things must be done more
largely, and in a more ample manner for them, not only to reverence them
according to their age, but to afford them such a liberal maintenance that they
may live in honor, and have sufficient of all things that are needful for
their families.

CHAP. X.
What good teaching does for a Man, and what kind of teaching it must be.
What good Instruction does for man.
IT is of much concernment to be bred as we should be. Wherefore so soon as
children are capable to learn, and apt to be instructed in the study of
Letters, they must be taught in time liberal and ingenious Arts. For by these
chiefly is the nature of man fashioned to honesty, and is cultivated with
humanity. The most fortunate beginning of Instruction is taken from the framing
of men's manners. Wherefore let a young man that is destinated to be a Scholar
first learn good Manners, next to that Eloquence and grace of speech, which is
ill conceived, as Pliny says, In Epistol.
without good manners. For it is better to live Honestly than to speak
Eloquently; though these two ought still to go together, and never to be
parted, for one is a great help to the other. Likewise we must consider
concerning the choice and judgment of things and words, We must learn things
and words.
for though it be more to be desired to know things than words, yet things must
be explained by fit terms and names. Also the precepts of life which adorn the
mind, and inform the understanding in piety, though they be honest and safe of
themselves, yet, as Lactantius and Fabius supposed, they are more powerful to
persuade, as often as clearness of speech is a light to the beauty of things.
For those things enter men's minds most effectually, that carry their force with
them, and are illustrated by Rhetorique. L. 1. c. 1. L. 1. c. 3.
And though we ought not to insist too narrowly upon words, as some young
Scholars do that want the knowledge of things, yet it is best to join
Eloquence and Oratory with Wisdom, lest we should get a custom to speak
obsolete, barbarous words out of use, which rather cloud than illustrate the
best Oration. But if there be neat trim words without wisdom, We must avoid
Barbarism.
and there be no grave sentences amongst them, Wisdom without Eloquence is
more to be commended, than a vain and foolish babbling. For, as Cicero says,
L. 2. de Oratere
Wisdom is the foundation of Eloquence, and of other things. Horace speaks
wittily, which speech all ought to practice.

Art. Poet.
Poets will either profit or delight,
Or speak what is good and fit, to do what is right.
He has done all, that sweet with profit joins,
Delights the Reader, and to good enclines.
But the holy Scripture that proceeded from the Inspiration of Gods Spirit
needs no humane supplies. For that affects our minds not by Eloquence and
curiosity of words, but by a secret and hidden force draws, and transforms the
minds of men, which thing when the Apostle Paul would have it known to the
Corinthians, 1 cor. 2.
when, says he, I first came unto you, and preached unto you the oracles of
God, I used no flattering words, or enticing speeches of man's Wisdom; nor was
my preaching after man's persuasive way, but in demonstration of the spirit, and
of power, that your faith should not stand in the Wisdom of men, but in the
power of God; The words of the Apostle explained.
In which words he rejects not Oratory and grave words and Sentences, that he
was abundantly instructed with, nor does he cast a way the efficacy and force
of persuasion, wherewith, by alleging strong reasons, and apposite words, he
drew the minds of men to embrace the truth; The sacred Scripture is not barren.
but he would show that professors of the Gospel must not trust to Eloquence
of words, or to win men's minds by enticing speeches, but by the spirit and
virtue of God. Wherefore the Apostle speaks Wisdom amongst such as are
perfect, yet not the Wisdom of this world, or of the Princes of this world,
that is of Orators, which shall be abolished, and the smoaks and vapors of
whose Oratory shall vanish, but he speaks the Wisdom of God in a hidden
mystery, which works more effectually upon the minds of men, and makes deeper
impression, than any humane learning, set forth and adorned with the most
Elegant words. Heb. 4. The word of God is fiery.
For the word of God is quick and lively, as he says, and more piercing than
any two edged Sword, penetrating into men's Souls and spirits, and dividing
between the joints and the Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and of
the Intentions of the heart.

So God speaks in Jeremiah: Jer. 13.
Are not my words like to fire, and as a Hammer that breaks the Rocks. David
acknowledged this, Psalm 118.
who felt the force and flames of Gods Word in his Soul: Thy words are as hot
as fire, and Solomon says, Every word of God is as a fiery Buckler to all that
trust in him. Prove. 30.
Wherefore such as are ignorant, must not think that the Christian Religion is
idle and unsavory, that replenisheth the minds of men with so heavenly and
saving virtue. The Prophets were learned.
But, that the holy Prophets wanted no learning, but had great skill in things
and words, this may serve for an argument to prove it, because every where in
the Bible there are so many excellent Parables, Tropes, Metaphors, Collations,
Figurative speeches, Similitudes taken from Animals and Plants, and from the
whole nature of things, which is exceeding large; wherewith the Sermons of the
Prophets shine and are illustrated, that you shall find no such thing in the
learning of men, nor is there any where so great Majesty of words and sentences
to be observed, that can affect the minds of men, and stir them up to embrace
such saving knowledge.

CHAP. XI.
Whence we must fetch Integrity of manners, and the best Precepts of life.
The beginning of instruction must be fetched from Christ.
YOu shall faithfully learn integrity of manners and a safe way to lead your
life by, from the decrees of Christ, into whom we were Baptized, and to whom we
have given up our names, whose doctrine does the more effectually work upon the
minds of men, and transform them, because, being delivered by the inspiration
of the divine spirit, it has no mixture of earthly dregs with it, or tincture
of old wives superstitions, which are but a shadow and kind of counterfeit
Religion, and which is the chiefest of all, it is the most remote from
Idolatry, that is, that corrupt and pernicious worship that is given to any
other besides the true God. Wherefore to what course of life soever, you addict
your self, and whatsoever study you take upon you, in which you think to
continue allwaies, be sure to exercise your self in the Commandments of God,
and in his Word, Let youth be accustomed to the best things.
and from your youth embrace this saving knowledge. For the mind of man,
instructed in Gods Word from ones infancy, and being fenced about with it as
with a Bulwark, does subsist and defend it self cheerfully and undauntedly
against all the monstrous desires of lust, and other vices. Hence Ieremias
speaks wholesome words. Lament. 5.
It is good for a man to bear the yoke of the Lord from his youth. For a young
man as Solomon says, will not forsake that way in his age, Prove. 21.
that he learned in his youth. To which agrees that of Cyprian, A sentence of
Cyprian.
That is not suddenly and quickly left, that is an old custom, and is grown up
with us: for what we used from our infancy can hardly be shaken of in our age.

Hence it is that from ancient custom, there are so many drunken, lascivious,
wanton old men, that, as Job says, Job 20. Job's words explained.
their bones are full of the sins of their youth, that is, they are lascivious
beyond decency or discretion that they cannot forsake their ancient sins they
have used so long. There are some who when their youthful blood is grown cold,
and the heat of their manhood is extinguished, fly from the vices that age is
subject to, and turn to lead an unblameable and good life. So Cicero speaks in
his Oration for Caelius. There were in our and our Forefathers memories, many
excellent and most famous men, who when the lusts of their youth were over,
became most rare men for their virtues in their elder years. But as it is
certain, that it has so happened to some men, who either by the loathing of
their past life, or by Gods inspiration, or else by good advice and admonition
of friends, have been recalled to a more sound mind: yet many carried swiftly
away by opinion have failed in their purpose to amend their lives, so that
delaying has been hurtful unto them, and the occasion of Repentance slipped
away from them, before they could lay hold of a good life, by detesting their
vices. Wherefore it is best, setting all delay aside to employ our labor to
rectify our lives, and from our young years rather to accustom our selves to
what is best, rather than to defer the occasion of it till we grow old. The
Apostle Paul inculcates as much, Ephesians. 5. Coloss. 4.
and that very often in many places, and he counsels men to walk wisely and
circumspectly in the course of this world, not as fools but as wise, redeeming
the time because the days are evil. The Apostles place explained.
In which words he warns every man, that in the race of this life they do not
suffer the opportunity of attaining salvation to overslip them, but that every
moment they should catch it as it is offered, and that they should redeem it,
and hazard all things for it, lest whilst they linger and regard it not, they
be destroyed when they think not of it. Galat. 6. Math. 13. Luke 11. Christ
bids us watch.
Also Christ in many places exhorts such as are sluggish and sleepy, to watch
and to stand upon their guard, and he exhorts men by many examples, that they
should watch for their Salvation, as valiant and experienced Soldiers, who
being placed in a strong Garrison, always stand upon their watch, and they
never neglect to keep guards, and sentinels, least any man unawares should
break into the Fort. Habbakuk uses this metaphor; Hab. 2.
I will stand upon my watch, or Watchtower, and I will fasten myself on my
place of defense, and I will see what he says unto me. He takes upon him the
person of a watchman, who silently observes the approach and snares of the
enemies, Habbakuk explained in that place.
having his whole thoughts fastened upon God, and relying upon him, he opposes
himself against the enemy, A simile from watch in camps Luke 12. Math. 24. 1
These. 5. 2 Pet. 3.
and stops his way. Our Savior brings most evident comparisons whereby he
warns every one of us of our duties, taken from the watch kept in Armies, from
a thief coming to rob in the night, from the sudden pangs of a woman in travel,
from a Bridgroom who goes to adorn his Marriage, from the secret and uncertain
coming home of a Lord or Master of a Family, Luke 12. Math. 25.
from sudden calamity and war, from famine and want coming suddenly upon men,
from a figtree shooting forth bloss^m and green figs, Mark 11.
from the day of death and last Judgment, and many more such similitudes
wherewith he gives us warning, and makes us to stand in readiness, and to take
care of our Salvation. Christ gives young men an excellent example how to lead
their lives from the first entering into it, who grew himself daily in age and
Wisdom, Luke 2. Christ's youth commended.
and favor with God and men by reason of his meekness, and integrity of life,
and it is fit we should principally imitate him, and by his example make our
selves approved to all of what estate and condition soever. Jesus when he was
twelve years old gave a large testimony of his goodness to all cordial men,
Christ is the mark and example of our ^ives.
he spoke many things seasonably and to the purpose, being asked questions he
answered meekly and lowly, without any show of pride or boasting, which are the
vices arrogant and insolent young men use to be guilty of. I collect from hence
that there is great reason that all young people, taking example from Jesus so
soon as they put forth any argument of their towardness and ingenuity, should
show something of virtue in them to their Parents and other they converse with.
But since there is need of some leader or guide that may show them the way in
which they ought to walk, and what examples of life they ought to imitate. I
will show in my discourse, what Arts they ought to learn, and what Patterns
they ought to follow, that they may attain the chief learning, and may come up
to the top of virtue, or very near unto it.

CHAP. XII.
What Authors are fit to read to learn Eloquence of speech and soundness of
Judgment, and what Arts are principally to be learned.
MAke such choice of Authors, that you may have the best to read and imitate.
We must imitate the best. A fimile from grafting of Trees.
For it is folly in imitation and emulation of study not to follow the best.
The very sowing of Corn teaches us thus much in nature, when we choose the
best Wheat to sow in the ground, and the art of grafting and inoculating
teaches as much, for we graft the best sciences upon Trees, and such as are
very fruitful, the same may be observed in Painting, Limming, Music, Poetry,
and Oratory, wherein the curious Scholar, will endeavor to imitate the most
cunning Masters, in those professions. The Apostle Paul will have the same
thing to be done in Godliness and the gifts of the spirit, 1 Cor. 11. By the
Apostles rule we must strive for the best.
that men should contend for the best gifts. For he that so orders his life
shall never repent himself of his time spent therein, as they commonly do who
first enter upon a superstitious and vain course of Life, and such whose speech
is unseemly and are not accustomed to words that are used by learned men, who
must to their great trouble unlearn again what they have learned. And herein
Italy the Nurse of learning, The commendation of Greece and Italy.
and learned Greece, seems to be worthy of much commendation, whose example is
followed by France and the Low Countries, in propounding to youth the knowledge
of the best things. For by this means it comes to pass, that young men being
furnished with purity of words, and elegant language, do seasonably attain to
the knowledge of things.

CHAP. XIII.
A Censure upon the Heathen Writers.
THough there are some who do not justly judge of things, who speak against, We
must embrace such Writings as will make us Eloquent in speech.
and banish profane Authors (as they improperly call them) and would have no
examples fetched from them, either for Eloquence of speech, or direction of
life, yet I think they are not to be despised. For Poets, Orators, Comedians,
Tragedians, Historians are a great help to youth, to attain thereby the
knowledge of words and things, and to teach them the liberal Arts and solid
learning, unto which they make a ready and easy way.

What, more polite learning can effect.
But these studies are deservedly called by the titles of humane and polite
learning because they teach young people civility, curtesy, and good manners;
And from these also men in years receive honest delights, and drive away the
tedious cares of their lives, which commonly compass men about by reason of
many businesses they are troubled with; which thing is the reason, that the
orthodox Saint Basil, In Epist. ad Nepot.
Surnamed the Great, diligently invited his Nephews to the reading of Poets and
Orators.

CHAP. XIV.
The office of a Poet and what helps he brings to studious youth, and to those
that are of ripe years.
The design of a Poet. L. 2. Epist. ad Augustum.
HOrace shows in most elegant Verse, how exact a Tutour a Poet is for language,
and manners, being next kin to an Orator; and for this cause he is styled the
Master that reaches men the liberal Arts, and how to regulate their lives.

A Poet is an exact teacher of manners.
A Poet frames the tender stutting Tongue,
And from ill words does wrest the Ear that is young,
And with good precepts does inform the mind,
Correcting anger, Envy, makes men kind,
Relates the truth, examples gives for time
To come, delights the Poor and sick with Rhyme.
Also a Poet inculcates some other wholesome precepts, not severely, or
commandingly, not by threatening lest they should fall away from what they have
entered upon; but pleasingly, flatteringly, sweetly, and handles all things
with Art, and moderation, as a Horseman that tames Horses, teaches them to
curvet and pranse, and amble nimbly by soothing them, and smacking with their
mouth.

For to rebound, and amble very fast. Virg. Georg. 3.
And not only these delightful studies raise spirit and vigor in the minds
of young men, but they are also useful for men of riper years, when they have
time to breathe themselves from more serious and weighty matters of crabbed
laws. Poetry i^ the most ancient Art. L. 10. c. 1.
Now besides Theophrastus, Cicero, and Fabius, testify that the Generation of
Poets was the most ancient and highly commended of old times. For it is certain
that Poets first drew barbarous, rude, savage men that wandered up and down like
beasts to lead a civil and sociable life, which Horace expresses in elegant
Verse.

In Art. Poet. The praise of a Poet.
Sacred Orpheus Interpreter of'th Gods,
Drew Wild Men to be calm, who lived at ods,
As Cannibals; and hence he got the name,
Of making Tigres, and grim Lions tame,
So Amphion who built the Thebane State,
Is said to draw the stones to banish hate,
With sound of's Lute, such Wisdom formerly
There was to sever what was privacy,
From public; for in that age men took care,
To part from profane, things that sacred are:
Laws were prescribed to marriage, wandering lust
Was bounded, Towns were built, and what was just,
Was carved in Wood, then was this dignity,
Given to Poets, and to Poetry.
CHAP. XV.
Of the use and profit of Histories.
SInce History, (that is a faithful relation of things acted) is as profitable
as pleasant, and besides the pleasure we find in reading of it, there comes by
it a great increase of Wisdom; it is fit that every man should be studious in
reading of History. Use of History. From Livy a commendation of History.
Titus Livius does by the way show us what use and fruit comes by History. This
is the most fruitful and wholesome thing in the knowledge of things, to see
the documents of all examples, as placed in a most famous monument, and from
thence you may take what is good to imitate for your self, and for your
Commonwealth, and to avoid what is foul to undertake, and which is foul in the
upshot of business. Zeno his opinion of History.
So when one asked Zeno by what way a man might be happy, he may (says he) if
he cast his eyes upon the examples of former days, and look upon the monuments
and actions of his Forefathers, De oratore.
For History is (as Cicero testifies) the light of truth, keeper of time, the
life and strength of memory, the Mistress of life, the Messenger of antiquity,
wherein all things are described accurately and ar large, and with the greatest
fidelity and narration of truth as it should be. The Sacred Scriptures do open
a most large field of Histories, and afford us most ample relations of things
done, from whence may be fetched wholesome documents, and fit examples to lead
our lives by, whereof many set before our eyes the prodigious Judgments of God,
The Scriptures hold forth good examples.
and we are all of us warned thereby, how abominable in Gods sight Idolatry is,
and the contempt of Gods word, and to give him no reverence, and to seek for
helps of safety elsewhere.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Comedy.
NExt to History is Comedy, the glass of man's life, wherein every man may
behold his own Manners and affections and an express pattern of his daily life
in the person of some other man, Use of Comedy.
and each man observes his own virtues or vices in a pleasant spectacle, as
Cicero calls it, that is, civil, elegant, ingenious, witty; in which kind of
exercise almost all Nations in their Mother tongues use sometimes great liberty
of speech and freedom of language, The liberty of Comedians.
so that, as Horace has it, their liberty exceeds the just bounds, for that in
reprehending vices they are oft-times too bitter; For they not only mark out
common people of the meanest condition, but in the most frequented Theaters of
the City they traduce the chief and principal men, and taunt them sharply with
their bitter Rimes. Moderation must be used in Comedies.
But if they do this without any spot of contumely or infamy, and the Verses be
not seditious, speaking only bitterly against such as deserve it, it may seem
to be tolerable, that those that are gauled may mend when their sore backs are
touched and may be put in mind of their duties. The Low Dutch call this liberty
in Comedies Batamenten; as they call their musical Verses, that they make their
Comedies with Rym or Dichten.

We must learn some things.
But we must learn these delights and pleasures of wits in our younger years,
and not when we are grown in years. For such studies are proper for flourishing
youth, yet such as are grown up, when they have learned them in their
childhood, they may sometimes recreate themselves with them in their riper age.

No age is too late to learn.
Yet let not men of ripe years, nor old men be ashamed to learn what is good and
profitable for virtue and honesty: for no age is too late or unseasonable to
obtain those things, as it is never too late for a man to forsake his vices.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Art of Eloquent speaking, which is necessary for any man of what
Language soever he be.
RHetorique, or Oratory, whose office it is to speak, fitly, distinctly, and
decently, and to allure and inflame the minds of the hearers with grave
sentences, and choice words, is chiefly necessary, and useful for those, who
are Preachers, or Magistrates, and Governors of Commonwealths, Eloquence
allays sedition.
or are Consuls, or Generals, such as are conversant in mutinous Armies, and
popular seditions whom it concerns by their places and authority to pacify and
overrule the unruly multitudes by their counsels and majesty of their words;
For subjects are not always to be constrained by threats, terrors, cruelty,
punishments, and by the Sword (unless the matter requires the shedding of
blood to allay the Tumult) but with pleasing speeches, and sugared words, and a
grave well-composed countenance, and by this means to recall wicked men from
their perverse ways, to their former duty. The same prudence must the Master
of a Family use toward those of his house, and Schoolmasters toward their
Scholars that are of a tumultuous spirit.

CHAP. XVIII.
To what Sciences do the studies of Humanity make way for us.
Politer learning is an Ornament to our studies.
BUt studies of humanity, or liberal Arts are not only useful to polish our
Tongues, with sweet words and enticements of speech, but for Arts that are
necessary and profitable for our lives, as Natural Philosophy, Physic, Law,
wherein chiefly the mind of man rests, and receives comfort, I mean not humane
but heavenly Philosophy, whereby Christ leading us, Chrisi's Philosophy.
we attain the knowledge of God, and to love and trust in him. For all Arts
wherein Man's Industry is exercised, must be referred to this, and directed to
this end. The professors of worldly Wisdom did not obtain this: who wandering
from the truth thrust into men's minds things false for true, vain for solid,
feigned for true, doubtful for certain, hurtful for safe; because they wanted
divine inspiration.

Three arts are chiefly useful.
But since amongst the rest there are principally three Arts, that not only
bring honor and profit to the professors of them, (though that must not be
very much looked after) but also they are useful for the people, and a help
for the more convenient leading of their lives: which of these three you would
learn, and to which you are addicted by nature, you must deliberate maturely to
find out. Theology, that is, the knowledge of divine things, Use of Theology.
delivered by inspiration from God, informs the mind with godliness, and shows
the manner God must be worshipped, and how every man must obtain his falvation.
Which (so it be taught sincerely) does so far leave all other Arts behind it,
What part of Theology is profitable for all men.
as divine things are better than humane things, solid than things transitory.
That part of this science is useful for all men to obtain salvation by, which
instructs the mind with Faith, adorned with the works of charity, as I spoke
more largely elsewhere; for by this, Christ being our guide, we have an access
and entrance to the Father by one Spirit. Physic by describing frugality and
temperance in diet, The use of Physic.
and by the use of wholesome things, takes care of our health, and cures
diseases. This, as Plutarch testifies, is so of the number of the liberal Arts,
Detuend. valetud.
that it is inferior to none in the splendor of Policy, and for pleasure.
This brings a most plentiful reward to those that study it, for besides the
increase of their substance, they have health of body, which exceeds all
possessions. A man can hardly persuade others what great delight and profit
there is in the contemplation of herbs, The Pleasant contemplation of plants.
and to know their virtues, what in the dissecting of the members of man's body,
and in the observation of all the parts, unless a man has had the trial and
use thereof. The Civil law was always in high honor, The profit of Law.
the office whereof is to govern Cities by counsels, to found them by laws, and
to amend them by judgments.

To give good counsels, and to help at need,
To spare good subjects, and make rebels bleed.
If any man think this order to be despised, Pro Caelio.
he, as Cicero says, pulls up not only the bounds of Judgments, but also of
profit, and common life. Cicero commended Law.
We see that Commonwealths are fenced by the help of it, and all things are
thus kept peaceable and quiet amongst the Citizens, and that by the Authority
of the sacred Laws; whereby the Prince or Magistrate executes Justice, and by
his power received from God, Christ and Paul approved the civil Laws. Romans 13.
(as Saint Paul testifies) punishes wicked and ungodly men, and protects the
good. Therefore God will have singular honor and obedience given to Kings, so
they command what is equal, and not against Gods Laws.

CHAP. XIX.
We must stand fast to some certain kind of study.
To hold to one certain study.
SInce some men are so delighted with these pleasant studies that they continue
in them till they grow old, nor do they betake themselves to solid learning; I
think it is good counsel that he who would receive any fruit of his studies,
and not to lose his labor and pains, should betake himself to that kind of
learning that he is naturally most fit for, least he seem to go against nature,
and his own inclination: Nothing against Nature.
then let him diligently follow that study to which he has addicted himself,
and let him hasten to come to the perfection of it, with all his might, that
when he has run a long time in that way he may be complete in it (if it be
possible to attain a perfection therein). Let a man taste of the delights of
other studies at idle times, as for recreation and rest from labor, so that he
return back to his wonted task and business, We must study and not be weary.
and that his mind may betake it self to those studies he has intermitted for
a time.

CHAP. XX.
What studies and employments are laboursome, and less profitable; what are
hurtful and pernicious.
Unfruitful studies are to be rejected.
BUt we must take heed of that which some do in some Arts; that we do not bestow
great study and labor upon hard and obscure things and such as are not
necessary, but it is praiseworthy to employ great pains and care upon things
honest and worthy to be known. For there are some who are busied in some
studies and they place all their industry upon them, which are full of
tediousness, trouble, and molestation, and yet yield but small profit for the
labor bestowed upon them. Such are the overcurious observations and judgments
concerning the Stars, How Astrology must be used.
fetched from the vanities of the Chaldeans, upon which the rash professors
depending, pronounce undoubtedly what shall befall every man, what fate he was
born to, what end he shall come to, what success every man must have, never
taking the providence of God into counsel, by whose will it is certain this
whole world is guided: C. 47.44.
Esaias speaks against their rash and uncertain predictions; and laughs at such
who go to enquire of them, and seek for Oracles from these impostors. For so he
derides them; let the Star-gazers stand and save thee, who look up to the
Stars, and count the Months, that they might show thee what is to come.
Likewise, Chap. 10.
Jeremias says, Do not learn the ways of the Gentiles, and fear not the signs
of the heavens, which the Nations fear, The Prophets disallow the vanities of
Astrology. Astrology is not altogether forbid.
because the Laws of the people are vain, that is, their demonstrations are
false and idle. By which words the sacred Prophets do not wholly condemn or
forbid all Astrology, which has both its use and profit, but they speak
against such professors, who by their false impostures deceive the people, and
make the credulous multitude believe some things that are false, and to expect
in vain, for somethings that are to come hereafter. Near kin to these are those
vanities that concern palmestry, What Arts are hurtful.
that by looking on the lines of the hands show wonders in a trifling way: such
are the fumes and cheats of the Alchimists, whereby these juglers persuade men
that they can change the species of things, and can turn Silver and all Brass
into Gold: To these may be added such Arts as are far worse; as Necromancy,
whereby they use to call the bodies of dead men out of their Graves, and to ask
questions to be answered by them, as we read that the Pythonist did, who to
please Saul, brought up Samuel, 1 Reg. 28.
in a false and counterfeit apparition. Next to these are Hydromancy, and
Pyromancy, that are done by water and by fire: and many more frauds of Devils,
and magical incantations, as South saying, divination, Auguration, good
fortune, that is, such signs that were taken from looking into the entrals of
beasts, and from the singings of birds.

I refer to these hurtful and enchanting Arts, those Arts whereby even in the
Low Countries some Witches and cunning Women do mischief to their neighbors
herds and flocks of Cattle, Witchcraft is hurtful.
and rob them of their milk and butter, by the help of the Devil, spoiling
their Corn and Wine, and destroying them. Also they take strength from men, and
as if they were gelded they make them weak and feeble for the Marriage bed: of
which some strong brawny men have complained to me, and that they were become
Eunuchs and unable, to their great disgrace and loss to their Wives, to whom I
strove to afford help, and to give them amulers, applying to them such herbs,
that in such cases, are present remedies by the gift of God.

Now for a man to toil his wits in such enchantments, is not only unnecessary
and idle, but also dangerous and destructive. For by laws of God and man, they
are to be punished with death, and tied to a post, Deuter. 28.
they are to be burnt who exercise any wicked Arts by the help of the wicked
spirits. But how enchantments may be driven away, and repelled; I shall show at
the end of the Book, where I shall speak of the Majesty of the name Jesus, lest
we should here interrupt the order and series of this treaty.

CHAP. XXI.
We must not less take care for our Minds than for our bodies.
We must adorn both minds and bodies.
BUt since man is made of Soul and body, we must with all providence take care
for the safety of them both. The Soul is the principal part in man, and the
body is the house of the Soul. We use most the command of the Soul, A simile
from domestic affairs
and the service of the body, therefore we must not be slothful in the
consideration of them both. For if we be so careful that our houses stand not
in boggy and marish lands, that there be no rifts nor open places for the rain
and winds to come in, and that our clothes be not moldy, and for want of
ayring, come not to be eaten by flies and mothes: how much more need have we to
look to our bodies? the vices whereof will affect the Soul also by consent, and
law of company, and they converse together in all things. For

Horace
Our bodies Faults do fasten on our mind,
The Soul divine is thus made earthy kind.
To which agrees that of the Wise man; The corruptible body presses down the
Soul, and the mind that meditates on many things.

Wherefore we must take some care of our body, upon whose props, as Pliny
faith, the Soul stands. Saint Paul observed that, who forbad Timothy to use
water any longer, and prescribed unto him the use of Wine, 3 Tim. 5.
to comfort his stomach, and to make him more cheerful in the propagation of
the Gospel. For the body being in a sound condition can better serve the Soul,
and hinders not, nor burdens the mind when it is employed in the contemplation
of high things.

But in the first place we ought to take care for out mind, and to adorn that,
which is no way better performed, than by a firm and stable confidence in God,
which raises a man into a most certain hope of immortality, and takes out of
our minds all dread and fear of death. And as meat is nutriment for the body:
The Souls food.
so is Gods word the food and nourishment of our Souls, whereby alone we
conceive peace and tranquillity in our minds, than which there is nothing more
to be desired and sought for in this life. But even the external habit of the
body shows what disquietnesse and anguish of heart there is, and what tortures
wicked men endure in their minds. The wicked are unquiet.
For wickedness is such a revenger of it self, that what mind it has once
fastened on, it will never suffer it to be at quiet, but continually holds it
upon the rack with perturbations; which Esaias expressed by an elegant
similitude taken from the waves of the Sea. Esaias 57.
The heart of the wicked is as the troubled Sea, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt; That is, the minds of those men who are stained and polluted with sins
and wickedness, are tumultuous, troublesome, Naughty affections hurt the mind.
and unquiet. For what man can take pleasure in his life, or enjoy a quiet
mind, who carries a body about with him that is soiled with most foul faults,
and a Soul polluted with obscene vices? wherefore since great part of misery
comes from the vicious affects of the mind, we must by all means abstain from
them, that the body may receive no hurt thereby. With the like care and
industry must the body be freed from diseases, least any blemish or contagion
might be conveied from the body to the Soul. For being that ill and vicious
humors communicate ill fumes to the brain, Ill humors cloud the mind.
they drive and provoke the mind to many mischiefs.

CHAP. XXII.
How we must help the body that it may subsist in perfect health.
Frugality is profitable.
FRugality and temperance in diet defends health and drives off diseases, using
moderation in those things that are necessary to confirm health and to cause
strength. Galen calls these conserving causes, because they are fit to conserve
the habit of the body, Art. Med. 83.
so we use them well and opportunely: Things that bring strength.
The modern Physicians call them things not-natural, not that they are besides
nature, but because being set without the body, and are not within us as the
humors, by use and effect, they affect nature and the faculties thereof with
some inconvenience, if they be employed amiss, and not duly as they ought to
be. Of this kind is the Air that is about us, meats and drinks, sleeping and
waking, repletion and inanition, affections and motions of the mind; all of
which man's body requires for the preservation and defense thereof. But because
the principal part of health consists in a sound diet, we must diligently
observe in that, what is good or hurtful to the body. And since gluttony is no
less loathsome, than it is pernicious and hurtful to the body, we must take
in so much meat and drink, as will serve natures necessity, and that the forces
of the body may be fed and not oppressed.

Moderate diet is profitable for students.
Moderate diet is profitable and necessary in all occupations of study, and
managing of great affairs, to endure watchings in labor, and in performing
public duties. For it is this that keeps health perfect, it makes the spirits
both animal and vital that are ascribed to the brain and heart, to be
cheerful and ready, so that what a man conceives in his mind he can readily
effect and bring to pass without any trouble.

But daily examples prove that by luxury and intemperance of life, diseases are
brought on, our studies are hindered, all honest cogitations fail, we cannot
proceed in our lucubrations, the cheerfulness of the mind flags, the vigor of
the Soul is extinguished, and men grow dull, idle, lither, sleepy, and do not
endeavor themselves to perform any great matters. Wherefore, who so addicts
himself to be a Scholar, and to learn books; he must so moderate his business
that he do nothing after the will of his appetite, but his appetite must be
subject to reason, and he must refer all things to the use of life, Christ
commands frugality Luke 21.
and necessity of nature. Christ requires that of those who profess
Christianity, and by these words he calls them back to temperance. Take heed to
your selves least at any time your hearts be overcharged with furfetting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
earth. In which Sermon he fastneth sobriety upon the minds of men, and he
drives away the love of earthly things, and he will have them to persist in
that business to the last day of their lives, least any worse thing should
befall them. L. 1. Satiety must be avoided.
It is well said of Cornelius Celsus, When you sit down to meat, over much
fulness is never good, and oft-times to abstain too much is unprofitable:
neither let hunger be from satiety, nor satiety from hunger; and immoderate
cramming is not good. Wherefore they do unadvisedly, who after banquets and
drinkings the day before, and marriage feasts, the next day they famish
themselves, so that sometimes they faint and swound away, and must be restored
with sweet smells. Others after fasting the day before, eat and drink the day
after, more than it is fit, that unless they unbutton themselves, you would
think they would burst.

We may sometimes eat freely.
Sometimes there is no fault in it for a man to eat a large supper, and to
refresh himself with seasonable cheer, and there is no reason to find fault
with it, so all things be done with moderation, and things consist within the
bounds of temperance. For by these refreshments sadness and grief are
discussed, which by overgreat care cast a dark cloud upon the mind, and they
make Scholars melancholy their spirits being wasted and extenuated, whereby
they become froward, slow, pensive, strangers to all civil company and
unsociable, which affections should be far from students and Magistrates, and
such as are given to learning.

CHAP. XXIII.
Meats that God has liberally and munificently bestowed upon us must be
received with great gratitude and thankfulness.
For meats we must acknowledge Gods Munificence.
BUt because by Gods munificence we abundantly enjoy the Creatures, and all
things from the beginning of the world were ordained for man's use and commodity
so soon as we sit down at Table, before we put our hand to the dish, or take
any food, we must lift up our mind to the maker of all things, Meat has its
power of nourishing from God.
and must cheerfully and earnestly beg of him, that what we shall receive, by
faith he would make wholesome for us, and effectual to feed and nourish our
bodies. For the power of nourishing and feeding us consists not in meats and
drinks but in Gods word that has given them such virtue. Wherefore we must
refer all to God. So Prudentius shows us, even as Saint Paul does, 1 Timothy 4.
Romans 14. 1 Cor. 9.
of whom we ought to seek and hope for food, and nutriment for our lives,
namely from God the Father, by whom through Christ we obtain all things.
Cathemer. lib. The song of Prudentius when we sit down at Table.
For so he directs his prayers unto God.

Christ almighty and eternal,
With saving looks regard us all,
That to the honor of thy name
We may now eat and take this same
Food: without thee nothing is sweet,
It will not help us, nor is it meet
To eat or drink till first thou bless
By saving faith, every mess,
Let each dish God resent, and taste
Of Christ, let all our words be placed,
And what we do to the glory
Of the Eternal Trinity.
When we have refresht our selves with meats, he provokes us to give thanks by
the example of Christ. Math. 26. Mark. 14.
For our Savior when supper was ended did not rise from the Table until he
had sung an hymn, whereby we may acknowledge that all things come from the rich
and bountiful hand of God, and it is his gift that they become wholesome for
us. And he proceeds thus in giving of thanks.

Prudentius his thanksgiving.
Having eat and drank what is good.
As our bodies live by food.
Our Tongue must then praise the Lord,
For his bounty does afford
All that we have, for the same
Let us ever praise his name.
There are in the most approved Authors many forms of these kind of prayers,
and also there are often ejaculations to be found in the Scriptures. But there
is no prayer more effectual to prevail than that which Christ has taught us.
Math. 6. Luke 11.
For to this must be referred and all proceed from this fountain, that can be
asked or conceived. It consists indeed in a few words, and is divided into six
or seven parts, but it is so full of heavenly mysteries, that it comprehends
all within it, that concerns either the glory of God, or our use and necessity,
or the good of our neighbor.

CHAP. XXIV.
How we must take care for Hospitality.
IT behooves every man to be wise and prudent as to that point which concerns
guests and strangers, Strangers must be softe^ed.
or feasting those who feed on other men's costs, and search and hunt after
feasts. First it is fit that every man should take care for hospitality, which
the Apostles commend, Romans 12. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 1 Pet. 4. Heb. 13.
besides other men, and Saint Paul requires in a Bishop; for to modest men our
doors and dining rooms must stand wide open. Cicero testifies that Noble men's
gates must stand open to Noble Guests, and it is a most comely thing that it
should be so. In which office of humanity that it may be performed without
ostentation or ambition, We must take care of the poor. Luke 14.
and without respect of persons, Christ would have the poor and such as are in
want to be called and invited, looking for nothing again from them, or that
they should make any recompense, but from our heavenly Father, who will repay
all with advantage. But since some men are impudent and brazen faced, who
having eaten shame and all modesty, will thrust themselves into feasts, and
sometimes when they have fed well, will secretly be gone, and never bid their
Host farewell: I think we ought to make a difference in our Guests, We must
make choice of Guests
as to admit modest and frugal men; but all Glutions, Licorish persons,
Cormorants, Devourers, and unbidden Guests, and Table Lackeys, who come in
against the Master's consent, and thrust themselves impudently upon our Tables,
ought to have the doors shut against them, or to be civilly admonished to
forbear our houses, and if we cannot prevail with them, we must as they sit at
Table object to them some notable sentences, whereby they may be put in mind of
their duties, for which purpose this and other sentences may be written upon
the posts of our doors, and be obvious for them to read, whereby they may be
ashamed and be mindful of what is convenient.

An Elegant verse for a Banquet.
Will thou sit at my Table,
Keep these rules if thou be able,
Do not any man defame,
Or falsely traduce his name,
Use no jeering words at meat,
What Is set on the Table eat,
Finding no fault; no healths drink,
Nor frown, nor on quarrels think.
Be full of Mirth, and Witty speech,
And for your meat, God beseech,
Thank your Host when you depart,
To be twice welcome from the heart.
A Proverb for a feast.
The Proverb, Do not overpasse my Salt and my Table, shows that the custom of
having feasts and inviting of Guests must not be neglected, and that the laws
of humanity and of friendship must be preserved: for when the ancients held
mutual Banquets one with another, with these tokens they did maintain and
uphold friendship once begun, and they confirmed it by a common Table,
Wherefore of old they were wont to be accused of treachery and fraud who passed
by the Salt and Table, that is, had broken the mark of friendship, and had
violated the Covenant and the intimate necessity of life, whereby they were
united one to the other by Salt and bread, and made partakers of the same
Table. To this mystery belongs that complaint of David, Psalm. 40. John 13.
wherein representing the person of Christ, he accuses his familiar friend of
perfidious dealing, and treachery, and that under the shape and disguise of an
honest man pretending to godliness. He expostulates thus with him: For the man
whom I trusted, and he that eat bread with me, The place of David expl^^ned.
that is, sat at my Table, has lift up his foot against me. It might be
tolerated, says he, and born with less regret, if any open enemy who had
proclaimed war by his Heralds, had made public war against me but for him to
lay snares falsely to entrap me, and to raise up his neck and heel against me
who was my familiar friend, and to whom I was wont to communicate all my
secrets, this is not tolerable, nor can it be endured. So Christ, moved with
indignation of such a fact, said, he that eat bread with me has lift up his
heel against me: that is, a domestic enemy, than which there is none more
dangerous: who meditates to destroy me with secret and hidden practices; it is
a metaphor borrowed from friends who at first salute, are very courteous and
friendly, and yet bear malice one toward the other in their hearts, and wound a
man secretly, and strike him with their heel backward, that he who does the
mischief can hardly be observed. A Proverb against the treacherous.
The Low Dutch in a proverbial figure call this striking with the point from
you, that is, not before but behind, and on the side of the body that is averse
unto you. Van bachten end met decromme pijcken steken. Like to this, there is
another expostulation of the Prophet David, where he complains of wrong done
him, by one that was his very familiar friend, and near obliged acquaintance,
that he made private to all his secrets, and one that knew all the hidden
thoughts of his heart. But he aggravates the foulness of the matter thus.
Psalm 54.
Had mine enemy spoken against me, I could have sustained it, or if those that
hated me had risen against me, I would have hid my self from them; but it was
thou my friend and intimate companion, we took sweet counsel together, and
walked in the house of God as friends. The words are very patheticall and full
of perturbations, whereby he declares how hainously he endures with high
disdain, that he who hitherto went for his friend, should prove his worst
enemy, and should covertly and secretly go about to do him mischief. But that
he may plainly express a cunning and crafty fellow who by his counterfeit
friendship flatters with his mouth and eyes, whilst inwardly he fosters
mischief and venom against his friend in his heart, he adds this to his
perfidious dealing, his words were smoother than Butter whilst he has war in
his heart, A simile from Oil and Butter.
His sayings were softer than Oil, when as inwardly they are very Swords and
Spears. By which similitude he shows what false malicious friends are, who
speak fair, and mean ill, carrying bread in one hand, and a stone in another.
Judas Iscariot gives us an example of this treachery, and after him many others
that have learned it by him, and practice by the false examples of others.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the care of our families and private estates, and the administration
thereof.
Administration of domestic affairs.
AS for Economy, and what concerns the government of private families, which,
as Cicero testifies, is the servant and handmaid of the body: every man ought
to be industrious and prudent in establishing and adorning the same; that the
increase of it may be referred unto the necessary use of life, to commodity,
and ornament, We must avoid over much provision of meats.
not to luxury, and pleasure, not for sumptuous feasts, and immoderate
provisions in diet, which will exhaust and diminish the greatest estates.
Wherefore in adorning a Banquet, and furnishing of our Table, we must chiefly
observe frugalnesse, and moderation in diet, and all provocation of lust and
gluttony must be eschewed; and all your costly Juncates which use to be set on
the Table for second courses, when men are full with meat, that so they may
obtain a new appetite to their meat. This profusion and luxury of our lives,
besides that it wastes our estates, and breeds diseases, ^phes. 5.
when men are hot with Wine, it serves to foment lust, and to stir up venery in
the obscence and secret parts, which, to use the Apostles words, makes them
burn, and be more provoked to venereous actions. 1 Cor. 7. Romans 13.
Wherefore Saint Paul will have nothing done according to the will of our
lusts, but all things to be referred to the necessity and use of nature, not to
luxury and pleasure, which are hurtful alike both to our souls and bodies. Now
no man is so dull and insensible in natural things, that he can endure to hate
his body, but as the Apostle says, nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ
does the Church. By which example Saint Paul persuades husbands to love their
wives, Ephesians. 5.
and to use the same care for them, that every man does for his own body, and
to do that for them that Christ did for his beloved Spouse the Church. Moreover
in the administration of household affairs, and in settling and confirming our
private estates that they fall not to decay, all things must be so moderated,
that we may not incur the names of prodigals, or spend-thrifts, or of covetous
dry holdfasts, that are too sparingly niggards. It is Parsimony that preserves
a man's estate and thereby it increases and grows greater: Moderation to be
used in all things.
yet you must not be so straight-fisted as to defraud your belly, and to starve
your families: as some sordid rich men do: again, you must not as wasters do,
make havoc of what you have and consume your possessions, joining with you
some companions of this strain who will persuade you to do it, and lead you on
in riotous courses. Now as Terence says, he that seeks for gain must spend: So
Plautus tells us, that there can be no gain where the expense is greater than
the gain. The Low Dutch speak that sentence thus; A Proverb commending
frugatily.
Stelt (...) teringhe naer (...) neringhe. Whereby they mean, that a man must
so moderate his expenses, that he may not waste his estate by immoderate
profuseness, but that there should be an equal proportion between our wealth
and our expenses; wherefore it is the part of an industrious housekeeper,
sometimes when it is requisite, to bring forth out of his treasury what is
needful, and again when it is time, to lay up. For, as the Proverb is, Late
parsimony is hurtful.
Parsimony is too late at the bottom. The Law that Amasis king of the Egyptians
made, and which Solon the Athenian Lawgiver practiced, is not from our
purpose, nor from the profit of the Commonwealth, and preservation of private
families, whereby there was provision made, as Herodotus testifies, L. 3.
Enterpe.
that the people and inhabitants should give an account every year to the
Governors of Provinces how they lived, and what way they used to gain their
food, and they who could not make that appear, and show that they came honestly
by what they had, should be put to death. Amasis his Law against idle persons.
By the severity of which law he strove to restrain idle persons, that they
might have no occasion to rob and steal, to which they commonly fall, who have
spent their fathers estates in gaming, and riot, and whoring, and have totally
exhausted their patrimonies. From hence I suppose was that Law instituted
amongst the Corinthians against prodigal people, and such as carelessly consume
their estates, or feast more costly and sumptuously than their yearly annuities
and rents will bear. Which since Diphylus in Athenaeus relates it, and Erasmus,
L. 6.
who has deserved much in all Arts, has put it into Verse, I am willing to
set it down here, whereby the Magistrate may enter upon a course, that may
effect and hinder Cities and suburbs and places near to Cities from being so
much robbed and spoiled by thieves and robbers, who night and day go about to
steal away men's goods that are kept in safety, and who violently and
barbarously torment those that will not discover where their treasures lie hid.
The meaning of this Law is expressed in these Verses.

The Law of expense amongst the Corinthians.
The Corinthians had a Law,
Which was, when they any man saw,
Live at high rates, him to demand
What great estate he had or Land,
What he did for to recompense,
The costs he made, and vast expense,
If he could then just reason give,
Of what he had, they let him live,
But if they found by his account,
That his expenses did surmount,
They gave him warning that no more
He should spend as he did before,
If he their counsel did reject,
He was fined for his neglect,
But if one who had no estate
Chanced to live at a great rate,
Him they tortured, for that he
From doing mischief, was not free,
For he must either robor steal,
And damnifie the Commonweal,
Or join with such or else forswear
Himself, or else false witness bear.
Now they that live amongst this rout,
As dung from this place we cast out.
The Apostle Paul was no less severe an exactor of duties, 2. These. 3. Saint
Paul commands idle persons to work.
who commands that sluggards and idle persons, shaking off laziness, should
work with their own hands, that they may be able to maintain their families:
and he would have this so strictly observed, that he denied to give them any
meat who refused to work, and were not careful to provide for their household
but lived like drones to eat up the honey the Bees labor for, living idly on
other men's liberality and bounty, being employed in no business but their own
curiosity. Saint Paul's admonishment to thieves. Ephesians. 4.
Saint Paul also gives the same strict rule to thieves, who rob other men's
estates, whom he not only admonishes to abstain from robbing, but that they
should labor honestly that they might have something to give to those that
were in need: so when a man has contracted a blemish by an ill life, he may
wash it off by good works and liberality to the poor. Such an example we have
in Zachaeus, who distributed to the poor what he had got by usury. Luke 19.
For by this means the errors and defects of the former part of our lives are
blotted out, when we make recompense by our virtuous behavior; our affections
being quite turned a contrary way, and our old vicious depraved custom being
laid a side.

CHAP. XXVI.
Moderation in sleeping and waking.
Moderation in sleeping and waking.
STudents and Magistrates amongst other things must take care for their sleeping
and watching. For if these be moderate and used seasonably they are of great
concernment to establish and maintain health. For beside that they make the
body lightsome and lively, they make the mind more ready and cheerful to
effect any duty. Immoderate sleep makes men stupid, sluggish, witless,
forgetful, and these men hardly come up, or attain to any famous Arts.
Wherefore men of this condition are always to be provoked to take pains, to
shake off sleepiness and drowsinesse, and to bethink themselves of something
that may be worthy of a man that is free and at his own disposal.

When sleep at noon does hurt.
What concerns sleep about noon and in the day time, I would not have young men
to use it, unless they be tired with heat and labor, or they have eat or
drank disorderly, or watched too long the night before: for then without any
damage they may sleep at noon, otherwise it weakneth the memory, and clouds
the mind, and makes the head heavy, and the eyes dark, especially when they
sleep with full bellies, and moreover this inconvenience follows it, that when
they wake they nauseate, and yawn, and stretch themselves with open arms, that
is, they retch their lims every way, the vapors being diffused all over their
bodies, What it is to stretch.
by reason of a faint affection, and feavourish cold, which our countrymen
call Wanlust, the old Latins called it Helucus, Helucus is a nauseating
affection.
which word signifies those that loath and are nagging by reason of some surfer
or sleeping at noonday, and who are always forced to yawn.

To sleep a^ noon good for old People.
But old men and such as are of ripe years may safely sleep at noon, that is,
after dinner, so that there be some distance between, chiefly in Summer and hot
weather, for that distemper of the Air makes men sleepy, and at that time we
may take the convenience either to sleep sitting in a chair, or lying down on a
bed, our heads being laid high upon a pillow. For by such refreshment in sleep,
the spirits both natural and vital, from whence the animal spirits of the brain
receive their nutriment, are restored and revived.

But immoderate watching is hurtful for all ages, but most hurtful for old
age, as is also fasting, for both these dry the brain, Watching dries.
and besides that they make men frantic and doring, they dry the whole body,
and make it lean and starved. Wherefore if by immoderate watchings, fastings,
or night lucubrations, or too much labor or immoderate venery, our forces and
spirits are exhausted and worn away, and we grow lean, the vital moisture being
consumed, we must renew our strength with moistning diet and sleeping drinks,
Sleepy remedies that moisten the Brain.
such are Lettice, Spinach, like Mallows in effect, Orach, Buglosse, and
Burrage, the fresh seed of Poppy, Water-Lilly-flowers, called commonly
Nenuphar, or water and Marsh-Lillies; the Hollanders call them Plompen, or
Waterlelien: to these add Violet flowers, Pine-kernels, sweet Almonds,
Pistaches, or fistick nuts, creme of Barley, Raysins and Currants that have
small kernels but no stones, Dates, Oranges, or Citron-pills Candied with Sugar
or Honey, for the vital or innate humor is refreshed by them, and the Brain,
which is the seat of the mind is moistened with a moist dew, and sweet vapor,
from whence arises sweet sleep and rest, How drowsinesse may be shaken off.
without trouble or tossing up and down. But if any man be naturally drowsy,
and he has no spirit to any brave actions, let him continually labor and
exercise himself, let him avoid all moist and cold meats, and eat only such
things that by their heating qualities can dry up the superfluous humors that
are the cause of sleep: as are Hysop, Rosemary, Sage, Origanum, Marjoram,
Savoury, red Coleworts, Ginger, Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves, and many more that
relieve the brain that is filled with moist vapors, and raise the mind that is
oppressed with damps and thick mists, and make it ready and prepared for to
conceive honest intentions.

CHAP. XXVII.
What profit or disprofit comes by fulness or emptiness, or when the belly
is bound too much, or is too loose.
THe same moderation must be used in all other things that may profit, or hurt
our health: as are repletion, and inanition, whereby the body is either
refreshed by meat and drink, or is emptied when it is full of humors.
Moderation must be used in ^aring.
But as students and magistrates must be frugal in diet: so they must not keep
too sparing a diet, least their spirits should waste: who must also observe
this accurately, that their bellies be not too costive or too loose. For both
these if they exceed the mean, are equally hurtful to our health. What loosen
the belly.
For if it be too loose, and we go to stool too often, it will make the body
lean and starved, and keeps us from sleep, dries our brains, and impairs our
memory: but if we be too much bound and costive, it clouds the memory, and
makes our eyes dull, causing troublesome and tumultuous dreams, gross thick
humors being carried to the Brain; What herbs make the Belly slippery.
But such things as gently soften the belly are violets, Lettice, Spinach,
Orach, a kind of Mallows, which Martial shows was commended by the Ancients for
that use.

The Country Wife to make my belly loose,
Did bring me Mallows, etc.
To these add Buglosse, and Borage, Chervil, in Dutch Kervel, Betes, Blites,
Damask-Prunes, Grapes and Currants with small stones, Mulberries, Figs. Physical
things that do it, are, Mercury, Fumitary, Polypod, Senna, Rheubarb, Wild
Saffron, Epithyme, Cassia, Manna or aerie honey: for Sammoney, Tripolium or
Turbith, Melaerean, etc. deject our forces, and therefore are to be exhibited
to none but such as are strong, as when we seek for a hard wedg for a hard
knot. But if the belly be more loose than is good for our health, it may be
stopped with the frequent use of red Mints, What bind the belly.
or by the Syrrup of it which is frequent in the Apothecaries shops. Also
Quinces stop the belly, and whatsoever is made of them, Red Roses, to these add
Medlars, before they grow soft and tender, Cornels with a stone kernel within
them, but with a very good pleasant taste, that is sour and astringent,
Pontick Sumach, our men call it Ribes, which wonderfully stirs up appetite, and
discusseth loathing of meat, and strengthens the stomach to retain the meat,
especially in Summertime when the choleric humor causes the belly to be
loose, and makes fluxes, for which use we have the juice of it made up with
Sugar, which Avicenna calls Rob, What is Rob in Avicenna.
and this is ready, and will serve to stop a loose belly, and to get one an
appetite and desire to his meat; as also Pomegranates, that have red cornered
stones in them, and are some sweet, some sour.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Students and Magistrates must often purge the passages of their excrements.
The passages ordained for excrements must be purged.
GOd that made the body of man has not in vain created so many ways and
passages to purge forth the humors, and to wash away the excrements, lest a
man might be choked or oppressed by the abundance of them, or the vapors that
arise from them. So the head purges it self by the Nostrills, Ears, the
Palate, and unburdens it self by neesing and spitting: The Breast and Lungs by
the vocal artery send forth phlegm by coughing: the Stomach and Ventricie
cleanses its sink by vomit and belching; The Intestines purge themselves by
the belly, and with breaking wind backward, the guts are cleansed from their
excrements: The Reins and Bladder send away the Urine by the urinary passages,
but the superficies of the body discusseth all fumes and sweat through the skin
that is full of holes and pores. Wherefore since the body cannot be well,
unless all parts be rightly constituted, and do their office as they should:
care must chiefly be had that no error or distemper arise, that may vitiate or
impair the actings of the organical parts, for the mind it self uses the
ministry of them, and by them does famous things. If any disease offend them,
if the head be heavy, or full of phlegm, if the stone, strangury, or dripping
of the urine vex a man, if dimnesse and blear-ey'dnesse hurt the eyes, if the
hands or feet be held with the Gowt;

Horace in Art.
If Scabs or swelling tumors do offend; The mind of man cannot so readily
perform it is office or functions. Wherefore I suppose they do well who take
care of their health, and keep the body and all its parts free from excrements.
For so the mind is fit for great matters, and more ready for any noble
employments. The greatest part of men neglecting all ornament, and taking no
care of their health hunt only after wealth, and is busied in getting of gain,
Health is better than wealth.
though health be better than Gold, and there is nothing more to be desired
than tranquillity of mind. Horace confirms it by Verses.

L. 1. Epist. 12.
If thou be sound of body feet and hands,
It Is better than to have rich Craesus lands,
For it is not wealth nor baggs of Gold be sure,
Can cares of mind or body sickness cure.
And that he might recall men to a frugal and moderate use of things, he adds,

L. 2. Epist. 2.
He that enjoyes his wealth
Must always live in health.
The wise Hebrew accords with the words of Horace exactly; It is better to be
poor and well, Ecclus. 30.
than to be rich and sick. Health and a sound body is better than any Gold, or
the greatest riches. There is no wealth better than a sound body, and no joy
greater than the joy of the heart; Wisd. 4.
therefore felicity is not to be measured by wealth or prosperous success, but
by the soundness of the body and of the mind. For he only lives and is well,
that perfectly enjoyes the commodity of both these.

CHAP. XXIX.
Wholesome precepts are no less proper for the mind than they are for the body.
THere are three things reported to be most wholesome, which are fit for every
man to observe,

To feed not to full,
Not to fly from labor,
To preserve natural seed.
To these I oppose as many things most unwholesome, which besides diseases,
bring on old age apace, and cause men to die young.

To eat too much,
To be idle,
To use too much venery.
We must use moderation in natural things.
For since frugality, when we banish gluttony, keeps the body sound; and
exercise, when we drive away idleness and sluggishnesse, makes the same nimble
and ready, we may take examples from horses for the other.

Virg. l. 3. Georg.
Our minds are strengthened by no industry,
As by declining love and venery.
Old age is not proper for venery.
For intemperate and lustful youth makes the body feeble in old age. Wherefore
since we are to use moderation in our desires, in our youth, we are to do it
much more in our age, and to stop up all ways of luxury; for, as it is naught
in youth, as Cicero says, so it is most unseemly and foul in old age. For as
we need strength in war, and agility, and force to endure labors: so in love
we need strength to wage war in Venus camps in the night, which will consume
the tediousness of matrimony, and make us able to sustain the conditions of a
froward Wife. Wherefore not War, nor love are fit for old men, because both
these carry with them many troubles and hindrances which old age is not fit nor
able to undergo. L. 1. Amor. Eleg. 9.
Ovid has expressed this in very elegant Verses.

Cupid has Tents, and every lover war,
Believe me Attic, every lover war:
What times are fit for war, with love agree,
Old soldiers are naught, so old venery.
Love is a kind of warfar, cowards then,
For to maintain these Ensigns are no men,
The Winter nights hard labor, and long ways,
And every pain, is found in Venus frays.
Who sees not how uncomely it is for an old man that is full of wrinkles, and
worn out, to fall to kissing and embracing like to young people; for old folks
are unable to perform those duties. So Sophocles when he was old, being asked
by one whether he would use venerious actions; answered well: that the Gods had
ordered it better, and that he would with a good will fly from that, as he
would from a rude and cruel Master.

CHAP. XXX.
We must take care of our credit and reputation.
USe all the means you can, that your acquaintance may have an excellent
opinion of you, We must have care of our credit.
and may give a laudable testimony and commendation of your worth, and may
think and speak of you worthily. Nor be ashamed to observe what opinion the
common people have of you, and how they stand affected toward you. For to
neglect what any man thinks or speaks of a man, ^. 1. offic.
is the part, says Cicero, not only of an arrogant man, but also of a
dissolute man. Math. 16.
So we read that Christ asked his Apostles what the multitude said of him, and
what rumors they scattered abroad concerning him; lastly, what they thought of
the Messiah: not that he sought for glory and was ambitious, but that he might
make trial, whether after they had heard so many saving Sermons, and seen so
many Miracles from him, they thought any better and more honorably of him than
the common people did. Chaist did not seek for honor amongst men.
Wherefore he enquired so much of them that he might draw from them a solid
profession of their faith, and that he might try how much they had profited in
the heavenly doctrine, that has no fraud or vanity in it, no deceit or
impostures, as the Pharisees did caluminate it; but is all saving, and sincere,
delivered unto us, by the truth it self, and the Son of God who is the Savior
that was expected. Whom when Saint Peter by the inspiration of God had openly
professed in the name of them all, Profession of* faith.
and had undoubtedly proclaimed Jesus to be the Savior of the World, and that
by belief in him, all mankind obtains redemption, Christ praised the profession
of Saint Peter that he had by inspiration from above, and says that being it
stood on so firm a foundation, it should never be conquered or fail. We must
take care for decency.
In every action and in every word and deed be mindful of decency, and what is
most comely, for the reason of honesty requires that. Whence it is a handsome
saying, that it is the chiefest Art to know what is decent, that is, what is
fit for nature, and convenient to our wit and manners, Dat u well voeght end
betaemt. How we must affect glory.
It is a compendious and ready way to solid glory, if you show your selves to
be such a one as you would be thought to be, which Horace gives us notice of;

It Is good to be what men do say thou art; L. 1. Epist. 27.
That is, what thou art said to be, and which the people testify of thee. For
if they say thou art a just man and honest, it is well so thou do not deceive
them, and do not counterfeit and personate an honest man, as some
stage players use to present the persons of others, for some men at first
acquaintance will seem very good, when as they are nothing but crafty and
wicked impostors.

Pers. Sat. 5.
-- Their Face is good,
But a false heart lies under a fair hood.
Remember that there are two virtues principally for which young men commonly
are wont to be commended, Silence is a safe reward.
Faith and Taciturnity, and if Bashfullnesse be joined to these, which is an
amiable color of young people, which sets them forth with a comely white and
red: there can be nothing that makes more for their honor modesty, ingenuity,
and makes them amiable. But who ever wants this ingenuity and ornament of
youth, or loses these, is esteemed of, as one that is lost and past hope, and
is marked for wickedness and impudence. Wherefore this sentence is not false;

I think him lost, who has lost shame. For shame-facednesse and modesty
exceedingly sets forth young people; that they will not easily come to good,
Bashfulnesse commends young people.
and they promise little for honesty and virtue, who have no signs of shame in
them. So Diogenes when he saw a young man blush, he said, My son, be of good
hope, for this is the color of virtue honesty and modesty. An argument of
Ingenuity.
So when Mitio in Terence had a great hope of his Son, He blushed, said he,
therefore all is well. Bashfulnesse and confession are an argument of
innocence, if they be found in those that offend not of malicious purpose; so
are impudence and obstinacy, signs of wickedness. For some most confident
young men are not afraid to look boldly upon men of gravity, Confidence i^
naught.
and to settle their eyes and countenance, and to deny the fact, though it be
evident and cannot be denied. But that you may have praise without envy, and
win friends, you must use, as the Comedian says, to endure all things.

For to submit to those with whom you live,
Terent. Andr. Act. 1. Scen. 1.
And follow them that good example give,
And for the chief place never for to strive.
For it is an argument of a generous and modest mind, to do much and yet to say
little of himself, as Jugurtha in Salust did; otherwise, than many boasting,
vainglorious soldiers use to do, who vaunt themselves, and speak reat words
concerning their own actions. But since windy words are hateful to all men,
Boasting is odious.
let no man flatter himself concerning his wit, learning, riches, or speak
ambitiously of his own gifts, but let him so moderate his actions, as to speak
humbly and think so of his own parts, least, as Saint Paul says, R^m. 12.
he seem to despise and under value others. Horace amongst the rest gives us
this admonition in these Verses.

Search not thou others secrets, L. 2. Epist. 19.
nor disclose,
In drink or anger, what one does repose
In thee, nor praise thy self, nor others nose.
Never insult upon another man's calamity, though he be thine enemy, but rather
be sorry for him, and pity him. For such are the chances in humane affairs,
that many from the highest felicity, and largest possessions have been cast
down to the greatest want and misery, and have fallen upon a most lamentable
end. Again, others from the lowest condition and miserable slavery have mounted
to high honors, Ecclus. 10.
dignities, and commands. What thou would not have done to thee, do not thou
do to another man: For Christ will have all our actions and endeavors brought
to this rule, Math. 7.
when he says, All those things that you would have men do unto you, the same
do you unto them; that is, afford honor, reverence, and help to every man, and
other duties of humanity, that each man would have others perform to him. Be
not hasty nor rash in words, Hasty speech naught.
or inconsiderate; take heed thy tongue outrun not thy mind, or thou speak
words through thy throat that must be eaten again. For many that we keep
company with are false, and cannot hold their peace, who not only publish what
any man speaks unawares, but who cast aspersions and calumniate the credit of
other men; wherefore Horace gives every man good counsel;

That I may warn thee if thou warning need,
Of whom thou speak, Epist. 17.
and to whom take heed.
Of much enquirers see thou do beware,
They Will prate, their Ears and Tongues both open are,
They Will never keep thy counsel, and in vain,
A word once uttered, is called back again.
In which Verses he admonishes us to speak considerately and sparingly of
others, Prating is hurtful.
and to utter nothing rashly, because it may sometimes do a man wrong, and hurt
him. Lastly that enquirers, Trapanners and spies must be taken notice of;
Verspiers.
who thrust themselves into all companies, and smell men out that they may
accuse them before the Magistrates and Judges, so that it cannot be safe to
whisper any thing concerning any man, and it is not lawful in such unhappy
times to utter openly what the mind dictates unto us, or reason persuades,
though it be consonant to truth and sound religion, and that by reason of
spies, to whom there are honors and rewards allowed, Spies must be taken
notice of.
that they may be the more diligent to hearken and to spy out other men's
actions, which is a most infamous and detestable course of life, and they that
employ them and use them for this end, hate them also. For the treason and
indictment pleases some men well; but they cannot endure those that are the
Traitors, though they serve their turns well at the present, and their office
is very well liked, for they suspect such men, as unfaithful and uncertain.
Informers are hateful to all men. Augustus his saying of Tr^^son.
Augustus Caesar made this appear, who, when Rhymirales, King of the Thracians
did overvalue his own merits very insolently before him; says he, I love the
treason, but I hate the Traitor. So, as Julius Capitolinus reports, all
informers were forbid by the Emperor Antoninus Pius that is, such kind of men
who had a fourth part of men's estates for accusing them. The Dutch call men of
this occupation Aen brengers, who are the more hateful both to great and
small, because in words and deeds they exasperate and make things appear worse
than they are. Wherefore Marcus the Philosopher an Emperor, Marcus the
Emperor. Capitolinus. In Persa.
put away all these accusers and calumniators, setting a note of infamy on the
heads of false informers. Saturio the Parasite in Plautus, held it infamous and
detestable to play the informer, and he had rather, as his Ancestors did, fill
his belly by flattering other men, than by traducing them, to grow rich by this
means, lying at catch for other men's lives and estates; A Parasite is less
dangerous than an informer.
yet neither of these officers is of any esteem amongst solid men, who will not
have their Ears boared by flatterers, and Parasites, and to let their minds be
drawn away with their alluring words.

CHAP. XXXI.
It is commendable to pacify dissentions.
Contentions are to be quieted.
IF any contentions or quarrels arise amongst the Citizens or our acquaintance,
it is the part of an honest man to allay them as far as he is able, to put away
all offenses and debates, and to compose them that they do not increase to
greater mischief, to take off all quarrels and controversies, to pacify
discords, to repair concord, and to make peace and quietness between such as
disagree, and to become a faithful and diligent reconciler of differences
between man and man, Math. 5.
which work of humanity our Savior places no small blessedness in, and he
calls such as are studious, to make peace the Sons of God. A peacemaker
deserves praise.
From this and many other virtues, wherewith charity, that is, a desire of
deserving well of all men is adorned, all turbulent and tumultuous men are very
far off, who hating all peacemaking and quietness, trouble all things with a
wicked intention, and use no means to heal and cure what is ulcerated and
wounded, but exasperate all, and as the Proverb says, add Oil to flame. And
when Kings and Princes, chance to be angry, Kings are soon angry.
whose minds are naturally generous and fierce, they are more and more inflamed
by their mad and evil counsel: than which kind of men there is nothing more
detestable and execrable, especially where Religion is concerned, whereas they
ought to be most free from all vicious affections: least by their sharpness
and cruelty it fall out that men's minds are estranged from the study of piety,
rather than allured unto it. For whether they think good to settle the old
custom, o^ whether by taking away the old errors, which by length of time
have crept in, they would innovate something, and bring Religion again to the
first fountain, all things ought to be done by judgment and sound counsel,
using reason order and measure, lest perhaps some tumults should arise, as it
happened the former year in the Low Countries, in which the minds of the Citizens
being drawn into diverse opinions, Religion began to be propagated by force of
arms, A slanderer is as bad as an informer.
and the end thereof was most lamentable. A virulent backbiter is no less
dangerous than an informer, who brings destruction on such as deserve it not,
by slanders, contumelies, reproaches, and calumnies, and by a venomed tongue he
kills men. Now such sort of persons Horace notes out unto us, and bids us avoid
them.

-- He that backbites his friend,
And does when others blame him, L. Sermon. 1. Satyr. 4.
not defend,
Who strives to make men laugh with scoffs and jears,
He that invents what is not, and what he hears
Cannot conceal, is dangerous indeed,
If thou be wise, of such a man take heed.
That advice of Solomon comes very near to this; Prove. 4.
put away from thee an evil mouth, and let the lips of scorners be far from
thee. And a little after: Prove. 24. Ecclus. 10.
Be not a companion of scorners, for their destruction comes suddenly.

The sacred Writers show in many places that this rage of detracting was
always hateful to the best men, Exodus 22. Ps. 70. and 100. Ezekiel. 22. James 4.
Romans 1.
and Saint Augustine did so much detest it, that he had in his dining room this
Verse set up to be read against backbiters, and to stop their mouths;

He that friends absent loves for to backbite,
Or to speak slippery words, Verses used by St. Augustine.
who takes delight,
Or with full cups to tire men, who love
Mirth, let him from this Table far remove.
For by this means he drove such fellows from his company at meat, who were
delighted with quassing or backbiting, or who would speak unseemly and immodest
words at Table.

CHAP. XXXII.
Let no man grow insolent by prosperity, nor be dejected by adversity, but let
every man support himself by Gods providence.
SInce in the life of man there is nothing certain, or of long continuance, nor
do things always run the same way in a constant course, but by turns sometimes
they flatter us with felicity, sometimes changing their posture, they press us
down with adversity: Constancy is commended.
we must establish our minds with so much constancy and stability, as not to
grow insolent in prosperity, nor to be cast down by adversity. The mind of man
must be supported by providence.
But whithersoever the affairs of a man incline (as sometimes it falls out upon
a very light occasion) a man must always bear himself up, supported by Gods
word, by whose will it is certain that this world is governed, and as he
pleases, so all things come to pass: and to this must all prosperous and
adverse events be referred, and not to the inconstancy and rashness of
fortune. The name fortune is rejected by Christians.
For be it far from us that they who have the knowledge of God, should persuade
themselves that any things falls out by chance or fortune, whereas the
principal cause of all things is to be referred unto God.

CHAP. XXXIII.
We must avoid curiosity.
BE not too curious an observer of other men's matters, but let thy chiefest
care be rather to amend thine own life, To be curious in other men's matters is
naught. 2 Cor. 5.
than to find fault or to observe another man's life. Also the Apostle Paul does
admonish carefully every man, that they should not have their eyes taken up
abroad, but that all men should be quick-sighted in himself, and diligently
observe that as to commit no faults that those who were without might justly
find fault with; But as for other men's matters, and businesses that concern us
not, he would have no man to be too curious about, or to observe too narrowly,
though there be some error committed. For some are such strangers to the
profession of the Christian Religion, that they refuse sound counsels, and they
hate those by whose means they might be recalled to a sound mind: as some men
that are diseased and sick of the Pox, A simile from Physicians.
despise a safe and experienced Physician, and had rather stink in their nasty
humors, than admit of found remedies. Meddle not with other men's matters.
Wherefore since it is not always good to meddle with every man's matter, nor
is it expedient to be curious in other men's affairs; The Low Countries use to
object this Proverb against all busybodies. Luttel onderwins maect veel
vre^dts. That is, he procures much peace to himself, that does not thrust
himself into other men's matters. Hence, Saint Paul recalls the Thessalonias to
their own business, and will not let them be busibodies in other men's matters.
2 Thessalonians. 4.
It is wonder how quick-sighted some men are in other men's matters,
Quick-sighted abroad, blind at home.
and how they can suddenly espy and observe what other men do, but they neglect
their own affairs, and are wholly taken up in prying into the state and
condition of other men, whereas they are at home more blind than Bats or Moles.

So no man sees his own, Pers. Sat. 4.
but sees the sack,
That hangs behind upon another back.
And such men Horace reproves as well as Persius.

Sermon. 1. Sat. 3.
Because thou art blear-eyed for to behold
Thine own defaults, how is it thou art so bold,
And see as quick as Snake or Eagle can
When thou do view the faults of any man,
Besides, I wish thou would search and find,
Unto what faults thou stand most inclined,
By nature or by custom: weeds will grow
In fields that are neglected as we know.
Since therefore this love of our selves does exceedingly blind us, We must
detest a blind love of our selves. Math. 7. Luk 6.
and cast such a cloud upon our minds, that many flatter themselves in their
own faults: Christ does sharply inveigh against them, that look rather to other
men's lives than their own, and can see a mote in another man's eye, but they
cannot see a beam in their own, The Proverb explained of a mote and beam in
men's eyes.
that is, they can spy any small fault, and a thing not worth noting in others,
whereas they cannot see a great fault, and the grossest vices as big as beams
in themselves.

CHAP. XXXIV.
We must use moderation in our garments.
We must regard the use of things
AS in Banquets and provision, we ought to be mindful of frugality, and
temperance: so in our clothing and garments we put on, we must use the like
moderation, that we may do nothing for luxury or vain ostentation, but all for
natures necessity and for the use and commodity of our lives, to this if we add
decency, and ornament, so it be not too curious, I think it may be well
endured. Women love to be gaudy in apparel. 1 Pet. 3.
But since women above others love to be richly apparel'd and adorned, that
they may draw affection by their attire and beauty; the Apostle Peter
admonishes Matrons, that they should not bestow too great cost on the
ornaments of their bodies, not plaiting their hair, or wearing of Gold, or of
putting on gorgeous apparel, Rings, Jewels, Bracelets, to be gazed upon by
others, but to use decency in their habit, and be pleasing to their husbands in
comely, though not over-rich garments, and should labor to win their love, as
those noble women of old did, Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Susanna. Genes. 19.
Prodigality to be avoided.
Yet I know many men that both in our days, and in the memory of our
Ancestors, who by costly clothes, and by new fashions brought from other
countries, and by sumptuous feastings were brought to want and beggary, and
were derided by those who helped them to spend large possessions, and they who
by cheating and crafty ways had so screwed from them what they had, would not
bestow one farthing to relieve them in their greatest necessities, when they
had brought themselves to live in Hospitals, and in extreme poverty. But since
we see every where so many prodigal spendthrifts, that waste what they have
foolishly, and yet covet other men's estates: it can seem no wonder, Borrowing
of money.
to see every where so many exhausted with debts, and oppressed with other men's
moneys, not only amongst the common people, but even amongst Lords, Courtiers,
and great men who carry it out like Princes, who oft-times defrauding Orphans,
and Widows, from whom they have got the money, will pay nothing to any man
while they live, nor after they are dead; that all they have is pawned besides
their souls, and indebted to Creditors, so that as soon as they are dead all
their goods are seized on by the voice of a common Crier, and the Creditors
strive who shall be first served.

CHAP. XXXV.
Let no man despise the Lot which is designed for him.
Let every man delight in his own estate.
BE content with that lot and condition that happens unto thee in this state of
life, and that thou must act upon the Theater of this world, and for the time
endure it moderately and patiently, what ever it be, in what place or order
soever thou stand. 1 Cor. 7.
The Apostle Paul requires some such thing of the Corinthians by bringing for
an example bond and free, circumcised and uncircumcised, married and unmarried,
and he exhorts them all to bear their condition with an equal mind, and for no
condition to revolt from their Christian profession they had entered upon. Let
every man stand in his vocation. Inconstancy is disallowed.
For as he says in Timothy godliness is great gain, if a man be content with
what he has. Yet there are some who when they repent of their condition, and
are weary of their present state, they desire to change it, and to take up one
that is more convenient, and if they cannot obtain this as they desire, there
is no cause for them to torment themselves, or pine away with sorrow, but they
must endure all willingly and quietly, God moderates all things.
and must not murmur or resist against God who is the moderatour of all things,
who by his singular providence governs this world, and disposes of humane
affairs fairs in the best way, not only, as Cicero says, for all in general,
but for each man in particular. Which also the Prophet David repeats in many
places, but especially when he says, Who fashioneth the hearts of all men,
Psalm 31.
and understands all their works. Wherefore every man ought to be persuaded,
that God is the moderatour of all things, and that there is nothing done, but
according to his will and pleasure, and direction; and that he observes every
man what he is, what he does, what he effects, and with what mind, and
affections; and whether he is piously and religiously addicted to his service,
also what is expedient and good for every one. Wherefore if at any time all
things do not answer our expectations and desires, and we fail of what we would
have, yet let every man continue in that state God has appointed for him,
until the favor and bou^ty of our heavenly father shall otherwise determine
of his state. 4 ^eg. 20. Isaiah 38. Josuah 10.
For he, as it seems good unto him, changes the order and courses of humane
affairs. He ra^seth the poor from the dunghill, and sets them in honor and
digni^y. He casts down the proud and arrogant, Psalm 110.
and drives them from the places of prosperity. Psalm 112.
He makes the barren woman fruitful, and to be a joyful mother of children.
Wherefore let every man endure his lot, with hopes and confidence to obtain a
better, and let him rely wholly on God, and rest in him, who takes the chief
care of humane affairs; To which belongs that of Isaiah, chap. 30. Thus says
the Lord God, the holy one of Israel, your strength shall be in silence and in
hope, The place of Isaiah explained.
swijcht end verwacht, be silent and wait. In which words he drives away
distrust from turbulent and unquiet spirits, and he exhorts them that they
would quietly and securely wait for help and succor from God; for they shall
in time obtain their desire, so they do not distrust his promises; for though
sometimes God sends help after a long time, yet he never fails those who
carefully wait on him with a sure hope and confidence. Sermon. 1. Sat. 1.
Horace, a curious observer of humane matters, when he saw men to be so tossed
and inconstant in that way and course of life they had begun, and that their
minds were totally unsettled and uncertain, so that every man disdained his own
lot, and desired to change with some other man, as the Merchant, Soldier,
Husbandman, Lawyer, he makes this enquiry.

L. 1. Sermon. Sat. 1.
How is it Maecenas that there is no mar,
Content with his own lot, nor reason can,
Prevail with, nor shall ever we persuade
Men to be constant, or hold to one Trade.
And this he prosecutes afterward in an elegant Proverb, borrowing a metaphor
from the herds.

L 1. Epist. 14.
The dull Ox would wear trappings, and the Horse
Had rather go to plough.
Wherein he observes that it is an imbred condition in men to repent of their
own lot, and to wish to change with others and to esteem things they know not
better than what they do know. In another place he gives the reason of this
Inconstancy and levity that the mind flotes with, We repent for what we are.
by a contestation arising from the delights of the City and the Country. For
one man commends the City affairs, and the noise and frequency of people, the
other prefers solitariness, and country delights, and the pleasures of woods
and fields. For thus they argue one with the other.

Epist. 14.
I say who lives in the Country lives best,
Thou say the City life is far more blessed.
He that loves other men's chance, hates his own,
Fools that we are, we love what is not known,
And discommend unjustly what we have,
The mind's in fault that never leaves to crave.
The mind is un-constant. A simile from the Waves of the Sea.
In my opinion the Poet does rightly accuse the mind and casts all the fault
upon the rashness and inconstancy thereof. For since the mind of man is led by
affection, and not by reason, and is tossed as a Ship with the Waves and raging
of the Sea; it is every moment carried diverse ways, and conceives diverse
opinions. And hence it is, that what course of life soever a man first enters
upon, he does not always persevere in it; but he continually thinks upon some
other way, wherein he supposes there may be more commodity: whereas the change
of our state or condition does not change our affections, or take off our
cares, which are not in the things themselves, but in our minds. For whether it
be that a man change a solitary life for to be conversant amongst many people,
or poverty be changed into plenty of all things, the mind will be never the
more quiet, because it does not shake off those troublesome motions that are
not obedient to reason. The like happens to such men, (as Plutarch and Saint
Basil testify) as it does to those that sail into the Ocean, and the wide Sea,
Of the tranquillity of mind of a solitary life. A simile from such as are
tossed at Sea.
who desire to come to a commodious haven they are bound for; for they are no
less troubled with vomitting, giddiness, and nauseating in a great Ship than
they are in a small, for neither in the one nor the other will their desire to
vomit leave them; because the superfluity of choler and phlegm in their
stomachs goes along with them in both veslels. So in changing the course of
life, no man attains tranquillity, unless he do wholly shake off his
affections, and manage all his actions by reason. Whence Seneca speaks pat to
the purpose. Ad Lucil. Epist. 1.
I think it the first argument of a settled mind that it can consist and stay
with it self. Wherefore (says he) I rejoice O Lucillius that thou do not
rove nor wander. For he that is every where is no where. Wherefore it helps
nothing to pass over-Seas, and to go from Cities to Cities, and to take up
sometime this, sometime that, course of life. If thou will avoid these things
that press thee, be not elsewhere, but be another man, that is, compose your
own mind, and shake off vicious affections by reason and counsel, and
moderating of all your actions by prudence. For, as he says,

To pass the Seas changes the place, not mind. What will settle a man's mind
But against boisterous desires that distract the mind diverse ways, so that
upon every light occasion it forsakes its purpose resolved on, we must fight
with Gods word and heavenly doctrine to assist us. For this will make a
wandering and unsettled mind constant, and to be content with that condition God
has placed it in; so that it will neither leave it nor disdain it, or be too
ambitious, and greedily gaping after another.

CHAP. XXXVI.
We must avoid the company and familiarity of wicked men.
SHun the company of wicked men as the Plague. L. 3. de Ira.
For as Seneca says, we take manners from conversation, and as contagions lay
hold of the body: so vices pass into our souls by words and pollute our minds.
So that a wholesome Air is not more profitable for our health than for unsettled
minds to keep the company of good men. Let every one converse with those that
are good.
We see this in cruel and savage beasts, which grow tame by the company and
society of mankind. It is also the condition of honesty to make those that are
used to it virtuous and well-manner'd: so wickedness and ungodliness have
this property to deprave and pollute those that deal with it and respect it.
Wherefore Saint Paul says, lest any man be drawn away from the truth, 1 Cor.
15.
and hope of Salvation, from confidence of obtaining immortality, and from the
integrity of his mind; he carefully admonishes those that are pious, that they
should not conceive any such opinion, as to persuade themselves there remains
nothing of man after death, but that the whole man perishes as brute beasts
do. Wicked men to be avoided.
Which ungodly men who fear not God do diligently strive to persuade impudent
and ignorant men, and by their pernicious doctrines they draw away doubtful
and uncertain minds from the saving truth, that is no ways doubtful or
ambiguous. Wherefore the Apostle by all means draws off Christians from
conversing with them, who carefully seduce into error such as are not crafty
enough for them; for so he illustrates his exhortation by a Trimeter of
Menander.

Ill speeches do good manners soon corrupt. CHAP. XXXVII.
We must bridle our Tongues not only from obscene words, but also from idle
speeches.
BUt since we find that Christ has blamed idle words, Math. 12. What are idle
words.
and such as are unfruitful, superfluous, frivolous, and which are spoken to
no profit of him that speaks or hears them, so that a man shall give an account
for them in the day of Judgment: how much, as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 5.
ought we to detest obscene words and scurrilous speeches, filthy mirth, and
unlawful delights, unseemly festivity, which wonderfully defile the soundness
of manners? also biting jears, and nipping language, Scurrilous words must be
avoided.
which leave a sharp remembrance of them in our minds, and leave their sting
behind, as Wasps do when they fly away, ministering fuel for quarrels and
contentions, that sometimes a matter being canvassed, and cast with scoffing
from one upon another, and so back again in figurative speeches, has at last
come to bloody battles, and by the Instigation of some, has raised implacable
and bitter hates and quarrels, which being conceived inwardly and having taken
fast hold on the heart, grow then most fresh when they seem to be forgotten,
and quite obliterated. Biting jeers to be avoided. Gal. 5.
This rage of ill speaking and railing displeases Paul the Apostle
exceedingly, and he carefully warns the Galathians, that they should abstain
from those vicious and foul affections, and that they should not suffer bitter
words, and biting speeches to prevail amongst them, nor any reproaches or
desire of defaming others, lest whilst one bites and hurts another by
reproaches, they should like beasts be one devoured of another. 1 Cor. 1.
He does the same thing amongst the Corinthians whom he lovingly invites to
concord and mutual love in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; contentions to be
avoided.
and he exhorts them that they should not disagree amongst themselves, hating
and quarrelling one with another, but to be of one mind and one heart. John 15.
The Apostle borrowed this example from Christ, who by many ways persuades his
Disciples to mutual love and charity, which is the bond of perfection, and the
fulfilling of the whole Law. For there needs no Laws to spur us on, where our
good will is in readiness, Colos. 3. Ephesians. 4.
and we have a fervent longing and charitable mind toward our neighbor. But
because from incontinency of the tongue sad Tragedies and grievous tumults use
to arise, especially when one vomits up against another, the venom of his
malice: Colos. 4.
the Apostle Paul does give wholesome counsel to the Colossians, and shows by
the way what moderation must be used in our words. We must bridle our tongues.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt, that you may know
how you ought to answer everyman. That is, let not your speech be very much in
rejoicing or sporting, least it fall into lasciviousness; nor yet severe,
sharp, or bitter, least it displease those that shall hear you, and so drive
them away, or alienate their minds. Let all your speech be courteous and
seasoned with prudence. Wherefore in Bishops and Ministers of the Church, Saint
Paul's wholesome exhortation. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. Saint Paul observed a Decorum in
all things.
he requires gentleness and lenity, and will not that they shall reprehend
others with brawling words, or to handle them too ruggedly. Since therefore
Saint Paul in allactions of life, in words and deeds, requires and measures all
things by the rule of honesty and decency, and that intemperance in our words,
besides backbiting and evil speaking, besides reproaches and contumelies, may
infect pure minds with obscene and filthy words, he takes care to root up these
vices, also out of men's minds.

So when he frames the Tongues of the Ephesians, and composeth their minds.
Ephesians. 4.
Let, says he, no filthy communication proceed our of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers; that is, that it may instruct the Auditors, and bring some fruit and
profit unto them. One vi^e springs from another.
And because all vices are joined together, and one grows out from another,
that no mischief may remain in men's minds. Let (says he) all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all
malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
Ill will must not be kept, or maintained. Romans 11.
even as God for Christ his sake has forgiven you. Also he presses the same
duty at large unto the Romans, and commands them. Let love be without
dissimulation, abhor that which is evil, be kindly affectioned one toward
another, with brotherly love, in honor preferring one another, that is,
succouring and assisting one the other, and that one should overcome the other
in duty. To apply themselves to the time, 2 Cor. 8. Heb. 12.
that they strengthen themselves in hope, and speak well of them that persecute
them, and should not curse or wish any ill unto them. That they be of the same
mind one toward another, not thinking proudly of themselves, not rewarding
evil for evil, that they should not give place to wrath, not revenge
themselves. Deuteronomy. 32.
That they may so overcome their enemies with duties of piety, that they may
inflame him to love them again. Prove. 24.
For this is to burn the adversary, and to heap up coals of fire upon his head.
Wherefore amongst other things which he mentions at large, he thinks it fitting
that every man should show all offices of humanity to other men, and should be
ready to do good to all. For affability and pleasing speech, does much
reconcile man to man, L. 1. offic.
as Cicero testifies; and obsequiousness, and study to deserve well of others,
procures a man a stable and continued friendship, Christians should strive one
with another in duties of humanity.
which being it maintained mutual good will amongst the Heathens, it ought to
be more ardent in those who are united in the Covenant of Christ.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Hypocrisy and dissimulation in words, and any action of a man's life is odious
and detestable.
LEarn always to speak the truth; for, to lie, or speak perplexedly,
intricately confusedly, doubtfully, and to deceive, is servile and unworthy of
a freeman. Phil. 4. Saint Paul's wholesome exhortation.
Wherefore the Apostle Paul does greatly and severely admonish the Philippians,
thus; Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; that is, whatsoever things are fit to
maintain love and friendship; whatsoever are of good report, that is, get a man
a good name, and to be well esteemed, if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things; that is, if there be any thing in virtue that is
praiseworthy, lay it to your heart, and continually remember and think upon
it, set such things always before your eyes, fasten them deeply in your minds,
and strive with all the force you have to attain thereto, and to express the
same in your lives and manners, and the God of peace shall be with you. For, as
the same Apostle speaks, Romans 8.
All shall turn to the best for them who love God; that is, they shall have a
good end.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Philautia, that is, a blind love of a man's self, must be laid aside, and an
empty persuasion of knowledge.
The opinion of Learning must be abolished ou^ of our minds.
SInce too sudden an opinion of learning does not a little hurt to our studies,
and hinders us in the progress of them; care must be had that nor in humane
learning or any Art which thou purposest to attain unto, thou conceive such an
opinion in thy mind, that thou should think that thou have already obtained
it, when as thou art far from it, and many things are yet unknown to thee and
not examined and proved. Now there are many who are such lovers of themselves,
who flatter and applaud themselves for their learning, and think that they want
nothing to be perfect in knowledge and piety, and that they are come to the end
of the race, when as they have scarce come half way. Hence it is that many
famous wits, designed for highest matters, never come to the top. Which Fabius
finding to be true, L. 1. c. 2.
he chiefly required this of such as profess themselves to be so; that they
should either be so indeed, or not think themselves to be so. Unskillsfull
Schoolmasters.
For there is nothing worse than those men, who being got but a little beyond
the first Elements of Learning, take up a false persuasion of knowledge.

CHAP. XL.
We must make a choice and difference of our friends, and familiar companions.
We must choose our friends.
DO not rashly make choice of all to be thy familiar friends, without choosing
or making any difference, but choose those who are of a tried virtue, and known
honesty and integrity of life. The Proverb warns us of it, That we do not give
the right hand to every man. A Proverb taken from dancing.
Which the Dutch render thus, Siet wie ghy bijden hand neempt, See whom you
take by the hand, the similitude being taken from dancing, and leaping
together. For young men when they go to dance will not take every one by the
hand, but they use to consider amongst maids who are rusticks, and who of a
gentile blood; which also is chiefly to be observed in the society of our
lives, and in contracting of friendship. For some that are unskilful in humane
affairs, and cannot discern false friends from true, admit all men even those
they never had trial of, into their most secret famililiarity, which afterward
they find to be false impostors, and deceivers. Wherefore as you ought to show
your self faithful to all; We must not trust every body
so you must rashly trust none, unless as the Proverb goes, you have eaten a
Bushel of Salt with him, that is, you have known him long, and had great
conversation with him, and whose manners and conditions are well tried, and
understood by thee. To which may be applied that of the Wise Hebrew, Commit not
thy secrets to a stranger, Eccius. 2.
for you know not what he may bring forth, that is, what monstrous mind he has
in him. Discover not thy intents to every man, lest he return thee evil for
good, Friendship should be immortal.
and shall afterward reproach thee. But the levity and inconstancy of men is
the cause, that the covenants of friendship cannot be perpetual; and many for
this reason are persuaded that friends must be so conversed with, as if
sometime they might become our enemies: also we must so exercise quarrels and
hatreds toward our enemies, as if in time all enmity being laid aside, they
might be made our friends. L. 12.
So Martial deters men from too much familiarity with any.

If thou would avoid great care,
And griefs of mind that biting are,
Be not too much a friend with any,
Thy joys and griefs will not be so many.
Let enmity be mortal.
Yet their opinion is not contrary to reason or to man's nature, who think that
quarrels and enmities ought to be mortal; but friendship which consists in a
faithful consent of mind and will ought to be immortal. For they cannor avoid
the crime of levity and inconstancy, who rashly suffer the bands of friendship
to be dissolved. Wherefore Cicero is of opinion that such friendships as are
not to our minds, ought by degrees to be unloosed, and not to be cut assunder
violently.

CHAP. XLI.
Do not rashly become surety for any man.
DO not inconsiderately and suddenly become surety for any man. For there is
danger in suretiship: It is dangerous to be a surety.
he that puts himself in trust for another, exposes himself to hazard. For if
the other sail, the surety must stand good, and he must pay what he promised
for the other. Prove. 6. Solomon forbids suretiship.
Wherefore Solomon deters his Son from being easily entreated to be any man's
surety. My Son, if thou have promised for thy friend, thou have stricken hands
with a stranger, thou art ensnared and taken in the words of thy lips, and art
held by thy own speeches; wherefore make haste to be delivered from the hand of
thy neighbor. Yet that must not be observed too rigidly, since in most urgent
causes we must pleasure our friends, and such as we are bound to by the law of
nature, and them we must gratify, and sometimes expose our goods and credit,
and our lives also to defend them; yet so that no man forsake what is right for
their sake, nor do any thing contrary to honesty, even as the Proverb
admonishes. We must observe our friend, How far we must observe our friend.
but that is only as far as to the Altar, that is, we must not pass the laws
of Religion, for it is no^ lawful to observe our friend to the damage of our
own Conscience, or wrong done to Religion.

CHAP. XLII.
Flatterers, which the Dutch commonly call Pluymstrijckers, must be avoided.
A flatterer is dangerous.
SInce the Art of cogging and flattering, or rather craftiness which consists
in an artificial enticing by words, may easily catch a simple man: I give thee
warning that thou let not thy Ears be open to flatterers, and not to suffer thy
self to be deluded by their enchanting and fair speeches. By these marks shall
you discern between a true and faithful friend, The difference betwixt a
friend and a flatterer. Prove. 17.
and a wicked and counterfeit dissembler. For he freely and gravely will tell a
man of his duty, to whom he wishes well, which Solomon places in the chiefest
seat of friendship: but this will cunningly flatter and daub you over with
gallant words, approves all you do, and applauds you in your errors, and fits
all things for your Ears, so that his words are not only agreeing to your
will, but he observes even your looks, and countenance, Gnatho in Terence does
accurately describe men of this condition, Esaiah 30. Eunuch Act. 2. Scen. 2.
and by these Verses he shows the manner how they use to endear men unto them.

The Condition of a Parasite.
There is a sort of men that fain the chief would be,
And yet they are not so, they shall not laugh at me,
But I do please them still, and wonder at their wit,
What they affirm I praise, and if they deny it,
I praise that also, I say and unsay again,
What ere they say, or unsay; now the greatest gain,
Is flattering which I use, all other arts are vain.
Wherefore since flattery is detestable to all men, though thy estate be very
mean; never become a flatterer or Parasite to any man; It is true that to
tickle the Ears procures the favor of some men, The friendship of flatterers
is unfaithful.
but it is unconstant and will not last. Sometimes men get great gain by it,
but it is base and infamous, and when the craft is detected, it proves hurtful
to the Author of it, so that no ingenious man who is free bred would endure
this character to be fastened upon him. Next of kin to flatterers are deceivers,
and crafty beguilers, The Art of deceiving.
who are as subtle as Foxes to circumvent and deceive simple men by many
cunning wiles and deluding ways, and they like to Hyenaes, Civility that is
deceitful.
and Crocodiles, lie in wait to entrap men's estates, and wives also: these are
at first sight and appearance very fair in words and deeds, but afterward they
will do a man hurt and work his destruction. These are very cunning and crafty,
but wonderful officious, and ready at every beck, who for that end and purpose
insinuate themselves into men's familiarity and acquaintance, that they may
cheat and defraud them of something. For so soon as they can catch any
opportunity to defraud you of any thing, they have both their eyes and hands
ready for it. Wherefore a man must not easily and lightly trust to any man,
unless he has first well known him by his Just actions and Integrity of life.

CHAP. XLIII.
Some commodious Precepts to teach a Man how to live well and happily.
In what things consists happiness of life.
SInce there are many rules laid down by learned men how a Man may live well and
happily, amongst the rest Martial has writ some Verses wherein he comprehends
things that agree with honesty, and points at, as it were with his finger, the
way whereby a Man may lead a commodious life, and enjoy the health of his body,
and tranquillity of mind also. He prosecutes the matter thus;

These are the things that made a happy life, L. ^0.

Goods by Inheritance, not got by strife.
Ground that is fruitful, and a constant fire,
No suits, few visits, and a set desire.
Free born, a body from diseases free,
Friends that are equal, prudent honesty.
An easy diet, a Table where is no Art,
The night not drunk, but free from cares of heart.
A bed not sad, but chaste, a fixed mind,
Content with what thou art in every kind.
Neither to fear, nor yet desire death.
If thou can not wholly obtain all these commodities of life according to thy
will and desire: The providence of God moderates all things. Psalm 30.
thou must not torment and vex thy self, but thou must refer all things to Gods
providence and will, which is the moderatour of all humane affairs, for so
David did in all things that befell him, whether they were prosperous or
unfortunate, for he submitted all to the power of God, not regarding chance or
fortune. The Godly acknowledge no fortune.
So when he ascribes to God the whole course of his life, he says. My time is
in thy hands; that is, all our affairs run according to thy will and pleasure.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Exercise wherewith the forces wearied are restored, both of the Mind and of
the Body.
SInce the Nature of man cannot subsist unless it take some time of
refreshment, and be released from labor for a while. We must indulge some
relaxation to our selves, least the forces of our bodies and souls grow feeble,
and be overcome with immoderate business. For as pleasing and seasonable sleep
restores and refreshes the weary lims after labor; To rest from labor is good.
so also remission or intention repairs and raises up the tired mind and
spirits that are exhausted with constant studies and lucubrations. The delight
of Husbandry.
The Ancients when they had their Vacation from business of the Commonwealth,
and Courts of Law, took their pleasure in the Country, and reaped as much
profit in husbandry as they took delight in it. For besides the Woods and green
fields that were most pleasant to look upon, and besides places set with Trees,
and adorned with Osiers, besides the commodities of their Farms, and country
houses, and sweet retreats, they reaped a most lawful and plentiful profit
from their well-tilled land, and large harvest, and yearly revennues. For
profit joined with honesty and Justice can be discommended by no man. For, as
Cicero says, of all things that men get profit by, there is nothing better
than husbandry, L. 1. Off^^.
or more profitable, or more becoming a freeborn man. So Hesiod thought that
nothing was so magnificent and becoming Kings, than to till the ground, and to
be employed in Country affairs of Husbandry.

A Husbandman is never idle.
Wherefore the old Romans hating the City: went into the country, as if they
came out of captivity. For here you shall find many things to offer themselves,
that you may take pleasure in by course; for sometimes it is time to prune and
lop Trees; then the pleasant spring invites us to inoculate and to graft Trees:
again, Horat. in od.
it is time to dress Vines, and when the Vine branches are sprung up, to plant
the high growing popular Trees.

Sometimes to catch wild beasts in snares, and then
Birds with lime twigs, Virg. 1. Georg.
and after that again,
To compass round Woods with Dogs, and by turn,
To entrap Birds, and bushes for to burn.
Many kinds of exercise.
Hunting and Hawking is healthful for young people, and such as are of ripe
age, and is a fit exercise for them, and is not to be discommended so a man be
not over-addicted to it, and do not spend all his time in following and
destroying wild beasts, neglecting serious matters, and his household affairs.
But it wonderfully refreshes a man's mind, to delight himself in geographical
Tables, and within the compass of his study to travel over the long and large
bounds of the world, and to measure with his eyes and compass those places
that are far distant from us, rather than to spend his estate to go from home
thither, and to wander into foreign parts. I reckon amongst cosmographical
Charts and Maps, Pictures feed and refresh the sight.
pictures that are artificially drawn, and well painted with fit colors, or
such as are naked without any painting at all, which do not affect our eyes
with an empty speculation, especially if we be free from superstition, but they
afford us some documents for virtue and god linesse, such are those that
comprise the sacred Histories. Whence the Ancients rightly called Picture mute,
or silent Poetry, and Poetry was called living and speaking, and not dumb
picture. Music delights the mind.
But pleasure in Music is commendable and very delightsome, which exceedingly
refreshes and checreth a drooping mind. For this by a consent of voices and
instruments sounding tunably, does not only delight our ears with variety of
sounds but does raise our spirits vital and animal with a noise that is spread
every where through the arteries, discussing all clouds and sadness from our
minds, and making them to be lively and ready for employment. Fa. l. 1. c. 7.
Hence it was that Pythagoras was wont when he awakened to awaken his mind with
a musical instrument, that he might be the better rowsed to undergo his
functions, and daily business: and again, at night going to bed he would ease
his mind by playing on his Harp or Lute, that his affections might be the more
calm. Cicero 1. Tus. cul.
So Epaminondas, a Prince of Greece, is reported to have sung well to the Harp;
and all Greece, as Cicero testifies, supposed that all learning co^^sisted in a
consent of voices and Instruments, and he that was not skilled in that was held
to be unlearned. So in elder times at Kings Tables they were wont to sing the
actions of the great men of the World, The Ancients were studious in Music.
playing upon a Harp unto it. So Virgil writes.

Long hayr'd Io pas on gilded Lute does play,
Which Art great Atlas taught him, L. 1. Aemid.
as most men do say.
One sings the wandering Moon, or labors of the Sun,
Another beasts and men, whence storms and fire begun,
Arcturus, and the weeping clusters, and both wains,
And why the Winter Sun so soon the Ocean gains,
Or what makes longer days, and shorter nights remain.
Besides other arguments, The Hebrews rejected not Musical recreations. 1 Kings
16. David honored God with Musical Instruments.
the History of the Prophet David shows that the Hebrew people wanted not the
use of this delight, and it was adorned and much esteemed of by great men
amongst them. For King David was wont to sing his sacred hymns to the Harp, and
to pacify the furious and discontented mind of Saul that was hurried and vexed
with an ill spirit, and melancholy, by playing sweetly on this Instrument, and
so he brought him to be of a better mind. 4 Kings 3. Elishah is affected with
Music.
Also the Prophet Elisha being exasperated with the importunate interruption of
the Kings, taking an Instrument, by harmony and musical tunes, he composed his
mind, and when he had settled his affections, and removed all passions from
himself, being enspired with Gods spirit, he began to Prophecy, and to
foreshew to the three Kings what should be the issue of that business. And the
sacred word of God shows in many places that Musicians were wont to be employed
at Feasts. Ecclus 32.
So the Wise man taking his similitude from Jewels adorned with Gold; As, faith
he, a Carbuncle adorns Gold; so does a consort of Music at a Banquet, where
men drink wine with moderation. And, as the same Author says, Similitudes
from Musical noyses, and Jewels.
the Emrald which has a transparent and full green color, called commonly
Amarant, beautifies the Gold: so does the harmony of Musicians at a pleasant
Banquet. But that no man should be given too much to these kind of delights,
and busy himself therein beyond measure, he shows by the way what we should
prefer before it; Eccl. 40.
Wine and Music cheer the mind and heart, but the study of Wisdom is better
than them both. Indeed Esaias reprehends drunkards with Wine, Esaias reprove^
Drunkards.
and such as are constantly given to feastings, and delight themselves with the
sweet sounds of musical Instruments; but it is because therein they considered
not God, nor referred unto him any of those things they so plentifolly enjoyed,
from whose bounty all things proceed. Chap. 5.
For thus he threatens them, Woe to you that rise early to follow after
drunkenness, and drink until the evening that you may be inflamed with Wine;
The Lute and Harp, and Timbrel and Pipe, are in your feasts; but you consider
not the work of the Lord, nor regard the operation of his hands. That is, you
have not your eyes and minds lifted up unto God, from whose bounty and
munificence all these things come. Amos 6.
The Prophet Amos handles the same argument, and he does reprehend all
lascivious and drunken men with such like threats. Amos complains of drunkards.
Woe to them that are rich in Sion, who walk stately, who lie on beds of Ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their couches, that chant to the sound of the
Violl, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music, who drink wine in bowls,
and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, yet none of them are grieved
for the calamity of the poor, nor do they lament their misery, there is no
regard or respect had to the needy, and no thanks is returned unto God for his
so great benefits. Wherefore musical delights, and at that time to use Wine and
meats moderately, whereby our drooping and feeble spirits are revived and
raised up, whereby melancholique fumes are dissipated, has no harm in it, nor
can deservedly be complained of by any perverse crabbed man, unless by the
abuse of these things and constant use, men fall into a deep forgetfullnesse of
God and sacred things, and of their own salvation. Amongst the more easy
exercises and such as are less troublesome and laborious, Less violent
exercise.
are encluded riding on horseback, or sailing in Botes or Ships, or else
walking in the fields and open Air, or in pleasant Gardens, or under Vines
that make long Arbours, The pleasure of Gardens refreshes our minds.
so that to walk under these roofs and vaulted places full of green leaves, is
no less wholesome than it is delightsome. And if we chance to be tired and
weary with walking, there want not in well-ordered Gardens shady bowers and
places of refreshment, where we may cool our selves, and keep off the heat. But
when we would stand in the open Sun, and expose our selves to the free Air, In
Summer we must go into cool close places and iz. Winter it is good to be in the
Sun.
we may do that in the wide fields, or upon some eminent and high place. But as
amongst moderate and wholesome exercises for students and magistrates, it is
very convenient to read aloud with a clear voice, and to speak out orations
frequently: so for strong and lusty people, wrestling is good, and to shoot, or
play at Tennis, which Galen approves in a book set forth to that purpose, and
to play at cudgels or fight on Horseback, whereby the natural heat is
augmented, and the body grows strong, the blood running through all the parts,
and hence it is that such as use exercise have a good color, and their skin is
very handsome and red. Yet let those that use these sports remember thus much,
that they must do all with moderation, least violent and winding motions should
cause luxations of their lims; that is, least any part should be dislocated, or
removed out of his place, by their toilsome stirring and turning of their
bodies. And as our minds are not presently to be wearied with studying so soon
as we have eaten our meat, that the stomach may more commodiously be employed
about concoction; that the natural heat may not be dispersed and scattered: So
when men have eaten freely they must not fall to over-hard labor, for violent
and uncomposed motions hinder concoction, Violent moving hurts concoction.
and all immoderate agitations of the body, carry the raw and undigested meats
into the Veins, and these become the seminaries of diseases, obstructions and
putrefaction proceeding from thence. Cockal what it is.
The Ancients used to play at Cockall, or casting of huckle bones, which is
done with smooth sheeps bones, the Dutch call them Pickelen, wherewith our
young maids that are not yet ripe use to play for a husband; and young married
folks, despise these so soon as they are married. But young men use to contend
one with another with a kind of bone taken forth of Ox feet. The Dutch call
them Coten, Cockall. Childrens plays are many.
and they play with these at a set time of the year, as they do also with Nuts
and Rattles, which childish sports are contemned and rejected by them when they
are something elder, so that once past fifteen years old, they hold it not
seemly and not generous to be employed in toys, for as Horace says, after a
childish manner. L. Sermon. 1. l. 3.


They build them houses, and put Mice to Carts,
Play at even and odd, and use such Arts,
To ride on sticks; but if one with a beard,
Delights in it, he is mad, and to be feared.
Moreover Cockals, Dice are different from huckle-bones.
which the Dutch call Teelings are different from Dice, for they are square,
with four sides, and Dice have six, the use whereof is so frequent in Europe
that many men oft-times by the use of these wast all their patrimonies, and
when they have spent all, they are thus brought to beggary: whereas Cockals are
used by maids amongst us, and do no ways waste any ones estate. For either
they pass away the time with them, or if they have time to be idle, they play
for some small matter, as for Chestnuts, Filberds, Pins, Buttons, and some such
juncats. Whipping of a Top.
But young youth do merrily exercise themselves in whipping the top, and to
make it run swiftly about, that it cannot be seen, and will deceive the sight,
and that in Winter, to catch themselves a heat. Sat. 3.
Persius says that this kind of exercise was usual amongst the Ancients, and
he and others were exceedingly delighted in it.

For that by right was most desired thing,
To know what ere the right sise point might bring.
And what the worst cast of the Dice might not,
Not to be cheated by the small mouthed pot,
Who had most Art to whip the top about.
Virgill also makes mention of this childish instrument, and he compares in
most elegant Verses, The pot was of earth as ours is, in which stares use to
breed, in Low Dutch Spre^^.
the mind of Lavinia that was agitated by the Furies for the love of Tur^us to
a whirlgigg, and that it was turned round like to a top, (for so it is called
in Dutch) that is driven about with whips and scourges. He prosecutes the
matter thus, Virg. L. 7. Aeneid. The elegant destription of Virgill.


Then she unhappy by huge monsters chased,
Runs madding through the great City in haste,
Like to a Top that is whipped by wanton boys,
In open Court amongst their childish toys.
Which they admire when it turns round,
So she through Cities ran, amongst people sound.
Children are commonly wont to be busied in these sports, but when boys grow
to be young men they desire some more decent employments. In all exercise
whereby the body or mind may receive some benefit, we must still have a care of
decency and honesty. So Salust commends Jugurtha's towardness, Jugurtha's
towardness.
when it was not depraved with ambition and desire of a kingdom; For he so
soon as he was grown up, Exercise of youth.
being strong and well favored, but most of all abounding in wit, he did not
give himself over to luxury and idleness to be corrupted: but as the manner is
of that nation, to ride, shoot, run with his equals, and when he wan the honor
from them all, yet he was beloved by all, and would do very much, and speak
little in his own commendation. Avoid Dice and Cards, In^^^ous plays.
and such other delights of idle people, as things most hurtful and infamous.
For in these sports Art and skill prevails not, but fraud, and cogging, and
cheating; reason, counsel, and Wisdom, can do nothing, but chance, fortune,
and accident. Dice or hazard comprehends all plays subject to chance, What a Die
is.
or fortune, as Dice cast out of the hand, or out of a Box, Tables, also every
way of casting Dice, so that it is not allowed in the smallest matters, and
childrens games, if it be often used or deceitfully, or contentiously. So
Martial speaks wittily.

Childish pastimes seem to be harmless things,
Yet often such delight great mischief brings.
Wherefore since in these sports commonly they do all with craving, defrauding
and wicked intention, so much moderation must be used, as to seek for
recreation therein rather than gain. For those that are ignorant are often
cousned of their money by cunning Gamesters. Gain must not be by fraud.
And though in such sports some hopes of gain tickleth the minds of men, and he
that wins is taken with the reward: yet we ought to do nothing with too earnest
a desire of gain and advantage. Exercise and sport is appointed and allowed not
for hopes of gain, but for recreation and for our health sake, and that the
min^ being tired may be refreshed, and obtain new forces to fall upon
businessse as before.

The condition of Dice-players.
Such as the nature and condition of Gamesters and Dicers, that when men have
once taken a delight therein, they can hardly leave it. For men of the same
Trade allwaies soliciting them, they are drawn to those lossefull games
continually, which vice is also imbred to Whoremongers. Therefore fore Ovid
gives good counsel.

Scorn gain, mad desire does vex man's mind,
And Dice will make men thereto still inclined.
In my opinion a desire and industry to get gain can be denied to no man, to
maintain his family thereby: yet we must follow such gain as is profitable and
honest, and that wrongs no other man. It is a good saying of Plautus, Every man
ought to be diligent to get gain, rather than crafty. Ill gotten goods soon
come to nothing.
For things got by sinister and wicked means, besides that they get a man an
ill name, are seldom lasting, but soon vanish away, as riches that come by
fraud, flattery, informing, cavilling, usury, Dice, Cards, and such like.
Wherefore use all means to persuade such as are your fellow students to abstain
from wicked actions, and to draw them to honest, honorable, and virtuous
designs. For this office of humanity not only deserves commendation amongst
Cordial men, but it is well-pleasing unto God, as the Lord testifies in
Jeremiah. Chap. 25.
He that separates the precious from the vile, shall be as my mouth. Whereby he
intimates that he has done some notable business, and to come next unto God,
and to deserve divine honor, who has drawn himself or his neighbor (for
there is nothing more dear, Jeremiah's place opened.
or of greater price with God than man) from base things, from a polluted and
sordid life, and from the ways of error, and becomes the Author and means to
bring a man to lead an honest life, and to be blameless in his behavior. To
which may be referred that of the Apostle James: Brethren, Chap. 5.
if any amongst you err from the truth, and one converts him, let him know
that he who turns a sinner from his ill ways, shall save a Soul from death,
and shall cover a multitude of iniquities.

CHAP. XLV.
In all business we must call Reason into Counsel.
IN every action and business of our lives all things are to be so moderated
by reason and counsel, that we may not do to day what we shall repent of to
morrow. It is filthy to do any thing so, that when it is done you should be
forced to say, It is a fault to say I wist not.
I had not thought, you shall more seldom fall upon this rock if you do not
your business headlongly and carelessly, but with consideration, maturity and
prudence, that all may be laid to the rule of reason. So Salust, commands
rightly. Consult before you begin, Nothing is to be done heedlesly.
and when you have taken counsel, do what you do maturely. And Cicero says,
whatever you do, use diligent preparation for it. L. 1. offic.
To which appertains that Proverb, Hasten with leisure, and that is done soon
enough which is well done.

CHAP. XLVI.
Do nothing which you doubt of.
DO nothing that may breed a scruple in your mind, and may cause you to be
doubtful, so that you are uncertain whether it be just or unjust that you go
about. L. 1. offic.
For Justice, as Cicero says, is clear enough of it self, and is joined with
virtue and honesty: But doubting is next to injustice and other vices. To this
agrees that of Saint Paul, Happy is that man who condemns not himself in that
which he allows: Romans 14. Doubting makes the m^^^ scrupulous. Saint Paul his
place explained.
that is, who in going about any business does not secretly feel his
Conscience reclaiming him from it. Which sentence though the Apostle writ it
concerning choice of meats, and to avoid offenses, as I said before, yet may it
fitly be applied to other matters. For in every action, wherein we do any thing
without a firm and certain constancy of mind, but with doubting and wavering,
we are condemned by our own Consciences. For it is naught and sinful, whatever
is against Conscience, and wherein we approve not our minds to God by faith.
For when any man does a thing that is good, and doubts whether it be so or no,
he thereby declares that he is ready to do what is naught, if occasion be
offered, or he can find opportunity. But true Piety, and solid Wisdom
accompanied by faith, and supported by Gods spirit does judge all things
knowingly, and will not attempt to do any thing that may have the least
appearance of evil, or may pollute the mind or conscience with any sin.

CHAP. XLVII.
The rewards of Virtue and Vice.
Pleasure is momentary.
WHat Cato the elder was wont often to say to his fellow soldiers, ought to be
imprinted in every man's mind. If a man by labor do any good thing, that is
joined with honesty; the labor passes away, but the good deed remains. If a
man com^^^ any sin with pleasure: the pleasure as a momentary thing is soon
g^^, Virtue is eternal:
and ^^^es away, but the sin and wickedness is indelibl^ and (...). Hence is
the Proverb, Once (...). A Proverb against d^^enerous persons.
For whoever (...) base business has made havoc of his honesty and
reputation, shall hardly get the (...) of an honest man, though he be grown
rich and wealthy. By su^^ ^^ke reasons did Plato stir up young men to obtain
felicity, Plato's exhortation to virtue.
setting before them the Images of virtue, and of ^^tious pleasure. For sudden
repentance, and perpetual vexation, disquietnesse of mind, and continual grief,
accompanies the mom^ntary and short delights of the one; but there follows the
few labors and travels of the other, a quiet and peaceable mind, a secure
Conscience, with solid and eternal joy. A sentence of Saint Gregory.
To this we may apply that sentence What delights is momentary, what vexes us
is eternal.

CHAP. XLVIII.
We must take the beginnings of all our actions from God.
We must be^^^ our actions from God.
Whatsoever thou have a purpose to do, and to bring to pass, always take
Counsel first from the greatest and best God. So if thou determine to deal upon
any thing, or to undertake any public or private employments, desire
assistance from God, that he would inspire you with what is best, and most for
your good. For it can scarf be said what great felicity in the success of
business comes from hence, and how much conducing thereunto it is, to refer
all our desires to the will of God. And commonly those that do not begin thus,
proceed but unluckily, and with ill event. Hence it is that God threatens in
Esaiah. Chap. 30.
Woe unto the rebellious children that take counsel but not of me, who cover
with a covering, but not of my spirit. By which words he denounces unto them
an unhappy and unprosperous success: because they looked for succor and help
elsewhere, and not from God, and took no counsel from him, not asked any answer
from him, God govern^ our actions. Prove. 8.
who rules over all, and has the dominion and Empire of the whole World. For
by him (as Solomon says) Kings Reign, and Princes do justice; By me Princes
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. Counsel and Equity, and
Prudence and Strength, and Honor and Power are his; he gives them their power
and Jurisdiction, to govern and rule their subjects by. God is the first cause.
Since therefore all things are brought to pass by the will of God, and he is
the prime cause of them all; we must beg with all our might from him, for a
happy success on all our business; and that he would be pleased to grant,
unto us all things good and necessary to live well and happily by Christ gives
us warning of this, when he says, First seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, Math. 6. Luke 12.
and all other things shall be freely administered unto you of his bounty, and
added thereunto. That is the most happy beginning of the day, which is begun
from the contemplation of heavenly things, from the Evangelical doctrine, and
praising the Majesty of God.

CHAP. XLIX.
The morning early is the best time to fit our minds, and to lift them up unto
God.
The morning is fit for prayers.
THere is no part of the day so fit to pray unto God as the morning is, For then
the mind is more lively, the darkness of the night being gone, and is more fit
to conceive wholesome cogitations. The sacred Scriptures every where restify,
that the hol^ Prophets were wont to do so. For David being in a strait, says,
My voice shall thou hear in the morning O Lord; Psalm 5. Psalm 61.
In the morning, will I dire^t my prayer unto thee, and will look up; In the
morning, shall my prayer come unto thee. Chap. 17.
So Esaiah; In the morning, shall the Lord hearken unto me, that I may listen
unto him, who gives me warning. And again; Chap. 26.
My Soul desired thee in the night season, with my spirit within I will seek
thee early. By which words the Prophet shows, that all his mind and all the
faculties of his Soul, The place of Esaias interpreted.
and spirits both vital and animal were fixed upon God continually, so that no
time should pass without the thoughts of him; but all our words, deeds, and
thoughts of our heart should be directed unto God,

CHAP. L.
When the day is ended we must examine our mind, for an account of the actions
we have done that day.
We must require a reason of our actions and examine our minds.
AT even examine thy mind concerning all thy words and deeds done or spoken that
day, so when the day is ended before you settle your self to sleep, take an
account of every days actions, and ask thy mind for a reason thereof: what
evil thou have amended this day, what vice thou have opposed? in what thou art
grown better? what addition has been made to piety? and what progress thou
have made in virtue?

Wherein he failed, Virg in vir^ ^on.
what is done in time, what not?
What good there came by such or such a deed,
What (...) let slip? what ac^ion was be got,
Th^^ ^^^ter ^^d born ^^^^ged? and at need,
What help be lent, or done what grief might breed.
It can hardly be spoken, how quiet and peaceable the mind of man will be, We
must daily hold a purpose of amendment.
and what sweet rest and sleep a man will take, when as with a purpose of
amendment, one discusses the clouds of his mind with such thoughts. But because
the action of the day, and such things as we see in the daytime, do sometimes
hinder our sleep, we must carefully labor to pass the day with honest
employments, that nothing fall foul upon the mind that may hinder our rest, and
make us sleep unquietly. Let the actions of the day be honest.


CHAP. LI.
Let no man flatter himself in his faults, or extenuate his evil deeds.
Faults must not be extenuated.
IF any thing be done foolishly, and contrary to right reason, and honesty, and
decency: never think how you may flatter your self in your errors, or
extenuate your faults by excusing them; for excusing of sin breeds confidence
of sinning, and gives occasion to commit the same sins again. So when David had
observed how much mischief proceeded from this error of this mind, Psalm 146.
The place of the Prophet David explained.
he said, Incline not my heart O Lord to malicious words, to find out excuses
for my sins. In which words he prays that an evil mind or intention may be far
from him, which wicked men being troubled heap one wickedness upon another,
and they extenuate and lessen their sins, and will suffer no fault to be laid
to their charge. By which blindness and darkness of mind it comes to pass,
that when the mind is once hardened in sins, and bound with evil desires, it
falls daily to worse and worse, and sinks down without any hope of coming
forth. To which appertains that of Solomon. The wicked when he is come into the
depth of sin, Prove. 18.
despises counsel, that is, he is persuaded he has done no harm, and is not
much troubled for the wickedness he has committed, but as the same writer
says, Confusion and reproach follow him. Whereby he shows that he undergoes so
great loss of his reputation, and is so branded with infamy, that he shall
hardly ever after procure or deserve the name of an honest and upright man.

A wicked man mind is hardened by wickedness.
After the same manner are they hampered, who, when they have offended, and are
fallen into any sin, will not acknowledge and confess it, though the wrack of
their conscience extort it from them, but they are silent and hold their peace,
and hope that in time all shall be forgotten. A simile from the nature of
children.
For it falls out with them as with boys who will not leave off when they are
forbidden, especially where they hope it may be concealed, and may not come to
their Parents Ears. We have examples hereof in Adam and C^^n, and in their
posterity, to whom original sin was derived. Confession (...) away sin.
Wherefore those that desire to have peace of Conscience, and not to be
^o^cured, must not ^^^ive to conceal or deny their sins, but must confess them
unto God. For to acknowledge and confess out sins is the means to p^^^ure
forgiveness, and washes away all spors and foolnesse from us, Silence
aggravates our sins. Psalm 31.
but to conceal and deny our faults exasperates the evil, and makes our cause
the worse. Which David having proved in himself, said, because I held my peace,
my bones consumed through my daily complaining; pain and anguish indeed made me
to cry out, and complain, but it made me not confess my faults. But forthwith
he intends to open his sins unto God whom he certainly knows to be ready and
easy to forgive his sins, when he or any man repents heartily and hates his
sins. Wherefore trusting in God, I said, I will confess unto God against my
self my own iniquity, and thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. God is
facil to pardon.
For such is the love and good will of God toward men, such is his mercy and
easiness to be entreated, that so soon as men purpose to repent he remits
their transgressions. Which he makes plain by Esaiah thus. Chap. 65.
And it shall be that I will hear them before they call, and whilst they yet
speak I will listen unto them. Whereby he shows that his favor and loving
kindness is ready, that if a man only purpose to lead a better life, God
presently forgives him the wickedness he has done. So we read in Ezechiel,
Chap. 18.
at what time soever a sinner shall repent of his wickedness. I will remember
his iniquities no more.

CHAP. LII.
We must refer unto God all the good that befalls us.
All the good that befalls a man, he must refer unto God.
IF in this frail and mortal body, and momentary and vanishing life, any thing
befalls thee that is royal, splendid, magnificent; If a man have large
possessions and revenues, if he have abundance of wealth and rich^^, and he
live in honor and renown, dignity, glory; If his mind be endued with the
knowledge of many things, and he has prudence and Wisdom; if his body be in
health, and lively, or if any thing more happen unto him; you must acknowledge
that you have received all this from God, who is a most merciful and
munificent father, from whom comes every good gift. Saint Paul recals unto
this thankfulness the proud person who is swollen with an empty conceit of
himself, 2 Cor. ^.
and he takes away from him all his confidence in these words: what have thou
which thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why boastest thou,
as though thou had not received it? God urges the same, Chap. 9.
and speaks it to every man in Jeremiah, Let not the Wiseman glory in his
Wisdom, Let not the Strong man glory in his strength, nor the rich man in his
riches, but let every man glory in this, that he knows me. He that glories,
says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 10. All our good comes from God.
let him glory in the Lord, from whom we have abundantly obtained all good
things by Jesus Christ, who is made by God unto us, Wisdom, Justice,
Sanctification, Salvation, and Redemption. But that no man may applaud or
flatter himself, or vaunt himself too insolently, of his external or internal
gifts, Saint Paul admonishes us, that we carry this treasure in earthen
vessels, that is, in frail and dying bodies, whereby every man may understand
that this must be ascribed to the virtue and power of God, and not to man's
strength. For as all the Light, Wisdom, Virtue and Justice that is in a man
must be referred to God and to the Father of Lights, from whom all good and
perfect gifts descend, as St. James the Apostle testifies: Chap. 1.
So all the fault and wickedness that is in man's mind, what blindness and
ignorance there is, what corruption and depravednesse; must all be ascribed to
our pernicious will, and no fault can be imputed unto God. For sin, and the
transgression of Gods Law, brought upon us all miseries, All sin proceeds from
our mind. Wisd. 1.
calamities, diseases of body and mind, and lastly, death it self; and this
sowed in our minds all readiness to do what is evil.

CHAP. LIII.
There must be consideration had in making choice of what course of life we are
determined to lead.
Deliberation in choosing our course of life.
IN choosing the course of life, you mean to lead, and wherein you purpose to
rest and continue unto your old age, this first of all must be thought upon to
enter upon all things with consideration, and not rashly to addict your self to
any Calling, from whence afterward if you should repent your self, you may not
lawfully return, and depart from it. For they who in their younger years, enter
upon any course of life, before they understand what they do, and to what they
are by nature prone unto, and yet bind themselves unto it for ever, they lead
an uncomfortable life, and full of trouble, and sorrow, if at any time (as
commonly it falls out) they prove to be weary of that condition, or they find
themselves not able to undergo the burden of it. Wherefore let no man
inconsiderately tie himself in chains; but, before he enters upon any course of
life, let him take time to deliberate what Calling he has most mind unto, and
what Trade he likes best. In which deliberation, as Cicero persuades, L. 1.
Offic.
every man must consider his own inclination, and so using all care in
regulating his life, he may persevere in the purpose he has undertaken. Some
err by error not by will.
For many who strive for the best things are deceived, not so much by their
will as by the error of the way they light upon, and they wander from the mark
that Christ has set before us, to superstition and a false show of Religion.
But from Christ chiefly must we fetch our helps of salvation, who alone being
our Pilot, John 10.
we sail in this Sea of the world unto our desired harbor. He is the door that
makes an entrance for us to the Father. He is the way, the truth and the life,
We must seek for salvation from Christ.
from which Satan attempts to turn us, who changing himself into an Angels of
light by wicked Teachers, thrusts into men's minds falsehood for truth, doubtful
things for certain things, counterfeit things for what is sincere, and for safe
things such as are hurtful unto us. Adam was deceived by a show of truth.
This was the first imposture of our enemy whereby he set upon Adam, and he
cast a mist and darkness upon his mind, and he defrauded him who was simple
and overcredulous by a show of truth; and he forbears not to do the same to all
his posterity, and by abolishing the sincere worship of God, and saving
Religion, to bring in superstition, idolatry, false doctrine, and doubtful and
dangerous courses of life, and lastly, to use all devices to draw mankind from
the true knowledge of God by extinguishing the light of truth, and putting out
the brightness of faith, and so to bring upon the mind an Egyptian and utter
darkness.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of lawful society in Matrimony.
Definition of Matrimony.
MAtrimony is an undivided and lawful conjunction of Male and Female which was
appointed by God, partly to bridle our ^usts, and to shun unlawful and
wandering copulation, and partly for procreation of children. It is, as (besides
Saint Paul) Columella relates from the economy of Zenophon, L. 12. c. 1.
a Matrimonial conjunction appointed by nature, that not only the most
pleasant but also the most profitable course of life may be entered upon, and
that mankind might not in length of time come to ruin. Gen, 2.
God would have the male and Female joined together lawfully, and he blessed
them, so that by this indissoluble band there might not be a help wanting to
mortal man, wherein besides the desire of begetting the like, they might be
united in a mutual conjunction of their lives and fortunes.

use of Marriage.
Wherefore since the harbor of Marriage is most safe, and a fast station for
mankind who is by nature prone exceedingly to propagate his like: he shall not
provide amiss for his own tranquillity, who shall marry, especially when he or
she is come to man's years, and are past their childish condition. Yet they do
inconsiderately, and not what is proper for that age, who marry too soon and
unseasonably, Marriage must not rashly be entered on.
not trying their strength, and examining the force of nature. For there are
some young people not yet ripe, who either rashly, or by the instigation of
bauds, or by the provocation of their Parents, Marriage enfeebles many.
who covet some great dowry, take upon them this yoke, and I have known some of
them, who before one year was past, were feeble and weak, and all their vital
moisture was exhausted, so that I was forced with medicaments to restore their
strength that was wasted and sunk down. Wherefore let not children, or such as
are not yet of age, marry to get children, but let every one try his own
strength, and know well what his back is able to bear. But whosoever has a
purpose to marry, must chiefly observe this, An honest family to be observed in
Marriage.
that he choose one to be his companion of life, that is of an honest stock,
not having so great a dowry (though that is not to be rejected) as to have a
woman well descended, which is honest, chaste, well-bred, and of good manners.
For a woman, as the Comedian says, if she have good conditions has portion
enough. That of Alcumena, in Plautus, is a witty saying, which all maids and
mations should well keep in memory, Amph. act. 2.
I do not think that to be my dowry which is called a dowry, but chastity,
modesty, and a settled desire to fear the Gods, to love my Parents, to agree
with my kindred, to obey my husband, to be bountiful, and to do good to such
as are good and honest.

We must have care of maids frailty.
Wherefore Parents must labor carefully, that the frail Sex of Females, that is
easily overcome, especially when a maid grows to be marriageable and to be
ripe, be not disgraced, or suffer any damage in their chastity, but they must
instruct their daughters in virtue, and honorable ways, Ecci. 7.
and provoke them to lead a sincere life, and to be of unblameable behavior.
There are some wicked Parents who give ill example to their daughters chastity.
We must give no cause to maids to fall.
For they corrupt them by their lewd actions at home, and open a gap for them
to impudence, drunkenness, and boldness, whereby they grow to a custom by
degrees, to lay aside all modesty, and expose their chastity for reward, and
are easily won, or will make no great resistance, against any crafty man that
lays snares for their Virginity, and they refuse not to be handled kissed and
tickled by them, and they admit their dalliance without resistance. Amongst
many other errors that are committed in entering upon matrimony, Errors
committed in Marriage.
three things chiefly seem to be blameworthy, out of which arise many
inconveniences. First that the greatest part of men run headlong and
inconsiderately, and without any mature deliberation on this course of life,
and that at such years as are not fit for this business. Again, some marry too
late, and when it is no fit season, and when their age is decayed, Weak and old
men are not fit for marriage.
and they are old, then they take this burden upon them. Lastly, that people
marry unequally, one that is well to one that is diseased, a young man that
gapes for a great portion, to some old woman and this is not agreeing to
natural society, an old man to a young maid, which cannot altogether be
discommended, nor is it contrary to the state and order of nature, since many
old men are green and lusty, and can get children, which old women that are
past childing cannot have. Now as in childhood to think of marriage too soon is
rightly disallowed and blamed: so in old people too tarry to long before they
marry. All things must be done seasonably in marrying. Strong age fit for
Matrimony.
For they that put on this yoke too soon and hastily, and have not their bodies
strong and lusty, but want strength, do soon fail, and cannot hold out but for
a short time. But such as procrastinate and marry too late, letting the time
slip away before they enter upon it, lead an unpleasant and cross life, or
else sometimes they have polluted themselves with wandering and unlawful
copulation: for hence it is that there are every where so many Pocky, sickly,
distorted, blear-eyed, crooked, gowty men, with swollen legs; and if afterward
they chance to marry when they grow weary of that life, they cast themselves
into great troubles and misfortunes. For when they are exhausted and out of
date, and are grown weak by their former venery, and intemperance, they grow a
burden to themselves, and the hope and desires of their new Bride fail.

CHAP. LV.
All society which consists not within the bounds of Wedlock, is faulty and is
not lawful Matrimony.
SEeing that Christ and his Apostles detest unchastnesse and obscene and
unlawful lusts, Hebr. 13.
and pronounce those to be excluded from the kingdom of God, that pollute
themselves with adultery and whoring, I see not what color they can have to
defend themselves, who hating marrimony, meditate how they may live freely and
loosly without marriage. Unlawful lust and copulation.
For there are some that living without the bounds of matrimony, yet they bind
themselves to one Mistress for a time, and this is not seemly, nor can it be
done with a quiet and contented mind. They think, as they persuade themselves,
that they seek for the convenience of life, What befalls them who delight
themselves in lease venery.
and they will endure to be married to none, but only to live with those whom
they can forsake and leave when they please. But these men ofttimes are
constrained to endure more grievous wrongs and indignities, from a petulant and
imperious Mistress, than he could do from a lawful and truly married wife. And
moreover there is an addition of mischief, that long custom procures
boldness, and confidence unto this Sex, that if any man begin to grow weary of
them, and would fain be quit of them, it cannot be done but by a tumult; For
they will mingle heaven and earth together, when once they hear of a divorce,
or when upon any discontent arising they fear they shall be shut out of doors;
Those Concubines which the Priests keep in their houses, to live with them, are
examples sufficient; for these men are forbid lawful Matrimony, and are
commanded to lead single lives, which is a thing exceeding hard and laborious
for lusty men that are full of natural moisture. Wherefore they err as much as
can be, and are wholly deceived in the choice of humane society, Copulation
without marriage is a burden to the Conscience.
who suppose that they live in peace, who being free from a wife, keep a
Concubine in their houses, or hunt after one abroad to take their pleasure, and
whose company they can enjoy when they please; when as oft-times besides the
unquietness of their minds, and torture of Conscience, there rises more
trouble and molestation by a friend that is so kept for a time, and more
jealousy and suspicion, than from a lawful and laithfull wife, which is
sole^only married to live with us so long as welive. No slate of life is void
of trouble.
And though in this estate as in many more, sweet and four are mingled
together, sadness and joy, bitter and pleasant, cloudy and clear weather, nor
are there jarrings wanting in this course of life, with contentions, quarrels,
and affections of jealousy (as there is no kind of life happy in all things)
yet no fault is to be put upon the order of Matrimony. For however many
inconveniences accompany Matrimonial life, and these men are busied with many
cares, great anxieties and disturbances in educating and bringing up of their
children, 2 Cor. 5.
as Saint Paul testifies in providing for their families, yet mutual love
sweetneth and mitigates all the rest, and the procreation of children according
to Gods Ordinance; Now children are the delights, and singular joy of
Matrimony, for conjugal love increases and is fostered thereby; Children are
the pleasure of Marriage.
and on both sides thereby is there great comfort taken. But if contrary to our
will and desire we chance to have no offspring, Want of children must be born
patiently.
and that the hope of posterity is deferred for many years: yet must we hold
the promise made in wedlock, sacred, and we must so continue between us a
mutual society of life, that one may bear up another, as fruitful Trees
planted hard by do uphold the Vine, by which it is prooped, and as it were
married, and taking hold of them by its tendrils, it grows very high and
spreads very far. For as a Vine wanting props and stays, falls down upon the
earth: A comparison of a Vine and Matrimony.
so Matrimony and household affairs run to ruin, unless they be upheld by the
mutual support of man and wife. But if there be any fault in this society, if
any distempers, tumults, Men's affections and not nature to be blamed.
quarrels or suspicions arise; we must ascribe them rather to men's affections,
and ill manners than to this ordinance; For they are not the vices of marriage,
but of depraved nature, and of a troublesome mind, contracted from the guilt of
original sin, upon which all the fault must be laid.

CHAP. LVI.
How it may be obtained, that death may not prove fearful to a Man that
naturally fears it.
SInce in humane affairs there is nothing firm and constant, but all things are
transitory, frail and uncertain, We must not trust in transitory things.
and the best things are subject to ruin, it is not for any man to admire or
to love these things too much, and be affected with them out of measure; But
rather let every man lift up his mind and thoughts upward to heaven, and there
contemplate things that are solid and eternal. For whoever with a full
confidence in God the Father through Jesus Christ, is lead with certain hope
and expectation of immortality, he need not sear any chances that shall hang
over him or inconveniences, he has no cause to be frighted with diseases,
calamities and dangers, or with death it self, which they especially fear who
are destitute of Gods Spirit, and have no true knowledge of God. For such as
place their trust in God, are supported by his holy Spirit, and they stand
undaunted against all adversities, Romans 8. ^ Tim. 1. Galat. 4. ^ John 4.
with a courageous mind, and as Saint Paul says, we have not recei^^^ the
Spirt of bondage and fear, but the spirit of adoption, of power and of love,
whereby we cry boldly, Colos. 2.
Abba Father. For in this, says Saint John, is our love made perfect, that we
may have confidence in the day of Judgment. There is no fear in love, but
perfect love casts out all fear, for fear breeds pain or trembling. Wherefore
that we may shake off all fear, and not be daunted at death, or any thing else
that may make us tremble, let us cast all our hope, wishes, thoughts,
confidence upon our most bountiful father through Jesus Christ, Christ
overcame death.
who has purged us with his own blood, and has set us at liberty from fin and
the tyranny of death, blotting out and taking away the handwriting which was
against us, whereby we were bound to the Devil, and were indebted to him. A
simile from such who are oppressed by bonds.
The Dutch say, In hem ghebonden, teghens hem verbonden. But that Christ might
support fearful and fainting minds, and might show that all hope and confidence
must be placed in him, he says, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World.
Now the Prince of this world is Judged, that is, he that brought in death, John
16. John 12.
is driven away by my death, and is condemned to Judgment, and is spoiled of
all power of doing harm; The Prince of this World is come and has found
nothing in me. Christ is formidable to Satan.
By which comfortable words he shows that Satan and all his confederates by
reason of sin in this world, have no power against Christ or his members that
firmly believe in him, and are engrafted into him: These saving and comfortable
words work thus much upon the minds of men that depend upon his help,
Comfortable sentences.
that shaking off all fear of death, they fortify themselves cheerfully against
the greatest tempests that can arise, Psalm 19. Psalm 26. Psalm 3. Psalm 22.
and become invincible, and with great confidence break forth into these
sayings. My eyes are still toward the Lord, for he shall pull my feet our of
the snare. God is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
upholder of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? If an army were encamped
against me, my heart should not fear, I will not be afraid of thousands of
people that shall compass me about. If war rise against me, I will trust in
him. Though I walk in the middle of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil
because thou art with me. Though he should kill me, Job 13.
I will trust in him: that is, if he should set before me the terrors of
death, and I were to lose my life, yet will I trust in him who by his
providence will find a way to preserve me. Psalm 117. Heb. 13. Jeremiah 17.
The Lord is my help, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. And that of
Jeremiah, behold they say, where is the word of the Lord? let it come. And I
was not troubled, following thee my Shepherd, and I desired not the day of
man, Lord thou know. The place of Jeremiah expounded.
That is, I look for help from no other place, but from thee alone, so that I
neither regard nor fear those who threaten my destruction; Be not thou a cause
of fear to me, thou that art my hope in the day of my affliction; let them
fear, and let not me be afraid. Saint Paul inflamed with the same heat of
faith, and leaning on Gods protection, confidently pronounces, that nothing
any where is so formidable and horrible, that can make godly minds afraid, or
divide them from their love and relyance upon God. For, says he, I am
certainly persuaded, Romans ult.
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels or invisible substances, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any
other creature, can be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Saint Paul's confidence does make others more bold. Psalm
30.
So Saint Paul pronounces constantly that he who is engrafted into God the
Father by Christ will stand unmoved against all terrors from whence soevever
they may arise, against the incursions and fightings of enemies, against the
horror of death which either the enemies purpose to bring, or the law of
nature or diseases do bring upon him. What can take away the fear of death.
Wherefore since nothing is more effectual to take off fear of death from the
minds of men, than a firm confidence in God, Christ being our Leader, whereby
we conceive a certain hope of a resurrection, and expectation of eternity: let
all men make haste and strive to come to this, let every one embrace and
cherish this saving doctrine, and fix it in their minds, by this let them
strengthen themselves, when the greatest troubles are at hand; by this let them
pacify and quiet their conscience, by meditation hereof, let them wipe off all
grief of mind, and discuss all sadness and sorrow that may befall them for
death of Parents or Children. To this belongs that excellent consolation of
Saint Paul, 2 These. 4.
wherewith by a certain expectation of a Resurrection and of eternity, he
corroborates the Thessalonians, We must not lament the dead as the Gentiles do.
and he will have them refrain from weeping, not lament for their friends
departed, as the Gentiles do. I will not have you ignorant brethren concerning
those that are asleep, (not as dead but asleep) that you grieve not as those
who have no hopes of a Resurrection, for if we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, Death is a sleep.
so those that are a sleep, by Jesus shall God bring with him; Again, when he
withdraws the Philippians from earthly things, Phil. 3.
and recalls them to solid things; he says, Our conversation is in heaven,
from whence also we look for the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall transform our
vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body, according to his mighty
power whereby he subdues all things unto himself. Wherewith is the fear of
death to be discussed.
By which words Saint Paul persuades them to comfort and support themselves in
their afflictions, by a love and desire of eternity, and in the conflict of
this life, that they should fear nothing that might turn them away from a
better life, whereunto Christ has opened the way for us, by the power of his
Resurrection. Wherefore when we come to the last day of our life, and death is
near, which is formidable to all men, unless they rely upon Christ, or when we
think of any such thing in the time of health, or if want, calamity, diseases,
or other miseries of life afflict us, let us refer all our desires, hope, and
wishes unto Christ, who by his death has endured the punishments due unto us,
who has pardoned all our sins, We must look upon Christ. Colos. 3. 2 John 2. 1 Timothy 2. Esaias 50.
and is become the propitiation for all our transgressions, who is our
advocate, as Saint John faith, and Mediator unto God the Father, who is the
reconciler of God to men, and who as Saint Paul says, made himself a
redemption and a sacrifice for all. In him is appointed salvation, ^ite, and
resurrection. By him we have access and an entrance in one spirit unto the
father. Ephesians. 2. Colos. 1. John 2.
By the shedding of his blood we have obtained redemption and remission of our
sins. Because it pleased the father that in him should all fulness dwell, and
to reconcile all things by him, who has made peace by his blood. Since
therefore we have an high Priest, Heb. 4.
as he says in the Hebrews, who has entered into heaven, Jesus the Son of God,
who was in all points tempted as we are, Christ is the peacemaker between God
and man.
yet without sin, who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, let us
come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we may find mercy to help in time of
need: We being supported by the defense of so great a Captain, How the mind
must be confirmed when death comes.
and compassed with his guard, against all the monstrous designs of the devil,
which presently vanish when the light appears: we subsist against sin, death,
hell, and are transported from the uncertain station of this life, unto our
desired harbor, and blessed mansion. And if any misfortune or inconvenience
befall a man in the course of this life, if any man chance to be cast upon any
difficulty of his life, to be pressed with poverty, tortured with diseases, to
be vexed by his enemies, if any destructions or calamities come on, if
wickedness abound, and the innocent are oppressed, and murdered, wholesome and
true doctrine be contemned, In Christ there is a consolation against calamities.
heresies, and pernicious opinions do spring up, and that perverse errors are
sowed in all places: in so great a confusion of things let every man look unto
Christ, let him seek for safety from him, and rely wholly upon him, Christ is
our sacred Anchor in a tempest. Psalm. 25.
and confirm himself by him as by a sure Anchor, and let him continually think
of that the Prophet David speaks; I beheld the Lord allwaies before me, because
he is at my right hand, that I should not be moved. In which words he shows
that he has his eyes allwaies fixed upon God, and that he depends wholly upon
him, that he subsists only by him in doubtful and dangerous matters, that he
did not waver, or was carried about with every wind of doctrine, but was
constant and stable, and was not moved from the firm confidence in God, for
this reason only, that he finds God gracious unto him, Ephesians. 4. Heb. 13.
Psalm 27.
and present with him in all things. So that he confidently breaks forth into
these words. Behold the Lord is my helper, in him have I trusted, and I am
helped, and my flesh has rejoiced in him, I will confess unto him from my
whole heart.

CHAP. LVII.
Concerning the amplitude, Majesty, and power of the name Jesus, by which only
we may resist Magical Charms, and all deceits of the Devils are to be
conquered, and all mischiefs or dangers that may happen to the Soul or body,
I Said before that Enchantments and Magical Arts were to be rooted out, and
that no man ought to exercise what may do mischief: It remains to show by the
way, by what force and efficacy, by what words and prayers the minds of men
possessed and afflicted may be relieved, The Devils are enemies to men.
and such as are entangled by the snares of the devils; also by what means
witchcrafts may be removed, which are brought upon miserable men by the wicked
Instruments of the devils, whereby their bodies and Souls are tortured. These
insinuate themselves closely into men's bodies, and offer violence to man's
nature, and spoil it of its faculties, or at least make a change in them. The
evil spirits mingle themselves with our food, humors, spirits, with the air
and breath, The Devils mingle with the humors, as contagious diseases do with
our bodies.
that we draw in and breathe out; and they pollute many other things that serve
for our use, and whereby our health is preserved. Wheefore I think I shall do
something worth my pains, if I can show by what means miserable people may be
happily freed from those chains, wherewith they find themselves entangled and
hindered. For the inconveniences and hurts they sustain cannot be referred to
any natural causes, nor be cured by the same remedies that common diseases are.
If any disease proceed from Gluttony, Venery, weariness, cold, heat, satiety,
hunger; each of these is cured by its proper remedies. The mischiefs the devils
bring upon us cannot be referred unto natural causes. God uses the malice of
the devils to correct sins. Why God sussers us to be tortured by the devil. 3
Kings 32. Ahab deceived.
But such diseases as the devils bring upon us, do not in any sort require
natural remedies, but such as are divine, and supercelestial. Some wonder that
so great power is given to the devil and his instruments to vex and torment
men. But God does partly wink at those hurts witches bring upon sinful men,
and he suffers them to be afflicted, and in so doing he has a sufficient
reason of his own counsel and providence, and he partly instigates the Devils
and their instruments to rage against many that have deserved to be so
punished, and he uses to another end their malice to chastise wicked men. So a
lying spirit was sent into the mouths of all the Prophets; whereby the King
Ahab, being deceived might go to the battle, wherein present destruction was
made ready for him. Sometimes God suffers some to be hurt to try their
patience. So he suffered Job not only to lose all his goods, and to be spoiled
of all his estate, but to be tormented in his body also. And this God suffered
to be done, partly to try the constancy of the man, and that he might stir up
other mortal men to endure evils, Why Job was tormented by the Devil.
least when trouble comes upon them they should revolt from God: and partly to
declare his power whereby he comforts and stays those that trust in him, and
raises such as are quite down, restoring them to their former dignities. But
the reason is different in those vulgar operations, of such as are possessed by
the Devil, or are tortured by him in any part of their bodies. For a great part
of those people are stupid, and know not God, upon whom, as fit instruments,
and ready for him, he exercises his tyranny. ^he Devil sets upon stupid people.
So Satan assaults idle people, Idolaters, Superstitious, in whose minds he
rather lodges, than in those that know God, and are supported by trust in him;
for he is rather afraid of these, and is fearful to plant any engines against
them, because he knows that all his endeavors and attempts against such who
stand upon their guards, and trust in God, are too weak, and shall be frustrate
and come to nothing. A simile from a City not well-fenced.
For, as Forts and Towns that have no walls, ditches or Trenches to defend
them, nor guards of Soldiers to keep them, are easily surprised: so dull and
sluggish minds that have no saving nor heavenly doctrine to support them, and
are strengthened by no trust in God, are more exposed to the wiles of the
devil, The Devil provokes a man to all mischief.
and soonest yield to him. But since Satan's chiefest end is to abolish the
glory of God, and to draw men from Salvation, and to solicit them to revolt,
he does not cease to assault him, both within and without, and sometimes he
troubles the body, Sometimes the Soul, and sometimes both, to work their
destruction. Judas Iscariot, besides Cain, and King Saul, affords us an
example, Genesis 4. 1 Kings 31.
who when the Devil had driven his mind to desperation and distrust, he caused
him to hang himself, being weary of his life, Math. 27.
and he made his body reproachful by being hanged. And though Satan the
greatest enemy of mankind has a thousand ways and Arts to mischief; The Devil
is driven off by trust in God.
yet by one effectual means that is ready at hand, is he chiefly driven away
and conquered, namely by, solid faith, and certain confidence in God the Father
by Christ. Met even vaest gheloove, Saint Peter instructs us against the Devil.
end even goedt betrowen op Godt. Also the Apostle Peter shows that by this
means we ought to fight against the snares of that Tyrant, against his frauds,
impostures, deceits, subtilties, rage, cruelty, namely, by sobriety and
vigilance, guarded and defended by Faith. 2 Pet. 5.
For so he warns such as are secure. Be sober and watchful, because your
adversary the Devil goes about like to a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist constantly in the faith. 1 John 5.
For this (says Saint John) is the victory which conquers the world, even your
faith. For the trust whereby we rely on Christ, and wholly commit our selves to
such a Protector, By confidence in Christ we must drive away the devils.
gets us the Victory against the Devils, and the Princes of this world, so that
we can win and carry from him, being cast under us, rich spoils. When therefore
we would do any thing against this adversary, and would resist his charms and
witchcrafts (the Dutch call that Toverye) or would cast ill spirits out of men's
mind: it must be done by confidence in Jesus Christ, contemning all old wives
superstition, and heathenish vanity, and other Magical execrations. For God by
his Son who is the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1. All things are attributed
unto Christ.
and express Image of his person, does do all things in all men, ruling all
things by the word of his power. He has merited this prerogative by his
singular obedience, humility and meekness toward the Father. For when he was
in the form of God, that is, Philip. 2. Christ is equal with God.
like and equal unto him, he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but he
humbled himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, being made obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross, so ignominious and execrable,
wherefore God has highly exalted him, and has given him a name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in
heaven, things on earth, and things under the earth, and all tongues should
acknowledge and confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the
Father, upon whom redounds all the glory of the Son, The amplitude of the name
of Jesus. High matters are done by the name of Christ.
and so of the Father to the Son. If therefore any man purposes to go about
any business, to ease minds afflicted, or dispossess devils out of men's
bodies, let him attempt to do it by calling on God the Father in confidence of
the name of Christ: For so shall he obtain all his desires, and shall not fail
of what he seeks for. By the force and power of this Majestical name (so a man
do not doubt and distrust Gods promises) diseases abate, affections and
perturbations of the mind are allayed, tempests and Seas are calmed, the
devils, as Christ promised, Mark 16. By trust in Christ all kind of diseases
are driven away.
when he was to ascend into heaven, fly away, poisons grow dull, serpents are
charmed and grow harmless, the clouds of the mind are dispelled, fear and
terror, and horror of death are discussed, all ill thoughts are dissipated
and vanish away, the mind obtains a quiet and peaceable conscience, so that
nothing can come which may make us afraid, because God the Father through
Christ Jesus supports us by his spirit; Wherefore we must raise up our minds
unto the living God by the Conduct of his Son, and whatsoever thou determinest
to go about, remember to do it in the virtue of that wonderful name Jesus. For
to him is given all power in heaven and in earth, Math. 28. Mark 16. Acts 2.
and there is no other name given under heaven wherein we may look
forsalvation, which is so terrible to wicked men and to devils, but to those
that trust in him, is he power, and Wisdom, Salvation, Act. 4. 1 Cor. 1.
Revel. 2.
Life, and Resurrection. He, even Jesus Christ, is appointed by God to be the
judge of the quick and the dead, he is the faithful Witness and Prince of the
kings of the earth, who loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood.
To him, as the Apostle Peter says, in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 10.
all the Prophets give testimony, that every one who believes in him might
receive remission of sins through his name. John 17. In Christ is remission of
sins
This is life eternal, which Testimony Christ ascribes to the Father, that they
may know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou haste sent Jesus Christ,
unto whom is referred, and from whom is derived all the force of divinity and
all the Wisdom and Virtue of God may be ascribed unto him.

Since therefore this name is so renowned and Sacred, and of so great Majesty
and power: we must be exceeding careful that we use it not in vain, or upon
light respects, and irreverently, as those ridiculous exorcists did, Acts. 16.
who when they strove with certain rites, and words conceived for gain and
oftentation to drive forth the evil spirit in the name of Jesus, by virtue
whereof Saint Paul wrought so many miracles; by this abuse they fall into great
danger, and their admiration, or rather ridiculous practice was very hurtful
unto them. The exorcists wounded.
For he that was possessed with the Devil leaped forth upon them, and cruelly
tore them, so that they were forced to save themselves by flight. There were
also in our memory some Popish Priests, The exorcists of these times are
furnished with foolish and idle doctrine.
who having no faith in the name of Christ, nor any sanctity of life, attempted
to do the like; but they were so mocked and made ashamed by the evil spirit,
that they were forced to depart with quaking and leave the business undone.
Yet if any man would go about to do any such matter, and to cast forth Devils
out of men's bodies: let him imitate the example of Saint Peter and Saint John,
The miracle of St. Peter and Saint John. Act. 3.
who used no ambitious words, yet raised up the lame man thus, In the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Arise and walk; and he presently (his legs and ankle
bones receiving strength) leapt up and stood on his feet, and walked, and
entered into the Temple with them, leaping, and walking, and praising God.

Since therefore Jesus Christ the only Son of God is equal and coeternal with
the Father, All glory is given to Christ. Colos. 1. Heb. 1.
in whom also are hidden all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge, ruling all
things by the word of his power: it is fit, that placing all our confidence on
God by Jesus Christ, by his virtue and defense we should resist Satan, sin and
hell, and all other enemies of mankind. For great and excellent is the strength
and force which God has set forth in Christ, Ephesians. 1.
as Saint Paul says, when he raised him from the dead, and made him to sit at
his right hand in heavenly places, above all power, principality, and dominion,
and above all that is named not only in this world but in that also which is
to come. And he has put all things under his feet, and he has made him the
head over all, Christ is head of the Church. Christ does all things in all men.
that is the Church which is his body, the fullness of him, who fills all
things in all men; that is, Christ is he by whom God fills and accomplisheth
and perfecteth all things in all men, especially in those who trust in him, and
as the Apostle Paul says, are sealed by the holy spirit of promise, which is
the earnest and pledge of our inheritance, for the redemption of the possession
that is acquired and purchased for us to the praise of his glory. Wherefore
Saint Paul who was accustomed to innumerable combats, and was forced to endure
many assaults, persuades all men, that whenever any dangers are at hand, or
death is threatened, or Satan makes war against our mind, they must resist and
stand out against all these with an undaunted and resolute courage. Christ
supporteth us in our afflictions. ^^ Ephesians. 6.
For so he animates and upholds the Ephesians: Finally my brethren, farewell,
stand fast in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor
of God, that you may stand against the wiles of the Devil; For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, that is, frail and dying men, though sometimes they
are troublesome enough, but against Principalities and powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world against spiritual wickednesses in high
places. In which fulness of words and plentifullnesse of sentences, A simile
from the industry of Soldiers.
and also by an elegant metaphor taken from the conflict and assault of an
enemy, he shows that the Devils and their servants do work and frame their
stratagems, and subtle practices with wonderful fraud against all those that
are Christ's, and have given up their names unto him.

The weapons of Christian warfar.
Wherefore since our enemies are so formidable, and so well acquainted with
spiritual wickedness, he shows by the way what weapons we must use to resist
them with. Take, says he, the whole armor of God (by an example taken from
those who are well armed to go to battle, and stand in readiness) that you may
be able to resist your adversary the devil, and when you have done all, Ephesians.
6.
and ended the business, to stand like to those who are not put to flight, and
compelled to turn their backs. Stand therefore having your loins girt about
with the girdle of truth, and having on the Breast Plate of righteousness, and
your feet shod that you may be ready provided to the preparation of the Gospel
of peace: And above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith you shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the Wicked, and take the helmet of
Salvation, and the sword of the spirit which is the word of God: to which he
adds as a supply of auxiliary forces, Prayer is arms against the Devil.
prayers and supplications in the spirit, which prevail so far as to gain us
the victory, that God in so doubtful a conflict, as it were a dubious event in
war, may (as Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.
who treats upon the same argument) restore, strengthen, confirm, and support
his afflicted ones, who are near inclining unto ruin. And since of old the
authority of Pythagoras was of such esteem amongst his Scholars, and his
doctrine so much reverenced, An argument from Christ's authority.
that it was held for an Oracle, and spoken as it were by Apollo, that they
would presently to persuade belief (as if it were wickedness to deny it)
object, (...), He said it; it is but just, and the reason of our salvation
requires it, that we should give to Christ the same honor and reverence, and
in asserting his doctrine, We must object Christ has said it.
and establishing the profession of faith, say to those that are deaf to his
words, Believe it to be true, for Christ our Savior has spoken it.

For his doctrine is not man's doctrine, not weak, not cold, Christ's doctrine
exceeds all Wisdom. Colos. 2. Colos. 1.
but it is lively, quick, saving, effectual, divine, and that brings felicity
unto man, which it is fit we should ask for from Christ only, who is the
fountain of all Wisdom and goodness, and in whom dwells the fulness of
the Godhead bodily, in whom we are made perfect. By him, as Saint Paul says,
God the Father has plucked us forth from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, God has given out all things
in Christ,
by whom we have redemption in his blood, and remission of our sins, who is the
Image of the invisible God, and the first born of every creature; for by him
all things were created, which are in heaven and in earth, whether they be
visible, or invisible, thrones, dominions, principalities, powers. All things
were made for him, and by him, and he is before all, and by him all things
subsist. And he is the head of the body which is the Church, the beginning and
first born from the dead, that he should be the chief in all things, holding
the Principality. Because it pleased the Father that in him should all
fulness dwell, and to reconcile all things to himself by him, and to make
peace by the blood of his Cross.

Since therefore God the Father has so largely and abundantly powered forth all
things upon Christ: let us strive and hasten to come to this most plentiful
and overflowing fountain, and with full assurance let us be bold to ask and
hope for all things from him, The force of Faith.
and try to accomplish what we desire. If we will put the devils to flight,
cure diseases, escape dangers, kill venomous beasts, make all poisons to be
harmless, remove Mountains from their places: you must know that all these
things are to be done by the virtue and power of Jesus Christ, and by firm
confidence in him. For Christ promises to him that believes, that all things
should be plain, open, and easy; which he testified to his Disciples in his
last Sermon before he ascended into Heaven, Mark 16.
Mark 16.
when he says, Go ye into all the World and Preach the Gospel to every
Creature, He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be condemned. Now these signs shall follow those that
believe: In my name shall they cast out Devils; They shall speak with new
Tongues, They shall kill Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
not hurt them, They shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall
recover; that is, they shall be well so soon as they are touched.

All these things shall be ever ready wheresoever the progress and profit of
the Gospel shall require a miracle. But in the Souls these miracles are
allwaies wrought by the Ministers of the Gospel, Miracles wrought in the Souls.
when they drive filthy vices out of men's minds, when by the effectual force of
the spirit and wholesome doctrine they cure the diseases of men's Souls, when
they free the heart from coveteousnesse, hatred, wrath, lust, calumny,
backbiting, and other venomous affections, and adorn it with divine gifts.

CHAP. LVIII.
Whether herbs and precious stones have any force to drive away Devils, and
to put to flight things hurtful.
THough plants have principally that use and those forces given them by the
Author of nature, Plants profitable for many things.
that they serve for nutriment and Physic for men's bodies: yet in ancient
writings some plants are honored, for that they resist witchcraft, and drive
away all charms and fascinations whatsoever. These are called Amulets and
remedies against witchcrafts, because they drive away from man all hurtful
things. Jewels have a secret virtue.
This virtue is ascribed to Jewels and precious stones also, which they have
not from their first qualities, that is, their temperament of heat, cold,
moisture, dryness; but by a specifique virtue, and hidden quality and secret
property: the cause whereof cannot at all be explained.

So the Loadstone draws iron to it, Jet, and Amber draw chaff and straws, the
Saphir which is of a blew heavenly color defends chastity. The Jacinth and
Chrysolite worn upon the ring-finger, resist the Plague. The Emrauld and
Prasius being green stones, refreshes the Heart. Erranos, that is a blew
colored stone, commonly called a Turcois, preserves a man from falling down,
and from ruin; or, if any such thing happen, it keeps the body from hurt.
Coral bound to the neck takes off turbulent dreams, and allays the nightly
fears of Children. The Carbuncle and stone called Sardius, commonly called the
Corncel, having this name from the red berry of the Tree called the
Cornel-Tree, makes a man's heart merry, and his countenance lively, diffusing
the blood into the body. So other Jewels have other virtues, and drive away
Hobgoblins, Witches, Night-mares, and other evil spirits, if we will believe
the Monuments of the Ancients. So amongst herbs there are some that resist
diseases, Strange diseases driven away by the help of plants.
which have much assinity with the vexations and tortures of the Devils. As
Melancholy, Frezy, Madness, Epilepsie, and most cruel diseases that befall
maids and widows from the affection of the Matrix, or when their courses are
long before they come, or they stay long unmarried. For by these fumes and
black thick vapors their mind is so affected that they seem to be tormented by
some hurtful spirit, and they are persuaded that the Devil possesses their
minds, and drives them to conceive many absurd imaginations. Against this evil,
first opening a vein in the ankle, it is good to apply such wholesome plants
that can free them from these accidents, as are Mugwort, Savory, wild Marjoram,
wild Thyme, Pennitoyal, Origanum, Clary. But amongst herbs which relieve
afflicted minds, and keep them free from venomous vapors, that offend the
brain, or from the Devil, or an imagination that some have of him; are Rue,
Squils, (of the juice whereof there is made both an Oxymel, and Vinegar)
Masterwort, Angelica, (which is a kind of Ferula or Laserpitium) Alysson or
Rubia Minor (which cures the Madness of Dogs, and such as are bit by them,
which disease is not much different from theirs who rage and are tormented by
the Devil) Rosemary purges houses, and a branch of this hung at the entrance
of howses drives away devils and contagions of the Plague, as also Ricinus,
commonly called Palma Christi, because the leaves are like a hand opened wide.
So Coral, Piony, Misseltoe, Contrary to the Epilepsy.
drive away the falling sickness, either hung about the neck, or drank with
Wine. Some of these, if any man think they may be given to drive away devils;
let heathenish superstition, and vanity be laid aside, let there be no foolish
prayers, and strange words used, whereby such as profess Magical Arts are use
to effect their Incantations; if there be any force in plants, as we find by
experience there is, Plants have their effects from God.
you must remember they had it from God. For all Medicaments and herbs that
are applied to men's bodies, become effectual, not from themselves, but by the
blessing of God, and so they procure some safe operation.

Wherefore if thou determine to do any thing by the help of herbs, trust not
so much to herbs as unto God. For so in curing of diseases you shall come to a
happy end with good success, otherwise all your endeavors are vain; and the
Artist fails of the event, when there is no thought of God from whom all things
have their being and effects, and we do not rely upon him.

Hence it was that Asa king of Judah, Why King Asa was not cured. 3 Kings 15.2
Chron. 16.
when he was afflicted with most sharp pains in his feet, and asked no Counsel
of God, but only trusted to the Physicians, found no help by all their
fomentations, but died, as the History says, of the Gowt in his Joints: God
does not forbid to use the Physicians assistance, but only that we should not
rely on them too much, and not to regard him who makes men whole, and whose
gift it is that all things become effectual. Psalm 3.
Yet they do superstitiously, and they attempt a thing not far from Idolatry,
who apply herbs that are consecrated with some fained prayers, to cure
witchorafts, or go about to conjure away discases by them. So they prepare Fern
gathered in the Summer Solstice, pulled up in a tempestuous night, Rue,
Trisoly, Vervain against Magical impostures, and thus they gull the rude and
ignorant people and dazel their eyes, that they may cheat them of some moneys,
and wipe their noses of what they have. Yet those vain Artists never grow rich.

Herbs must not be used for Magical enchantments.
Studious Reader I thought fit to insert these things to this argument, that so
every man may abstain from Magical enchantments, and observe from whom we ought
to ask aid against diseases too, and how (despising heathenish superstition) we
may use ready and obvious remedies, which God has given us abundantly of his
munificence.

CHAP. LIX.
Of the Majesty and Power of the Supreme Deity, and how various appellations
the one Essence of God distinguished into three Persons, has: by the
contemplation whereof the mind of man receives comfort and tranquillity, and
conceives the highest confidence in God.
BEcause that excellent and Almighty Power, God, and that eternal Mind is free
from all mortal concretion, The nature of God is Inserutable.
and is immense filling all places, governing all things, and ruling them by
his power: for these reasons that one God is distinguished by many names, by
reason of the virtues and excellency of his works, John ^.
and he is illustrated by many famous titles, both amongst the Hebrews and
other Nations that had any knowledge of a God. So in the holy Scripture he is
called, Jehovah, El, Elohim, Adonai, God has many names.
Emanuel, whereof every one siguifies a peculiar power and virtue, and ascribes
great force unto God, which he exercises upon inferior creatures. Whence when
he propounds the precepts of the law to be carefully observed by the Jews, that
the more authority and adoration might be given to them. I am, says he, Exodus
20. Deuteronomy. 19. Johovah is a singular name of God.
Jehovah, thy God that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage. Thou shall have no other Gods but me. By so most sacred and wonderful
Name, he challenges to himself the Empire and dominion over all things. For
since that he is the Fountain and original of all the world, and is only
independent, he gives force to all things that have their dependence upon him.
God has a name given him from the effect.
Wherefore it is fitting that all mortal men should obey his Empire and
commands, and be subject to his Laws, and are to seek for no help from any
other but from him, or turn to any creature from him, who alone subsists from
eternity. Whom the Hebrews call Jehovah, the Greeks (...), the Latins
Existentem, the Lower Dutch Even eeuwich goddelick wesen, therefore the
appellation of the divine Essence is denominated from many things. From his
first force and power of existing, from his eternity, magnificence, majesty,
rule, Empire, to which all are subject, and whereby he governs all things
created, and rules them by his supreme providence. Also God has a name given
him from his placable goodness, mercy, clemency, Hoseah 3. Joel 2. Nahum 2.
which he uses toward men who when they are afflicted and past hopes seek for
his help. For the Hebrew word El, signifies Gods mercy joined with his Justice,
whereby he supports and defends the godly, and punishes the wicked, and by
putting them in fear, recalls them from their wickedness. From light, whereby
he dispells darkness and mists of errors from our minds, Nahum 2. Hosea 12.
John 1.
and illustrates dark understandings with the light and knowledge of himself
and his truth. So Christ said, I am the light of the world, he that follows me
walks not in darkness. From fire whereby he inflames the Godly and makes them
burn with the love of his divine nature, and instructs their mind with saving
and lively doctrine. But he consumes the adversaries and such as have no
reverence nor fear toward God, and he brings them to nothing, as the fire does
stubble, and dry fuel. Wherefore Moses and Paul persuade men that God is to be
worshipped religiously, Deuteronomy. 4. Heb. 13. Mich. 6. Hosea 2. The Dutch call him
Godt from hu goodness.
that he may accept our service. For, says he, our God is a consuming fire;
wherefore let every man carry himself humbly toward God. Also God has his name
from his goodness and munificence, that he uses toward his, which he will not
suffer to be oppressed with the want of any thing, or to faint for necessity;
but he does bountifully provide them with all things, and gives them abundantly
all things necessary for their use, both external goods with tranquillity and
peace of mind. From his piety and Fatherly affection, with which he embraces
his, and provides for their safety and welfare, is he called a Father. So says
God in Jeremiah, Jerem. 3. Malachi 1. Jerem. 1. Esaias 63.
thou shall call me father, and shall not leave off to follow me.

Again, I am become a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first born, and I
will lead them by the Rivers of waters into the right way, and they shall not
stumble, that is, they shall tread in my steps, they shall accompany me, and
they shall rest in my pleasure, and I will keep them safe in all their ways,
that no evil may happen unto them, and no injury misfortune or calamity may
befall them. But Esaias mentions specious and glorious titles, Esaias 9.
which God the Father attributes to Christ, whereby every man may know what our
Savior Christ has done for us, by his Birth, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven. For so the Prophet explains Christ's magnificency,
splendor, glory, honor, power, greatness, none of which but redounds to our
benefit and commodity. What signifies Emanuel. Jerem. 5.
A Son is born to us, and to us a Son is given, and the government shall he put
upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

Innumerable and infinite are the names that may be given to this immense
Majesty, and which God attributes also to himself. So he calls himself a
Physician because he heals Soul and body, Hosea 7. Esaias 5. Math. 9. Esaias 40.
John 10. Psalm. 78. 1 Pet. 2. John 15.
and cutes all vices in man be they outward or inward. A Shep-heard, because
with the greatest care and vigilance he sees to his flock, and gathers together
his scattered sheep, and he feeds and refreshes them with the wholesome food
of his Word. So Christ calls himself a fruitful Vine, and his Father a
husbandman, and us branches engrafted into this Vine, which he cleanses and
lops off all unfruitful boughs, that is, all superfluous desires, that they
bring forth more fruit; but those that he finds to be barren, A simile from a
Vine.
bearing no yearly fruit (by which metaphor he points at those who bring forth
no fruits of faith) he condemns to the fire as unprofitable branches, that are
dry and without any sap in them. Saint Paul also uses the like metaphor, taken
from care and industry used in husbandry and architecture. 1 Cor. 3.
For the jars and contests being extinguished and ended whereby the Corinthians
disagreed amongst themselves, A simile from architecture.
and were puffed up by reason of their teachers, one against another: as we see
it falls out even in our days, he admonishes them all, that if they had
learned any saving knowledge, they should not attribute that to their ministers
but unto God who is the Author of every good gift. We, The Apostles were Gods
Ministers.
says he, are fellow-helpers, and as it were hired laborers; we do Gods
business, and we approve our industry unto him, and we labor for him. You are
Gods husbandry, and as it were the ground, which we make the more fruitful, by
sowing it with wholesome doctrine. You are the building and structure that
rises to Gods glory.

God is an absolute example of virtue.
Moreover what concerns the Majesty and greatness of God, nothing can be
thought on to be so sublime, Magnificent, illustrious, excellent to be desired,
and singular, that may not justly be refered to the divine essence, and be
accommodated thereunto. Gods Wisdom. Ps. 31.32.109.146. Ephesians. 2.
His Wisdom, whereby he governs all things, whereby he defends this world, and
preserves it by his inscrutable counsel and providence, cannot be comprehended,
is inexplicable, infinite, so that the order and series of so great matters
must needs draw all men to admire the Artificer, and to love Him. His
fortitude, Gods fortitude power. Ps. 27.62. Esaias 25. Proverbs 8. Luke 2.
strength and power whereby he casts down his enemies, and supports those which
are godly is inexpugnable, and invincible. For there is nothing but must yield
to his omnipotence, and no Towers, Bulwarks or Forts, be they never so strong,
that can resist his force. His Judgments and Justice, Gods Justice. Ps.
78.47.84.
whereby he distributes to every one what belongs to him, and rewards men
according to their works, and as they have deserved, are right, holy, sincere,
lawful, and most equal; so that no man, whose judgment is not depraved, can
justly speak against them. His Mercy, Ps. 16.22.149.84. Gods mercy is a refuge
for sinners.
Clemency, Placablenesse, which every Prophet has at large, and magnificently
set forth, is immense, and over all his works. For all those that fear his
Justice, fly unto his mercy as a place of refuge and safeguard.

This removes distrust, and desperation from fearful minds. Psalm. 32.56.
Colos. 1.
With this the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, supports those that slip and fall;
and by putting into them hope and confidence to attain Salvation, he drives
them to the throne of Grace (which mercy the Dutch call it Remis end quiit
schelding van misdaet) that they may obtain it. So that nothing can be imputed
unto them, Heb. 4.
or make them guilty of death. When Paul had made trial of this, he became an
Apostle from a persecutor. So he supports the doubtful and wavering minds of
men, and provokes them to seek for Gods mercy by his own notable example:
Whereas, 1 Timothy 1. Paul magnifies Gods mercy. Joh. 16.
says he, I was first a persecutour, blasphemous, and injurious, I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantly through unbelief, that is, wanting faith,
and being ignorant of Gods counsel, for he thought when he persecuted the
Christians that he did God good service.

Saint Paul provokes all men to submit to Gods mercy.
Now that every man may take care of his Salvation, and all may know that sins
are purged by Christ's blood, for so many as believe in him, Paul pronounces
with an asseveration and firm assertion, that this is a faithful saying and
worthy of all men to be accepted that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, whereof I am chief. But I therefore obtained mercy, that Jesus Christ
might first show in me all long suffering, for a pattern to them who should
hereafter believe in him to life everlasting, that is in hope and expectation
of his heavenly kingdom. Which benefit since it must be only referred unto
our heavenly Father, and it is not meet to deprive him of his due praise and
glory, he concludes thus: To the King Immortal, Invisible, to the only wise
God, be ascribed all Glory and Honor both now and forever. Amen. Peter also by
reason of the Mystery of Redemption, 2 Pet. 1. Saint Peter infinitely extols
Gods mercy. Tit. 3.
gives the like praise unto God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who
according to his abundant mercy has regenerated us unto a lively hope, by the
rising of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an Inheritance Immortal, Undefiled,
and Uncorruptible, laid up for us in the heavens, that is, for the love of us.
For after that the gentleness and love of God our Savior appeared unto us,
not by works of righteousness that we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being
justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. This is a faithful saying, and every man ought to fix it in his
mind. Since therefore the love and inclination of God is so great unto mankind,
so great is his favor and mercy, that besides the use and commodity of all
things, he has also given his only beloved Son to Redeem us, that by the
death and Resurrection of Christ we might obtain favor and Reconciliation; We
must approve our life to God. Faith is adorned by works.
It is but just, and all equity and gratitude for so great a benefit requires
it of us, that every man should place his hope and confidence in God, and extol
him with the highest praises, and strive to approve his life unto him; and to
please him by faith, not that which is vain and conceited, but which is
compassed about, and guarded by works of charity, denying all ungodliness and
carnal lusts, to consecrate himself unto God, Tit. 2.
and to live soberly, justly and godly in this present world looking for that
blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of our great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquities, and to
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. For by this way
of ordering our lives, Romans 5.
by the assistance of the Spirit our Comforter, peace and security shall be
maintained in our minds, and all trembling and fear of death being cast away,
we shall find an entrance into immortality, and those blessed mansions, Christ
being our leader. For death is not the destruction of our bodies but the
renewing of them, not the annihilation of Nature, Death is the renewing of life.
but the passage to a better life, and the gate and first entrance into the
heavenly City, and the way to eternity. And of the certainty hereof no man
ought to doubt, or to distrust Gods promises, since the truth it self that
cannot lie, will faithfully perform what he has promised. For God is truth;
but every man is a liar, God is faithful in his promises. Ps. 62.115. Romans 3.
that is, God deceives no man, nor mocks him, or frustrates him of his hope and
expectation; he is none of those vain boasters or idle promise-makers, as men
are, who break their Covenants, and rend asunder all bargains and agreements,
and that find out some subtle ways to elude and to free themselves from what
they seriously promised: but he is stable, firm, constant, and will with the
greatest assurance and fidelity make good all his promises, and what he said,
he will do, he will perform. But every man is a Liar, that is, false, trivial,
idle, light, slippery, inconstant, What is meant by man is a liar.
unfaithful, changeable, doubtful, wavering, diverse, fraudulent, vain,
captious, uncertain, and who will say one thing sitting, and another when he
stands up, so that no man can safely put any confidence in him. But these
crimes are far from the majesty of God, for no humane passions fall upon him.
Wherefore we must chiefly depend upon him in full assurance, all our wishes
hopes and desires must be transported unto him, whether dangers or calamities,
or death and our last conflict come upon us. In danger of life we must fly unto
God.
For all things grow more tolerable by reason of his favor and presence, and
be they never so bitter and sour, they are thereby made sweet. The fear of
death is shaken off by our trust in him, and all trembling and fear is driven
out of our minds. For the love of him we despise and regard not the delights
and flatterings of this World. By his help and assistance we endure all such
miseries and calamities that compass us in every moment. By a solid hope and
expectation of eternity, and being supported by him, we joyfully leave the
Prison of this world, and we are carried on to those blessed habitations,
Christ being our Conductour. But it will trouble us the less to forsake the
society of our bodies here, and to leave our station of this life, Christ's
death purges our sins
and our last conflict with death makes us less sorrowful and doubtful
(wherein almost distrust and desperation are ready to lay hold of us) because
we are certain that Christ by his merits has obtained redemption and favor
for us. Christ's Resurrection justifies.
For Jesus Christ who is the Mediator between God and man, has reconciled us
to his Father, and washed away all our sins by his own blood, and by the power
of his Resurrection has justified us. For Christ was delivered for our sins,
John 1. Romans 4.
as Saint Paul says, and was raised again for our Justification. So that by
Christ's Resurrection as by a pledge we are confirmed, and are confident that we
shall be saved, and be raised again by his power. For he, as the Apostle
testifies, shall transform our vile bodies and make them like unto his glorious
body, Philip. 3.
according to his mighty power whereby he subdues all things unto himself. For
although, according to Saint Paul his doctrine, 2 Cor. 4, 5.
this earthly house of ours, or this earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, like to a
ruinous building that is disjoynted, and all the frame and contignation of it
taken asunder; yet we have a house with God not made with hands which is
eternal in the heavens. For God who has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise
up us also by him, and shall make us partakers of the same glory, and this
certain assurance, effects thus much in us, that we are not so refractory and
unwilling to leave this World.

FINIS.

