Lemmata MEDITATIONUM OR, The Contents of a few Religious MEDITATIONS. Given as
Directive and Incentive to that invaluable DUTY.

By Philo-Jesus Philo-Carolus.

Psalm. 11.148. Mine eyes prevent the Night-watches, that I might meditate in
thy word.

Psalm. 139.18. When I awake, I am still with Thee.

DVBLIN; To be sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castlestreet. 1672.

IMPRIMATUR

Mich: De Laune Rmo in Christo Patri, ae Domino, Dno Michaeli, Archiepiscopo
Dubliniensi; nec non summo Hibernie Cancellario e sacris.

To my EXCELLENT MOTHER, Grace and joy in the Holy Ghost be multiplied.
My Dearest Mother,
THese Papers were long written for my own peculiar use, and laid abbout the
shelves of my study; in a dress, whose hue they yet retain: and indeed so
sensible I am, of the unfitness of such Youth as mine, to appear in Print, that
were I not under the Press my self, I would not suffer my Soliloquy's, ever to
come under it; and the rather, because intending them purely for my own service
in their draught, I expended my whole industry in getting affections, and
neglected that accuracy in the contexture of my Expressions, which otherwise I
had taken. Renewing the Copy, is a Task, that I (a poor Day-labourer) can by no
means set on; and since I comply with those, who think this worthy to be sent
abroad, a necessity is laid upon me to send it as it is. You know, I never
affected taudry fashions in my own Garb, nor indeed do I in my Books; and I
have a satisfaction to my self, in that those judicious Christians, who gat it
out of my hands, esteem it as clad (at the least) decently. A very aged and
learned Doctor, (an eminent Dignitary of this Church of Ireland,) whom I never
yet saw, save once, and that but on an occasion, which gave me no more than a
half-hours Discourse with him, Dr. W.S.
has in an affectionate Letter to me these very words: In these Papers I now
with many thanks send you, you have made choice of acceptable words, choice
arguments, and superexcellently expressed; no language ever better. You have
spoken your own thoughts by Gods words; so that no enemy, not the Devil
himself, can say, but that you have said as well as may be, though among the
English, Theology is cultivated in most of its parts, beyond what is found
among Foreigners; yet, I think, the Papists outgo us in Devotionary Books. We
are forced to English and alter some of theirs, to make them (...), Thomas de
Kempis, Bellarmine, Parsons, etc. But so far as you have gone, you have outgone
them: they have spoken holily, and very usefully; but what you utter is Bible
all, and your thoughts are apples of silver, are placed in pictures of gold.
Your last Book, ( i. e. a sheet of Christ's satisfaction I sent him, acquainted
me with that argument, better than I was before; but this has gone deeper into
my heart, I have taken this with me, when I went to God, and like Hezekiah's
Roll, I spread some of these Papers before me; and if like him, I did not weep
sore, I have the more reason to grieve, that I did not so grieve. Had I been
younger, and my eyes better, I would have Transcribed, if not all, yet some of
these so pious Meditations. But if my Head be not laid, before they come out in
Print, I shall with the first get one of the Books. The good God bless your
holy endeavors with suitable success, etc. My honored good Mother, this (with
like encouragements,) has emboldened me to present you thus publicly, what I
thought to have done in my own Handwriting It is true, the excellent Mr. Rob:
Bo^l's occasional reflections, were put into my hand, more than a year agon, by
a Lady happy in a near relation to that truly honorable, both Gentleman, and
Christian; and I had thoughts of presenting you the fruits of my plowing with
his heifer, but they being caught from me by a Friend, who liked them too well
or too ill to restore them, I had not till now, any Essay of a Subject and
language proper to send you. The illustrious Gentleman I last named, has very
praise-worthily set upon the reducing of both Philosophy and Divinity, from
aerie, opinionative, and talkative, to solid, experimental, and demonstrative.
As for Philosophy, (though I rejoice in his, and the Royal Societies labors
for it, (if I had brains, I have nor time nor affection to the extreme studies
thereof: but as for Divinity, I should have a thousand joys, if this, or any
endeavor of mine, should make for its reclaiming from controversial to
practical, in any one soul; for sure I am, the exercize of my heart, in pouring
out such Soliloquies to the Lord in my Closet, stand me in much more stead,
than a thousand Disputes about that Mint and Cummin, which slayes the general
regard of the weighty things of the Law, in Great Britain and Ireland. But to
so mean a Present, why preface I so many words? I will end with only
congratulating my self this, That whereas the glory of some Children is only
their Fathers, mine, is my Mother too; for as I glory in having a Father, who
is able better to serve the Faith and Joy of Christians; so I do in having a
Mother, who ere now has, and I am sure will again encourage by her kindest
acceptance, the weak endeavors of. My gracious Dearest Mother,

Your very affectionate Son, and obedient Servant, Philo-Jesus, Philo-Carolus.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER
LOng before the World was perplexed with unprofitable Subtilties in Philosophy,
and destructive Controversies in Divinity, Solomon complained of multiplicity
of Books; But surely, not of such as were designed to mend the World, and were
likely to answer the end of the Authors, for he wrote much himself of Beasts,
Fowls, creeping things, and Fishes, and of Trees, from the Cedar in Lebanon to
the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall; moreover beside these books of
natural Philosophy, his books which belong to the Canon are a considerable part
of the Hagiographa; If that which is written be upright, even words of truth,
and delightfully composed, or contrived for efficacy, like the words of the
wise, which are as Goads and nails fastened by the Nailers of Assemblies, no man
of Solomon's mind will complain. Books are faulty, it must be acknowledged; many
of them so faulty, either as unsound, or profane, or ridiculously senseless,
that they are more fit for Fuel, then the Library of any man: But were all
such condemned to the flame executed; it cannot be expected that any one of the
surviving books in all its parts should find Catholic accptance, nor indeed
that any one, except the mysteries of the Holy Ghost, should please all men of
unquestionable fidelity, and skill to peruse it; yet, Reader, Allow it to be
said of this book, (uot as peculiar to it) If it be impartially read, and
rightly understood, according to the intendment of the Author, it will commend
it self. The words and phrase where figurative and Tragical, require not a
profound judgment to discern the meaning, unto such as are well acquainted with
the Author, and able to judge of his excellent endowments, it is a sufficient
commendation of this book, that though it bear not his name he will own it; yet
because it will come to the hands of diverse strangers, especially in this City,
to them much may be said concerning it, and him. Samuel says of the virtuous
woman, Many have done well, but thou excellest them all. Reader, if thou art
apt to take offense, perhaps thou will now take off thine eye, and close the
Book, lest it follow in the next line. After the same manner may be spoken of
the Author of this Book. But discreet persons being better pleased with a just
Title to a good character, than to find it upon record; The Friends of the
Author, although they know his mind is enriched far beyond the ordinary rate
of men of his years, and that he made good improvement of his time, while he
was exercized in this work, which he offers to thy service, will forbear giving
him this Encomium; yet without offering any violence to his modesty, or the
credit of former Publishers of their soliloquies, it may be said, that among
all the Discourses of this kind, imparted to the world, a more pure Scriptural
style is not to be found. That spirit of Atheism and blasphemy, that haunts the
Wits of our times, displays it self most impudently, in quibling and drolling
upon the Bible, making a mock of all that is sober and Sacred; depreciating,
debasing, and (what in them lies,) debauching the very lip and language of the
Holy Spirit himself.

This Authors innocent abuse of Scripture, is so far from countenancing, that
it rather shames and condemns that licencious and abominable practice: Nor can
we admit of the most useful allusions, without that harmless, (nay helpful and
advantageous) (...) or abuse here practiced; Wherein the words, are indeed used
to another, but yet to an Holy end and purpose, besides that for which they
were at first instituted and intended; The author, (not playing with that
Edge-tool, but) endeavoring only, to cut with both sides of that two
edged-sword.

The Beautiful Captive, was to have her head shaved, and her nails, (not pared,
but) made to grow, and the shaving her head, was the readiest way, to make her
nails to grow, Deuteronomy. 21.12. All means were to be used, to make her ugly and
deformed, (It is a shame for a Woman, to be shorn or shaven, 1 Cor. 11.6.) So
to take off an Israelites affection from her; Let it be so still, with all
humane Wit and learning, that Divine truth alone, may be fair and lovely, but
when the former of these, is no Enemy, no Competitrix, no Rival, but an
Handmaid to the latter, then let both grow together, until the Harvest, yea let
both Run together, and be Glorified. It is hoped, that the Candid Reader, will
understand things up otherwise, then is intended by the pious Author; as when
he says of Meditation, that it has told him, all that ever he did, yea and
all that ever his God did also, undoubtedly his meaning is, that so far as he
knows aright either his own or his Gods doings, he is beholding for it, to
self reflection, and Meditation: what he has written with a Sober, and
unprejudiced mind, and of all the profit which thou shall receive, give the
glory to God, and thou will please the author, and also

Thine to serve in any Office of love, Thomas Harrison. Daniel Rolls.

READER,
BEfore thou turnest to the following pages, I could wish for thy regards to
these few particulars.

1. Though my youth, and sins, and sufferings therein, make my acquaintance
with Books much narrower than I could desire, yet on that acquaintance I have,
I dare humbly to give it thee as my opinion, that our modern writers have very
much departed from this way of Insinuating Piety, by religious meditations and
soliloquies, in which, the fathers and ancient Hero's of divinity were very
happy, and have been for some centuries very serviceable.

2. I should (for reasons seventy seven) think that this Age were to be dealt
with, in it; much more congruously, than in those other more insisted on; of
the regular of which, I cannot think of one, which might not receive full great
advantages from this; from this I say, which with the catechetical one, I pray
God revive among us. Let ancient records come out of their dust, and they shall
bear me witness, that there was never age from Christ to our own, which stood
in more need of reductives from an Aerie professional, I know not what, called
religion, unto devotional and Practical Piety, the power of Godliness! At this
the following essay drives, the good Lord succeed it.

3. Since the joint Justice and clemency of Magistrates, the preaching and
writing of Minister s, the unparalleled Judgments of the great God on us,
(these late Years,) have bin all too little to keep Cities, Towns, Villages, or
very families, from bandying into factions, and men's baiting each other with
the epithets of Praelatist, Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptist, Arminian, Antinomian, Legalist, and who can tell how many like; I
have thought it as vain to interest my self in the contentions of any, so very
proper to commend the Practicks of Piety to all, in such a way as this, which
some judicious believe will offend none. I cannot think, but that there is of
Israel, in each of those Parties: and my hearts desire and prayer to God for
them is, that they may be saved. As far as I know my heart, I suffer these
sheets to go abroad to serve the faith and joy of each of them: let them all
forgive me this wrong, I confess my self,

The worst Servant of Christ, P P.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to the Reader; Page 15 For Nailers, read Masters of Assemblies.
P. 16. for Tragical read Tropical, for Samuel read Lemuel in the Epistle to the
Reader.

1. A Soliloquy with Soliloquy it self.
OH Meditation! I see thee, and now I will leave my Joh. 4.28, 29.
water-pots, and go call all mankind to come and see the Duty that told me all
that ever I did; ay, and that my God ever did. Lu. 11.27.
Blessed is the womb of that Grace, that bears thee, and the paps that gave
thee suck. Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled with thee! Mat. 2.18.
The fair Rachel of piety, may cry out her eyes, for children, and holy seed,
and break her heart, because they are not, if she be not impregnated by theel
Psa. 113.9.
Thou make barren Graces to keep house, and to be the joyful mothers of
children. Thou suffer no Psalm. 105.44.
man, nor devil to do them harm, thou rebukest the Prince of darkness for their
sakes. They that will be 1 Ti. 6.9.
rich in thee, will not fall into many temptations! for by thee, one Grace will
chase a Deu. 32.30.
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight! Thy Job 13.11.
Excellency makes them afraid, and thy dread falls upon them! Thou Plal. 104.32.
look on earthy affections, and they tremble! thou touchest the hills of
corruption, and they smoke! In thy Name I have cast out devils! and over thee
the Mat. 16.18.
gates of hell cannot prevail! Thou art, as it were, an Emmanuel, God with us!
In thee grace and peace do live, move, and have their being! Thou rainest down
manna, and give Angels food to them whose soul Psa. 107.18.
abhors all manner of meat, and draws near to the gates of death! If thy
Psa. 11.3.
foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Thou deliverest in Job
5.19, 26.
six, yea seven troubles! in spiritual famine from death, and war from the
sword! Thou have made a Job 1.10.
hedge about piety, about her house, and all that she has, on every side! thou
blessest the work of her hands! Pro. 29.18.
Where there is none of thy vision, the people perish; but in thy light we see
light! Thou Mat. 7.5.
castest out the motes out of thy own eye, and see clearly to cast out the
beams of ours! Thou Luke 1.76, 79.
shall be called the prophet of the Highest; for thou go before the face of
the Lord, to prepare his way! thou give light to them who sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death! Job 28.13.
Man knows not thy price, neither is it found in the I and of the living. The
Job 29.13, 15, 16.
blessing of him that was ready to perish, has come on thee a thousand times 1
for thou art eyes to the blind, and legs to the lame! a Father to the poor; and
that which thou know not, thou searchest out Thou Job 35.11.
teach us more than the beasts of the earth, and make us wiser than the
fowls of heaven! I Psalm. 119.93.
will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened me! and sure
I am of those who follow thee. Psa. 73.5.
They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued as other men.
To what Isa. 1.11.
purpose is the multitude of our sacrifices without thee? without thee the Am.
5.18.
day of the Lord is darkness, and not light! I have said, That without thee it
Mal. 3.14.
is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance?
Faith comes not by To. 10.17.
hearing, without thee; yea, without thee, the Mat. 21.13.
House of prayer is a den of thieves! thieves that break through and steal,
duty and comfort! Hope, without thee To. 5.5.
makes ashamed; and Repentance, without thee, is to 2 Co 7.10.
be repented of! Without thee, sin does Heb. 12.1.
easily beset us! and methinks thou art the in-door Zec. 13.1.
fountain, opened for sin, and for uncleaness! without thee, the whole Isa. 1.5.
Head of piety is sick, and the whole heart is faint! Thou art the Apothecary
to the Mar. 9.12.
physician of souls! There is no Jer. 8.22.
Balm in the Gilead of the Gospel; and there is no physician there without thee!
Duties without thee, are physicians Job 13.4.
of no value! it is thou 2 Co 7.1.
perfectest holiness in the fear of God! It Is impossible to serve thee Mat. 24.
and mammon! Thy two Mar. 12.42.
mites, make such a farthing, which I had rather present the Lord with, than
with Mie. 6.7.
thousands of rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil! Luke 7.22, 23.
Blessed is he, whosoever is not offended in thee, who make the blind to see,
the lame to walk, the leper to be cleansed, the deaf to hear, the very dead to
be raised! Psalm. 22.1.
Oh my Soliloquy! my Soliloquy! why have thou for saken me? why art thou so far
from helping me? Can. 1.6.
Tell me, oh Meditation, thou whom my soul loves, why should I be, as one that
turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? Psa. 42.2.
As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks; so pants my soul after thee! My
soul thirsts for thee, in this desert land, De. 32.10.
and howling wilderness, to lead me about, and instruct me! Ex. 28.36.
It Is thou only that can grave like the ingraving of a signet, on the plate
of my heart, holiness to the Lord! Ge. 3.13.
For really, without thee, the serpents will beguile me, and I shall eat! Ge.
4.13.
and my sin will be greater than I can bear, as Cain said. At every fools
bidding, my own and all, Job 2.9.
I shall curse God, and dye, if thou stand not by me! What are my gifts,
graces, duties, etc. without thee? Job 4.21.
Does not their excellency which is in them, go away, and they dye without
wisdom? Job 5.14.
Don't they meet in darkness in the daytime? and grope in noonday, as in the
night? 'Twas ever well, when thou and I Psa. 55.14.
took sweet council together, and walked unto the House of the Lord in company.
Isa. 1.24.
Ah! I will ease me of my Adversaries, and be avenged of those enemies, which
keep thee and me apart! Isa. 1.22.
Let not thy silver be mixed with dross, nor thy wine with water, and thou shall
be preferred to my chiefest joy! Psalm. 137.1, 6.
While I sit down by the rivers of Babylon, and weep in the remembrance of
Zion, Thou, oh Soliloquy! Psa. 139.3.
thou shall compass my path, and my lying down: Thou shall be acquainted with
all my ways, Can. 1.13.
Thou shall be to me as a bundle of myrrh, and lie betwixt my breasts all the
night long! Can. 4.16.
Thou shall blow upon my garden, and make the spices to flow forth, that
Jehovah Jesus may come in, and eat his pleasant fruit. Psa. 119.127.
So will I love thy commands above gold, yea, above fine gold! Ge. 2.24.
I will leave father, and mother, and wife too, and cleave to thee. Amen and
Amen.

2. A Soliloquy with God, of Created things.
OH my God! Heb. 4.13.
There is no creature which is not manifest in thy sight! But alas! that there
is any such thing as a creature, or that there ever was such a work as
Creation, is hardly manifest to mine. 2 Co 5.17.
It cost thee a second creation of me, to make me believe the first! For that
the world was made by Christ, I never believed, it is I was made by him too: And
it may well be faid, Ephesians. 3.9.
Thou have created all things by Christ Jesus, since the very Faith, of all
things being created, is by him also; it being impossible, that man should
rightly know himself Gal. 6.15.
to be any creature, 'till he is a new one! They are not many thousands of
years past, since there was no being, but thy own; nor indeed is there any now,
whose name is, Jam, or is not rather a Nothing, than a Being, besides thy own!
but as if when thou created'st ours, thou had annihilated thy own, and thou
had ceased to be, scon after we began to be; how art thou as sar out of mind,
as out of sight, with me, for the most part? How rarely, and faintly, do I say,
Job 19.25.
I know that my Redeemer, or my Creator either lives! So difficult it is to
weak Faith to believe thee the Maker of heaven and earth, that I am put hard to
it, many times, to think thee the Maker of that little spot and clod of earth
that I carry about me. I am so bad at remembering thee, the worlds Creator, that
I have much ado to remember thee, my very own. But did Eccles. 12.1.
I not live, move, and have Act. 17.28.
my Being in thee, the fault would be less heinous, and monstrous. Thou art
nigher to me, than I am to my self; and I have as perpetually, and necessarily,
thy upholding, as my own subsisting: so that did I not forget my self, I could
not possibly forget thee: Nay, and did I not forget all things, 'twere
impossible but I must remember their Maker, being all bear thy superscription;
yea, and aloud say of thee, It is he that has made us, Psalm. 37 17.
and not we our selves. 1 Ti. 4.4.
Every creature of God, is good to teach me, were I but good to learn; its
being a creature, and God being its Creator! But, oh my God! I neither learn of
creatures, to honor their Creator; nor of the Creator, to scorn creatures! I
can very seldom see, either thee as thou art in thy self; or them as they are
in themselves. I converse much with both, and yet but little, because I
converse with thee without thy Attributes, and with them without theirs; not
viewing them as insufficient, or thee as alsufficient. Isa. 54.5.
If thou my Maker, (as the prophet speaks) art my husband, and jealousy be the
rage of a man himself; sure it concerns me, to look better to my ways, than to
go a whoring after the idols of my foolish imagination. I find to my woe, I
converse mostly with nothings, not with thee the Creator, or thy creatures; but
with the idols and creatures of my own corrupt fancy. For as there is no such
God. as I but too often conceive thee: so there are no such-creatures, as I often
conceive them to be. There is no God less than omnipotent; there are no
creatures more than nullipotent. I am making an idol, not worshipping thee,
when I contemplate of thee otherwise, than of an Albeing God! and I am setting
my Pro. 23.5.
eyes on that which is not, when I am meditating of them, as any other, than as
very Nothings, as to subsistence, without thy providence, as they were to
existence, without thy creation. There were variableness with thee indeed, and
more than shadow of turning, if thou were not as Albeing a God now, as before
thou made all beings: and sure if I, and all thy other creatures, were more
than Nothings; and if thou were not-the very Being of our beings, thou could
not so be. Teach me then, oh my God! teach me to have all creatures manifest in
my sight, and thee the Creator also! Show me manifestly, That thou Art as
really, and to Faith as apparently, the Albeing God and Good, as thou wast
before the world began; and that all thy creatures Beings, consist in being
Nothing without thee now, as before they ever were manifest to me. Oh my God!
how thou have made Nothings, but very Nothings! not one Being, that has any
Beings more, without that which it derives from thy providence, than it had
without that, which it drew from thy creation. Not being, without thee, is as
essential to a creature, as being by thee. For could it be any thing without
thee, its name would be I am, Isa. 40.6.
and it must be a God. And woe is me, if I deny the Unity of the Godhead, as often
as I think of created Beings, without the thought of their not Being, it being
not possible that thou should be, I Am: if there be any beside thee, or if
there be any thing beside thee, which is not a Nothing without thee! Every
creature declares by its experience, that God is its 1 Co. 15.28.
All in All; and God works all its works, in it, and for it. Lord make my soul
(the worst of thy creatures) to make thee its All in All; the Being of its
being, and of all other beings, neither conceiving of thee as less than All
things, or of the world, more than a Nothing. I may lose it, and lose nothing;
but were it so, that I could save my soul, and lose thee, I should lose my All.
I may gain a world, and gain just nothing; but could I gain thee with the very
loss of my soul, I should gain all things! For, sure I am, gain is of Good
only, etc. Mat. 19.7.
There is none Good but God; thy Self, oh my God, who do truly say to thy
creatures all, without me ye can do nothing.

3. A Soliloquy with the Soul, of the same Argument.
I Will now go to my soul, I will consider her ways, and be wise. Come now,
and let us reason together, oh my soul! If I should ask that, which was once
God's Question, From whence connest thou? I doubt you must return, that which
was once the devil's Answer; Job 2.2.
From going to and fro in the earth. The earth, which he has Job 38.6.
hanged on nothing, and charged you to lay no stress upon, while you keep in
this my Co. 4.7.
earthen Vessel, your life, indeed, must be on earth; but Phil. 3.20.
your conversation in heaven. I would that you so use the world, as not abusing
it, or your self! You are both poor enough, and you know who bids you, wrong
not the poor, because the Lord is their Maker. If you tell me, That God
pronounced all that he made Ge. 1.31.
very good: I must tell you, So it was, and so it is, for Gods ends with it.
But whether it be not as very ill for your ends with it, is a doubt; He
intended all for his own glory: for which it is good and fit, if you intend it
for yours, you will find it much otherwise; because though i Co. 1.27.
God has chose, even the foolish things of the world, to manifest his wisdom
with: you must choose the wise ones of a better world; to manifest yours. God
that so loved the world, as you know, bids you not to love it, as you are not
ignorant of; for the earth he has given into the hands of the sons of men, but
it is himself he gives to the Son of God: And because he resolved to satisfy
them, that they should, and could have no more, he calls himself their Ps 16.5.
La. 3.24.
portion and godliness, with content in it self, their great gain; pearl of
price, and one thing necessary. Oh my soul! The mighty Lord who humbles himself
to behold the things that are done in earth, calls thee to look up to him in
heaven, making the earth thy footstool, as well as his own. Knowing the
emptiness of the earth, and of the fullness thereof; knowing the creature not
only subject to vanity, but altogether lighter; knowing all made things to be
but nothing, he charges thee to trust in none of their vanities. I hope for
salvation from none of their hills, but to say of all creatures, as he of all
men; Psa. 14.3.
There is none that does good, no not one. Ponder it then, oh my soul! though
thy self art a very nothing; and if it be worth my while to lose thee, to gain
the world, yet sure, it were a hard bargain to lose thy God for ten thousand
worlds: yea observe, whoever parts with God, parts with him for nothing, though
it be to save himself, and all he has. And do but think how heinously God must
needs take it, That of Nothings themselves, any thing should be thought too
much to part with, for him who is our All. What think thou, oh my soul! of
Popish doctrines of Merit? we our selves are but Nothings, without God; our
services are less, and are incapable of being greater than our selves. Our God
is our All, if we give him any thing that is good, we must give him his own
goodness; and it is a prodigious way of meriting, to give any one his own. Take
heed to your self of this leaven, and know, You have, and are nothing, but what
is Gods own. I adjure thee by the living God, That thou for ever seek him, as
no less than thy All; that thou tell him, That though every thing he made
answers his Ends, it is He only, that made every thing, can answer thine. That
thou say plainly, That unless he be all things, he is a poor God: All he has
beside himself, being very Nothing to thy wants and desires, and such as leaves
thee in straits, in the very Job 20.22.
fullness of its sufficiency. Thou know, oh my soul! that wherever in a Duty,
Prayer, etc. he gives in of himself, to a poor Nothing spirit, it is Job 3.17.
there the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest.

4. A Soliloquy with God, about Piety.
OH my God! even Job 4.8.
as I have seen, They that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same:
and 20.
They are destroyed from morning to evening, they perish for ever, none
regarding it, Were it of necessary choice, I vow I had rather have the very
devil my Guest, than To. 7.17.
the sin that dwells in me; and have Satan my Tyrant, than sin my King. Other
evils are drones, it is sin 1 Co. 15.56.
which is the sting of all. Make me any thing what thou please, besides Isa.
45.99
a striver with my Maker, the Deu 32.33.
wine of which contention, is the poison of dragons, and venom of asps. Oh my
God! I read that 2 Ti 4.3.
godliness is profitable unto all things; if so, it must be profitable to sin
it self; I mean, the finding, driving, and keeping it out, and profitable to it
self, in maintaining, feeding, and clothing it self well. 2. iT 6.6.
With content herein. I am told it is great gain, and I protest I believe it,
because as thou do Psa. 4.3.
set a part him that is godly, for thy self: so he that is godly, sets apart
thee for himself. Methinks it is a strange question, Ex. 15.11.
who is like unto thee -- Glorious in holiness? Lord, I would ask thee, Who has
any glory or holiness, but is just like thee? and that with a likeness of
participation and representation. Were I asked, to whom I would liken God, I
would answer (in both those ways) to every Saint on earth. For, Joh. 5.22.
as the Father judges no man; so neither do they, but commit all judgment to
God the Son: As Ge. 18.25.
the Judge of the whole earth does right, 1 Pe. 1.17.
so do they, and that Phil. 2.15.
without respect of persons, their own, or others! The same mind is in them,
that was in God our Savior; and I may boldly say of Saints wills-deliberate
To. 9.19.
who has resisted his will? To will, just as God wills, is To. 7.18.
present with them: Thou chusest them, and they choose thee; and they are a
choosing, as well as 1 Pe 2.9. Luke 10.42.
a chosen, Generation: Among their affections, there is not one (habitual) Non
conformist. The very love of God 1 Jo. 4.16.
dwells in them; their love and Gods has one object: and it is no other than
that God hates, which they hate! if God loves his enemy, they Mat. 5.14.
do so to: if he hates themselves, they will do so too: Their way is to follow
and imitate God, and nothing satisfies them, but his Ps. 17.15.
likeness: They never think they have done like themselves, save when they have
done like Christ Jesus. They make the very graven image, and likeness of him
that is above, in their conversation here below on the earth. Their very
eating, drinking, and sleeping bears the image and superscription of Christ on
it; and if any word or deed be not conformed to his likeness, seasoned with
justice, like salt, they disown and renounce it, and would not have it imputed
by God unto them, for the whole earth. I may then call Saints, i Co 11.7.
the image and glory of God, the express image and likeness of him! O my God,
my God! Let this likeness of thine be mine; and let not my heart or life be
disfigured by my corruptions and temptations, which Mat. 6.7.
use vain repetitions, as the heathen do, thinking that they shall be heard for
their much speaking, against thy likeness. Scatter my proud Lu. 1.51, 52.
lusts, pull down the mighty ones from their seats, exalt my likeness to thee,
which is of so low degree: Hear me, oh my God! what I say, e're I give sleep to
my eyes, or slumber to my eyelids. Job 6.8, 9.
Oh that might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing I long
for! Even that it would please God to destroy my unlikene ss to himself; and
that he would let loose his hand, and cut it off!

5. A Soliloquy with Piety it self.
Pro. 10.26.
AS vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes: so is a sluggish heart, to
them that send it toward thee. Oh piety! Pro. 13.7.
There is, that makes himself rich without thee, yet has nothing! There is,
that makes himself poor with thee, yet has great riches. Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee; for thou have not
forsaken them, that seek thee! They that seek thee early, will find thee; and
they that find thee, never lose their way. If God himself make me happy without
thee, he must make me happy without happiness. Mat 8.8.
I am not worthy indeed, that thou should come under my roof! because in my
house, there are many mansions of thy implacable enemies, because too too often
I have Mat 7.6.
given thy sacred things to dogs, and thy pearl to swine. I have killed the
counsels and rebukes that were thy prophets, and stoned the Ambassadors that
were sent unto me! I have sometimes betrayed thee with a kiss, and calling thee
Lord, done thee disservice! Sometimes, I have hid thy Talent in a Napkin, and
otherwhile sacrificed to thee, with the strange fire of blind zeal, fire
prepared by the devil and his angels! I have seen thee a stranger, and not took
thee in! Naked, and clothed thee not, so much as with the garment of praise!
Sick and in prison have thou been, and I not visited thee! Nay, I have cried
with the rabble, Lu. 23.21.
Crucify him, crucify him! I will Psalm. 38.18.
declare my iniquity, and I will be sorry for my sin. I will now count all
things but dung that I may win thee! Though thou slayest me, I will put my
trust in thee, and the loftiness of my looks to thee, shall never be humbled!
Open, oh piety! open thou my lips, and my mouth shall speak forth thy praise!
in thee I Will Act. 17.28.
live, move, and have my being! I Will lust after no other beauty, thy Pro. 5.19.
breasts shall satisfy me at all times, and I Will be ravished always with thy
love! I Will fight the devil, and wrestle with God for thee!

6. A Soliloquy with God about his Law.
OH my God, my God! Psa. 2.1. Job 21.1.
Why do the Heathen rage! and the people of the earth set themselves against
the Lord, and his Christ: Why say they to thee, Depart from us, for we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways? Why cant they abide Christ's Gospel Mal. 3.2.
coming, and endure that he should appear? Does Heb. 7.19.
thy Law make nothing perfect? yes it does. It makes the world Psa 139.2.
hate thee, with a perfect hatred, and count thee its enemy! Thy Law which
binds the Kings of their lusts, in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron;
Psa. 135 8.
which smites the first born of their Egypt, and dasheth their little ones
against the stones, makes them say to the whole Trinity, Mat 25.
Depart ye cursed, and call to the devil, Jud. 9.11.
as all the trees to the Bramble, Come thou and reign over us! Oh my God, To.
7.7.
I had not known my own sin, or other men's, but by the Law; for the sake of
which Gal. 3.29.
Schoolmaster, the whole world is out of love with thy School, Mat 5.19.
Had Christ made an end of the Law. I see none would have been offended in him;
but I see now, his first Sermon has made him thousands of rebels. But till the
Fifth chapter of Matthew be blotted out, there is no hope of their return: They
will still pray, That Mat 6.9, 10, 13.
their Father which is in hell, his name may be hallowed; That his kingdom? may
come, and his will be done, in earth as it is in hell; That his may be the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. But oh my God! were Job
6.25.
right words forcible, and would arguing reprove, there were some hope! For,
alas! alas have thou not made it Jam 1.29.
perfect liberty, as perfect law? And have not the To. 8 21.
sons of God a glorious liberty, whom God restrains from nothing, but Joh. 8.32.
slavery; and exacts nothing from, but to Mat. 5.4.
be like himself! Lord, Thou have commanded nothing that I know of, but the Ex.
20.
having no other God beside thee, and what hurt is in this, there is no other
to have! And if we make an idol, that is, a Nothing, what true pleasure is
there in serving such a Lie, any more than in making it? If it be Mal. 3.14.
vain to serve any God, sure it is so, to serve a vain one, as a Phi. 3.19.
Belly, and the other gods of this world! Oh my God! in taking humane nature on
me, I have took on me Phi. 2.7.
the form of a servant; and his servant I am, to whom To. 6.16.
I obey: could I find a better Master, I would not say as David, Psa. 116.10.
I am thy servant, I am thy servant! I would say of this thy Law, It Is a hard
saying, who can bear it? Nay, I would psalm. 2.3.
break this Bond in sunder, and cast this cord behind my back, if I could! But
seeing Isa. 44.6
thou art God, and there is none besides thee. If this Law be a Mat 11.30.
yoke, I Will say it, it is an easy one; and if any burden, light enough in
conscience, a burden that I would not be without for my head, and a yoke, I had
rather lose my neck, than lose it. If there be any 2 Co 4.17.
weight in it, 't is a weight of glory; and if at any time it seem Heb 12.11.
grievous, I am sure it does seem so only, but afterward brings forth the
peaceable fruit, which undeceives us. I am sure, as many as have known the good
of it, have took joyfully the Heb 10.34.
spoiling of all other goods for it. If it mar any mirth, how comes Psalm. 16.11.
fullness of joy into thy presence? If it check pleasures, how flourish they so
at thy right hand? Sure enough, this Law is in full force there: if it confine
a man, David took an ill course to walk Psalm. 119 45.
at liberty, when he chose to live by it, for that end: and they err, who call
thy service perfect freedom; if it makes valor flat, how come pro. 2 8.
the righteous to be bold as lions? and they that violate it, to flee, when
none pursue! Oh my God! I do confess, I am Jam. 1.18.
a double-minded man, and therefore unstable in my ways: I see that within me,
which tastes thy Law as Mat 27.34.
vinegar and gall; but I have also that in me, which says to thy Law, Thy Can
4.11.
lips, oh my spouse! drop as the honeycomb; honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon. I have
that, which says to thy Law, 1 Sa. 17.43.
Am I a dog, that thou come to me with staves! And I have that which rejoyns;
yes, it is a dog, for the love of Christ beat it out. I have that
indeliberateness, which upon the devils, Mat 3.9.
all these things I will give thee; will give the Law a repulse: and I have
that deliberacy, which if it might have Nu. 22.18.
a house full of gold and silver, will not go beyond the word of thy Law, to do
more or less. I have that which resents Mic. 4.
the best of thy Laws, as a briar; and the most upright, as a thorn hedge. And
I have that, which in the Mal. 3.7.
day or night, when it makes up its jewels, makes Job 28.18.
no mention of coral, or pearls, Ophirs gold, or the precious Sardonyx, but
calls thy Law its Isa. 58.15.
delight, the ornament of Grace, Pro. 3.22.
life to my soul, and grace to my neck: and this I can truly aver, Psa. 139.21,
23.
I hate the men, and things, that hate thy Law, I am grieved with those that
rise up against it! I hate them with perfect hatred, and I count them my
enemies. When thy righteous Law Psalm. 341.5.
smites me, it is a kindness; when it reproves me, it is an excellent oil. It
breaks not my head with thoughts, how to break its own; but my heart with
cares, how to get a plaster from Christ! For though I cannot Pro. 18.14.
bear an unbroken spirit, neither can I bear a wounded one! Some imagine, that
the voice of thy Law is nothing, but Cursed be every one! But me thinks I hear
all thy Laws, saying with one mouth, Ge. 1.26.
Come let us make man in our own image! and their design seems to me, to be
Tit. 2 14.
the redeeming us from all iniquity, purifying us as a peculiar people, zealous
of good works. Oh my God! none ever perished by the Law falling on them, but by
their own Mat 4.44.
falling first, on the Law; it is we break it, and our selves in it. If none are
its Joh. 15.14.
friends, but such as do whatsoever it commands, I must stand out! But if To.
13.10.
love unto, be the fulfilling of the Law, fure I am one, such a one as it is.
Though Luk 2.1.
Augustus like, it tax the whole world, and meet not with any that pays it, so
slender tribute of obedience, as my rebellious heart: Yet this, oh my God, Psa.
38.18.
I declare, I will declare my iniquity, and I will be sorry for my sin! For I
must needs say of thy Law, as Joh. 19.4, 6.
Pilate of thy Son, I see no sault in him! I will pray, That all its Heb. 10.13.
enemies within me, may be made its footstool, and that it may Jude 14.15.
come into me, with ten thousand of its arguments, to execute judgment upon
all, and convince all ungodly lusts of their hard speeches against it! and that
now he may Re. 2.27.
rule them with a rod of iron! For really, To. 3 19.
the way of peace they have not known, except by fighting against it. Oh my
God! let thy Law take away Joh. 15.2.
every branch that bears fruit, let it purge it, that it may bring forth more
fruit! It has of Mat 4.24.
old healed sick people, taken with diverse diseases and torments; those that
were possessed with devils, those which were lunatic, and had the palsy! And
sure its Nu. 11.23.
hand is not shortened, that it cannot save! It has of old, led souls into the
Can. 2.4, 5.
Banqueting house of the Gospel, staying them with its flagons, and comforting
them with its apples, when they have been sick of love to God, and hatred to
their sins! Other Isa 3.12.
Icaders cause poor souls to err. But, oh my God, let this Luk 1.79.
Guide lead my feet into the way of peace!

7. A Soliloquy with God about his Promises.
LOrd, when I turn to thy promises, I am ready to ask my soul; Pro 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes on that which is not? as if thy mouth spoke vanity,
and thy right hand, were a right hand of lies! Psa. 104.8.
Promises from God, think I, Joh. 3 9.
how can these things be? Psa. 113.9.
He humbles himself indeed, to behold the things that are done in heaven! But
he will not humble them so low, as to bring them to us on earth to, will he? Mat.
16.19.
Whomsoever thou bindest to thy service on earth, to them art thou bound, for
rewarding each one in heaven? Lord, Isa. 53.1.
who can believe this report? and to whom is this Arm of the Lord revealed?
Pro. 19 4.
Every one is a friend to him that gives gifts; Jam 1.17.
and if so good and perfect gifts, come down from thee, oh my God! Why is not
every power of my soul, thy friend? Pro. 18.16.
A man's gift makes room for him, will not God's do so too? It Is good advice, Mar.
13.5.
Take heed least any man deceive you! But what, am I afraid God will deceive
me too? Psa. 119.86.
I hy commandments are faithful, and are not To. 4.16.
thy promises sure? Are they called exceeding great, because they exceed belief
and credibility? 2 re. 1.4.
and precious, because too good to be true? Are their Yea and 2 Co 1 20.
Amen changeable into Nay, nay? and must my faith, Jam. 2. 19.
as the devils, believe and tremble, while it does so? Shall I, oh my God!
shall I think it not He. 6 18.17.16.
impossible for thee to lie, because my own incredulousness, has made thee
swear? Do men's oaths put an end to strife, Luk 1.37.
and shall not thine? Must I be jealous, that thy Word is the more infirm,
because firm'd by an oath? Oh foolish brute, Gal. 3.1.
who has bewitched me? Oh my God, my God! Acts 2.39.
thy promises to me and my children, are to them that are afar off from
believing them! We make Mat 22.5.
light of them, and go every one our ways; one to his Book, another to his
play: A fit of sickness, a storm at Sea, etc. will make me cry. Mat 14 18.
Bring them hither to me; but alas even then, Mat 22.14.
though many are called, few are chosen; they cannot answer me satisfactorily,
Job 9 30.
one of a thousand. Nav, sometimes Psa. 14.3.
there is none that does me good, no not one. Though they have all Joh 10.30.
one Father, and in truth, they and their Father are one; For my very life, I
cannot Psalm. 61.31.
trust in them at all times, an least not securely; For some times, in my
thirst, they have given me Joh 19.29.
vinegar to drink, the conditions frightning me more, than the grace
comforting. But oh my God, thou know, I wish I were Mat 25.43, 44
sick, so they might visit me: and in prison, so they might but minister to me!
for they have instructed many, Job 4.3, 4.
and have strengthened weak hands! They have upholdem him that was falling, and
strengthened feeble knees. Dying souls have set down under their shadow, Can
2.3.
and their fruit has been sweet to their taste! From thy promises, oh my God, I
have known those who have Can 5.1.
gathered myrrh, and spice; honey and honeycomb, wine and milk, when they had
been Lam 3.15, 17.
filled with bitterness, and made drunk with wormwood: when their souls had
been removed from peace, and they had forgot prosperity! Psalm. 30.6.
In my prosperity I would say indeed, I should never be moved, and confidently
bid Luk 12.19.
my soul, take more ease than now it dares, as having Goods laid up for many
years; yea, for eternity, I would remove Ec. 11.10.
sorrow from my heart, could I but undoubtingly say of thy promises. That Joh
17.4, 6, 10.
I have finished the world they gave me to do! Could I but boldly tell thee, oh
my God, That thine they were, and thou gave them me; and all mine are thine,
and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them! But alas, as often as these are
not my Psalm. 33.1, 2.
shield, my glory, and the lifter up of my head. Lord, how are they increased
that trouble me; many are they that rise up against me; many there be which say
of my soul, There is no help for him in God. By night on Can. 3.1.
my bed, when I seek the particular promises, which I have chose for my joy,
when I seek them, and find them not: When Can 5.6.
I open my heart to them, and they withdraw themselves, and be gone, when Pro.
1.28.
I seek them early too, and cannot find them, though my coneeits before had been
high, Oba 1.3, 4.
though I had exalted my self as the Eagle, and set my nest among the Stars,
how am I brought down in a momenr? How are my (...) 2.7.
lofty looks humbled, and my haughtiness brought low? My own former comforts
Job 30.10, 15.
abhor me: They flee from me, and spare not to spit in my face! Terrors are
turned upon me, they pursue my soul as the wind, and my welfare passes away as
a cloud. For why? it is very true, in all thy Laws and Threatenings, Psalm. 34.8.
I see the Lord is good, but it is in the promises, that I taste and see; he is
good, I can safely say, all thy words are sweet, but it is of thy Psa. 119.103.
promises, that I dare cry out, Oh how sweet are thy words to my taste: All
their sweetness is lasting, not only giving my soul a feast, but a continual
one; and that a physical, not a diseasegendring one. It does good, and that
like a medicine, it is honey purges, as well as pleases. Were it sweet Job 20.12.
as sin, only in the mouth, I could not give it a good word. Oh my God, the
Pro. 9.17.
stolen waters of it, which my heart in musing takes secretly away; the bread of
it, that I eat in secret places, I cannot say, How sweet they are; 1 Co 15.41.
there is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, that gives light, and heat
too, and life, this only light. There is one glory of thy commanding word,
that Moon rules in the night we are in, throughout our life, in this dark
world. There is another glory of thy promising word, that Sun gives light and
life to poor souls, and makes 2 Co 5.6.
us present with the Lord, even while we are absent: And really Mat 9.15.
the children of the Bride-chamber can t mourn, while in thy promises they have
the Bridegroom with them. When they sit at any time in the dark, and see no
light; lo, thy promises do make both Josh 10.12.
the Sun aforesaid, to stand still, upon their Gibeon; and the Moon in their
valley of Ajalon, till the faces of their enemies are clothed with Psa. 83.16.
shame, and the crown of their faith flourishes on their own heads. Mat. 2.20.
The Herod's which seek the lives of my poor Infant-Graces and Comforts, oh my
God, they are never stone dead. I can never say, They which sought my childrens
lives, are dead: No, they make, and I am sure, they keep war Rev 17.14.
with my Lambs. Thy very promises Psalm. 46.9.
cannot make their wars to cease; but they can Psalm. 68.30.
and do scatter them that delight in war? and that which they help me do, makes
me say experimentally, Ex. 15.39.
The Lord is a Man of War. But, oh my God, my God, How to put on this armor,
it is rare that I can tell! Though thy promises be To. 13.12.
armor of Light, yet sure it is such dazzling light, that I cannot tell how to
wind and turn it. From whence it comes to pass, that I am daily Lev. 26.25.
delivered over into the hands of sin and sorrow, doubt and fear, and all
enemies; and did thou not, as an every days Emanuel, rid me out, and lead my
Re. 7.23.
captive, the sorrows of hell would not only compass me, but swallow me up,
and I should be, not as my 1 Isa 15.29.
Savior was, rejected of men, and a man of sorrows, but rejected of God, Isa.
53 3.
and a man of sorrows. How often, oh my God, do I hear that voice, Luk 12.20.
This night thy soul shall be required of thee! How often am I afraid, to Pro.
6.4.
give sleep to my eyes, evenwhen I have much ado to keep it from them? How few
nights in a week can I sleep, as do 1 Th. 5.6.
athers? for they rest from their labors, which I cannot; Psa. 40.12.
innumerable evils compass me about, my iniquities take hold of me, so that I
am not able to look up, or lie down! my conscience it self reviles me, saying,
Psa. 42.3.
Where is now thy God? I am Psa. 29.9.
dumb to my friends, because they cannot remove my stroke: Nay, I live, 2 Co
6.10.
though as sorrowful, yet as always rejoicing, in my worst fits, being sure of
this, La. 3.
I am a living man. And it is meet for the Isa. 38.10.
living, to praise thee, not complain of thee. But, oh my God, my God, I pray
thee for time to come, let that word of Truth, by which (...) Jam 1.18.
begat'st me, and of a stone dead imp, made me a child to Abraham. Feed my 1
Pe 2.2.
Babie graces and comforts with its sincere milks, and be within me a word of
Life. Amen, Amen.

8. A Soliloquy with God, about his Threatenings.
OH my God, I have thought, That it is not for indisturbed Professors, Pro.
31.4, 5, 6, 7.
to drink too much of the wine of the promises; and that least they drink, and
forget the Law, its direction and ob igation! I have judged the strong drink of
thy promises to belong to him, that is ready to perish, and their wines, to
them that are of feeble hearts, that they may drink, and not forget, but
redress their poverty by Christ's wealth, and consider, That in him they shall
feel their misery no more. Now, thou know, I am one of that wretched number
of men, who are settled on their lees, and that (too often) say, Zep. 1.12.
The Lord will not do good, Deu 24.19.
neither will he do evil! Oh my God, thou know, I have blessed my self in my
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my
heart! I have not been Jer. 48.11.
emptied from vessel to vessel, neither have I gone into the swift captivity of
the Gospel: My taste has remained in me, and my scent has not been changed, so
settled have I been on my lees! Oh my God, I need, that word of thine, which is
quick and powerful, Heb. 4.12.
sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit! I need some of its faithful Pro. 27.6.
wounds, which will do me infinitely more good, than all the Pro. 28.23.
deceitful kisses. which my presumption will never be able to fasten, on thy
sweetest promises! Oh correct me with them, withhold them not from my soul; for
if thou beatest me with them, I sha not die! Whatever the minds of others are,
Lord, thou shall beat me with thy Pro. 23.13, 14.
rod of threatenings, and deliver my soul from the hell of self-liking, and
self-applauding. I dare not say to thy richest promises, Job 6.22, 23.
bring unto me, or give me reward of your rich substance! or deliver me from
the enemies hand, redeem me from the hand of the Almighty; without first saying
to thy threatenings, O ye just statutes, upon my hardness of heart, and all my
wicked lusts, Psalm. 11.6.
rain ye fire, brimstone, and horrible tempest! Bring upon them, that shut out
my peace, 2 Pe 1.
a swift destruction; for I am sure, before such their destruction, the heart
of man will be haughty! O Lord, without this passing through the fire of thy
threatenings, I find, when I do my best, my hope is cut off, and my trust is but
Job (...)
a spiders web! Thy justice conspicuous, in thy treats, being as needful to
keep me from presumption, as the mercy in thy promises, to keep me from
despair! Oh my God, I love thy book the better for thy threats, because I find,
they are the harbingers of the promises, and Laws to the world. The world cries
out, Joh. 6.6.
They are hard sayings, who can bear them? I esteem them soft, and gentle, in
every thing, saving their objects, to whom they are denounced; and they are To.
2.5.
heart-hearted indeed. Thou, oh my God, their author, art a God Ex. 34.6.
of grace, thy end in giving them is 2 Ti. 1.9.
gracious; their effects on honest hearts, are gracious; but to the
hard-hearted, all things are hard: It Is true, they bruise but Gen 3.15.
a sinners heel, even while they bruise sins head; if they do give us stripes,
those stripes are gifts, for with them, we are Isa. 53.5.
healed; they never cutting open any more than an orifice, for the oil of thy
promises to come in at! I know for the grace of the promises lips, and the Can
1.2.
savor of their good ointment, the virgins, foolish as well as wise, love them
and follow them! But, oh my God, thou Mat. 25.12.
know thy holy promises will not give that which is holy unto dogs, or
dogged snarlers at thy righteous treats; they will not cast their pearls unto
swine! Mat 7.6, 7.
They may ask, and conceit it is given them; they may seek and fancy they find
divine puri ie and peace, but a lie is in their right hand, Eccl 4.12.
and their three fold cords of ignorance, error, and pride are easily broken,
sometimes with man's, but ever with Gods judgment; which has made me choose Heb
11.25.
rather to suffer the humiliations and breakings of thy threats, than to enjoy
such kind of pleasures of heaven it self, as are but for a season. Oh my God, I
find within me, that which is sweetly drawn to thee, with the Hos. 11.4.
cords of a man, and the bands of love: But I also find within me, that which
were not Jer. 23.19.
thy word. A hammer, it could never beat any good into me. If thou only Can
1.5.
drawest thy spiritual part with thy promises, it will run after thee! but my
carnal part is not made willing to stoop, but in the Psalm. 110.
power of thy forcive Threats. Mar 16.16.
He that believes shall be saved, will animate the Law of my mind; but it is he
that believes not, shall be damned, that will break in pieces To. 7.23.
the Law of my Members. I thank thee, oh my God, for such Zec 2.5.
a wall of Fire, round about my graces and duties! The Law is a defense, and
the promises are Eccl 7.12.
a defense against the weakness of Grace! But these Threats are the defense,
against the streng th of corruption: Ten Laws, and ten promises, will not Deu
32.30.
chase a thousand lusts; but Two of these will put ten thousand to flight. Oh
my God, Thy promises do lead many, but thy Threatenings 2 Co 10.5.
drive every thought, to the obedience of thy Son, Lu 19.27.
even those that would not, that he should reign over them. These rods of iron,
rule those my Rebels, whose 1 Sa 15.23.
rebellion is as the sin of witchcrast; they are the rod, which with the staff
of thy Laws and Promises, do exceedingly Psa. 23.4.
comfort me. If I say, That I (the chief of sinners) have no sin, I deceive my
self: and if I say, whilst I have sin, 1 Jo 1.8.
I am so whole, as not to need the Lancet of thy Threatenings, sure the Truth is
not in me. 2 Ti 3, 16.
All thy Scripture is profitable, I will never except the threatening part. Psalm
19.9, 10, 11.
Thy judgments, David sates, are to be desired above gold, and are sweeter
than honey: By them, not only thy enemies, but thy Friends are warned and in
keeping them, as the apple of ones eyes, there is great reward. Lord, I find
this true of thy Threatenings, which as To. 7.12.
thy Law are holy, just and good: and as 2 Pe 1.4.
thy promises are exceeding great and precious, and so let them ever be to my
soul: Amen, Amen, and Amen.

To my own SOUL.
THE Horse, Job 39.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
whose neck is clothed with very thunder,
Whose nosthrils sparkle fire,
Hates valleys, would run higher; Counting it a wonder,
That armed men, and fears themselves affright
His Rider, sword, and spear, and shield,
To him with fury steeled,
Are very play-games, he treads on so light:
He cannot feel the ground
He paws upon; and then the sound,
The Trumpets sound exeites him more
To scorn them, shan he did before.
The thunder does but whistle in his ears,
He noses the Heaven it self, and appears
Affected with the scent, and sight of war,
Until he feels what its sad issues are.
Thus thou, my Soul, bearing
Thy neck of brass,
Thy heart of Adamant;
And the rocks none understand,
Look Heaven in the face,
While fire and brimstone's raining down upon thee:
Nor shakest thou at all,
As if pride being thy wall,
It could not make its threatened hell light on thee:
Nay, (what is prodigious!) the more God's thundering Cannons roar
To thee, deaf adder, thou the more by far, Slightest his war!
God give thee ears to hear his Trumpet sounds,
They Will make thee haste to Christ, his Blood, and Wounds.
Amen. So be it.
10. A Soliloquy with God of worldly Friends.
OH my God, (the greater includes the less) See Romans 8 31.
he that has the best Friend, has all friends. Methinks when he bids me Pro
22.24.
make no friendship with an angry man, does almost bid me, Make none with any
man! For indeed, though Eccl 7.11.
anger rests not, save in the bosom of Fools, yet it finds too easy an
impress into the bosom of Pro. 15.1.
the Wisest! Though thou my God be Joel 2.13.
slow to anger, they are few of thy servants who are so: insomuch, That Solomon
must be understood of Duty, what should be; not of Certainty, what is, when
he says, That Pro. 17.17.
a friend loves at all times. Brethren, Zec. 13.6.
there are, that one would think, were born for adversity indeed; the giving it
to us, not the taking us from it. Nay, and (such is the height of pride) few
give their hearty friendship on other there terms, than what the common
Savior gives his upon; every familiar saying implicitly to us, Joh 15.14.
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you! and if we will not make
them our Gods, they will make themselves our Devils: if we shall Esth 3.5, 6.
be Mordecai's, they will be Haman's Pro. 19.4.
Wealth, it is true, makes many friends; and when goods increase, they are
increased, but it is to eat them; and when they are Ecc 5.11.
eat up, many friends will not make wealth. Mat 11.5.
the poor shall have the Gospel preached to them, and be turned off with a 2 Ti
4.8.
God will provide: but for any glad tidings out of the worldly friends
charity, they must not expect it, but sit down, and content them with 1 Ti.
6.6.
the gain of their own Gospel! Godliness, which is indeed so 1 Ti 4.8, 18.
profitable to all things, that their friends unkindness is matter of pure
notice, no resent. Oh my God, I have seen precious friends take much more
joyfully Heb. 10.34.
the spoiling of their friends, than the spending of a pittance of their goods.
I have seen them in a corrupt sense, 1 Th 5.21.
hold fast that which is good; and making what goodness they have laid out, as
fleeting Hos. 6.4.
as Judah's, a very morning cloud, and early dew. Sure if there be any faith in
mortals, it is less than a very grain of mustard seed, which is the Mat 13.33,
least of all seeds, though when it is grown up into high professions, etc. it
is the greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree: so that silly deluded men,
(hastening to snares as very birds,) come build most strange nests, and lodge in
the confidence of its branches. It seems from men's practices, to be of the same
certainty. To. 3.4.
God is true, and that every man is a liar, and experience manifests it, That
to trust to man, is but to make Isa. 28.15.
lies our refuge, and Jer. 13.25.
trust in falsehood: For out of the Jam. 3.10, 12
same mouth proceeds both blessing and cursing; and out of the same heart
sweet and bitter. Oh my God, when in distress one shall call aloud to his
friend, (as 1 Ki 18.27, 29.
the Baaelites to Baall (either he is taking a journey, or peradventure he
sleeps, and must not be awaked: There Is neither voice, nor any to answer or
regard, if otherwise; yet the friend cannot shut up the sea of sorrows Job 38.8,
11, 31.
with doors, or say to ones calamity, Hitherto shall thou come, and no
further; he cannot bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the
bonds of Orion. My friend is Psalm 23.1.
my shepherd, (my friend in Court) therefore I shall not want, is a Logic in
its argument unsound; in its experiment unsafe! No mortal Can 4.4.
neck is like the tower of David, builded for an Armorie, hnng with Psalm 35 2.
Bucklers and Shields, against all assaults: Nay, there is none but what may
need our help, while we seek its. Mat 25.8.
If our lamps be gone out, it is vain to say to friends, Give us of your oil.
Joh. 3.27.
Christ says, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven;
much less can he give any thing, except he receive it from heaven. Whence it
came to pass not unfrequently, To. 7.19, 17.
That as the evil our friends would not do us, that they do: So the good they
would do us, that they do not; or if they do do it, it is no more they that do
it, but God by them. Help me then, oh my God, and teach me for Jesus sake, Mat
2.25.
to render to friends the things that are of friends; and unto thee, oh my God,
the things that are thine. Make me know, that the flesh of my friends is Isa.
40.6.
grass, as well as other men's; and though their love comes up like a flower,
it is obnoxious to be cut, or trod down like grass, Mat 6.30.
which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven: Be thou my friend, who
changest not, but love to the end; yea, world without end, Rev 2.10.
who art faithful to the Death, and give thy friends a crown of Life; whose
love neither death can strike, To: 3.38, 39
nor life consume, nor angels stop in the way, nor principalities To. 13.2.
and powers resist to any, but their own damnation; nor things present cross,
nor things to come annoy, nor height pull down, nor depth swallow up, nor any
other creature do any other injury unto. Oh my God, make me know, men Jam. 1.8.
are double-winded, and their love is unstable in all its ways, He. 12.15.
any root of bitterness may spring up, and trouble it; the rust of money Mat
6.19.
may corrupt it; thieves may break in and steal it! An unbridled tongue may
ride over it, and spoil it! Oh make me sell all I have to get thy love; thy
love which is an inheritance 1 Pe 1.4, 5.
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven, kept
through my faith indeed, but by thy power, unto salvation! Make me know, good
Lord, That all the friends on earth, cannot make one Mat. 5.36.
hair of my head white or black; nor by Mat 6.27.
taking ever so much thought, add one cubit to my stature! when sick or
sorrowful, there is not one to whom I can say, Mat. 8.2, 7.
If thou will thou can make me clean and whole! nor can a soul of them say, I
will come and heal thee. Job 7.38.
But oh my God, he that believes in thee, though he were dead, yet should he
live! Thou can Ezo 37.6.
lay sinews upon dry bones, cover them with flesh, and breath in life! It Is but
a word, Heb 11.3.
and a world with thee! Ecc 1.15.
that which is crooked, thou can make strait; and that which is wanting, thou
can number it. My God, my God, I beseech thee put away my lovers and friends
from me, and Job 19.13.
let my acquaintance be estranged from that intimacie and perpetuity of
converse with them, which hinders my communion with thee! Though of all things
below, they are the sweetest, they cannot Pro 30, 8.
feed me with food convenient for me; though I am greatly prone to put Pro.
25.19.
confidence in them, I find that confidence in them in time of trouble, is like
a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint. Though they have Ephesians 4.28.
stole away too too much of my affection already. Oh my God, let them steal no
more! Enable me to Luk 14.26.
hate my very father, as much as is requisite, to come a friend to thee! Be
thou my whole acquaintance, and let me be ever with thee! either in delights,
or desires! Let me be a Psalm 119.23.
companion of all them that love thee; but let my communion be with, and my
strong confidence be in thee, who art never better known than trusted! Amen, my
God and Savior, Amen, Amen!

10. A Soliloquy with God, of the Holy Scriptures.
BLessed God Job 6.25.
how forcible are right words, thine I am sure are Right, because thine! and
right forcible, because they are such Jer. 23.29.
hammers as break the very Rocks of my heart! such a fire as pierces into my
inmost depths, and reaches the dross, 1 Co 2.9.
which no Eye has seen, or ear heard. Such Monitors, as whoever will not hear,
Luk 16.31.
would not believe, if one came from the dead! Such as Psalm. 119.9.
cleanse the ways of even young men themselves, so hard to be reclaimed, that
David cries out astonishedly, Wherewithal shall a man young, cleanse his
ways! Of very stocks and stones, thy word Mat. 3.9.
has raised up children to Abraham! It is Isa. 43.1.
the arm of God; yea, and very sword too! God the Father's arm, God the Son's 1
Co 4.20.
power, God the Ephesians 6.17.
Spirits sword! Oh my God, Pre. 15.23.
words spoken in season, how good are they? but when are thine out of season?
When 1 Pe 2.2.
we are babes, they are milk, Pro 16.24.
sweet and nourishing! When grown, they are strong meat, making us go in thy
ways without weariness; yea, Psalm. 19.5.
run without fainting; when in bitterness of sin and sorrow, they are honey,
pleasant and purgative too! When in doubts, they are Counselors! when
fainting, Can 2.5.
they are flagons of soul-reviving cordials, and apples of comfort! When quite
dead, and the spirit gone, Jo. 6.6^.
the words which thou say, they are spirit, and they are life. Jam 1.18.
We are begotten by thy holy word, psa. 119.93
as many as are born of God! We are fed by the same, and no better fed than
taught neither. O my God, there is not a Psa. 119 105.
word in my tongue, but thou know it altogether. Oh would to Christ, there
may not be a Psalm. 139.4.
word in thy Book, but I may know it altogether. Jam 1.5.
Praised be thy holy Name, thou do not say; If any man want wisdom, that then
he shall strait be damned for a fool; but say, That then he should ask it of
thee! Lord, I ask of thee that 2 Ti. 3.15.
wisdom to salvation, which thy word alone is able to give me. I observe, That
all worldly wise withour this, are Mat. 10.16.
as harmless as serpents; as wise as doves without hearts: they are wise to do
evil in the form of godliness, but to do good as good, they have Jer. 4.22.
none; the least knowledge. What are all humane Authors, that I should take
knowledge Psalm. 144.3.
of them? Or the most Learned, that I should make account of them? Isa. 55.8, 9.
Their words are not as thy words; nor their notions as thy notions! As the
heavens are high above the earth: so are thy words high above their words; and
thy notions above theirs! Methinks of all the Books in my Study, it is my
Bible only which can use the mighty Lords own words. Isa. 45.22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved! All the ends of the earth, Pro. 8.18, 20, 21,
14.
riches and honor are with me; yea, durable riches and honors lead in the way
of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of Judgment. That I may cause
those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures!
Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom; I am understanding, I have strength. Other
Books, I confess, with their much Pro. 7.21.
fair speech, do cause me to yield, with the flattering of their lips they
force me: But when they draw me from thy Book, oh my Book, I find my going
after them, is just a mere oxes going to the slaughter, and a fools to the
correction of the stocks. Other books Pro. 25.14.
boast in Title pages, of false gifts, and are mere clouds, and wind without
rain; but thine gives good and Jam 1.17.
perfect gifts, coming down from the Father of lights. Pro. 23.35.
They have stricken me with reproofs, and (...) was not sick; they have beaten
me with inculked rebukes, and my conscience felt it not; but in thy word, the
Mar. 26.75.
Cocks crow so loud, that they will make one go out of ^^n, Luk 22, 62.
and weep bitterly, that one can go out no further. The word Mal. 3.2.
is a Refiners fire, and suffers some cleansing inside and out! Theirs makes
Scribes and Pharisees, painted sepulchers, but no Joh. 1.49.
true Israelites, in whom there is no guile; Isa. 5.12.
the harp and the viol are in their feasts, the tabret and pipe of the
excellency of man's wisdom, pleasing words, and tinkling cymbals. But thy Book
gives Can. 15.1.
the myrrh with spice; the honey with the honeycomb; the wine with milk. Oh my
God, thou have made great Psalm 136.8, 9.
lights in thy word, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, of precepts, promises, and
providence; else would this world be Joh 10.21, 22
a land of darkness, and the shadow of death: A land of darkness, as hells
darkness it self, of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the
light would be as darkness. Some deal with thy word, as Ru. 1.14, 16.
Orpah with Naomi, go some part of the way with her, kiss her, and then leave
her. But oh! may my soul (as Ruth's) cleave to it, and for ever say, Whither
thou go, I will go; where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy ways shall be my
ways, and thy God shall be my God. psalm. 145.10, 11, 12, 14, 15.
All thy works do praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints do bless thee! they speak
sweetly of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power; but it is thy word
makes known to the sons of men, thy mighty Acts of Creation and Redemption, and
the glorious Majesty of thy Kingdom! It Is thy word upholds all them that fall;
and raises up those that be bowed down! Out of thy word thou give the best
meat to them, whose eyes wait upon thee. Thy gracious providence often make me
cry out, psalm. 136.1, 10, 15, 16,
O give thanks to the Lord, for he is good! But it is thy Word only makes me
add, His mercy endures for ever. For why? It Is by thy Word that thou smitest
Egyptian lusts in their firstborn! and overthrowest reigning sins, and their
hosts of snares and temptations, in the Sea of thy grace, red with the Blood
Royal of thy Son! It Is by thy Word thou leadest thy people through the valley
of sin and sorrow, into the heavenly Canaan! It Is thy Word, that in the
wilderness of this world, Psa. 105.41
opens very rocks that waters gush out! yea, Psalm. 107.35
that turns my part of this wilderness into a standing pool of mercies; and my
dry ground into water springs.

11. A Soliloquy with the Soul, about its sloth.
O My soul! my soul! Pro. 2.6, 16.
It Is in thy own conceit, That such a sluggard as thou, is wiser than seven
men, that can render a reason. Do think it enough, as Mat. 9.20.
the woman with the bloody Flux, only to come behind Christ, and touch the hem
of his garment? Hers was a Flux of Blood; thine of such sins, as made a Flux of
Christ's Blood! Her disease but of Twelve years, thine of almost twice twelve,
for thou wast conceived in it! Mat 9.21.
As she said of Christ, dare thou say of Christian Religion; If I may but
touch its garment, I shall be whole? If not, why stand thou idle? has not
God sent thee to hotter work. Mar. 6.8, 9, 7.
Is this like a Disciple of Christ, to be projecting for scrip, bread, money in
thy purse, and two coats? and not be caring for power of thy unclean spirit,
and being shod with the sandals of the Gospel? Art thou my soul, the Bethlehem
wherein Christ is born? or the Sodom wherein pride, idleness, and fullness of
bread reigns? Pro 21.25.
The desire of the slothful Christian to be saved, damns him, because his hands
refuse to abound in the work of the Lord. Mat. 19.20.
All these things have I kept from my youth up, was the word of an hypoorite,
and very likely an Apostate! It Is another diligence 2 Pe 1.10.
ensures Election, and secures from falling? Be not Jam 1.22. Jam. 1.21.
deceived, oh my soul, with vain words! It is the doing Christian only, that
undoes not himself! A man's own words are not (as God's) able to save his soul!
Salvation must be Phil 2.12.
worked, not talked out! Examine thy self, prove thy self, oh my soul! for
know thou not, that great industry is in thee, 2 Go 13.5.
except thou be a reprobate! Not to do well, or Gal 6.
to be weary of well doing, is a manifest token of God's being weary of thee,
and thy being so of him! and every such Heb. 10.38.
drawing back, finally persisted in, is to perdition! 'Tell not me there is a
lion, or singularity in the way; a lion of censoriousness in the streets, I
shall be bit! Thou must be so, but who can help it? If Christ Mal 10, 16, 25.
will send forth his Disciples in the midst of lions and wolves, it is so much
the better for you, if you are bit soundly, you will be the more like your
Master! Heb 10.
The sacrifice of thy fame, the offering, the burnt-offering of it, on this
account, is such as God will not despise! but has pleasure in: Men indeed, and
of repute, for piety, too many will not endure 2 Ti 4.3.
sound doctrine! much less convincing conversation! But God will have us do
more Mat 5.47.
than others, either do, or allow us to do! Oh my soul, look right before thee,
Were it not better that men should say to thee and thy graces, Why do ye more
than others, by way of accusation, than that Christ, when he comes, should say,
What do ye more than others, by way of condemnation. Christ, Mat 7.29. Read the
four Evangelists.
thy Doctor, teaches not as the Scribes, but as one having authority, Don't
thou live as the Scribes, but as one having activity! Christ thy Savior did
and suffered nothing, but miracles for thee, double miracles, to wit, because
he did them, and because he did them for thee! and will thou stick to do more
than ordinary for him! Hear, oh my soul! not merely Mat 9.13.
the whole in sin, but the sick in grace, do need the physician! For Jesus came
not only that his souls should have life, but that they Joh. 10.10.
should have it more abundantly! If thou art not purged to bring forth more
fruit, it is dubious whether thou art yet ingrafted in him, Joh. 15.2.
or bear any! David confidently says, God's right See Psalm. 63 8.
hand upheld him! but when was that, not when he ran from God; no, nor when he
sat still neither; no, nor when he followed God ordinarily neither, but when
his very soul followed hard after God. Solomon says, Pro 1.16.
That the feet of some run to evil. It Is pity that good should be gone unto a
slower pace; and know thou my soul, If hell be mostly Psalm. 119.32. Can. 1.4
Heb. 12.1.
run unto, it is a shame but to go to heaven! and thou wast best look to it too;
for I mistake, if there be any way to heaven, besides See 1 Cor. 9.24.
the Race one! in which it self, be confident, every Runniug will not obtain!
Beware of a false gallop. Methinks S. Peter makes 2 Pe 1.8.
abounding in grace, and daily addition, the only security against
substraction. St. Paul contends for 2 Co 8.7.
abounding in every particular grace, I am sure one degree of abounding would
not serve his turn neither; Abound 1 Th. 4.1.
says he) more and more; nay, and he was for 1 Co 15.58.
abounding always too: Youth and old age, prosperity and adversity, etc. still
abound. And really all but need, since now I remember it, what ever a man has,
and abounds not in, goes for nothing with him who is to be our Judge. From him
Mat. 25, 29.
says he) that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has. If so,
as 1 Ti 5.17.
the Elders must labor, in the word and Doctrine, I protest thou and thy
neighbors were best labor hard, in the word and practice of it. It Is true,
they Re. 14.13.
who do rest from their religious labors, have their works follow them; but if
they don't follow them too, and cast them at the bar of God, far from that
rest. Say not, oh my soul, the wind blows in thy face, set heavenward! It Is
only a Pro. 20.4.
sluggard, that will not plow, by reason of the cold! He that observes the wind
(of any opposition) well he may scatter, he will never sow, in the whole
seed-time of grace: and he that does but so much Eccl 11.4, Pro. 20.4,
as regard the clouds, that drop down scuds of temporal inconveniences, he may
dream of reaping in the harvest of glory; but there he may be, and have
nothing; no, not a drop it self to cool his tongue. I tell thee, oh my soul,
hindrances of thy pious diligence, numberless thou may make, not one can
thou find made to thy hand. Thou lie, when thou say, Pro. 22.13.
There Is a lion in the way without! The lion that will bite thee, I mean, for
why? 1 Pet 5.8.
Satan is a lion, that if but resisted faithfully, will not bite thee at all,
unless his flight, and leaving thee to sin alone, will bite thee! The lion, if
any be, is in the den of thy brutish sluggish heart, whose lusts, indeed, are
roaring lions, ever seeking what gracious motions they may devour! No man
stands idle, but he who stands for idleness; and I may boldly say it (as of
every wicked Agent, so) of every one wickedly inactive, (who To. 9.19.
has resisted his will? Even we poor potsheards, have To. 9.21.
power over the dab of clay, called our selves, to make freely one action unto
the honor, and another to the dishonor of our Christian names! God gives us,
would we but give our selves Phi 2.13.
to will, and to do: We have his, could we get but our own good pleasure. Pro.
19.15.
The deep sleep, in which we cannot work, it is slothfulness casts us into that;
the Pro. 15.19.
nettles and thorns that make irksom our work, are also its product. Oh my
soul, let not idleness Pro. 24.30, 31.
hinge thee on thy bed, and give thy hand to thy bosom, Pro 26.14, 15.
and then thou shall find it no more grievous, to set thy hand to God's plow,
than to put it to thy mouth, even with thy necessary food. Methinks the Author
of the Epistle to the Sea Heb. 6.12.
Hebrews, makes Believers and slothful Professors nothing a kin, his But is so
adversative; and I protest, it is enough to make thy betters in sacred industry
shake again, to once Con Solomon's Observation. Slothfulness not only confuses
the materials of one that is going Ecc 10.18.
to build, but it even decays that which is ever so well built up already;
Nay, and though it be built, ay, and possessed too; though it bea house, a
furnished house, yet idleness will make it untenantable! My soul, my soul I
though thou were built up; ay, and Christ inhabited thee; thou must not lend,
but give; not some, but all diligence to secure his House, and Hold.

12. A Soliloquy with Pride.
OH pride, pride! Job 9.30, 31
If I mash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean, yet do
thou plunge me in the ditch, and make my own clothes to abhor me! Hos. 13.8.
Thou meetest every gift and grace I have, as a Bear that is bereft of her
whelps, and do rent the very caul of their hearts. Ge. 49.7.
Cursed be thy anger, for it is fierce; and thy wrath, for it is cruel! Thou
have smitten all God's friends on the cheek-bone, nor art thou Psa. 3.6, 7.
afraid of ten thousand of Gods threatenings, which have set themselves ^ound
thee! Who Job 41.2, 14 21, 26, 28, 29, 33.
can put an hook into thy nose? or bore thy jaw through with a thorn? Who can
open the doors of thy face? thy teeth are terrible round about? Thy breath
kindles coals, and a flame goes out at thy mouth! The word of God, that lays
at thee, cannot hold! the spear, the dart, for the Habergion! God's arrows make
thee not fly, thou countest his darts as stubble! Upon earth here is not thy
like, thou art made without fear. Psalm. 55.21.
Thy words are smoother than butter, but war is in thy heart! They are softer
than ^yl, yet are they drawn swords! Thy voice, oh pride, is Ge. 27.22.
Jacob's voice, but thy hands are the hands of Esau. Job 13.7.
If thou do speak for God, it is wickedly! and if thou do talk for him, it is
deceitfully; as Job said of his friends. Psa. 45.8.
All thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes and Cassia! but they are fearfully Jude
23.
spotted by the flesh, if looked into! Gifts, which are Job 1 14, 15
thy oxen, thou keep ever plowing; lusts, which are thy asses, thou keep
feeding, till the righteous God send his Executioners of Justice, to take both,
and slay them, with the sword of vengeance. ^ Ti 6.6.
Thy godliness is no gain, nor is it profitable to any thing 2 Ti 3.5.
with its form, but to gnaw out the heart of the power. Heb. 5.7.
The strongest cries of thy prayers are but idle clamorousnesses, and stark
sin; it is Psalm 109.7.
strength is just as its length, but for a Mat. 23.14.
pretense! Mat. 21.13.
Thy House of prayers is but a Den of thieves, lying in wait for the curse of
being well spoken of by all men! Jam 2.18.
Thou show thy faith by thy works! I Will say it is a faith of miracles, which
Mat. 17.20.
if one have of it no more than a grain of mustard seed, one shall throw away
mountains of the convictions of God on ones soul. Heb. 11.33.
It Is a faith that subdues Kingdoms indeed! For I call God to witness, it
subdues the Kingdom of Christ To. 14.23.
in the Gospel. Luke 7.50.
It Is a faith, that whatever is of it is sin: It Is a saving faith with the
vengeance; for I confess, it saves it self, though it 1 Ti 1.19.
make Shipwreck of a good Conscience! 1 Jo 4.28.
Thy love (...) Pride is so perfect, that it casts out all fear of the Lord!
Exo. 20.
and shows kindness to thousands of those both men and things, which love
thee, and keep thy Commands! But it is true, for Gods Statutes, which are thy
Mat 5.44.
enemies; thou can not love them: and for Gods Attributes, which despitefully
use thee, thou can not pray for them. Thou do indeed, oh Pride Col. 3.2.
set thy Affections on those things which are above, and (to use thy own hearts
dialect.) Psalm. 113.6.
thou do humble thy self, to behold the things that are done in heaven! But,
having said in thy heart, That Isa. 45.22.
Thou art God, and there is non beside thee; it is the plainest thing of ten
thousand, Psalm. 53.3.
that every of thy affections is gone back to thy self, they are altogether
become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. Psa. 57.4.
Their poison is like the poison of a serpent, and they are deaf adders. Let
God Job 2.11.
but touch their bone or their flesh, they will curse him to his face. Ex. 1.12.
And the more they shall be afflicted, the more they will grow. Let Religion
ask them for water, they will Jud 5.25. 26, 27.
give her milk, and butter promises in gay professions; but they will put their
hands to the mail and their right hands to the devils hammer; with the hammer
they will smite piety, and smite off its head; when they have pierced through
its Temples! Job 10.14, 12, 13.
They break down godliness with breach upon breach; and rush upon it as a
Giant, they take it by the neck, and shake it to pieces, and set it up for
their mark. Oh pride, I do not wonder that God hates even the very Pro 6.17.
look of thee! For I am sure, thou and all thy fathers house, do hate God with
a Psalm 139.
perfect hatred, and count him your enemy! Thy natural language is, Eze 21.26,
27.
Remove God's diadem, take off his Crown, overturn, overturn, overturn him! I
have sworn by my self, that unto me every knee shall bow. Oh pride, pride! Jer.
13.27.
I have seen thine Idolatries, thy Adulteries, and thy Neighings; the lewdness
of thy spiritual whoredom, and all thy abominations. Hab. 2.16.
The cup of the Lords right hand be turned upon thee, and a shameful spewing be
on all thy glory, in my heart and life! ^^. 3. 17, 18, 24.
The Lord smite the crown of thy head with a scab, and discover thy seeret
parts! The Lord take away the braverie of thy tinkling ornaments! In stead of
thy sweet smells, let there be in my soul the stink of my own corruption! In
stead of thy girdles, a being rent and broken in spirit! In stead of thy well
set hair, baldness! In stead of thy stomachers, a girding of sackcloth, and
burning by the Heb 11.34.
fire of his spirit, In stead of thy beauty! How joyfully could I take the
spoiling of rhy Goods! Have thy Mat. 5.29, 40.
right eyes bored out, and thy right hands cut off! and not only have thy
cloak, but thy coat also took away! God fire out thy Lu. 9.58.
Foxes out of their holes, and thy unclean birds out of their nests, that the
Son of Man, and Savior of men, may have where to lay his head, within my Ephesians.
3.17.
heart! May thy Sun, thy Moon, and thy stars be darkened. Eccl 12.2, 3, 6, 1.
May the keepers of thy House Tremble, and thy strong men bow themselves, may
thy silver cords be loosed, and thy golden bowls be broken; may evil days come
on thee, and such wherein my Soul may say, I have no pleasure in thee. Job 4.9.
By the blast of God, may thou perish, by the breath of his nosthrils may
thou be consumed Rev 2.13.
I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, in the
hearts and manners of men! I know thou 2 Pe 2.1.
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought me! Thou Heb.
13.9.
carriest men away with diverse and strange doctrines; thou make the morality
of the earth, Jam 3.15.
earthly, sensual, divelish. Cursed be the Luk 11.27.
womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck. Psalm. 137.9.
Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones!
Job 20.9.
May the eye of God, which has seen thee in my heart and ways, never see thee
more, nor those places know thee any more! May thou, oh pride, Psalm. 132.18.
be clothed with shame; and upon all the graces of God, that are thy enemies,
may the Crown flourish, so even so.

Psalm. 130.6.
My soul shall wait for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning; I
say, more than they that watch for the morning! Amen, Amen, Amen.

13. A Soliloquy with the soul about Hypocrisy.
MY soul, my soul! It is said Eccl 6.7.
All the labor of man is for his mouth. But who had thought, this could have
been true of his religious labor? For really, though Josh. 1.8.
the Law ought not to depart out of a man's mouth; so neither ought it to enter
in, save Mat. 12.34.
out of the hearts abundance. Eliphaz advises Job 22.22.
Job, to lay up God's word in his heart, not his mouth: Pro 3.1. Prove. 4.23.
and Solomon thought no cabinet so proper to keep divine Commands in, as it:
Nay, God himself chooses the Tables of the heart, Jer. 31.33.
for to write his Laws in; which makes me conclude, A man may keep his mouth
and tongue richly, and yet never keep Pro. 21.23.
his soul from troubles: and this, because I know, whatever enters in at the
mouth, (if it find no place in the heart) it goes into Mat 15.18.
the belly of hidden lusts, and is cast out into their draught. The things of
God which proceed out of the mouth, when they proceed not forth out of the
heart, they defile the man. So little a praise is it, to be a man of pure lips,
if no more; and especially if that of the Isa. 29.
wise man be true, to wit, that though Pro. 14.23.
in all labor there be profit, yet lip labor has a direct tendency to
poverty! Oh my soul! Pro. 11.9.
Solomon tells thee, That the Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his
neighbor. I tell thee more, even that he destroys himself: for though he has
Pro. 7.14, 9, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Peace offerings with him, and every day pays his vows; yet he goes forth, in
the black and dark angels of his soul, to meet the Devil, diligently to find
him, though he decks his bed with covering of religious Tapestry, with carved
works and fine linen of profession, though he perfumes his bed with myrrh,
aloes, and cinnamon; yet he takes his fill of spiritual whoredom, and solaces
himself with atheistical loves, while the good conscience is not at home, but
is turned out of doors with a bag of money, not to come home till the day
appointed, even that of Death and Judgment! If of any soul alive, this, oh my
soul, is true of the hypocritical one, He feeds on ashes, a deceived heart
has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Isa. 44.20.
Is there not a lie in my right hand. Pro 12.15.
For the way of such a fool is right in his own eyes: And Christ himself does
not deny, but he has his reward. Mat. 6.2. Mat. 6.4 Mat.6.7 Mat. 6.6 Mar. 6.31,
32,
He does his alms to the devil in secret; and that father of his, who sees him
in secret, himself rewards him openly! Though when he prays to God, he uses as
vain repetitions as the Heathens do; yet when he prays to the devil, and
wishes for devilish things, he keeps in the closet of privacy, and shuts all
the doors, at which men may see in. He takes no thought, saving, What shall I
do to eat Christ's flesh, or drink his blood, or cloth me with the garment of
his Righteousness. (For after all these things do true Israelites seek) but he
seeks first the titular Kingdom of God, and the professional Righteousness
thereof, and thinks all these things shall be added. He takes no care for to
morrow, but lets that care for it self! Sufficient he thinks, unto the Day of
Judgment, if to any day, is the evil thereof. His love, I cannot say, is
without dissimulation, but sure Mat 5.44.
love he does his enemies, God's Laws; bless he does them, though they curse
him; and pray for God's promises, though they despightfully use him, and give
him no one drop of comfort! He Is even almostas perfect as his father, which is
inHell, is perfect. This indeed, oh my soul! Mat 7.11, 9, 10, 9, 10.
I observe; that being evil, the hypocrite knows how to give good gifts: and
though when his friend asks of him for bread, what he gives him, in respect of
himself, be no more than a stone, and he takes no more in it; yet to his friend
it is good bread. Though the Truths he delivers, be to himself serpents, that
sometimes sting his soul, yet, as he delivers them, they are fish. What is 2 Co
4.2.
handling the Word of God deceitfully, if this be not? to wit, Taking it Deu
30.14.
very nigh one, even into ones mouth, and yet not so much as know it, any
otherwise than God knows the proud, to wit, Psalm 138.6.
afar off; to be not a hearer only, but a talker too, and yet not a Jam 1.22.
doer of the Word; to do with it many wonderful works, by it to Mat 7.22.
cast out devils, and nevertheless (as the Pharisees and Scribes) Mar 7.13.
making that of none effect to ones self. Oh my soul! for the love of God let
not the Word of God Psa 119.103
be sweet to thy mouth, and not to thy taste! 1 Th 5, 26.
Kiss it with no Judas-like but with a holy kiss. Mat 13.57.
As it is said of a prophet, he is not without honor, save in his own country:
so may it be said of the Word, it is not without honor, save in its own proper
Region, that of the heart. Deu 4.9.
Oh keep thy heart and it, more dear than thy hearts blood, with all diligence;
Psa 45.1.
Let thy heart endite good matters of it. Pro 15.13. Pro. 15.15.
A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance! Let thy hearts mirth in it, be
that which sets thy cheerful countenance on it! It Is a heart, a heart, a heart
I tell thee, a merry heart with it, which has a continual Feast for the Lord,
and from the Lord. In the Word, God opens his heart; to the Word, open thy
heart, even the hidden man of thy heart. Oh my soul, 1 pe 3.4.
I charge thee before God, who has quickened thee, and before Jesus Christ, who
never made or will endure rotten professions; that thou take not the oil Psa.
104.15
of the Word, to make thy face to shine without the wine of the Word, to make
thy very heart glad in the Lord. Jam 3.5.
The tongue is a little member, don't think that God intended it for the Seat
and Dwelling house of his great Law. Pro. 16.1.
The answer of the tongue, is indeed from the Lord, but when? When the
preparations of the heart in man, be so to pro. 15.7.
the tongue, is the dispenser, and should be the disperser of holy knowledge!
But the heart, my soul, the heart it is, that has the good Mat 6.21.
treasure; and as it is true, where the treasure is, there the heart will be: so
really, where the heart is, there the Mat 12.35.
treasure will be, good or bad. O my soul, better is a little in the heart,
Pro. 15.16.
with the fear of the Lord, than great treasure of God's word in thy mouth, and
the trouble of thy tongue therewith. He, Heb 11.4.
who being dead, yet speaks of spiritual life, is infinitely far from that
speech, which Ca. 411.
Christ Jesus calls comely; and yet, if he were not, the wise man tells us,
Excellent speech Pro. 17.7.
becomes not a fool. O my soul, my soul! Take thou Mat 10.19.
then no thought, how or what thou shall speak of God, or his ways, Mat 12.35.
but out of the good treasure of thy heart. Let it ever be given unto thee,
what thou shall say. Mal. 2.6.
Let the Law of Truth be in thy lips, Psalm. 15.2.
and speak the truth in thine heart. The way to be without offense, is to be
sincere, and make clean the insides of the vessels, Phil 1.10.
the Kingdom of God is not in word!

14. A Soliloquy with God, complaining of vile Affections.
OH my God, my God! Job 19.23, 24.
oh that thy words were now written in the Book of my heart! Oh that they were
printed in my conscience! That they were engraven with an iron pen, and lead,
in the rock of my heart for ever. But alas, Psalm. 1.6.
I am afraid of ten thousands of vile affections, which have beset themselves
round about me; not only to keep me from holy wisdom, that Pro. 6.25.
I lust not after her beauty in my heart, nor let her take me with her
eyelids; that I am not ravished with one Can 4.9.
of her eyes, and one chain of her neck, Job 29.22.
but to make me mock at her sear, and not be affrightned, nor turn back from
her swords, to say, among her trumpets, Ha, ha; to scorn the thunder of her
captains, and their shouting! Nay, and as if they themselves were not enough,
they say to all temptations, Pro 1.11, 12, Pro. 1.17.
Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for all the Laws
of God that ever come here; Let us swallow them up alive, as the grave; and
whole, as those that go down to the pit. O my God, are not all thy nets spread
in vain, in the sight of such Birds, as my worldly affections: who say of
heavenly-mindedness Ecc 2.2.
that it is mad: and of self-denial, what does it? who taunt at my conscience,
saying, Can 5.9.
What is thy beloved more than another beloved? O my God! I confess it it is but
just on me; Isa. 1.2.
I have nourished and brought up these children of Belial, and now they rebel
against me, domineering over my heart, (the womb that bare them, and the dugs
that gave them suck,) so that To. 7.15.
that which she allows not, she does: that which she would, she does not, and
does what she hates. And verily, oh my God, these 1 Co 1.27.
foolish things confound the wise within me: these weak, confound the things
that are mighty! Eccl 4.1.
I have considered all the oppressions that are done under the Sun; but, oh my
God, I know none like those done by my vile affections, Isa. 3.15.
which beat thy good Teachings to pieces, and grind the faces of my poor
convictions, which fence up my way, that I cannot pass from them, and set
darkness about all my paths, which make me ever and anon grumble. Psalm 73.13.
I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence! to wit,
while they say to my graces and comforts, Jer. 13.18.
Humble your selves, sit down, for your principalities shall come down, even
the crown of your glory! Oh my God, my God! it is through these that Jer. 12.2,
3.
thou so often art near in my mouth, and far from my reins! but oh thou that
know me, see me, and tryest my reins; thou know that I pray thee, for
the love of Christ, to pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare
them for the day of slaughter. For alas! alas! Isa. 57.20.
they are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt! the winds and the seas will obey me, as soon as they; and the worst of
it is, Pro 29.12.
That my Rulers, my judgment and conscience, do but too often hearken to their
lies, and then all their servants, my will, memory, and all other powers are
wicked; and so wicked, as that if any good seed get into me, Job 14.2.
it comes up like a flower, and is cut down; it flees as a shadow, and
continues not. My God, I fear at my yery heart, 2 C^^ 26.2^.
That (as Vzziah) I shall be a leper to my death, and dwell in a several house,
severed from the near access to thee, and thy holiness, which my heart pants
for! because really I am Job 2.6.
in the hand of these devils, only thou savest my life! of which it self I am
woefully afraid, when many times Psa. 46.9.
they make my very warfare with them to cease; they break my spiritual bows,
and cut my spears in sunder, and burn the Chariots of God in the fire! Their
cursed peace being Isa. 48, 18.19.
all the whiles as a River, and their unrighteousness numerous and boisterous,
as the waves of the sea! Their ungodly seed as the sand, and their offspring
as the gravel thereof. Oh my God, if whosoever Luk 14.11.
exalts himself, shall be abased, sure I should hope these corrupt affections
were to be brought down; for sure they exalt themselves above thy own Majesty.
When I sometimes query with them, methinks the sum of their answer is, what was
said of old, These Isa. 48.5.
and these things mine idol has done, and my graven image, and my molten image
has commanded them; They are steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the
works of sin and vanity. They are Ephesians 6.10, 11, 17.
strong in the Devil, and the power of his might, putting on his whole armor,
that they may be able to stand against the very sword of the spirit, the Word
of God. O my God, 2 Ti 3.16.17
I find they are notable for doctrine for reproof, for corrections, for
instruction in unrighteousness, that the child of disobedience may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all evil works: they subtly Tit 2.12, 13
teach to deny all spiritual Godliness and Grace, and to live indeed unsoberly,
unrighteously, and ungodly in this present world, looking for that hope which
makes ashamed! They Jam 1.21.
lay apart all spivituality, and godly sineerity, and receive with proud
desperateness the devices of Satan, the least of which, is -- enough to damn
humane souls! To do evil, and to communicate it, they Heb 13.16.
forget not; for with such sacrifices, the god of this world is well pleased:
and indeed, the Devil is not so Heb 6.10.
unrighteous to them, as to forget their labor of love to him: No, he gives
them day by day Mat 6.
their daily bread, Pro 30.8.
and feeds them with food convenient for them, crying, Eze. 13.10, 13.
Peace, peace, where there is either none, or but such, as thou, oh my God,
wilt rent with a stormy wind, in thy fury, and consume with-an overflowing
shower in thine anger! and verily, as these vile affections Psalm. 109.18.
have clothed themselves with cursing, as a garment, so let it come into their
bowels like water, and into their bones like oil. Through them, oh my God,
through them, often have Jer. 12.7.
I forsaken my house; ay, my tower, (for so is thy Name) I have left my
heritage, for so is thy Word, and given Christ, the dearly beloved of my soul,
into the hands of his enemies, I have! -- Jer. 11.20.
But, oh Lord of Hosts, that judge righteously, that tryest the reins and the
heart, let me see thy vengeance on them; for unto thee have I revealed my
cause! Amen, oh Jesu, Amen, for thy Name sake. Amen, Amen.

15. A Soliloquy with God against self.
O My God! my self has Mat 18.15, 16, 17.
trespassed against me; (and thee too!) I have gone, and told it its fault
between it and me! It has not heard me, nor have I gained it! I have took with
me two, nay three witnesses, the Three that bear record in heaven, and it has
refused to hear them! What shall I do, but count it a heathen, and a Publican?
I profess, were not Jesus a friend Mat 11.19.
to publicans and sinners, all the manners Mat 12.31.
of its sin and blasphemy, could not be forgotten! Is not Job 22.5.
its wickedness great, and its iniquities infinite? Oh my God, what soul Job
34.7, 8.
is like it, it drinks up scorning like water, it goes in company with the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 1.1, 2.
and walks with wicked lusts! It walks in the counsel of the ungodly, it stands
in the way of sinners, it sits in the seat of the scornful: its delight is
great in the law of its members, and in that law does it meditate day and
night! Pro. 17.1.
Better to it is a dry morsel of temporal loss, and dung, and carnal quietness
therewith, than a house full of sacrifices to God, with striving to be holy! It
Ecc. 10.20. Mat. 9.20.
curses the King of Heaven in its thought, and thy rich grace in its Bed
chamber; and this issue of its mad blood, has been more than of Twelve years.
Among them that are used by the Devil, to devour me, there has not risen an
agent greater than self; For, oh my God, thou know, from Ge. 1.1, 2, 3.
the beginning wherein thou createdst the little of heaven within me, or from
the very time wherein thou said, Let there be light, and there was light
within me, thou know it has been this my self, which has made me without
form, and (as it were) void: and has put darkness on the face of my soul,
making it, as if the spirit of God had never moved on the face of it. O Lord,
this self is Jud.
the Sampson, which with its Asses jaws, has slain many thousands of thy
spirits motions and convictions in me. It is the Herod which seeks the life;
nay, it is the Judas which betrays, and the Pontius Pilate which condemns, and
the Jew which crucifies Christ within me: it is the Ex. 1.11, 24.
Pharaoh which oppresses my graces with Task masters, and makes their lives
bitter with hard bondage, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of vile
service. Phil 3.19:
The end of which, is destruction; the God of which, is the belly; the glory of
which, is shame; the nature Jam. 3.15.
earthly, sensual, devilish, foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse
lusts and pleasures, malicious, envious, Tit 3.3, 4.
hateful, and hating the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man. O
God, this self, which Hos 12.1.
so feeds on the wind, and follows the East wind, increasing lies and
desolations, what a Job. 10.22.
land of darkness as darkness it self, does it make my heart; a place of the
shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as the darkness.
Lord, if I know my heart at all, sure Job 42.6.
I do abhor this self, and desire to repent in dust and ashes! Though all its
pleas and arguments are Pro. 30.26, 27, 30.
a feeble folk, yet make they their houses so, in the rocks of my heart, that I
cannot for my life get them out: though its lusts have no King reigning in my
heart, (as I know of,) yet so they go forth all of them by bands, that l'le say
it, I cannot dissipate them as I would: for, they are as a lion, the strongest
among beasts, and which turns not away for any. O my God! Selfs Isa. 1.13, 14.
vain oblations, and its incense, are an abomination to me! its appointed
feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them! Pro.
23.3.
I am not desirous of its dainties, I know they are most deceitful meat. But
alas, I too often eat its pro. 9.17.
bread in secret places; and though I know, its wine is a mocker, and its
strong drink is raging, Pro 20 1.
and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise; yet (woe is me) Pro; 23.31, 32.
when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup, when it moves it self
aright, how do I forget, that at last 'twill bite like a serpent, and sting
like an adder? Oh Lord my God! When shall I be able (as my Love did) to phil 2,
7, 8.
make my self of no repute, and humble and empty my self? Oh that to morrows
Ep. 4.26.
Sun might go down upon my wrath against self! for, of a truth, in selfishness
dwells all the fullness of Antichrist, and that bodily; and it is complete in it,
which is Col 2.9.
the head of the Devil's principality and power! 1 Th 2.3.
Its exhortation is of deceit, uncleaness, and guile. Its lust opposes and 2 Th
2, 3.
exaltsit self, above all that is called God, or is worshipped, that it may sit
in the Temple of God, showing it self, that it is God. Its rise and progress is
after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders. Oh
my God, if 1 Ti 1.51.
Christ came not into the world to save selfishsinners (of whom I am chief,) 1
Co 15.17.
my faith is vain; and as I live in, I shall dye in my sins. But through him
strengthening me, I hope I shall (as Paul Acts 28.5.
spoke of this viper, though it fasten about me, I hope I shall both pluck out
my selfish Mat ^5.29, 30
eye, and cast it from me too: chop off my selfish hands, and cast them from me
also; yea, and throw out my selfish holiness it self, unto the dogs. I hope to
see the Job 31.22.
ar mof all self, fall from its shoulder blade, and broken from the bone;
broken in pieces psalm 89 10.
as Rahab; and served as the Midianites, as Sisera; as Jabin, at the brook of
Kison. If not, piety must say within me, Jer. 10.20.
my Tabernacles are spoiled my cords are broken: there is none to stretch forth
my Tent any more, and to set up my curtains! and, woe is me, I must say to the
power of godliness (if any live in me) 2 Ki 20.1.
set thy house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live; for sure I am,
selfishness wipes out spirituality of obedience, as a man 2 Ki 21.13.
wipes out a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down: Nebuchadneuzar like,
it makes a decree, that every power of the powers of the soul, that shall Dan
3.5, 6.
hear the sound of its cornets, flutes, and harps, shall fall down, and worship
the golden images that it sets up; and if any grace withstand, it must be cast
into the midst of the burning fiery furnace of rage and malice! (like the woman
in the Revelation) it is Rev 18.21.
arrayed in purple, and scarlet-colour'd pretenses, decked with gold, precious
stone, and pearl, in its professions, and has in its hand a golden cup, like a
sacred chalice; but it is full of abominations and filthiness of its
fornications: upon its forehead should be wrote, Mystery, Babylon, the great,
the mother of harlots, and abominations of the heart and life! wherefore thou,
oh my God, send thou the Angel of the Covenant, Rev 18.21.
the mighty Angel indeed; and by his holy spirit, let him take up thy word,
like a great millstone, and cast this Babylon into the sea, and let it be found
no more at all in my soul, or any of its ways! As Exo 15, 4, 5.
Pharaoh's chariots, and his host, were cast into the sea, and his chosen
captains drowned in the red sea; so let the deeps cover my selfishness, and all
its Egyptian crew, let them sink into the bottom, as a stone! Amen, my God,
Amen.

17. A Soliloquy with my Soul, about its evidences for Divine Love.
OH my soul, my soul! Pro. 24.24, 25.
He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse!
Shall nations abhor him? I prithee, He that says to his wicked self, Thou art
righteous, shall not God curse him too? shall not Saints also abhor him? Psalm.
39.1.
Take heed then to thy ways, that thou sin not with thy tongue! Keep the mouth
of thy very heart also, with a bridle, while thy wicked lusts are before thee.
Job 12.6.
The tabernacles of them who rob, and take from Gods promises their comforts
which they give them not, do prosper for a while; but the wealth of evidences
for heaven, Pro 13.11.
got by vanity, will be diminished; when they that gather them by laborious
consulting the conditions of Gospel promises, shall increase. The devil's
beasts do not know Isa. 1.3.
their Owner; nor his Asses their Master's crib. Without are dogs, which
neither ken their being dogs, but dream themselves God's children; nor believe
themselves without divine favor, but conceit them wrapped up in the bowels of
it. Thousands, I am out of doubt, thousands of Christ's Mat 25.33, 37, 44.
sheep, think they are goats; but thousands of thousands among Satan's goats,
think they are sheep! Many, in whom Christ is, think 2 Co 13.5.
they are Reprobates; but more, who are Reprobates, think that Christ is in
them! Oh my soul! my soul! If I my self, Gal. 1.8.
or an angel from heaven, do preach to thee any other Gospel, or salvation on
any other Terms, than what are delivered in Christ's own, hold it accursed; He
that does Joh ^^ 21.
the truth, comes to that light, e're his deeds can be made manifest, that
they are of God. pro. 18.17.
It being first in thy own cause, thou should seem just, God, thy very near
Neighbor, will be sure come search thee out. He leads corrupt Job 12.17.
self-counsellers away spoiled, and makes partial Judges of themselves, fools:
and believe me, the Mat. 24.35.
heaven of presumptions making, shall pass away, but his works will not pass
away. pro. 20.6.
Most men, and especially the worst, will proclaim every one his own
righteousness; but, a faithful friend to God, who canfind for all that? My
soul, I am sure thou have those within thee, which Isa. 30.10.
say to thy Seers, see not: and to the Prophets, prophecy not right things,
speak unto us smooth things; but for the love of Christ, don't let them make
Isa. 28.15.
thee make lies thy refuge, and undersalshood hide thy self. God has written to
thee excellent things in counsel and in knowledge, pro. 22.20, 21.
that he might make thee not guess, but know, not the probability, but
certainty of the words of Truth. Pro. 3.5, 6.
Lean thou not then to thy own understanding, but in all thy ways acknowledge
them. Job 38.2, 3.
Don't darken counsel by words without knowledge. Gird up now thy loins, for I
will demand of thee, and answer thou me! Has thine eye seen God, Job 42.6, 7.
so as that thou abhorrest thy self in dust and ashes? Are all thy springs in
God? and Psalm 121.1, 2
do thou lift up thy eyes to no other hills, for thy salvation? Do find,
that it is indeed his Psalm. 104.28, 29.
opening his hand, that fills thee with good; and it is his hiding his face that
troubles thee? Art thou sure of this? Do verily believe Psalm. 84.11.
that God is the Sun, who gives thee all thy light, without any efficiency of
thy lower Moon and Stars? and that he is the only shield in life and death? Is
he in good earnest thy love, Isal 119.16.
delight, desire, and joy, and hope? Have thou said (as he says) to all other
gods, Ye shall die? Is Psalm. 97.10.
he Lord of lords, God of hosts, I am that I am, wonderful, Counselor and
mighty God, See the whole Law and Gospel.
Holy, Faithful, and True, in thy inmost reins? Is his Son God-man, crucified
under his Fathers wrath, satisfactoriously, meritoriously, and victoriously
dying, rising, triumphing, and interceding at his Fathers right hand, thy life,
light, bread, raiment, ark, City of Refuge, Priest, Prophet, King? Is God the
Joh. 14.18.
holy Spirit, thy Enlightner, Quickner, Convincer, Converter, Comforter? Is thy
being shapen in sin, and conceived in Psalm 51.3, 5.
iniquity, ever before thee? Do. set thy secret sins before thee, thy Psalm
90.8.
hidden ones in the light of thy countenance? Do smell them stink, ready to
choke thee, bowing thee, ready to break thee, and killing thee all the day
long? Tell me, is the Law the delight of thy eyes, and do keep it in them?
Do make it a light to they feet, as well as thy brains? Can say without
lying, thou have not a 2 Co 1.9.
comfort in all the world, but it springs from one or other of the Lord's
promises? Does his threatening Isa. ult. 2, 3.
word make thee tremble? Do live by sense as a horse; by carnal reason, as a
man; or by faith as a Christian? Has thy faith any Acts 26.18.
eyes, do they see God, heaven, helf, death, and Judgment, every day, every
duty, every time, of seriousness; and that as real, certain, indisputable
things? Jer. 6.10.
Has thy faith any ears, can it and does it hear the voice Job 35.10.
of God, in his Word and providential works, that which natural men do no more
hear, than stocks and stones? Don't thy natural Eze 12.2.
ears hear the Minister speak a great deal, while thy spiritual ears don't hear
God speaking one word of it? Don't lie, but tell me, Have ears for God's mouth,
as thou have for men? Has thy faith Psalm 135.
a nose, one that smells myrrh, aloes, cinnamon in every Truth, and every good
notion, practice, and person, together with fire and brimstone in every sin,
though sweetened with profit, pleasure, honor, love of Kings themselves? What
manner Psalm 34 8.
of Taste has thy faith? Does secret converse with God, in bed, at board, on
horseback, in closet, etc. Does converse with thy self, and Christ's members
(as such)? Do duties of all kinds, such as most exclude thy own carnal ease,
and men's carnal peace and favor? Do these taste indeed, and in good earnest, so
well Psalm 119.103.
as honey to thy 1 Pe 2.3.
palate? Do they affect thee with so palpable a pleasure and sweetness? And
lastly, for God's sake tell me, what feeling is thy faith of? Cannot it let thee
go without its robes about thee, but strait feel the sterming wind of God's
wrath, and scorching Sun shine of his fury? and that as plain, as thy naked
body would feel a December frost, or March wind, on a hill? Is God thy All, art
thou all Gods, and that in secret sober sadness? Can vow and protest to
Father, Son, and Spirir, that thy heart labors after, and cannot, and will not be
satisfied without 2 Co 13 14.
the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father, and the
communion of God the Spirit? If so, Go in peace, and the God of peace be with
thee. Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.

17. A Soliloquy with the World.
OH World, World! Joh. 8.48.
Say I not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? Nay rather, is
not thy name Mar 5 9.
legion, and art thou not many Abaddons, and Apollyons? I am sure thou have often
caught Saints themselves, and they have been Luk 8. 29, 33.
bound with thy chains and fetters, breaking God's holy bonds. And as for
unregenerate Swine, into whom thou entrest, and art not soon dispossess't, thou
hurriest them down into the lake, where they are clothed with fire and
brimstone! The Devil had less specious Ge 3.
apples of old, to delude eye with, than thy apples of gold in pictures of
silver be. If that serpent did not eat and feed men with thy dust, we might
triumph over him; oh Serpent, where is thy sting? Joh 8.44.
oh Devil, where is thy victory? He was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the Truth; and wast not thou a like apostate, of whom God said,
Thou wast very good, and by and by Ge. 1.31. Genesis 3.17.
cursed thee! that once barest good fruit for the use of man's body, now
nothing but thorns and thistles, at least husks, for soul and body? I Will say it,
Jud 6.
Thou kept'st not thy first estate, but art now reserved to the jud gement of
the great Day! And I Will vow my judgment is, that if I don't in the mean time
drownthee in the Rev 12.15.
flood of my penitential tears, and burn thee out of my soul with the fire of
my love and zeal, for a better world, the flood cast out of thy mouth will
swallow me up, and I shall find the God of this world a consuming fire! For if
any Devil Heb 2.15.
has the power of death, I dare say it is the world, to whose Ephesians 6.12.
principalities and powers, mankind so conforms its life! It Is the world makes
every Luk 22.3, 5.
Judas in it, and we betray not Christ to our lusts, till that enter into us,
and covenant with us: Nor keep we back any thing from him, till this Act 5.30.
Satan fills our hearts, to oppose the Holy Ghost! Thou, oh world, art the
Satan that stand ever at our right hands, to resist us! and I vow, I think 2
Ch 10.10.
thy little finger thicker, than the loins of all the Devils in hell. If the
Saints must judge 1 Co 6.2.
the world, and the things of the world, I doubt not but they will judge them
the worst enemies, next to lusts after them. If they resist the Devil, he will
fly from them; but the earth abides for ever a Tempter, and its Herod's which
seek the life of Christ within us, will never be dead. We may choose, whether we
will give any place to the Devil, or no; but the world must have our backs, on
which it makes (but too often) very long furrows: and our bellies, in which it
leaves its Idol-gods. Of all its clothes, how few there be that will not be found
naked, and uncovered with Christ's Garments. I cannot think without horror,
and surely did it poison as many bellies as souls, it would have few to feed.
Oh world, world! Miserable are thy men, and miserable the servants, 2 Ch 9.7.
which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom, though with that
pleasure, of which the world is not worthy. I assure Ecc. 1.8.
thee, my eye is satisfied with seeing thee; and my ear with hearing thee! The
Devil brags of thy Mat 4.9.
All these things; but God calls thy things, things which are not: and if that
damned Ghost did not think my soul worth a thousand of thee, he would scarce be
so busy with me, to give my soul in exchange for thee. I know by my
experience, Jer. 2.13.
thy cisterns are broken, and can hold no water. My comforts in eating and
drinking, do tell thy bread and wine, as See 2 Genesis 45. Mat. 7.10.
Joseph his Brethren, It was not you, but God, that sent me hither. My God
knows. I pity as many as gather their grapes from thy thorns; and hold them
children, who take their figs from thy thistles. Thy Mar 11.20.
fig trees are cursed, and dried up from the roots. Till Christ's blessing
return, they are the roots of all evil. I confess thou have Luk 12.19.
much goods laid up for many years; but hang thee and them too, thou have none
for eternity. Job 14.11.
As waters fail from the sea, and the flood dryes up: so thy Goods lie down,
and rife no more. As often as I have Psalm. 37.25.
seen the righteous forsaken by thee, I never saw them so more brutish, than
Psalm 104.21.
the beasts of the wilderness, as to beg bread from thee. A man may possess all
thy things, and yet not so much as have any thing to 2 Co 6.10.
possess. One blessing of God's makes rich. Ten thousand of thine cannot so do!
For thee and thy followers are reserved to the Day of Destruction; and in the
interim, even that which is wanting, cannot be numbered; and that which is, is
besides vexation, no more than vanity. Oh world, world! I protest it is Jesus
that must feed me with food convenient for me, and cloth me too; thy daily
bread without his will starve me. Mat 13.44, 46, 52.
If the Kingdom of heaven be treasure, thou art a dunghill: If a pearl, thou a
cherry-stone. Go, get thee and offer thy accursed things to thy Achans; money,
and change of raiment to Gehezies; fat cattle to thy Saul's; thy Dalilah's to
thy Sampsons; preferments to thy Balaams; and thy pre-eminence to thy
Diotrephes! Lay thy suares in Mizpah, and spread nets in Tabor; use thy laws
and menaces, thou shall make no Demas of me. I have seen thee smite the Body of
Religion with Job 2.7.
sore boils, from the sole of its feet to thy crown! I have seen thee shaving
many poor Christians, till their spiritual strength has gone from them, and
they have Jud. 16, 17.
become weak, and been like other men! When I my self have often been going about
my God's service. Oh world, world! how have thou Nu. 22.22, 24.
(as the Angel to Balaam) stood as an adversary in my way, against me? and made
as it were a wall on this side, and a wall on that! Jud. 14.9.
How rarely have I found honey in thy carcases? How often venom in thy sweets?
God Job 35.10.
deliver me from the songs that thou give in the height. Better is a Dinner
of herbs, where the love of my God is, than all thy stalled oxen, and thy love
therewith! Pro. 15.17.
Thy goodness is as a morning dew, and as an early cloud, it passes away: but
of thy temptations, one generation passes, and another still comes! Thy men are
every one a Jannes and Jambres: Thy things are all Sampson's Foxes, with
Firebrands to destroy piety.

Yet will I be just, oh world! Fle give the Devil his due, I do acknowledge it
is my sin that has made thee thus thy enemy! it is my own fault I am hurt by
thee; and therefore say I now well to my own heart, my polluted heart, Thou art
a Samarita, and have a Devil.

18. A Soliloquy with the Lord, of the weakness of Grace.
OH my God, my God! I read in thy word that he is Psalm 41.1, 2, 3.
blessed, who considers the poor, that thou will deliver him in time of
trouble: That thou will preserve him, and keep him alive, and make him blessed
on earth! That thou will not deliver him over into the hand of his enemies:
That thou will strengthen him on the bed of languishing, and make his bed in
his sickness! Oh my God, how often has my faith considered all my poor distressed
comforts and hopes? How often has the blessing of them, when they have been ready
to perish, come on my faith? Now therefore, oh my God! Deliver my faith in time
of trouble, preserve it and keep it alive; bless it, and deliver it not over to
the hands of its enemies! Strengthen it on the bed of its languishment, and
make all its bed, on thy promises, in its sickness! As with a sword in its
bones, my lusts do reproach it, while they daily say to it, Psalm 42.10.
Where is now thy God? peace and joy, its Psalm 38.11, 12.
lovers and friends stand aloof from its sore; and hope and trust, its very
kinsmen, stand afar off. They that seek after its life, lay snares for it; and
they that seek its hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the
day long! Oh my God, its Isa. 1.5.
whole head is sick, its whole heart is faint, Pro. 24.11.
it faints in the day of prosperity, its strength is so small. It is not with
it, as in the days of its Job 4, 5, 6, 19.
first Love, when the Secret of God was upon its Tabernacle; when the Almighty
was yet with it, and its children (of Repentance, Zeal, and Heavenly
mindedness, etc.) were about it! When it washed its steps with butter, and
every rock it self poured it out rivers of oil! when its root was spread out by
the waters of Divine Love, and the dew lay all night on its branches! Now Jer.
15.9.
she that has born seven languishes, she has given up the ghost, her Sun is
gone down, while it is yet day. My faith, oh my God, now Isa. 59.10.
gropes for the wall, like the blind; gropes as if it had no eyes, stumbles at
noon day, as in the night! My hope lays its 1 Ki. 23.30.
carcass in its own grave, and mourns over him, saying, Alas my brother! Oh my
God, what shall I do! All my graces seem to have said to thee as Exo 10.29.
Moses to Pharaoh, We will see thy face no more. All their Gen 48.10.
eyes are as Isreal's, dim, they cannot see: their ears are shortened, that they
cannot hear thee: and their arms, that they cannot lay hold on thine. Their
leanness rising up in them, bears witness against them. Job 17.18.
Their breath is corrupt, their days are extinct, the graves are ready to
them. If their Offspring of Duties be multiplied, oh my God, Job 27.14.
it is for the sword of my vile corruptions; Jer. 15.3.
to their sword, to slay: to their dogs, to tear: to their fowls and beasts, to
devour and destroy. Those very duties, that e're while were Lam 4.5.
brought up in scarlet, in the very blood of Jesus, how do they embrace even
dunghills of rotten, stinking Formality, etc. the skin of which being broken,
becomes loathsome. Job 7.5.
The hand of faith has offended my lusts, Mat. 18.8, 9.
and they have cut it off! The eye of faith has offended them, and they have
plucked it out! My hope has offended them, and they have made it ashamed! They
have tied milstones about the necks of all my souls graces, and thrown them
into the depths of Distrust! But oh my God, my God! though the Gen 49.23, 24.
Archers have sorely grieved them, and shot at them, will thou yet return their
bow to its strength, and shall the arms of their hands be made strong, by the
hands of the Mighty God of Jacob? From whom is the shepherd and stone of
Israel. Hos. 13.9, 14.
Though they have destroyed themselves, in Thee is their help! Ransom thou them
from the power of the grave, and redeem them from death! Say to their death,
that thou will be its plagues; and to their graves, that thou will be their
destruction! So shall the very dead praise thee, and those that have gone down
to the pit, remember thy Name! Nor shall my lusts, my Eccl 9.4.
living dogs, be better than my graces, though dead Lions I Redeem, oh my God,
Psalm 103.4.
Redeem their life from Destruction! And, for Christ's love, Psalm 66.9.
hold thou their souls (as well as mine) in life! Without thee, oh Jesus, my
life, my food, my raiment, my All; without thee, what is the life of my grace?
it is even a Jam 4.14.
vapor that appears, and but appears for a time, and but a little time, and
vanishes away: Job 24.22.
No man is sure of their life; no, though Job 2.4.
all that a man has he would give for their life! But, oh by thee, in whom my
graces life is hid, may it Luk 21.28.
lift up its head, and may its salvation draw nigh! The winds and seas obey
thee, make thou the Rev 20.13.
sea of my corruptions to give up its dead! So shall my love for thee be
stronger than death, and my jealousy Can 8.7, 8.
for thy glory, be cruel to them, as the grave; the coals thereof shall be
coals of fire, which have a most vehement flame. No waters shall quench, or
floods drown it, though the devil would give all the substance of this great
house of the world for it, it should utterly be contemned.

19. A Soliloquy of vain Thoughts.
OH my soul, my soul! Thy thoughts are thy Gen 49.3, 4.
Reubens, thy firstborn, thy might, the beginning of thy strength, the
excellency and power, if good: but if unstable as water, thou can not excel.
Paul says, That 1 Co 13.11.
when he was a child, he thought as a child: when a man, he thought as a man.
But verily, when I was a child, I thought as a beast; when a man, I thought as
a child. The mighty God Psalm 139.2.
understands thy thoughts afar off. Oh that thou would understand them
better, far and near! For solemnly I tell thee, that though Heb 4.13.
all things are naked and open before the God, with whom I have to do, yet are
they secret sins which he is said to set before him, and hidden ones that he
puts in the Psa 9.7.
light of his countenance! Though he be justly called Heb 12.23.
Judge of all, yet particularly and chiefly he is said, Coming to judge To.
2.16.
the secrets of men! Of every idle word, an account must be given; but Mat
12.36, 37.
of every idle thought, which produces millions of them, what account can be
given? If (in my sense) I was to be justified by my words, I should scarce hope
well! But alas, if a man offend not Jam. 3.2, 6, 8.
in word, yet if he does in thought, he is no perfect man. Add hereto, that the
tongue is no such fire, no such world of iniquity, no such untamable and unruly
member; but the heart is by thousands, and by ten thousands, worse! Ecc 10.14.
Fools indeed cannot rule their words, but the wisest cannot rule their
thoughts. David protests he hated vain thoughts, but never once boasts of a
conquest over them. Besides, what are our words? They are even a vapor which
appear for a little while, and vanish away! Evil thoughts are a sin that
dwells in us, and tell me, oh my soul, oh tell me, Jer. 4.14.
how long shall they lodge within thee They have lodged in thee so long
already, that they have begot a hundred monsters, opinionative, affectional,
and practical. I protest in God's presence, to thy face, Ecc 4.1.
I have considered many of the oppressions that are done under the Sun; and
like to that of thine own, by evil thoughts, I know not any. My God alone does
know, what I would give, to have my thoughts taught Tit 2.5.
young women's duty, to be discreet, chaste, and keepers at home; good, obedient
to the dictates of my own conscience, that the word of God might not be
blasphemed: to be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, and
patience: to be in behavior as becomes holiness. But alas, alas! Job 2.2.
their feet abide not in their home; like the devil, they are mostly going to
and fro in earth: they are very Gen 49.21. Pro. 22 6.
Naphtali's, Hinds let loose, and they love to wander. Let me train them, ever
so much, in the way wherein they should go; Psalm 90.9. Mark 14.20.
yet instantly they will depart from it. If any good be thrown in upon them,
yet it passes away like a Tale that is told! but rarely falls a seed of evil,
but it takes root, and bears, some thirty, some sixty, some a hundred fold. As
for all foregoing good inclinations, and purposes, they make them as grass upon
Psalm 129.6. Hos. 4.11. Romans 11.8.
the house tops, which withers before it grows up. In a word, there is much of
whoredom, and wine, and new wine in them, which utterly take away the heart,
and infuse a spirit of flumber: The form of Godliness, they sometimes feed,
even Luk 15.22, 23.
with the fatted calf, and cloth with the best robe, putting rings on its
fingers, and tinkling ornaments about its feet too. But for the power of
Godliness, they serve it, as Samuel did Agar, they hew it in pieces. As for the
object of Devotion, the Holy God, ah my soul, my soul! How abominates he vain
thoughts, he removes his way far from them, he Pro. 5.8. Pro. 4.15. See Pro
6.16, 17, 18
will not come nigh the door of their house; he, be sure of it, avoids their
mansions, passes not by it, turns from it, and passes away. Every vain thought
is a virtual Gergesen, beseeching Christ to get him gone out of the region of
the heart; and ordinarily, a few serve to send him going. As for the heart it
self (the subject of Devotion) vain thoughts, take the Kingdom of Grace out of
it, and very reason too, in a great measure, they drive it from Saints, yea,
from men: They make its dwelling with Dan 4.31, 32. Hos. 12, 1.
beasts of the field, they make it to eat the grass with carnal oxen; with
Ephraim to feed on the wind, and follow after the Eastwind; yea, they sometimes
turn the children Mat 3.9.
of Abraham into stones, obdurate and insensible. As for acts of Devotion, Hos.
13.3.
Prayer, Meditation, etc. Vain thoughts make them, First, to be as the morning
cloud, and as the early dew; as the chaff driven with the whirlwind, out of
the floor; and as the smoke out of the chimney, which leave no sign behind
them. And Secondly, to be mere Jud. 12, 13.
clouds without water; trees whose fruit wither, without fruit, twice dead,
plucked up by the roots: raging waves of a sea of hypocrisy, foming out the
souls shame: they make them grievous to us, and odious to God. As for the means
of Devotion, holy Meditation alone, holy conference with Christians, holy use
of God's Word, and good Books. Oh my soul, sadly do thou know, how vain
thoughts make one Rev 3.16.
spue them out of ones mouth, or at least taste no more in them, than in the
white of eggs. Thou know, vain thoughts make the heart (like the Leviathans)
firm as a stone; yea, hard as a piece of the nether millstone; and then let
God's Books, or his Saints, or both say to us (as Job to his friends) Job 27.11.
I will teach you by the hand of God, that which is with the Almighty, will I
not conceal; Yet they will be utterly contemned, and be to us Physicians of no
value. As for the Opposites and Contraries of Devotion, Pride,
earthlymindedness, Atheism it self; vain thoughts are those, which took them
out of the Psalm 22.9, 10. Psalm. 25 13.
womb; upon vain thoughts they were cast from the very breasts; and vain
thoughts were their Gods, even from the belly. Vain thoughts make them to dwell
at ease, and to lift up their heads above the heads of Humility,
Heavenlymindedness, and practical piety. All things methinks, of every sort,
says to vain thoughts, You are our Psalm. 142.5.
refuge, and our hiding place: You are the hills, whence comes our help? They
will not in truth, my soul! they will Psalm 3.5. Hos. 13.8.
not be afraid of ten thousands of Sermons, which set themselves against them:
They will lie down, and sleep, and awake, while vain thoughts sustain them,
Sermons, Conferences, etc. would meet every of thy sins, and rent the caul of
their hearts. They would make their strong holds like Nah 3.12.
fig trees, with the first ripe figs; if they were but shaken, they would fall.
Were it not, that Psalm 125.2.
as the mountains stand round about Jerusalem: so vain thoughts stand so about
my corruptions, that the means of Grace cannot have full reach of them. Would my
God but cast down my 2 Co 10.5. Rev. 18 2. Psalm. 10.4.
imaginations, and bring my thoughts into captivity, and the obedience of
Jesus, then should my heart be no longer the habitation of Devils, and the hold
of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird! But hear,
oh my soul, if God be in all thy thoughts, vanity and sin will be in all thy
best words and deeds! For the love of Christ, go cry to thy God, and say, Pro,
6.2.
Thou art snared with the thoughts of thy heart! Beg him for Christ's sake,
that their root may be dried up, and they may bear no more fruit; yea, though
they should bring forth, Hos. 9.16.
that he would stay even the beloved fruit of their womb, and dash their little
ones against the stones. Now consider this, oh ye the poor beginnings of grace
and comfort within me, least vain thoughts Psalm 50.22.
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

20. A Soliloquy of idle words.
Gen 15.5.
LOok now toward Heaven, oh my soul, and tell the stars, if thou be able to
number them! Lift up thine eyes, Gen 13.14, 16.
look abroad from the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward; Eastward,
and Westward. if thou can tell the stars, and count the dust of the earth,
then may thy Job 6.25. Mar. 7.18.
words also be numbered; words, of which there is not one, but is very forcible,
whether right or no: for though (but too often) thou make the words of God of
none effect in one sense, God will never make thine of none effect in another,
but will by them, Mat 12.37.
or justify, or condemn thee. Jam 3.10.
Out of every of thy so many words, a blessing or curse is sure to proceed; and
woe be to thee, if God make thee an offender, for a word unrepented of. For as
every unsanctified tongue, so every vain word thereof, is it self a world of
iniquity; yea, behold it is Psalm. 51.5.
shapen in iniquity, and in sin does the heart conceive it. It Is by nature a
Ephesians 2.3.
child of wrath, even as other works of disobedience; it is of its Joh 8.44.
Joh. 8.48. Luke 10.17.
father the Devil, and the works of its father it will do, damn it self, and
its corrupted hearers. Say I not well to every of thy idle words then, Thou art
a Samaritan, and have a devil? Devils, without all peradventure, they are; and
oh would God, thou could now go, say, Lord, these devils are subject to me in
thy Name. If 1 John 3.8.
such as commit sin, be of the devil, I am certain they are his genuine seed
and issue; for why, To. 3.23.
sin dwells in them, and they are carnal, sold under sin, they lay on thee
weights, and make actual sins easily beset thee. Yea farther, oh my soul, thy
idle words have not only sinned all of them, and come short of the To. 7.13, 14.
glory of God; but they have made many to be sinful through them, who else had
not known the sins imparted to them. In a word, idle words (the plague of their
plagues is,) they become 1 Jo 2.2.
propitiations for sin, and not for ones own only, but the whole companies.
God's (word is indeed the Psalm 119.105. Read Isa. ^.8. Phil. 2.16.
light to our feet, and the (due) lanthorn to our paths! But the very truth is,
there is (a kind of ignis fatuus) a false light, sparkling out of ones own
words, which generally does lead our feet, and chalk out our paths. Nor have
evil communications a little influence on like manners: every word of ours, is
ordinarily a word of life, in a sense, God rarely holding our hearts, when once
Psalm. 12.4. Psalm. 2.
our lips are our own, and our hands ever breaking his bonds asunder, and
casting his cords behind us, as soon as his Josh 1.8.
Law is departed out of our mouths. Nor yet, oh my soul, may thou think,
that thy tongue or thy words are sufficient lodgings for Divine Love, they are
but for walks, to move and appear in. Thy honor to God, though it be but
barren, without the fruit, and the calves of thy lips, yet these oblations are
odious to the very soul of God, when they are not offered from out the very
soul of man. Though stinking breath argues rotten lungs, and I am out of doubt,
thou art most impure, if thy speech be not seasoned with salt; yet this I
utterly set at naught, unless thou have Col 4.6. Mat. 9 5
salt in thy self also. The cleaner thou sweepest before the Mic. 7.5.
doors of thy mouth, oh my soul, sweep so much the cleaner before the doors of
thy heart too, and within its chambers; otherwise, thy Psalm 57.8.
tongue will be indeed thy glory, but no more than thy vain glory. Add whereto,
Mar. 3.24, 25.
that the Kingdom of God cannot stand in humane souls, wherein the heart and
tongue stand divided against each other. The practical impieties of an
hypocrite, Job 29.17.
will break his own jaws, and pluck the spoils of Grace out of his teeth. If
his tongue break not its own word, his hands will. Being evil, he may speak
great things, but not good to himself, who speaks them, nor very likely to be
good to others, coming through so polluted lips as his. But, oh my soul, David
says, The words of the Lord are pure words: And his son tells thee, The Psalm
12.6.
words of the pure are Pro. 15.26.
pleasant words. Oh count thou them only pleasant, which are pure; and them
pure, which are godly. Christ, who in one sense Mat 10.19.
forbids thee, in another commands thee, to take thought how, and what thou
shall speak. Ecc. 5.1.
Be not rash with thy mouth, says Solomon: Be Jam 1.19.
slow with it, says James. 1 Co 14.19.
Five words with understanding ones self, and with edifyingness to others, are
better than ten thousand without the same, says Paul. The wisest of men
declares it, That acceptable words he did not find, without Ecc 12.10.
seeking them out. The most godly of men professes, it cost him good Psalm. 39.1.
heed to keep sin out of his tongue, and sometimes 'twas a bridle only, which
could rule it. A blessed prophet mentions Mic 7.5.
doors of the mouth, and calls for Porters to keep them to. Were it an easy
thing, graciously to open those doors, Why prayed Psalm. 51.15.
David so urgently to God, to open his for him? Were it easy to keep them duly
shut; one chapter in St. James his Epistle, would swarm with errors. Though one
love pureness of heart, it is not the natural gift, but the supernatural Pro
22.11.
grace of ones lips, for which the King of Heaven will become our friend. In
the multitude of words uttered by the best, if there be not a multitude, yet
neither is there any Pro. 10.19.
want of sin. Thy sad and woeful experience tells thee, Thou art apt to Exo 23.2.
follow those multitudes to do evil. Wherefore do this now, oh my soul, and
deliver thy self, go humble thy self to God! and give not sleep to thine eyes,
Pro. 6.3, 4, 2
or slumber to thy eyelids, till thou have confessed it to him, that thou have
been snared with the words of thy mouth, and taken by the words of thy mouth,
which had they been savoury and sound, they had been Pro 8.11, 19.
better than rubies, and their fruit better than gold; yea, fine gold: but
being corrupt, Psalm 58.4.
their poison is like the poison of a serpent; and when best painted, they are
but stinking sepulchers. Go, and beseech the Christ of God, to give thee a Luk
21.15. Romans 15.6. 1 Cor. 13.1.
mouth and wisdom; wisdom with my heart, and mouth also, to glorify him all
the day long; to make his Word the rule and mold, wherein to cast mine. Would
God, oh my soul, the tongue of men and Angels were but one; and the praises of
God were as incessantly sung aloud on earth, as in heaven! Would God there were
no such things, as tongues devising Psalm 52.2.
mischiefs, and like sharp rasors, working deceitfully! Would God there were no
tongues of the beast, save in the mouths of beasts! and Psalm 49.3.
the meditation of humane hearts, were so of understanding, that the mouth of
the whole world would be of wisdom! Would God iniquity were more than
tongue-ty'd, even rooted out; and the words of men, Psalm. 12.7. Mat. 12.34.
would become as the words of God, pure words, tried in the furnace purified
seven times! But seeing so it (sadly) is, that out of the abundance of my
hearts wickedness, my tongue is hasty to speak. And seeing in the Job 20.12.
Pro. 10.14 Mal. 2.7.
mouths of the most, wickedness is sweet, and holiness bitter as gall: seeing
the mouths of fools are near destroying themselves, and others too: Seeing God
will also require his Law at thy mouth; and Christ Jesus owns not those for
his, whose lips are not as Can 3.8, 11.
thread of scarlet, and speech comely; whose lips drop not as the honey comb;
and under whose tongues there is not honey and milk. See Can 5.13.
I charge thee, oh my soul, before God, and the elect Angels, that thou slack
not prayer, till thou hear God saying to me; All days of thy life, I will be
with thee, and with thy mouth, and Exo 4.12.
teach thee what thou shall say.

21. A Soliloquy of evil Company.
CUrse ill company, oh my Psalm 103.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
soul, and all that is within me, curse its wicked name! Curse it, oh my soul,
and forget not all its injuries! which sets afoot all thy iniquities, and
strengthens all thy diseases, which reduces thy spiritual life to destruction,
and crowns thee with the thorns of its loving kindness! which fills thy mouth
with evil things, Isa. 65.4.
and broth of abominable things! Psalm. 103.12.
As far as the East is from the West, so far has it removed the thoughts of my
God, and my Christ from me. Even when I remember it, Job 21.6.
I am afraid, and trembling takes hold on me. For it has cast down many
wounded; yea, many strong in grace, have been slain by the wiles of it. Satan's
agents are subtle spirits, and his ministers a Psalm 105.4. Psalm. 76.7. Psalm.
76 1, 2, 3.
flaming fire! They, even they are to be feared, and who can stand not guilty,
or at least not accessory in their sight? In evil company. Satan is well
known, his name is great in evil company, in evil company also is his
tabernacle, and his dewlling place in evil companies. There breaks he the
arrows of the Almighty, the shield of Faith, the sword of the Spirit, and the
whole armor of God. Oh my soul, Psa. 1.1.
it is bad walking in the counsel of the ungodly; it is worse standing in the way
of sinners, and to sit in the feat of the scornful is worst of all; unlikely to
dwell in God's holy Hill, is that man, in whose eyes a vile person is not
contemned. Of evil company, Job 42.5, 6.
I had long heard, by the hearing of the ear; but when my eye saw it, and by
sad experience I felt it, I abhorred it, and my self for no more abhorring it,
in dust and ashes. Psalm 149.8.
For it binds the motions of the holy Spirit in chains; and the Dictates of
conscience in fetters of iron: and it works with 2 Th 2.10.
such deceivableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish by it, that few
who Pro. 2.19.
go in unto it, return again, nor take hold such of the paths of life. Thy good
company be to me, but as a very lovely Eze. 33.32.
song, of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well upon an instrument.
Though I hear their words, and either do them not, or not as I ought; Yet alas,
in evil company all things are said, and done too, unto edification! They
build one up in vanity, and sinful-mindedness; and the 2 Co 10.4, 5.
weapons of their warfare, I will say it, are (though carnal) yet mighty,
through the Devil without, and devilish Justs within, to the pulling down of
the strongest holds of Grace, and casting down holy apprehensions, and every
divine thing, that exalts it self against the works of Satan. True it is, evil
company cannot enjoin or enforce: yet Phil 9, 10.
as Paul did Philemon) for loves sake, it will beseech us to entertain again,
those very sins which we have renounced. Satan cannot force, but shrewdly can
he tempt; and I much mistake, if evil company be not the very brightness, and
Heb 1.3, 13. Pro. 2.27.
express image of his person: Nay, and methinks, I hear the Devil saying to all
company, Sit you at my right hand, and I will make some of your enemies my
foot stool. Deep, oh my soul, deep is the ditch, and narrow is the pit of evil
company; and it is almost Heb 8 4.
impossible for those, who are once so darkened, as to taste their hellish gifts,
and be made partakers of the damned Ghost, who is never more an Abaddon and
Apolluon, than in evil company, ever again to return savingly, to the great
Shepherd and Bishop of souls. Rev 2.13.
I know the works of such as dwell in evil company, even where Satan's seat
is; they hold fast Satan's name, and deny not his service. No wonder that Elihu
cries out, Job 34.7, 8.
What man is like Job, if once he goes so much, as in company with workers of
iniquity, and walks with wicked men? David said once to Abigail, 1 Sa. 25.32,
33.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me.
Blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou! But alas! How often have I said,
Cursed be my own sin in unnecessary visits and resorts! cursed be their
advices, and cursed their ways. It was a true report which I had heard in my
minority and childhood, of the Acts and madness of evil company; howbeit, 2
Ch 9.5, 6, 7
I believed not their words, who told me thereof, till my eyes had seen it. And
behold, oh my soul, my soul, and all that is within me, Behold, the one half
was not told me, the sin of evil company, and its infectiousness exceed the
fame thereof! Cursed are their men, and cursed their servants, which stand
continually about them, and hear their folly. Psalm. 24 7.9.
Open the gates of the house, and of the heart to evil company, and without
the least doubt, the Prince of darkness shall come in; and when he comes, shall
find or make the heart empty, swept and garnished for his use. Egypt was no
house of Bondage, comparable Exo 20.1.
to that of Egyptian Company: nor is ever the Lord's flock so carried away
captive, as when they are carried by their own heedlesness or worse, into the
Synagogue of Satan: for these captivities Jer. 13.17.
weep thou, oh my soul, in secret places, my eye shall weep sore, and run down
with tears! It Is evil company, oh my soul, that deceives its neighbor, Pro
26.19, 18, 25, 26.
throws firebrarnds, arrows and death, and says, Am not I in sport. Oh when it
speaks fair, believe it not, there are seven abominations in its heart! Their
hate is covered with deceit: may their wickedness be shown before the whole
Congregation of God. In a worse sense than Paul's, We are made of the filth of
the world, when we have fellowship with those who are so. Mat 11.19. 2 Cor.
6.14.
Christ was a friend indeed, to Publicans and sinners, and so may we. Though he
held company, he held no communion with them, nor may we. His company with
them, was to reform them. Woe to us, if our company-keeping with men evil, be
not to make them good, and with a care, they make not us evil. Had the Prince
of this world any thing in him to catch him by? nothing at all. Woe then to us,
who have so much for him to catch us by, if we make so bold as he, in some
cases: Psalm. 119.63.
David was companion to all them who feared God, and kept his precepts; in
order to which, he took a very good (and it may be the only) course, when he
resolved, that he would not know Psalm 101.4.
a wicked person. If I will imitate my God, Psalm. 7.11.
who is angry with all wicked every day, I must be angry every day with my
wicked self, and beware of my own company; and why not as well of all wicked
company. Pro. 15.9.
A wicked man is loathsome to God, why should he be lovely to me; or how can
he, if I am like God in my affections? Had the Lord Christ thought it
impossible for me, to converse with worldly men, without holding communion with
them, I am persuaded he would have Joh. 17.15.
prayed the Father, to have taken me out of the world; which since he has not, I
resolve to sojourn (if providence will require me) in Psalm 120.5.
Mesech; and have my habitation in Kedar: But to put away Psalm 119.119.
all the wicked like dross, to beware of devils very much, but of men, more,
and put a wide difference between men and brethren. And now, Acts 15 13.
oh my soul, to confirm thy faith, and animate thy zeal, herein I charge thee
before the Trinity, and the elect Angels, to con well Two Texts, which have
flaming swords to keep thee out of ill company: The one is Genesis 3.15. The
other Rev. 22.11. All between remember, but these repeat thou every morn, noon,
and night. Amen.

22. A Soliloquy with God of my Soul.
LOrd! Psalm 119.79. Psalm 139.14.
thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: But nor 1, nor my parents know how!
I am fearfully and wonderfully made, in the very Isa. 40.6.
grass-plat of my flesh; and even such Psalm. 139.6.
knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain it. But as for
my spiritual substance, Heb 10.34. Heb. 12.9.
my better and enduring substance, my spirit, whereof thou art the immediate
Father, how that lives, moves, and has its being; what it is, how it-acts, how
it lives, man knows not; it Job 28.21, 23.
is hid from the eyes of all living, God only understands the way thereof, and
knows the place thereof. Though it dwell in a clod of earth, and a few drops of
blood, all the world to it is as nothing, as a Isa. 40.15, 17.
drop of a bucket, and the small dust of the balance, less than nothing and
vanity; it takes up the Isles as a very little thing. Oh my God, my body is
not so little a a thing to the whole world, as the whole world is to my soul:
fewer such bodies would fill the world, than such worlds would fill my soul.
Thou have but little in saying, The world is mine, and the fullness thereof;
than thou magnifiest thy self, when thou say, Eze. 18, 4.
All souls are mine, souls, Heb 11, 38.
of whom the world is not worthy. I have read of the ends of the earth, and
Psalm. 135.7.
I have seen an end of all perfection herein. But the capacity of my soul, I
find exceeding broad, so broad, that nothing less than what Jer. 13.24.
sills Heaven and earth too, can fill it; and if thou, oh my God, wilt fill it
when it is Luke 1.53.
hungry, with good things, thou must fill it with no worse, nor less, than the
fullness of God. The Lu. 58.
heles of the earth may contain foxes, and the worlds nests may hold unclean
birds; nay, each of them possibly may say, Psalm 132.14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it! But alas,
my soul has not where to lay its head herein! Thy Psalm. 15.1.
tabernacle, oh my God, thy holy hill, thy House not made with hands is the
least it can dwell in! The whole Earth is not a livelihood for one soul,
without thee; nor were Heaven it self tenantable, did not thy presence make it
a Court. Thou did once bid man Ge. 1.28.
replenish the earth, but never the earth replenish man, whose soul thou
know, Pro. 30.15.
and make one of those things which are never satisfied; and say not it is
enough, till it has as much more than the World, as the Gen 3.14.
Creator is than the Creation. Oh my God, I find that my soul cannot go upon
its belly, and eat dust: if thou thy self would tell me of the Kingdoms of
the earth, Mat 4.9.
All these things will I give thee for thy portion, it would utterly be Can 8.7.
contemned. I find my soul is opinionated, that it is a substance of more value,
than many sparrows, and will not be put off with a this-years nest, nor with
Luk 12.19.
goods laid up for many years neither, no lease for less than eternity: No
inheritance besides an 1 Pe 1.4.
incorruptible, and in no place but heaven will satisfy it, much less at all
gratify it. If thou should bid it go seek a happiness, it would return.
Lord, Joh 6.68.
to whom shall I go, thou have the words of eternal life! it would say, Lord,
every of thy 1 Ti 4.4.
creatures is good, and nothing to be refused for a servant; but I will call
none upon earth master, while I breath. Joh 18.36.
Had Christ's Kingdom been merely of this World, I would never have fought for
him so much as now I have and will, though I am driven out of the World. But
the very truth is, Joh 3.16.
God has so loved the World, that I will never love it. I read in thy holy Book
of many things lost; of but two (that I think of) won. Solomon mentions Pro.
11.30. Phil. 3.8.
winning of souls: St. Paul, winning of Christ; let me win but those Two, and
let Ziba take all for me; I cannot be exceedingly angered, or pleased Jon. 4.6,
7, 10. Isa. 5.10
with the gourds, which come in a night, and perish in a night. Oh my God, I
find, that whereas Christ's soul was made an offering for sin, most men make
their souls an offering to sin: But my soul (mindful of its primitive glory,
and likeness to God) declares its To. 1.18. Job 20.9.
Wrath against all sin, offers it self to thee; and resolves if thou vvilt not,
yet sin shall not have it; it will not serve sin, or abide by its crib. Nor
will it humble and Psalm. 113.6.
abase it self to behold (amorously) the things that are on earth. In
comparison of God, it Job 42.6.
abhors it self; in comparison of it self, it abhors the gain of the whole
World. The World, whose Mic. 6 10.
scanty measure is an abomination to it; and to all of whose Treasures, the
Heavenborn Joh. 8.23.
Spirit says, not infrequently, (as Jesus to the Jews) Ye are from beneath, I
am from above: Ye are of this World, I am not of this World; Adding, that Mat
5.18.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away; but not a jod or tittle of its substance
shall pass away. Hab. 3.17.
Though the fig tree blossom not, nor fruit be in the vines. Though the labor
of the Olive fail, and the fields yield no meat: Though the flock be cut off
from the fold, and there be no herd in the stalls: Though Moab reproach, and
Ammon revile, Zeph. 2 8.
my spirit can sustain its infirmity, and through Christ prosper too; but
without him, enjoyments are torments, and gains losses. Wherefore surely, oh my
God, I may say of humane souls, That man knows not the price: and it is so
far from being Pro 28.13.
found in the land of the living, that with infinite justice and prudence we
may all cry out, What shall we give in exchange?

23. A Soliloquy with God, of Evidences for Heaven.
OH my God, I cannot but ever and anon break out into such a Quaery of Heaven,
as Abraham put to thee of Canaan; Lord God, How shall I know, Ge. 15.8.
That I shall inherit it. I thank thee, O Lord, I do not yet hear thee say of
it to me, as of that Canaan to Moses, I have caused thee Deu 34.14.
to see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not go over thither: But nor yet do
I hear thee say, (so plainly as I would) Fear not, it is my good pleasure to
give thee Luk 12.33.
the Kingdom. Many seek to enter in, and are not able: Thousands not only say
and read, but cry Lord, Lord, Open, and yet are shut out. Some get so far, that
they be not far from Mat 7.22.
thy Kingdom, and yet never reach it. Nay, the children of the Kingdom
themselves, (Christ tells me) Mat 8.12.
are cast into outer darkness, the most part of them; and if so, Lord, what
cause have I to say to my soul, as Rut 3.1.
Naomi to Ruth, Shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
Of that soul, oh my God, so forgetful am I, that often it checks me (as Jud
16.13, 15.
Dalilah her Sampson) Hitherto have thou mocked me, and told me lies; How can
thou say I love thee, and thy heart is not with me. When it reflects on the
madnesses of my heart and life, it fears thou will one day say of me, as Achish
1 Sa. 29.15.
of David, Have I need of mad men? Shall this fellow come into my house? Heb.
4.1.
It does not infrequently alarm me in the being left us of entering into God's
rest, we should come short of it: For 1 Pe 4.12.
if the righteous scarcely be saved, Where shall we appear? Solomon says,
Blessed is the man that fears always. Oh my God, Let me not serve thee
therefore without fear of my self. Psalm 118.6.
David said, He would not fear what man could do unto him, but sure he meant of
other men: he feared his own heart, when he cried, Keep, yea, Psa. 119.13 Pro.
29 25.
keep back thy servant from presumptuous fins. Indeed the fear of other men,
brings a snare, as Solomon says; but the fearlesness of ones self brings a
million. The counsel is divine not to fear other men, who Mat 10.28.
can kill our body, and no more. But it is also as divine, that a man should
fear himself, who is not only able, but prone by sin, and by disobedience, to
destroy both soul and body in hell. Oh my God, Help me to attend Moses's
advice, Deu 4.9. Joh. 13.13.
to take heed to my self, and keep my soul diligently. I find, That in every
Prayer and Conference, wherein I do not so do, I must cry out to my Lord and
Master, as Josiah to his servants, when shot by the Archers, 2 Ch 35.23.
Have me away, for I am sore wounded, and that in my grace and peace too. As
Martha of Lazarus to Christ, I often say of my faith and hope, to my care of my
evidences for Heaven. Oh divine ears, had Joh 11.21.
thou been here, my faith and hope had not dyed; and indeed when that is
absent, whatever my labor is in Duties, in the end I must say, as Simon to
Jesus, Master, Luk 5.5.
We have toiled all night, and have taken nothing. Wherefore, oh my Blessed God
and Bounteous, Grant thou, that when thy holy Spirit Mat 5.41.
compells me to go one mile with him, in securing my title to glory, I may go
with him twain. Oh let my conscience be ever telling me, like to what Michol
told David, If thou save not 1 Sa 19.11.
thy life to night, (by ensuring thy evidences,) to morrow thou will be slain.
With sins, sorrows, and temptations. If at any time. I call the proud, Mal.
3.15.
happy (as Malachi says;) and say in a but seeming prosperity of grace, that I
shall never be moved. Oh my God, let thy good Spirit take me off, as the King 2
Ki. 18.19, 20.
of Assyria did Hezekiah, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest? Thou
say, (but they are but vain words,) I have counsel, and I have strength. O
my God, say to me of the host of my corruptions, my pride, folly, etc. as once
thou did to Gideon! Arise, Jud 7.5.
Get thee down to the host, for I have delivered it into thy hand. Help me, oh
Lord, incorruptly to say to Jesus of his Redemption-work, Rut 2.12.
as Boaz to Ruth; The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee
of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou have caused me trust; and to
vow unto him, as Ittai to David, As the Lord lives, and as my Lord Jesus
lives, (as the living Father lives, and Jesus lives by the Father) surely in
what place my Lord, (the King of Saints) shall be, 2 Sa. 15.21.
Whether in death or life, even there will thy servant be. Help me, oh my God
to set my Jesus Can. 8.6.
as a seal on my heart and arm, with a love strong as death, with jealousy of
all rivals, cruel as the grave. Give me to write on this World, and the glory
of it, Dan 5.27.
TEKEL, Thou are weighed in the balances, and are found wanting of any good for
my soul. Col. 3.1. Job 23.2.
Let my affections be on things above, my comforts in heaven, and my hopes on
high. Let me know, oh my God, where I may find thee in all distresses, and let
me come even to thy seat! When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock
that is higher than I, Psa 61.2. Ps. 119.139. Job 32.12.
Order my steps in thy Word, let not any iniquity have Dominion over me in
health, or distrust in sickness: in both let me esteem thy Word above my
necessary food or physic! And so, oh my God, of my evidences for heaven, Mat
10.20.
it shall not be I my self that speak, but thy Spirit in me. Amen, my God, Amen
and Amen.

Whiles this Piece lay at the Press, it pleased GOD to visit the Author with
the Small Pox, and gave him a Recovery full of Extraordinary Providence; of
which (upon his Friends request) he has annexed his Meditations.
24. A Soliloquy with God, after Recovery from a Sore Disease.
OH my God I am sure I can say, Mat 25.36.
I was sick, and thou visitest me! Oh that in the Day of Judgment, thou may
say likewise to me, I was sick, and thou visitedst me! I read of thy own
people, that once Isa. 42.25.
they had a fire about them, yet they knew it not; nay, and it burned them, yet
they laid it not to heart! Sure I am, I had my Disease about me, and I knew it
not: nay, and it brake out on me, and never entered into my heart what it was,
till by thy providence 'twas made known to me. So unable was I to do thy work;
Psalm. 103.3.
, to heal all my diseases my self, that in St. Paul's sense, and another too, I
might and still must say, 1 Co 4.4.
I know nothing of my self. Psalm. 39.12.
When with this rebuke thou did correct me, for my iniquities, thou made my
beauty to consume away like a moth, but in such measure, did thy grace correct
me, that I may use the great Apostle's words; 1 Co 1.27.
When I was weak, then was I strong; for all the while Psalm. 73.26.
my flesh failed, my heart never failed: and whiles my disease changed, and my
sores much destroyed my skin. Isa. 1.5.
neither was my head sick, nor my heart faint. Job 7.5.4.
When my flesh was ^^ath'd with scabs and botches, my skin broken, and become
loathsome through thy grace, oh my God, I was not full of tosssings to and fro,
I had yet then it self Pro 24.33, 34.
a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, till
my ease came to me, as one that traveled, and my victory of my Disease, as an
armed man. My body did, (oh may my soul so too) Jam. 1.21.
quickly lay aside all the filthiness and superfluity of its naughtiness; and
by thy blessing, receive that temper which saved my soul from leaving it! it
suddenly laid aside every weight, Heb 12.1.
and the Disease which did so easily beset it, by thy commission; all my
distempers 2 Sa. 18.7.
dealt as gently with me, as if th^^, oh my God, had charged them of me, as
David charged Joab, Abishai, and Ittai, of Absolon; Deal gently with the young
man; and at thy word of command, they departed from doing me evil; oh may they
now do me good! For Psalm. 119.67.
before I was afflicted, I went astray, and so I am afraid to my heart, I shall
after it. Hos. 5.15.
If in my affliction, I sought thee early, what I shall do out of it, I am very
jealous: for thousands call to thee, Psalm 41.3.
to make all their bed in their sickness, who commune not with thee, on bed or
up, in their health. Thousands cry to Christ Jesus, to Mat. 2.17.
take their infirmities, and bear their sickness, who yet sacrifice their
strength and health to the Prince of Devils, and live not to God. But in thee,
oh my God, do I trust for good! I will not suspect that thou have so cured my
body, as to have killed my soul: this were to say to the whole Trinity, (as
Job to his Friends, Job 13.14.
) Ye are all Physicians of no value. There is, oh my God, Jer. 8.22.
aBa Im in Gilead, and a Physician there, for healthy as well as sick
Israelites. Oh let me have both! for Lord, I appeal to him himself, who said,
That Mat 9.12.
the whole need not a Physician, but the sick: if I don't need thee now I am
whole, as much as when I was sick. When I was sick did I say? Alas, alas!
Though my scabs be pretty well off, and sores competently up again, I am (thou
know oh Lord) nothing but spiritual wounds, and bruises, Isa. 1.9. Can. 2.5.
and putrefying sores! I am still sick of all things, save of love to thee; nor
do I find, that this rod of thy late correction, has driven so far from me, as
I could wish. Pro 22.15.
Folly, the seminary of all Diseases, that not only is in, but bound up in my
my heart pit. Blessed God, I am not of them, on whom thy rod is not! but since
thy Job 21.9.
rod without thy reproof, gives no wisdom that I know of, oh lend me the
latter, or I lose the comfort of the former! If thou do not spare thy Pro.
29.15.
rod, yet if thou denyest thy counsel, I shall conclude my self a hated son, or
a reprobate Heb ^ 8. Pa. 48.10.
bastard. I read, affliction is called a furnace; Lord, if it be so, heat it as
hot as Dan 3.19.
Nebuchadnezar's, seven times hotter, and in with me into it, rather than let
the Jer. 6.29.
bellows be burnt, the lead consumed of the fire, the founder melt in vain, and
my wickedness not be plucked away. Help me, oh my God, that I despise not, or
misimprove this, or any of thy Job 5.17.
chastisements; for that is a mere killing Mat 23.37.
of thy prophets, and stoning them that are sent to me! yea, it is a very
saying, Who is the Lord, that I should fear him? All the sicknesses and the
sorrows, that I improve not to Mat 3 2, 8.
repentance and amendment of life, methinks in my reflections they bring me
down, this thy dismal word, of old pronounced, Gen 3.16.
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow! But verily, oh my God, when one of thy
chastifements Deu 32.30.
chases a thousand of my corruptions; and two puts ten thousand to flight:
There be three that bear record in heaven, how unfeignedly I conclude, That
affliction with Jo. 6.6.
contentment is great gain! I cannot say of all my Visitations, Job: 17.12.
as Christ of the Elect, Those that thou gave me, I have saved, and none is
lost; but yet sure I am, some of my afflictions there be, which when they have
done all, cannot say, Luke 17.10.
We are unprofitable servants; for of one and another, oh my God! thou know,
that Mat 1.20.
that which has been conceived in them, has been of the Holy Ghost. My perils
by sea, that made me cry, Mat 8.25, 27 1 Cor. 3.21.
Lord save, or I perish, through thy grace, made the wind and seas of my own
tempestuous affections, more obedient to my conscience, ever since, in my
deliberacies. But alas, of any man alive, I cannot glory in my self! Gen 47.9.
Few and evil (like Jacob's days) have all my improves of thy corrections
been; and though in this sickness I hear a voice Mat. 19.21.
of Christ, Come and follow me; and in the many singular providentials of it, I
see a blessed plenty of thy goodnesses too, I fear I shall not Joh. 6.12.
gather up the fragments, so that nothing be lost. But, oh thou that have
sweetly Phil 3.21.
changed, and art yet changing my vile body. Let this sickness be unto the
death of many a corruption, and let my soul be 2 Co 3.18.
changed into the image of thy Son from glory to glory. Let not my pride, and
security, and forgetfulness of my God, like Lazarus, come out of their Joh.
11.39.
graves, after they have been in for a few days, and have stunk in my
nosthrils! If thy Spirit help me not strongly to believe in thee, though all my
sins were dead, Joh. 11.25. Joh. 10.10,
yet they would live, they would stand up from the dead, and unbelief would
give them life! Unbelief, which when it comes, it comes that all sins may have
life, and that they may have it more abundantly. How often, oh my God, do I
methinks hear this unbelief say of all sins (as Christ of him whom he loved)
Our friends sleep, but I go that I may awake them out of sleep. Through faith,
Heb 11.33.
oh Lord, give me to subdue Kingdoms; yea, the world of oppositions to my
duty, in improving this my Recoverie! I mean, this thy Eze. 37.6.
laying sinews upon me, bringing flesh upon me, covering me again with skin,
and putting (as it were) a new life into me. Forbid good God, that the show of
my Isa. 3.9.
countenance should cry against me, and Job. 31.38. Pro. 17.8. Pro. 17.17.
the furrows thereof complain of me, for unthankfulness to thee. Let this thy
gift of my new life, be to me (as Solomon says all gifts are) a precious
stone! Whither soever it turns, let it prosper to my faith, hope, and charity.
He tells me, a friend loves atall times; I know no such friend but thy self;
nor any brother born for adversity, but the Saints elder Brother. He says,
the Pro. 18.14.
Spirit will bear infirmities. But oh, if he mean not by the upholding of thy
Spirit, my experience contradicts him! Wherefore thou, oh Triune God, art my
God, and early will I seek thee, because thy loving kindness is my life, and
Psalm. 63.3. Psalm. 54 6.
better than my life, I will bless thee while I live, and I will lift up my
hands in thy Name, I will sacrifice unto thee. Psalm. 4.12.
Thy Vows are upon me, oh God, and I will render praises! Psalm. 119.11.
Thy word will I hide in my heart, that I may not sin against thee! Every day
will Psalm. 145.2.
I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. Psalm 146.2.
While I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises to my God, while I
have any being! and in this Quaery I will live and dye. Psalm 116.12
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? Oh my God, the very word
of the Devil I will verify, and all that I have will I give thee for my life:
Nay, and I will use his Words also to thee, of all that ever I shall have in
this world, or in the world to come. Mat. 4.9.
All these things will I give thee. Amen, my God, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

