Master Speakers LETTER Ordered by the Honorable House of Commons, to be sent
to the high Sheriff and Gentry of YORKSHIRE.

Showing their dislike of such as have endeavored to persuade the Country,
that their petition to the parliament was ill relished.

Secondly, their dislike of such as have endeavored to persuade godly
Ministers, that their exercises are not acceptable to the House.

Thirdly, their dislike of such as have endeavored to persuade the Trained Band
from going into Hull, upon the Parliament Order.

Also showing their great acceptance of the Yorkshire Petition, and how ready
they are to take care for the discharging the Billet-money in that County.

Likewise the Parliament wondering at the impudency of those men, who dare to
hinder the advancement of the glory of God and of his worship, and also to
scandalize the piety of the house in so high a measure.

Likewise showing how ready they are to propagate Religion, also desiring and
enjoining the High Sheriff, to return the names of all those who have vented
these untruths, and dissuaded the Trained Band in Holdernesse, from entering
into Hull.

London, Printed for John Franck, 1641.

SIR,
THe House has received information by Letters from your self, that the
malice of some has proceeded so far of late, as to endeavor first, to persuade
your Country, that the Petition to the Parliament were ill rellished by this
House. And that your free offers therein of putting your selves into a Posture
of Defense, has given such testimony of your abilities, that it has utterly
taken away the hopes of paying your Billet money, till the Parliament knows not
how else to dispose of it. Secondly, to cry down Exercises (which have already
done much good) and to draw off some Ministers by persuading them that they are
not acceptable to this House. Thirdly, that some in Holdernesse have dissuaded
the Trained Bands from going unto Hull upon the Parliament Order.

Which information of yours, the House takes for an especial service, and for
so full a ^estimony of your fidelity to the Parliament, and of love to your
Country, as they hold it an evident character of your worth, and for this
commands me to give you very hearty thanks. And to desire you in the name of
the house to declare to the Country, how false and malicious these r^ports are:
since the House was so far from disrellishing their Petitions, or turning their
free offer to their disadvantage, as that they returned their public thanks
when the Petition was received: Passed a vote to approve of their offer, and
since by another Vote justified them in the same Act upon his Majesty's taking
notice thereof. And have since ordered that the same Counties which paid their
Pole-mony heretofore at York, shall now pay all their proportions of the Bill
of four hundred thousand pounds shortly to be raised to the discharge of the
Billet-mony in your County and those other Counties where it is owing, which if
it shall not fully satisfy, they will discharge as soon as the great
necessities of the Kingdom can possibly permit. And likewise they command me
to let you know that they do very much wonder at the impiety and impudence of
those men who dare to hinder the advancement of the glory of God and of his
worship. And also to scandalize the piety of this house in so high a measure,
as to say those good Ministers endeavors are not acceptable to it, they
accounting it their greatest honor to patronize painful Preachers in the
performance of their duties. And being resolved to cherish and advance with
their utmost power, whatsoever may tend to the propagating of Religion of which
they hold those exercises to be an especial means. This house therefore being
very sensible of the great inconveniences which may happen by their misreports
in these distracted times, and from the malice of these men, if it should
proceed uncontrolled desires, and enjoins you to return the names as well of
those who have vented these untruths, as likewise of those who have diswaded
the Trained Bands in Holdernesse, from entering into Hull upon the Parliaments
Order: Persuading themselves that you who have already given such proof of
your affection to the Kingdom, will still continue it by your endeavors, to
prevent the practices of any ill-affected persons upon any of that County, to
the disturbance of the peace.

Die Mercurii 16 Martii, 1641.
It is this day ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in parliament,
that this Letter be forthwith printed.

H. Elsyngs Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

