Mr. SPEAKERS SPEECH, Before the King, in the Lords House of Parliament. July
the third, 1641. Concerning the passing of three Bills. Viz. Poll-money.
Star Chamber, and High Commission.

Mr. Speaker's SPEECH.
THe Government of Common wealth rests in the Rules of order, and has so much
affinity and consent with the Rules of Nature, in the government of the World,
that the first copy and mutation of the one may seem to be taken from the
original and first model of the other.

This contemplation (most excellent and gracious Sovereigne) casts our eyes
upon your sacred Majesty, as that Celestial Orb, which never resting without
the office of perpetual motion, to cherish the lower bodies, not enriching it
self with any treasures drawn from below, exhales in vapors from the inferior
Elements, what in due season it returns in showers.

The application makes us consider our selves, those subluninary creatures
which having their essence and being from the influence of those beams (as the
flowers of the field) open to receive the glory of the Sun.

In this relation both contribute to the common good, your sacred Majesty as a
Nursing Father designed to bestow on your people, the blessing of peace and
unity, and we as the children of obedience return our duties and affections
in Aids and Tributes. And this compacted in one body by the ligaments of
Religion and Laws, has been the object of admiration to the whole world.

Amidst the distraction of foreign Nations, we only have sat under the
shadow of our Vines, and drank the wines of our own Vintage.

But your crafty adversaries, perceiving that the fervent profession of your
own religion and the firm observation of our Laws, have been the pillars of
our prosperity, By subtle insinuations, pretending a politic necessity to
admit of a moderation in our Religion, to comply with foreign Princes, and
suggesting it a principal in the rule of Sovereignty, to require and take
into, ask and have, that it must postulare by power, not petere by Laws, and
keep this misery of war and calamity, between Nation and Nation, and put us in
the posture of gaze to the whole world.

But when we behold your sacred Majesty descended from the Royal loins of
that glorious King, which by his wisdom and policy, first ingrafted the white
Rose and the Red, upon the same stock, and sheathed the sword that had pierced
the bowels of so much Nobility, glutted with the blood of people, and then
laid the first hopes of the happy union between the Nations.

When our thoughts refresh themselves with that happy memory of that religious
King your gracious Father, on whose sacred Temples both diadems were placed,
wrethed about with this motto, Faciam eos ingentem unam, we cannot but believe
that God and Nature (by a lineall succession from those Fathers of peace) has
ordained you that lapis Angularis upon which the whole frame settles, and put
into the hands of your sacred Majesty, the possibility and power to firm and
stablish this happy union between your Kingdoms, and so raise your memory a
Statue of glory and wisdom from generation to generation.

In all this length of time, the assurance of this Union and peace has been
the chief object of our desires, Our Purses have been as open as our hearts,
both contributing to this great work manifested by so many Subsidies already
presented, sufficient in our first hopes for the full perfection.

But finding that fail, have again adventured upon your peoples property, and
in an old and absolute way, new burnisht by the hand of instant necessity,
expressed to the World the heart of a loyal people, and howsoever guided with
a new name of tranquillity and peace to your Kingdom, that with more ease the
people may digest the bitterness of this Pill, yet still our hearts had the
same aim and object.

A gift suitable to the necessity of such vast extent that time cannot parallel
it by any example.

And by which, if your sacred Majesty vouchsafe your Royal assent, we shall
not doubt you may soon accomplish those happy effects that may present your
wisdom the object of wonder, and your policy to be admired amongst the
Nations.

FINIS.

