LA GALERIE DES FEMMES FORTES


THE GALLERY OF Heroic Women.

Written in French by PETER LE MOYNE, of the Society of JESUS. Translated into
English by the MARQUESS OF WINCHESTER

LONDON, Printed by R. NORTON for HENRY SEILE, over against S. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet. M.DC.LII.

The Translators Address to the Ladies of this Nation.
LADIES,
ME Thinks I see your curious Eyes advancing apace to behold this Noveltie,
this fair Gallery of Heroic Women, first erected in France to the Honor and
instruction of your Sex, and now transported into England upon the same Account.

These Gallant Heroesses repaired first from all the Regions of History to the
Court of France to lay down their Crowns at the Queen Regents Feet: This
Ceremony and Duty performed, they had a desire to pass the Sea, and inform
themselves of the condition and state of this Island; And finding no Queen here
to whom they might render the same obedience, they resolved to address
themselves to you, hoping to find amongst such noble Company, some Ladies, who
resemble them at least in part of their Virtues, if not in all.

A Voyage of this Nature deserves the best Entertainment; And the most
sumptuous Feast you can set forth to such illustrious Guests in acknowledgement
of the Honor they have done you by this Visit, will be the pure oblation of
your Hearts inflamed with a desire to follow their Glorious steps, and imitate
their Exemplar Virtues.

The conversation of such brave women cannot choose but be most delightful and
instructive to you: and some of your hours I assure my self, will be well
employed in giving a serious Attention to the Stories of their renowned
Actions, and in reflecting chiefly on the examples of those Christan Heroesses,
who beautify this rich Structure, and contribute most to your Imitation. Their
gallantry is so perfect, as you need not doubt, but they will gladly suffer
your noble Hands to take some Flowers out of their Garlands; which if well
applied, Crowns may be formed on them, and one day placed upon your Heads by
some worthy Person of our Country, who taking notice of your Virtuous
Carriages and improved Actions in this land of trial, may hereafter erect a new
Gallery, in which your Statues and Names will remain a Spectacle of Honor and
Imitation to Posterity.

I need say no more, having given you sufficient matter of Emulation: It is
powerful in all great souls, and observed to be particularly grafted in your
Sex. I will not then detain you any longer from entering into this resplendent
Gallery, but open the Do^r to you by this little tribute of Respect, rendered to
your fair Hands by

Your most Humble Servant WINCHESTER.

The Authors Panegyrical Address to the Queen Regent.
MADAM,
THE Heroic Women assembled in this Gallery are come from all parts of History
to lay down their Crowns at your Majesty's Feet, and to congratulate in common
the Honor you have rendered to your Sex. True it is, Madam, that all the Eyes
of Europe are now fixed on you. And there are no Mouths so little Christian and
so much engaged elsewhere, which do not seriously, and sincerely applaud you.

However, Madam, I may say, that the Company I present unto you will bring no
confusion to the Feast. They are Sovereign and Illustrious Women, who have been
like your self, the choicest objects of their Ages: They are Victorious
Persons, whom Virtue and Glory have Crowned with their own Hands. And this must
needs be a sweet satisfaction to you that so many Sovereign and Illustrious
Women have descended from their Thrones and Theaters to become your Spectators.
The Sound and Acclamations of so many Heroesies who applaud you with their
Hands cannot choose but be a pleasing harmony to your Ears.

The chief thing, Madam, is, that these Applauses are no Stage Representations;
that these Acclamations are no constrained or purchased Flatteries. They are
serious and legitimate Tributes, which the vanquished pay to their Victress.
And you have vanquished them with so much Grace and Justice; the Advantages you
have over them are so charming, and your emulation has been so modest, as
there is not one amongst them who is not thankful and well pleasing with your
Victory.

This Victory, Madam, so acceptable to the Vanquished, is entirely Yours. It is
not of your Regency; It is of your whole Person: And though it be Peaceable and
free from blood, yet it is not inferior to those tumultuary and bloody
Victories you have gained in the general distemper of all Europe. It is
certainly your great glory to have overcome on the Rhein, on the two Seas
beyond the Alps and the Pyrenean Mountains: But your Glory (Madam) is much
greater, by having overcome in Histories and Annals, in Heroic Ages, and in
the Region of great Examples. And what noise soever is made by the Arm's of
France, the Reputation of your Virtue Victorious over the Artemisias, the
Radaguna's and Pantbea's, is far more illustrious and resplendent then the
renown of your Fortune victorious over so many defeated Armies, and reduced
Fortresses.

I need not fear that any one will accuse me of flattery, or reproach my words
with hyperbolicall Excess. Heathen Virtues were never of the force, or stature
of Christian Virtues, and amongst these later yours ( Madam) are the most
Vigorous and eminent; they are Heroic and Sovereign*

Your Piety indeed is of another Elevation and Zeal, then their affected shows
of Devotion, who limit to the circle of their Beads, who refer all their
Meditations to the modesty of their dress, and to a few tears squeezed out by
force. Your Piety amuseth not its self in making smoke in the house of God, and
trafficking with him by consuming Tapers, and evaporating Perfumes. It draws
from the bottom of your heart the fire Incense and Victime of the Sacrifices it
offers to his Divine Majesty; And which is more acceptable to him then all the
Gums of Land and Sea; which is more pleasing to him then the blood of
slaughtered flocks; it presents unto him the Contrition of a Sovereign heart,
the Humility of a Crowned head, and the abasement and adoration of a humiliated
and religious Authority.

This private Worship, and these domestique Sacrifices, make not her whole
employment; she has other more general Practices, and other Exercises exposed
to the eyes of the world. These Practices are Instructions which equal the
worth of Laws: And these Exercises are Examples which command. She refers her
particular devotions to the edification of the People: She Prays and Meditates
for an infinity of Souls: And the Propagation of Faith, the Defense of the
Church, the safety of the Kingdom, the Peace and Tranquillity of the whole
Christian World are the points of her Meditation, and the scope of her Prayers.

Public persons ought thus to meditate and pray for the Public: Their
Devotion should be a devotion of Order, and their Zeal a zeal of Discipline.
They cannot vow any thing better then wholesome Laws, and good Examples, not
any thing more holy then Mercy and Judgment. And what is aspiration and desire
in their Oratory, ought to be reduced to Order and Policy in the Body of the
State. In this sense it is said, that Piety is an universal Good, and for all
uses; And in what sense soever it be spoken, the extent of this saying is at
present filled up by the extent of your Piety, which is the General Merit, and
the Common good of the Kingdom.

Is it not your Piety, which has forced heaven, and overcome the resistance of
years; which has obtained the fruit of Benediction, the expectation and desire
of the People, after all their desires were exhausted, and their hope and
patience in a manner consumed? Is it not this Piety which has retained on our
side both the Fortune which the death of the deceased King had set at liberty,
and the reputation which seemed ready to retire with Fortune? Is it not this
Piety which crowned the ashes of this good Prince and brought Victory to his
Funeral; which infused resolution and courage into the sorrow of France; which
showed unto our Enemies courageous and formidable Tears, and a bold and
triumphant Sadness? Is it not this Piety which has made the Perfume wherewith
our malicious Devils have been chased away; which has bound up the spirit of
Discord, fatal to Regencies, and funestous to the Minorities of Princes?

Our fear Madam was, that we did ask too much, and did believe our wishes too
great when we demanded a smooth and peaceable Regency for your Majesty, and
when we wished the King a Minority free from Rebellion and Troubles: Yet what
we behold at present Madam, is far greater then our wishes, and much exceeding
our demands. We see a Regency managed with Vigor, and Address, still
attempting and prosperous: A Regency which has the splendour and reputation of
the most Illustrious Reigns. We behold a Minority Victorious and Conquering: A
Minority respected by Subjects, and dreadful to Enemies: A Minority which is
the hope and support of the Christian World. We see a Woman who diverts bad
blasts, and changes malignant Constellations: A Woman beloved and followed by
Fortune: A Woman the Superintendent and Directresse of Victory. We behold a
Child, who has the Credit and Reputation of Reigning Sovereigns. Who is the
Arbitrator of Princes, and the Master of Nations; who balances and decides the
Affairs of Europe.

All these Prosperities, Madam, are after God the works of your Piety, the
fruit of your Devotions, and the reward of your good Deeds. Your Oratory is the
common Fortress, and general Magazine of our Frontiers. It is the principal
Piece of our Camps, the most redoubtable to our Enemies. In your Oratory, that
is formed which destroys their Engines, and disorders their Designs: that which
takes in their Towns, and defeats their Armies: And all our Victories commence
in your Cabinet, through your Zeal and Prayer, before the Conduct of Generals,
and the Valor of Soldiers complete them in the Field.

By this way of Combatting you make a holy War, and fight like a Christian
Heroesse. Thus the good Angels and blessed Souls fight in the behalf of Men:
Their Piety is their Valor, and their Prayers are their Weapons. And your
Majesty, who so profitably imployes this Victorious Piety, and these
combatting Devotions, merits no less thereby the Name of Heroesse, and the
Title of Conqueress, then if you exposed your Person to the labor and toil of
Sieges, to the perils and hazards of Battles.

Force is not so great as it is esteemed, for being clothed in Iron, for
handling fire and steel, for making a breach with Canon-shot. True and eminent
Force is to defeat Armies by desiring their overthrow; It is to demolish
Citadels and Forts, by bowing knees, and lifting up hands to Heaven: It is to
take in Cities, and to subject Nations by a Tear let fall a hundred Leagues
from thence, by a word which no man hears.

Such was the Force of the Prophets, Generals of the Hosts of God: Such was
that of Moses, Gideon, and Debora, who led the Elements, and Meteors to the
Wars; who had Nature and Fortune in their Troops; who effected more by a
sign given by their hands, then could be performed with armed Nations, and a
whole world of Engines. Such was the Force of the Victorious VVidow, who
vanquished all Assria, encamped before a City, and defeated it with a few
sighs and tears. It was like that of St. Hellen who overthrew Maxen^ius his
Party, by her good works; Like that of Pulcheria, whose Alms and Fastings were
the principal weapons of two Reigns. Like that of C^otilda who preserved
Clodoueus, engaged in a disadvantagious Encounter, and repulsed the Germans,
who poured down like a deluge upon their Frontiers. And even at present, Madam,
this Force is the same with that of your Piety, which at the foot of Altars
performs all the memorable Exploits of our field Armies; And which even in
your Closet gains Battles, and takes Towns in all the parts of Europe.

But this commanding and Victorious Piety is not the only Piece of your
Regency: It is assisted by Prodence and Justice, by the Graces and
Magnificence, by all serviceable and delightful Virtues; And these
Cooperating Virtues, acting as they do, in the Spirit and by the conduct of
Piety which governs them, are indeed of another Elevation then those which Act
in the spirit of the World, and by the direction of Morality.

That Prudence which the World inspires, is but a tutored and disciplined
Malignity, but a certain Venom tempered with Phlegm, and infused with method.
Your Majesty purified both within and without, has nothing of Malevolent or
Imposture, nothing of captious or double, Dealing.

The lights of your Wisdom cannot be false, coming from so high a Region, and
from so clear a Source. They cannot be defective, Marching with so even a pace,
and levelling at so elevated an End; nor cannot it be reproached, as having
either by mistake or weakness fixed it thoughts upon those mean and inferior
Ends, which humane Prudence seeks in Time, and within the limits of Matter.

Justice merely Moral, is, to express it well, but an authorized
VVilfulnesse, a wild and cruel Habit, which lawfully offends. Its force is
but a force of Obstinacy and unpliableness; By striving to over-bend the Level
it breaks it; It snaps in two the line, by endeavoring to hold it too
straight. And being often enough abused by the small distance between the
extremity of right, and the extremity of wrong; It acts great cruelties where
it thinks to produce great Examples. Your Justice, Madam, illuminated and
tempered by Piety, which governs it, is equally remote from those two Extremes.
It is truly forceable and entire, but it is of a temperate and gentle Force.
It is of an Integrity like that of Laws which are far from Cruelty and
harshnesse, which are modest and respectfull. And ordaining things with this
Integrity and Force, it commands Persons with respect, and sweetens in them the
sense of what may be the most rigid in its Orders. It cannot be said, Madam,
that the Law is a leaden Rule in your hands: It has there all the evennesse
and solidity it ought to have: Nor can it be said to be a Rule of Iron; It has
neither the weight nor roughness thereof, nor breaks the things which will be
no more then adjusted.

But there is no Law so rigorous which may not be sweetened by the Graces with
which you Act. And Justice; nay the most unflexible and vindicative Justice
would alter its inclination, and countenance, and become mild and munificent
in their Company. In this I say much, Madam, and yet this much is but a part of
what may be said. We know the History of the first Domination the World has
seen, and consequently know, that they were the Graces which tamed the cruelty
of the first Men; which imposed the yoke upon their necks, which made them love
bondage and chains. However this yoke was yet but rough-drawn; These chains
were rude and and unpolished: And the wonder is, that the Graces which imposed
them on Men, were then but unexpert and half rustic. Your Majesty's Graces are
of a higher Elevation, and have another kind of Force then those other. They
are such whose commands oblige, and which are pleasing to those they bind:
They are such as alleviate duties, and sweeten servitude; such as know how to
polish the Scepter, and temper the over great resplendency of the Crown. And,
Madam, I shall not stick to say, that less efficacious Graces then your own
have sweetened Injustice, and set a pleasing face upon Tyranny.

The Importance is, that these your Majesty's Graces are not only modest and
disciplined, but Religious and entirely Christian: Your Piety has inspired
them with devotion and zeal: It has sanctified them, and sanctified your
Prudence and Justice. And this sanctification of the Graces, Madam, is not a
vain intertainment of the mind, nor an amazement of unimployed Reason. Force is
more necessary thereto, then to the melancholy austerity of retired Virtues.
And it cannot be but the effect of a continual and obstinate labor, of an
ever firm and attentive soul, to please without intermission; to delight with
seriousness; to be still in good humor and of good example; to gain hearts
without making any unseemly Advances, or hazarding one single word of
Indiscretion.

Magnificence, which is an other Virtue attending on great Fortunes, and great
Souls, is governed like your Majesty's Virtues, by this directing and
commanding Piety, which is the Superintendent of your Life. It is no new thing
to see Magnificence at Court. It is Originary of that Country: There it has
its Theaters and Exercises: And there is no private Person so well provided
with whom it suffers not inconvenience and constraint. But to speak truly (
Madam) it is very rare to see at Court a well Ordered and Regular Magnificence,
purified from Pride and Haughtiness, cured of Ostentation and Excess,
disingaged from sense and from the things it manageth. And this Orderly,
Regular, Spiritual and unclogged Magnificence has an other kind of force then
Frugality, Modesty, and Simplicity which are far remote from burdensome, and
engaging Objects.

Sovereignty, Madam, has a splendour which suits with its own Condition. It
has lights which belong unto its Dignity, and which you cannot lawfully
extinguish. The Virtues of your Fortune are of another Order, and ought to have
other Marks then those of your Person. And by a disposal contrary to that of
the Ark of Covenant, which was only covered with skins, and adorned within with
Gold and Purple. Your Majesty may well reserve Modesty for your Interior, and
Humility for your Sentiments: but it owes Luster and Pomp to your Dignity: It
owes a specious and splendid Exterior to the eyes of the World. This mixture
of Splendor and Modesty, and this alliance of appearing Majesty with a veiled
Humility, is the last form and consummation of Christian Magnificence: And I
know not Madam, whether in the whole Course of your life there be any part
wherein your Virtue is more vigorous, or your Spirit acts more gallantly and
with greater Force.

There is mauy times but a constrained and necessitated Moderation; nothing but
an artificial and ill-looked Poverty in what is styled the Virtue and Power of
private Persons. That which is Humility under Sackcloth, and is Abstinence in a
Cloister, would be peradventure Pride and Presumption under Purple; Ambition
and Avarice in a Palace. True Power, Madam, consists in floating as you do,
above the abundance of your Condition, and the plenitude of your Fortune: It
consists in conserving the elevation of your Soul, and the Freedom of your
Heart amidst an Infinity of Objects, which sweetly ruin, and bind with
pleasure. It consists in keeping your self in a posture of mind like that of
the Cherubius on the Ark, who amongst Gold and Pretious-stones, in the midst of
Purple and Perfumes, turn not away their eyes from the Propitiatory. In fine,
it consists in preserving the Purity of Intention, and the Rectitude of sight,
in the most pompous and resplendent Actions, and in Imitating the
Planet-R^uli^g Intelligences, which look only upon God, and aim at nothing but
his Glory in the splendour of their Orbs, and amidst the numerous Objects they
convey unto us.

These Virtues Madam, which are all Heroic and Royal, have conjoyntly wrought
upon the Statue erected unto You in the midst of this Gallery: Magnificence
has furnished the Matter, which is precious and befitting the Merit and
Reputation of the Work. The Graces, I mean the industrious and skillful Graces
have carved it, and given it all the Lectures which a complete Figure can
receive from a perfect Model. Force has received it from their hands, and
raised it upon its Basis. Justice has graved the Inscription, and Piety has
been the Overseer and Directresse of the whole Piece.

These Artists are none of the common Artificers, nor their works any of the
Vulgar ones. Their hands transcend those of the Ancient Sculptors: And the
Eternity they are to give, is a far different eternity from that of the Heroes
in Marble, and the Gods in Brass All these Gods and Heroes framed by Men, are
long since dead and buried: We scarce retain their dust, and some small
fragments half consumed by time It belongs only to the Graces and Virtues to
work for Eternity. Not only Years, but even Ages, more injurious then Years
treat their Works with respect: And yet at this day in the Books and Memorialls
of Worthy Men there are Ancient Pieces of their Model, which are as neat and
entire, as if they came but newly out of their hands. The Portraitures they
have made of your Majesty, of what matter soever they be composed, will be used
with the same respect and esteem, they will not be defaced and destroyed; they
will be entertained and multiplied by Time. And Posterity, even the least
Curious, yea the least Cultivated and rudest Nations will desire their Copy.

VVhiles these honors and this acknowledgement of Posterity are in
Expectation, be pleased Madam, that the most Noble and Illustrious Part of
Antiquity may honor you in this Gallery. This will be no impure and tumultuary
Worship: The honors which shall be rendered you by so many Wise, by so many
Magnanimous, by so many gloriously chaste Women will not be disavowed, and
unauthorized. Such fair hands cannot present you but with most pure Incense,
nor make you other then beautiful and precious Crowns: And nothing but just
and melodious Acclamations, nothing but a Harmony of Honor and Heroic Hymns,
can proceed from so many Sovereign and well instructed Mouths.

This Veneration will be common to the Illustrious of your Sex: But those of
your Race and Name will bring unto it a particular Zeal, as they have a Duty, a
Part, and Interests peculiar to themselves. And in the Crowd of so many
Heroesses which will press to be seen by your Majesty, the Blanches and
Isabella's, whether of Castile or Austria, will make their Offerings and Vows
remarkable amongst the rest. Besides Madam, they have a nearer Relation to you,
and owe you more then others: And the honor they have to Revive in you, and to
be Irradiated by your Reputation, is to them a second Life more Illustrious
then the First: It is to them a temporal Beatitude, wherein they take more
glory then in the eternity they enjoy in History.

But Madam, the Honor which Heroic Women shall render you, will not be like
those Ceremonies of the good Goddess wherein Men had no share: We shall be
admitted thereto in Common; we shall mingle our Duties, and Acclamations with
theirs; their Incense and our own shall make the same Persume; their Hymns and
ours shall make but one Consort. Your Goodness Madam, and our Duties, your
Virtues and the Wonders they have wrought, will be the Subject of these Hymns.
The Prosperities and Victories of your Regency will be loudly sung: And Peace
which is the Crown of Prosperities, and ought to be the End of Victories, will
be the close of our Songs, and the accomplishment of your Praises.

Yes Madam, this Victorious and Crowned Peace, will be the reward of your
Piety and good Works. It will be the fruit of the Zeal and Conduct of those
two Princes, who are so Beneficial and Glorious, either by the hazard of their
Persons in the Field, or by their Abilities and sincere Intentions in the
Cabinet Counsel.

Their Example will infuse Force and Vigor into the Results of Counsel: And
so many judicious and sharp-witted Heads, which compose this Illustrious Body,
will contribute to the Conclusion of this Important Affair, the union of their
Judgments, and the harmony of their Lights. The chief President of Justice,
that Christian and French Cato, who might make up a whole Senate, and whom we
might oppose to the Ancient Republique, will put his helping hand thereto, with
that incorruptible Integrity, and that unlimited Capacity, which is the Hope
and Ornament of this Reign, and will be the Example and Admiration of future
Ages. I hat other, so just, so well tempered, so well composed, and so
charitable wise Person, to whose care your Majesty has committed the
Administration of your Revenues, will contribute thereto that generous and pure
Integrity, and that disinterressed and faithful Zeal, which have always
carried him to the good of the State, and the ease of the People. And if he
has been able to sweeten the harshest part of his Ministry, if he has
introduced Civility and good Offices into the Exchequer, and reconciled the
Graces with the Treasury, well may he also sweeten the Asperity of Factions,
well may he contribute to the restoration of Tranquillity in the State, and to
the Reconciliation of Peace thorowout all Europe.

Here Madam, I must not forget that so able and faithful a Minister of State,
who assists you to sustain the burden of Affairs: He is one of our Chiefest
hopes, and will be one day one of the principal Instruments of the Peace we
expect. The spirit of Ancient Rome wherewith he is so abundantly endowed, was a
spirit of Direction and Counsel, a spirit Superintendent over Victories, and
Arbitrator of Events. Heretofore all known Nations, and the whole world that
was capable of Discipline submitted to the Manners and Impressions of this
spirit. It ordained with Authority and Sovereign Power, both Peace and War. It
disposed the good and bad Fortunes of Kingdoms, and made the temporal Destiny
of Nations. Now if this spirit was so sovereign and efficacious in rusticke
Senators, in half savage Consuls and in gross and Illiterate Sages; we cannot
sear that it degenerats and grows weak in him who is the Senator of the
Christian World; who is the Consul of a spiritual and sacred Republique, who
has joined acquired with natural Lights; who has been polished both by
Ecclesiastical and Civil Sciences. The wheels of the State Mad^m, directed by
this spirit, must needs be ^rdered rightly and with address; nor can the
Genius and Purple of the Senate, which succeeds the Ancient Senate but give
Force and Dignity to our Affairs.

It is not prejudicial Madam, that this spirit be the spirit of Rome, which
was heretofore the Head of the Roman World, and which is at present the Head
of the Christian. There is no member to which the spirits of the Head are
strangers: There is no Country where Wisdom and Fidelity are not natural. And
moreover the most Noble and perfect things, even those that have most Virtue
and Force, are not Originary of the places where they Act Great Rivers have
their Sources three hundred Leagues from the Countries they enrich and
cultivate. Fire, Light, and the spirit of the Planets, which produce so great
effects in the low Region of this World, are Originary of the Higher. The
Intelligences were not created in the Sphere they move. The Angel-Guardians of
this World, are not of this World. And your beautiful Soul Madam, that Soul
of yours so Noble and Munificent, so Elevated and Royal, is but a Guest and
Passenger in the fair Body it governs.

It is not then Madam, Inconvenient or contrary to Justice, nor yet against
Order, that this rare Spirit should be to our Affairs what the Administering
Spirits are to the Spears and Provinces committed to their charge: We thence
cannot expect but a less defective, and a more harmonious Conduct; but an
Administration more disingaged from matter, and elevated above the clouds of
Interest; but a Tranquillity less casual, and more regular; but a Prosperity
more general and of a larger Extent*

No, Madam, this Prosperity will not be a restrained and particular Prosperity.
Superior Causes are not National and propriatory, they do no good which is
not Universal: And all Europe, even the whole Christian World will have their
share of it after France. The Acknowledgement thereof will be also common, and
the Benedictions general. Your Majesty will receive Praises in every Language
for it. And in this consort of Praises, Madam, I may peradventure, be so happy
as to raise my voice above the rest, to give it a Body and light, and to make
it last with your Name and Memory.

So excellent a Work should not be unadvisedly undertaken, and in a bad
season: It should not be touched with a heavy and benumbed hand: It requires a
calm and commodious Serenity, as also fit and selected hours. I hope to enjoy
them, Madam, from the continuation of the fair days your Regency does promise
to us.

And I further hope, that the Graces which engage themselves in all that
belongs to us, setting their hands to this work, together with the Muses, will
jointly draw your Picture, which shall resemble you as near as is possible.

What I here offer you Madam, is but a rough Draught of this Picture. Your
Majesty may see in little the height of my Design, and the greatness of my
Zeal: And this Earnest will manifest that by the common Obligation of our
Order, and by my particular inclinations, I am as perfectly as any other

Madam, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and servant
PETER LE MOYNE, Of the Society of JESUS.

THE PREFACE. Of the AUTHOR.
I Have not undertaken this Gallery to present the issue of my own Brain, a
spectacle to the curious or an amusement to persons wanting employment. The end
I propose to my self is of greater use, and of a higher Nature. And according
to the sense of the most enlightened amongst the Philosophers, who conceived the
Virtue of Women to be one of the prime pieces of Politic Felicity; if my
enterprise had such success as it may have, and I desire; I should not think
to have done less for the public, then the Founders of Academics and Colleges.

Fruits begin to receive corruption from the Earth; And Rivers from their
Springs. There would be no impurity in Metals, if there were none in the Mines.
All Figures would be exact^nd perfect, if all the Moulds wherein they are cast
were uniform and without defect: And Vices would be rare amongst Men, if Women
of whom Men are borne were all endued with Prudence. Let not good Antiquity,
and old Opinions be displeased that Li^urg^s was no very great Master in
Policy, who set down so many Rules for the Men of Sparta; who imposed so many
Laws and Chains upon them, and abandoned Women to public and authorized
disorders, to Liberties founded on Privilege, and erected into Custom. It
nothing avails to prune Trees if the Earth which bears them be left unmanur'd:
And in vain would a Physician proceed with Method and by Aphorisms to the cure
of a sick Head, if he suffered had Humors and Indigestions in the Body which
breed diseases in the Head.

Solomon understood it much better, and this Divine and Inspired Morality,
which Wisdom her self taught him, was another kind of Morality then that
carnal and licentious one which a counterfeit Devil, and apparelled like a
Nymph, taught a Law Maker of Sparta. This Wise man, who was particularly chosen
by Almighty God to be the universal Tutor of Mankind, and to read Lessons to
all Conditions and Ages, has no less labored for the instruction of Women
then Men. He showed himself no Niggard to them in (...) or Proverbs: And his
Parables are the Extracts of rectified Philosophy.

The holy Fathers who instruct us also in their (...) when their Learning
rem^^^d, with (...) zeal (...) great account of this little part of Moral
Philosophy. And the regular and uniform Works which they have lest of it, show
clearly, that they allotted not thereunto their recreative and (...) hours. If
there there be any place where their Doctrine is perspicuous and methodical;
where Eloquence is exact and vigorous; where Zeal has sweetness and Force;
where the Graces are instructive and edifying; we must acknowledge it to be in
that part of their Writings. And these great Masters, who behaved themselves so
judiciouly in her other productions, have displayed all their Art, and employed
all their Capacity therein: Have acted there with their whole Spirit, and
poured forth all their Lights.

The Schoolmaster of Clement of Alexandria speaks always sublimely, and like
a great Doctor. But when he undertakes to instruct Women, he is not satisfied
with the Height and Solidity of his Opinions; but adds thereunto the Dignity
of expression, and the Magnificence of words: He gives a Relish and Gloss to
Sentences, Cadence and Luster to Periods. And the mixture he makes of Profit
and Pleasure is so just and fitly tempered, as he seem to say for delectation
and divertisment, all that be delivers for persuasion and instruction. There is
something of the same Greatness and Majesty in all the works of S.
Chrysostom: But this greatness is polished and cultivated; and this Majesty
has certain Delicacies and particular Graces in all that he has written for
Women: And not to say any thing of the Books he composed either to instruct or
confirm Virgins, or to comfort and fortify Widows, it sufficiently appears by
the Letters he has written to Olympiada, that he dropped Gold from his Pen, as
well as from his Mouth; And that he took particular care to polish this Gold,
and give it a new Luster and fair forms when he employed it for Women.

The Fathers of the Latin Church have not less contributed to their
Institution then those of the Greek Church: And what they contributed thereunto
is not labored with less Art, nor seasoned with less Grace. Without citing the
true works which S. Cyprian, S. Jerome, and S. Augustine have left us upon this
Subject; Every one knows that to Women their choicest Letters have been
written; I say those excellent and learned Letters, which seem to contain whole
Volumes in few Lines, and great Books reduced into Epitomies. S. Cyprian does
not appear an Affrican in those quaint Letters* All the rudeness of his
Country is sweetened in them: They are set forth with all the Ornaments of his
Rhetoric. S. Jerome is not guilty in his, of that Austerity, who seems not to
have written but in Choler: Not only the tartness wherewith the Critics
reproach him is tempered, but the very Thorns of his profession flourish in
them: And the Stones of his Desert are there precious. As for S. Augustine,
what he has composed there, appears wonderful by the sweetness of his Spirit
mixed with that of his Style; and he has left in them as many Rays of light
as there be Sentences.

I say nothing of S. Ambrose who has had Bees for his Nurses: And who was, to
give a true Character of him, an intelligent and discoursive Be. Every one
knows that he has inserted all the Honey of his Hive into the Books he
composed for Virgins, and into that he addressed to Widows. The expressions
therein are so pure, so exquisite, and delightful, the sentences of choice and
elaborate; and there is every where so great a profusion of Flowers, as he
thought fit to justify them by the Condition of those Persons to whom they
were to be presented. The most peevish and harsh of all Authors have written
for the Instruction of Women. I speak of Tertullian, who besides the Book he
wrote concerning the veil of Virgins, has composed another touching the
Apparel of Women, and a third concerning their Attires. And if there be any
harshness or asperity in those works, as in all others of his Composure, this
harshness is at least magnificent, and like the riches of Barbarians: These
asperities have a kind of Dignity and Splendour; They have something I know not
what, which shines and wounds; which resembles unpolished Gold, and misshapen
Diamonds.

The holy Fathers have not only applied Moral Philosophy and Rhetoric to the
Instruction of Women, but have made Poesy and the Muses serve to the same use.
And those severe ones, who lived only of pure Light and Spirit, did not
conceive it unworthy the severity of their Life, or the Sanctity of their
Priesthood to measure Syllables, to adjust Words, to paint and flourish their
Discourses, to give a Relish to their Doctrines, and Grace unto Virtue; to
instruct by divertisement, and to make what is profitable pass under the
Color of delightful.

Adhel^^^s who was one of the most learned Bishops of Scotland has left us a
Poem, where Virginity, Chastity, Modesty, Devotion, and the other Virtues of
Maids are adorned with all the Gold and precious Stones of Parnassus, which is
the Peru of Poets. We have likewise another of the same matter and form, which
Avitus Archbishop of Vienna composed to Crown the Virginity of his Sister
Fuscina. And albeit this Crown be in the time of the first Lilies which were
sent into France, yet the Flowers thereof remain at present as fair and fresh
after twelve hundred Years, as if they were but newly gathered. Thereby these
two holy Bishops have rendered Honor to the Muses; They have reconciled them to
Chastity; They have sanctified their Ornaments and Attires; They have done to
them what Moses and Aaron did with the Looking-glasses and Jewels of the
Egyptian Ladies.

My design is not to assemble here all the Authors who have contributed their
Lucubrations, and Writings to the Instruction of Women. The Assembly would be
too great for so narrow a space; And it were to make a complete Library of a
Preface. Such as I have alleged, are sufficient to evince the Importance of
this Instruction, and to persuade, that it forms at least the Moity of
Christian Policy. Could Doctors and Prelates so enlightened by God, so penetrated
by the Unction of the Holy Ghost, so purified and heated by the Fire of the
Altar, lose their Fire in unprofitable Productions? Have they consumed their
Time, and wearied their Hands to effect nothing considerable? And would Saint
John himself have written to a Woman with the Pen of an Eagle, wherewith he had
written to the Angels and Churches of Asia, wherewith he had made the first
Draughts of what was before, and will be after time; if he had not believed
that a Letter written to a Woman might be as Canonical and profitable, as
Letters directed to Angels and Churches?

These Reasons and Instances more powerful then any other have engaged me in
this Work. My Pen is not the Pen of an Eagle like that of Saint John. I write
not by the Wisdom and Light of the Holy Ghost, as Solomon did. I have no Gold
to employ like Saint Chrysostom. I fall very short of the Idea's and
Conceptions of the alleged Fathers. And if these great Saints and eminent Men
did not believe, that the matter upon which I Labor was unworthy of their
Capacity, and beneath their Idea's; I ought not to fear, that it may appear
Noble and Precious enough for mine. And no man ought to call in question the
Utility of a Work, whereof so many Learned Hands have left such excellent
Models.

It is true that I have given a new son to this matter, and altered the Shape
and Figure of those Patterns. There is a Philosophy more delightful and
instructive then that Anatomized one, read in the Schools. Her Attractives are
modest, and accompanied with Force: she has no affected Dress; and having a
more lovely Aspect, and better Fashion then the other, she gives not less
Edification, nor a worse Example. She does not produce like that other, crude
and discolored Axioms, formless and dry Decisions. She Beautifies them with
exquisite Inventions, with curious and coveted Figures. She knows how to add
Luster to Force, and to give Grace and Dignity to what is solid.

I conceived that my Design might fall into the hands, and under the direction
of this Inventive and pleasing Philosophy, magnificent in Materials, and rich
in Designs. And to the end she might not have all the trouble of the Work; I
have to her, associated Portraiture, Poesy, and History, which are three other
illustrious and renowned Co-operatresses: and these three, associated to this
noble Superintendent, have framed this whole Structure which I consecrate to
the Public, under the Title of The Gallery of Heroic Women.

This Title is not so limited, as it may seem to some who know not Virtues but
by the Draughts which Painters form of them; and do not believe that there is
any other Fortitude, then that which they see with a Helmet on its Head, and a
Pillar on its shoulders. This armed and robustious Fortitude is but subordinate
to another general one which assists all the Virtues; which is present in all
great Actions, which supports all good Works, which is the Directress of all
Heroes both in Peace and War. It is to this Fortitude St. Ambrose and St.
Gregory attribute after Plato, the Victories of the Spirit over the Flesh,
those of Virtue over Fortune, those of the Honest and Honorable Good over the
Delightful and Profitable. It is of this Fortitude Solomon speaks in that
Picture, where the Heroic Woman is drawn with so fair Colors, and Crowned
with so magnificent an ^^ogy.

In effect, Temperate and Chaste Women require Fortitude: Loyal and Constant
Women need it: Modest, Reserved, and Devout Women need it as much; And
peradventure they require more then those presumptuous and haughty Gallants,
who fancy to themselves that they support States; And that their Arms are the
Pillars of Empires. Courage is necessary both to bear handsomely the Chains of
Marriage, which though never so well gilded are yet painful; and to endure its
Yoke, which is never so smooth as not to incommodate; it is so needful to
resist both pleasing and frightful Passions, flattering and dreadful Objects.
It is requisite to regulate Love, even that Love which is Honest and Lawful. It
is necessary to bridle Lawful Joys and innocent Pleasures: to moderate
obligatory Sorrows, and Afflictions authorized by Nature and Custom. In a word,
there is no Christian or Moral Virtue to which Courage is not required. And for
this Reason my Gallery has a larger extent, then the Frontispiece does
promise. There is room for all Virtuous Women by what Names soever they are
called: And the Prudent, the Chaste, the Faithful, the Courageous, the
Constant, the Pious may all enter into it, and keep their degrees there under
the Title of Heroic Women.

The assembly of these Gallant Women might be greater then I have made it: And
albeit Solomon was troubled to find one single Heroic Woman, yet since his
Time enough have appeared to Plant here a whole Colonie. Of all this great
Number I have chosen twenty of the most Renowned all Illustrious amongst them.
And not to produce them confusedly and in disorder, I have divided them into
four Squadrons. The first of Jewish Woman; The second of Barbarian Women, to
take the word Barbarian in the same sense as it was understood by the Grecians:
The third of Roman, and the fourth of Christian Women. I exhibit a Picture of
each; and the Subject of this Picture is taken from the most resplendent and
courageous part of her Life. Besides, these Pictures are not merely
superficial, and carry a bare outside like those of Philostrates who was
content to express what was visible; and to copy out the draughts of the Pencil
with the strokes of his Pen. They represent chiefly the Interior and that
secret part which cannot be disclosed or expressed but by Philosophers. They
discover all the Features and Motions of the Heart, all the Postures and
Colors of the Soul: And the Scope of it which is wholly Moral, aims more at
the Manners then at the satisfaction of the Eye. Every Picture is accompanied
with a Sonnet, which is another piece drawn in little: And the Sonnet is
seconded by an Historical Elogie, where the Life of the Heroess is abbreviated,
which serves for the Subject of the Picture. I add a Moral Reflection to the
Elogie, which tends more directly and immediately to the Benefit and Regulation
of Manners. And there I mark out what is most profitable and instructive in the
preceding Example: I establish practical Axioms, and draw from thence useful
consequences: I advertise Women of their Duties and obligations, and cause them
to take in by Grains and Drops the pure spirit of Christian Philosophy, and
the extraction of her Maxims, which they scarce receive but with distaste, in
Books where it is without seasoning and in gross.

In sequence of this Reflection, and in order to the Maxims which are given
therein, I propose a Moral Question, in which there is enough to satisfy the
Intellectual part, and to fortify the Appetitive. And after the having decided
it to the advantage of Virtue, and to the edification of those Women I desire
to instruct; I confirm my Decision by a Modern Example, which I take either at
our own Door, or fetch it from our Neighbors; to the end being seen near at
Hand it may make the deeper impression, and act with more Vigor. Besides,
these Examples are all illustrious and Heroic: They contain great and
wonderful things: And I have chosen them of this form, to teach such as run
after the Fantomes of Romances; that Truth is not only instructive, but also
more delightful and divertising, then falsehood; and that natural Bodies are
more Luminous and Graceful, then all the Apparitions and Specters which Magic
Art produces. As for the Heathen Women which I bring upon the Stage, I place
them not there as perfect Models. I know very well that their Virtues have been
but rough drawn; And that wanting the light of Faith, they remain imperfect.
But I know also, that such fair rough drawn Virtues are presented there, as we
may gather from thence wherewith to form excellent pieces. And by the same
reason that the Son of God alleged Nin^ve against Jerusalem, and proposed
Tire to Judea, one may allege the Heathen and Barbarian against Christian
Women: one may well propose Pantheas to Catherins, and Zenobias to Agathas.

I particularly declare, that I do not pretend to justify the Death of those
who slew themselves with their own Hands: what Color soever the Philosophy of
that time gave to their Deaths; and with what paint soever the Poets have set
them forth. If they had the Force and greatness of Courage, it was enormous
and disproportioned; it was a greatness beyond limit or compass. Nevertheless
this does not hinder that these enormous and great disproportioned Women may
have something of imitation. One may frame by a Colossus a Figure of a middle
and very exact Stature. In Moral Philosophy as well as in Logic, Error may
be serviceable to Truth: And a good consequence may be drawn from a bad
Principle.

Behold what I had to say in order to the design and structure of this Work. I
have nothing to add to what has been said, but these few words with which S.
Ambrose concludes the second Book he dedicated to Virgins. Since the tastes of
men are so different, and that there are as many Opinions as Heads; If any
Neatness and Care appear in some places of my Discourse, those places can
justly displease no Man: If there be any mature and serious ones, they will
please the Palate of those in whom the Maturity of understanding accompanies the
Maturity of Age: If any be found flowered and delightful, they will not offend
such as are in the Age of the Flowers of Grace; and Men will grant me, that it
is no less necessary to write for these Persons then for others. There remains
nothing more for me to say to the Reader. He may enter into my Gallery when he
pleases; The Door is open to him.

DEBORE (...)

THE GALLERY OF HEROIC WOMEN.
The Gallant Jews.
DEBORA.
THIS Country so delightful to the eye, and so adorned with the riches and
ornaments of Nature, is the western Part of Palestine. You cannot choose but
know it at first sight by that verdure which makes it enjoy as it were a
perpetual spring; And by those tufts of Palms and Cedars which serve as
natural Garlands to crown it. These Towns and Cities which appear afar off are
not built by the Israelites. They have as yet erected in this Country nothing
but flying Towns and walking Cities. They have only built with Canvas and
Cordage: All their Houses have been hitherto but field habitations: And during
the obstinate and continual wars wherein they were employed, their thoughts
were more taken up in rendering soldiers warlike and forming Captians; then in
hiring Masons and making Architects. Besides at present the whole Country is
filled with the rumor of wars and preparrd against the Cananites. Ten thousand
men selected out of two Tribes, are rlready advanced toward Mount Thabor: And
the men you behold in arms about the great Palm are the most remarkable of the
people, whom Debora the Prophetess and Governesse of Israel retained with
Barac to instruct them in the discipline of war, and excite them to act
gallantly.

You never beheld a Tribunal like that of this Governesse. Surely their enters
more splendour and pride in the Thrones of Kings, but less natural Majesty and
true Glory. This is not the work of a year, nor the masterpiece of a Carver:
It is of the Suns own modeling, that Illustrious and universal Artist, which
forms Mettalls and precious Stones. And you may belie^e, that having wrought a
whole age to perfect it, he has not kept from thence that sovereign spirit,
and those pleasing Rays* which draw respect in dazeling the sight. The
greatest splendour and the chief glory thereof nevertheless is derived to it
from Debora, who gave it her Name, and chose it for the Seat of her Justice.
The Graces when she gives Audience under this Palm, serve her son Herralds and
Guards; And at all the Decrees she pronounces, every lease seems pliable to
crown her words.

Surely also no woman was ever heard to speak more soveraingly, nor with an
Authority, accompanied with more sweetness and efficacy. Prophecy and Law
were never expounded by a more powerful Mouth. And it is a wonder that all the
Offices of Regal Dignity, being so weighty and combersome, are not felt by so
beautiful a head. She often gave Judgments, and composed differences under
this Palm: At present she gives our Orders for the Combat, and exhorts her
Officers; and within a few hours you shall see her upon the head of Troops
joining action to Command and contributing by her courage and example, to the
victory which she her self had prophesied. Though you hear not her words, and
that even her voice does not reach you, yet her very Countenance is
intelligible and persuasive: Her Gesture and Looks give vigor and luster to
her speech: And from her very eyes, which are the two fairest pieces of her
Eloquence, there issues forth something, I know not what, of vigor and
brightness, which would make it self to be understood by the deafest persons,
and persuade the most incredulous; which would even cast fire into the coldest,
and excite the most drowsy and stupid souls.

Barac and the other chief Commanders by hearing her, took a second courage and
a new zeal. They fight already in desire and thought; in the agitation of their
hearts and with the fierceness of their looks. The encounter is hot in their
imagination, and the vanquished enemies are forced to fly. There is not a
Soldier so ill armed, there is not a Commander so little versed in war, who
has not victorious visions; who alone and without striking a blow puts not a
whole Troop of Canaanites to flight; who figures not to himself the possessing
the Head of their General, and the Crown of their King laden with chains. But
as yet there is not one drop of blood shed in their imaginary Combats; there is
not a Lance broken, nor a dart thrown: And it would be fine sport to the
enemies, if they had no other defeat to fear. There is another field of battle,
and other dangers which attend them, they shall have no occasion to defend
themselves at so great a distance, and to fight against Apparitions: And by a
revolution which they expect not, and humane Prudence cannot prevent, their
fortune which they believe to be so well established and guarded by so great a
multitude of armed chariots and offensive engines, will be suddenly ruined by
two Women.

See how this Palm already crowns one of them, she bears not only the Name of
Debora; but seems to be animated by her spirit, and to possess like her a
warlike soul and a prophetic Instinct. Her verdant youth more gay and pleasing
then ordinary, is a presage of victory. Her very arms embracing the Queen
Regent applaud her promises, and infuse courage into her Auditors: You would
say that they congratulate her approaching Triumph, and demand for their share
of the booty a Trophy of the arms of the enemies General. But behold, Debora
armed and ready for the Combat: her elevated arm testifies the impatience of
her zeal: and her heart appears already inflamed in her eyes and on her face.
Her grace nevertheless is not altered by it; her animosity is becoming and
modest; and from this little fierceness, which is as the flower or cream of
choler, and a tincture of zeal added to her other natural attractives, a third
quality and a mixture of courage and sweetness is formed, which will work a
double effect upon the Enemy, and at once, and in an instant imprint in them,
both terror and reverence.

SONNET.
DEBORA speaks.
A conqu^ring Sybil I, a Prophetess,
With Voice and Arm served Israel in distress:
My Prophesies and brave exploits made Fame
Through Idumea trumpet forth my Name.
My just Decrees beneath the Palm, did cause
My Words to be erected into Laws:
The Character to Kings and Judges given,
My brow did wear, stamped by the band of Heaven.
What cannot Virtue do, with Beauty graced?
My self without a purple Robe she placed
In such a blessed Regality, as nere
Knew what Conspiracies or Rebels were.
Without or Guard or Forts I was secure;
I did not make my Subjects necks endure
The yoke of Cittadels; but having gained
The Affection of their Hearts, I freely reignd.
ELOGIE OF DEBORA.
HISTORY does not furnish us with a Gallant Woman more ancient then Debora, to
whom I give the first place in this Gallery. She succeeded Moses and Joshua,
and inherited from the first, the Spirit of Prophecy, from the second, Courage
and military virtue: and from both, Authority and Magistracy. Priesthood
excepted, she exercised all the Offices, and filled up all the Dignities of
that time: and out of her divided graces, a Prophet, a Judge and Captain was
formed. Her Audiences had something I know not what of military: she exercised
there a kind of field Magistracy; and gave them under a Palm of her own Name,
which served her for a Tribunal of Triumph, and crowned her Decrees, as well as
her Victories. God having chosen her to break the yoke of his people, and to
redeem them from the bondage of the Canaanites, she assisted with her Person in
the battle given them by Bara^, and contributed her conduct, predictions and
courage, to the glory of that day. She contributed thereunto even her last
hopes: and though the were a Widow, and that her husband had lest her but a
spark of what remained, (to make use of a sacred word) yet she hazarded in that
fight with this spark the resource of her blood, the foundation of her house,
and the seed of her posterity. I speak according to the sense of the Doctors,
who believed that Barac was the Son of this excellent Mother, that he became a
Soldier and Captain under her discipline, and had learned of her how to fight
and overcome. So that in his time, to join my words with those of S. Ambrose, a
Widow was seen governing a holy Nation, a Widow distributing rights, and
arbitrary duties, a Widow mediating between God and his people; a Widow
ordaining peace and war; a Widow directing combats and victories, a Widow
leading an Army, nay the Mother and Commandresse of the General of an Army.
And the untractable and mutinous Jews, whom no human prudence could govern in
time of peace, faint hearted and vanquished Jews, whom no valor of men could
defend in time of war, were reduced to order and military discipline, became
docible and victorious under the Regency of a Widow. The wonder is, and it must
be added here to crown her memory, that no complaint was made, not any fault
found during this Regency. And the sacred Writ which has not concealed the
defects of the Patriarchs, and has published to posterity the dissidence of
Moses and Aaron, the imprudence of Joshua, the incontinence of Samson, the fall
of David, and the follies of Solomon, sound nothing to reprehend in Debora, and
left us only her Prophesies and Hymns, her Laws and Victories. This example is
wonderful, and our sex has reason to be jealous of it, there was in this woman
wherewith to form three great men: and this triple Spirit which was given at
once and in gross, might satisfy for the government of three Races, if it had
been placed severally and bestowed by intervals.

MORAL REFLECTION.
FRom time to time such examples are seen, to the end we should be advertised,
that souls of the first magnitude may be found in bodies of the second sex:
that the instruments which God employes receive their virtue from his hand, and
not from their own matter* and that the authority and impression of his finger
upon what faces soever merits respect, and requires obedience. We ought to
submit to those Powers he has established, as we are subject to his Sun and
Planets. And as we undertake not to prescribe Laws to the Planets, and to order
the course of the Sun, but leave them to the guidance of those intelligences
which move them, and equally bear and without murmuring the sweetness and
force of their influences: so ought we not by an unlawful usurpation, and which
would appear a certain sac^^ledge of State, to set our selves in the Seat of
Magistracy, and undertake to judge our Judges and rule our Masters. We must not
degrade Authority, nor make our Sovereigns our subalterns. Let us rest content
in beseeching God to inspire them. And this prayer once made, let us leave them
to the inspiration of God and to the conduct of their good Angels, who are
their invisible Counsel. And what ever arives to us from them, let us bear it
with equality of mind, and remember that there is no loss comparable to that
of obedience.

Certainly if S. Paul wills us to be subject to superior Powers, and to bear
even with our most rigorous and insupportable Masters, far mote just is it that
we submit to the Powers, whose commands are mild and pleasing, and which are,
like Debora, assisted by fair Virtues and Graces. It seems that God acts more
visible by those, and that his Authority is more resplendant and appears most
clearly through theirs* The obedience likewise which men render them is
commonly more blessed and victorious: and if we consider what is done under
Deboram Judea, under Pulcheria at Constantinople, under Amal^sonta in
Loembardy, under Isabella an Spain, and lastly in Flanders under Marga^^^^
Duchess of Par^^a, we will confess that such miracles are wrought under the
government of women as have not been done under that of men.

The hand of God is not shortened; and our Regent, not to speak of others, has
much of resemblance with the Jewish Regent. She has the spirit of wisdom,
which is an habitual, constant, and peaceable Prophecy. She gains battles in
her Closet, and at the foot of Alta^* She gives Judgments under the Palm of
the deceased King, and under her own: and if her good intentions be not
obstructed, she will suddenly render them under the Olive, and Peace shall be
the coronation of her Virtues.

MORAL QUESTION.
Whether Women be capable of Government?
I Know very well that there be Politicians who are against the government of
Women; but I know also, that these Politicians are no Evangelists, and that
there is no Creed as yet made of their Opininions. The example of Debora is a
famous and Prophetical proof against their Doctrine. It is adeclaration of God
himself to which there are no Axioms to oppose. And when we see a woman made
the Governese of his people, and the General of his Armies, a Woman who gave
Judgments, and gained Battles, a Woman who had the mission of Prophets, and
the Authority of Judges, which were then particular Sovereigns and Kings
without (...) and D^adem: It cannot be said that Women are absolutely incapable
of Government without opposing the Sacred History, or accusing with contempt
the choice which God made of her for the ruling that Nation which he himself
has sanctified.

States are not governed by a beard not by an austere Countenance: they are
ruled by the strength of wit, and with the vigor and activity of reason: and
Wit may be as strong, and Reason as vigorous in the Head of a Woman, as in that
of a Man. There are some Planets called Males, and others Females. These are
not less regular not less active then those: they have not less light, nor
are guided by less perfect Intelligences. As for the want of heat, and the
excess of moisture where with Women are reproached, besides that these are but
superficial differences, which reach not to the soul, nor can place any
mequality between minds; it will be granted me, that not the hot and
choleric, but the cold and phlegmatic are the wisemen.

Let us say* likewise that it imports not of what color, or of what stuff a
Pilots garment be made, provided he understand the Card, and have the knowledge
of the Winds and Stars* little more does it import of what (...) or Complexion
the body is, serving but for a garment to the soul with governs. The main
importance is, that this soul be well instructed and directed: and it is not
from the bulk the instruction is formed: it is not the strength of the nerves
which produces good Counsels If wit and prudence were so meanly de^^^ed, the
Lawmakers and Wise men of Greece would have been Wrastlers. That ancient
Senate, which was the purest and most spiritual part of the Roman World, would
have been a company of Gladiators: and if now adays the Ministers of State
were to apply themselves to wrestling and running, we must choose them amongst
Smiths and Seamen. I here have been some weak and tender Princes, to whom the
affairs of two Kingdoms seemed of no weight; and who governed both on this side
and beyond the Seas without quitting their Closets. Some strong and (...) ones
have been seen who bowed under the lightest, and were disturbed with the most
easy and gentle affairs. They might be excellent Wrasile^^, but were most unfit
to be Princes. They were composed of the Arms and Feet of the State, and could
bear all its Office^^ but they were not composed of the Head; they had not the
form, not could perform the functions of it.

It is not then the vegitable part which forms great Princes. The good conduct
proceeds not from the strength of the Arms, not from the well closing of the
Shoulders: the Stern is handled otherwise then the Oa^, and other forces and
hands are required for the Scepter, then the Hatchet. Women as well as Men may
have these hands and forces. Prudence and Magnanimity which are the two
principal instruments of (...), appertain to both sexes. There is as much
discourse concerning the sight and courage of the Female, as of the Male
Eagles. The heart of a ^^onesse is as great as the heart of a Lion. And the
female Palm as well as the male, serves to make Crowns, and support Trophies.

Women are accused of excess, inconstancy, and weakness: and notorious
examples of them are alleged which cannot be disavowed. But surely (...)
proceed from persons, and not from sexes: and if we abandon reason, to act by
producing presidents and memorials, I fear very much that the Catalogue of bad
Princes will be found more ample, and their actions more dark and staind with
blood, then those of bad Princesses. Let us speak freely, our Abab was little
better then their Jevab^l, not our Manasses then their Athalia, our Tiberius
and Caligula were not better then their Cleopatra and Messaline; and three or
four hours of (...) reign proved more fatal to the Roman Empire, then the whole
life of his Mother Agrippina, if we except the night of his conception, and the
day which brought him forth.

Women cannot only reproach us with the Monsters of our sex which dishonored
Diadems and sullyed Sceptres; but may also alleadg the Virtues and Graces of
their own; which bore them with Dignity and managed them with address. And not
to introduce Amazons and others in the time of Fables, which are the imaginary
spaces of History: Zenobia conserved the conquests of her husband Odenatus, and
stoutly upheld the Forces of the Empire. Pulcheria governed under Theodocius
and Marcian, and had Virtue enough to supply the duties of two Emperors, and
to contribute unto the happiness of two Reigns. The Regency of Bl^^ch was more
fortunate to France, then all the lives of its slothful Kings. But it is not
needful to look so far back into History to find women, who have governed with
wisdom and courage. Some of them may be found there, whose memory is very
fresh, and who but lately appeared upon the stage.

EXAMPLE.
Isabel Infanta of Spain, Arch Duchess of the Low Countries.
I Hear daily that the same is said of Spaniards as of Hawks: and it is a
common saying, That the Females are better then the Males: but in my opinion
the saying is biting and over sharp: And it would savor much more of Civility
to say with one of our Authors, that great Queens, and Women sit for commands
are of Spain; as great Kings, and valiant Men are of France. To alledg none but
celebrious and remarkable example, Blanch the Mother of S. Lewis, Isabel the
Wife of Ferdinand, Margarite Daughter to Charles the fifth, and Isabel her Niece
the Daughter of Philip the second are sufficiently illustrious, and of credit
enough to defend this truth. And their bare Names without other discourse, may
be invincible Arguments, and of sovereign Authority to such as would prove,
that the Princesses of Spain understand the Art of ruling powerfully, and with
a Majestical grace; that they know how to manage the Scepter with address: and
that there is no Crown so weighty, which is not well supported on their Heads.
I will reserve the two (...) for another subject, and content my self to give a
touch with my Pensil upon the two last. They are not as yet clean out of our
sight: and we have their pictures drawn to the life, and their blood with their
spirit in our good Queen their Niece.

Isabel the Intanta of Spain and Arch-Dutchesse of the Low Countries has thown
to what height the understanding of Women may advance in the Science of well
governing. And though fortune made her not a great Queen, yet Virtue made her a
Heroesse, who gives place in nothing to those that make the greatest noise in
History. I shall not need to produce Testimonies thereupon, or to cite Books
and Authors. Our whole Age is equally knowing in the life of this wise
Princess: her memory is publicly honored in all the Courts of Europe: nay
even such as were no Friends to her House, had for her the Castilian heart and
the Flemish spirit. They have applauded her in good earnest with handsfree from
the Dominion of Spain: and besides she is daily crowned at Paris and Leyden, as
well as at Madrid and Bruxels.

Her virtues were no shadows nor parcels of virtues; they were solid and
perfect ones: virtues for every use and of every form: and Policy is
acquainted with no virtues which had not in her all their force and extent.
Though they have all an affinity with each other, yet all of them have not the
same resemblance, nor the same functions in the civil life. There are some
which are born with us, and are as it were the advances and graces of Nature.
There are some which must be acquired, and are the fruits of labor and study.
There are some which are strong and vigorous, fit for action: there are
pleasing and polished ones which serve only for show. The Infanta possessed
them all: and what most imports, she had them all great, and in a condition to
practice them with splendour.

First, she was born with this graceful Sovereignty, and by natural right,
which has its title and force upon the face of beautiful persons: and this
Sovereignty is a powerful and very useful piece when it is well managed: it
governs by the bare aspect the most harsh and least tractable hearts. It
softens the hardest commands, and takes from them what is biting and vexatious:
it would infuse even mildness and grace into Tyranny. Certainly it is not
beauty which deliberates, which judges, which enacts Laws and Ordinances. But
the Common people, for whom the most part of Laws and Ordinances are made, is
an Animal into which there enters more of the body then mind, and which obeyes
more by sense then reason. Likewise it is true that this flower lasts not long,
and appears only in the Spring: but saded Roses retain full a good odor: And
besides that the Infanta kept all her life time certain remnants beautiful
enough, of this first flower; these very remnants were supported by so sweet
and becoming a Majesty; they were accompanied with so many graces and
civilities, and so many other flowers of the latter season were mixed with
them, as no body could well distinguish between them and those of Youth.

The Intellect is the eye of Wisdom, and the guide of all virtues. It is the
chief Minister of Princes, and their natural Counselor: and Policy can effect
nothing if it be not enlightened by it. The Infanta's understanding was ranked
amongst the most elevated and capable ones, and could suffice for all the parts
and duties of Government. There were no affairs so vast or weighty, which it
did not comprehend and manage with ease: there were none so obscure which it
did not inlighten: none so confused which it did not set in order. Her
Counselors were never busied to find her ways and expedients: it was enough
to give their approbation to those she furnished of her own: and she never
furnished any which were not advantageous, and according to the measure of
affairs. Besides this capacity of mind, and this interior prudence even borne
with her, she used great care, and extraordinary diligence to study the
capacity of other men, and had the dexterity to appropriate to her self by a
discreet and judicious Do^^^^, the understanding and prudence of those
Ministers that assisted her. This Do^^lity so much esteemed by Politicians, and
so highly preferred before an opiniative and presumptuous ability, was to her
as an universal science, and a second capacity of greater use, and less
subject to (...) then the first. Thereby the being yet in Spain, and in the
School of her Father King Philip the second, she replenished her self with the
lights and science of this Prince, the ablest of his time in the science of
Kings. Thereby she framed an abridgement of the experience and great age of the
Spanish Ministers, and applied it to her own use. Thereby remaining single in
the Government of Flanders after the Decease of the Archduke Albertus, she
made the understanding of Cardinal de la C^e^a her own. She added to his
Prudence that of Marquess Spi^^la, and of President Rosa: And all the wise
principles of State, wherewith the Grandees at Court were enriched, became her
own.

Moreover this Capacity did not consume it self in vain speculations in
wandering and fruitless Idea's; it was active and attempting, bold and
laborious. And there have been some Princes of great repute, who acted less
Gallantly and with less vigor then this Princess. The pains she took in
Audiences is incredible: the never made affairs wait upon her: never was her
Closet or mind shut to them* never did the accuse them of importunity, nor
complained of their crowding in. Likewise she never remitted them to the care
of her Officers: she was as jealous of them, as if she had inspired them with
understanding and conduct, as if her hands had brought happiness to them, as
it they had taken address and light from her presence. Secretaries were to her
rather Officers for show, then use. She her self finished the most difficult
and important dispatches: and when it was needful to write in commanding terms,
and in a maiestical style* when it was necessary to use the Character of Grace,
and civil, and obliging expressions, she did not pay with borrowed words, or
hired conceptions, her mind furnished her abundantly with all that could
persuade Soveraignly, and with Dignity, and with all that was capable of
gaining hearts, or taking them by force.

When she was resolved for the siege of Breeds, which served so long for the
exercise and spectacle of all Europe, and which was before the siege of R^^bel
the Idea and Masterpiece of the military Science, she wrote with her own hand
for aid to all the Princes her Allies; to all the Communities of the
Low Countries for Contributions and Convoyes; to all the Commanders of her
Troops to issue forth Commissions, and to give out Orders. And it may be said,
that all the chief Engines of this famous Enterprise received from her mouth,
from her hand, and presence, a spirit of Authority which infused vigor into
them, and made them act with success.

She wanted not even courage and address in military affairs: but her courage
was bound up, and her military address restrained. And had she not been so
famous, and so very exemplar amongst modest and pious women she might have had
the first place amongst the valiant and Heroic. It not suiting with her
condition to sight with her hands, she sought with manly counsels, and bold
resolutions. She employed the valor of the heart and the courage of the
countenance, where it was not permitted her to use the strength of the Arm. She
marched confidently even into the mouth of danger, and expected it sometimes
with a steady pace, though only armed with the stability of her mind, and the
Dignity of her looks. Such as have written the History of the wars in Fl^nders
sa^, that before the battle of Newport she was pleased to be present at the
general Randezvous of the whole Army before Bruges; and that the went from one
company to another, animating the Soldiers with the fire which issued forth of
her eyes and mouth, and with the money the scattered abroad with her hands.
They add that at the S^ege of Oste^d she visited their Quarters on horseback:
she encou^aged the Soldiers, and sent them to fight fortified with presents
and promises: she ordered the batteries, and she her self levelled the Canons,
as if she had a desire to manifest thereby, (to use this saying of the Poet)
that the Goddesses can thunder as well as the Gods; and that they have like
them their Arcenals and Thunderbolts. Certainly if it has been said, that the
military sweat of the first Consuls, and those hands which tasted of Liberty,
gave to the earth they cultivated a stately secundity mixed with glory; I doubt
not but the Canons levelled by this I rincesse, received from her eyes and
courage a second fire which gave spirit to the first, and redoubled its force.

But her most usual duty in her Armies was not to make breaches and ruin
walls, it was a wholesome and charitable duty: a duty of P^ety and mercy: and
this duty contributed to victory: this mercy assisted to the taking of Towns
and the gaining of battles. Knowing that there are some enemies more
formidable, then those against whom men arm and entrench themselves: and that
the Canon composed of Iron and Fire is less destructive to Armies, then
necessities and maladies, she took a particular care of the infirm Soldiers;
she caused them to be liberally and abundantly furnished with necessaries. She
disposed of her Jewels and moneys laid up for her trifling pleasures, to
provide them Drugs: and the lost hours, which another would have employed at
play, and recreative walks, she employed in furnishing them with pla^^ters and
making swath-bands for such as were wounded. I have been told of some Princes
who tore their shirts to bind up their Soldiers wounds: I know the name of
that Person who once made his Diadem serve to the same use. But concerning this
matter I have learnt nothing, nor read any thing of Antiquity which is not very
ordinary, if compared with the Charity of the Infanta. It is very credible,
that the virtue of those Remedies was no ways weakened by this Charity: and I
doubt not but the Plasters and Swath-bands, which passed through so pure and
beneficial hands, preserved more Soldiers, then Casks and Curresses. Whereupon
I call to mind that courageous Victorius, who was called the Mother of Camps
and Armies. This name indeed is full of glory, and in my opinion of higher
value then the Statues and Triumphs of many Emperors: but of what esteem
soever it be, the Infanta deserved it by a better title then Victorius: she was
not only the Mother of her Armies, but even the Preserver of them: her
charitable acts made them subsist, her presence and Piety made them overcome.

To these employment of the field we must join the inclination and dexterity
she had in that innocent war and pastime which is used in Woods, without
effusion of human blood, and without leaving Widows and Orphans. She there gave
a little more freedom to her modesty, and suffered its bounds to be a little
more enlarged: we know likewise that she there performed all that a most
courageous and dexterous person could have done. And as if she had delighted in
a danger wherein she might be humanly valiant, and overcome without doing hurt;
she was seen to encounter chafed Wilde-boats with a javelin in her hand; And to
show in this single sport a^ serious a valor and as true courage as would have
been requisite on a breach or in a set Battle.

There is a haughty capacity and a swelling Pride: There is a savage Courage
and a magnanimity which would fain strike a terror into others. This alliance
of vices with virtues was not observed in the Infanta, she was both modest and
capable: she was humble and prudent: and her magnanimity though high and
courageous was yet sweetened by a goodness victorious without Arms, and
conquering without violence, which gained her more hearts, then all the forces
of Spain could overcome. This goodness did only acquire her the love of her
Subjects; but it gained her Subjects where she had no Jurisdiction: It
entertained her servants without Pensions or Wages. It made her Dominion of a
larger extent then her own Country. It made her reign of a longer durance then
her life. Besides it was an universal goodness for all uses: a goodness
without delay or resence: at all hours and in all proportions: a spring of
goodness which could not be exhausted by any effusion: a goodness ingenious
to do good; and to do it seasonably and to the purpose* to do it with a good
grace and Majesty.

It is wonderful that this awful Princess, who at her pleasure gives limits to
Fortune and Ambition, and extinguishes the most enflamed Passions; it is
wonderful I say, that even death it self could not suspend the inclination she
had to do good: and the last breach of her life was a spirit of grace, and an
effusion of good deeds. She had received the last Sacraments, and her soul
strengthened with the bread of the strong, and prepared by extreme unction,
expected only the moment of expiring, when she remembered that many petitions
were remaining in her Cabinet unanswered. These were petitions of the afflicted
and miserable, who were apparently in danger of never coming out of their
misery, if she drew them not forth before the alteration which her death was
ready to produce in affairs: she gave order that these petitions should be
brought her; and causing her head and hand to be raised up, she employed all
that remained of her sight and motion to sign them in the best manner she was
able. Surely she could not die more gloriously, nor with a more noble and
natural essusion of goodness. And this makes me remember the Sun, which still
enlightens the Earth, and does good to it, even when it is in the Eclipse.
Thereby she supports whole houses which are ready to sall: she raises up some
which were already fallen: and this last trembling of her head supported
Communities and wrought the preservation of many Families. This was the right
way of reigning charitably, and exercising a most benign Sovereignty, to give
pardons and grant favors in the very sight, and even in the arms of death.
This was the true way of dying Royally, and after an Heroic manner, to rise up
out of the bed of death, that she might save Families from shipwreck which were
ready to perish, and to employ the last breath of her life, to make the
miserable revive* to restore them hope, goods, repose, and Fortunes at the very
rendering up her soul. Surely those ancient Heroes who took a vanity to die
standing, and to have their bodies upright, and their souls elevated never died
so nobly, nor in so good a posture. And that Prince, the delight of Mankind,
who reckoned amongst his acquisitions the goods he had bestowed, and counted
amongst his losses all those which were remaining, how thristy a manager soever
he were of favors and benefits, yet he never arrived to that height as to
oblige by his last breath, and to do good in the last motion of his Soul.

There are forced favors and constrained benefits, which fall but by drops:
there are some which carry with them as it were the stings of repulses and ^ll
Language, and serve only to distaste those that receive them. Nothing of this
Nature came from the Infanta. Her favors were without delay, and often
prevented the asking: they were all pure, and without thorns: and her benefits
resembled gold which should grow without earth and ordure: they were not only
of great value and solidity, but they had besides much luster; they surprised
the heart and dazzled the sight.

This Grace of doing good was the particular character, and as it were the
proper Beauty and Mark of the Infanta. All her actions, I say her most serious
and vigorous actions were imbued therewith: her piety it self had taken a
tincture of it: and though her virtue were one of the highest and ^reest from
ostentation, yet she never did any thing fiercely and with shagrin: she acted
nothing which was not gallant and civil, which was not done with reflection
and study, which relished not of quaintnes^e and magnificence: Nay, it is said,
that even her seventies did not distaste; and that her very rigours were
obliging. Whereupon it is related, that when she was in Spain, a certain Knight
less wounded in his heart then head, having entertained her with some
discourses, into which there entered fire and adoration, the wise Princess who
knew very well that there was something of Eudimien and of the Moon in this
man, had more pity then anger for him. And to free her self dexterously from
his importunities procured the King her Father to give him an honorable
employment attended with a great Revenue which carried him far enough off from
Spain. Thereby she satisfied Virtue without exaspirating the Graces, and proved
at once so rigorous and indulgent to this melancholy person, that with one
stroke she punished his love, and made him a Fortune.

Above all, this goodness of the Infanta appeared admirable in supporting
ruined Powers, in comforting great wounded Fortunes in conserving the Luster
and Dignity of eclipsed Planets put out of their Houses and Courses. To perform
the like acts of mercy, another sort of charity is required then is practiced
in Hospitals: and the pain of an ulcerated Prince demands other lenitives then
the pain of a broken Leg, and of an Arm cut off. The Infanta did sundry times
such good deeds, and her charities have ascended even to crowned Heads. Princes
flying to her for protection, and decayed Princesses found with her their House
and Rank. They found there preparatives and remedies for their wounds, even
precious preparatives, and agreeable and perfumed remedies: and the Hand it self
which touched them was so skilful, as to charm their anguish, and to take away
the seeling, and almost the very remembrance of their falls.

Authority which is to Princes a Crown without matter, and a character of
invisible Majesty; which is in them a virtue that acts without motion, and
procures them obedience without force or violence: This Authority I say, which
is formed out of the virtue of a Prince, and out of the esteem of his Subjects,
was sovereign in the Infanta, and alone affected more then all the Engines of
Spain assisted with all the Mines of the Indies could have done. She neither
wanted Armies nor Cittadels to support her Commands: and what she did with two
words, another could not have done with four Cittadels, and as many Armies. Her
Subjects obeyed her intentions, what marks soever they had of them, and by what
mouth soever they were declared. Even strangers and enemies honored her Name,
and had for her, submissions of respects, and compla^^ncies of esteem; even to
that degree that the French, who had not respected the Kings Authority before
the Barriers of the L^^^re; and the Royal Palace yielded respect to the
Authority of the Infanta even upon the Frontiers of her Country, and had a
scruple to sight threescore leagues from Bruxel^.

All these virtues of Peace and war which became familiar and domestic to the
Infanta, which assisted her in her Closet, and followed her in the field, were
under the conduct of another superior virtue, and of a higher descent. I speak
of Religion which is the Tutresse of States, and ought to be the Superintendent
of Policy. That truly was the predominant virtue of this great Princess: but
it was not a superstitious and timorous Religion, a Religion of scruples and
apish faces; much less was it of those artificial and painted ones, which
compose and fit themselves for show, which have studied looks, and tears of
reserve for the public, which deride in private the masked part they act in
Churches. The Infanta was solidly religious, and even with vigor of spirit:
she was humble and submissive to God without dejection: she dr^aded him with
that respectful fear which is the only fear of the wise and constant.
Nobleness and Dignity were to her so inherent, as they entered in a manner
against her will into all her good works: And in her least devotions there was
a tincture of Majesty, and some thing I know not, what which had a touch of the
greatness of her birth. And surely to speak my thoughts of it* Great men are
not permitted to be less devout then mean persons: and crowned heads owe no
less subjection to God then others. But the devotion of Great ones ought to be
more magnificent and resplendent, then that of inferior persons: And crowned
heads even in their submissions, and when they humble themselves have a luster
and motion of dignity which others want. The fire of the mountains which God
himself has touched is another kind of fire, then all those which are
enkindled with the sat and moisture of the valleys: And the majestical
submission of the ^alm, bowing under the weight of its fruits, renders far more
honor to Heaven, then the lightness of a reed under the first wind which
(...) it.

As the greatness and dignity of the Infanta assisted her piety, and had their
place and share in all her devotions: so her piety entered into all the actions
of greatness and dignity which related either to her quality or office. It had
the first rank and principal Authority in her Counsel: It was present in the
beginning and end of all her enterprises; It gave them the platforms and
designs of all that was to be executed, both within and out of her Dominions:
And what proposition soever was made either for Peace or War, it was always
the first heard. This Piety had likewise its part in the liberalities and
profusions of the Infanta, and dispensed them so Christianly and with so
general a Charity, as they overflowed even into the ^ouses of the poor. By this
means Churches and Hospitals became the festival recreations of the Palace*
Citizens did not fast for the good ch^^^ of Courtiers: And mercy as well as
magnificence did honor to the public. Even divertisements and pastimes were
practiced in the sight of this piety proper for all uses: It brought thither
order and discipline: It took from them even the indecency of gesture, and the
immodesty of discourse: It only left them a serious and regular gallantry, and
a most pure and spotless joy. Affairs were also blessed and prosperous in the
hands of so religious a Princess. Flanders was never more happy then in her
time: And it has been very evident since her death, that war and ill fortune
bore her respect while she lived. But the virtues of this great Princess
detain us too long: behold more matter then is requisite to crown her. Let us
make the draught which we promised of her Aunt the Duchess of Parma; and let
us examine whether there will be matter enough to compose a fair crown to her
memory.

Margarite of Austria Duchess of Parma and Governesse of the Low Countries.
MARGARITE of Austria Duchess of Parma may well be placed with the Infanta
Isabel her Niece, and serve as an advantageous and modern proof for the
Government of Women. She had much of the spirit and address of Charles the
Fifth; I say of that spirit of government and authority, and of that politic
address which did more mischief to France, then all the forces and
machinations of the Empire united and combined against her. She being sprightly
and already capable by her birth, it was not very difficult to polish her self
by practice, and to add to so excellent a nature, as to a rare and valuable
matter, perfect habits, and exquisite and accomplished comportments. She
received the first strokes of these habits in the Court of Florence, where
adversity furnished her all it could with the best impressions, and most exact
and fairest forms. A second marriage having caused her to pass from thence
into the house of Fer^ese, the discipline and cares of Paul the Third, the
ablest person of his time in the Science of Princes, completed in her mind
the rough draught she had brought from the School of the Medicean Family.

A while after she was called to the Government of the Low-Countreyes by Philip
the Second, who had less regard in this choice to the blood and memory of
Charles his Father, then to his proper interest, and to the conservation of his
Patrimony of seventeen Provinces. They remained yet all in peace and obedience
when the Duchess of Parma arrived there: and there was then no speech of
Factions or States, Guex or Heretics. But this calm lasted not long: And the
Heresies of Germany and (...), which had crept into those Provinces quickly
drew thither Rebellion after the dissension. This alteration of time gave work
enough to the Governess: but it was a glorious work and full of reputation,
wherein she had Kings for her Encouragers, and was looked on by all Europe with
astonishment. It was likewise to the wise and speculative of that time a
wonderful spectacle to see a woman wrestle alone against so great and dangerous
a storm. Yet she got the upper hand at last: and after nine years of agitation,
she brought back the vessel into the Haven in despite of the winds and tides,
which had forced it out. I say that she was to wrestle alone against the storm;
because the Council it self had begun the trouble, and the Ministers hired to
save the vessel were the first that split it, and made way for the waves.

Grau^^lle Archbishop of Arra^, whom King Philip had assigned to the Governe^s
for an honorable Spy, and a Pedagogue raised to the degree of a Minister of
State, gave her more jealousy and distrust then good advice, and proved rather
obstructive, then assistant to her. His Corrivals and Enemies accused him of
all the ill had happened. Such as stood indifferent, suspected him for raising a
tumult in the vessel, to the end the stern might be wholly left to himself. As
for the Prince of Orange. the Earls of I^^mond and H^rn, the Marquess of Berg,
and other D^tch Lords, being all declared enemies against Granville, and secret
Corrivals to each other, all suspected of Rebellion, and ill affected to the
Domination of strangers, they brought nothing to the Council, but a spirit of
contradiction and confusion; nothing but interested and partial opinions,
nothing but hidden conspiracies and open animosities. By which means they more
imbroyled then assisted the Governess and not daring either to reject or take
their advice, she might be truly said to be abandoned amongst all these guides,
because they were either ^uspected or disloyal* and that it was equally
dangerous either to leave or follow them. Nevertheless she forcibly overcame
all these difficulties. she de^te^ously loosned her self from these
incombrances: And after di^erted and discovered conspiracies* after
extinguished, and chastised ^^ditions, after the revolt of Towns reduced to
obedience, she chased away Rebellion and Heresy out of Flanders: she sweetly
and de^^erously tied up again the (...) which gaped after liberty, and had
already broken a piece of his chain. The States of Holland would have been at
present but a Republic in Idea; and Leyden would have been (...) to Spain as
to Bruxels, if King Philip had left for a longer time the Government unto the
Duchess of Parma. Ruy (...) and the Duke (...) were indeed of this opinion:
Likewise none but indulgent and popular Ministers were ignorant, that clemency
is more persuasive, and make^ it (...) better obeyed then severity. But the
advice of Cardinal Spinosa and the Duke of Al^a carrying it against their
opinions; the King concluded upon the way of rigor and force. The duke of
Al^a. being sent to put them in execution, opened afresh with fire and sword
those wounds, which lenitives had closed up: and what the dextent^ and
mildeness of a wise and obliging woman had re-established, was ^^^ned by the
violence^ of a bloody and rigorous Minister of State. Philip to (...) this
error resolved to send back the Duchess into ^lande^^, which very earnestly
demanded her, believing that its cure could come from no other hand then hers.
But he desired it too late and out of season God thought that she had labored
enough, and sufficiently overcome; and therefore called her to give her repose,
and the crowns she had merited. The Flemings being out of hope to have her
Person, conserved her Memory: They honored her in Public, and in their
houses, and whereas they had solemnly, and with ringing of Bells thrown down
that insolent and proud statue which the Duke of Al^a had caused to be set up
in the Citadel of Antwerp, they erected in their hearts, which were stronger
then Citadels, a statue of pure esteem and glory to the Duchess of Parma.

IAHEL (...)

Iahel.
THERE is now an end of the Cananites and of their Fortune: their Army
composed of so many Troops and Engines of war was defeated by the Israelites,
who are still pursuing the remainder of it. And all the presages are deceitful,
nay even Prophecy it self is a liar, or their Empire shaken by this Blow will
not much longer expect its fall: the Earth is covered over with the bloody
parcels of so formidable a Bodi^; some of them have fallen upon all the
Mountains, and into all the Valleys of the Country; and the stately Head
thereof, which has hitherto rolled along, happens to be broken in pieces by
the Hand of this Woman. It is Jahel who has finished the overthrow of the
Canaanites by the death of their General, whom she killed with a Nail in her
own ^ent, where he had sheltred himself after the routing of his Army: she is
still moved with the blow she so lately struck. Certainly she could not have
given a more hazardous one, nor of greater consequence: and the Age of our
forefathers which was an Age of Miracles and of prodigious Adventures, has
never seen any thing of like Courage, nor of greater Fame.

The joy she felt at the success of so high an enterprise adds new luster to
her eyes, and a second grace to her face. The confidence of her looks
corresponds with the boldness of the Action; her hands armed with the fatal
Hamm^r which proved of more force then the warlike Engines of the Enemies, and
performed more then all the Lances and Swords of the Israelites, prepared
themselves to gain a second Victory: And yet her Hands all heated as they are
with breaking the Chain and Yoke of Israel upon the Head of Sisera* seem
willing to give the like blow even unto the Ghost of the Cananean King, whom
her imagination has brought Captive to her, and laden with Chains.

Nevertheless Sisera wrastleth in vain against the Earth. At the same time he
pushes with his arms as it were to force her to give back: and by a contrary
effort he seems willing to carry her away with his head. His heart strives
within to succor the wounded part, and not being able of himself to assist it,
with all the remainder of his force, he conveyes thither Anger, Rage, and
Despair. These impotent and furious Passions appear confusedly, and with horror
on his face swollen with the blood and spirits which are there poured out from
the whole body. It would be hard to distinguish them by their proper features,
and by the Colors which are natural to them: All of them have participated of
the Anguish which is mingled with them, and are grown either pale with Death
which entered by this wound, or red with the blood which flowed from thence.

His eyes, which to him had been ill Advisers and unfaithful guards, and had
suffered themselves to be surprised by beauty and sleep, bewail the mortal
error they had committed, and seem willing to cast forth with their blood and
tears the pleasing poison which they have taken in from the looks of J^hel:
Besides they turn up and down in their last pains, as if they sought her out to
reproach her of Infidelity; And the very sight of Debora and Barac happening to
be present at this Tragic spectacle increases their torment and begets in him
a second confusion: The victory of his Enemies proves a torment to him: Death,
nay even such a death made it another death to him. But the third yet more
sensible and cruel death was, that his enemies in his very presence and sight
rejoice at his death and at their victory.

Surely also this sight may be called the death of Sisera, and the wound which
he received thereby in his heart though it cast forth no blood at all, is yet
more painful to him then that of his pierced head; You would say that he is
ready to dart out of his mouth a thousand Blasphemies against Heaven, and as
many Imprecations against Jahel; But his voice is stifled with the press of
his passions, and dies in his throat; There issues forth of it nothing but
froth, which is the blood of his inflamed rage, and not being able to blaspheme
with his tongue, he blasphemeth with his countenance and the motion of his
lips. Debora and Barac look upon him in silence, and with a kind of Religious
horror. Astonishment which opens their mouth, deprives them of breath, and
their stretched out hands seem willing to speak for their tongues that are tied
up.

The very servants which are of their Train are stricken with the like
amazement; and as if there were a charm in this spectacle, it took from them
their voice by gazing on it. Sisera who could not astonish them by his valor,
and with a sword in his hand, does now amaze them by his punishment, and with
the Nail in his head. And if all the people should be destroyed, if the Ark it
self were a captive, and if the Cherub^^s which guard it were prisoners, there
could not appear more Trouble in the mind of Barac, nor more Emotion upon the
face of Debora. But this trouble and Emotion will be quickly followed with joy,
and every one resuming the Function which this spectacle has suspended, Debora
inspired with the spirit of Prophecy shall sing a Hymn unto God of the wonders
which have finished so great a war with the point of a nail, and destroyed the
Empire of the Canaanites with the stroke of a hammer and by the hand of a woman.

SONNET.
IN Jahels Bresta Hero's Soul survives,
Which prompts her modest thoughts to brave atchives:
Her flaming eyes declare with how much heat,
She did an Army in one Head defeat.
Sisera her struggling, his black Soul does groan,
That by a Woman's hand he is overthrown:
It quits his Breast, amazed Rage conceives,
And in his Blood its wrath enkindled leaves.
Behold Man's ^ickle state, how near allied
His Ruin is to his insulting Pride;
And with what ease this Ball is every way
By Fortune racketed, to find her play.
She can advance him when in most despair,
As though she raised him with a puff of Air:
As strangly too, without her Wheels full poise,
She by the p^^cking of a Nail destroys.
THE ELOGIE OF JAHEL.
JAHEL gave the last blow unto the Pride of the Canaan^^es, and finishing the
victory which Debora had begun, she showed that God had chosen the hands of a
Woman to break the yoke of his people. Sisera the Lieutenant General of Jabin,
seeing his Army defeated by the Israelites, saved himself a^oot in the Tent of
Jahel: But Death knows no Sanctuar^ or place of Refuge: And it is evident, that
she suffered him (...) in the heat of the conflict, to kill him afterward more
at (...), and at more lea^ure out of the Battle. Jahel inspired by God (...).
And to quench the extreme thi^^ which labor, flight and (...) had caused,
presented him with milk to drink.

There are some dangerous charities and courtesies whereof we must bewa^^: And
sometimes the presence of Women have defeated those who could not be overcome
by stratagems or armed Legions. (...) together with the freshness of this drink
having (...) unfortunate Sisera, Jahel without noise pulled up one of the Nail*
wherewith her Tent was fastened, and with the blow of a (...) to deep into his
head, as the Nail pierced it clean through* and entered into the earth with his
blood and Soul. This Woman wa^ worth an Army, and a Nail in her hand effected
that which ten thousand (...), and as many Swords were not able to effect.

(...) may well believe that this action was done by inspiration* otherw^^
(...) not have violated Hospitality, which is naturally holy (...) to the Law
of Nations. She would not have corrupted (...) and favor, not have sta^nd it
with blood and murder: She would have at least respected the gentleness of
her Sex, and the sanctity of her Tent: But it was Gods will on that day, that
two Women should work the Redemption of a whole Nation. And that by this
example they should teach posterity that great forces are not necessary to
great Actions, that the powers of the earth break asunder if never so little
touched, and that without framing Engines or rolling mountains there needs but
one thrust to cause the fall of a Colessus.

A MORAL REFLECTION.
I Fear that if I propose the Example of Jahel to gallant women, they will
reject my proposition and abhor the blood and (...) of this Precedent.
Nevertheless they may imitate her without violating the Law^ of Hospitality,
without exasperating the mildeness of their Sex; without ^^taging o^ framing
the (...) with blood. There are no more Canaanites to overcome* not (...) there
another Sisera to vanquish: But there are (...), there are commanding and (...)
Passion, which are to the (...) at that day what Sisera and the Canaanites were
heretofore to the Israelites: Not only Men ought to take up arms against these
spiritual (...) but even Women also must enter into this war, and the (...)
which they should hold with them would be a kind of treason and (...). Above
all, it there be any woman who has entertained some Sisera in her (...), who
has opened her heart, and promised security unto some predominant Passion, the
ought to be advertised, that this sort of charity is destructive and not to be
(...) in* and that toward (...) mercy proves (...), and fidelity scandalous and
of dangerous example. Saul was reproved for the (...) thrown to the king of the
Amalekites, and because he was pitiful out of ^^ason, and against the will of
God, he lost both ^rown and (...). Take heed of the li^e fault, if you be not
prepared against the (...) misfortune. And if you have afforded a place of
retreat to some Sovereign passion, to some Capital and commanding vice.
Remember that you are bound in honor both to betr^y it, and to keep no faith
with it, as it is a Sisera to you, so ought you to be a Jahel to it, and you
shall be to it an Heroic and victorious Jahel, if you ^ull it asleep with the
blood of the Lamb, and plane a Nail of the Cross in the Head of it.

A MORAL QUESTION.
Whether there was Infidelity in the Act of Jahel?
THe act of Jahel is not numbered amongst those which instantly gain
approbation, and which at first sight informs the understanding. The color of
it is not so beautiful, nor the face of it so taking. There appears therein
much dexterity and courage: but there is de^^ipt in this address, and this
courage has something of barbarous in it: (...), the breach of faith seems in
that action very evident, cabinet and chamber (...) cannot fail to fill their
Common places therewith* and to compose a piece against the infidelity of
women: But here and every where else we must defy seeming illusions and the
false lights of the superficie^^ We must beware of fastening our opinions upon
the (...) of things, and of judging by the color. The outside (...) deceitful
and (...) into belief. And very often colors are more (...) and have more
Justice about vice then virtue. Moreover since the holy Ghost himself has set
forth the praise of Jahel, since he has inspired her with a prophetic mouth,
and has even dictated it to one of his writers, we need not fear to hazard our
esteem upon his approbation, not make a scruple to honor the memory of a
virtue, whereof he has lest us the (...) and picture after his own manner.

There was then prudence and conduct, address and courage in this action of
Jahel, and particularly fidelity which is questioned was herein courageous and
magnanimous: It was fortified with zeal, and consecrated to Religion. I know
not whether Jahel might owe something to Sisera and the Canaanites who were the
enemies of God, Tyrants over his people, and public oppressors of the
posterity of the Patriarchs. But I know very well that she could not engage
unto them a second faith against the first which she owed to God against the
Law of her forefathers and to the ruin of that holy nation: A treaty of this
nature had been an Aposta^ie of State and Religion: and she could not have kept
her word without the breach of her says, without betraying her brethren,
without sinning against God and Moses.

The Holy Scripture very well observes that there was some kind of peace
between the house of her husband Hebar, and the Canaanites. But this was not a
regular peace, and according to usual forms: It was but a good interval hardly
and dearly purchased by the weakest side, It was but (...) of (...) and
pillages which the Canaanites accorded to the house of Hebar in respect of the
contributions they drew from them: And doubtless this Accord on Hebars part
was without pre^udice to the faith he owed to God and his people, and this
particular repose which he purchased was not a falling off from the common
cause. It was in all probability of the same nature as particular Treaties are
now adays between common people residing upon Frontiers, who (...) and sword
with money, who divert the ^undation and in^oad of the Enemy by contributions
which they lay upon them; this is properly called, and without abusing the
term, so con^ure a tempest, and charm wild beasts. But these charms and
comutations do not bind the Common people who put them in practice. They live
within the limits of (...), and under the duty of joining as occasion serves
with the Troop of their (...), of ma^^hing against the common enemy, of (...)
the same beasts which they themselves had enchanted.

The Treaty of Hebar with the Canaanites was in this form. It was not a
surrender of his right, not a dispensation of his duty; It was an innocent
Charm against (...) and sword, against Tyrants and oppressors. And the wa^
undertaken against them proceeding from the will of God, (...) by express
revelation, and declared by the Reg^n^ Prophet^^, as he might list himself
without any ^reachers amongst the Troops, and ^oyn hi^ Arms with the common
Arm^ for the liberty of the people. In Jahel with a good Conscience and me^^t
might let her hand to the same work: the might be a^ding by her (...) and
forces to break the Cha^^ of her brethren: she might finish by a particular
inspiration the victory which Debora had begun with public. Authority, and by
the Spirit of Prophecy.

This particular inspiration supported the common Interest, and strengthened
natural reason: And Jahel ex^ited on the one side, and persuaded on the other,
exposed for the people both her life and reputation to a hazardou^ enterprise,
and which might leave her an ill ^ame. Thereby the performed an (...) Act of
fidelity toward God whom she obeyed, toward the ^aw of her Ancesters which
she established by the ruin of the opposite Power, toward her people, whole
^oke she brake, and whose chain^ she rent in pieces, toward posterity to which
she conserved both Religion and the Sanctuary, Freedom and Hope.

Neverthelese this Act is reckoned amongst those extr^ordinary one^ which
surpa^^ received Laws, and exceed such measures as are in use. It may well
(...) us admiration and respect, but we cannot (...) a model of it, and draw
copies from thence. And since Fidelity is an essential part in a Gallant Woman,
it is proper to produce some example^ whereby virtue all Pure and without the
least appearance of stain may serve as well for Imitation as Show.

EXAMPLE.
Joan of Beaufort Queen of Scotland, and Catherine Douglas.
IT is with the History of Scotland as with those frightful pictures wherein
nothing is represented but dead and wounded Bodies; nothing but fired houses
and ruins. One cannot engage himself in it without passing over blood and
murders; nay even upon sacred blood, and paracide murders, and it is very
strange that so little a crown should be divided by so many factions and so
often stained with the death of those who have worn it.

That of James the First was a Tragedy which might pass for an Ori^^ either in
the time of (...), or in the Age of Oedipus; But as there is never any Age
represented so cruel wherein some person of good life does not inter^^ne, who
reads not upon the stage lessons of Virtue and corrects the scandal which
others give. Two women who were present at the death of this good Prince, gave
an example of Fidelity which cannot be seen now adays in history without
applauding and (...) it, at least in thought.

The (...) of (...) a Scotchman being possessed with the Ambition of (...),
which is a bloody Devil, and the Instigator of Paracid^, (...) against his
Nephew King James: and because he could not depose him but by death, resolved
to have his head to obtain his crown: This resolution (...) taken, and
obstinately determined, he seeks out trusts and resolute Executioners, and
without going out of his own (...), he found some who were truly fit
instruments for such an undert^^^^ At the appointed day a Groom of the Kings
Bedchamber (...) them in, and shows them the door without defense. This
Traitor (...), the ^arl had taken away the bolt, as if he meant to corrupt and
(...) it to his crime.

All things being prepar^d for the Execution, and the moment of the last Act
approaching, an Officer discovered the Conspirators, and desiring to (...) the
Kings Bedchamber from whence he newly came, he drew upon himself their first
blows, and the prologue of their fury. At the (...) Assassinate Catherine
D^^glas who was attending on the (...) to the door, and finding it without any
stay, and incapable (...) her courage and necessity, (which is inventive, (...)
thing defensive) makes her arm supply the place of (...) Groom of the Chamber
had taken away. (...) had been as strong as her heart, the door would have
(...) and sword, nay even against Engines and Canon^: (...) for this use, it
was broken at the first assault, and the (...) over the belly of the faithful
Lady, entered furiously (...) who had no other guard then his Queen.

This good and courageous Princess was no way frighted at the glittering of so
many swords already staind with blood, and even reaking with the murder which
was newly committed at the door. She boldly advanced before her husband, and
alone acted the part of all the Archers of his Guard: But the match was too
unequal, and fidelity being abandoned, and without arms could not resist a
multitude, nor overcome an armed Fury.

The King being thrown on the ground, the Queen cast herself upon him, and
covered him with her body, to the end at least he might not be wounded but
through her wounds, nor receive death but through her own: Her Sex was not
respected, the Virtues and Graces of her person proved no Sanctuary to her: she
received two blows upon her husbands body: and these furious Murderers having
at last by Violence taken her from him, the poor Prince being mangled all over
with wounds, rendered up his soul in the tears and blood of his wife; The
Author of this execrable Patricide, and the cruel executioners who had assisted
him with their hands, carried not far the blood of their Prince. Divine
Justice, and the revenging Angel of Kings followed them by the track and voice
of this blood which cried out against them; and there was none of them which
was not brought to condign punishment: there was made the same example in
several spectacles, and the people had full leisure to be instructed, and to
glut themselves with their punishment. The detestable Earl of Ath^e was
reserved for the last act of the Tragidy, which lasted three days; in each of
which he appeared under several Engines of torment and terror, with a Crown of
hot iron upon his head. And thereby unfortunatly and contrary to his own sense
was verified the vain prediction of a woman, who had assured him, that he
should be one day solemnly crowned, and before a great assembly of people.

We may learn by this History that the Majesty of Kings is sacred; that their
blood and lives are holy things, and that there is in Heaven a particular
Tribunal, and selected Executioners established against those who violate them.
From hence also it is learnt, that the end of Ambition is commonly bloody and
tragical, and that it is a dangerous thing and full of hazard to commit crimes
and to attempt upon the promises of a Fortune Tellers. In fine to return to my
subject we are taught thereby that the strength of hands is not necessary for
the force of Action, that delicate and polished Graces can do as much as
courageous and strong Virtues, and that Women are no less capable of an
Heroic and eminent fidelity then Men.

IVDITH (...)

Judith.
THIS strong place which seems to be borne upon the top of this Rock is the
City of Bethulia; And this Camp which takes up all the Plain about it is the
Camp of the As^yrians who besiege it. You may boldly approach it, and pass
securely and without fear even to the Tent of Holofernes. Wine and sleep have
defeated all the Courts of Guards. They have not left a Sentinel which was not
laid on the ground; even the Fires which should watch for the whole Camp become
drowsy, and are half extinguished. You would say that they have been corrupted,
or forgotten the ancient Discipline: Do not accuse the liberty of the
Soldiers, nor the negligence of the Commanders. A stronger virtue then the
Soldiers, and a greater Authority then the Officers has overcome them both,
and con^ounded the duties and orders of War.

This defeat without murder or effusion of blood is a blow from the Angel of
Israel who is come in person to defend the Frontiers of his Country; He has
made darkness which has something I know not what, of resemblance with that
which he heretofore caused in Egypt. And the Night was advanced by his command
to contribute its silence and obscurity to the great Action which he prepares.
But this obscurity serves only for the enemies of the people of God, this
intelligent night is discreet, like that of Egypt; it knows how to distinguish
the faithful, and to put a difference of persons. That which is cloudy and dark
for other shall be light for us. And were there nothing but the brightness of
these luminous spirits added to the resplendency of the zeal and eyes of
Judith, which seem to infire all the precious stones of that stately Pavillion,
yet there would be enough to discern from thence the Tragedy which is begun in
the Tent of Holofernes.

All things are disposed there, to a strange revolution; and this fatal
conjuncture has in an instant reduced to extremity the life of Holofernes, the
honor of Judith, and the safety of Bethulia. The gallant and victorious Widow
who so courageously exposes her honor for the safety of her people, has but
this moment to manage; and if she does not happily manage it and with success,
there is an end of her honor and the safety of her people; there is an end of
Bethulia, even of Jerusalem it self and of the Temple besieged in Bethulia: It
is her work to save all this; and all this cannot be done but by one stroke and
by the death of Holofernes. Behold how she is prepared to give this fatal and
important blow, which must cut of an hundred and fifty thousand-heads, and
restore spirit and heart to twelve desolate Provinces. She did not cause
Legions or armed Elephants to march before her; she came not accompanied with
Giants or Engines of war: she is only environed with Beauty and Graces: But it
is a bold and victorious Beauty, they are magnanimous and conquering Graces:
she is only guarded with attractives and graceful charms: but they are violent
attractives, and forcible charms. She is equally dangerous and graceful, and
wounds even by that which delights: Not only her eyes are piercing, and the
lightning which God has placed in them does dazel the sight; but even her very
feet contributed to the victory, and the eyes of her Buskins have surprised
Holofernes by the eye, and enslaved his Soul.

These arms, though divinely reinforced and purified with a Heavenly ray, could
not have overcome alone. They effected nothing but after prayer, fasting, and
tears. And though these which are spiritual, and of an invisible temper have
not wrought upon the sight of Holofernes, yet they have done it upon the heart
of God, and opened a passage whereby Safety came upon his people, and Death
upon his enemies. Judeth is ready to give a beginning to both, The
exterminating Angel who assists her, puts not a Lance of Fire into her Hand,
nor the point of a Thunderbolt brought down from Heaven; such noble weapons,
and descending from so great a height are not necessary for this execution: And
God does not use to leave to the haughty the title of a glorious and renowned
death. He presents to her the sword of Holofernes, and putting it into her
Hand, he settled confidence and boldness in her Heart. You would take this
fatal sword for the stroke of a Thunderbolt: you would swear that it is all
composed of lightning: But these lightnings are not like those which are formed
in the clouds: they come to it from a Diamond and a Rubie whereof the ^ilt is
composed: and what luster soever it receives from these fires of pre^ious
stones which adorn it, it expects more from the innocence and virtue of this
fair hand which is ready to employ it. You would say that it glittereth from
the impatience it has to be serviceable to a stroke, which will be worth many
Battles, and which shall be heard by all Ages.

Judeth receives it courageously and with confidence; but her courage is far
from fierceness, and her confidence appears modest and submissive, Her faith
renewed in this perilous moment, and her zeal breaking forth, enlighten her
face, and diffuse themselves by her mouth. And her eyes are lifted up toward
Heaven, as if they did show the way to the prayers she sends thither in silence
and accompanied with the spirit it of her tears. There is nothing which so pure
a soul, and so holy tears may not obtain; and the voice of this silence is too
powerful and pressing not to be heard. But though it were strong enough to
penetrate Heaven, and to make it self to be heard of God, yet it reaches not
the ear of Holofernes. Beast that he is, he is far from waking at this voice,
he would not awake at that of Heaven, though it should thunder with all its
force. He has not only lost both spirit and motion: but even his hea^ing and
sight are bound up: and he is more fastened by the fume of wine and the vapors
of sleep, then he would be by six great cords and as many cha^s.

Do not believe that in this plight he dreams of the taking of Bethulia or the
sacking of Jerusalem, that any Siege is laid, or any battle fought in his Head.
No Armies are now there to lead, nor Kingdoms to overcome. Judeth is there
alone what War, Glory, and Nabuchodonezer were before. But it is not th^^
Judeth whom virtue, zeal, and these Angels have brought: It is a Judeth, not
unlike a cheating dream, which has transformed a Heroe^s into a mincing Dame;
and this mincing and imaginary Judeth shall be suddenly overthrown by the (...)
and chaste one. The sword which you see in her hand shall do her Justice upon
this cheating dream. And all these vain Ideas shall be drowned in the blood of
the Dreamer, and shall fall with his Head.

Whilst the measures once more the greatness of her Enterprise, and that her
last tears demand of God courage, and proportion^d forces; the Angels who
brought her thither rema^n as a Guard about her person at the door of the Tent.
Her Angel Guardian lights her with a Torch, and at the same time bowing down
the Pike of Holofernes (which he had seized on) seems to assure her with his
looks and gesture that he will second her, if her hand should fail. Observe the
Action of these Angels who sport with a cask and Cuyrass: There is a mystery
in their Action, and what they sport at, is the assurance and instruction of
Judeth; They break in pieces the Armer of Holofernes, which was thought to be
all composed of solid Fires, and of well tempered and well hammered
Enchantments; and which was so long the general terror of all Asia: In
breaking it, they deride the infirmity of human powers; and you see that they
show the pieces of it to Judeth, to assure her that there is nothing to be
feared, having guards and seconds to whom Diamonds and Steel are but Glass and
Tiffany.

As for those whom you see at the door of the Tent, they stand there to chase
away fear and apparitions from this Maid, whom Judeth placed there for a Guard.
They remain in that place to repel the Devils, Enemies of Gods people, which
might come to the aid of Holofernes. Their arms though seemingly obscure are
yet composed of a Celestial and most resplendant matter: but because lightnings
might issue from them which would awaken the whole Camp, they themselves
obscured them and suppressed all their light. Nevertheless this restraint is
no longer needful for them. Behold Judeth coming forth with the ^ead of
Holofernes and the Heart of all these different bodies, which are half dead
with wine and sleep, and which shall quickly be dispatched by the Israelites.
The blood still reaks after the sword, and where it passes, the earth greedily
drinks up the drops which fall from it.

You believe indeed that the joy of this Victory is not little in the heart of
the Conqueresse: It is there so great as it is dilated on her face, and her
eyes have received thereby a second fire with a new and accessory light. It
will suddenly appear far greater in Bethulia where the generous Widow is
impatiently expected: and to which place she is going to carry, with the Head
and Death of the Public Enemy, the life and freedom of all the people.

SONNET.
PRoud Holofern is laid, the sun his light
Has mixed with darkness to commence the night:
Whose shadow Judeth for her veil does take,
Lest with her Beauties luster he should wake.
The sword which this chaste wonder does advance
Adds a fierce splendor to her Countenance:
And in this exigent to quell all Fear.
Thou speaks her Angel-Guardian in her ear.
Shrink thou not Judeth, let thy Foe be sped,
He is already little less then dead:
For Sleep and Wine, by their joint forces, have
Begun thy Conquest, and the Tyrants grave.
It would beseem thee ill to be afraid
Of him thou have thy humble Captive made:
Well may thy Arm his Head and Body part,
Who with thy ^^es have from him torn his Heart.
THE ELOGIE OF JVDETH.
IT is not necessary for me to say who Judeth was, and what Act she has done;
she is sufficiently known to every one: For above the space of two thousand
years she is in all Countries, and in the sight of all Nations still cutting
off the Head of Holofernes, and raising the siege of Bethulia. This part of her
life has been indeed the most radiant and remarkable, but peradventure not the
most laborious or Heroic; and she more easily defeated Holofernes environed
with a whole Army, then Pleasure and Grief, Covetousness and Fear, then her
own Beauty and Youth. She was victorious nevertheless in all sorts of
conflicts, and got the upper hand both of pleasing and terrifying Enemie^. At
the Death of her Husband she overcame Grief by resignation, and showed, that
with the blood of Patriarchs her Predecessors, she had inherited their Faith
and Constancy: This first Adversary being mastered, the overcame also
Idleness, Pleasures, and the latter Affections, which are the second and most
dangerous Enemies of young Widows. She not being able to renounce her Youth,
nor to be rid of her Beauty, which were to her like suspected Domestics, and
hard to be preserved: she kept them continually shut up; and likewise ^^aring
lest they should make an escape, she weakened them by Prayer, Labor, ^asting,
and Hair-cloth.

She grew warlike by these Domestic and Private Combats, and prepared her self
all alone, and in one single night for this famous Field, in which the Fortune
of the Assyrians was ruined by the Blow received from the Hand of a victorious
Woman, and the Head of a vanquished Man* Besides, in this so magnanimous and
perilous an enterprise she was to overcome, not only a man whom Love had
disarmed, and Wine and Sleep had secured, but to overcome the power of Gold, to
which armed Legion^ submit and strong Forts are rendered; she was to overcome
the sparklings of precious stones, which wound even souls which are (...) to
the sharpest point of swords: she was to overcome pleasures, which is stronger
then valor it self, and triumphs every day over the Victorious.

Besides these pleasing and flattering enemies certain cruel and terrible ones
presented themselves, which she was likewise obliged to overcome: Her
Enterprise could not prove successeful to her but by miracle; and if it took no
effect, she was to pass through all the hands of a furious Army; she must
suffer all the punishments and Deaths which enraged Tyranny can inflict; she
measured all these punishments, and numbered all these Deaths: And upon a
serious consideration of them all the undertook in their very sight and
presence this memorable Action, by which with one stroke she showed her self
not only more courageous and valiant, but more intelligent and prudent then
all Judea which she preserved, and all Assyria which she overcame.

A MORAL REFLECTION.
WOmen have not every day Holofernes's to vanquish; but every day they have
occasion to fight against excess, vanity, delights, and all pleasing and
troublesome passions; The memory of this Heroic Woman may instruct them in all
the enterprises and exercises of this war, which though made in shadow and
without effusion of blood cease not to be laborious, and made with vigor of
spirit and stability of courage. Let them learn then from this illustrious and
glorious Mistress to discipline their graces, and to give to them devotion and
zeal, To imprison dangerous Beauty, and to take from it all the weapons
wherewith it might offend, Let them learn from her to reform Widowhood, and to
put themselves under the yoke of God, after they are free from that of men. Let
them learn from her to be loyal to the memory of their deceased Husbands, never
to divorce themselves from their Names, and to place under their ashes all the
fire which may be remaining in them: as for this celebrious Act, by which
Judith overcame all Assyria a Tent, and struck off with one blow the head of a
whole Army, It teaches men that Heroic Virtue proceeds from the Heart, and
not the Sex, that valor clothed with iron is not always (...), and that the
weakest and most tender hands may (...) the safety of Nations when God directs
them.

A MORAL QUESTION.
Concerning the Choice which God has made of Women for the preservation of
States reduced to Extremity.
IT is noted in the Book of Judges, and observed there as a wonder and
prodig^^^, that meekness was once born of force, and that nourishment (...)
from the (...) of him that devout^ It is a wonder which (...) of prodigy, and
which nevertheless has not been yet observed* that (...) is a portion of
meekness, and that the hand^ accused to have been the Autho^^ of Death, have
brought safety and given (...). However, this second wonder is true, and no
less surprising then the first, not less proper to frame a (...). Problem,
and a specious (...). The examples thereof are likewise less (...) and more
known; (...) to be seen of them almost in all the Regions of History; And God
has renewed them a^ often as he has chosen the hand^ of Women other to
establish tottering States, or to support their (...).

The great wonder in this is, that God has almost made this choice (...)
Counsels and Hope, and in the last confusion (...) And in occasions wherein the
Arms of the strong were (...) Heads exhausted* he has raised up Women, who
(...) the valiant and (...), who have taken away (...) and the Sword held over
the Head of Nations: who have chased away from surrendered ^owns Armies already
victorious; who (...) and Courage to vanquished King, who (...) and fallen
Crown. It suffi^^th to believe that such works are not done, but by the hand of
God, and with much of hi^ spirit and by the Virtue of miracles. There are
neverthele^^ appearances and Reasons within the reach of out sight, which in
this particular make good his Providence.

(...) Power appears therein more independent, and his Wisd^m (...) infallible
and (...). There is very often De^eption in (...) Thought, and mistake (...) in
our Terms. We take Force (...) and that which we call Power, ought to be called
(...) and a Weakness with a great Train. (...) was to be truly powerful, to
take Towns, and overcome (...) Canons and other Arm^, but with broken Po^^ and
(...) This were to be extraordinarily strong* not to throw (...) with many
Engine, but to break in (...) with blowing on the ^ace of it; to ^leave a
Mount^^n with (...) of Snow. And the Art as well as the Courage of (...) might
be called Divine, who in the sight of a Storm should (...) with ^ails of (...),
and with a (...) of Paper. It ^utes very near with the manner of Gods acting,
when in the Tumult of (...), and amidst the (...) of falling States, he (...)
the Arms of (...), and the Heads of Politicians, and makes choice of weak Women
and tender Maids to subdue the victorious, and to (...) up the vanquiried, to
support Ruins, and repair Shipwreck.

Secondly, he thereby (...) his little of the God of Host* and a powerful Lord
in War. He shows that Victory (...) Subject that it follows (...) Orders, and
ob^^ves his Providence* And that (...) Common and (...) Ma^^, and this blind
and gidd^ Fortune, of which (...) much reckoning to made, are but ^antom^^ of
men. Invention. Thirdly he thereby reaches Humility to the proud ones of the
(...). He reaches (...) to Conquerours and Haughty spirits, and makes them.
(...) that Crowns depend on his (...), and not on the strength of the^^ own
Hand. That he takes them off at his pleasure from proud Heads to place them
upon the Humble, That he (...) Crowns for Women as well as men, for Shepherds
as well as Prin^^s and that upon what Head soever he places them, he still
(...) the (...) of them.

In the fourth place, these wonders wrought from time to time by the hands of
Women are (...) Acts, and illustrious instructions for the whole (...). Thereby
(...) tongue are refuted and Calum^e (...) second work of God (...). Thereby
Women (...) have Heart of the ^ame matter* and as well denied (...) not corrupt
them* ^f they be not overcome by (...). They learn (...) by that (...) tender,
and (...) to wool and silk, (...) Actions, (...) a long (...) does not (...)
Virtue, (...) That to prepare (...) Courage and (...) adventures. They (...)
themselves, to overcome, and to begin the^^ (...) and upon themselves. Jud^th
was not victorious (...), and without (...) prepared her (...) ^or it by (...)
and Domestic Combats, and this was not till she had overcome pleasure, till
she had chased away Pa^lion, and (...) from her Heart, till ^he had (...),
driven away the (...) from before (...).

Morecover, this is not the sole example of (...) kind: there are more even in
(...) and Nation, a long time before Judeth, Debora, and Ja^el (...) people
from the Tyranny of the (...). Some years after (...) preserved them from the
Hands of (...), and the general (...) which was prepared for them thor^owout
all Per^^^. Under the Reign of David* the (...) being besieged b^ Joab, and
threatened with the (...) ^ity, were delivered (...) from the Pillage and the
(...) by the Providence of a wise Woman, who persuaded them to clear the^ hands
of a Rebel, who they had harbored, and to (...) Head over the Walls. This Head
being thrown over effected more then twenty thousand Arms and Engines could
have done: Peace remained to the Abelites, and Joab without taking the City
retreated with Victory.

EXAMPLE.
Marulla of Stilimena.
THE Maid of Orleans may well be added to these Gallant Jewish Women, though
far distant from their time and Country. France in her had a protectress and a
Warrier, a Debora and a Judeth, and what she did to deliver that Kingdom from
Invaders, who had already put the voke over its Head, is a famous proof of a
miraculous gi^t divinely con^erred on some Woman for the preservation of
oppressed States, and Cities reduced to extremity. But all the wholesome and
warlike Virtues of this Sex are not of so great Antiquity: th^se latter Ages
have had them as well as the former; and there are some of them as it were born
in the sight of our Fathers.

In the time of Mahome^ the Second, the Turks conducted by Bas^^ a Solo^^^,
ma^ched down into (...), and set upon Coce^, which is the chief City of the
Island: diverse assaults courageously given in several places, and repulsed with
like Courage; at last either by fraud or force they gained a gate, where the
sight was a long time sti^^lly maintained; so far that the Governor of the
place, who was a man of Counsel and Valor lost his life. He had a daughter
called Marull^, who was then upon the Wall with other Women, prepared to give a
handsome reception to the enemy, and to act for their Honor and Religion much
more then their Sex required. This courageous Maid had her Eyes and Heart in
the Combat, and accompanied it with her Gestures and motions; Though wounded
with the Blow which had killed her Father, yet the was not overcome with him,
not lost her Spirit and Courage by his Wound. She descended from the Wall to
the Gate; she runs through (...) and Sword to the Body of her Father; she takes
up his Sword and Buckler, and as if with his Buckler and Sword she had taken
the boldness of his Heart, and the strength of his Arms, she presents her self
to those Enemies, which appeared the most pressing, and were the most advanced.
Some the repels, and knocks down others: She fights with so much Courage, and
her Courage assisted from above, and supported by the rall^^d inhabitants
proves so happy, as she puts to flight what Turks soever she found in her way,
and leads her Companions fighting even to their Galleys. The very same day they
returned to sea, and le^t the Victory entire to Marulla, and Liberty to
Stilime^^.

The next day the General of the Venetian Fleet, thinking to be at the Fight,
came to the Feast of it. The People being richly clothed, and the Magistrates
in their ceremonial garments went out to meet him, and brought to him their
Deliveress in Triumph. He caused her to come before the Army raing'd in order
upon the shore. And there after the having Crowned her with an Elogie, which
was of more value then the Laurel, or the Oak of the Ancients; He ordained that
every Soldier should make her a present, and offered her for a Husband what
Captain soever she would please to choose, with promise, that he would prevail
so with the Senate, as he should be adopted of the Signory, and her Marriage
Portion given her out of the public Treasury. Marulla, who was truly bold and
courageous, yet more advised and discreet, rendered Thanks to the General for
his Presents and offers; and made him this answer, That the difference was
great between the Virtues of the Field and those of a Family; that an excellent
Captain might make a bad Master of a Family, and that Marriage being no
Warfare, the Hazard would be too great, and the Election too rash, to choose a
Husband in Arms, and to take him in a Field of Battle. This Answer set a second
Value upon the Act of Marulla: and made appear, that there was a great deal of
light in her Fire; and that her valor was both spritely and Juditious: and
from that time, they looked upon her, not only as an Amazon, equal to those
represented in Fables, but esteemed her also as a learned Person amongst the
Muses.

SALOMONE (...)

Salomona.
THE Combat you behold, though it be bloody on the one side, and cruel on the
other, yet it is none of those where Valor should be brutish, and commit
murders. She is very resolute and courageous; but she is disarmed and
suffering. In like occasions the weak become strong, the dying victorious; and
they that strike and kill, were the vanquished. The Combat is for the God of
Abraham and Moses, for the Law of the Patriarchs and Prophets. On the other
side this cause is defended by abandoned and naked Faith, and on the other,
assaulted by Infidelity, armed with Engines and punishments. The match seems to
you to be unequal: And you will hardly believe, that Infirmity and Tenderness,
can be of more Force then Iron and Fire; that a Mother weak both in Sex and
Age, and Children both abandoned and unarmed, should vanquish a furious and
armed Tyrant, and overcome all the Executioners of his Train. Nevertheless they
subdued them all, and there are already on their side as many Victories as
Deaths.

Salomona was present at all these particular Combats: All entire that you see
her, she has already delivered up six parts of her heart; And I believe that
she is now come to her last Child, and to her seventh Crown. Her face bears as
many Victories, as Years. There is something I know not what, of venerable and
August in her wrinkles: and you would say that even the Law it self is come out
of the Propitiatory in humane shape, to infuse Zeal into her Followers, and to
teach them Fidelity and Constancy.

Certainly Beauty, whatsoever is said of it, belongs not only to Youth. Virtue
is graceful in every Age, Her flowers are of the latter season as well as her
fruits: And whether by natural right, or by an Immemorial Privilege, she has
ever preserved the advantage of being at once, both Beautiful and Ancient, and
of having charms under gray Hairs and wrinkles. You will profess at least, that
she has commanding Attractives in this half dried up skin, and upon these
withered ^heeks: And you will be as much inamored of these venerable Ruins,
and this Heroic and generous Caducity, as of adorned Youth, and a scandalous
Vivacity.

Besides, do not believe that her Constancy is blind and obstinate; it is
fortified with Sense and Reason, and its solidity is resplendent, and
penetrated with light, as well as that of the Diamond As if she were not
furnished enough with that which is intrinsical and diffused from her own
Spirit; A light more vigorous and pure, descends to her from Heaven, which
infires her Heart; and her heart being inflamed with this fire, seems ready to
issue forth of her Eyes to receive it, even in its source By the Charity of
this Divine Light she came to know the short and ruinous Carreir of time, and
the Immense and sollid Extent of Eternity: She has seen the Waste and Defects
of Fortune through the Paints and Disguises wherewith she varnishes her self:
And one Single Ray miraculously extinguished in her apprehension all those
Piles of Wood which are set on fire for her self and Children, and made her
discern afar off, in the hands of Abraham and Jacob, the Crowns prepared for
them.

Illuminated by these Lights, and fortified by this Object, she has already
overcome even six Deaths: and behold her wrestling with the seventh, which
assaults her by the youngest and last of her Children. There is tenderness
indeed on that side, but nothing of weakness; and this last part of her Heart
in being the most innocent and less fortified by time shall not be the less
invincible. The Tyrant thinks to gain upon her by that way, but he was not well
acquainted with her: He persuades himself, that at least with this single drop
of blood which was left her, she would preserve the hope and restoration of
her Posterity. But the blood of the Macchabees would not endure the least stain
for its Conservation: and so holy and glorious a Race could not end more
honorably, then by seven Martyrs.

She was far from contributing her voice and Carresses to iniquity, and from
becoming the Temptress of her Son, she fortified his Mind, and strengthened
his Courage: she discovered to him her Bosom and Breasts, which are reasons so
much the more powerful, as having the more tenderness: she shows him the
Heavens open, and the God of Abraham a Spectator of his Conflict, with the
Patriarchs and Prophets. I think also that the spoke to him of his Ancestors
the Macchabees; and made him understand, that this great Light, is that, of
their Conquering Souls, which are descended to assist his Victory, and to
finish by his Constancy the Glory and Coronation of their Name, the Triumph
and Sanctity of their Race.

The Courageous Youth hears her with a manly Constancy: his Resolution is
visible already in his Eyes, and gives a Color to his Face: His Constancy in
Punishments will quickly show, that he is twice born of this Heroic Mother;
that he is no less the fruit of her Heart, then of her Womb; and that he has
sucked with his Milk the Spirit and Quintessence of her Virtue, and the very
blood and Marrow of her Soul. Being now assaulted by large Promises and
magnificent Words, he only opposes his silence to this vain Battery: and one
motion of his Head, accompanied with a Gesture of Scorn, over turns all those
Mountains of Gold which are offered him. The Tyrant being irritated thereby
bites his very Lips; wrath prepares new Fires in his Heart, both for the Mother
and the Son: Some sparkles of them are seen already to issue from his Eyes, and
smoke out of his Mouth: and two great stacks of wood will suddenly be here
enkindled with his Breath, and the Fire of his Wrath.

Mean while Salomona rejoices at the Courage of her Son, she animates him
afresh to the Combat; and proposes to him the Example of his Brothers. She
shows him their souls already crowned, who remain at the Gate of Heaven,
staying only for his, to begin their Triumph. Those are their Bodies which you
see amidst the Executioners and Tortures. Of six, two of them have been
delivered up to the Furnace encompassed with Fire; and the four other have been
divided between two great Caldrons. They live no longer, and yet still resist;
They seem to contest with Insensibility, which is to them, as it were a second
Constancy, and a natural Force, which their souls have left them at their
Departure. You would say, that they had a mind to make show of a distinct
Virtue from that of their minds, and to possess their labors and merits apart
in this common cause: You would say, that every member has a Heart peculiar to
its self, and a particular life to expose. Their blood, though shed, retains
still its vigor; There issues thence a smoke which proceeds from the fire of
their Zeal; nay, even their flead skins, and their lopped off Feet and Hands
retain still something of the Spirit of the Macchabees, and seem to seek a
second Victory.

There remain none about them but these two Executioners. All the rest are out
of the Combat and have lost their Resolution with their Forces. The Fires which
have been kindled to consume these Holy Victimes, are overcome by the Divine
Fire, which has left them nothing but the exterior to burn: Neither do I know
whether they respect not the very marks which appear upon these bloody and torn
relics: Surely they owe this and more to that Fire, superior to all others;
And the impression of Charity ought to be at least in like reverence, and no
less sacred then the impression of Lightning. Heretofore the Flames of the
Babylonian Furnace had this discretion, either Natural or Divinely inspired.
They respected the three Jews, whom Faith and Charity had consecrated; And by a
violent breaking out, like that of a Lion, who should leave his prey and fall
upon his Keeper, they devoured those Ministers of Impiery who kindled them.

But nothing but Miracles of Courage and Patience will be wrought here. God
will permit the Consummation of the Sacrifice, and receive all the Smoke of it.
Salomona her self who has hitherto fought but in heart, and been only tried
against Compassion, shall be suddenly tried against Grief. By the same Force
wherewith she restrained all her Tears she will pour out all her Blood. She
will overcome Cruelty, as she has vanquished Nature: And after seven Deaths
suffered in Mind and by Piecemeal she will endure the last, which shall be
the Recompense and Coronation of all the rest.

SONNET.
IN Natures sight in sight of Heaven above,
Brave Salamona combats Grief and Love:
Which, through her seven Sons Breasts with deadly Smart
Have made a Rent in her undaunted Heart.
Nor Blood nor Tears do trickle from her wound;
All that is in her is with true Valor Crowned:
Her Faith d^^ends that Breach, ^midst horrid pains
Her Soul much more believes, then it sustains.
What cannot Love improve its force unto?
What has not Faith abundant power to do?
The Love of seven brave Sons, dear as her Eyes,
Makes her endure seven Deaths before she dies.
Yet Faith does more, and by a rare ^ffort
(Which Love should emulate in its transport)
Makes her seven times a Martyr, ere pa^e Death
Constrains her to forsake her vital Breath.
ELOGIE OF SALOMONA.
THe Mother of the Macchabees was peradventure the first Gallant Woman who
sought without Arms and overcame by death. She was the Daughter of holy
Conquerers, and the Mother of Martyrs, and gave to Jud^^ a Christian Heroess
before Christianity. In the common ruin of her Country, and general Martyrdom
of her Nation, all sorts of Engin^ were applied to withdraw her Children from
the Religion of their Parents. They were put to defend themselves against
objects both of delight and terror, and to overcome a Tyrant armed with
favors and punishments.

The Courageous Mother assisted at all their Combats, and contributed her
voice, her ^eal, and spirit to their Victory: so far was she from concealing
them from Torments and Death, that she produced them one after another, armed
with her Virtue, and fortified with her Admonitions: she animated them with her
faith, and warmed them with her tears* she gathered together their ^lead skins,
and their mut^lated members, as the matter both of their Crowns and of her own;
and as many deaths as she numbered, so many accomplished Victories she counted
in her Thoughts.

Not that she was less a Mother then the tender and weeping ones (...) Her
soul endured Iron and Fire in the bodies of her Children, she ^ell in (...)
with their Members, and her Heart melted away through the^^ Wounds. But she
knew the order and quality of her obligation: It was her belief that she owed
more to God, then to her own blood, and more to Religion, then to her Race: And
knowing that a (...) Death is more happy then a sinner who lives and reigns,
she chose rather to make a Family of Saints then of Apostates; and to be rather
a Mother in Heaven, then upon Earth.

MORAL REFLECTION.
LEt our Ladies learn of this Jew to be Mothers and Christians: Let them learn
by her Example that Children given to God are not lost. That it would be much
better to have them innocent in a Grave, then vicious on a Throne, That a good
Death is the best Fortune they can attain to. And that it is for the glory of
the Macchabees, and the good of Children to be saved even before their time,
even with many pains* even by their own blood, and through all the Engines of
Death* and not to be damned after their old Age, laden with sorrows and sins.
It is a glory to the Earth, that Marble stones which come out of its Bosom,
should become excellent Figures under the Hammer. And it is better that a Shute
should be cut off when it is yet tender, and that it be grafted in the Garden
of a Prince, then to have it wither upon the Stem, and serve only for matter of
Fuel.

MORAL QUESTION.
Whether Religion be the Principal Virtue of a Gallant Women?
THere are some Virtues indeed of greater noise, and carrying a sa^er Gloss
then Religion, but none of greater use, not more necessary for a Gallant Woman.
All the rest, what (...) soever they make, and what color soever they have,
are without her, but Stage-Vertues. They resemble those superficial bodies,
made only for show, which are all Mask and Garment, they have neither life nor
spirit, they are without form and consistence: And though they seem to be
active, and full of motion, yet they act to no purpose, nor move, but by
Artificial wheels. Even Force and Valor which are not supported by Religion,
are feeble and impotent: At the most they have but a Flash of Choler and a
precipitous Brutallity. Prudence (...) blind without her ^^ght: And the Graces
cannot please, if Religion has not adorned and instructed them.

There is then no solid and perfect Virtue without Religion, and by this common
reason: (...) all the rest should (...), Religion ought to be the principal
Form, and the predominant Quality, of a Gallant and sollidly Virtuous Woman.
But that is effected by a more (...), and which reflects particularly upon the
Courage which (...) this place: there are (...) functions of courage, and (...)
were (...) general duties which supportall particular ones, and give a solid
state and consistence to the whole life. By the first it makes us act equally
and with a constant and regulated ^^ennesse; by the second it fortifies the
Mind against either Fortune, and keeps it up what wind soever blows between
the elevation and the fall. By the third it arms the Heart against the
corruptions of flesh and blood, and preserves it from maternal Passions. By the
last it secures it against the apprehensions of Death (...) it victorious over
this dreadful thing, which is the common (...) Bear of mankind, and the
terror of Nature.

These duties are noble and sublime: But force should impertimently strive to
use extraordinary violences, it could never acquit it self with the aid of
Morality alone, it has need of a more powerful assistance to support it, of a
supernatural and Divine Coad^^^esse to labor jointly with it; And this
Coadju^^ess can be no other then Religion, whose part it is to loosen the soul
from abject things, and elevate it to God. This elevation also being (...) well
undertaken, and made without deviation is able alone, to strengthen the mind,
and suffices without other Philosophy for all the duties of courage.

First, all the Actions of life being subjected thereby to the eternal Law, and
applied to sovereign Justice, and to the essential and primitive Rule, receive
from thence an equal and constant evennesse, and a ^ectitude incapable of
deviation or infringement. Secondly, the soul approaching to God by this
elevation, and consequently illuminated by his ^^ght, and instructed in the
orders established in the World by that Providence which governs it, does not
repiningly, and with frowardness receive that part of events which is assigned
her; she accomodates herself by degrees to the rules of this vast Family into
which she is entered: she performs her part of the consort, and contributes at
least her resignation to the design of the great Workman, and to the general
harmony of his Work. Concerning Hazard and Fortune, knowing very well, that
they are but Figures which Error has painted and set up; and that none but
Children and Idiots regard them, she equally de^ides their favors and their
threats: And whatsoever happens to her of good or ill, she receives it with
the same satisfaction of Mind, and acknowledges therein the care and goodness
of the Father who sends it her.

Thirdly, the soul is purified by this elevation, and disburdens herself of
matter: And the nearer this elevation approaches her to God, the stronger and
more vigorous she is, the purity also which she receives thereby is more exact,
and her disingagement more perfect; she is thereby less capable of material
passions, and can raise her self to such a degree, and unite herself so close
and straightly to the first spirit, that being made one spirit with him, she
forgets the alliance and interest of her body, and assists indifferently and as
a stranger to its sorrows and joys.

In fine the Soul brought back by this elevation to the spring of life, and led
into the entrance of Eternity, which is promised her, learns to contemn these
little Moments which roll within the Circle of time, and mark out to every one
the space and length of his life: And so far is she from apprehending Death, or
being affrighted at the sight of its terrible Arms, that she looks upon it as
her Deliverer, as that which was to break her Chain^, and loosen her from the
wheel of revolutions and human vi^issitudes The Synagogue in its declining Age
had in Salomona an Example of this Religious Fortitude. The Church in her
beginning had the like in S. Felicitas, who was a Roman Salomona, and who of
seven Sons which God had given her, and by her restored to him, made seven
Christian Maccabees. In these last Ages, in which Schismatical Tyrants have
succeeded Idolatrous ones, and unbridled and furious Heresy has fought
against the Church and Faith: There has been plenty of Heroic Women, who have
given examples of the^^ Fortitude and Religion. Behold here one of Note, and
chosen amongst our Neighbors, where we shall see a Woman an Exhortresse, not
of her Children, but of her Father, a Martyr: A Woman above interest and Nature
and equally victorious over Fortune and Death.

EXAMPLE.
Margaret Moor, the Daughter of Sir Thomas Moor, Lord Chancellor of England.
THere is no Person who has not heard some Discourse of the Birth of the
Schism in England, and who knows not the Cruelties which followed that
Incestuous and Tragical Love, and that fatal Malice, which of a Prostitute made
a Queen; and of an excommunicated Layman, of a rotten and mutilated Member,
made a Sovereign Prelate, without Unction and Order, a Schismatical and
Monstrous Head. The Lord Chancellor Moor was one of the first and most noble
Victims Immolated to A^^e of Bullen, and to the Schism which was born of this
unfortunate Marriage. King Henry omitted no kind of Temptation to gain this
learned and wise old man, who was grown white in the Service of the State, and
had spent forty Years to the Honor of his Country and Time. But all his
temptations proved weak, and his Offers as well as his Threats returned back to
him without effect. The Chancellor was stronger then all the Engines which were
prepared against him: the Prayers and Tears of his afflicted and mourning
Kindred were not able to move him. The Engines and Rage of an inflamed and
furious Tyranny could not alter his resolution.

He had a Daughter called Margaret, who was no less the Daughter of his
Spirit, then of his Body; He had formed her with his Tongue, and polished her
with his Pen: He had imprinted in her by degrees and in diverse Figures, the
Flower of his Learning, and the Spiritual part of his Soul: And he that shall
represent to his imagination an exact Graver, and jealous of the perfection of
his Work; who should spend Days and Nights about some rare piece of Marble,
which he designs for one of the Muses or Graces, will have a right imagination
of the Cares and Assiduity which this good Father had shown in the instruction
of this excellent Daughter. His Cares also proved successeful, and his
Assiduity was very fortunate: And if it be a common saying, that Books are the
Children of their Authors, one may well say that this Daughter was the most
learned and polished Book which issued from the Mind of Sir Thomas Moor. His
Vtopia and other Works, which still live, are but in one Language and of one
matter, That other Piece was both Greek and Latin, Prose and Verse, full of
Philosophy and History.

Of all the Family of Sir Thomas Moor there was scarce any but this Woman
learned and courageous, who went not along with the Time, not was pliable to
Interest. She was singularly beloved of her Father; and a few Words of her
Mouth, accompanied with as many Tears would have battered him more dangerously
then all the suborned Ministers of Henry: and all the Engines of Schism.
Nevertheless these so powerful words, and these forcible Tears which might
have shaken him, were all employed to confirm him: Friendship and Tenderness
fortified his ^aith, and gave Courage to his Constancy: And the Piety of the
Daughter added to the Zeal of the Father, and finished his Martyrdom. Sir
Thomas Moor being Prisoner in the Tower of London, where he was visited by God
alone, and had commerce with none but the Muses which suffered with him; his
Courageous Margaret caused a forged Letter to be spread abroad, in which she
feignedly seemed willing to gain him to the Kings Will, and procured leave by
this innocent and charitable deceit both to see and serve him. Being received
into the Tower she left at the gate, with the person she had taken upon her,
the resentments of Nature, and the weakness of her Sex, and entered with the
pure Spirit of Christianity, and with a courageous Faith prepared for the
Combat.

So far was this Daughter from tempting and assaulting him with the Ruins of
his tottering House, that she represented to him the importance of his
suffering for that Cause; that Men and Angels were Spectatours of his Victory,
that he had the Applause and Congratulation of the Church, and that the Glory
of his Family was raised to the Alliance of Martyrs. She spoke nothing to him
which he knew not before; but she said nothing which did not confirm him. Old
reasons received a new light from her Tears, and issued with more vigor out of
her Mouth. And whether God placed in her Voice and upon her Lips some tincture
of Divine Spirit, whether pleasing persons have a natural Charm, and an
Eloquence without Art; or that their sole presence is persuasive. It seemed as
if an Angel appearing to this Moor, had inflamed him with more Zeal, or infused
into him more Light. In fine having received the Sentence of Death after
Fourteen Months of imprisonment, and an illustrious and solemn Confession of
his Faith, made in the presence of all the Ministers of the Schism, his good
Daughter was willing to be a spectat^ess of his Combat; and to fortify her
self by the Evidence of his Faith, and with the last Act of his Constancy, she
expected him in his passage, and went to embrace him in the midst of the
people, who gave back out of respect, and with their Admiration and Tears
honored so resolute and so examplar a Piety. At these last embraces the
fervor of friendship mixed with that of Zeal, ascending from her Heart to her
Head, caused some Tears to distill from her eyes. But these were courageous
Tears, and such as heretofore the first Heroes of Christianity shed upon the
wounds and Crowns either of their Fathers or Children still warm with
Martyrdom.

After the execution of the impious sentence, which had submitted this High
Judge of Equity to the sword of a Hangman: Margaret prepared her self to tender
her last duties to the Body of her Father. Concerning whose Head after it had
served a whole Month for a spectacle of terror upon London Bridge, she bought
it of the Executioner, and caused it to be inchased in Silver; to the end it
might remain with his Writings, the Relic of his Family, and of her Domestic
Devotion. Notwithstanding, this Devotion wanted not Accusers, and was pursued
by Justice. It was made a crime of State, that they might have a pretense to
persecute Sir Thomas Moor even after his Death, and cause that part of his
Heart and Spirit which he had left to his Daughter to suffer a second
Martyrdom. She was made a Prisoner, and examined before the Schismatical
Tribunal: But she showed so much Constancy in prison: she answered so
prudently, and with so great courage: she made so resolute and a noble
confession of her Faith, that the Commissioners themselves being become her
Admirers, conceived it much fitter to send her back, then to give a second
Victory to her Father, and multiply Martyrs and Crowns in his Family.

MARIAMNE (...)

Mariamne.
THIS Terrace encompassed with ^allisters of Jasper belongs to the Palace of
Herod: And it can be no other then Mariamne, who comes out of it with so much
splendor, and so sumptuously apparelled. There needed no Diadem and Scepter to
make her known; Her Dignity is neither Artificial nor borrowed: It is from her
Person, and not from her Fortune. And her Heroic Stature, her Majestical
Countenance, and sovereign Beauty came from the Maccabees, as well as her Blood
and Courage. Can you believe, seeing her so Beautiful and Resolute, that she is
going to Execution? She goes thither most fair and undaunted as you see her;
And all the Graces and Virtues accompany her to that place. Bloody and
murtherous Judges, suborned by her Husband, Mother, and Sister in Law, come to
give the Sentence of death against her. She appeared before this Tribunal of
Tyranny and Injustice, with a Countenance of Authority, and a Sovereignty of
Heart equal to that of her Face. You would have said, that the Criminal was to
pronounce the Decree; and that the Lives of the Judges were in her Mouth. But
as good Intervals stay not with sweetened Tyrants, nor with charmed Vipers; so
malice and poison quickly return to the Judges of Iniquity. Their fury which
Innocence and Beauty, equally Imperious, had chained up with respect, is
loosned and confirmed; And they at last pronounced her Sentence, but still with
Fear and Trembling. As if their Faces had accused their Consciences and given
the Lie to their Tongues; As if their very Tongues had retracted what was done;
their Palenesse and stammering made a Declaration contradictory to their
Decree, and justified condemned Innocence. In what manner do you think she
received this unjust Sentence, and procured by her own Husband? With more
Equality of Spirit, with more Indifferency then she could have received his
Carresses. And had it been but a feigned Death they pronounced against her, she
could not have appeared less moved. She is come hither with all the Calmnesse
of her Heart: the Reproaches and Injuries of her wicked Step Mother, who
combined with her Enemies did not provoke her. And had she gone to a public
Sacrifice or to some solemn Feast, She could not have carried thither a better
composed Modesty. Since it is decreed that she must die, she resolves to die
resolutely, and like a Macchabee. And there will not only appear a Constancy in
her Suffering, but even a Dignity and Grace. Pity it is nevertheless, that so
perfect a Light should be extinguished at its high Noon, and in the midst of
its Carreer: And the Mists must needs be very thick and malignant which could
not be dissipated by it.

But we amuse our selves in bewailing her, we lose her last splendor, and the
last examples of her Virtue. She is already arrived at the Place of Execution:
And the envious Saloma has so violently pressed the Execution, that at the
very instant I speak, there is an end of poor Mariamne. Herod himself is come
too late to save her: His Retraction was fruitless: They left him not so much
leisure as to suspend the wicked Sentence, or to keep back even for one moment
the Arm of the Executioner And repentant Love which brought him thither, found
nothing but sorrows to vent, and unprofitable tears to shed. Affrightment,
Horror and Despair entered into his Soul, at the sight of Mariamne dead Spite,
Anger, and Jelousie, at the same time issued from thence: And the marks of
these Passions mixed at their encounter, caused this distemper in his Eyes, and
the Confusion you behold on his Face. His Body half reversed, and his arms
extended follow the posture of his Soul, which remains as it were in suspense
between astonishment and aversion, between the respect and horror of these
deplorable Relics. He was willing at once both to remove his sight from
thence, and to sacrifice himself upon them for the expiation of just blood, by
blood that was guilty: And to Immolate the jealous Penitent to executed
Innocence. He wished that he were able at least to tear out his Heart, and to
rid himself with it of his Crime and Punishment. His Eyes besieged by a Death
as yet warm and bloody, and by two Specters equally frightful, find every
where Torment and Reproaches.

Me thinks this Fury strikes Fear into you. Surely she is frightfull; And the
most Resolute and Heroic Souls, even those which deride Death with all its
disguises, cannot behold her without Trembling, if she appears to them. Of
these Serpents which you see upon her Head, some raise sinister Reports, and
bad Rumors; others infuse suspicions and distrusts: There are some which steal
in by the Eyes of Husbands: others which enter by the Ears of Wives. The
fairest Flowers wither as soon as they are touched by them. The best united
Hearts are severed, if never so little bitten by them; and from their mouth
does fall, as well the Gall which imbitters the sweetest Humors, as the Venom
which corrupts the fairest Flowers of Marriage. The Torch which she holds in
her Hand is no less pernicious, then the serpents about her Head. All the bad
Colors wherewith the most innocent Actions become darkened, are compounded of
this Coal. Her Smoke obscureth the purest and clearest Lights, and draws Tears
from the fairest Eyes; she robs the fairest Faces of their Luster and
Attraction; Her Fire seizes on both Souls and Bodies, she causes Frenzies and
Calentures, and even in this Life she makes Devils and damned Souls. All this
teaches you, that this Fury is Jealousy, and Enemy of the Graces, and the
Corruptresse of Love. She is come as you see, to act her second part, and
begins to revenge that Murder, to which she her self did instigate. All the
Serpents which are wanting on her Head, are about Herod's Heart, and even tears
his Conscience. The Bloody sword which she shows him is a dreadful
Looking-glass to his Imagination. He beholds there, the horror of his Crime, he
sees there, the wounds of his Heart and the stains of his Soul.

This Apparition indeed is frightful: but the incensed Ghost which arises from
this beautiful Body is much more: And Herod suffers an other fire, and other
stings then from the Torch and Snakes of the Fury: His wandering and troubled
Eyes change their station at every moment: They are obsest with these two
Specter, which haunt them every where: And thinking to repose them upon this
dying Beauty, wherein heretofore consisted his chief Happiness, he finds
there a Tribunal and Scaffold; his condemnation and punishment. His Yesterdayes
Idol is to day his judge and Executioner. This just Blood which still reaks
is, a devouring fire which fills his distempered Imagination, and there comes
out of it Imprecations and Complaints, Outcries of Reproach and Vengeance.
These cold and tied up Hands tear his Heart in pieces: and this Beautiful Head
which caused all his joys and happy days, is now the Principal part of his
Torment. Mean while she has only changed place: the blow which cast her down,
has not shaken off her flower: her Grace and Beauty are thereby a little
faded, but not defaced: And her open and still ^^rene eyes seem to expect
another Death, as if there needed more then one to extinguish them. Thus the
eclipsed Moon is still fair, and the Sun sets daily without losing one single
Ray, or changing Countenance. The mischief is, that whereas the Moon recovers
her defections, and is cured of her Eclipses; and the Sun rises again the next
day after his setting; there is no renovation of Light or a new day to be
expected for Mariamne: And this Beautiful Head is fallen in her own Blood never
to rise again.

SONNET.
MAriamne's dead, her Corpse is now the seat
Of Whiteness only, by her Souls Retreat;
The Royal Blood that tinctured it with Red,
In Crimson streams flows from her severed Head.
Megaera holds before the Tyrants Eyes
The murdering Sword: He in that Glass espyes
The stains wherewith his Heart is covered ore,
And sees his Image purpled with her gore.
The Vigorous impressions of this sad
And ^atal Object render Herod mad:
Two vindicating Ghosts his Eyes invade
With flaming Torch, and with a glittring Blade.
But now his Fury dreads nor Flames, nor Swords,
Her Blood that is boiling still, such Fumes affords
As make him feel all Hells tormenting Evils,
Without the Scorch of Fire, or Scourge of Devils.
ELOGIE OF MARIAMNE.
MARIAMNE has appeared too often upon the Theater not to be known in this
Picture. All things were great in her, Birth, Beauty, Virtue, Courage, nay bad
Fortune. She was the Grandchild of Patriarchs, Prophets, Kings, and High
Priests. Her Countenance captivated Herod, and inchain^d him for a time, and
her Picture stood in Competition with Cleopatra in the Heart of Anthony. Her
Virtue nevertheless did not consent to this concurrence; and being far from
thinking on forbidden Acquisitions, she never dained to put any constraint upon
her self, for the preservation of that which she lawfully possessed. Her
Chastity was so severe, and so little indulgent outwardly, that there remained
within something I know not what of stately and piccant, which exasperated
Herod, and made him return to his own Nature. But she was the same to the
bitings of this in^aged Beast, as she had been to his Indeerments. She retained
her confidence, and preserved all her Majesty amidst suborned Accusers,
confederate and corrupted Judges. The Face of the Executioner did not alter at
all the ser^^ity of her Countenance, and her Head was struck off without paling
her Brow, or displacing her Heart. Her Constancy did not begin by her
punishment, it began by that which is termed her good Fortune. Having espoused
a jealous Tyrant, it was requisite for her to be as courageous in the Palace,
as in the Prison; and Resolution was as needful for her under the Diadem, as
under the Sword. The Blow which struck off her Head was less her Death then the
End of her punishment: for one Crown it cut off, it brake a dozen chains, and
it was a Redeemer and not an Executioner which delivered her from Herod.

MORAL REFLECTION.
HEROD glorious and tormented, and Mariamne crowned and unhappy teach us, that
the greatest Tranquillity is not found in the Highest Regions of the World.
There are no privileged Territories, nor exempt from Malediction: Many
sufferers are seen in Prisons and upon Scaffolds; but the worst treated Persons
remain in Palaces and upon Thrones. These nevertheless cause more Envy then
Pity. The People admire what they ought to lament; and when there is occasion
of drawing the Picture of Happiness, they represent her upon a Throne, and
place a Scepter in her Hand, and a Crown upon her Head.

But the People are ignorant Judges, and very unskilful Painters: Every day
they judge at Random, and without knowing the Cause; Every day they vent
Chimaera's and Caprichio's for well regulated Figures. They sufficiently
understand of what matter Crowns are made; and discern well enough how they
glitter: but they know not their weight and asperity, nor see from whence they
wound. They assist indeed at the Sacrifices which are offered to crowned
Fortunes: They keep an account of all the grains of Incense which are burned to
them: but they assist not at their perturbation and torments. They see not the
Wheels, nor the Nails wherewith they are pricked; and less also do they
discern the fire which is put into their wounds. They have a dim sight, and an
Imagination filled with a Stage Felicity, which has only a fair Ma^k and a
purple Garment made merely for show: but they see not all the tears which
trickle down under this specious disguise; not do they see the Wounds which
bleed under this Purple.

Let us learn then, not easily to subject our Opinions to our Senses, never to
esteem things by the Exterior, to make more account of a sweet and peaceable
Mediocrity, of an obscure and silent repose, then of a bitter and turmoiled
Greatness, then of a punishment magnificently attended and exposed to the view
of the people. And let us understand that this so common saying delivered by a
gallant Person concerning the Fortune of Laborers may be spoken generally of
all competent Fortunes: They would be happy if the advantages of Mediocritie
were known unto them.

As concerning the Death of Mariamne which was the Crime and Punishment of her
Tyrant, it teaches us that Jealousy is a dangerous Beast; that it makes no
distinction of Persons; nay, spares not him that foments it: That it is that
ungrateful and cruel Serpent which leaves nothing entire in the House of its
Host. And that if the fire be not extinguished with Sulphur, if Wounds be not
Healed by Lancing them, it is a very dangerous Experiment, to think to
extinguish Spite with Choler, and to cure the bitings of Jealousy with the
Teeth and Nails of Cruelty: There is another Reflection to be made upon this
Picture; but it will serve as matter for the ensuing Question.

MORAL QUESTION.
Why the most Perfect Women be commonly the least Fortunate?
I Speak not of interior satisfaction, and of that solitary and retired
Felicity which appears not in public, which in wholly consummated in the
Heart, which proceeds from the quiet of Conscience, and from the ^alm of an
equal Spirit, and disposed to find every where a settled and commodious abode.
I speak of that superficial and specious Felicity, which is all composed of
exterior and hazardous pieces, and which the Vulgar attribute to Fortune. I
say that this Felicity was never the Companion of Victory, nor the Domestic of
the Graces, and that to take things in the common Track, Persons of greatest
me^^t, have ever been the least Happy, and the most Crossed. Mariamne is not
the first upon whom this observation has been Made: History entertains us only
with sad adventures of unfortunate Beauties. There have been heretofore no
Tragical Accidents nor violent Deaths, but on their Account: Now adays there
are none but these who lament, and are lamented upon Theaters.

To the end we fasten not upon Apparitions, nor accuse either the Hardness of
Destiny, nor the Jealousy which Fortune has of Virtue, God has ordained even
in Nature it self which is governed by so just and regular Intelligences, that
the most excellent and rare things should retain some Image of unhappiness,
and something I know not what resembling the Adversities of those Persons of
whom I speak. None but the great Planets have their Blemishes and suffer
Defections and Eclipses The Rose which is the Virgin-flower, nay the Sovereign
of Flowers, and clothed in Scarlet (as a certain Person has said) is the most
beset with Thorns, and the most subject to be blasted. Diamonds and Rubies grow
in Precipices and upon Rocks, and Pearls are in the Element of Tempests and
Bitterness. It is no small Comfort then to th^se Excellent Persons, that they
are in the like degree, and in the same condition with the prime Pieces of the
World, and the most precious portions of Nature. And if they be not extremely
tender, they will find (I assure my self) that their Bitterness and I horn^,
their Eclipses and Blastings retain something more of Honor, then a ^ain^ and
corrupt Mildnes^ then an Essem^^acle of ill Odor, then an obscure Security
and a regardlesse Health, wherein Vulgar things do languish.

But besides Honor and Dignity, the Benefit thereof in other Respects is
great: And it is principally in Regard of those Excellent Persons that this old
Proverb is verified, which says, that Adversity is Instructive, and that
Afflictions are better then Doctrines. First they are preserved thereby in
Christian Humility, and are cured of a certain interior and secret Pride,
which is the ordinary Disease of Beautiful Women. They learn at least, that
the Divinity wherewith Men treat them is but a Poetical and Stage-Divinity;
That the Reverence which is rendered them is but a Mask or Play: And their
understanding fortified by Adversities is not easily corrupted by the Smoke of
the Incense, which their Adorers offer to them.

Moreover they are advertised thereby that God has not made them for the
Earth: and that Heaven is their proper Region, as it is the Region of Spirits
and Light: And surely if that Prince would not be accounted wise, who should
cause his Statue to be made of Gold, and placed in a back Court or Stable; can
these so perfect reatures, which are the Fairest, and most precious Images of
God, believe without Blasphemy, that they have been finished with so much Care
to adorn only the low Story of the World, to Beautify the Region of Disorder
and Misery, the Element of Thorns and Tears? God has made them then for his
Palace, nay even for the Highest and most Luminous part thereof. And because he
will have them there most pure and spotless, he puts them in the fire of
Afflictions which purifieth them from the ^ust and stains they contract upon
the Earth, and prepares them to receive more purely, and to reflect with
greater Force the radiant light of his Face, and the effusions of his Grace.

This is Gods Design in the Adversities which he sends to perfect Men: These
Adversities are Remedies against Pride, and Preservatives against Corruption,
they are seeds of Salvation and materials for Crown^ But these Remedies and
Preservatives must be taken with Courage. These seeds remain fruitless if they
be not well Husbanded; and th^se Materials never become Crowns if Patience does
not form them. The most unfortunate Women will have for their Consolation and
Instruction a Model of this Patience in the Following History.

EXAMPLE.
Blanch of Bourbon, Queen of Castile.
WHoever shall read the History of Blanch of Bourbo^, Queen of Castile, will no
longer believe that Virtue is a Charm against Disasters, nor that the Graces
are able to inchant Fortune. This Princess who had Whiteness and Beauty even
in her Name, was of those Li^^cs, which the Holy Scripture represents unto us
besieged with Thorns. She was of those Pearls which were drowned in
Bitterness, and abandoned to Tempests. All her days were serene, and all
hours sweet and quiet under the Climate of France: and by a Destiny contrary to
that of Roses, which have prickles only upon their stalks, and must be first
gathered to be Honored; she was Happy and Honored whilst she was a Maid, and
lived in the House of John Duke of Bourbon her Father. The Tempest, Bitterness,
and Tragical Revolution of her Life, began from the very Moment of her Marriage
with Peter the Cruel, King of Castile. Certainly also the Alliance was too
unequal, and the union too ill made between Innocence and Cruelty, between a
most pure Grace and a Devil composed of Blood and Dirt.

Before Blanch went into Spain, the Prince had no longer any Heart to give her;
Mary of Padilla was become Mistress of it: and whether it were by Conquest or
Usurpation, she reigned there so absolutely, and with so great a Command, as
all the Authority of the Queen her Mother, and all the Favor of Albuquerque
her principal Counselor, were needful to dispose him to the Consummation of
the Marriage. The Wedding was not celebrated; it was tumultuary precipitated,
and done in silence without the least Show or Pomp. It was rather a mournful
Act then a Feast of Joy; and if this forced Prince brought to it nothing but
discontent and aversion; the unfortunate Princess assisted there with the
Spirit of a Mourner, and the Countenance of a Victime designed to Death. They
had not been two days together, but Peter resolved to leave her. He could not
live content far off from his Heart, and his Heart was in the Hands of his
Mistress, who laid a charge against him for marrying Blanch, and threatened him
as a Rebel Subject and a fugitive Slave.

The Queen his Mother, and his Aunt Elenor being advertised of his Design,
replaced before his Eyes the wrath of an offended God, the ill opinion of his
scandalized People, and the incensed Arms of France. He loosneth himself from
all these Chains, he overcomes all these Obstacles, and rides post where his
Love or his wicked Devil called him. After some Months dedicated to them both,
he returns to his Wife, drawn by the earnest Entreaties of his Mother, by the
good Offices of Albuquerque, by the Counsels and Solicitations of his
Grande^^. But he returned to forsake her two days after, and to give her by a
second Divorce, a second Wound more injurious and sensible then the former. The
noise of it was great, and the History also says, that this so violent
aversion was wrought on him by a Charm; and that a Jewish Magitian corrupted by
Mary of Padilla's Brothers, fastened this Charm to a (...) beset with rich
Stones, which Blanch had presented to the King. But (...), if a certain Person
said, that Love was a Sophister, and a Mountebank, I may well say, that it was
a powerful Sorcerer, and a great Incaanter: It knew how to pervert and corrupt
^ounder Heads, and better tempered Hearts then that of this Prince, without
either Spells or Characters: And whatever Men say of the power of Magic, It
knows no Herbs more Efficacious, nor can compound any D^^nk more to be feared,
then the depraved Habits of a Soul abandoned by God, and delivered up to a
reprobate Sense.

Whatever it be, this Cruel King not only left his Wife a second time never to
see her more: but even Banished her to a little Place, where he converted her
Chamber into a Prison, and assigned her as many Goalets and Spi^s as Guards.
And his Cruelty passed so far, as he was deliberating whether he should appoint
Commissio^ers, to cause her to be put to Death Juridically, and according to
the forms of Law.

This barbarous and unjust Treatment of the Fairest and most Virtuous Princess
of her Age, was a Scandal to all Europe. The Pope sent a Legate armed with
Excommunications and Anathema's, to set at Liberty oppressed Innocence, and to
punish the Incorrigible and Scandalous King. The Princes of Castile and Aragon
made a League with the Inhabitants of (...), Cordona, and other principal
Cities, and joined in common their Offices and Arms. France offended with the
Calamity of a Princess of the Blood, hastened to side with them. Heaven it self
took in hand this Cause: And the King being a hunting, a Spirit appeared to him
in the shape of a hideous and frightful Shepherd which threatened him with
Divine Vengeance, if he recalled not his Wife. All this did not mollify the
obdurate heart of this Prince: On the contrary being persuaded that the Life of
Blanch was the Fatal Firebrand which nourished all these Fires, and that they
would be all extinguished with her. He caused her to be impoisoned at Medina in
Andalo^za: where by a Courageous and Magnanimous Piety, she knew so well how to
join Devotion to Patience and Incense to Mirrhe, as she sanctified her Prison,
and made it a House of Sacrifice and Prayer.

I know not whether any Princess was more perfect then this: but in all
appearance, there was never any one less happy; she was Espoused in Mourning,
she was a Widow during Marriage: and the Wedding day, which is (...) for all
others, and makes Flowers to grow even upon the Chains of Slaves, darkened her
Diadem, obscured her Purple, and ^ielded her nothing but Smoke and ^horns. But
God would have her accomplished and pure, and it was his good pleasure, that
Adversity and Constancy should give her the last Hand, and that Princesses
should learn by this Example, that Martyrs may be made as well between
Ballisters, and under a Cloth of State, as upon Scaffolds and Amphitheaters.

PANTHEE se deffa^^ de la vie pour sunire Abradate: et (...) aussi
glorieusement son amor et de sa fidelite, (...) (...) mort de son courage et
de sa victoire. (...)

The Gallant Barbarian Women.
Panthea.
YOU see that it was a remarkable Day, which proved Fatal to vanquished Lydia:
And which was like to prove no less to Victorious Persia. The Blood runs still
from the Wounds of these two great Rivals: And the Earth is covered all over
with the pieces of their broken Armies. But Lydia was not acquit for a little
Blood and some slight wounds. She lost there her best Men; and such as
remained were put in Chains It is not yet known how Fortune and the Conquerers
will despose of Craesus. He was newly driven by Force into his Capital City:
And his Riches instead of fighting in his defense and preservation were taken
and led Captives with him.

Persia also did not purchase this Important Victory at a cheap Rate: she lost
there much of her pure Blood, and a great number of useful and precious lives.
Abradates was the most generally Lamented: His Death, though Illustrious,
obscured this fair Field, and mingled Mourning with Triumph. And even in the
fruition of Victory, it made victorious Cyrus to sigh, and drew tears from his
^^yes. If we had come one moment sooner, we should have seen these Noble and
Generous Tears trickle down: they would have taught us that the Eyes of Heroes
are not Adamantine Eyes; And that the Vulgar are deceived, who take great
Hearts, for Hearts of Brass. Cyrus then bewailed Abradates; but he did it
magnificently, and after an Heroic manner. His tears were followed by a
profusion of Riches, which will be presently burned with the Dead: And he is
newly returned to the Camp, to give out Orders for the Funeral Pomp, and to
make choice of the Victimes which were to be Immolated to the Ghost of his
Friend. He believes him still in the Field of Battle, where he enjoyes his
Reputation, and numbers the Dead and his own Victories.

As for these sad Preparatives and Funeral expenses, they are made for the
Consolation of Panthea, no less then for the Honor of Abradates. But Panthea
is no longer in a Condition to Comfort her self with burned Purple, or Gold
consumed to Ashes; with the Smoke of a Flaming Pile, and the Blood of a
Butchered Flock; with the large shadow, and great Images of a vast Sepulcher.
Her Grief was too violent to expect such Superficial and VVeak Remedies; and to
be cured by Ceremonies and Superstitions. She had Recourse to a Consolation of
less Cost, and far more Efficacious: She believed that a small Piece of Steel
plunged into her Bosom, would be to her Sorrow a more Infallible and Speedy
Remedy, then Mines of Gold, and Quarries of Jasper, erected into Pillars and
Pyramids over her Husbands Body. And this Remedy, which she conceived the
most speedy and Infallible, she newly took courageously, and with a boldness
which merited to be reserved for a less Tragical Occasion.

Behold on her Face the Confidence of her Spirit, and the graceful Composure of
her Grief. Every thing is very Becoming to Beautiful Persons: Their Sorrows and
Angers look handsomely; Their Tears adorn them, and their very despites
Beautify them; And there is nothing even in their Maladies and VVounds which
appears not Decent; There is not any thing even in their Deaths which seems not
pleasing from their Attractives, and shines not from the same Luster which it
extinguisheth. That of Panthea has nothing hideous or ghastly; you would rather
take it for a sweet Sleep, then for a violent Death. The Graces themselves, if
there be any such as Painters and Poets describe, could not sleep more
modestly: And a Flower which the North Wind has withered, could not more
gently bow down its Head, nor die more gracefully. It is not likewise a
Palenesse which you see upon her Brow and Cheeks; It is a tincture resembling
that dying Brightness which appears in a Clear Cloud when the Sun withdraws
his Beams from it Trust not her Eyes though they begin to close: The Fire Burns
still, even when it is extinguished: And the Sun being in the Ecli^se cease
not to be dangerous, and to offend the sight. The like may happen to these
dying Eyes: The Sparkles which fall from them retain still a kind of Lightning
and He it: and I do not doubt but if (...) were here, and that one of them
should enter into his Heart it would in kindle there a second Fever, and send
back the Fire into his former VVound.

Whilst her Eyes half shut cast forth their last Light, and that her Mouth is
open to her last ^ords, you observe peradventure the passage of her Soul, and
desire to know whether it will issue out by her Eyes or Mouth. A^^ure your self
that through what art soever it passes, it will pass generously, and depart
victorious and through a fair gate. It is credible nevertheless, that it will
sally forth by the nearest Gate to the Heart, and which she her self newly made
with her own Hand. A stream of Blood which goes before this great Soul,
prepares the way: And spurting up even upon the Body of Abradates, enters
there through all his VVounds, as if it would fill his empty Veins; as if it
would even penetrate his Heart, to reinkindle the extinguished Fire; and
dispose it, by the Spirits which it brings to receive the Soul which was to
follow them. Her Countenanc^ though languishing expresses joy at this
encounter. Her life seems to pass in good earnest with her Blood into her
Husbands Body: and her Soul is assured to find there a second Abode, which
will prove more happy then the former had been.

Comforted by this Vain and sweet Imagination, she let fall her Head upon the
Head of Abradates. You would say that she prepares her self to expire upon his
Lips: And that after the transmitting into him her Blood and Spirits, she
resolves to place her Sighs and last Breath upon his Mouth. Love supports her
in this Action: But it is an Heroic and Magnanimous Love, a Love which
instructed her in Virtue and fortified her Courage. For Loves, if you are yet
to learn it, are not all Wanton and Voluptuous There are Austere and Chaste
Loves, there are Valiant and Philosophical ones: And amongst them, Glory and
Virtue have their Confederates and Disciples, as well as Vice and Pleasure. He
that assists Panthea with so much Care, is one of these Confederates of Virtue,
and Disciples of Glory: It is he that strengthened her against Temptations, and
the Courtships of Ariaspes; he that inspired her with Chastity, and Conjugal
Faith; he that taught her to apparel her self with the Reputation of her
Husband, and to Adorn her self with his Victories: he that persuaded her rather
to love Abradates glorious and dying with a good Name, then living and Infamy.

This manner of loving Gallantly, and like a Heroess was indeed according to
Abradates own Heart: And you see in what Posture he set himself to correspond
therewith We have not seen him in the Conflict breaking a Squadron of
Egyptians, and pursuing the Victory in a Warlike Chariot; But we behold the
Glorious Colors which he brought thence, and received even between the Arms of
Victory. It seems that his Valor could not die with him: At least it appears
still heated in his Wounds, and stately on his Face. The Rich Armor which his
Generous Wife had bought him with her Pearl, was pierced through in diverse
Places; as if a great Soul could not fally forth by one single passage. The
blood which trickles down from thence is mixed with the blood of his Enemies,
wherewith he is covered, and seems willing still to overcome. All things have
in him, some Mark of Honor and Generosity: And even Death it self is bold upon
his Brow, and resembles Victory. In this so glorious and Mournful Condition,
his Virtue begot Pity even in those to whom in the Conflict it had bred
Emulation. It was Honored by the Blood of Enemies, and by the Tears of his
Rivals: by the terror of the one, and the affliction of the other. And
immediately a sumptuous Monument erected over his Body and that of Panthea,
buried in the same Garment, will be to each of them as a second Life and an
Immortality of Jasper and Porphire.

SONNET.
WHile this Heroic Mede attempts to gain
Over weighty Palms, be by their poyse is slain;
His Brow still sweats with Gallans Actions done,
Still does the Blood about his Armor run.
His Hearts late active Flames have lost their Fire,
And, through its reaking Blood, in Smoke expire,
While, couched among the Dead, his Soul pursues
The wandering Shades of those the sword subdues.
O hold, Panthea hold: thy best Relief
Rests in the moderation of thy Grief:
Save thou at least thy Husbands second Heart,
And let one Death suffice your common Smart.
In thee he still survives, and may again
In thee, fair Cruel, by thy Hand be slain:
The inhumane Steel that shall dismiss thy Breath,
To him must needs procure a second Death.
ELOGIE OF PANTHEA.
PANTHEA had a Philosophers Spirit in a Woman's Body, and a knowing and
disciplined Soul under a Barbarous Climat. There was nothing weak or rustical
in her Life: All her Actions were full of Courage and Dexterity. Chastity,
Grace, and Modesty excepted, nothing appeared in her agreeable to her Sex.
Having remained a Captive after the Defeat of the Assyrians vanquished by
Cyrus, she was set apart, as the most precious piece of the Spoil, and as the
choicest fruit of the Victory. And in this occasion her Virtue appeared more
rare and prizable then her Beauty. A noble man of Persia having had the
Impudence to attempt upon her Honor, Discretion, Chastity, and Fidelity
defended it: And the Victory which remained to her, evidently showed that
Fortune had not yet overcome her. And that though she were an absolute Captive,
yet she had always a free Heart and a sovereign Soul.

The Affection she bore to her Husband Abradates, was serious and manly, she
did not consume it in affected Discourses, and superfluous Apprehensions. She
truly loved his Life and Repose; but she was jealous of his Reputation and
Renown: And she would rather have wished him an untimely and glorious Death,
then a dishonored and complete old Age. So far was she from making him lose in
her Closet the hours of the Field, and from withdrawing him from Gallant
Encounters, and Honorable Dangers; that she sent him thither in a costly
Equipage like a Conqueror; that she delighted to see in him an adorned and
sumptuous Valor, which might both dazzle and affright; which might beget at
once both Admiration and Fame.

He died likewise Victorious in the Gold Armor which she had bought for him
with her Pearl and precious Stones: as if she intended thereby either to adorn
his Death, or to set a Value and Luster on his Victory. Being brought to her
covered over with his own Blood, and that of his Enemies, she received him
Courageously and with a manly Constancy, mixed with sorrow and Majesty. She
forbore not to bewail him, but it was done with those modest and decent Tears
which do not soften the Heart, but beautify the Face. Not being able to make
his Soul return into his Body, she essayed to substitute her own in the place
of it: For that end she opened her Bosom by a wide wound: and leaning on him,
as if she were willing to fill his Heart with her Blood and Life; she dyed in
two Bodies, and yielded up her Soul through her Husbands Wound and and her own.

MORAL REFLECTION.
I Put not here a Sword into Women's Hands, nor invite them unto Poison, a
Halter, or Precipice. Voluntary Death might appear handsome and becoming in this
Barbarian; it would seem black and hideous in a Christian Woman. But Chastity,
Fidelity and Constancy are in use with all Nations, and requisite for All
Sects. And our Christian Women without darkning or disfiguring themselves may
imitate Barbarian. Let them learn of her, that Conjugal Love is not an
effeminate and mincing Passion; That it is vigorous and serious; That it is
capable of great Designs, and of Noble and Courageous Thoughts. Let them
understand, that though their Sex be exempted from the Dangers and Functions of
War, yet their Fortunes and Minds are not so: that they ought to serve with
their Goods and Possessions, if not with their Persons: And that it were a
Disgrace for them to spare two or three Pearls, and Parcels of rich Cutwork in
Occasions, wherein Princes are Liberal of their Blood, and Kings expose their
Crowns and Heads. In fine let them know that their chief Ornament consists in
their Husbands Glory: that they ought to adorn themselves with all that
contributes to their Credit and Reputation: And that a man without Honor is as
great a Deformity to a brave Woman, as a Head of Clay to a Statue of Ivorie.

MORAL QUESTION.
Concerning the Order which a Gallant Woman ought to observe in Conjugal Love.
IF good Eyes and a great Light be requisite to love regularly, more Courage
and Virtue is yet required to it: And well ordained Charity what sweetness
soever it promises, is the most powerful, and the most rare perfection of a
Gallant Woman. There are many who tenderly love their Husbands: The Heart of a
Turtle or the Soul of a Dove, without other Philosophy would suffice for this
Tenderness. But surely, few there are that love them according to measure and
in order to their duties; few that know how to afford just proportions to their
kindnesses, and to set every office in its place, and in the degree which is
proper to it: Finally few that can boast with the Spouse in the Canticles of
having a regular Love, and a well ordered Charity. And nevertheless it is this
regular Love, and well ordered Charity which must accomplish the Fortitude of
a Woman; For according to the saying of S. Augustine, these give the Character
and Tincture to all other Virtues of what Sex soever they be, and by what Names
soever they are called.

Morever this Order, to draw the Design of it in little, and to teach it by
Epitomie, must be taken from the very order of those Objects that are beloved.
Wherein this proportion is to be exactly observed, that every Object be ranked
in the esteem, and according to the degree of its Merit: That the most precious
and important should have the first Cares and be furthest advanced in the
Heart; that the rest of less consequence should remain in the superficies, and
rest satisfied with the second thoughts and remaining Affections: And generally
that love should grow intense or remiss, rise or fall, act or acquiesce
according to the different weight, according to the several degrees, according
to the Value of the good which is to be affected and pursued.

This Rule ought to be in a Gallant Woman, what the Rod was to the Angel whom
Ezekiel saw measuring the Temple. She ought not to Love, but with proportion
according to the quantity of merit: And how vast soever her Heart is, she must
yet be wary of pouring it out rashly and at random, she ought to give nothing
of it but by weight and measure. Not that I permit her to divide, and
distribute it to whom she pleases, she owes it all entire to her Husband: But
she owes it not equally to her whole Husband. And as she owes more of it to his
Person, then to his Apparel and Livery; more to his Head, then to his Hair, and
more of it to his Hands, then to his Nails: so she owes more to his Honor then
to his Life; more to his Conscience then to his Honor, more to his Soul and
Salvation, then to his Body and Fortune.

These measures and proportions are taken from Moral Philosophy, which
teaches us, that such Loves as are loosned from us, and slide out of us, are
but small threads of that Love which remains in us. They are taken from
Christian Philosophy, which directs that Charity, whether it be terminated in
our selves, or shed upon our Neighbor, should be of the same Nature, both in
its source, and where it makes its discharge; and that it should pass from one
to another to the same end, by the same tracks. Now there is no Woman so ill
instructed, who knows not, that by the Law of well ordered Charity, she owes
her essential and principal parts, and as I may say, the Heart of her Heart, to
his Honor and eternal Happiness: And owes only the accessory and superficial
parts to his Life and Fortune. By this Law then, as such Wives love themselves
immoderately and inordinately, who give to their Honor and Salvation but their
second affections, and the remaining cares after their lives secured, and their
Fortunes settled. So such do love their Husbands very confusedly, and without
discretion, who torment themselves both day and night about their Health, who
demand of Fortune Riches and noble Offices for them; and put themselves to as
little trouble concerning their Souls and Salvation, as if the Body were the
whole Person; and as if beyond the Tomb there were nothing but Fables to be
expected and nothing but Fantomes to be feared.

Certainly so inconsiderate a Love must needs have very bad Eyes: And it cannot
be, whatever men say, but a very childish and besotted Love, to value things by
the sound and color, to forsake the solid which is obscure, and noiseless; and
to run after the superficial which is bright and resounding. What would they
say of a Woman who should take the pains every morning to present flowers unto
her Husband, and who should at a great expense cause Essences and precious
Powders to be brought from foreign parts to perfume his Clothes and Linen; who
should take upon her to feed his Servants and Horses; who should disconsolately
lament the fall of one Hair from his Head, and the prick of a pin on his Hand.
And after all these Tendernesses and Cares, could without Emotion and with a
quiet Spirit see him choked with an Apoplexy, torn in pieces by his Dogs, and
tied upon a Wheel? What might be spoken of this Woman, ought to be said of the
most discreet and prudent Women, I mean the discreet and prudent according to
the sense of the World. There are some of these wise and discreet Women who
employ all sorts of Cares and Inventions about the Body and Passions of a
Husband. The touch of a Lancet which should but scratch the skin would even
pierce their Hearts, and cause their very Souls to issue forth by their Eyes. A
slight Fever which shall draw but a few drops of sweat from him, will congeal
the blood in their veins. And as for his soul, which is the essential and
important piece in order to Eternity, they less deplore its falls and wounds,
then they would lament a torn Gorget, or a broken Dish of Purcelane. They will
suffer it without trouble to be tormented by as many Hangmen as there are sins
to be confiscated to the Divine Justice, and to its eternal Executioners, to
become a prey to Hell and the second Death.

A Gallant Woman will not have such confused cares, nor such disproportionable
kindnesses: All her Offices will be Just and Regular. And if Panthea, who was
but a Heathen, nay a Barbarous Heathen, had a Heart Noble and Philosophical
enough to with her Husband rather a precipitated and Honorable Death, then an
effeminate and dishonorable old Age; our Christian Woman, who has more light
and a better Guide will advance one step farther; and will rather wish for the
last perfection of her Love, that her Husband might ascend to Heaven before his
time; though he went thither without Feet or Hands, as the Gospel says, nay
without either skin or Head, then to descend into Hell all entire, and laden
with Scepters and Crowns. This Virtue is not without example: some of them are
seen in the Palaces of Kings, where present interest crowds in, and finds so
much relief; and where the pretensions for the future are so little
considerable and abandoned. Those which I am going to present to your View are
of this Nature: they give not only instruction to Women, but will render Honor
to France, which has educated Holy Queens and Martyred Princesses.

EXAMPLE.
Indegundis, and Clotilda of France.
SPAIN was never so well cultivated, nor so Catholic as now it is. It has had
Monsters, and Heresies, Gertons and Arians in a time when (...) was ^et a
Virgin and when Rebellions and Errors were not (...) come to disturb her Repose
and adulterate her Innocence. We were necessitated to make Alliances and Wars
for the instruction of this good Neighbor: And the Faith, whereof she now so
much ^aunteth, has cost us exposed Princesses and ruined Armies. Indegund^^
the Daughter of Sig^^^rt was one of these Princesses exposed for the
propagation of Faith, and the reduction of Spain from Arianisme. (...) caused
her to be demanded in Marriage for Hermenigildus his eldest Son. The Counsel
sat long without being able to resolve on this Alliance with an excommunicated
House. But God who intended to make a Saint of Indegundis carried it at last
against Sigebert, who feared least in seeking to make her a Queen, she were
made a Heretic.

The first (...) of her Marriage had a most pure serenity, and flowers without
thorns or bitterness. Hermenigildus for all the Crowns of the World would not
have changed the pleasing tie, which fastened him to so rare and perfect a
Princess: and possessing in her both Virtue and Graces, he thought that there
was nothing more to be asked of Glory or Fortune. But so sweet a season was not
to last long, Dark Clouds quickly gathered together which overshaded this fair
serenity: There grew Thorns and Wormwood amongst these Flowers: And the sweet
Chain which was the Dradem of Hermenigildus Heart, chanced to be broken by the
malice of his Stepmother Gosuinda.

This unhappy Woman, possessed by the Devil of Arianism, undertook to pervert
Indegundis and proposed unto her to receive the profane Baptism of her (...)
Her s^^atagems and wiles having ill success, she employed therein, (...) and
Tyranny even to that height, as she made her to be cast naked into a Pond,
threatening to drown her unless she would change her Religion. The courageous
Princess was not daunted at the Death she saw before her Eyes, and as it were
upon the Brink of her Lips. She was drawn out from thence with an initiated
Martyrdom, and a complete Victory. And to overcome her self, as she had
vanquished Gosuinda and Heresy, she suppressed the resentment of this injury,
and concealed it even from Hermenigildus himself. But the Eyes of (...) are
more spiritual, and see farther then others: they have something of prophetical
in them: and the most artificial dissimulation with all its Countenances, and
Masks, could not make them believe it. The Prince no sooner beheld her as yet
pale with the Combat she had lately sought, but he conceived an ill opinion of
this Paleness: And not knowing whether he should take it for a sign of the
past evil, or for a presage of evil to come; he suffered in a Moment all that
Indegundis either had or could yet suffer. His Entreaties at last having
wrested the Truth out of her Mouth, he left the Court with her, and retired to
Sivil.

It was there where the Princess freed from the Importunites and wicked
Devices of Gosuinda set upon Herisie in her turn: And gained a second victory
over her, which was evidently the Recompense of the first. She was a Sovereign
in her Husbands Heart: and though this Sovereignty of Love placed her above all
the Empires of the Earth; yet she had a scruple to reign in that Heart, where
the Son of God was degraded. Having an Heretical Husband, she could not believe
her self to be entirely Catholic: And becoming one self same Flesh and Body
with an excommnnicated Person, she apprehended to be burned or stained with his
Anathema: she feared left the sound part might draw putrefaction and infection
from the corrupted. But though she were assured of her own salvation by an
express Revelation from Heaven; yet the eternal Reprobation of her Husband was
a frightful Specter, which awaked her every Night, and caused her to have
strange Dreams. At every moment she seemed to behold the Sword of the Divine
Justice severing two so well united halfs; And the exterminating Angels seized
upon the one and cast it into Flames.

On the other side she apprehended that the Conversion of Hermenigildus might
prove fatal to both their Lives, or at least that it might infire the State.
She had reason to fear the Fury of an irritated Stepmother, and the Hands of
an Heretical Father, become a Tyrant. It seemed to her, that it would be more
proper to suffer God to work; To expect the effect of his Mercy with patience,
and to enjoy, meanwhile, the Flower of her Youth, the Fruits of her marriage,
and the Offers of Fortune; then to lose all this by an indiscreet Piety and of
Supererogation; and by an Enterprise exceeding her Forces. Faith nevertheless
weighed more with her Spirit, then human Considerations: and the Interest of
Eternity prevailed against the Interest of Time. She resolved, whatever might
happen, no longer to endure this Divorce of Religion, which profaned her
Marriage: No longer to suffer the Excommunication and Anathema of her Head, the
Heresy and Reprobation of her Husband.

Love was the first Doctor that began the Conference with Hermenigildus: The
Graces, who are persuasive without speaking, joined themselves with Love, and
were of the Party. There were neither Texts cited, nor Reasons alleged in
this Dispute: All the Arguments were Tears and Prayers: And Tears and Prayers
effected more then all the Divinity converted into Dilemmas and Syllogysms
could have done. Hermenigildus, shaken by this first Conference, showed less
opposition at the second, which he had with the Bishop of S. Leander. And the
Light of Truth working more efficaciously, and with more Force upon a Subject,
which the fire of Love had prepared, he submitted at last to both. This change
made a great noise: and he himself, to give notice of it to all Spain, caused
Money to be coined which was as it were a public Act of his Faith, and an
abjuration of Heresy, which his Image and Name published thorowout all the
Cities.

After this, the Father irritated at the Conversion of his Son, and the Son
inflamed with his new received Faith, came to an open Breach. ^n^aged Gosuinda,
and the Furious Heretics enkindled the Wrath of the Father. The Church of
Spain being under persecution, and the Catholics ill treated, increased the
Zeal of the Son. Indegundis tried all sorts of Expedients to bring things to
moderation, and to reconcile (...) to his Father, as she had reconciled him to
God. She seriously and with Tears represented to him the ill example and
dangers of this War, and made him discern, that after a long contention it
could lead him but to a decryed and scandalous Victory, or to a dismal Defeat
followed by a Tragic Death. She made him call to Mind the Heroic Maxims of
that Faith he had embraced: And often repeated to him, that according to this
Faith Acts of Injustice might less handsomely be committed, then suffered: and
that there was no Sufferes in so bad a Condition, who was not of more value
then the most happy Criminal of the World. But the Fire was already too much
^nkindled: And there were too many Hands and Mouths, which stirred the Coals on
all sides. Hermenigildus who foresaw that it would be great and lasting,
resolved not to cast himself all entire into it, and without reserve. He
believed that if the dearest part of himself were removed, the other part which
he should expose thereunto, would thereby become more Courageous, and be better
prepared against all the strokes of Fortune.

He resolved then to send Indegundis into Africa: And Indegundis was not a
little troubled to resolve for this passage: She was in very great apprehension
concerning the Life and Liberty of her Husband: but her fear was much greater
for his as yet tender Faith, and for his initiated Salvation: And having
conjured him at her departure to make an Accommodation with his Father; and to
endeavor rather to gain then vanquish him: She added with a serious Tone, and
with a more affirmative Countenance, But Hermenin^ldus to what side soever the
Fortune of War shall incline, and what proposition soever shall be tendered you,
take heed of entering into any Treaty wherein Religion enters not with you If
Peace can be purchased with some loss, remain a looser in Gods Name to obtain
it: but let the loss be of your Fortune, and not of your Piety. Abandon freely
to the bad time, your Pretentions and Rights, your Crown and Succession, nay
your Head with your Crown, and your Life with your Succession: but proceed in
such sort, that you preserve at least your Faith, and rest assured that
conserved Faith will render you all things with use. Hermenigildus promised to
remember her good Instructions: He himself took the Spirit and Zeal thereof
from her Mouth. And all that he promised, he kept exactly and with Constancy.

War having bin unfortunate to him, and the Imperial Forces which he had called
to his aid having betrayed him after a long Siege, he lost Sivil and Cordona.
And in this extremity he remembered the tears of Indegundis; and acquainted
Leovigildus with the inclination he had to Peace and Obedience. The old Man,
who was not ignorant that despair is a dangerous weapon, and that the last
Efforts of the vanquished, and the bitings of dying Beasts are equally to be
feared, sent his Brother Richardus to him, who ended the matter by persuasion,
and brought him in, without giving other Assurance then his Word. This
confidence was Hazardous and full of Danger: And it is credible, that the
remembrance of Indegundis wrought more effectually therein, then the
persuasions of Ricaredus. The old man also having him in his power, forgot his
own Blood and Nature; and having in vain tried him, like a Tempter and a
Tyrant, with Offers and Threats, Chains and Prisons, not being able to deprive
him of his Faith, he took off his Head

Indegundis received this News with a sad Satisfaction, And a Resentment
wherein even in Despite of her, Nature was present with Grace. She bewailed her
dead Husband, and crowned him a Martyr; And she could not crown him more richly
then with her Tears. A few days after God called Indegundis to give her a
Crown. Affliction, Love, and Zeal loosned her Soul: she died Victorious over
Nature and Heresy: And at her expiring cast forth a light which illuminated
all Spain, and finished the Conversion of that Country under the Reign of
Ricaredus who succeeded (...).

The Combats of Clo^^ld^ were no less celebrious, nor less glorious to France
then these of Indegundis. But Spain drew not thence the same advantage: And the
ill treatment it gave her had not so happy a sequel. She was Daughter of the
great Clodovens, and of this holy and wise Clo^ld^, whom Christian France
acknowledged for her Mother and Instructresse. The King her Father caused her
to espouse Amanlry, who was a Go^^ by Birth, and an Arian by profession. He was
ignorant what a Monster is formed of Barbarism and Heresy assembled in one and
the same Body: but he believed that a far stranger and dreadful Monster might
be charmed by the Virtue of his Daughter: He believed that the Name of Clo^^lda
was an Apostolical and miraculous Name: and that the second might well effect
in Spain, a Conversion like that which the first had wrought in France. But the
time for this Conversion was not yet come: Ama^lry imitated those obstinate
Asps, which are mentioned in Scripture: He shut his Eyes and Stopped his Ears,
for fear of being charmed by Clo^lda. So far was he from respecting the Graces,
which instructed him; and from submitting to so sweet and pleasing a Virtue,
that he became a Tyrant and Executioner to them: He used all possible
Inventions to pervert these Graces: He practiced all sorts of Violence to
betray this Virtue to Heresy. It lay not in his power to overcome the Courage
of Clod^ve^s, and the Sanctity of their Daughter. The good Princess armed with
their Spirit, and fortified by the remembrance of their Triumphs and Miracles,
resisted his Wiles and Violence. How little soever she had complied and given
way to the Tempter, she might have reclaimed the Tyrant, and made him a good
Husband: But the preferred Honorable Wounds before deceitful and dangerous
Carresses; and rather affected a Tyrant who might crown her, then a Husband who
might corrupt her.

It cannot be expressed how costly this crown was to her: and how much she
suffered from a Prince and People equally Barbarous and possessed with the same
Devil and Heresy. Her Husband tormented her at Home with the Countenance of a
Hangman, and with words of Blood and Death, and abroad she suffered the
outrages of an insolent and (...) Multitude, which followed her with Reproaches
and throwing of stones, when she went to Church. The Heretical Ministers added
(...) to this public Violence: And Amaulry himself, who authorized it by his
Example, did once so outragiously beat the poor Queen, that he covered her all
over with Blood, leaving her half dead. Having recovered her senses, she sent
her bloody Hankerchief to her Brethren Kings The Blood of the Innocent had both
Spirit and Voice upon this Linen, and carried Indignation and Wrath thorowout
all France. (...) took horse, and marched at the Head of thirty thousand men to
require his Sister. This journey cost Amaulry his Life, and Spain chastised,
de^^ayed the Charges of it. As for Clo^ilda, she was called to Heaven before
her Arrival in France. Peradventure God foresaw that her Merit would suffer
some diminution by repose; and that her Crown might be lessened thereby. And
intending to give it her complete and fulls round, he bestowed it on her
immediately after her Victory. However it were, Clo^ilda added to Indegundis,
to Blanch of Bourbon, and others who followed them, made us believe that Spain
was fatal to our Princesses, as it has been thought to be fatal to those
Planets who go thither to expire. In effect all those that have been sent
thither dyed very young, and replenished with Life and Light. But this death
was only in appearance like that of the Planets. God made them pass from
thence to a better Life, and to a Kingdom of longer durance. And it is credible
that they have there a particular Luster, and hold the rank of Princesses
amongst highly descended Martyrs, and noble Sufferers.

CAMME Princess de Galatie, victorieuse de l'Amour et de la Mort, fait un
sacrifice fidelite et de vengeance a l'Ombre de Sinnate son Mary. (...)

Camma.
HOW vain are the Hopes of Man! And how dangerous Imposters, and treacherous
Guides are Desires! Sinnorix came hither to give a beginning to his Marriage:
Death, which is found every where, would be at the Feast in Despite of the
public Joy. That which is very strange, Love himself brought him thither: and
by a new and Fatal Revolution of all things, Virtue is there a Cheat and a
Homicide: And the betrothed serve as Victimes to the Sacrifice prepared for the
Ceremony of their Nuptials.

Fidelity and Treachery are the Subject of this Action; Camma and Sinnorix are
the Actors; and the Temple is the Scene. Sinnorix not being able to overcome
the Chastity of Camma, at last caused her Husband Sinnarus to be slain, that he
might succeed to his Bed and Throne. And Camma knowing no other way to be quit
with Sinnorix, compassed it by the feigned Consent she gave to his Addresses.
She deserted not her Revenge to time and occasions which might happen: she
would not expect obscure and Domestic ones: she believed that she ought to
satisfy her self in a high, and remarkable way: And without giving one moment
of Truce to her Enemy, she comes to poison her self publicly with him, by the
drink which was prepared to confirm with Ceremony, and by a solemn sacrifice
the Contract of their Marriage.

The Declaration she made of so Courageous, and so little expected an Action,
raised a Tumult in the Temple, and confusion amongst the people. No person is
seen there who reflects on the Goddess, or remembers the Sacrifice. The
Victimes which were already at the Foot of the Altar crowned with Garlands of
Flowers, and powdered over with fine Meal, were affrighted at the Noise made
about them: And saving themselves with their Garlands and Ribbons threw down
the Perfumes and Censors; and scattered the Assistants surprised with
Astonishment, Superstition, and Fear. Instead of bringing them back, the most
confident accompany them in their Flight. The Virgins of Diana only stayed
behind, and they themselves were detained by a Terror which tied their feet
and congealed the Blood in their Veins. Their astonishment and fear appeared on
their faces, which bore the Color of their Garments. The very flowers of their
Crowns seemed to wax pale by their Example, and Affrightment. The Torches
fallen from their Hands are extinguished by the Milk and and Wine of the
Goblets which were tumbled down: And of these two confounded Liquors a third is
composed, which retains the Color of them both.

In this general tumult Camma alone remains quiet and undaunted. She was never
more fair and Graceful then you now behold her: She never drank any thing more
delicious or pleasing to the taste, then that Remnant of Death she newly gave
her Enemy. The sweetness of the Revenge she took, wrought upon her Heart
before the poison, and penetrated even to the bottom of her Soul. There was
spread from thence upon her face an effusion of Joy, accompanied with a
majestical and pleasing fierceness, even Anger it self was there graceful: and
the last drops of its Gall had there a kind of Sweetness. Nothing is seen in
her of that Death she had taken in: her Couutenance resembles a Conqueresse,
and in her Attire something appears festival and Triumphant. The very Flowers
where with she is Crowned seem to rejoice that they shall not be carried to a
profane and polluted Bed: And that they shall dye Ghast and without Blemish in
her Company. It was believed that she had taken them to sacrifice with more
decency; and to render Honor to her Ministry, and new Marriage: And this was
done to go more adorned to Sinnatus, and to Triumph over Sinorix with more Pomp.

The wretched Man dejected by the Guilt of his Conscience, and pierced by the
Reproaches of Camma, falls on the Ground with the Fatal Cup which deceived him.
The Palenesse of Death, which he drank, begins to spread it self on his Face:
And disquieted by his Despair, no less then by his Anger, he looks upon Camma,
with Eyes which speak neither a Lover nor a Husband. I think also that he vents
forth against her all the Gall of his Spirit, which is more bitter, and comes
from a far worse spring then the poison he drank. And being able to do her no
more mischief, he dismembers her at least by his desires and Gesture: And makes
of her Body as many pieces, as he sends forth Imprecations and Reproaches
against her. She hears him coldly and without Trouble. It may be said that she
loves him in this Condition: And having never beheld him without Horror, she
now sees him with Joy. Meanwhile the Poison gaining on her Noble Parts, and
finding the Heart half open, by the Effort which her Soul makes there to sally
forth, and reunite it self to Sinnatus; behold her sinking between the Hands of
her Maids.

They are well recovered of their first disorder; but in no Condition to help
her, if their tears serve not for an Antidote. The best they can do is to lift
up their Eyes and hands to the Goddess, and to demand of her by their Gestures
and Sighs the preservation of so sublime a Virtue, for the Honor and Example
of their Sex. Do not believe that they are heard. Camma opposes their
Petitions, and offers up Prayers to the contrary. In the Smoke of the
extinguished Torches, and the overturned Censors she beholds the Ghost of
Sinnatus still bleeding from his VVound, who gives her a sign, that it is time
to depart; And that she is expected in the Region of Chaste and Faithful Souls.
Her impatience redoubles at this Object: And her Heart closing up she takes
leave of the Goddess; Craves Pardon for having in her Temple, and at the Foot
of her Altar and Image, sacrificed to Love and Revenge: And with these last
words, rendered up her Spirit with a serene Countenance; and such as a
Conqueror would have, who after the gaining of a Victory, should expire in the
f^uition of his Glory.

SONNET.
THis Queen, whose noble wrath admits no rest,
(With poison at her Lips, Death near her Breast)
Does the now trembling Synnorix upbraid
With that sad stroke his murderous Hand conveyed.
Her Husbands Ghost, which often called in vain,
(With Langnor pale, yet bloody as when slain)
Waits to receive her in that Cloud the late
Extinguished Torches with their smoke create.
Brave Soul forsake not thy fair Prison; stay,
Do not, Renowned Camma, post away
To thy Sinnatus, ere the poisnous Draught
Have on his Murd'rers Head due Vengeance wrought
To which the Heavens and all things else conspire
With his sad Fate, and thy inflamed Ire:
And Love himself i^ accelerate his pain,
Megrra's Torch, and Deaths cold Shafts has taken.
ELOGIE OF CAMMA.
CAMMA Princess of Galatia, and the Wife of Sinnatus, was doubly Sovereign, and
reigned by the right of her blood, and by that of her Face Her Beauty which was
her first Crown, drew Suitors to her, and furnished her with Combats: and these
Combats rendered her Spint sit for War, and manifested her Courage and ^idelity.
Her Virtue made Fortune Jealous, and her Beauty begot Love in Sinorix. But not
complying with Sinorix, and abandoning all to Fortune, she remained victorious
over both Solicitations and Services proving unsuccesseful to Sinorix, he
employed Despair and Crimes: And persuaded that a vacant place would be weakly
defended, and with less obstinacy, he murdered Sinnatus; and of his Body
makes a step to his Bed and Throne. This Blow strengthened the Courageous
Princess instead of dejecting her. She gave no Ear to the bloody Ghost of
Sinnatus which summoned her; And before she would follow him resolved to
revenge his Death.

After so soul and base a Treachery Sinorix renewed his addresses, and sweetened
them with the Name of Marriage. He presented himself to Camma with all the
Artifices and Disguisement, by which he thought to hide from her his Crime. She
failed not to discern it through all his Arts and Disguises, and to scent the
Murder and blood which remained still fresh upon him. Nevertheless the
restrained her self: And for fear of losing her stroke if she lifted up her
hand too high, she enclosed her Design in her Heart with her Anger.

In sine, after many premeditated difficulties, and counterfeit irresolutions
she seigned to submit to the persuasions of her Kindred who solicited her in
Sinorix behalf; and gave them her Consent and Promise. At the assigned day for
the Ceremony of her Marriage, all things being ready for the Sacrifice, she
took the cup in which poison was steeped: And having out of respect poured
forth two or three drops thereof upon the Altar of the Goddess, she drank part
of it, and gave the rest to Sinorix. The unhappy Creature expecting to taste
the first sweets of his Marriage, drank there his Death, and the punishment of
his Crime. Camma had the satisfaction to see him die with her: And having
enjoyed two or three hours of her Revenge, and the Glory of her Fidelity, she
went to carry the News of both to Sinnatus.

MORAL REFLECTION.
ALL the Lines of this Picture are instructive, and the very shadows of it are
luminous, and enlighten the understanding. We learn from the unfortunate Beauty
of Camma, that as there be flowers which impoison, so there are Riches which
render those unhappy who possess them: And that very often we are only slung
with what glitters about us, as well as with what pleases and adorns us. We
are taught likewise by her Courage, that in the Combats of Virtue, Victory
consists in the strength of the Mind, and not of the Body: That the weakest
Sex may herein Dispute in point of advantage with the strongest: and that a
Crown is more for the Heart, then for the Arms or for the Head. On the other
side we learn from the Crime of Sinorix, that unchaste Love is a dangerous
Guest: It enters with Nosegayes in its Hand, and Garlands on his Head; And
as soon as it comes into a House, and has there settled it self, it exhibits
poisons and swords. We gather also from his punnishment, that Divine Justice,
though it sets forth late, yet it fails not to arrive in due time: And that
without causing Executioners to come afar off, it often makes our Idols become
our Tormentors, and our sins our punishments.

MORAL QUESTION.
Why Conjugal Love is more Faithful in Women, then in Men.
I Suppose the Truth of the Thesis, and suppose it upon the Report of History,
which is the Conserver of Truth, and the Depository of fair Originals and
eminent Examples. I have been consulting on it in all Countries and Ages: and
I confess that in every Country and Age where I have examined it, History has
shown me Heroic Women by Troops, who dyed out of Fidelity and Love to their
Husbands. But when I required from it Husbands of the like Virtue and Courage,
scarce could it furnish me with enough to make a number. This certainly is
wonderful, yet most true: And such as shall not have Faith enough to believe it
upon my word, may inform themselves upon the places.

They will be showed in Greece the Ashes of E^ad^e, who cast her self into the
flaming Pile of her Husband; and who by an honest and lawful Love performed
that which a furious Hero, and vaunting Philosophers have done either out of
brutish despair, or ridiculous vanity. They will be showed the Web wherewith
Penelope preserved her self for Ulysses: the Cup in which Camma drank death and
revenge: Another Cup wherein Artemisia drank the Ashes of Mansolus. They would
cause them to see at Rome the Coals which Porcea swallowed: the Dagger of Aria
and those efficacious words by which she gave Reputation to her Death, and
Courage to that of Petus: The Lancet wherewith Paulina opened her Veins, that
she might die with Seneca: And diverse other famous pieces which are in
Veneration with the Ancients; and which are seen still colored with Blood, and
marked with the Fidelity of Women. The sight of these pieces is sufficient
alone, and without other proof to persuade, that Women love more constantly,
and with more Fidelity then Men. But I suppose this Advantage of Women's
Fidelity above that of Men, who have hitherto lest no Relics of it: And
seeking Reasons for it in Natural and Moral Philosophy, I find eight, which
added to the Memorials of Antiquity, will strengthen this Proposition against
the malicious Allegations wherewith some use to assault it: And which may make
it at least an Article of Human Belief.

First, if Philosophy and Experience have Authority enough to be credited
therein, Affections follow Humors; and take their qualities and tincture from
the temper which serves them for matter. Now it is not doubted, but Melancholy
is the predominant Humor in a Woman: it is not doubted, but that her Temper is
more moist and her Complexion more tender then ours: we ought not then to
doubt, but that her Affections are more adhering and settled: and that she is
more strongly united to whatsoever she fastens her self. Why should we doubt
it, since Melancholy has been hitherto believed to be the matter of
Constancy, and the most proper Oil to nourish the fire of Love? Since we see
that loft things are better linked together then hard ones: and that without
Humidity no lasting union can be made. From thence comes the ancient saying,
which declares that the affections of Women can endure no Mediocrity: and that
whatever they desire, they desire it obstinately, and without intermission.

Let us add Instinct to Humor, and Necessity to Complexion: and what Faith
teaches us, concerning the Creation of Woman taken out of the side of Man,
being supposed; Let us allege for the second Reason, that the Instinct of the
part to the whole being of necessity, and consequently stronger then the
Instinct of the whole to the part, which is but of congruity: It was according
to the order of Nature that a Woman should do by an Intelligent and Judicious
inclination, what all other separated parts perform out of a blind and
insensible Propension. And since Man, from whom she was taken, is necessary for
her conservation; it appears nothing strange, that she adheres more constantly
to him, and renders him more affection then she receives: And besides, this
surplusage which she gives him, is less an advance and a work of
supererogation, then a duty and acknowledgment.

After this second Reason there follows a third, which is grounded upon the
Assistance and good Offices which Women receive from Men. This assistance is
frequent and more then ordinary, and these offices continual and at all hours.
Those which the Body receives from the Head can hardly suffer less
interruption; those which the Moon expects from the Sun can scarce be more
necessary to her. And therefore if good offices be the ties of Hearts, and the
chains of Souls; is it not reasonable that Women should love more then they are
beloved; and be more strongly ^astned then they fasten; since in the Domestic
Society they servelesse then they are served; and are more obliged then they
oblige? Should they have less of good Nature then (...), which fastens it self
inseparably to the Tree that supports it, and never leaves it either in Life or
Death? Should they love less constantly then the Female Palm, which never
finds comfort, never receives verdure, nor is ever capable of Renovation after
the Death of her Male to which she was allied.

This Fidelity does not only appertain to the duty and gratitude of Women: but
it concerns their Honor and Glory: And whether in their opinion there be
something of Nature and Instinct therein; whether there be not something of
Tradition or Hearsay; they are all persuaded that Constancy, next to Chastity,
is the predominant Virtue and the essential quality of Virtuous Women. Men
place not therein their puncti^^o of Honor: there is no Title less alleged
among them, there is no quality more cheap, then that of a good Husband: They
scarce rank or hold it considerable in the Description of a Gallant Man. And
from hence it comes, that Constancy and Fidelity, whereof I speak, being not
controverted with Women, they have engrossed them both to themselves, and left
to men in their room Valor, Knowledge, Justice, and other Virtues, which as
they conceived, suited better with the Dignity of their Sex.

Moreover, it is the chief Ambition of good Women to be beloved by their
Husbands entirely and with perseverance. This begets their Peace and Content at
home: this procures them a good Name, and a good odor of Reputation abroad On
the other side they know, and Nature has taught it them, that the Heart is the
only Bait with which another Heart may be taken: and that Love, to which wings
are given, is a Bird not to be caught, but by another Love. From whence it
arises, that to possess this so important Love, they make advances of it which
exhaust them, and whereof very often there remains only in them a habit of
loving solitarily, and an obstinate and customary Fidelity.

Besides, it is with the Heart of a Woman, as with Rivers which are kept in,
and shut up; and have but a little Descent by which they have liberty to
disburthen themselves. Conscience and Honor, Chastity and Fear, the Laws of
God, and the Laws of the World are the obstacles which encompass it on every
side: and it cannot dilate it self without breaking them, not break them
without extraordinary violence. Likewise, when amidst so many obstacles, the
discharge lies open to it on the Husbands part, it pours it self forth on that
side with more impetiosity and restriction, then does the Heart of a Man, which
resembles those shallow Rivers, which have neither Ridges not Ba^^^^, but many
little open streams through which they disburthen themselves.

Let us also say, that Women being freed from many affairs wherewith Men are
charged; And Love being, as a certain Person said, the business of persons
wanting employment, and the occupation of those that are at leisure: they must
necessarily love with more Force, and with more application of mind then they
are beloved.

In sine, I add for the eighth Reason, that Love has Jealousies like a King:
It is also the Princely and Sovereign Passion: And in a Heart where it reigns,
it cannot endure that any should go equal with it, nor play the Mistress. Now
the Hearts of Men are more divided, and subject to more Passions then those of
Women. Every day occasions and affairs introduce there some New Passion: and
every one will command in its turn, and reign at least on the day of its
Arrival. Perfect Love, which is Jealous of its Authority, and an enemy to
disorder and confusion: not knowing how to be at quiet and in a state of Honor
amidst these turbulent Passions, gives way to them, and retires into a Woman's
Heart: And it is there less disquieted and more absosolute: No Rival is found
there to rise up against it: There is no Passion which does not obey it. For
this Reason, Fortune, Affairs, and the Passions which are of their Train
standing almost all for the Husband, nothing remains for the Wise, but Conjugal
Love accompanied with Fidelity and Constancy. I might produce great number of
Reasons for it: but it is the weight and not the multitude which ought to
persuade. Let us conclude this Question with an Example, which will manifest in
despite of Monteigne, that there are modern as well as ancient Fidelities: and
that good Wives have appeared long after the Age of either Ar^^ or Pa^l^a.

EXAMPLE.
Sanchia of Navarre.
I Am to draw in this History the Picture of two Sisters, who have not not one
drop of Blood in their Veins, not one Hair on their Heads by which they
resemble each other. This nevertheless is neither strange nor new: the Rose and
Thorn grow upon one stalk: and one fire produces both Light and Smoke. The
representation thereof in that respect will not be less delightful: And by an
opposition like that which is made by the Impostures of the Perspective, a
Grace and a Fury, an extreme Fidelity, and an extreme Treachery will be seen
there upon the same Ground, and almost under the same Line.

Sanchias the second, King of Navarre was slain by Ferrandus Gonzales Earl of
Castile in a public and regular Duel, undertaken solemnly, and in the fight of
two Armies, to end their quarrel, and to spare the Blood of their People. This
Disaster left so lively a resentment, and so obstinate a grief in Theracia,
Daughter to the deceased King, and Wife to the King of (...), that she took an
oath never to admit of any Lenitive but Revenge, and the Blood of Gonzales. She
sought every where this Lenitive of Blood, and this Revenge which might (...)
seeing no Honorable or lawful occasion which might lead her to effect it with
a good Conscience, she resolved to compass it by Treason and Surprise. The
wrath indeed of a Woman is a dangerous Wrath: All that she has of sweet is
imbittered and turns into Gall when she is netled and in despite of her Natural
Constitution poison (...) forth of her Eyes, and the teeth of Serpents enter
into her mouth. But though she be every way to be feared; yet she ought (...)
to be mistrusted when her fire is rakedup: when her teeth are hidden: and when
her Gall and Poison are covered with a seeming sweetness. And we may take also
in this sense the saying of holy Scripture, which advices us to avoid the fury
of an irritated Dove.

These Ashes of a plaistred Reconciliation, and this feigned meekness of a
Dove, had like to have ruined Gonzales. He would have preserved himself from an
open Fire: and would have defended himself against an Eagle which should have
assaulted him by Force. Theracis counterfeits her self tractable and inclined
to Peace; makes an offer of Reconciliation: And to establish a solid and
lasting Peace between Navarre and Castile, she proposes a Marriage between her
Sister Sanchis and Gonzales. Surely the Bait was too tempting, and too subtly
prepared, and with too much dexterity to catch nothing. Gonzales who was
generous and no Enemy to Peace, gave ear to this Proposition; receives from
the Queen of Leen (deputed for the solemnization of the Contract) the Promise
of absent Sanchia, and returned her his. When all things were agreed, he
undertakes a journey to Navarre, with no other Attendance then his own Family:
Neither did he think to go to a Siege or Battle: he beheved that his Voyage was
to a Treaty of Marriage: and a Marriage is not treated of with Armies and
Engines of War: No man espouseth a beating Drum or flying Colors.

As soon as he arrived in Navarre, King Garcius a Complice in the Treason of
his Sister Theracia, received him with outrages and reproaches: and without
giving him time to recollect himself commits him to Prison, and causes him to
be laden with Chains more harsh and ponderous, then those which he came to
seek. Sanchia advertised of so soul a Treason, to which she had contributed
innocently, and with no ill intent, thought her self obliged, for the
Justification of her promise, and for the Honor of her House, to assist a
Prince who was taken in her Name, and by her promise. She found out a means to
see him in Prison, and this sight mollified her Heart, and laid it open to
Passion, which never before found any access unto it. Pity which is not
bashful and suspected by no man, entered first boldly, and without resistance:
Love stole in fearfully after her, and was there received upon the engagements
made by Gonzales, and upon the faith which had been given him. Sanchia was
already sufficiently tied by the promise delegated to the King of Navarre her
brother, and to her sister the Queen of Leen: But she found her self there much
faster tied by the chains of Gonzales: She renewed to him the promise she had
sent him by the ministers of her brothers treachery: And having given necessary
orders for his liberty, she took him out of prison, and fled away with him to
Castile, where she was married to him in great pomp, and with the general
applause of the people.

I confess that there was much of boldness in this action; and I would not
pardon it in a Maid, who had followed a wandering fire, and played the part of a
(...), or a Lucipps. But if we consider that Sanchia was no longer at her own
dispose, nor at her brothers: that she was promised and betrothed to Gonzales:
that she had given her faith out of obedience: And that she owed more to her
betrothed faith, then to the treachery of her House; her boldness will be no
reproach to her memory: And men will rather give her an honorable rank
amongst the Her^^sses, then join her with the wandering women of Romances.
Nevertheless the King her brother did not take it in that sense. As soon as he
was advertised of his prisoners and sisters flight; he presently raised a
powerful Army and fell into Castile: But he fell in under so ill a Planet,
that he was defeated in the first Battle; and by the sport of Fortune, which
mingles at her pleasure, chains and Crowns, and places them sometimes upon one
Head, and sometimes upon an other; or to speak more Christianly, by a just
disposure of Divine Providence, which would punish Injustice and Treachery, the
King of Navarre in his turn remained prisoner to his Fugitive, and was laden
with the same Chains he had brought for him.

After some months of imprisonment, Gonzales moved by the persuasions of his
Wife, set him at liberty, and sent him back with honor to his Kingdom: These
benefits ought to be ranked amongst those Coals, which according to the saying
of the Wiseman, give new heat to congealed Charity, and reenkindle extinguished
affection: But they stirred up hatred, and inkindled a new war which would
have caused great flames and ruins, if the wise and courageous Sanchia, before
one drop of blood was spilt, had not mediated between her Husband and Brother,
and quenched with her tears the fire which had taken on all sides. These tears
which had virtue enough to extinguish a war already flaming, and to pacify
two Kingdoms in Arms, had not enough to sweeten the Animosity of a Woman. The
Queen of Leen reserved her passion in all the Treaties which were held: And in
all the Articles which were proposed to her, whatsoever her lips and tongue did
swear, and whatsoever her hand did sign, she full swear in her mind, and
signed in her heart the death of Gonzales.

The obstinate Princess not content with having labored unprofitably and at a
great expense to dishonor the Name of the King her Brother, with having
perverted her Faith and falsified her promise, took away also the Honor and
Reputation of the King her Husband: And persuaded him to make of his Word and
Faith a second snare for Gonzales. The Faith of Kings is sacred; Their Promise
is holy, And it is a profanation, and a kind of Sacrilege to convert them
into Deceits and Treasons; and to make them serve for Baits to Circumventions.
This Prince nevertheless seduced by his Wife, consented to the Profanation of
his Word and Faith. He convened the States of his Kingdom, and sent thither the
Earl of Castile. The Earl had sight good enough to discern afar off the snare
which was laid for him: but he had too good a Heart, and too confident a Soul
to avoid a snare from which he knew not well how to fly, but by flying from
his Duty, and turning his back to his Reputation. He stuck fast then to his
Reputation and Duty; and committed his Life and Liberty to Fortune. Fortune
nevertheless which is said to be favorable to bold Actions, gave him no better
entertainment at Leon, then he had received at Navarre. He found there a second
Prison, and as strong and heavy chains as the former: And found no Sanchia in
that place, who might break these chains and open the Prison for him. But Love
which was more just then Fortune, and works far other Miracles, did not long
retard the bringing thither his Deliveress: And if she had been Courageous and
Faithful during the time of Contract, she showed her self yet more Courageous
and Faithful in the state of Marriage.

As Soon as she had notice of her Husbands Captivity, her first thought was to
march in the head of twenty thousand men, to destroy his Prison with Fire and
Sword, and to bring him back to Castile through the Ruins, and Light of a
flaming Province. To this first thought which arose from her Courage, another
succeeded, wherein there was more of Prudence, and more of Safety for her
Husband. She fixed upon that, though the danger thereof was more evident for
her self: And she resolved to oppose to a foul and treacherous fraud, an
innocent and purely charitable deceit. She chose amongst the most Faithful
servants of the Earl her Husband, all those who had most courage and strength,
and commanded them to follow her without noise, and with Arms of more effect
then show. This done, she began her journey in the habit and Marks of a
Pilgrim: passes every where for a Woman of quality, who went to perform her
Vow made to S. James. And being arrived in Leon with two Knights, she so
craftily and dexterously assaulted the Gates of the Prison, as at length they
were opened to her, and obtained leave to see her Husband.

The apparition of an Angel environed with fire and covered over with light,
could scarce have more dazzled Gonzales, then the arrival of disguised Sanchia
had done. After the first Embraces, and the Tears that were mixed with them,
which supplied the place of Words, she acquainted him in few words with the
occasion of her coming: And conjured him to take the garment and liberty she
had brought him, and to leave her in exchange his Chains and Apparel; nay his
punishment and Death, if it were decreed he should die. This exchange being
made, he went out of Prison with the Garment and Heart of Sanchia; And found
the two Knights at the Gate, who brought him to the place where his servants
waited for him. The next day the light discovered that charitable Fraud which
the night had concealed. The King of Leon on the sudden expressed an Anger,
which seemed never to be allayed without effusion of Blood. But reason
returning by degrees, admiration succeeded his wrath: He highly praised a
deceit so well meant, and of so great example. And having magnificently
treated his Sister, he sent her back to her husband with ceremony and pomp:
and this Pomp served as a Triumph to Conjugal Love and the Fidelity of Women.

ARTEMISE (...)

Artemisia.
THERE is nothing here but exceeds the measure of mean Spirits: Nothing but
transcends the Capacity of shallow Heads. The Mausolaeum which you behold, is
one of the Worlds great Miracles. Artemisia who caused it to be built, is
another far greater Miracle, though not so vast, nor wearieth so much the
sight. But both have wherewith to fill with her Renown, as well the present as
future Times: Wherewith to furnish matter for new Fables; And to serve in
History for a spectacle of magnificence, and prodigy to all Nations and Ages.

They are no common Architects which direct this sumptuous and stately
structure. Love is the undertaker and has traced out the design: Magnificence
presides in the Execution; and all the Arts gathered together work there under
her Command, and by her Orders. Surely it were needful to have a very vast
apprehension, and Eyes capable of great objects to contemplate at once these
pendant Quarries wrought into Pillars: And to behold at one View a whole
Mountain of Jasper erected into an Obelisk. Asia and Africa must be thereby
exhausted and impoverished: I do believe that at present there are left neither
Marble in their Bosoms, nor precious Metals in their Veins. And you there
behold in Frizes, Chapters, and Ballisters, all that the sun was able to
produce rich and resplendent in many Ages. Not only all the Treasures of the
Earth have been exhausted to serve for this Enterprise, but whole Colonies of
workmen have been consumed therein; And all those rich carved Pieces, whereof
your eyes partake in an instant and without trouble, are the Invention and
labor of the ablest heads and the most skillful hands of Greece.

Leocarez who was the Author and Father of the most exquisite Gods, and of the
most eminent Artists of these days, employed all his skill in that Statue
which he made of one single Agate. It has no other colors then what the Stone
brought with it from the Quarry. And nevertheless by a concurrence, which
exceeded the expectation of the Workman, Nature so well mingled them, and with
so much equality and proportion, that a Picture, were it drawn by the hand of
Apelles himself, could not better resemble Mausolus. Three Lamps framed of
three large Rubies make a precious Fire, fed with Balm under this Figure. There
is a fourth, which is composed of a more noble matter, which sends forth a
cleerer and more resplendent flame, though it be invisible. It is the heart it
self of Artemisia, which burns always equally and with the same fire, and
consumes before her Husbands Ghost still present to her eyes.

I observe that you have a long time fixed your sight particularly upon the
face of this Colossus, and upon the strange Characters it bears. The Characters
are Egyptian and Sacred. The Subject is the Elogy of Mausolus, expressed in
figured and mystical terms. The mourning of his Widow, and sorrows of his
People are not there forgotten: But all this, as you may see, is there only in
Epitome, and in a cold and livelesse style. The most Magnificent, even the most
eloquent and faithful Epitaph of Mausolus is in the heart of Artemisia. Love
and Death have engraved it with their Pencils. There is not a word in it which
has not both life and heat, which does not love and sigh, which does not
resent and is not resented. Is it not that which the Architect meant to
express by this Love and Death, which he has couched at the Foot of the
Obelisk? Would you not say that these Characters were but newly engraven, and
that they made all Passengers who shall read them to accompany with their sighs
and Tears, the Sighs of the Arts, and the Tears of the Muses; the sadness of
the Metals, and the mourning of the Marbles?

As for those two other Loves which close up the Ballisters, they are numbered
among those which have contributed their Cares and Labors to this vast Work.
They hold also the Square and Compass in their Hands: And seem thereby willing
to give Testimony against the Errors of the ignorant, who persuade themselves
that Love can act nothing which is not tumultuous and irregular; And that there
is nothing but confusion and disorder in all its productions. Love nevertheless
(whatsoever these ignorant persons may say of it) is the superintent of
Harmonies and Accords; and the first inventer of Squares and Measures: And I do
not doubt, but if some one of those people came hither, he would presently avow
that Love is more regular and better proportioned in this vast building, then
Philosophy ever was in the Tub of the Cynick. Surely also it is wonderful to
behold, such regular Enormities, and such adjusted proportions amidst so great
excess. But nothing yet there appears save the first draughts of this
proportion and evennesse: And one must expect the last form of the whole Body
to judge of the correspondencie between these enormous and monstrous parts,
which are the Temerities of Art, the Exaggerations of Marble and Jasper; And if
I may say so, the Hyperboles and Amplifications of Architecture.

We are not the only persons in whom so sumptuous and magnificent a mourning
begets astonishment. Those that you see at the Foot of the steps, though they
belong to the Court of Artemisia, and are accustomed to the Majesty of her
Design, and have their Minds and Eyes as full of it as ours. Some express
their astonishment by their Gesture, and seem to say that this Monument will
one day draw all Europe to Asia, and be an Heroic Temple, where Magnificence
and mourning, Love and Death, Artemisia and Mausolus will be honored together,
and receive from Posterity an equal worship, and like Oblations. The rest
further advanced observe her action, and accompany it with their respect and
silence.

The affliction of her Mind seems to have passed even into her Garment, which
is black and without ornament. Her sadness nevertheless is Majestical and
becoming: And upon her face, still pale by the Death of her Husband, there
appears a kind of pleasing languishment, which demands compassion and would
beget Love, if it were in a subject either less elevated, or less austere.
Two Turtle Doves which she her self newly sacrificed to the Spirit of Mausolus
burn before her, with her Hair upon an Altar of Porphirie: And mean while the
fire which seized on her Heart by degrees consumes the ties of her Soul, and
prepares it to go join it self with the other Heart which expects it. The ashes
of Mausolus, which she hitherto so charily preserved, are moistened with her
Tears in the Cup you see in her hand. She takes it up to drink them: And her
moist and sparkling Eyes which partake something of the Sun and Rain seem to
say to those that understand them, that she nevertook any thing more sweet and
pleasing to her taste: That the richest works of Art and Nature could not
worthily enough conserve so precious a Pledge: That these dear Ashes are due
unto the fire of her Heart, and that nothing but Artemisia alone could make a
fit sepulcher for Mausolus.

SONNET.
ARTEMISIA speaks.
BEhold this Sepulchers proud structure, where
Glory and Grief do equally appear:
Where Asia (raised into one Monument)
Tired all the Arts, and Natures skill outwent.
Love with his shafts has wrought the Sculpture fair,
Love did the Cyment with his Fires prepare,
And makes, in spite of Death, my Lover have
An endless life in this stupendous Grave.
But tell me Love, what Glory do I gain
By these my sumptuous Labors, if I daign
Marbles to be the Rivals of my Fame,
And share with them my Souls resplendent Flame?
Now if the gentle Shade, with wandering Feet,
Among the Dead do stray, it will be meet
That of its Flame my Soul the Fuel be,
And that his Ashes live entombed in Me.
ELOGIE OF ARTEMISIA.
IT is nothing strange that Artemisia speaks in this Picture: She has lived
above three thousand years in the Memory of Man. Her Fortune and Dignity
nevertheless has not preserved it for her. Whatsoever has been said of Gold,
it does not exempt those from corruption who wear it in their Crowns: and the
Names of Kings and Queens ought not to be more privileged then their Persons,
which die upon Thrones. Virtue has made Artemisia live to this day, and would
have her remain to her Sex, an everlasting Example of a peaceable Magnanimity;
and of a Widowhood Courageous without Despair, and afflicted without Dejection.
The one Moity of her dyed with Mausolus, and she burned with him that part of
her Heart in which Joy resided: But she reserved the other in which was
Fortitude and Courage. And if since the fatal Moment which had thus divided
her, she was never seen to delight in any thing, yet no man ever observed the
the least weakness in her. Her modest and strict mourning, and her well
becoming and Majestical reservednesse suited with a perfect Widow: But her bold
and Courageous activity in War her dexterous and free Conduct in managing
affairs; and her constancy in rejecting all sorts of second affections, was
like a Woman, who acted still with the Heart and Spirit of her Husband, and who
had even espoused his shadow. But not being content to have preserved his
Courage in her action, and his image in her Memory, she must needs have also
his Ashes upon her Heart; And erected his Name and Tomb into a Miracle, by a
structure in which all the Arts wearied themselves, and Nature her self was
almost exhausted.

MORAL REFLECTION.
ARTEMISIA though a Heathen and a Barbarian is to young Widows a Governesse
full of Authority and of great Example. She teaches them that the most
invincible and strongest Widowhood is not that which sends forth the loudest
cries, and which seeks to express it self by Poisons and Precipices: That it is
Modesty and Fidelity which make chaste Matrons, and not Hairs pulld up by the
root, and torn Cheeks, That a sober and lasting Mourning is more decent and
exemplar, then an unequal affliction which tears it self to day and paints it
self to morrow, which is furious on the day of a Husbands Burial; and will
endure no Discourse but of Poison and Ropes, and two Days after will have
their Hair curled, their faces painted and spotted. And that a Heathen woman
having in one Monument placed all the wealth of a whole Kingdom, to raise unto
the Name of her Husband an imaginary and fantastical Eternity. It is a very
great shame that Christian women should not distribute even for the salvation
of their Husbands, and the Comfort of their own Souls the Remainder of what
they spend upon Play, Vanity, and Excess. And because this Truth is important
and of great use, I conceived, that it would be very beneficial to give it a
more solid foundation, and to make a Discourse of it apart, where it shall have
all the proofs and all the light whereof it is capable.

MORAL QUESTION.
In what manner a Gallant Woman should mourn, and what ought to be the duties
of her Widowhood.
THose Women are very ill instructed in the Morality of their Sex, who reduce
into Shagrin and sadness all the Duties and Virtues of a prudent Widow. A
serious and constant Love does not wholly pour it self forth into tears; And
all the decency of exemplar Fidelity consists not in a black cypress Veil or
Gown: It is not expressed by shadowed lights, and weeping Tapers; And it is not
discovered by studied looks, and by forty hours of artificial darkness.
Philosophy, I say even Christian philosophy, forbids not tears in like
occasions, It is impossible that blood should not flow from hearts which are
divided, and from souls which are severed by force. And since man, as the
Scripture tells us, is the head of the woman, the wonder would be no less, if
a Wise should lose her Husband without weeping, then if a body should not bleed
when the head is cut off: But she ought not also to persuade her self that her
wound must run everlastingly; And that it concerns her honor to have always
tears in her eyes, and complaints in her mouth. Sadness, Mourning, Solitude,
relate indeed to her duty, but make not the most important, and indispensable
part thereof: And yet by a public Error, which time and custom have
authorized, this less important part is superstitiously observed. Women are
not content with a regular and discreet sadness, they put on an extravagant and
fantastical kind of sorrow; And Opinion beginning where Nature ends, they sigh
for fashions sake, and weep artificially, after the true mourning has consumed
the real sighs, and when tears in good earnest are exhausted.

A Prudent and Courageous Widow will give no way to fancy, or opinion, and will
submit all that she can reasonably and with decency, to lawful Customs, and
to instructed and cultivated Nature. But having once satisfied these duties of
tenderness which proceed more from the superficies then the bottom of the
heart, she will reserve her self for more solid and serious duties of greater
force and use, wherein her affection and fidelity may act more profitably, and
be produced with more honor and reputation. The weak widows who raise up a
heavy and slothful sadness to a degree of Virtue; and the wilful who glory
in an incurable grief, will oppose to these duties the example of the widow
Palm, I mean of that Palm from which the Male is taken away: She is never
cured, as they say, of her dryness, which is her affliction; and what care
soever is taken to reestablish her, she dies at length languishing, and of I
know not what secret disease, which resembles our Melancholy.

However it fares with the widowhood of the Palm, which is but a Metaphorical
and figurative widowhood, as her love is but symbolicall and allegorical: If
it be lawful to make comparisons, and render figure for figure, I will say
that a prudent widow ought to leave unto weak souls examples of weakness, which
resides in the lowest story of souls; and to seek out in the Region of light
and pure spirits, patterns of a generous mourning, and of an active and well
governed affliction: She will perform during a widowhood of many years, what
the Moon does during a widowhood of few hours: An obscurity is seen upon the
face of the Eclipsed Moon; And this obscurity is, to speak properly, but the
sadness and mourning of her widowhood, occasioned by the interposition of the
Earth between her and the Sun. But this sadness which deprives her of color,
takes not away her force. It makes her not descend from her Elevation, nor
diverts her course: Though she appears black to us, yet she forbears not to
keep her Station, and to move regularly and in order: And her mourning does not
hinder her from following the conduct of her Intelligence. The affliction of
the sage Widow ought to be just and regular, like that of the Moon. Her
mourning ought not to deject her heart, nor discompose her carriage. It ought
not to obscure the light of her soul, nor retard the activity she owes either
her House, or the Republique, to which she is after the death of her Husband,
what the Moon is to the World in the absence of the Sun. Her affliction is
not exempted from these duties, and her Sex gives her no dispensation for them.
The Widow and afflicted Turtle does not abandon the care of her neast, and the
feeding of her little ones. And the Mother Eagle when the Male is taken from
her does not forbear to prey and make war upon Serpents. There are examples
enough of this Active and Courageous Widowhood, of this reasonable and well
ordered sorrow, of this discreet and magnanimous mourning. This which I am
going about to propose, is Illustrious and full of Reputation: and the sight of
it ought to be so much the more delightful, in respect a Copy of it is now
drawn, which posterity will esteem no less then its Original.

EXAMPLE.
Blanch of Castile, Queen Regent of France.
SPain boasts to have produced Artemisias as well as ancient Lidea; And she
boasts not of them without reason. The chiefest point is, that she has
produced them as Quarries of stone produce fair Statues. Their matter was
indeed of Spain, but the lineaments and beauty of their Figure they owe to
France. Blanch the Mother of St Lewis was one of these Artemisia's born in
Spain, and formed in France. Her Race was one of the most Illustrious and
Remarkable in that Country. The Mines of Gold, and the Veins which bear the
most Precious stones, were not so rich nor famous. And we may say that her
Heroic life, and great actions were to the greatness of her birth, what a rare
Figure is to rare Matter.

She was the most respected and renowned of four Crowned Widows, who in their
time were the honor of their Condition, Sex, and Age. The first was Margarite
of France, sister to Philip the August, who had the Courage to undertake a
War against Infidels, and to go seek out in the Holy Land, honorable and
renowned Dangers and Crowns, Blessed by God and Men. No less Courage was
requisite for Queen Blanch, to consent to the Expedition of her Son Lewis
against the Turk, and his enterprises beyond the Seas, then was necessary for
Margarite to begin a holy War, and to engage her self by an express Vow, in
dangers of the Sea and War. And whatsoever the most Malignant interpreters of
the best actions may say of it, who avouch in despite of History, that Blanch
persuaded St. Lewis to take a Journey into Syria, that she might Reign a
second time, by a second Regency. It is certain that this Crosiad, or holy
War, was the heaviest cross of her life, the punishment of her heart, and the
torment of her soul; the death of her pleasures and joys: And the Courageous
Queen since the very moment her Son left her, did nothing but suffer in mind,
and fight in imagination. Nothing but dangers, and objects of fear were
presented before her Eyes; And in the Lo^^er it self she was continually tossed
by Tempests, and thought her self in danger of suffering shipwreck with her
Son; every day she was a Prisoner, and sick with him, and every night she died
by the Hand of some Arsacide or Saraz^n whom her apprehensions and dreams
represented to her: The second illustrious Widow of her time, was Hed^^ga
Duchess of Silecia. The Church, to which appertains the Crowning of Virtues,
rendered Honor to her long and difficult Repose, to her painful and laborious
Solitude: And judged her worthy to be Canonized, after a Widowhood of thirty
years spent in a Monastery. The Virtue of Blanch had need of no less
Cons^ancie at Court. Her Widowhood was no less laborious, her Devotion no
less servent, nor less exercised or profitable in that place, and she required
no less Courage against the pleasures of the Palace and the Pride of
Authority, then was necessary for (...) amidst the Aus^ctities and Humiliations
of a Religious Life. Elizabeth of Hungary was the third Widow, who honored
this Age, so fruitful in Sovereign Examples, and Crowned Virtues. Her Charity
and Works of Mercy retain still a good odor in the Church, and edify the
faithful. It is reported that the Emperor Frederick the second, who was present
at the opening of her Tomb, made an offering to her of three Crowns of Gold:
And by this Ceremony crowned in one single Person, a holy Virgin, a holy Wife,
and a holy Widow. The Charity of Queen Blanch was practiced in a higher degree
then that of Elizabeth. Her works of Mercy were more universal, more
necessary, of greater use and better Example. The poor were not only
entertained and the sick comforted by her good deeds; but Nations were
conserved thereby, and Provinces settled in Peace, Wars extinguished, Troubles
pacified, good Laws established, public abuses reformed, Heresies either
humbled or abolished, and a whole kingdom preserved in peace, and quietly
governed, and with Justice. These Royal Charities and Mercies of State, are of
a quite other Rank then the particular ones which are practiced in Hospitals.
And the Crown of a Holy Queen which Blanch has merited thereby, may equal
those of a holy Wife, of a holy Widow, and of a holy Nun, which the purchased
by her other Virtues.

But I look upon her here as a Widow: and without doing injury to the memory of
three others, who were not set forth with so much advantage, and who left less
light behind them; We may well place her upon the Stage, and propose her for
the pattern of a modest and constant, active and victorious Widow. Her heart by
the Death of the King her Husband suffered all that a Heart violently t^rn from
another, and divided between Grief and Love, could endure. But Reason and Piety
prevailed over Grief and Love; and so well joined the pieces of this Heart,
that a scarre only remained without weakness or undercencie.

After this secret and domestic Combat sought against two predominant
passions, and authorized by Nature; she began by the Cares and Duties of a
Mother, which was to her more intimate, and of a longer standing then a Regent:
and applied her first thoughts to the education of her Son. Having a design to
make him a Holy, Wise, and Victorious King, she placed about him able Religious
men, and of good (...), who seasoned in him the first principles of Piety; Men
of business and experience who read him lessons of State Affairs, and taught
him Policy suitable to the time and practice; Captains and Knights of
Reputation, who instructed him in the Science of War, and rendered him one of
the most Gallant men at Arms in the whole Kingdom. Passing from thence to the
Functions of her Regencie, she began with settling Religion, which ought to be
the principle Pillar of a State. And because she was not ignorant that the
least Divisions in this Pillar might procure the general destruction of the
whole building; and that Conspiracies and Revolts are the ordinary Attendants
of Schisms and Heresies, she vigorously endeavored the reduction of the
Albigenses. Her pains therein found so happy success, as she dissipated the
Remnants of this unhappy Sect: And Raymond Earl of Toulouse forced by her Arms,
submitted to the Authority of the Church; expiated the Apostacy of his House,
and the Rebellion of his Progenitors, made public satisfaction, and in his
shirt, to that Religion which he had so often violated.

These happy successes of a most happy Regency did not hinder the Commotions of
some disgusted Princes from shaking the vessel, and indangering it in the midst
of a Calm. They did not hate the Princess who governed, she was too amiable,
and ruled with too much Prudence and Grace: But it vexed them to see the Stern
in her hands; and they were willing to take it from her, with a purpose to
break it, and to divide it amongst themselves. Noise and Tumult did not
astonish the Regent not put her in disorder: she dexterously managed the most
tractable, and brought them back by little and little to their duty, she showed
her Sword lifted up to the most perverse and untractable persons. And by her
Prudence, no less then by her Courage, their raised Troops, and plotted
Enterprises were reduced to Deputies, and a Conference. Force having proved so
unsuccessful to them, they resolved to practice Treason, and undertook to carry
away the King as he was going to the appointed Assembly at Vandome. But it is a
dangerous thing to undertake to steal away a young Eagle from under the Wings
of his Mother, and to carry away by force a young Whelp from a Lioness. Blanch
being advertised of their Conspiracy saved the King in the Castle of
Mount-le-Hery: and from thence brought him back to Paris with a strong Convoy,
and even the sight of the Conspirators, to whom there remained only shame and
despite, which are the first punishments of discovered Treasons.

After these appeased Troubles the Duke of Brittany on the one side, and the
Earl of Champain on the other, raised with new Charges a new party. Blanch went
out the first in the most rigid season of the Year. The heat of her Courage was
so great in this War, and her March so speedy and vigorous, that not being to
be stayed either by (...) which stopped the most rapid Rivers, nor by the
Heavens which poured down Snow, she returned in few Months victorious over
Winter, Nature, and Rebellion. The Earl of Champain was defeated with less
Noise, and with gentler Arms. The King being already set forth to chastise him,
the Regent got before him, and went to try whether persuasions might prevail
without Force. But he yielded neither to persuasions nor Force. They were the
Graces which vanquished him; The face of Blanch left nothing to be acted by
Reason or Arms, It gained the Victory without Combat; It concluded the Treaty
without contestation or Articles. And the Earl who was come forth a Rebel to
the Son, returned back a Slave to the Mother, and a sworn Servant to them both.

All the whole Regency of Blanch was thus powerful. And in the Field as well as
in the Closet, in Military no less then Civil Enterprises, she showed that her
Heart and Head were equally capable of the two parts of Regality: That her
Hands were as fit for the Scepter as for the Sword; and that she knew how to
govern as efficaciously, as handsomely to overcome. This so lively and
beneficial light did not escape the being assaulted with very soul slanders,
which fell upon that which ought to be most respected and inviolable in a
Woman. But the vapors which arise from the Earth do not darken the Sun, nor
hinder it from doing good to the World; and these Obloquies took not away one
single Ray from the Virtue of Blanch, nor hindered her from shining and
finishing her Course peaceably and with Honor. In fine, to equal also in
austerity and submission, such as she had excelled by action and in the
Government of affairs, she embraced like them the profession of a regular life.
Thereby the acquired out of the World the Regality of the poor and humble, the
Sovereignty of Spirit and interior Unction. She finished what was wanting to a
Queen by adding to that Dignity the Title of Religious. And the Veil which she
took was to her a second Crown, which gave a second Luster and set a new value
upon the first.

MONIME. Femme de Mithridate, se deliure de la tyranny de la Fortune* et (...)

Monima.
YOU have heard of the Rout of Mithridates, and of the last part his
treacherous Fortune played him. This extravagant, after many fantastical
prancks, and daily disorders at last entertained new Loves, leaving him, to
bequeath her self to the Romans. She carried away ather going off, all the
favors she had given him: she resumed all her Crowns and Scepters: And of so
many Marks of Love, of so many stately Pledges, and glorious Ensigns, she left
him only an impoisoned Ring, to the end his Despair might possess at least
something that was rich; and that a Diamond might procure him a more honorable
and glorious Death, then a halter could do.

This pernicious Example spread it self thorowout all Asia; and the Infidelity
of Fortune was followed with the Revolt of the People. But that which will move
Pity even in Treacherous Asia, and would do the like in Fortune if she had
any sensible part; that which will be lamented by deserting and Rebellious
People, is that Mithridates as jealous of his Wife, as despairing of his
Affairs, resolved to depart out of the World, to remain no longer in the power
of Fortune; and to take a Course that his Wife might first go out of it, not to
leave her behind in the Hands of his Enemies. This Barbarous Resolution
accompanied with a far more Barbarous Command happened to be brought to the
Queen, by an Eunuch of her Chamber. The Message was delivered solemly and with
Ceremony, with mournful looks, and a Pomp which resembled some great Funeral.
Monima on the contrary received it with her Festival Countenance, and a Face
full of Joy. She likewise adorned her self, and put on all her Jewels to
perform it with the greatest show and Luster. As if she had taken this Message
for a Defiance of Fortune and Mithridates, she resolved to brave them both, and
inform the World, that she had rather be with Death, then alive with Jealous
Mithridates, or deceitful Fortune.

Being informed that her Husband carried in an easy and woundlesse Death an
impoisoned Ring; she believed that her Diadem might well be as compassionate to
her, and render her the like office. And that after the having deprived her of
Liberty it might deprive her also of Life. But the Diadem as you see is broken
in her hands: You will peradventure believe that Majesty opposes it self
thereunto, and that it concerned his Honor not to suffer an Ensign of
Dignity, and a Sacred, and Regal Ornament to become an Instrument of Despair,
and a Fatal Core. You will perchance believe that the Graces are come to the
Aid of an Innocent and ill treated Grace* and have hindered the Pearls which are
particularly dedicated to them from being profaned by her Death, who is the
Glory of their Sex, and the Pearl of Asia. Others will believe, and
peradvanture with more probability, that the Diadem had much of the malice and
Spirit of Fortune which wrought it; And that it being made to deprive Monima of
Liberty, it ought rather to break then to bestow it on her. However it were,
the Wise and Courageous Queen looks upon the pieces of it with a Countenance
where there is less of Despair then Contempt, and more of a Philosopher then a
Woman. This haughty and becoming Action, mixed with fierceness and modesty,
has something I know not what which explains it self more efficaciously then
Clamours and Reproaches: And a furious Woman, who should exclaim with open
mouth against Fortune, could not do her more Despite, nor so highly reproach
her Impotencie.

Surely also the Woman that you see is not a painted Idol, a dainty and
voluptuous Barbarian, and Asian fit only for the Bed and Table. She is a
Courageous and knowing Beauty, a severe and Stoical Beauty; A Beauty which lead
Philosophy into a Seraglio; which reformed the Riot and Delights of a
debauched Court, which preserved amongst the Women and Eunuchs of Asia, the
Constancy and Austeritie of the Sages of Greece: Notwithstanding all this, she
is commanded to die: In vain do the Virtues and Graces intercede for her; In
vain do they appeal from her Husbands barbarous Will; They will not procure it
to be cancelled whatsoever they alledg to the contrary: And you see already the
poor Queen laid on her Bed, and ready to receive the stroke which was to
execute it.

But consider here on the one side the trouble of a brutish and discomposed
Soul: And on the other side the calm and serenity of a wise and well
instructed Spirit. The Eunuch is affrighted with the cruel Obedience which he
is going to render unto his Master. Of his two hands the guilty one which was
to give this unhappy Blow, proves weak and feeble, scarce able to bear up the
Sword. The other, more innocent is lifted up as if it stood upon its Guard
either against some Fantome which threatened it, or against the Lightning which
issues forth of Monima's Eyes, and which fills the Chamber with a sudden and
new Light. It would be hard to judge whether it be out of Fear or Respect, that
he turns away his Head; whether he be affrighted with the Jealousy of his
Master, or dazzled with the Majesty of his Mistress; whether he apprehends the
being unfaithful to the one, or impious and Sacrilegious to the other. Monima
nevertheless confirms him, and presents to him her naked Throat. To behold the
Serenitie of her Countenance, and the sweetness of her Eyes, you would take
her for a Captive, who flatters her Deliverer, and entreats him speedily to
break her Chains. Hence it appears who would be most terrified with the Prick
of a Thorn, and who would be less bold in gathering a Rose.

You are astonished to see so much resolution joined with so many Graces, and
so much Constancy in a Country of Riot, and in an Asian Court. Surely also
the Graces are seldom accompanied with Resolution. Constancy is not the
Companion of Riot: And the Virtue of Monima is not borne upon this Stately and
Sumptuous Bed where you behold her. The Jewels which load as much as they adorn
her, neither settled her Mind, nor fortified her Courage. Philosophy has
educated and trained her up with her own Hands; and good Books have formed her.
They have been her Instructors in her Fathers House: They are her Counselors
and Confidents at Court: She has given them all the Hours which others bestow
on their Looking Glasses and Flatterers: She has drawn from them that
Constancy and Vigor of Spirit, which you behold in her; And even at present
she caused them to assemble upon this Table, to be supported by them in this
Combat; and to overcome Fortune and Death by their Assistance and in their
Sight.

But what Disposition soever she had to die Courageously and like a
Conqueresse; her Despairing Women cry out against her Courage, and oppose her
Victory. The boldest amongst them put back the Eunuch with her Hand and Voice:
She gives him injurious Language, and yet tenders supplications to him. Anger
and Pity speak both at one by her Mouth; and you would say, that either
willingly or by force she will obtain from him the Death he prepares for her
Mistress. The rest melt into Tears, and tear their Hair; as if of their torn
Hair Ropes were to be made to tie the Hands of Death: And as if by their Tears
shed in streams they were able to Ransom their Mistress; They would likewise
Redeem her with their Blood, if Death would be paid with the Exchange: And if
they could either deceive or satisfy the Jealousy of Mithridates.

They alone were not afflicted at the deplorable end of their Fair and Wise
Mistress. The Virtues and Graces which always attended her, are yet more
afflicted at it then they. We might behold from hence these Fair afflicted
Women, and become Spectators of the Modesty of their Sadness, and the
Comeliness of their Tears, if our Eyes were purer, and more accustomed to
Spiritual Visions. Fortune her self, who has composed all this Tragic Scene,
cannot look upon her without some kind of Regret; and I do not doubt but she
would make another Catastrophe, and conclude it by a more happy issue, if she
could make a Reconciliation with Virtue, and be cured of the Jealousy which he
has of her.

SONNET.
MOnima here dies; her Jealous King requires
Her presence with him in Hels dark Retires:
Love tears his wings, enraged at that Decree,
And Nature curses such Barbaritie.
By her stand sighing the Dischevel'd Graces,
Affrightment pales her waiting Damsels Faces:
Fortune her own revolt can hardly brook,
She crosses and admires her with one look.
Behold the noble Pride that does possess
This Gallant Heart, a Conqueror no less
Of charming Objects, then of ills that have
The most of Terror, and does Fate out-brave.
The Diadem which Fortune had designed
Wherewith ^enslave this Heart, which naught can bind,
Is, by it, turnd' into a Cord, to free
It self from Fortunes loathed Captivity.
ELOGIE OF MONIMA.
MONIMA in a private condition was born a Princess; and before her bad Fortune
had placed a Diadem on her Head, she was crowned by Nature. The title and
power of her Regality were seated in her Mind, and on her Face. But it was a
Regality without fears and jealousies* A Regality free from conspiracies and
revolts. Though unarmed and tender by her Sex and Complexion; she was yet more
immovable then the walls of Mileta besieged by Mithridates, more Courageous
then his Troops which beleaguered it: and after the Fortune of her Country was
overcome, she vanquished the Victorious. Mileta was taken by force; Monima
could not be so, either by force or composition; And amidst the ruins of a
pillaged City, she remained alone ungarded, and yet impregnable. Mithrid^tes,
who could not think himself Victorious, if he did not possess her, caused her
to be assaulted by fifteen thousand Crowns: The like Battery would have
defeated four Legions, and made a breach into three of the strongest Cittadels
in Asia: Monima was not so much as shaken by them; This generous obstinacy
completed the conquest over the Assaulter, and persuaded him, that his Crown
was not too large for so great a heart, nor too resplendant for so beautiful a
Head. He gives over unlawful pursuits, and sought Monima in the way of
Marriage, she consented thereunto through the ambition of her Kindred; And
rather to repair the ruins of her Country, then to ascend to his Throne. She
likewise found there nothing but gilded Nails, and persumed chains, which
proved to her a glorious punishment, and a magnificent Bondage.

Some time after, Mithridates overcome by the Romans, and resolved for death,
caused his last will to be carried to her, by which he ordained her to go and
wait for him in the other World, with assurance that he would presently follow
her. This generous Woman accepted this barbarous Testament, with less Emotion
then she had consented to the contract of her Marriage. And without going
farther to seek means to execute it, that she might brave Fortune, who had
changed her Palace into a Prison, and her Throne into a Wheel, she resolved to
make a cord for her self of her own Diadem. That Regal Ornament which was made
to torment the mind, and not to kill the body, being broken between her hands,
she tendered her throat to the Eunuchs sword who brought her this news: And her
soul went forth Victorious over Fortune, Death, and Mithridates himself, who
had done her more mischief then either Death, or Fortune.

MORAL REFLECTION.
LEarn of this Woman to discern evils under the painting, and through the masks
wherewith they are disguised. Take heed of wishing to your self high and
splendid Miseries: Beware of running after celebrious and remarkable
punishments. We are not scorched but by that which glisters: We fall only from
high places: And Fortune raises only those upon the Stage whom she has a
mind to torment: You esteem any life wearisome in a private condition, and all
days seem rainy to you, and all hours clowdy in an obscure and ignoble Family.
Monima would have rather desired to wax old amongst the Lilies and Roses in her
Fathers little Garden, then to expose her self to a thousand thorns, and
perchance to as many blemishes in the Palace of Mithridates. This Palace was to
her a gallant Prison, and her Sovereignty a specious Yoke. She was inchain'd
with her own Diadem, and tormented upon her Throne: And the matter of her glory
was the matter of her servitude, and the instrument of her punishment Her blood
retains still a voice and spirit in this Picture; And if you hearken to her
Ghost, it will tell you, that your Liberty though obscure and incommodious, is
of more value then the luster and riches of her Chain; that it would be better
for you to be your own Mistress in a Cottage, then to be a slave under a Cloth
of State: And that a Turtle is more happy in the Desert, then an Eagle in a
gilded Cage.

Learn then from the unfortunate Dignity of Monima, that the happiness of Women
consists not in those remarkable Pieces, and specious Colors, whereof Fortune
composeth great Ladies. It is made up of the tranquillity of the Mind; Of the
satisfaction of the Heart, and the repose of Conscience: And the privilege of
sitting in presence of a Queen, contributes nothing to the tranquillity of the
Mind, Nor places the soul in a better seat. Crowned Coats of Arms, and the
Title of a Palace written in golden Letters upon the gate of a House, are not
Defenses against Adversity, Discords, and the exterminating Angels Canopies of
State, and Balisters are not respected by spite and jealousy, nor by unquiet
Nights, and perplexing Dreams. There is nothing that prohibits evil passions,
and detractions, to follow Coaches which have right to enter the Louvre: And
commonly the thorns of the Heart spring from the Jewels on the Head; The
wounds and ulcers of the Conscience proceed from the trickings and ornaments of
the face. In fine, if the Virtues and Graces be for you, do not envy others
their good Fortune: And remember, that flowers are more fair and continue
longer fresh in Valleys then on Mountains. There is another Consideration to be
had upon this History, and because it is curious and practical* The ensuing
Question will teach us the speculation and use thereof.

MORAL QUESTION.
Whether it appertains to the duty of a gallant Woman to expose her Life to
satisfy the mind of a Jealous Husband.
IT would be very Inhumane to go about to lay more weight upon the yoke of
married Women. It lies heavy enough already upon their necks and hearts: And
if the most Courageous amongst them had not their comforts, they would scarce
be able to bear it one hour. It is enough that they have been condemned to
obedience and subjection, without being still subject to Jealousy: And that an
imaginary and barbarous duty, which nature avows not, and which is neither
according to the universal, nor written Law, should oblige them to sacrifice
themselves, as often as it shall please this fantastical fury. Truly not to
speak of other burdens; The condition of Mothers would be harder and more
deplorable then was heretofore the condition of Children, who were immolated to
fiery and sanguinary Idols. And if they owe their blood and life to the cure of
their jealous Husbands, there is scarce any so happily married, or so discreet,
that three or four times a week, ought not to prepare her self, either for a
knife, rope, poison, or precipice.

Extreme and expensive Remedies are not for daily Maladies; and there is no
Malady so popular and common to weak Spirits as Jealousy: nor is there any
infirmity which does so easily, and at random seiz upon unsettled brains. There
needs but a piece of Ribbon, or a Nosegay, but a word, which signifies
Nothing, but a sigh vented by chance to make a man jealous: And being once so
made, he has visions and raving sits, which exceed the whimsies of frantic
people. His mind and thoughts will quarrel with all the Figures in a piece of
Tapistry, and will take them for Rivals, that debauch the eyes of his Wife, and
court her in silence. If she presents her self before her looking-glass, he
will accuse her very Image of bringing her some message of assignation: And in
case she commend but an ancient marble Statue, or look but fixedly on a
Picture, it will hinder his sleep. He will even mistrust the prayer Books he
shall see in her hands; And when she shall say her Hours, he will believe that
she reads Love Letters: There will be no Domestique upon whom he will not
ground some suspicion: And the most faithful, will in his conceit, be taken
either for disguised Gallants, or confidents maintained at his expense.

Would it be just to oblige Women to the Warranty of all these extravagancies?
And would it not be extremely cruel, to demand their blood, to make a Remedy
for so fantastical a Disease? There is then no written Law, nor any Tradition
which ordains them to die for their jealous Husbands: But excepting life and
conscience, they can have nothing so intimate to their Souls, nothing so fixed
to their Hearts, which they ought not to tear from both; be it to prevent
Jealousy which might grow, or to cure that which may be already grown.

This they owe first to their Conscience; and to the Evangelical Precept, which
ordains them to cut off their Hands and Feet, if they be feet of Offense, and
hands of Scandal. I say not that they should cut them off with Saw or Rasor:
but by an unbloody and moral incision, whereby, without tearing one single
Nail, without taking from them one Hair, they deprive them of all the
functions, which may occasion a fall. It imports not that these functions be
innocent of their own Nature; and that besides there be no evil intervening
intention to spoil them. Persumes are excellent things; yet Women to whom
Persumes are offensive, would not excuse their Husbands indiscretion, should
they take pleasure to torment them with Essences and Spanish Gloves. Let them
use as much Justice in the Subject now in question, and let them not conceive
themselves innocent before God, when they obstinately persist in torturing
their Husbands with Conversations and Customs, which though indifferent and
without bad design, cease not to beget strange convulsions of Mind; and to
cause sometimes their Brains even to turn in their Heads.

Secondly it concerns the purity of their Reputation, that they generously rid
themselves of all the habits, which make way for suspicions, and may leave any
shadow of Jealousy. It is a strange Domestic; It is impossible that it should
remain long in a House without causing a great noise and fume. Now this noise
bears a part in all Tatlings and detractions: And the same fume which makes the
Husbands Head turn round, and fills his mouth with bitterness, slains also the
reputation of the Wife. If she be not esteemed unfaithful, she will at least be
accounted disobedient: And though of these two blemishes the second be less
sordid, and savoureth not so ill as the first; yet it is still a blemish which
sullies; and when Reputation comes to be once sullied on the one side, no great
scruple is made to stain it on the other.

But though Women had no Conscience nor Reputation to preserve; yet the very
interest of their quiet should be alone prevalent enough to withdraw them from
Gossipping. Certainly those small delights wherewith they amuse themselves,
cost them strange anguishes of Mind; and are followed with very tart
reproaches. They bring not a Flower from any suspected Walking-place which
becomes not at home a Thorn in their Heart and Head, and very often tormenting
Devils approach them in Angelical shapes; They find a Domestic Hell under an
imbroidered Heaven. This implies not that Jealousy does every where perpetrate
murders, and that it always imployes poison, Sword, and halter, yet is there
no place where it does not bite and scratch. It is never without Teeth and
Nails; and its Teeth, which cause nothing but pain, are more to be scared then
Ropes and Swords, which might give Repose in taking away Life.

A Gallant Woman will not insist upon these three Reasons where Interest is
more prevalent then Honor: She will pass to the fourth, where Glory is most
pure and Virtue is disinterested. What others will do through terror of
Conscience, or to preserve their quiet and good repute: she will do the same
upon the sole account of her Husbands affection, and out of a Complacencie
purely conjugal. There is yet more; and this is the last degree, to which
without doubt Women will never ascend in Troops. Her Love being Heroic, and
her Complacencie vigorous and Courageous: not only to cure her apprehensive
Husband, and to remove all the Thorns from his Heart, and all cares out of his
Head; She will rid her self of objects, even of the shadow of objects which
might nourish these Cares and Thorns. She will even destroy her own Beauty, if
he do but suspect it: she will extinguish her Graces, if he mistrust them of
holding any intelligence with a Foreign Love: she will dye courageously,
provided she may die innocent, and without staining his hands with her Blood.

Although I have said that Women will not ascend in Troops to this high degree:
yet some there are, who have arrived to this Pitch, and gone thither more
innocently and courageously, then Monima, she whom I shall immediately produce
will find few equals. She cannot be placed in too great a light, nor upon too
fair a Stage. She cannot have too noble Spectators: and History will never give
her so many applauses and Crowns as she deserves.

EXAMPLE.
The Brave Hungarian.
THe Wound which Hungary received at the taking of Seget was great and
dangerous: And if God had not reached out his hand, and upheld that Kingdom; it
was ready to perish by this wound. The siege was famous by the presence of
Solymon the second, who began this last Expedition with five hundred thousand
men, and left the finishing of it to his Reputation and Fortune, dying a few
days before the taking of the place, and almost in the sight of Victory. It
was not the Earl of Serins fault, who defended the Town, that Solymons Fortune
and Reputation died not there with his Person; and that Victory did not abandon
him in this Action, and remain to the Christians* The Ladies of Seget did what
service they could with their Jewels and Pearls which were converted into Money
for the pay of the Garrison: they served also there with their persons. And by
a Zeal much bolder then that of the Carthaginians, who gave their hair to make
Ropes for Engines of War, they employed their Arms to the repairing of the
Walls, and exposed their Heads to the defense of the breaches and Gates.

At the last assault given by the Turks, the Earl of Serin perceiving that the
hour of perishing was at hand, resolved to dye most magnificently and in Pomp;
and to give Luster and Reputation to his Death. He ^ought in an Imbroidered
Suit, and with a string of Diamonds tied about his Hat, having the keys of the
Town fastened to his Scarce, and a hundred Crowns in his Pocket for that
Soldier, who should send him to Triumph in Heaven. The History renders this
testimony of his Death; that it was a Triumphant and Victorious Death. But
though it was victorious; yet it did not equal the Death of a Lady of Siget,
who surpasses all that is left us of the Memory of Heroic time.

She was a Woman of quality, and one of the fairest: but she was none of those
languishing Beauties and without Vigor; of those Beauties which resemble the
stars of the North, which have no activity, and shine faintly, and without
heat. She was vigorous and bold, yet vigorous with sweetness, and bold with a
good Grace and Comeliness. Her Husband who loved her passionately, and even to
the degree of Jealousy, scared nothing but her taking in the taking of Siget.
The Image of captivated and inchained Hungary, nay of flaming and bloody
Hungary was to his apprehension a less dreadful apparition, then the Image of
his Captive Wife. To rid himself of this Fantome, which followed him every
where, and to secure the Honor and Freedom of his Wife, of whom he was more
Jealous, then of the Honor of Christianity, and the Liberty of Europe; He
resolved to take her out of the World, before the Victorious Turk should enter
the City; which was no longer able to resist, and had too good hearts left to
yield themselves.

This so Tragic and soul a resolution was no sooner fixed in his Mind, but
the slains thereof appeared even in his Eyes and upon his Face: His Wife who
was discreet and quick-sighted observed them, and was touched therewith, she
pardoned his Jealousy in consideration of his Love: And though she was fully
prepared for death, yet she did not desire a death which might make him a
Criminal, whom she loved more then her own life. She took him aside and made
him understand, that his bad intention could not be hidden from her: She was so
dexterous as to draw the confession of it from his own mouth, and upon his
Confession she strongly and efficatiously represented to him the infamy which
would remain to him from so Barbarous an Act, and the Scandal which he would
give to his Age, and leave unto posterity. I confess said she, that I owe you
all my blood; And behold me ready to give it without reserving one drop* But
have patience till some other come to shed it: Do not fully your hands with
it; stain neither your memory nor your soul therewith: Do not inkindle an
eternal fire by it. For my part, I apprehend far more Life then Death: and all
the Scimiters of the Turks cause in me far less fear, then their most gentle
and precious Chain, were it more sweet and precious then the Diadem of the
Sultanesse. But permit me to die gloriously and with Reputation: Do not
dishonor the Repose which you seek, Disparage not your good affection: My
Honor is not so desperate, that it cannot be preserved but by a Crime. You
think to justify your self by laying the blame upon Love: You are much
mistaken, if you take it for a murderer: Do not put the Dagger into its hands:
Do not solicit it to commit a murder; and if you cannot restore it the goods
you have received from it, leave it at least its Reputation, and do not envy
its Innocence. An honorable Death is not so hard a thing to find in a Town
taken by force: There enter enough of them by Gates and Breaches. Let us fallie
forth together with Swords in our hands to choose an illustrious and renowned
end. Let it be by fire or sword; let it be short or lasting it imports not; It
will be sweet to me, provided I dye a rival to your Valor, and not a Victime
to your Jealousy.

Having said this, she caused her self to be completely armed, and went out
with a Sword in her hand, and a Buckler upon her arm; her Husband followed her,
armed with the like weapons, and encouraged by her words and Example, which
gave him a second Heart, and a new Spirit. They went on boldly where fire,
noise, and danger were greatest. And as soon as they came to the place, where
they were to fight between the flaming Fire, and the victorious Army, They
showed by the wonders which they did, that there is no valor like the valor
of despairing Love, and of Graces armed in defense of their Honor. After a
long and rude fight, they were at last rather overpressed then overcome by a
barbarous multitude, irritated by their own losses, and their resistance: And
feeling their strength stealing away with their Blood, they gave each other
their last embraces, and fell upon a heap of dead bodies, which had been slain
by their Hands. They could not die more sweetly then in the fruition of their
mutual Fidelity: They could not have a more magnificent Tomb, then their Arms
and Victories. Their souls which embraced each other as well as their Bodies,
could not be severed by Death. And it was believed that God, who is the Author
of chaste Unions, received them into Heaven in this condition, and crowned them
with the same Glory.

ZENOBIE. Reyne des Palmyreniens, victorieuse des Reys et des Lions, (...) la
chasse et les dress par sen exemple a la vaillance et a la victory. (...)

Zenobia.
CONFESS that this new Spectacle has surprised you; And that you could not
have believed the Graces so Courageous, nor Lovers so Adventurous, as to go in
chase of Tigers and Lions. Besides, if it were to the chase of Swans, which are
harmonious and amiable, and armed only with feathers: If it were to the chase
of Bees, which have nothing but honey in their bodies, and respect Innocents
and Virgins: the party would be less unequal, and the divertisment less
hazardous and rash. Beauty which is the Mother of the Graces, and Loves goes
also sometimes a hunting; But it is only to the chase of Eyes and Hearts,
which have neither teeth nor nails, and can neither bite nor scratch: And now
adays the children of this Mother have the boldness to hunt Tigers and Lions.

But show no fear for them; they are accompanied by Zenobia, who yesterday gave
chase to the Roman Eagles, which are more dreadful and furious Beasts, then
Lions and Tigers. Yes, she whom you see hunting there so gallantly, and with so
graceful a boldness, is the famous Zenobia Queen of the Palmyrenians, who
lately gave Chase to the Roman Eagles: And by the defeat of the Imperial Army,
secured to her self the Conquest of Egypt. So glorious and painful a Chase
well deserved that peace and divertisments should succeed. But this generous
Woman has not learned to refresh her self like others in her Closet and under
a Canopy of State. Her very repose is Active and Heroic: and her divertisments
ars dangerous Combats, and essays of Victories.

You may approach without danger, and contribute at least with your eyes to the
noblest Chase which was ever given. It is not like those which are practiced in
the Amphiaters of Rome, where captive Beasts are chased by captive Men* There
is nothing here which is not Glorious and Noble; They are Sovereigns that
chase, and are chased: And that which is yet more wonderful, Lovers are here
bold, and the Graces adventerous and dreadful. Beauty indeed was heretofore
seen armed; but it was rather for show then a Combat: And her weapons were as
little dangerous, as the prickets which Roses bear. Zenobia was not content
with furnishing her with Arms; she made her warlike, and taught her all serious
and practick Combats.

Consider with what boldness she attaqu's this Lion. It appears by her
countenance that she takes this danger for a pastime of her Courage. The
fierceness you see in her is not a fierceness of any trouble or emotion: It
is a demonstration of courage, and a tincture of boldness spread upon her
face: It is a valor of countenance, and a Meene of Combat: It is a manly and
military Grace: It is a tart sweetness, which pleasingly affrights which
begets at once both fear and love. But Zenobia imployes not here any thing of
this tartness; she reserves it for other occasions, when she is to grapple with
Consuls and Kings. This Chase is to her but a mere divertisment: And her heart
could not be more calm* nor her face more serene, had she been to deal only
with Beasts in a painted Cloth.

Her Horse courageous by Nature, and proud of the fair burden he bears, casts
forth his feet as if he meant to give the first stroke, and anticipate the
Javelin which is ready to part from the Princesses hand. The chased Lion
prepares to receive them both: And he was even ready to have cast himself upon
Zenobia; but the lightnings which her heart and spirit dart into his eyes, the
flaming of those feathers which dance about her head, and the jewels wherewith
she is adorned making her appear like a flaming fire, he looks upon her with an
irresolute Anger mixed with Fear: And you would say beholding his posture, that
he deliberates between the dazzling brightness, and the threatening Javelin.

Disquiet not your self, and abandon the fear you express to have of Zenobia;
she is accustomed to overcome all sorts of Enemies; and if she should fail of
her stroke, Araspes who is present with a sword in his Hand to second her,
would have Courage enough to draw upon himself the danger and Fury of the
Beast. He could not be worse treated by him, then he is by his own Love, which
exposes him to a thousand cares and vexations, tearing him in pieces without
teeth or nails. Likewise the most frightful instruments, and the greatest
wounds do not always cause the greatest Torments. Such as delivered up their
Slaves to Lions, were less cruel then he that commanded his own to be cast
amongst Lampryes; and it were better to be crushed in pieces by an Elephant,
then to be gnawn by Rats, or eaten up by Flies.

This poor Prince Zenobia's Prisoner, even a Prisoner without Chains and
Manacles, is come from a remote Country to offer her his Person with his
Kingdom. But he assaults a place too well provided: and though a Scepter and a
Throne be powerful Engines; yet in vain will he bend the forces of his Throne
and Scepter against her. The Heart of Zenobia is too well fortified against all
sorts of second affections: The Name and Image of Odenatus leaves no place
empty there: And surely she will not violate the Vow of VVidowhood which she
made to his Ghost and Memory. Eraspes is in Despair of her, as you see; yet his
Despair is respectful, and accompanied with esteem: And he loves better Zenobia
generous and inflexible, then he would do Zenobia base and yielding. Observe
his Respect in his very looks, his Despair by his Palenesse, and the fire of
his Heart under the Ashes of his Face. See how he suspends his Address and
Courage before his Conqueresse: He will leave her all the Glory of the Chase:
And looking on her with imploring eyes, he demands of her for himself, the same
fair Death she prepares for the Lion: and entreats her to do that favor at one
stroke to them both. But she was satisfied in having wounded him with her eyes,
without undertaking to wound him by her hand. And so far was she from taking
away his life, that she was ready to have given him his Liberty, and reduced
him to himself, if he would have embraced it.

As for this stately Beast, he will carry no further either his Liberty or
Life: And in recompense of them both he will have the Glory to be overcome by
the same Arm, which Yesterday vanquished the Roman Eagles. Her two sons who
stand by her, intend to share in her Victory, and finish with their Bows what
she is going to begin with her Javelin, It is not requisite that I show them to
you to make them known. Their Beautiful and Courageous Mother is so to the Life
upon their Faces and in their Actions, as there are no Eyes so bad which do not
suddenly discern, that these two lovely Coppies come from this fair Original.
You will remain astonished to behold in them so great Courage in so tender an
Age; if you consider that they are born of an Heroess, who possesses all the
Graces of her Sex, and all the Virtues of ours. Her active and contagious
Courage is not only communicated to her children, who grow warlike by hunting,
and learn by practicing on Lions to vanquish Kings: But it animates her whole
Family, and inspires all her domestics: And her House represents no less the
Court of a Queen, then the Camp of a Conqueresse. The most usual and chief
employment of her Domestics is to fight and overcome. Her very Daughters
become valiant by her Example, and have the Generosity of Amazons, wearing
their habits, and executing their Functions.

They stay to hunt in the neighboring Wood: And from hence you might have the
pleasure of their Chase; you might be Spectators of their Boldness and
Activity, if the Trees did not hinder your sight. Behold three of the boldest
and most diligent about the Queen, who undertake to set upon a Tiger, which she
had wounded in passing by. But he is no longer in a condition either of saving
or defending himself. The Arrow has pierced his shoulder, and whether he
received with it some Charms from the hand that sent it, or whether these
Cupids which bind him with strings of Myrrh, have deprived him of his Natural
fierceness; It seems that his Wound affords him more Glory then it gives him
pain. You would say that one single stroke does not suffice him: and that he
expects to dye from more then one hand; and to do Honor by his Death unto more
then one Grace. And had there been some secret attractive in these shafts, had
the Cupids that bind him drawn them out of their Quivers, and lent them to
these Huntresses he could not expose himself to their strokes with more
Cheerfulness and Delight.

SONNET.
WIth armed hand, with brow where lightning springs,
After defeats of Consuls and of Kings;
Zenobia, in this Wood, her self will grace
With the wild Triumph of a dangerous Chase.
The Flames of Courage which her Eyes do shoot,
By Charm, or ^^we, render the Lion mute;
Who vanquished without fight, doubts which to try,
A noble Death, or noble Slavery.
Careless Spectators, from the like surprise
Defend your selves, since from these conquering Eyes
Are sent such fires and shafts as though no sound
Is by them made, do make a mortal Wound.
They have been practiced in the chase of hearts:
And if yours be not winged, to fly their Darts,
They easily may in this stout Lions steed
Be either taken or be made to bleed.
ELOGIE OF ZENOBIA.
ZENOBIA, who hunts Lions and Tigers in this (...) makes war also at present
against all Asia in this History: And in all places where her memory is
mentioned, we see Towns taken either by force, Armies defeated, of Crowns
acquired. She was of the Race of the Ptolo^^^^, and descended from Cleopatra,
whose Beauty, Spirit, and Magnificence she inherited. Besides these qualities
of succession and hereditary Graces, she had acquired Virtues; and she was of
her self Modest, Courageous, Eloquent, and Warlike. Her Beauty, to behold it in
the Pictures which Historians have left thereof, was a (...) and Military, an
Active and Commanding Beauty: And her Heroic Statute, her confident Meene, her
stately and bold Grace, her sparkling and flaming Eyes, and all her Exterior,
like that which Pain^^^ ascribe to Virtue and Victory, was to her as a specious
Dignity, and a certain pleasing and becoming Authority, which persuaded
without speaking, and subjected souls by the sight.

So perfect a Body was inhabited by a more perfect Soul, which ^^sembled a fair
Intelligence in a beautiful Planet. She was very expert in the knowledge of
Princes, and private Men, in Policy, and is the Military Art: She possessed
both pleasing and profitable (...) She was so well read in the History of the
East, as she her self composed brief Annals of it: And thereby also she
equalled the glory of these Conquerours who were no less renowned by the Pen
then the Sword, and who at night wrote down in their Tents, what they had (...)
day in the Field. The Cabinets of Cleopatra, in which there were Jewels enough
for four Crowns, could not have enough to honor (...) History. She deserved
respect from the most injurious time. And if there be, as they say, a Genius
Guardian of Books, and a (...) of Learning, Let us avow that he has very ill
discharged his (...), in having saved either the true or forged Epistles of the
Tyrant (...), in having conserved the impure Visions of (...) and the (...)
Dreams of Apulci^s, and done nothing to preserve this glorious Monument of the
Wit and Eloquence of Zenobia.

In all times malicious and jealous persons have given out, that there was no
good correspondence between the Graces and Virtues; And that very rarely, the
Fair and Learned were Chaste and Modest: Zenobia has given the lie to these
spiteful and distrustful people: And the Roman Historians, who for reason of
State, have more sullied the reputation of Cleopatra, then the Sun of Egypt
had blacked her face, did never entrench upon the honor of her Progeny. She
was a chaster Wi^e then the most part of their Vestals were chaste Virgins. As
soon as she suspected her self to be with Child, she declared her self a Widow
until she was delivered: And though in this manner she every year took upon her
a Widowhood of nine months during her Husbands Life; yet after his death she
could never persuade her self that she was a Widow. (...) lived still in her
thoughts; and his Body having been ravished from her by the Crime of one of
her kindred, she remained (...) married to his Name and Memory.

(...) also and pleasure, which are the Incendiaries of dishonest Love, were
not of her Court, nor had any access about her. War and hunting took up her
whole time, and were all her divertisments. And when there were to Kings to
overcome, nor Towns to besiege, she went unto the Woods to fight with wild
Beasts, and to enter by force into their (...) and Caves. During the Life of
(...), she waged War against the Persians for the Romans: and after his Death
she made War of her self against the Egyptians and the Romans themselves. She
marched in the Head of her Troops, always the first in fight, and the last in
the (...). Her eyes were the Common fire of her Camp: the most effe^^^^e there
warmed themselves, and drew vigor and Courage from (...). And when she made
any speech in the day of Battle, she left nothing to be effected by Clarions
and Trumpets.

Her designs were no less vast, nor less elevated then those of her
Grandmother Cleopatra, who prepared a Yoke and Chains for the Gods of the
Capitol; and had the Ambition to have Consuls for her (...), and to be attended
by Captive Dictators. She thought like Cleopatra to make her self the
Commandresse of all the Grandees of the (...): and undoubtedly she would have
carried her Arms even to (...) self, and shared the Empire with Victoria, who
was another (...) Princess of the West; if Fortune, jealous of her Honor, had
not with (...) and all the Forces of the Empire come against her. (...), she
could not be but half defeated, and by Composition: And (...) rather triumphed
over by her a Treaty, then by a just Victory. (...) Triumph was also followed
by the Triumph of his Captive, who (...) in her turn. He had but half overcome,
and with much (...), the Valor of the Mother: the Beauty of the Daughter
vanquished him totally and without Trouble; and having at length (...), as some
Authors affirm, (...) had the satisfaction to see her (...) upon the Throne of
Caesar's, and her Image adored at Rome.

MORAL REFLECTION.
IT is great Pity that so eminent a Generosity, so Heroic a Constancy, so
invincible a Chastity, so modest Graces, so many Virtues of Peace and War
should be damned: And that Zenobia the Courageous, the Temperate and Chaste,
should find as bad an Eternity as Messaline the dissolute and incontinent. But
how should we help it? Heathen Virtues, what Beauty soever they have, how well
adorned soever they be, are in fine but foolish Virgins. The Heavenly
Bridegroom knows them not: and what supplications soever they present at the
gate of his Palace, it will never be opened to them. If Chastity, Temperance,
Modesty, and Fidelity, which shall not come to him with full and lighted Lamps,
and shall not be presented to him by Faith and Charity, will not be admitted to
these Nuptials. If there be no place there for temperate, and modest Heathen
Women, who had no warning to prepare their Lamps, and to follow these lovely
Guides to the Bridegroom; what will become of the licentious and debauched
Christian Women, who have broken their Lamps, contemned, and rejected their
Guides? Certainly if it be written that penitent Nineve shall condemn
incorrigible Jerusalem; it is much to be feared that the gallant Zenobia, and
other Virtuous Heathens shall rise up in the day of Judgment to give Testimony
against our Ladies, who refute their belief by their course of life: who
condemn by their Wantonness and excess, the force of Christianity, and the
Austerity of the Gospel; who had rather lose eternal Crowns, then part with
little flowers half perished, serving only to infect them with their ill odor,
and to prick them with their thorns.

MORAL QUESTION.
Whether Women be capable of Military Virtues?
I Dispute not here against the general practice; nor pretend by private
authority to discard an Immemorial Discipline, and a policy as ancient as
Nature. Less also is it my design to publish an edict by which all Women
should be summoned to War. They ought to keep themselves to the distribution
which Nature and the Laws have made, and Custom received; and to content
themselves with that part which has been assigned them in oeconomie and
household affairs. I say only, that this common Right which deprived them of
Arms, has not robbed them of Courage, nor cut off their Hands; that military
Virtues are neither too unwieldy nor too harsh for them: And if it were the
good pleasure of Custom, valiant and victorious Women would not be ranked
amongst the prodigies of their Sex. The Number of them would be as great, and
the Examples as common as of Wi^e and Chaste Women.

First, the Heart is the essential part of Gallant and Valiant Men: It is the
Heart which begins all assaults and Combats; which gives the first Charge, and
comes off the last: and it cannot be denied that a Woman's Heart is as vigorous,
and of as good a temper as that of a Man; if we consider that it was made by
the same Hand, and formed of the same matter. And there is some ground to
believe, that it may be more vigorous and of a better Temper: if we remember
that the first Woman was made of a matter already solid, and which had need of
softning. Moreover as Steel what hardness soever it received from Nature,
cannot be formed into the iron of a Lance nor into a Sword unless it be
softened: so Courage is gross and material, immovable and unactive, before it
be sharpened: And Choler according to the saying of the Philosopher, must be
whetted that it may become Valor and serviceable for War. Now it is certain
and experience shows it, that this Choler which excites Courage, and gives it
the title of Valor, is more quick and sudden in Women then Men: And
consequently if Custom has deprived them of acquired and habitual Valor, it
has not taken from them Natural Valor, and that Spirit of Choler which is a
combating Spirit, and the last tincture of that Humor which produces Gallant
Men.

Some will oppose to me here the delicacie of their complexion, and the
tenderness of their Temper. It will be demanded of me what reckoning will be
made of such a Hand as may be hurt by an ill sown Glove, or an ill polished
Ring? Of such a Head as sweats under silk, and bows under a soft Pillow? Of
such a Body as may be pierced through by a Beam of the Sun, and be beaten down
by a single Hailstone: To this one may answer; first, that this Weakness
proceeds from the ill Education of Women and not from their temper: And Plato
observes very judiciously to this purpose, that if the excess of Humidity,
which allayes their Vigor, and renders them more tender then Men, were dried
up by moderate exercise; their Complexion being reduced thereby to a more just
and exact quality then ours; their Bodies would become by that means stronger
and more active, and have a more free and lasting motion. Whereupon, that I may
not seem to vent a Proposition at random and without proof, he makes us
observe, that among all the Species of Animals of prey, the Females have the
swiftest pace and the strongest flight, and sight more courageously, and with
more vigor then the Males.

In the second place we must answer, that valor does not require Arms of
Steel, nor Hands of Iron: That the ancient Hero's were not brazen Statues: that
they were not all of the Complexion of that famous Grecian, who wrastsed
against the greatest Chains: And that even in these days men dried up by the
Sun, and hardened by Frost, are not the Persons who gain victories. Let us add
for a third answer, that tenderness is not so timorous as they make it, nor so
incompatible with Valor. Roses which are so Beautiful grow completely armed,
and though tender forbear not to prick. Bees which live within the Honey Comb,
and are sed by the Spirit of Flowers, have stings and wage war. The Holy
Scripture makes mention of a Dove which was no less formidable then Eagles:
And not to go so far, the Heart it self, which is the scat of Valor, is the
most tender part of the Body: It is composed of flesh without Nerves, and
Bones; has neither Teeth nor Nails to fortify it. There may well then be
generous Spirits and vigorous Souls in tender Bodies, as there are good swords
in Velvet Scabbards, as victorious Hands are seen in persumed Gloves; as
Conquerors are lodged in painted and gilded Tents.

That if it be necessary to support reason by experience, and to make History
speak for Philosophy; it will produce from all Ages whole Armies of courageous
and warlike Women; Women Conqueresses and victorious over men; even the most
gallant and valiant amongst men. That famous Cyrus, who deserved the Name of
great by the greatness of his exploits, was defeated by Thamaris Queen of
Scythia: And the Scythiaus themselves who were all born Soldiers, and had no
other Country nor Houses then a Camp and Tents, were overcome by the Amazons.
That famous Semiramis to whom a Prophet gave the Name of Dove, was indeed a
Dove in her Closet, even a voluptuous and perfumed Dove, but a victorious Eagle
in the Field: And in her time Asia had no King out of whose hands she wrested
not the Scepter, and from whose head she snatched not the Crown. Bund^va was
another Eagle, to useful the same Phrase, but a Northern Eagle, who in several
Battles vanquished the Roman Eagles; and intended to chase them out of England*
Zenobia, whose Picture I have newly given you, did not treat them more gently
in Egypt and Persia: and the Commanders of Natitions and the Conquerors of the
World were necessitated to come to composition in point of Victory with a Woman.

France has had Amazons as well as Scythia and other Countries beyond the
seas; And to defer to another time the Maid of Orleans, whose Valor came to
her by Inspiration and Miracle; not to produce here a (...) L^sse who drove the
Flemmgs out of Amreus; and forced out of their Hands a Town taken, and a
victory gained: not to speak of the boldness wherewith the Ladies of Be^^^ais
repulsed the Hugonots during the Civil Wars of France: The memory remains still
fresh of the late Siege of C^^^brey, and of the Heroic Courage, which the Wife
of the Marshal of Balagus showed there to the general astonishment of all those
that beheld her upon this Stage. She assisted in all Military duties, she
visited the Sentinels and the Courts of Guard; she made Speeches upon the
Bulwarks, she gave Life to their Labors by her Presence and Example. And if
betimes she had known how to gain the Hearts of the Inhabitants; the Head of
Count Fue^tes, and all the Arms of his Camp would have unprofitably wearied
themselves at this Siege. She was likewise of the House of Amboise; and the
Name of Amboise, is a Name of valiant Men and Women. The Race is courageous and
full of Heroic Spirits in all the Branches thereof. It resembles that of
Palms, whose Females are as vigorous as the Males, and as fit for Victories and
Triumphs. And besides now that we have War with Spain, if some Count Fuenutes
should present himself before ^resie, he would not indeed find there the
Courage and Magnanimity of the Marshal of Baligni's Wife to be cruel and
haughty, but a Valor accompanied with sweetness, and a civilized and gentle
Magnanimity, mixed with armed and liberal Graces. And assuredly this mixture of
sweetness and courage, and this conjunction of Arms and Liberalities in the
Governess could not be the least strong piece of the Citadel.

But it is not necessary to inroll here all the gallant Women, who have made
Beauty warlike, and armed the Graces. The Princess whom I am going to produce
will finish the convincing of those who place valiant Women amongst Monsters:
And who believe that a Cask and Plumes of Feathers upon a Woman's Head, make no
less a Prodigy then heretofore the Snakes did upon the Head of Medusa.

EXAMPLE.
Joan of Flanders, Countess of Montfort.
EAgles whatsoever they do are still Eagles: And whether they sport in the Air,
or have any thing in Chase, they sport with Vigor, and chase courageously and
with vehemence. Joan Countess of Mountfort, and Daughter to Lewis Earl of
Flanders, was one of these ever generous and bold Eagles. Her whole Life was a
perpetual Warfare, or a continual preparation to it. Her first divertisments
were laborious and manly: And at the Age when Maids begin to see the World to
go to Bals, and show themselves at public Meetings; she began to learn the
riding of great Horses, running at Tilt and fighting at Banners.

She learnt all these Exercises without forgetting the Bashfulness of her Sex,
without taking off from sweetness or discomposing Graces: And there was always
upon her Face, and in all her Actions, a mixture of Beauty and Valor; a
tincture mingled with Boldness and Modesty, and a certain Air like that of
Minerva, drawn by the ancient Painter, who was armed and yet appeared a Virgin.
Her Valor likewise was not a Valor for Carrousels and Tournaments: and her
Gallantry was not painted and specious. From counterfeit Wars and Chamber
Combats, she passed to real Wars, and Field Encounters: she was present at
Sieges and Naval Battles: she gained all kinds of Victories, and merited all
sorts of Crowns.

Joan Duke of Brittany dying without Children, left to the Earl of Mountfort,
and Charles of Blois the strife about Succession. The Earl began the pursuit of
his right by a seizure: and assisted by the Wit and courage of the Countess
his Wife, partly by Force, and partly by dextetity, he gained the most
considerable places of the Province. Charles prevented by what was done, had
recourse to the Court of Peers and to the protection of the King, whose Niece
he had married. The Court adjudged the difference about succession in his
Favor: And the King committed the Execution of the Decree to his Son the Duke
of Normandy, sending him with an Army into Brittany. After the reduction of
some Places, the Earl of Montfort was taken at Nants, and sent Prisoner to
Paris, where he dyed in the Tower of the Lo^^er.

This fall of the Count must evidently occasion the Ruin of his Countess, As
they say, the Death of the Male Palm is followed by that of the Female; But all
Loves are not of the same complexion, nor subject to the same Symptoms. The
generous Widow remained unshaken between her Husbands Death, which lay
extremely heavy on her heart, and the war he left upon her shoulders: And it
was a hard task for a Widow to stand out against all France, her Enemy and in
Arms. She visited in Person all the Towns of her Party: she settled the
affrighted people, and confirmed the wavering Garrisons: she gained noble souls
by her Caresses, and the mercenary by presents, And by her Example infused
courage into the one, and fidelity into the other.

Afterward the War being reinkindled by the first ray of the spring: And the
City of Rennes, after some assaults, being rendered to Charles of Bloi^,
notwithstanding the resistance of William of Cad^vilal who commanded there; the
French Armies marched to besiege Henebond, to which place the Countess betook
her self with her choicest friends: She manfully sustained the siege, and
served there with her whole Person: She acted no less with her arms then with
her heart and head; And she alone was of more use then many Soldiers and
Captains. She gave out Orders, and was the first in executing the Orders given:
She made one in all the Sallies, and assisted at all the Assaults. And when she
ascended upon the walls, and went through the streets mounted on a warlike
horse and completely armed, the lightning of her eyes and the fire of her heart
spread upon her face, and this Valor of carriage and countenance which
reinforced her Beauty, and gave it a quickness, did encourage the most
scarful, and awaked the most drowsy and faint-hearted.

One day, when the Besiegers equally irritated by her resistance, and their own
losses come to a general Assault, the Courageous Princess having for defense
set in order all her people, even her Women and Maids, whom her example had
made warlike, ascended unto the top of a Tower to discover the state of the
sight: And as soon as she discerned that none but servants were left for the
Guard of the Camp; she came down from the Tower, took Horse and Sallying forth
by a Posterne Gate in the head of three hundred Cuirassiers she fired the
Enemies Quarters. The smoke and flame called them quickly back to the defense
of their Tents and Baggage. The Countess having done her work, made a Gallant
Retreat in the sight of her Pursuers: And the ways of Herel^and being shut up,
she got with her Party into Aulroy. The besieged were five days without
hearing any tidings of her: Meanwhile she made up five hundred Horse: And the
sixth day very early in the morning she presented her self before the face of
the Camp: She forced all that she found in her way, and entered the City with a
great sound of Trumpets: Victory her self could not enter more Gloriously, not
be received with more joy.

It was not only her work to resist Force and Engines raised against the Walls,
but the was to defend her self against Stratageins, and to contest with those
artifices which slack the courage of her people, and debauch them from her
service. But in fine, her Prudence, her Dexterity, and the Eloquence of her
entreaties accompanied with her presents, stayed them till the arrival of the
English succors which raised this first Siege. She procured afterward a
Cessation of Arms, which gave her time to pass over into England, and in
Person to solicit new aids. Magnificence, Civility, and all the Graces asked
them in her behalf, and caused them to be Embarked: Her Valor and Fortune
preserved them at Sea, and rendered them Victorious in Britany.

The Naval Army of Charles of Blois having set upon her before the Islands of
Garnsey, the manifested that her Valor was for both Elements: and that she had
as good a Heart, and as solid a Head in a ship, as upon a Bulwark and in
^renches. She fought all the day with a Sword in her Hand, under a storm of
Iron and Fire, and amongst many dead Bodies of different forms and all of them
frightful enough. Nevertheless she did neither sink under Iron nor Fire: she
beheld with a stedsaft Eye all the shapes of these bloody and ghastly dead
Corpse: And though they had been more terrible and in greater numbers, she would
not have sailed to carry away the Victory in the midst of them, if the Night
and Tempest which intervened had not taken it out of her hands. As soon as she
landed with her Troops, she marched directly to Vanues, and began the War
afresh by besieging this Place. Her presence and Example proved the two
strongest Instruments wherewith the Walls were beaten down. And the Town at
last being taken by Force after several assaults, in which she sought both with
Voice and Hand, she made her entry on horseback, and like a Conqueress.

If I were to follow this Victorious Woman in all occasions, and in all the
fights at which she was present; I should write here a History of many years:
It suffices to say for conclusion, that after diverse Sieges and Battles, she
placed the Crown upon her Sons' head. And if she had lived in an Age of Statues
and triumphant Arches, she would still triumph in Marble and Brass, upon all
the Gates and public Places of all the Cities in Brittany, as she still sights
and will fight eternally in our History.

LVCRECE (...) par Tarquin, laue son malheur et sa reputation de son propre
(...) la liberte Roman et a la Republique. (...).

The Gallant Roman Women.
Lucrecia.
HOw dangerous a Good is Beauty! how difficult is it to keep! and to what
strange Adventures is it exposed! I know not whether the danger would be so
great to have the keeping of a savage Beast in ones house, as to harbor a
handsome woman: or whether the Graces, I say the modest and chaste Graces, are
not more to be feared, then irritated Fortune become an Enemy: Lions at least
have intervals of Innocence; they bite but till their hunger is satisfied: and
there are some Feasts which bad Fortune celebrates: there are days of Truce for
those whom she persecutes. Beauty knows none of those days of Truce, nor those
intervals of Innocence. Her very Complacences are dangerous, and her Repose is
to be feared. And to the end you may know that it is not only a debauched and
licentious Beauty which is destructive, that of Lucrecia ruined Tarqu^n: And
Lucrecia her self, who was so severe to her own Beauty, and kept it so
watchfully, and under so great restraint, happens to be newly murdered by it.

You may have peradventure heard of the undiscreet gallantry of those Princes
who are in the Camp of Ardea. The other day they entered into discourse
concerning the merit of their Wives, and every one giving the prize to his
own, it was resolved that the Eyes should be chosen Judges of this difference:
without adjourning the agreement to the next day, they all took horse together,
and rid Post to Rome and Collatia. It is said that all the voices were for
Lucrecia: she gained unhappily an advantage, which she did not dispute: and
this unfortunate and fatal Purchase cost her the loss of her Honor and Life.
Young Tarquin of his own Nature Arrogant and full of Pride, and inheriting from
his Father the name of Proud, being returned to Collatia, and received by
Lucrecia as her Husbands Friend, came with a Sword in his hand to surprise her
in Bed, and offered her a Violence which surpasses the Title of Proud and
Tyrant. I will not acquaint you with the particulars of this Attempt, but only
say, that by break of day the poor Woman, grown desperate in her Misfortune,
sent in all haste for her Husband Collatin, and Lucrecius her good Father; They
being come, with Brutus and Valerius their intimate Friends, she with Tears
related to them the sad Accident of her violated Chastity: and having engaged
them by Oath to Revenge it, she on a sudden, preventing their Excuses and
foresight of her Intention, struck her self to the Heart with a Dagger which
she kept hid under her Gown. Behold the last Act of this funestous Tragedy;
which will perchance have yet more sad sequels: and you are come very
seasonably to receive the last sights of the first Roman Heroesse.

She gave her self but one blow, and all that were present received it. A
stream of blood ran from Lucrecia's VVound: Streams of Tears flowed from her
Husbands and Fathers VVound: And of these two sorts of VVounds, I know not
which is the deepest and most painful. I know not whether the blood comes more
from the Center of the heart, or whether it slides away with more resentment,
then the tears. However it were, Lucrecia appears well satisfied with the
stroke she newly gave her self. You would say that with her blood there issues
forth something, I know not what, that is luminous, and clears the dark clouds
which the shame of the last night had left in her eyes, and on her brow. You
would say that her Innocence and purity of heart are seen through her wound:
and her wound is to her, as it were, a new mouth, which calls upon the eyes, and
persuades in silence. Do you hear what this mouth, eloquent without noise, and
persuasive without words, utters: It protests against the outrages and
tyranny of the Tarquins: it implores the revenge of Gods and Men, and doubtless
it will obtain it from them both, and obtain it by the voice of her blood,
which is courageous and bold, which is animated with indignation and justice,
which is full of a Roman spirit and virtue.

There is nothing seen effeminate or weak in her person; nothing which is not
either a proof of her innocence, or a mark of her courage: And though there
were no other testimony for her, yet her justification is clear and manifest in
her looks, in the air of her face and countenance. The tincture of virtue is
not there a superficial painting, and an addition of art; it is there interior
and natural: it has been still entertained by the effusions of her heart, and
the ^ayes of her soul: And now that her soul has abandoned it, and that her
heart pours it self out through her wound, this fair tincture resists still the
color of death, which effaces all the rest; you will not believe that I say
too much, if I aver that it would neither submit to the stain of vice, nor to
the dye of impudence.

You may have seen bashfulness elsewhere: All honest women have this tincture,
and the brown should have it as well as the fair. You may have also observed
modesty elsewhere; it is a natural ornament, and no costly dress, which may be
used by rich and poor. But perhaps you may have never seen but upon this face a
courageous bashfulness, and a vigorous and heightened modesty. This temper
belongs to the ancient Heroesses, who armed the Graces, and led them forth to
the wars. Those of Lucrecia, though not warlike, appear not less bold; and her
beauty, though brought up in the shade, and under a veil, has no less vigor
or courage.

Nevertheless this powerful and courageous beauty begins to decay, and these
wounded Graces will quickly expire one after another. Mean while it is apparent
that the loss of their Honor does more disorder them, and is more sensible to
them then the loss of life. Their shame is still fresh and entire, and fear is
not yet come upon them. Their blushes do not vanish, though their spirits steal
away with their blood; and before they die of their wound, they will expire
with regret, for having complied with the last nights crime, though they then
assisted without being seen, and by mere constraint.

Collatin, who had the greatest loss by this accident, seems the most
afflicted: He supports Lucrecia, who sinks between his arms; and he himself
would need another arms, if he were not sustained by wrath, which came to the
succor of his heart, and inflamed his countenance. Seized as he was with wrath
and grief, indignation and pity, he could not express himself but by his eyes;
and his tears, since his voice failed him, bid unto Lucrecia the last adieu,
and confirm to her the good opinion he had of her Innocence.

To this discourse of tears, Lucrecia makes answer with blood, and sighs: She
casts down her eyes upon her wound, as if she meant to give a sign to Collatin
to behold at least her naked heart through this gaping wound. I believe that
the last motion of her lips is an oath, whereby she assures him that he shall
find it free from the stains of her body; that he shall meet there with no
other image then his own, nor any print of a foreign flame: and that if there
remain still any ashes of it, they are the ashes of a lawful fire, which he
alone has inkindled, and which is no less pure then the sacred fire of the
Vestals. Though there be nothing but spirit and breath in this oath, yet it is
understood by Collatin, who makes the like protestation of fidelity for the
future. But it is only expressed in tears and sighs, he has forgotten all other
terms: And Lucrecia, who yet well understands them, accepts the protestation of
his eyes, and consigns it to her soul, which carries it with joy to the other
world.

Brutus, who stands by, makes a third protestation, which is of a different
form, and will not be accomplished but with fire and sword. The countenance you
behold in him is not his ordinary mien: The language he speaks is new to him,
and without doubt the Genius of Rome hapening to be present at this action,
appeared to him, and inspired him to the full. It is from his light this Romans
eyes are ardent, and his whole face as flaming fire: It is with his spirit he
is possessed, and they are his words which issue forth of his mouth. With one
hand he holds the bloody Dagger which he but newly drew forth of Lucrecia's
wound, and seems to offer it as a sacrifice to the Genius that speaks to him;
the other he lifts to Heaven; and accompanying with his voice and fire, the
voice and smoke of the chaste blood, which distills from the fatal Dagger, he
vows to the Gods and his Country the ruin of the Tarquins, and the extirpation
of Sovereignty.

This new fire stays not with him: it passes to Valerius and Lucrecius the
Father: It dryes up the tears upon their Cheeks, and sadness in their hearts,
and inkindles in place thereof an anger, which is yet but a particular and
domestic fire, and such an one as will soon set Rome and all Italy in an
universal flame. These two grave Senators confirm by their gesture and
countenance the same oath which Brutus takes: Their fiery eyes and their faces
grown young again, by a heat unknown to their age, swear in the same form to
extirpate the Tarquins. Col^atin dazzled with his affliction and loss, does not
mind what they do; but when he shall return out of this amazement, he will
mingle his zeal with theirs: And all four consecrating themselves to liberty
and revenge, by touching that blood which this woman gathers up, they jointly
renewed their vow to Lucrecia's Ghost. And Lucrecia will be hereafter, next
unto liberty and virtue, their Domestic Divinity, and the principal Religion
of their Families.

SONNET.
LUCRECIA speaks.
ALL Nations know my Tragedy; I find
That still the fact is fresh in every mind;
The blood still from me flows, which in Rome's sight
Repaired my wrong, and washed my honor white.
Nature admird my genrous Death, set forth
In History, by Pens of greatest worth;
And to eternize me, each hand that is rare
In Glory's Temple draws my Picture fair.
But all these marks of Honor, and of praise,
What do they serve me for, since now adays,
They slander my disaster with the name
Of Crime, and wrongfully arraign my Fame.
But this affront my noble Ghost resents,
And to my Fate her thence-sprung sorrow vents:
Nay rather then endure so soul a slain.
I in this Pourtrait kill my self again.
The Apology and Elogy of LVCRECIA.
LVcrecia complains in these verses of her rigorous usage, and of the charge
laid against her, to the dishonor of her Memory. I have seen this charge, and
the sentence annexed to it in the Books of the City of God: I have been present
sometimes at the declamations which one of the highest and strongest Virtues of
her Sex is wont to make against her: And I confess, that if she be judged by
the Christian Rule, and the Laws of the Gospel, she will be hardly able to
justify her Innocence. The most favorable will be at least of S. Austins
opinion, and conclude with him, that she neither merited the death she gave her
self, if she were innocent in her dishonor; nor the praises she received, if
she were guilty of it.

Nevertheless, were she withdrawn from this severe Tribunal, where no Heathen
Virtue appears, which is not in danger to be condemned: were she to be judged
by the Law of her own Country, and by the Religion of her time, she will be
found one of the chastest Women of her Age, and one of the most courageous of
her Country: Noble and Virtuous Philosophy, which so often accuses her, will
absolve her of her disaster, and be reconciled to her; and every one will
confess that her sin is less ascribable to her own fault, then to the
imperfection of the Law, which had ill directed her, and to the scandals of
that Religion which had given her but bad presidents.

In effect, the Law of that Country was then but specious and superficial; the
Moral was only applied to plaster over the exterior, to imitate the
countenance and gestures of Virtue, to make fair masks and handsome delusions:
It touched not upon corrupted intentions, it had no Rule for inordinate
desires; and in case depraved passions came not so far as to ill effects, yet
it abandoned them to their own sense, and permitted their hearts to enjoy a
liberty more then popular: It allowed them an unpunishable and unrestrained
freedom. As for the Religion of the Romans, which erected Courtisans into
Goddesses, and sacrificed to Adulterers, it was not to be expected that it
should produce Virgins and chaste Women. Therein Lucrecia, even ravished
Lucrecia was better then the Gods of Rome. It was not the love of pleasure, nor
the fear of death which induced her to sin, but the love of Honor, and the
excessive fear she had to lose it: and if she were not endowed with the
resolution of Susa^^s, who sunk neither under death nor infamy, it suffices to
say in her excuse, that she knew not the God of Susanna: And the miracle would
have been too great, it a Heathen Woman had equalled one of the highest Virtues
amongst the Faithful, without the Law, and the Graces, which made them so.

Let us not forbear then to commend Lucrecia, she is worthy of our praises.
Ancient Rome, which has been the Nurse of sublime natural virtues, and of
great Pagan Heroes, has brought forth nothing more high and great, nothing
more gallant and courageous, then Lucrecia. This great City was the
Exterminatrix of insolent Kings, and the Mother of the Commonwealth: And to
bring into the World this famous Maid, who ought to have commanded so many
Nations, she opened her own bosom, and procured to her self a remarkable and
violent death. Therein she was more glorious and worthy of esteem then the
Mother of the first Caesar, whose belly was (...) up to make way for the
Usurper, whom she bore in her womb. The outrageous Villain who offered violence
to her Honor, did not dishonor her: Honor stuck close to Virtue, and Virtue
cannot be torn out of the heart, it must fall of it self. Being unable with her
single hands to resist armed Force, she repelled it with her mind; and her
soul raised it self as much as it could, not to be stained with the impurity
which defiled her body. Besides, she was willing to cleanse it with her blood:
and the zeal of her Modesty was so great, as she punished upon her self the
uncleanness which another had committed.

MORAL REFLECTION.
YOU who see Lucrecia dying in this Picture, take heed lest her blood fall upon
you, and put you to the blush, if you be a less chaste Christian, then she was
a chaste Idolatress. And if you be pure in that point, and possess the prime
Virtues of your Sex, remember that a chaste Woman is but an initiated
Christian, and that it is no great praise to you to be under the Law of a
Virgin born and a Virgin-God, what so many other have been under lascivious
Gods, and adulterous Goddesses. But if your Honor be humble and modest; if
your Chastity be sweet, charitable, and religious; if you be numbered amongst
the industrious and prudent Virgins; if you listen to the Bridegroom with
patience, and with a Lamp lighted in your hand; if you be strong in the
strength of Christianity, all Ancient Rome, whether of your Sex or ours, was
endued with less Fortitude then your selves: And you do not only take away the
honor from Lucrecia, but you take it also from the Cornelia's, the Panthea's,
and the (...); you take it from all the Virtues of the Republic and Empire.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether Chastity belongs to the Honor of Heroesses and great Ladies?
I Have seen the discourse of Tassus, concerning the virtue of Ladies: and I
understand very well the difference that he places betweeen the honor of
Women, and that of Heroesses: But I very well discern to what his discourse
does tend: And I am not ignorant of his sickness caused by the Princess (...)
of Es^e. Surely if he were upon his oath, where he could not be heard by the
Princess (...), he would give the lie to his own book, and stand for the
received truth. and if by preoccupation or interest one single licentious and
scandalous word happen to escape him, his (...), Glorind^, and G^ld^pp^ would
depart out of his Jerusalem to declare against him, and would by force of Arms
constrain him to retract this word of scandal, and to condemn his (...) and
(...). But whether he has been the Author of this novelty, which gives so ill
example, whether he had learnt it by tradition, or whether the Philosophers of
his Country have made a mystery of it; certainly it ought not to prevail
against common Morality. And Ladies would be ill advised to renounce the belief
of their Sex, and relinquish the Doctrine which Nature her self has taught
them, to follow the opinion of an interested Innovator, of an amarous and
pretending Poet, who sought to accommodate Philosophy to his passion, and draw
advantage from the novelty of his erroneous Doctrine.

They must then keep themselves to that Morality which all Nations and Ages
have received, and believe generally and without exception that chastity is an
essential part appertaining to the honor of their whole Sex. Why should
Heroesses be exempt from it? why should impurity be permitted those that art
born in Palaces and under Crowns? Is it that they are of a third Sex and of
another Species* Is it that deformity and de^^sts after nature under cloth of
God? And is it that great Fortunes are so efficacious and luminous, as they
purify vice, and give luster and grace to sin? surely it would be very
strange, if out of the ordures and infection of petty Bourgers houses, gold and
perfumes should be made in Palaces, if tattered garments, which would
discredit the wife of a mean shopkeeper should adorn a Princess; If the dirt of
the hands and feet should become a Paint and Ornament of the head, if spots
which appear unseemly in a little Star should not be so in a great Planet: This
would be to relapse into the error of the Ancient Idolaters, who sung Hymns to
their adulterous Gods, and punished their servants for the same crimes: who
adored in public debauched and prattling Goddesses, and at home preached
chastity to their wives and daughters.

I add hereunto, that by the right of Nature, and by the Order established in
the world Greatness and Nobility have a particular obligation to purity. The
noblest spirits and the most elevated Intelligences, are, if I may say so, the
purest Virgins, and the freest from the stains of matter. The Planers, who are
the Pe^^s and Nobles of the corporeal world, have the advantage in point of
purity, as well as in that of Greatness and Nobility. And not only fire, which
is the superior Element, is purer then the rest; but it is also more purifying,
and a more declared enemy to whatever defiles. By the same reason gold and
silver, which are the Sovereign Metals, are esteemed for their purity; And the
same purity gives a value to Pearls and precious Stones, which are, as a
gallant person said, the Majesty of abbreviated Nature. Regulation observed
with so hansome order and so just a disposition of things, is to Princesses and
great Ladies a Law of purity which they have found in their birth. It cannot be
more lawful for them to dispense with it by the moral Doctrine of Tassus, then
it can be permitted by the Philosophy of Chymicks, that either Gold should be
mixed with Brass, or Diamonds be blemished with Flaws.

Moreover, if Chastity be a natural Ornament, and an easy attire without art,
which is proper and peculiar to the second Sex, I see not why it should less
appertain to the condition of Heroesses, then those fancied Ornaments, and such
cumbersome rich Dresses, in which they are so curious. It would be very strange
that they who might not decently apparel themselves in course cloth, might yet
appear decently without the robe of chastity, and that nature had made for them
the whiteness of Pearls and the fire of Diamonds, and for others the whiteness
of chastity, and the fire of modesty. And assuredly Nature has not given them
so many Beauties, nor imprinted in them so lively lights, which we ordinarily
observe in them, to the end these Beauties should be profaned, and these
lights obscured; and that by their profanation and stains they should
scandalize such as behold them. She is too jealous of so excellent things: The
exact curiosities wherewith she has ranked them, the care she has had to
preserve them for the purest part of the world, are marks visible enough of
what she expects from great Ladies, to whom she uses to be so liberal of such
treasures.

And if modesty be an Ornament proper to their quality as well as to their Sex,
it cannot be denied, but the contrary vice is by the same reason a stain to
them both, nay a stain so much the baser, as the subject upon which it falls, is
of a higher birth, or of a more elevated fortune. And therein not to displease
the Muses, whom I respect, and Pc^sie, which ^ honor, their Tassus seems to me
ridiculous, for permitting that to illustrious Ladies, which he permits not to
ordinary Dames. He might have maintained with as much reason, that scabs are
noisome on the feet* and on the face; that due which spoils linen or course
Cloth, gives luster to Silk or Scarlet; and that defects, which would disgrace
a figure of clay, would not do the like to one of Ivory Was he so possessed
with his Love, or so troubled with Melancholy, as he had forgotten that great
Persons may not have small imperfections, and that the least defects disfigure
the fairest works? Has he never observed that all the defections of the Moon
are numbered? That there happens no Ecclypse to her which causes not all
Historians to speak of it? That the spots and defections of the Sun, though
they be only such in appearance, are yet ill interpreted by the world? And if
he had observed all this, in what sense, to what end, and with what color
could he write, that those Heroic persons, of whom he speaks, might lose their
fairest flower, and receive no dishonor by it.

Nay more, public honesty here join it self with the honor of particular
persons against this fair Morality of Tassus. Impurity is not only more fordid,
and of a worse odor in these eminent persons, but more contagious, and of more
dangerous consequence. Ill example, and an infectious air is always to be
feared from what part soever it comes, and what wind soever moves it. But it
has a more subtle poison, and a more penetrating malignity, when it issues
from great Houses, when it is breathed forth by a mouth of Authority, when it
is carried in garments of silk and gold. And (...) in these times Princesses,
and such as approach near to their degree, had declared themselves for the ill
Doctrine of Tassus, the very next day all other women would believe that it
concerned their honor to be Gallants. And the licentiousness of Ladies would
be brought in fashion, as well as their Apparel and Dresses.

It will nothing avail to oppose hereunto the example of Semiramis, of
Cleopatra, and of other Princesses who have been courageous, magnificent,
learned and expert, and yet have not been very chaste. I have said already,
that this stain was so much the baser, as being placed upon a more precious
matter, and wrought with more art And if the integrity of Cato the Sensor and
drunkard could not justily drunkenness; I see not how the incontinence of
Ladies will be justified by the valor of victorious and unchaste (...), or by
the spirit and generosity of the knowing and licentious, the magnanimous and
debauched Cleopatra. Surely it is great pity that so many Virtues have been so
ill lodged, and with so bad company. And since the Holy Ghost has compared
fair women who are not wise, to Sowe's adorned with bracelets of gold: since a
Philosopher has said, that fair ignorant persons were vessels of Allabraster
filled with vinegar, we may also say by the same reason that these magnanimous,
debauched, and these learned, licentious women were full fraught vessels, and
laden with dirt, magnificent Palaces, and infected with Ordure and unwholesome
air; costly Monuments, and filled with putrefaction. And therefore we must
conclude, that modesty is a virtue necessary for Hercesses; And that great
Ladies have more interest in its conservation, then those that are inferior to
them both in birth and fortune. The discourse by which Tassus endeavors to
prove the contrary, is scandalous: And if I might be credited, he would be
condemned by the express sentence of all Ladies; And his Author would be
banished out of all Closets, and Chambers, as Poets his predecessors were
heretofore out of the Commonwealth of Plato.

EXAMPLE.
Gondeberga of France, Queen of Lumbardy.
THere are not only good reasons to allege against the bad doctrine of Tassus,
but whole Volumes of examples to oppose against him: And for two or three
licentious women, who have dishonored Nobility, and disparaged the Graces,
History might send Heroesses in Troops, who have been chaste and magnanimous,
who have had the same degree of courage and modesty, and have conserved the
tincture of purity in the splendour of a sovereign Fortune.

I leave all the fabulous ones which are created by Poets, and nourished by the
Composers of Romances. I leave even the true ones which are too far-fetched,
and appertain to foreign History; and it satisfies me to produce a French
woman, who has been more chaste and valiant then Lucrecia, and will no less
courageously defend the honor of Ladies; though I do not expose her with a
sword in her hand, nor represent her prepared to commit a murder.

Gondeberga, a Princess of the blood of France, and near allied to King
Dagolert, was born with all the Graces and Advantages she could receive from
Nature. Her Nobility was of a Race which had this quality of the
Pome-Granad-^^ee, that it bears no head that is not crowned, and full of
Heroic spirits. Her beauty was sovereign by right of Nature, which reigns
without strong holds and Armies. Her wit and courage might have made a
Conqueror, if it had been placed in another Sex. Nevertheless it was a courage
without cruelty* (...) was a wit tempered with sweetness and force: And as for
her virtue, it was so pure, and of so good odor, as it penetrated all her
actions, and left no part of her life, upon which detraction it self could
colourably ^asten an untruth.

Being advantaged by this natural endowment, which was more to be esteemed then
all the Crowns Fortune could give her, she was espoused to Arioldus King of
Lombardy. The first years of her marriage were happy and peaceable, either by
her carriage, which was pleasing and dexterous, or by the power of her virtue,
which wrought successfully upon Arioldus heart, and disposed him sweetly to
contribute his esteem and complacences to this domestic felicity. Nevertheless
as there be Serpents which are naturally enemies to fair Flowers; and as Dogs
do not bark against the Moon but when she is perfect, and possesses all her
light; so there be jealous Devils who have a particular spite against pleasing
and illustrious virtues: and it was one of these infernal Spirits who
impoysoned the mind of Arioldus, and changed the happy state of Gondeberga.

She had in her service a young Lord, native of Lombardy, named Adal^^sus, a
person of a graceful aspect, and full of courage; who besides his exterior
gallantry, had also that which was useful and serviceable in the Field. But as
the most part of Court Virtues, to qualify them rightly, are but sportive, and
painted Virtues; but poor ones, which act the part of Queens, and deformed ones
with fair masks: so this graceful mien, and great courage of Adalulsus,
covered a dangerous pride; and an extreme presumption lay hid under this
Gallantry. Nevertheless, whether these defects were covered over with so
curious a plaster, and so artificially applied, as nothing of it appeared to
the eyes of the Queen, whether she suspected it to proceed rather out of Youth
then any formed malice, or that she really believed that virtues did lose
nothing of their grace in the company of vices, she did not forbear to have a
singular esteem of him, and to reserve those favors and kindnesses for him,
which she had for no body else.

These favors indeed were very innocent and pure: and there was nothing
undecent and immodest in these kindnesses. But discretion was wanting: and
Gondeberga should not have trusted so much to her innocence, and the purity of
her intentions, as not to remember, that there is nothing so pure, which may
not be impurely interpreted; and that even the spirit of Roses, innocent as it
is, serves for matter of poison to Spiders. Moreover there are some men so
vain, and so well persuaded of their own merit, as they cannot believe that a
woman, what preservatives soever she may carry about her, and with what Virtues
soever she is guarded, can look upon them without forfeiting her liberty at
first sight, and her reason at the second. And the extravagancy of some
proceeds so far, as to persuade themselves, almost with the good man of the
Comedy, that the Dog-daies, and the Southern wind, which cause Feavors, are
less dangerous to women then their presence.

Adolulsus was one of these good people; he easily believed that the esteem
which Gondeberga expressed toward him, proceeded from passion. He took her
civilities and favors for colored Courtships, and forerunners of a
vanquished Chastity, which was willing to be summoned, to the end it might
surrender with Ceremony, and according to the forms of War. Adding temerity to
this Vision, he had the impudence to speak to her of Love, and to violate
Majesty by the impurity of his mouth, and by the blasphemies of a sacrilegious
solicitation. Gondeberga, who was one of those generous Ladies, who are not to
be touched without punishment, and who have thorns of Roses, as well as their
Graces and Blushes; remaining a while without making any reply, either because
she feared to prostitute her voice and soul to the ears of this infamous
person, or that she deliberated on the punishment of his Audacity, she suddenly
rose up, and without other answer, spit in his face at her departure.

I expect indeed that gentle spirits will not approve this quickness, and that
they will allege against her the address and moderation of the wise and
virtuous (...), who punished with a profitable and honorable dismission that
lunatic Sp^^^rd, who had discovered his love to her. But surely the boldness
of the Lombard, who violated the sanctity of a Crown, which came near to
Sacrilege, was another kind of folly, then that of the Spaniard, which related
more to his head then heart: who was respectfull and modest: And passing no
farther then to Congi^^ and Grimaces, might be satisfied with wind and smoke.
Let not the Stoic^s and their Paradoxes take offense at it, all fools are not
of the same stamp, nor will be treated in the same manner. And if mildness were
seasonably used by the Princess of Spain toward a melancholy Innocent, who
discoursed not of his folly, but to windows, and only expressed himself by his
guittar in his Serenades. The severity was no less opportune, which the French
Lady exercised on a furious person, who had need of chains.

However it were, Ad^lulsus equally confounded, and irritated by the affront he
conceived to have been offered him by Gondeberga, retired, with shame upon his
face, and poison in his heart. He likewise deferred not long the vomiting it
forth, and what he vented, troubled all Lombardy, and dispersed its bad odor
as far as France. He represented to himself, that in affairs of this nature one
ought not to be fearfully wicked, and by halfes; that bold and consummated
Crimes were the most successful, and that since the King could not sail to be
advertised of what had happened, it were good to begin first, and turn the
storm upon the head of Gondeberga.

Being fortified by this resolution, and his natural Audacity, he presented
himself before the King with the face of an Impostor, and a countenance versed
in the art of dissimulation and lying. He began by a counterfeit grief and
false regrets: He complains of the harshness of a new duty, which changes the
duties of his condition, and offers violence to his honor. He calls that
necessity, cruel, and unfortunate, which enforces him to become an informer
against a person, who was sacred to him, and for whom he would have exposed a
thousand lives. And after a tedious int^^cacy of many confused words, by design
and craft, it fell from his mouth, that he had discovered a strange practice
between the Queen and Tason, Governor of T^kan^: That the end of this practice
was to poison the King, and to raise Tason to his Bed and Throne: That there
remained nothing but a fit conjuncture to execute this design. And that if an
efficacious and courageous prudence were not opposed to so pressing a mischief,
and which hung already over his head; it is to be feared that his delay and
circumspection might prove fatal to him; And that a moment of time ill managed,
might draw, together with his death, a general ruin upon the State.

A^^^lus affrighted with so strange a relation, and a danger so little
expected, remained speechless for a while: And his mind perplexed with the
confusion of wandering thoughts, and balanced between belief and doubt, knows
not what resolution to take. His thoughts being fixed at last upon the
testimony of Adalulsus, the contestation was great in his heart between a
Husband and a King between Love and Fear: And these pieces being so near to
him, and so contrary in themselves, he neither presented to his mind an
expedient, whereby he might reconcile them, nor any considerable reason upon
which he might justly give sentence for either. At last he submitted to fear,
and declared for the King, upon whose conservation the Husband depended* And
being persuaded, that in dangers of this nature distrust brings safety, and to
be credulous is the part of a wise man; without deferring the business till the
next morning on the same day he secured the Queen, and caused her to be carried
to the Castle of Amello, where during the space of three years she had commerce
with no person whatsoever: And light it self beheld her only by intervals and
stealth.

The wise Princess patiently did acquiesce to the will of the King her Husband;
And endured this civil death with a constancy, which showed clearly that there
was something in her more noble then her blood, and more Sovereign then her
Crown. This trial, though harsh and painful, proved not unprofitable to her. It
gained her the consummation, and the last purity of virtue: And when God
perceived this last purity, and this compleatment, which forms great Examples
and Heroic models, he caused a deliverer to come from this side the Alps, who
took her out of prison, and replaced her with honor upon her Throne.

Dag^bert advertised of this unjust Treatment, and contrary to the Articles
which the King of Lumbardy had entered into concerning his Niece, sends an
Embassy to him to complain of the injury, and to require the justification of
the prisoner. Anselo^, to whom the Commission is given, discharges it
courageously, and with words of authority which savored more of command then
Remonstrance. He represented to him that the blood of France had been till then
pure, and held in veneration: That it has never been yet known that one single
drop of it was ever stained. That the King his master could not persuade
himself, that it had begun by his Niece to lose its luster and become corrupt;
that it concerned his honor and duty to justify her: That to this end he had
sent a Champion to fight with the Informer. And that if (...) refused to grant
the Combat according to justice and custom; he would come in (...) ^^solve his
Niece with a hundred thousand men, and inkindle (...) fire at the gate of her
prison, that all Lumbardy should feel the (...) of it.

(...) having assented to the Combat for the decision of this affair, (...) the
Queens Cousin threw down his Pledge, and it was taken up by (...), who judged
it more safe to commit his life and honor to the fortune of Arms, which might
prove favorable to him, then to abandon them both to a certain loss by an
anticipated Declaration. Adalul^us was indeed both dexterous and valiant: But
there is no Address against the providence o^ God; There is no valor which
sinks not under his justice. He was overcome and punished by death, after a
public confession of his impe^^tute. And Gondeberga was re-established with
the general Aplause of all Lumbaray which had deplored her misfortune, and
still conserved for her, its good affections and suffrage.

The History does not only speak in favor of the chastity of Heroesses, and
defends it against the scandalous Morality of Tassus: But one may also draw
other lights from thence, which are no less instructive, nor less useful for
the direction of Ladies. First, this so pure affection of Gondeberga toward
Ada^lsus, ought to teach our malicious Critics, that very often what they find
of ill Odor in particular actions, proceeds from the depraved disposition of
their own brains; That they take sometimes Stars for Co^v^ts; and that they
suspect impurity and corruption even in those friendships, where there is
nothing but a pure spirit, a most pure light, and a fire loosned from matter.

But it is not enough for Amities to be pure and innocent, they ought to be
considerate and reserved, and must take heed of making indiscreet advances.
Rash and presumptuous Adalulsus are to be found every where, who have always
prepared matter to inkindle a fire out of the least sparks of affection which
are discovered to them. And what most imports, is, that they cannot be
satisfied with a secret temerity, and an interior presumption. They become
confident by their imaginary conquests. They dream of favors and fortunes, and
divulge them when they are awake. They counterfeit Assignations, and forge
Letters; And these counterfeit Assignations are followed by real quarrels:
These forged Letters inkindle fire in Families, and blast the best Fames, and
the most innocent lives; surely such must needs be incorrigible who cannot be
converted by so many examples. And though the sacred scripture forbids us to
lament an Inchanter, who suffers himself to be stung by a Serpent which he
himself has charmed, yet is he more to be deplored then a woman who confides
in so deceiptfull a faith as that of men, and hazards her reputation upon oaths
which have been so often broken.

In fine, misbelieving Christians and baptized Epicures will learn from the
double revolution of this Tragedy, that although truth and justice do not
visibly intervene in all actions which are represented upon the Theater of this
world, yet we cannot say that they sleep behind the Scene, or remain there
idle. They suffer there indeed confusion and disorder for a time, but it is not
a perpertual confusion, nor a disorder without art. And this art cannot appear
till the conclusion, to which they by design reserve the deliverance of
Innocence, and the punishment of Calumny.

CLELIE. et ses Compagnes deff^nt le camp de P^rsene, par la hardiesse de leur
(...) et portent a Rome la joy la paix et la gloire. (...)

Claelia.
HAve an eye and hand upon your Horses, generous Fugitives: The River where you
pass is rapid and full of danger: and though it be of your party, and a Roman
like you, yet one may fear that it approves not of your flight: and that it
carries you away to Sea, instead of bringing you back to Rome. But I may cry
out with open mouth, and with all my strength, yet cannot be heard. It is
impossible for my voice to reach them amidst the confused clamors, and the
pressing outcryes of a whole Camp pursuing them. The tumult as you see is great
upon the shore. The whole Army near upon have quit their Tents: you would say
that the signal is but now given either for a battle, or a general assault; and
this tumultuary Sally, and with so much noise, is only designed to apprehend
nine or ten Maids who are fled from thence.

Do not believe that this accident is a prank of the Devil, who causes panick
fears: much less is it to be taken for a game of Fortune, of this insolent and
fantastical Sportress, who often raises these fears in the greatest Kings and
Armies. It is a mystery of Romes Genius: It is a serious presage of her future
Empire, and a certain forerunner of the Victories which are ordained her: For
it is fit to inform you where you are, and to render you an account of the
spectacle which begets your astonishment.

This River is Tyber the nurse of Rome. It is not yet adored by other Rivers,
and acknowledged by all Seas. It is not yet crowned with Triumphant Arcks,
Obelisks and Amphitheaters, as one day it will be: And nothing but initiated
Towers and imperfect VValls appear upon its Banks, which are as it were the
swath-bands of the yet Infant Republike. Meanwhile it rolls along gravely and
with pomp: And as if it were already sensible of its future glory, you would
say that it does accustom it self betimes to the Roman dignity, and the
Majesty of the Empire.

As for these Maids who so boldly and with so much danger pass it over, are of
the chief Families of Rome, and the Companions of Claelia. The Senate had
delivered them up for Hostages of the Treaty made with Porcena, who but
yesterday kept the City besieged, and endeavored to replace the Tarquins. But
being persuaded by Claelia that their detention was an imprisonment sweetened by
specious terms, and by forms unknown both to their Sex and Age, and that in
other respects it stood not with their honor nor the dignity of the
Commonwealth to suffer so fair a portion of Rome to be led Captive into
Tuscany, they made an escape out of the Camp by confederacy: And behold them
crossing Tyber with a boldness, which will complete the liberty of their
Country, and be recompensed with Elogies and Statues.

The noise of it is great, and the astonishment general through the whole Camp
of Porcena. He came himself to the Sea side to be a spectator of his second
defeat, and of the disorder in his Army. The loss of a battle would have less
weakened him then this bold Act which assaulted his reputation, and overcame him
without effusion of blood. The attempt of Mucius, who lately undertook to kill
him in the midst of his Camp, had apparently left him more courage and hope to
overcome the fortune of Rome, and to humble the pride of the Romans.

He resented indeed this adventure, wherein he saw all his designs ruined and
his reputation lost. But he resents it generously and like a King: His
astonishment was not barbarous and stupid: He was not one of those unjust
persons, who can only esteem such Virtues, as are their stipendiaries, and wear
their Liveries. He looks with respect upon the presages of the growing
Monarchy: And though he has taken upon him a superficial and exterior anger
to satisfy his irritated people, and to contribute something to the violated
Treaty; yet interiourly, and in his heart he applauded this boldness, and
submitted the Tuscan Fortune to the Roman. He will presently make a greater
noise, and send Deputies to the Senate to complain of the breach of Faith by
the Fugitives, and to require restitution of them. But he will only restrain
his anger till their return: And changing his part as soon as he shall have
them in his power, he will convert his Complaints into Praises. He himself will
compose an Elogy of Claelia, and seriously, and with a solid reward crown the
same Virtue which he menaceth with his countenance.

The Soldiers who went disorderly out of their Tents, render not so much Honor
to his Virtue, nor look upon it with so respectfull and peaceable an eye. The
alteration appears as extreme in their spirits: and their indiscreet and
tumultuous anger clearly demonstrates, that in Armies, sound judgment is not
common, and reason resides ordinarily all in the General. Cast your eyes in
this occasion upon these who are as immovable, as if this adventure had charmed
them: You would take them for armed Statues, or for Giants that sleep standing,
and with open eyes. They have likewise but an uncertain and confused sight, and
the least amazed amongst them cannot say, whether he sees what is done, or
whether he dreams. Behold others who stretch forth and stir their arms, as if
they had wings, and were to fly after these Maids. But whatever has been said
of Icarus, they will not rise up from the ground with their arms; and their
whole flight being merely imaginary, nothing but their reproaches and
imprecations will pass the River. The arrows of these Archers are much more to
be feared by Claelia and her Companions: They have iron teeth and real wings;
they can fly faster, and wound more dangerously then the reproaches and
imprecations of the rest. Behold the straining of some in bending their Bows,
and the strength of others in discharging their Arrows. Let us cry out to them
to spare innocent and disarmed Beauties, and not to offer violence unto a Sex
for which War and Barbarity it self has respect; to pardon at least the
Graces of Rome, if they will not honor its Virtues, and submit to its Fortune.
But by no means, let them alone; their Arrows will be more humane and discreet
then themselves; they will better understand the rights of their Sex, and the
common respects which are due to them. The noise they make in the air, is as it
were a complaint of the violence which has been offered them: You would not
take them for Courriers sent after these Fugitives; you would take them for
other Fugitives, who save themselves after the first. Some fall down at
Claelia's feet, others sink before her Companions, and all these Arrows
plunging themselves in the River, assure them by their fall that they come not
to hurt them.

Meanwhile the courageous Damsels recover the other shore, where Glory and the
Genius of the Republike expects them. Claelia, who instigated them, is still
their guide, and advances first upon a Horse generous by Nature, and probably
proud with the Beauty and Nobleness of his burden. That other so famous Beast
upon which Europa crossed the Sea of Creete, was less stately, and swam less
gallantly, and with less pomp. See how he manages his feet in measure and
cadence, and how his lofty head salutes afar off the Towers of Rome. Surely he
would merit to be consecrated, as well as the she Wolf, which was Nurse to the
Founders of the City. And the Senate will appoint him at least a Statue, and
cause her memory to be kept in Marble.

She that governs him is as little affrighted with the Arrows, as with the
cries and reproaches which follow her. Fierceness is beautiful, and boldness
pleasing on her Face. There is something, I know not what, that is Noble and
Majesticall about her, which resembles Sovereignty. And were she armed, one
would imagine that it were Victory her self which abandons the Tuscans, and is
going to render her self to the Romans. Her Companions follow her with a bold
and resolute cheerfulness: The weakest are mounted two by two upon their
Horse; the rest hold by their Tails, and swim the best they are able. They
have all an equal confidence; and the fire which issues forth of their eyes,
and adds something, I know not what, of splendour to the fierceness of their
looks, clearly shows that they are very pure Roman women, and that their
hearts are full of the blood and spirit of the Republike. The waves becoming
smooth under their bodies, carry them with respect and delight. It seems that
some Sovereign Genius, and full of Authority is come opportunely to keep them
in awe: And if some of them rise above the rest, they do it with so much
modesty, as gives occasion to believe, that it is only to applaud this
Adventure, and to testify their joy.

The God of the River comes forth in person to be a spectator, and to partake
of the hopes of Rome, and of the presage of her Victories. Behold him Crowned
with branches of Corrail, and Encompassed with Reeds, who expresses his
astonishment by his action. Tears of joy trickle down from his eyes, which are
mingled with the water which falls from his Hair and Beard. Horacius was
lately received by him with less gladness, when he cast himself between his
Arms after the fall of the Pridge, which had been so bravely and courageously
defended by him. And his hands lifted up to Heaven, seem to thank the Gods for
having allied him to a Republike, whose Daughters triumph over Kings, and know
how to vanquish Armies without fighting.

SONNET.
CLAELIA speaks.
CLaelia escapes, she to the shore is nigh,
The Fortune of great Rome does with her fly:
Before a Camp, whose shafts pursue her pace;
Her heart, to brave them, mounts into her face.
Tyber invites her from his Channel's side,
His waters under her do gent'ly glide,
And, while she swims triumphantly, do even
Shine with her beauties like a spangled Heaven.
You beauteous Fugitives, depose all fear
Of meeting Death; these shafts in their careere
Stop to respect you; and these waters show
Your fires consume them, they are sunk so low.
But set these Charms apart, yet were it in vain
To think you e're could perish: You obtain
From Vignon's Pencil an enlivening breath,
And what he quickens, is exempt from Death.
Elogy of Claelia.
THe Republike was but newly born when she was attaqued in her cradle by the
Tarquins, and besieged by their Allies. (...) a young Roman, ambitious to set
her at liberty, entered in a disguised habit into their Camp, and attempted upon
the life of Porcenna; The blow and death he carried, having by a happy mistake
for the King lighted upon his Secretary* The enraged Roman punished his hand
for the error of his eyes, And in the sight of Porcenna and his People he burnt
it with the fire of the Altar which was there prepared for a sacrifice. Thereby
he gave them a second astonishment, far greater then the first, and affrighted
them more with the punishment he inflicted upon himself, then he had done by
his bold attempt; Porcenna despairing of taking the City from whence as many
Gladiators might sally forth against him, as there were young men whose blood
and courage the burnt hand of Muc^us might inflame, sent Propositions of peace
to the Senate which entertained them and offered him the children of the chief
Families of Rome for Hostages of their Faith. The Treaty was concluded, and the
Hostages accepted: Porcenna withdrew his Army from the City, and being encamped
along the ^yber, made way for the adventure represented in this Picture.

The Hostages followed the Camp, and each of them was religiously observed, and
as an Article of Peace. Claelia was particularly considered, both in regard of
her birth and graceful behavior, and the courage which appeared in her looks.
This Virgin, who knew not how to distinguish between an Hostage and a prisoner,
and who had only learned hitherto to be free and Chaste, not accounting her
Chastity very secure in a Camp allied to the Ravisher of Lucrecia, preached
honor and liberty to her Companions, and offered to lead them courageously to
both. Persuaded by the Eloquence and authority of her countenance, by the force
and vigor of her words; they all went forth with her, and casting themselves
into the River Tyber, they crossed it under a cloud of Arrows and Darts which
pursued them* Being arrived at Rome, as much inflamed by the action they had
performed, as bathed with the water they had newly passed over, these came a
crowd of people to applaud and load them with Benedictions and Crowns. The next
day the ^us^ans sent to demand them with threats, and the Senate returned them
back to make good their says, and accompanied with excuses.

At then return to the Camp, Porcenna praised them in the presence of the whole
Army which was set in Battle array to receive them with ceremony and pomp. He
professed, that if Mucius had affrighted him. Claelia had vanquished him; and
that so bold and courageous a flight was his defeat, and the victory of Rome.
This done, he sent her back with such Hostages as she was pleased to choose.
The Senate received her in Triumph; And to leave unto Posterity an Eternal mark
of her virtue, caused her Statue to be erected on Horseback, which was the
first of this name and Form, and the eldest of all the Brazen Statues of the
Consuls, and of all the Marble ones of the Dictators, which adorned the City
since her time. The Republic, which received its Birth from the Virtue of a
Woman, was conserved by the boldness of a Maid: And the Camilli, Fa^^^^ and the
Cat^^ inherited from Lucrecia and Claelia, Courage, Glory and liberty.

MORAL REFLECTION.
THis generous Maid, who rather affected an honorable and perilous Freedom then
a subjected and captivated Security, is to chaste Women a great Mistress of
Honor and Christian Liberty. She teaches them gallantly and like a Roman, the
very same which St. Ambrose does in so handsome a Latin style. She tells them
that Chastity is not servile, and cannot be made a Captive; that it cannot
endure chains; no not those which adorn and beautify; that it is an enemy to
all sorts of Prisons, even glorious and magnificent ones, even those which are
built for riot and pleasure. This free and generous Chastity did not invent the
Neck-laces, Bracelets, and other ensigns of this precious and specious
servitude which Women have made for themselves. And when they are imposed on
them by a superior Power, and the tyranny of Custom, so far is Chastity from
rejoicing, or beautifying and adorning her self therewith, that she wears them
with regret and pain; and groans under chains of gold and pearl, as Hester did
under the yoke of her Diadem.

But if she cannot endure these jewels which adorn the body, much less can she
bear with those which afflict the mind; which are the yoke and torment of the
heart, which bind the thoughts and inchain desires; which make of a poor soul a
voluntary and obstinate Captive. Likewise there is no servitude more aver^s to
her, then that of the heart. It is very hard for a woman to be held by that,
and remain chaste: And how strong soever a place may be, yet it is taken when
Hostages are once given. Besides, it is observable in this History, that the
generosity of Claelia effected more alone then all the heads of the Senate, and
all the arms of the Camp: And that which is very strange, a virtuous Woman and
a bold Maid were the Foundresses of the Republic, and the principal causes of
the Roman Liberty. A more famous proof cannot be brought, concerning the
utility of the Virtue of women. But this matter will have a more just extent in
the ensuing Question.

A MORAL QVESTION.
Whether the Virtue of Women be as beneficial to the Public, as that of Men?
THis Question is not one of those extravagant Problems and Paradoxes which are
made at random, and without any appearance of doubt. On what side soever you
take it, there is a probability, and evident and colorable Reasons for it: And
the virtue of Claelia, which was no less profitable, nor less esteemed at Rome
then that of Horatius and Scerola, does clear it at least of Temerity. However
my intention is not to decide it. It will suffice that I set down plainly and
sincerely the pretentions and right of the Parties. The Readers will deliver
their opinion how they please, concerning my Relation: If there be injustice in
their Censures, this injustice will neither prove Murder nor Theft: and after
this, there will remain neither any death for them to expiate, nor any
restitution to be made.

Let us begin with our own Virtue which is the eldest, and will have the first
place; and let us forget nothing which may support her Right, and set a value
upon her Advantages. First the Virtue of Men is a Virtue of Command and
Authority, a superintendent and directing Virtue. She is for that side which
governs and directs: And it is as well a part of her Duty as of her Right to
govern and conduct. For this reason, as in a humane Body the Head is of more
use then the Arms, and Discourse then Motion: As the Art of a Pilot is more
necessary and useful in a Ship then the skill of the Mariners: As the valor
of a Commander in chief, nay an infirm and weak Commander, is more important in
an Army, and contributes more to Victory then the valor of Soldiers who are
in perfect health (which has caused this saying, That Stags which should have
a Lion for their Captain, might overcome Lions which should be led by a Stag.)
So in a Commonwealth, the virtue of Men which is on the commanding part and
has the superintendency and government, seems to be more advantageous then the
virtue of Women, which is dependant and subalte^n, and has only by natural
Right a docility, subjection and obedience.

Secondly, What is said of Good, is to be said of Virtue. That Virtue which is
the most common, and whose limits are least restrained, which acts the most
universally and in more then in one place; which extends it self to more
subjects, to more uses, and to a larger space, ought to be without doubt the
most beneficial to the Public; as it is in its self the most perfect, and in
its Stock and Natural Goods. Now the virtue of a Man is dispersed through the
whole Body of the Commonwealth: It act^s in all the parts thereof, and gives
to every one that life and motion which is proper to it. All Civil Functions
appertain to it, All Military offices enter into its Duty: Churches and
Tribunals, City and Country, the Court and Desert are under its jurisdiction;
and consequently for this consideration it cannot be disputed in point of
utility with the virtue of a Woman, which is a particular and quiet virtue, a
restrained and sedentary virtue; a Virtue which scarce goes abroad without
staining its self, or at least without blushing, which can no further enlarge
its self then the length of the silken and woolen ties, wherewith it is
fastened to its home.

In fine, Virtue is more profitable where it is most active; It is most active
where it is most vigorous: And doubtless it must be more vigorous in subjects
naturally solid and fortified by use, then in weak and slothful ones, where it
is weak and remiss. It is then more vigorous and active, and consequently of
greater utility in a man who is of a stronger and more solid complexion then a
Woman; and who has more vigor, more s^^^dness, more constancy, and more
natural stability. And this Reason added to the two former, seems to conclude
for us, and to give the prize to the virtue of our Sex.

However the virtue of Women has likewise its right and pretentions: (...)
grounded upon Reasons and Examples: It can allege for its self Experience and
(...): And if we give credit thereto, it wants but indifferent and
dis^ntere^^ed Judges, and an eloquent and famed Advocate for (...) of its
cause. Though I have never been at the Bar nor possess that valent of Spirit
and Language, wherewith combats are sought in the long Robe; yet I will
adventure to say something in its behalf. And if heretofore Military Orders
have been instituted to defend it with Arms, I believe that without deserting
the cause, one may at present defend it with the Pen.

To begin then by giving an Answer to the Reasons of the adverse pa^^y, I say,
It is certain that Public Good is rather a work of Virtue which commands and
governs, then of that which obeys and is governed. But it is (...) certain,
whether this commanding and ruling Virtue be ^^^ely on out side it is found
also on the other, and not as a stranger. It acquits it self there in the same
charge, and executes all the Functions which (...) can perform amongst us: And
sometimes these charges succeed there more happily; these Functions are
performed with more address and with a better grace Assuredly of this Virtue
found any opposition, either Natural or Moral to our Sex, Ar^^^isia and
Zenobia, Tul^^eria and Amalasenta would be no less prodigious then the fabulous
(...) and Gorgone's. And the wonder would be no less rare to see a Woman reign,
then to see a Woman fly* Yet that is not so, and the number of Princesses is
large enough* who have governed more happily and with more dexterity, I say
(...) weak Princes such as (...) the simple; I say capable and able ones, even
those capable and able Princes, who have most affected to be like Tiberrus.

As for what has been said, that the most diffused Virtue, and the most
universal in its actions, is the most beneficial to the Public; I confess that
it has been spoken judiciously and with reason: But the Virtue of Women has
been wrongfully and injuriously represented as an honorable Captive, to whom
its house was given for a Prison, and was bound with ties of thread and couen. I
know not whether the use and custom of this Age have not in this point offered
violence to Nature: But I know very well that there was a time when it was more
free: and that the Virtue of Women, less restrained then now it is, served more
profitably in all the parts of the Rebulick. The Jews had Women Generals of
Armies, and Women Judges and Prophetesses: Women have publicly taught
Philosophy and Rhetoric at Athens: A Woman succeeded in the School and
reputation of Plo^^^us in Alexandria. The Universities of Palus and Bo^g^^ have
had women Graduats and Readers: And to say nothing of those whom Orators,
Poets, and Painters have had for their Competitors and Rivals, there is scarce
any Nation which has not furnished History with Heroesses and Amazons.

It has been said in the third place that Virtue is more active, and
consequently more beneficial in a strong subject wherein it is vigorous, then
in a weak one wherein it is remiss. This Proposition being understood of the
vigorous operation of the soul, contributes nothing to a Man, not takes nothing
from a Woman. Their souls are essentially equal and of the same temper: There
are some Men indeed in whom Wit and Courage, Discourse and Resolution (which
are the Nerves and Muscles of the Soul) have less hold and vigor, then in many
Women. And that if the Proposition be understood of the strength of the Body,
and the solidity of Matter it is from our purpose, and carries besides our
Level. Virtue is not of so low a degree: It has not been given us to bear
great burdens, and to hew down Trees: And the Moral has not placed amongst
the qualities of a good Magistrate, and the conditions of a perfect Prince, the
strength of the arms, and the breadth of the shoulders.

From this consideration then, the equality is at least seeming between the
virtue of a Man, and that of a Woman. And some person who would not rest
satisfied with having reconciled the parties, and reduced their pretensions to
equality, might add over and above to the right of Women a new weight of
Reasons, which would carry it against the right of Men. First he might say,
that the particular disposition of Families and the Families themselves,
resemble particular States, and abbreviated Kingdoms, in which Women Reign. If
they be Wise, Virtue and Peace Reign there joyntlie with them: And from this
Peace of well ordered Houses, the public tranquillity, and good order of
Cities arises.

Unto that, he might add that the matter and first seed of men's Virtues comes
from a good birth, and is formed by good Education: And that the Virtue of
Women contributes much to a good Birth, and does all in matter of good
Education. It does not import that Man should be the first Principal or
Original of Man, and that a Woman should be but the second and subaltern. Thus
is the Sun the first Producer of Trees and Metals, and yet Trees are good or
bad according to the disposition of the Earth which is their common Mother: And
under one Sun Gold and Palm Trees are produced in one place; and elsewhere
nothing but clay and thorns* It is the same with men; if there be of them
Intellectual and Stupid, Courageous and Faint hearted, Modest and Insolent, all
these good and bad qualities derive from the Virtues or Vices of their Mothers.
They take in their wombs by track of time, and drop by drop the different (...)
and several tinctures of good and evil, sleep'd in their blood and mingled with
their humors: as Potters Clay receives a good or bad shape from the Mould in
which its Cast.

I (...) very well what de^terous and careful Tutors are able to perform, and
what is done in Colleges and Academies. But surely what address soever these
Tutors have, and what Care so ever they employ, yet they change not the matter
which they work upon. Iron becomes not gold in the hands of the Goldsmith. Nor
is Earth converted into Marble under the hands of the Engraver. Precious
matters ought to come from the Quarry and Mine: And Noble Subjects and capable
of handsome forms, are to be composed in the Mothers womb. I speak nothing of
Education, which is a painful generation and of long labor, and a Birth of many
years It is certain that this Education is effected by the cares and hands of
Women And if children be like shape-less lumps, to which it is necessary that
the tongues of Mothers should give the right form; it cannot be doubted but
these tongues give them also the tincture, either of virtue or vice, according
to the good or evil qualities wherewith they are endued.

In fine, one might allege for the last proof of this Discourse, that the
virtue of Women is more efficacious then ours; and that our Examples are not so
much followed nor run after in such throngs as theirs; whether by reason
Meekness is more attractive and persuasive then Force, and that pleasing
Originals never want Coppiers: Whether by reason guides of this Nature take
away all excuses from the Faint-hearted and Tamerous: and that there is no
Person who dares complain of the thorns and ^^ggedness of the way in their
Company: Whether by reason all men being either Sons of Husbands to some Women,
the Sons follow by instinct, of out of respect the wills of their Mothers; and
the Husbands accommodate themselves out of friendship or complacencie to the
inclinations of their Wives. And for these reasons the virtue of Women being
generally followed, and having Imitators in both Sexes, it seems one may
conclude, that their Sex is more profitable, and more conducing to the Public
Good.

EXAMPLE.
Theodelinda, Queen of Lumbardy.
IMpetuous Rivers which precipitate themselves with noise, stay Passengers, and
beget Spectators. And the quiet ones which gently and in silence (...) those
places through which they pass, scarce find any one to behold them.
Nevertheless these impetuous Rivers are dangerous neighbors. They never do
good which is not accompanied without some damage: And their manner of
enriching is commonly by ruin and waste. It is even so with Military and Calm
Virtues; both of them are serviceable and beneficial to the Public: But the
Military do not profit innocently and without prejudice. They only repair those
ruins which themselves have made: And the riches which they distribute are
slained with Blood, and acquired by Rapine. However by reason they make a noise
and act tumultuarily, men run from all parts of the World to see them. Their
Memory receives Elogies in every Language, and Applauses from all sorts of
hands; And their Images are preserved with honor in History. From thence comes
it that all Writers make so glorious mention of Warlike women, and that on the
contrary they scarce take notice of the Peaceable, who have effected Good in a
calm repose, and by ways usual and proper to their Sex.

Th^^^^linda was one of these peaceable, obliging, and less famous Women: And
perchance we should not have at present any picture of her, if the Great St*
Gregory had not taken the pains to draw it with the same hand, wherewith he
Administered the Sacrament, Blessed the People, and wrought Miracles. She was
the Daughter of one (...) King of (...): And that which is very wonderful,
though she were born in a half barbarous Age, and more then three hundred
Leagues from the Roman Excellency and Learning, yet she equalled the Memory of
the most Accomplished, and Learned of Ancient Rome. The chief thing is that her
Science had no resemblance with those specious and superficial Sciences which
serve only for shows she was pleasing and solid, she delighted beneficially,
and with profit: and all the lights of her mind were beneficial and fruitful.

So perfect and so adorned a Virtue required a more glorious Theater, and less
distant from the eye of the world then (...) King of Lumbardy, enamoured with
her reputation, sent a magnificent Embassy to the King her Father, to ask her
in Marriage. And his Ambassadors being returned with satisfaction, he undertook
upon their relation a great piece of Gallantry, and resolved to go disguised
unto the Court of Bav^^^a, to be a Spectator of the wonders which Fame
published of Theodelinda. He saw her, he was vanquished by her; and returned
more wounded by her presence, then he had been by her reputation. A while after
the Marriage was celebrated in great pomp at Milan: And there was nothing
wanting to the happiness of their Marriage, but the lasting of it. But what
help for this* Is there not some malignant Constellation which causes the best
Fortunes to be less constant and lasting then the bad? Has not Time a spite
chiefly to handsome lives, and beautiful Couples? And do we not see that Roses
last but a day, and Thorns a whole year?

Nevertheless, this Marriage, which lasted so short a time, was to Lumbardy the
beginning of a long and important happiness. Autharus who had War with (...),
being enforced to take the field, to stop the Conquests of the French, who were
entered into his Country, Theodel^^^a in the interim staid behind, entrusted
with the Government of the State. It was very difficult to have good success
therein, being young, a stranger, and unacquainted with the Country.
Notwithstanding she did undergo this Office with so good a grace; she governed
so judiciously; and showed so much courage and dexterity in the managing of
Affairs, as she gained the approbation of all degrees: and in less then six
months she became the absolute Mistress of all hearts. Not one remained free;
not one which would not be hers. And by a strange revolution, at the same time
that Auth^rus and Childebert fought for the Crown of Lumbardy, Theolelin^^a
vanquished it without Arms, and took it innocently both from the Possessor and
Pretender.

This was not done by a trick of Fortune: she is without motion, and may well
be sported with, but can sport with no man. It was done by a particular design
of Divine Providence, which was willing to prescribe a great employment to the
Virtue of (...), and to make use of her for the good of the Church. In effect,
Autharus dyed before the end of the War: and the Lumbardus not finding
themselves strong enough for the French, made as Honorable an Accommodation as
they could with Childebert. Their first care after the conclusion of Peace, was
to choose a fit person to fill up the Throne, which Autharus dying without
Children, left vacant. It is apparent that the Customs of Nations, the
Interests of State, and the Pretentions of particular persons would have (...)
return into Bar^^ta. Her Virtue yet carried it against Custom: the Graces made
sure for her, and gained all the voices on her side: and by a general consent
her hands already accustomed to govern well, were judged the most proper to
manage happily the interests of the State, and to divert with addresses the
mischief which was feared from the ambition of par^^^^lar persons.

The Crown was solemnly delivered up to her: And from that time she began to
Reign of her self; and by the right of her Virtue, which is the fairest right
of Kings, and the most illustrious claim which can enter into their (...).
Surely this cannot be paralleld in History* And there would need a very
persuasive virtue and of great authority to effect it. They must be Graces of a
high expectation, and of a fair carriage, which could gain with so much ease
upon great Ambitious Men, and a mercenary People; and procure the unitement of
them both, in the choice of a Woman and a Stranger Being satisfied of her
dexterity and capacity, they invested her with absolute Power and Sovereignty
without restriction. They did not imitate those that bind their Princes upon
their Thrones, who tie their hands to the Scepter which they make them bear,
and take from them dispolute of the same Authority which they give them. They
only declare unto her that if after the having tried the weight of Regality,
she should think fit to share it with a Husband; they wished that she world
seek no Foreign assistance, but settle her affection upon some person of that
Kingdom.

Confirmed by this proposition, and by the advice of her Council, she cast her
eyes upon (...) Duke of Th^^^n, and divided with him her Person and Regality.
This (...) was a young Prince of a handsome aspect and of (...) courage, who was
endued with all the Qualities fit to undertake and overcome: And it was to be
^eared, le^t Fortune, which he might court, should raise him to the Throne, had
not (...) prevented her. Not content to have made him a great King, she
undertook to make him a Catholic King, and to withdraw him out of the slavery
of the Arian Heresy. This was evidently an enterprise of greater labor and of
longer time, then all those which are performed with iron and silver Engines,
with ^leets and Armed Nations. Nevertheless she accomplished it by her cares
and good offices, with Prayers and ^ears. Her Prayers drew upon (...) the light
of Heaven: And every Tear proved a persuasive reason to him, which all the
Arian Doctors were never able to answer.

Her conquest reaches farther then one individual soul, though it were a
Sovereign one and raised above others. It was more ample and of greater
advantage to the Church. The chief Noblemen of the Kingdom, and almost the
whole People being converted by the Conversion of their new King, submitted
with him to the zeal and piety of their good Queen: And this zeal was so (...)
is, and of so great authority, this piety was so efficacious and victorious,
that in a very short time all (...), and the Provinces subject to it, abjured
Arianism, and became Catholic, by the industry of a Woman She effected much
more and advanced the ^^tivity of her zeal, and the victories of her piety to a
higher degree. Adalulsus had increased his sins and dominions by the violated
rights of the Church, and by usurped Lands. He had thrown Catholic Bishops
out of their Seas, and introduced into the sheepfold disguised Thieves, public
impoisoners, and Doctors of Error and Pestilence. The virtuous Queen enjoyed no
repose till the good Pastors were recalled; till the Church was re-established
in her Rights and Honors; and till restitution was made her (...) the ^ands
which impetuous and bold Heresy had taken from her.

These actions did not proceed from an unprofitable and idle Virtue: The most
courageous and warlike ones did never act so vigorously, and with so much
success. And all the Crowns gained by the valiant Women in this History were
never worth so much as a flower of Theodelind's Crown. The great Saint Gregory,
who governed the Church at that time, understood the weight and importance of
her Services: And being willing to reader her public and lasting thanks for
them, he Dedicated his Dialogues to her by a Preface, wherein she triumphs to
this day: and wherein there i^ not a word which is not worth a Statue erected
to her Virtue.

Some time after the E^ark of Ravenna did overrun the Territories of
Agilulsus, and took in some Places which lay convenient for him, and were ill
guarded. This ^^on, which was become more gentle, yet had not suffered himself
to be enchained, quickly found again his Teeth and Claws, and hastened to take
revenge. All things tended to a perilous and scandalous War; and not only the
E^ark^at of Ravenna, but even the Patrimony of Saint Peter was in danger, if
(...), gained by Saint Gregory, had not extinguished by her dexterity and Tears
the fire which already began to be inkindled. Thereby she preserved liberty to
the Church and sacred things: she freed the Church from her yoke: she brake in
pieces the Chains prepared for the successor of the Apostles, and chased away
the Barbarians from before Rome. Her whole life was thus powerful: And I know
not whether there ever passed away one hour of it which was not beneficial
both to the Public and particular persons. The most Magnificent Churches were
built by her: and what is more to be prized then many erected Churches, was,
that by her cares and good offices Lumbardy re-entred into the Church. But we
must not make a whole Book of one Example* And I have sufficiently discoursed
of it, to encourage the Virtue of Women, to give them a holy and profitable
Emulation, to withdraw them from idleness; to make them understand, that
Christian Conquests, Conversions of People, Heroic Works, and great Crowns
belong as well to their Sex as ou^s.

PORCIE a^^le des charbons ardens, pour aller apres son Mary: et par la
hardiesse et (...) de sa mort, egale la reputation de Cat^n et la gloire de
Brutus. (...)

Porcia.
THE defeat of Brutus could not be concealed from Porcia. The noise and
mourning for it are great everywhere: The Publik as well as Particulars regret
it equally and in common: and I believe that the very Statues in the Senate and
Tribune have lamented a Citizen with whom in fine the Republike and Liberty of
Rome even then expired. This generous woman did not receive this loss with
outcryes and fainting fits; she did not violate her Cheeks and Hair; she did
not accuse Heaven, nor reproach Fortune for it; and one may say that the news
of Brutus Death found Brutus living and victorious in Porcia. Nevertheless,
with all this Fortitude and Courage, she took a resolution to die: and you need
not doubt but she will execute the resolution she has taken.

Nothing of Cowardice ought to be expected from the Daughter of Cato; nothing
of weakness from the widow of Brutus. She is courageous from her Race, and a
Philosopher by Alliance: and her Death will be as Stoicall as that of her
Husband and Father: Her kindred and friends being willing to preserve this fair
remainder of the ancient Virtue, did in vain set guards upon her: she made them
understand that they might inchain her body, but could never fetter her soul:
That she could pass through a thousand Chains, and as many closed Gates: and
that if her Fathers Virtue was able to free him from the power of Caesar; and
that of her Husband, to preserve himself from the victory of Anthony; Hers
would not remain captive to their importune charity and troublesome offices. In
fine, whether she had persuaded or prevailed with them, you see her out of
their hands: And how little soever their cares are retarded, it is much to be
feared they will come too late, and not find her alive.

A slave who had broken his Chains, and freed himself from a long imprisonment,
could not be more joyful then you behold her. Her joy notwithstanding is
modest and severe: As her heart never changes place, so her face never alters
color: and her Death from this very instant will be as quiet and serene, as
her Contentments were heretofore. She represents not to her self the place to
which she goes, nor the way she takes. She has nothing but Brutus in her
thoughts, and before her eyes, and provided she go to him, it is indifferent to
her whither she go by Sword, Precipice, or Poison. The shortest way is the best
in her opinion: and the nearest Gate, what spectre or terrifying object soever
has the guard of it, will be fitter for her purpose then one more free and
remote.

But all ways appear to her equally barred up, and the diligence of her
servants removed from about her, all that could open any passage unto death.
She pretends that this charity is a violence offered her, she is vexed and
angry at it; yet this vexation is without trouble, and this anger ascends not
to her face. All her thoughts are busied to deceive these officious Importunes,
and not to take revenge of them. There are no offensive arms which she does not
try upon her self in imagination. Her Fancy puts into her mouth, and to her
throat all it can compound of Poisons, or forge into Swords. She attempts to
strangle her self with the Scarf you see in he hand: she tried in vain to do it
with her Neck-lace and one of her Bracelets: And nothing remains but to tear
off her Hair, and work it into a Cord. Surely to commit a murder with such
instruments, is to inrage Beauty, and render the Graces cruel. But all means of
getting out of prison seems lawful and honest to a Captive.

With this thought she entered into her Closet; she found an opportunity to dye
more courageously, and without violating such ^nnocent things. She found there
a pan of Coa^s which little Cupids, the Authors of fair Couples, and
Superintendents of virtuous Amities have prepared for the ea^e of her
affection. I doubt not but she sees them by the light of the fire within her
Soul, which is mingled with that of their Torches. And you may behold them as
well as she, if your eyes were purified from the vapors which arise from
Matter: The two least present to her the pan of Coals, which they carry upon
their heads. They render her this last office, with smiles and serene
countenances: You would say that they animate her with their sparkling eyes,
and with the joy of their looks; and that their mouths half open, seem to
promise her the acclamations of Fame, and the applauses of all Ages. A third
Cupid, greater and stronger then the two other, and hanging in the air, lights
with his Torch the Coals which are in the Pan: I believe notwithstanding that
his Torch, what virtue soever it has, contributes less thereunto then his
presence. And if some one might say, that by only touching a Tree with the end
of his Finger, he could set a whole Forest on fire; it is apparent that this
Cupid might in passing by, and with his bare shadow infire Mountains, even
frozen Mountains, and covered over with Snow.

Do you not observe upon the face of Porcia the pleasing mixture which proceeds
from the light of this Torch, added to the fire of her eyes, and that which her
heart spreads upon her Cheeks? There truly it is where confusion appears noble,
and where delight and glory enters. Painters and Dyers could invent nothing
like this. And the concurrence is not so lovely upon a Rose freshly blown, when
the first rays of the day newly flaming, and still red from its birth, adds an
artificial Purple to that which is natural to it. You have a sight piercing
enough to sever the brightness of the fire from the fair dye of blood, and to
distinguish the luster which appears outward, from that which Courage begets,
and is reflected from the bottom of the Soul.

But you are too attentive in contemplating the action of Porcia: And her heart
is more visible by that then her face. With one hand she puts a burning Coal
into her mouth; with the other she takes a second, as if she needed many to
conclude her life: And whether the grief for her loss has suppressed all other
sorrows; whether she has no sense remaining but in her heart, where her soul
contracts it self about the Image of Brutus; you would say that they are Rubies
which she handles; you would say that they are Leaves of Roses which she
swallows. But whether it be insensibility or resolution, whether it be Love or
Philosophy, it does not hinder the fire she had within, fortified with an
exterior flame, from burning the ties of her soul.

I conceive them already consumed, and this generous soul speedily departing
out of her fair prison, will join it self with her likeness which is come to
receive it. Her Guards affrighted and surprised, hasten with tears in their
eyes, and complaints in their mouths. But their tears will not quench this
fire, nor will their complaints terrify Death, or chase it away from the place
into which it is entered. This fire will shine in the eyes of all Nations and
Ages, and give an eternal luster to the memory of Porcia: This Death will be
paralleld with that of Cato and Brutus: And this Closet will be as fair a
Perspective in History as the City of Vtica, and the Philippian Field.

SONNET.
PORCIA speaks.
LEss worthy of regret, then envied praise,
I by a Death which Nature did amaze,
Equaled a Father's Glory, and the Fame
Of a dear Husband, who their Fates ore-came.
Their Virtue, which I traced, did me attend
When they were gone, to guide me to my end;
But envious Fortune in revenge, did strive
By cross Designs, to keep me still alive.
My cruel Friends amidst this hot alarm,
By their offensive cares my hands disarm;
Therein obstructing, like inhumane foes,
My passage to sweet Death, whose gates they close.
But Love, to give my Soul desired room,
Came with his Shafts to open me my Tomb;
And I, for want of weapons, to expire,
Swallowed the Coals his Torch had set on fire.
The Elogy of Porcia.
THis Picture is of a magnanimous Woman, who dies of Grief and Love, and
resolutely like a Stoic. It is the famous Porcia who was the Rival of a Father
Defender of the Public Liberty, and of a Husband the destroyer of Tyranny:
And who renewed in the Age of Riot and Pleasure, the Virtue and Severity of the
Primitive Republic. She was the daughter of Cato, and the wise of Brutus: Of
the one she was born constant and invincible: she became wise and learned from
the other: and had Virtue for her inheritance, and Philosophy for her Dowry.
Her Husband ruminating upon the death of Caesar, and the Deliverance of the
oppressed Republic: she deserv^d to be admitted to the communication of this
fatal secret, and to assist his high thoug^ts busied in contriving the Destiny
of the Empire. She conspired with him in heart and spirit; she promised to send
at least her desires, her vows and zeal to the execution. And since her Husband
seemed to mistrust her silence and fidelity, she made by one stroke of a dagger
a great and painful wound in her thigh: And thereby she showed him what she was
able to do against torments, and gave him some of her blood in Hostage for her
Constancy and Loyalty.

After the death of Caesar, and the ruin of Pompey's Faction; Brutus having
slain himself upon the bloody Body of the Republic, defeated in the Philippian
Plain; Porcia d^ed not like him, blaspheming against Virtue, and repenting her
self for having ever served it. She continued her reverence to it to the last;
and honored it with her last words. Seeing her self besieged by her kindred,
which took from her all means of cutting asunder the ties of her soul, she
resolved to kindle there a fire with burning Coals, which she swallowed down.
Thus she set at liberty what remained of her Father and Husband: And by her
death the blood of the one, and the heart of the other, once more overcame
Tyranny.

MORAL REFLECTION.
WOmen ought to learn from this example, that the fault cannot be charged upon
their Sex that they are not valiant: That their infirmities are vices of
Custom, and not any defect of Nature: And that a great heart is no more
discomposed by a tender body, then is a great Intelligence by a beautiful
Planet. Doves would have the boldness of Eagles, and Erins the courage of
Lions, if their souls were of the same Species.

One may gather out of the same Example, another instruction for Husbands:
Brutus was a man honest enough, and a Philosopher able enough to read them a
Lecture. And they should not be ashamed to learn of him, that Wives are given
them for Assistants and Co-adjutresses, that they ought to have a place for
them as well in their Closets as Beds; and to share with them in affairs no
less then at Table: And that capacity grows from employment, and fidelity from
confidence. Judgment proceeds from the head which is not changeable from the
variety of that which covers it. Augustus proposed nothing to the Senate, upon
which he had not deliberated with Li^ia who was as his Associate in the Empire,
and if one may say so, his Domestic Colleague. The Holiest of our Kings being
a Prisoner to the Saracens, would conclude nothing about his Freedom but with
the consent of the Queen his Wife: And under the Reign of Ferdinand, Spain was
not happy and victorious, but by the prudence and courage of Isabella. The
ensuing Question will inform us, whether Porcia were endued with generosity?
And whether women be capable thereof?

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether Women be capable of an Eminent Generosity?
I Have been present at some Disputes undertaken upon this Question: And
sometimes it has caused me to have innocent and pleasing quarrels with my
Friends. I have seen some who could not endure that a Woman should be commended
for Generosity: It is, said they, as if one should praise her for having a good
seat on horseback, and for well handling her Arms: It is as if one would set
her forth with a Helmet or the skin of a Lion: It were to confound the bounds
which sever us, and place disorder in Morality. And a generous Woman is no less
a Solecism then a Woman Doctor, and a Woman Cavalier. It is an incongruity
almost as undecent as a bearded Woman.

To this I did Answer, that Virtues having their seat in the Soul, and needing
only a good disposition of the Soul to operate, belong to both Sexes; That
Generosity is one of those Virtues: That the office of the Body and the action
of its Members are not necessary to it; That all its Functions are interior
and performed in the heart: And that the heart of Man and Woman is of the same
Matter and Form. I added thereunto, that the Comparison of Arms and Military
Exercises concluded nothing against the Generosity of Women: That all things
are becoming to well-shaped persons and of a handsome aspect: That Semiram^^,
H^psicrates and (...) were as gracefully set forth with Helmets as with Crowns:
And that another as well known in Fables, was not found unhandsom in the Lions
skin, which Hercules wore. That besides that, there have been women seen who
knew how to manage a horse, to throw a dart, and use their swords with a good
grace. No just comparison can be made, nor a right consequence drawn from the
exercises of the Body in reference to the Habits of the Soul. That a Woman
Doctor and a Woman Cavalier were but Errors of Grammar which do not violate
Morality. That Generosity not being fastened to the heart of a man as a beard
is to his face, it might belong without any incongruity or undecency to both
Sexes.

To these Reasons which came to my mind, and which I alleged tumultuary and
without choice in like Disputes, others of more weight and better prepared may
be added upon meditation. Generosity, to define it rightly* is a height of
courage, or an Elevation of mind, whereby a soul raised above interest and
profit, is led inviolably and without deviation unto Duty which is labourious,
and to Gallantry which is painful and difficult in appearance. And because this
disposition taken in its usual foil, and in respect of matter, scarce belongs
to any but Great and Noble Persons: the name of Generosity has been given to
it, which is a name of Greatness and Nobility. Whether then that we take
Generosity materially, and for that cream of good blood and pure Spirits which
nourish and sustain it: Whether we take it Morally for an immutable and
constant resolution to pursue Duty and Gallantry, even to the contempt of
Interest, and with the loss of benefit, it will appear that in either sense,
Women are no less capable thereof then Men.

First, it was never said, that Nobility appertained only to one Sex, and that
the cream of good blood was all on the one side, and all the dregs on the
other. The distribution of it is equally made, and according to natural
Justice. Sisters possess it in common and without distinction with their
Brothers* And it is with noble Races as with Pomegranate Trees, which bare no
Flowers without Purple, nor Fruit without Crowns: And it is the like with Palm
Trees, whole Males and Females are of equal Nobleness. Wherefore a noble mind
belonging no less to Women then Men, and the pure blood dispersing its self
equally through the veins from their Birth: it remains that Generosity should
have on either part an equal stock, and that the matter of which it is composed
should be common.

Secondly, The true form and proper spirit of Generosity proceeds from the
Intention, and pursuit of that pure and laborious Good which is its object And
this object is not so difficult, nor placed in so high a Region as women cannot
pretend to it. They are not so meanly born that they cannot raise themselves
above what is pleasing and profitable: they may have higher a^ms and more noble
desires; Nature has given them as well as to us, the relish and appetite of
acting gallantly: And in History the footsteps remain still fresh, of those
who have arrived to this virtue through thorny passages and precipices, even
through flames and tortures. The frequent toyls they have undergone to run
after a luminous and deceitful Fantome, testify their disposition and forces,
showing what they are able to do herein. and when Queens and Princesses shall
be exposed, who have cast themselves from their Thrones, who have mounted upon
flaming Piles, who have passed through Swords, to follow a seeming and
imaginary Good, who will be so incredulous and obstinate as to deny that Women
have a Natural inclination to an effective and real Good?

Thirdly, as Princes and great Persons have their Duties and a Gallantry which
is proper to their Fortunes: So Princesses and great Ladies, besides the Duties
and Gallantry of their Sex, have second Duties, and a particular Gallantry,
which appertains to the Decency of their condition. Now if these Duties be
laborious, if this Gallantry be difficult and environed with dangers; if one
cannot arrive to it but with trouble and ruins? If to attain to it one must
abandon certain Interest, and ruin a present Fortune? If one must part with
his blood, and expose his life, what will a Courageous Woman and of qua^^ty do,
and to what side will she betake her self? Can any one wish that she should
submit to fear and conjectures* That she should expose her honor to preserve
her Fortunes? That she should fail in her Duty, not to prejudice her estate?
That she should suffer her blood to be stained, rather then part with one drop
of it* This truly would be very poor, and unworthy of a Noble Soul. She must
then renounce the pleasure and profit; she must trample upon the Mines of her
Interests: she must renounce Fortune, and reject her Parents; she must expose
her self even to death and punishments, to advance (...) and with decency to
Duty.

Since this cannot be effected without an Heroic Generosity, one must of
necessity either grant this Generosity to Women, or allow that they may be
Covetous and Interessed out of Duty; that they be lazy and disloyal, handsomely
and with decency, ungrateful and treacherous by the right of Nature, and the
privilege of their Sex.

But Nature has not conferred on them so bad a Right, no^ so scandalous a
Privilege. On the contrary, she would have them all born with an inclination
to what is glorious: And whether she has infused some Ray into their souls; or
whether their hearts in their very Birth have received in Impression of it,
like to that which Iron receives from the Load stone: the^ hearts adhere unto
this luster, in what matter soeve^^ is found: And their souls at the first
Idea, which excite^ the rage (...) they have received of it, turn to it by
their own instinct, and without ex^pecting any extrinsical motion which
presses them to it. From thence it comes that Women are generally curious in
what is fair and glorious, diligently seeking after all the Species of it, and
observing all the Rules and Forms thereof. And if upon their Bodies, and in
their Garments, in their Movables, and all things else they so pas^ionatly
affect, a material and sensible Beauty, which is of the lowest Order* It is
not credible, that they have less inclination to the Intellectual Beauty; and
of the first Order, which is the Beauty of what is Noble and Gallant. From
hence we may conclude regularly, and in good form, that the inclination to this
Splendo^ being, as truly it is, the Fountain of true Generosity, one cannot
deprive them of it without taking from them thereby that inclination which is
most Natural to them; it being the second spirit of their hearts, and the first
property of their Sex.

But why should we take it from them? Has Nature made them les^ Noble then the
Females of other Animals, to whom she has given another kind of Generosity,
which she has not bestowed on the (...)* I know not whether any man has made
this observation before me; yet it ought to be made, and Women may draw
instruction, and advantage from thence. Lions and Tigers, Leopards,
Male-Eagles, and all other beasts which are naturally so fierce and courageous,
never fight but for Interest, and Prey: And their whole Courage, to express it
well, is but a violen^ greediness; Their Valor is but for necessity and
Rapine: Hunger is the only Punctilio of Honor which sets them on, and without
this provocation their fierceness pines away, and their metal grows dull. It
is not the same with Females, their metal is more Noble, and their valor less
Interested. They fight not only for their proper necessities, and do it as
courageously as the Males: But they fight also for others wants, for the
defense and preservation of their young ones, which the Males use not to do;
even to that height, that they expose themselves to fire and sword for this
Duty, which is the only Duty and Good they are capable of. Has Nature then
given Generosity to Lions and Eagles, has she given it to Turtles and Doves,
and shall it not be in her power to give it to Women, to whom she has given a
Soul of the same form, a Heart of the same temper. Blood and Spirits of the
same tincture as she has given to Men? Let us conceive her to be more regular
and exact in her Works: We will believe nothing of it gratis, no^ out of
complacency: We ground our belief upon Natural Reasons, and the Morality which
Philosophy alleges for it. We believe upon ancient Examples, and those Modern
ones, which History has conceived of it: And if all others were forgotten, we
should have enough of this which is of our Nation; which is present before our
eyes; which has begotten astonishment in our Age, and will give emulation to
all Posterity.

EXAMPLE.
Francis Cezely the Lady of Barry.
THere are some froward persons, who never esteem any but strangers, and can
approve nothing but Antiquity: who generally dislike all that is of their own
Country, and have always a quarrel to the Age they live in. These kind of
People adore* Demi- Caesar's of Plaster, and Pompeys of Marble, who time has
maimed; and scarce cast their eyes upon entire and living Hero's of their own
Age. They show us Tamberl^^s and (...) as a wonder, who are the Divinities of
their Galleries and Closets. They allege to us Alphonsos and G^smans, not
without an Elogy; and incessantly Preach to us of Granadian virtues, of a
Moorish Wisdom. As for French Virtues, which speak their own Language, and are
born in their sight, they cite them not but with a spirit of contradiction, and
to reprehend them. These Gentlemen think much to endure the Air and Soil of
their own Country: And if they bear any respect to the Sun which inlightens
them, the reason is, because it comes from the Indies, and was in being before
the Deluge. We ought to harbor more reasonable thoughts, and judge of things
more discreetly, and with more equity. Virtues are not National, nor tied to
differences of Time: There are some of all Countries and Ages: And I may say,
that it is the same with those of these days, as with our Sun, which is as
Great as in the time of our Progenitors, and as luminous as that which produces
the gold and precious stones of the Indies. This will appear in the subsequent
Example: It is Modern, and of France, and more to be valued then all that
Antiquity, whether Grecian or Roman has ever seen most Generous and
Illustrious.

Whilst Henry the Third fought against the Head of the League about Paris, the
Provinces being torn in pieces by their own Members, received dangerous wounds.
His strongest Attempts were upon (...), where the Confederates had either taken
by force, or gained by practice all the best Places. They only wanted La^cate
to become absolute Masters of that Province; and to have free Commerce with
Spain, which was a great supporter of the League. Being out of hope to possess
it by open Hostility, and to enter it like Lions and by a Breach, they had
recourse to a Stratagem of ill example, and sought out by-ways to enter in
like Foxes. This Device being dexterously managed, took effect as they had
Designed. And Monsieur de Barry who held La^cate for the King, being gone out
with no sinister intention upon the Liberty, which a short Cessation of Arms
had given him, fell into an Ambuscado which was laid for him.

The Confederates of the League conceived La^cate to the taken with the
Governor: but they had neither taken his Fidelity nor Constancy: And in case
his Fidelity and Constancy should have been taken; he had entrusted the place
with another Constancy, and a second Fidelity, which were better fortified, and
harder to be taken then its Bulwarks and Half-moons. I speak of his Wife, whom
he privately advertized of his mishap, injoyning her by a few words, written
with a coal upon his Handkercher, to repair as soon as possibly she could to
La^cate. This Gallant and Generous Woman did not deliberate upon the Orders
which required the conduct and courage of the best experienced Captain: And
because expedition was particularly recommended to her, she immediately put to
Sea and exposed her self to the dangers of Water and Fire, to Tempests, and the
Frigots of the Enemy. And God who reserved her for a far more Heroic and
exemplar combat, ordained that she should happily arrive at La^cate.

Mean while Monsieur de Barry was carried prisoner to Narb^^^: And La^cate was
there a^taqu'd by continual Assaults given to his Courage and Fidelity. There
was neither fire nor sword employed in these Assaults. A man of so much Honor
and Courage, who had contemned two thousand Pikes, and as many Muskets upon a
Breach, could not fear a Dagger or a Pistol in a Chamber. He was batterd only
with large Offers and magnificent Promises, with Governments and Pensions: Unto
which, to Batter him on all sides, words of terror, and threats of death were
added against his Children and Wife, in case he provided not for their safety,
by the rendition of the Place.

In all these Assaults Monsieur de Barry showed himself a dis-interessed
Servant, a Courageous Husband, and undaunted Father. His Answer was, That he
had never known other Interest to preserve, then his Honor; not pretended to
any other Fortune, then the discharge of his Duty: That Governments and
Pensions were too weak Arms to vanquish him. That an innocent and unspotted
Poverty would be more glorious to him, and give him better content, then
criminal and sullyed Riches: That the death of his Wife and Children, which
they placed before his eyes, was a Fantome which did no ways affright him:
that he owed much to his own Blood and Nature, but far more to his Loyalty and
Prince. That his Reputation was never to him then his Family, and his
Conscience more interior, and of an older date then his Posterity: That a fit
of the Cholick might to morrow take away his Wife, that his Children might be
as soon hurryed away by a Fever; and that it should not be said, that to
reserve his Wife for the Cholick, and his Children for a Fever, he had robbed
his Prince of his Right, his Country of Repose, his Name and Race of their
Honors.

When La^cate was Battered in this manner at Narb^^^, the Confederates of the
League battered it at a nearer distance, in a place which they conceived less
Naturally strong: And it was done with weapons from which they expected more
effect, then by Mines and Canons. They presented themselves before La^^ate, and
demanded to speak with Madam de Barry, who was prepared for all the sad events
which so dismal a beginning might produce They acquainted her that her Husband
was their Prisoner: That after his lost Liberty, he was still in the Eve of
loosing his life: that both nevertheless depended on her: That an easy ransom
should be set upon him: And that without alienating his Lands, without emptying
his Coffers or pawning his Jewels; in a word, he should be restored to her for
the bare keys of La^cate.

This Lady was of a Family which a Canonized Saint, and a Pope esteemed
Blessed, had in some kind Sanctified. By her Father she was of the Race of St.
Ro^^. By his Mother who was of the House of the Earl of Ro^^^, she came to be
allied to Urban the fifth. Besides this Heriditary Sanctity, and belonging to
her Family, she had much Piety of her own, and was very virtuous by her own
Acquisitions. Her Piety nevertheless was not tepide and timorous: her Virtues
were none of those idle and Antic ones, which amuse the most part of Women.
They were strong and courageous; they acted continually and with vigor; and
this vigor was supported by a Generosity which might make a life Heroic, if
it had been placed in another Sex, and in a Sovereign Condition.

She needed no less courage to resist the Assault, and to acquit her self with
honor of so perilous an Attempt which was made upon her. She made answer to
those that proposed to her an exchange of La^cate, and her Loyalty for her
husband: That she owed her first and highest affections to her King and
Fidelity: And that she would not take them off to give them to her husband, to
whom she owed but second and inferior ones. That she loved him entirely, and
had great tenderness for him, yet loved him in his degree and with order, and
that there was nothing remiss or weak in her tenderness. That she understood
better then any body the worth of her Husband: That were he to be sold
innocently, and to be put to a Lawful ransom, she would not only alienate her
Lands and pawn her Jewels to redeem him, but even rent out the labor of her
hands, and make money of her blood and death, if she could compass it by her
sweat and pains. That nevertheless for this, she would never alienate her
Fidelity, nor engage therein one single point of her Conscience: And that if
she should make so ill a bargain, her husband would be the first breaker of it.
That he would never be persuaded to depart out of Prison without his honor;
nay he would never descend from a Scaffold, nor ascend unto a Throne without
it. But should he forget his honor (went she on) yet I will never be
unmindfull of mine: I know too well the value of it, nor will I ever dispossess
my self thereof for any gain or loss which may arise from it. I understand very
well to what Marriage obliges me; and what I owe to my Family: But I was not
born a married Person, as I am born a French-Woman. And it shall never be said
that to preserve a Family, which was but yesterday, and peradventure will not
be to morrow, I have laid open a Fort to Rebellion, and contributed to the
ruin of my Country.

The Confederates of the League being overcome and repulsed at this first
Assault, did not yet retire: they continued the Battery for the space of seven
weeks: And every day they gave some new onset upon the Place, through the heart
of this generous Woman. Sometimes they swear to make her Husband suffer all
sorts of torments: And they made her endure them all in her imagination with
terrifying looks, and far more frightfull words. Sometimes they threatened to
render him back to her by piecemeal: And these threats were worse then Canon
shots, or Grenades, but they fell upon a heart which was stronger then the
strongest Bulwarks; and which would not have yielded either for Canon shot, or
for all their Grenades. In fine, the Confederates of the League despaired of
taking La^cate by so well guarded a place: and the doleful and tragic
execution which followed their despair, clearly showed that they spoke in good
earnest; and that their threats were real. Monsieur de Barry was strangled in
his Chamber by the hand of an Executioner: And neither the Cord nor Engine
wherewith he was strangled, could not draw from his mouth any sign of
irresolution, nor one single word of weakness. In History there are more
glorious and famous Deaths then this; but a more magnanimous and heroic one
has not been seen. Remarkable Deaths are not made so, by the Grandeur of the
Arms which destroy; they arise from the greatness of Courage, and the force of
resolution: and there are enough which will not yield before two hundred Piles,
and a battery of twelve Canon. But there are few which render not themselves to
the Rope of an Executioner. Surely it were to be wished, for the good of the
State, that we might have many Copies of this gallant Man, and of this generous
Woman: If there were but one in every Town of the Kingdom, it would be at least
impregnable through coveteousness or fear.

The sending back the body of Monsieur de Barry, did in a strange manner
incense the Garrison. In the first heat of anger and compassion, the Soldiers
transported by both, ran unto the Governors house, with a resolution to kill
Monsieur de Loupian, who was a Gentleman of quality, and a particular Confident
of the house of ^oye^^e. Monsieur Mont^^rancy, who kept him Prisoner, being
advertised of the taking of Monsieur de Barry, had given him in charge to his
wife, that he might be responsible to her for the life of her husband; and that
by the right of Reprisals he might make satisfaction with his own life if the
other miscarryed. Doubtless there had been an end of him, and all the credit of
the League could not have saved him in this tumult, if Madam de Barry had not
been more generous and humane then is observed in the single order of Nature.
But she was so after a more pure and sublime manner: and there was in her heart
another kind of spirit, and other principles, differing from the spirit of the
world, and the Maxims of Morality. She presented her self before this
irritated Troop, and spoke so efficaciously, and with so powerful and
persuasive a grace of Monsieur de Loupians Innocence, of the Crime they would
commit, in making him undergo the penalty of a murder, whereof he was not
guilty; of the punishment God would infallibly inflict upon this offense; that
she appeased their spirits, and removed all spite and rage from their grief.
Addressing her self afterward to her Son He^^d^s, whom the soldiers had
followed, she proposed to him the Heroic constancy, and the inviolable
Fidelity of his Father; The Patrimony of Glory which his death had purchased to
their Family; the stain which the unjustly spilt blood of Monsieur de Loupian
would bring upon this still-fresh Glory: the repentance which follows
precipitated Anger and unlawful Revenges: The Protection they ought to expect
from him, who makes himself to be called the Father of Orphans, and the
Defender of Widows. And by these reasons, fortifyed by her example, and
animated by a spirit of Virtue and Authority, she saved this poor Gentleman,
and sent him back to Monsieur Mont^^rancy, with a Convoy.

The History of Spain makes a great deal of noise about the Generosity of
G^^^an the Good, who being summoned by the Moors either to deliver up Terissa,
which he defended, or to be a Spectator of his Sons death, who was a Prisoner
in their hands, would not become a Traitor to remain a Father, and chose rather
to preserve his Honor then his Race. Truly this Generosity was Heroic: And
Spain, so magnificent in great words, and in vast and high expressions, has no
words so great, nor expressions so vast which can equal it. Nevertheless the
action of a Woman, and a French Woman has surpassed it: And the Loyalty of
Madam de Barry was so much the more Gallant and Generous then that of Gu^man,
in as much as a dearer pledge, and a more irreparable and sensible loss was to
be hazarded thereby. The Spaniard consented to the loss of a young Plant which
was dear to him, and made one part of himself: But perchance this young plant
was not single: This part was served from him; And besides others might grow up
in its place. The French Woman came not off at so cheap a rate; she was to
undergo the loss of the Stem, and of all the Roots. She was to suffer the
Incision of a part which was inherent in her; which stuck to her flesh and
bones, which was flesh of her flesh, and bone of her bone, which made up the
mo^ty of her heart and spirit. And the chiefest matter is, that this so
difficult and costly fidelity was exercised in a time of trouble and tumult; In
a time when Laws were in disorder, and Duties in confusion: when Rebellion was
Canonized by the People, and Loyalty made an Hackny: when Sovereignty was
L^tigious, and brought into Dispute, when the oppressed Crown seemed ready to
be torn in pieces, or to change its Master.

The Command of La^cate continued to this generous Widow: And for the space of
seven years she performed the Functions of it with so much courage, and with so
laborious an Assiduity, as she left nothing more to be desired in point of her
care and conduct. By her presence she gave encouragement to the labors and
exercises of the Soldiers: She was assisting in their Duties, and kept them in
an exact Order, and under a regular Discipline: She Commanded pleasingly, and
with Dignity; and she her self added example, and the show of action to her
Commands: And whatsoever an active and vigilant Captain, Armed with Authority,
could have done in a Garrison Town, this gallant Woman did it generously and
with success, she did it with comeliness and a pleasing grace.

The deceased King Henry the Great, who esteemed nothing rashly and out of
fancy, highly prized this Generosity: And when some Courtiers affecting the
Government of La^cate, represented to him, that a Place of such importance was
not safe in the hands of a Woman: He often Answered, That he reposed more Trust
in this Woman, then in the ablest Man of his Kingdom: That he knew not any one,
who could give so gallant an Earnest, or so precious a Pledge of their
Fidelity, as she had done: And that above all, it concerned the honor of
France, to have it known, that there were Ladies of that Nation, not inferior
to Captains. Nothing could be added to these few words: They spoke more then
our longest Elogies can do. They Crown the Memory of this Generous Woman, and
are a greater Honor to her then a triumphant Arch, and many Statues.

ARRIE fortify son Mary contre la Mort et par l'essay et l'exemple de la
sienne, (...) qu'on meurt sans douleur, quand on meurt auec courage. (...)

Arria.
WE are come too late, and have lost the fairest piece of the most magnanimous
action Rome has ever seen: The Actors as you see are few in number, but all
choice and famous ones: And what they do in private, and without noise, will
be speedily carried to Theaters and public Places, and will receive Applauses
from all free and Roman Hands.

You come not so far off, and are not so great a stranger to Rome, that you
have heard no speech of Arria. She is a modern Copy of the ancient Virtue: she
is a young woman, and has the Features of the old Republike. Her Apparel and
Speech suits indeed with this time: but her Courage, Constancy, and Fidelity
are of the Sabi^s Age. And though she lives under the Reign of Claudius the
Simple, and in the Court of Messeline the Incontinent, yet nothing of this
Reign, nor of this Court appears in her Manners: They are of Lucrecia's Age, or
of some other far purer Time, and less remote from the primitive Virtue. Common
Fame may have told you all that can be said of this woman's Virtue: but it could
not as yet inform you what you see of her Courage.

She returned long since from Dalmatia, following in a small Bark the Fortune
and Ship of her Husband, who was led away Captive. You may have heard that he
had been one of the Heads of the Scribonian Conspiracy; and that he h^d liberty
to pass which way he pleased to Messalin and Narcissus. His wife perceiving him
irresolute, between Fear and Courage, she her self took a courageous
resolution, that she might fortify him by her example, and teach him how to
make choice of a Consular Death, and equal to the (...) and Triumphs of his
Ancestors. I could wish that we had been present at the Discourse which she
newly had with him. We might have heard the Images of the Cicinna^s speak: we
might have seen the memory of Cato and Brutus, and the glory of all the
Defenders of Liberty laid before him to give him Courage.

To the force of so many Heroic reasons, and of so many magnanimous words, she
added the force of her Example, which is far more Heroic and Magnanimous. And
the mortal stroke she but even now gave her self, set a value upon her
Reasons, and fortified them by a present Authority, and by a Personal and
still-fresh Experiment. She exhorts him with her eyes, and countenance as you
see: she exhorts him with her hand, with which she presents him a Dagger. But
her most efficacious and pressing Exhortation is that of her wound, which is a
mouth of good credit and belief; a mouth which can only say what it thinks, and
nothing which it does not persuade. This stream of blood which flows from
thence, has her voice and spirit: and this spent all warm, that it penetrates
the heart of Cicinnas, dissipates his fears and coldness; stays his trembling
fits, and fortifies his weakness; and raises up there against Death a true
Patriciman Virtue, of the Age of Liberty, and of the spirit of Rome.

Arria accompanies with the sweetness of her eyes the vigor of this spirit:
and the shadow of approaching Death was so far from obscuring them, that they
never cast forth more fire; they never diffused so pure and penetrating a
light. You believe peradventure that this is done by an effusion which is
natural and common to all Torches which draw near their end. For my part I
believe, and believe it with more probability, that this surplusage of light
issues from the very soul of Arria, which shows it self openly by these fair
Gates to the soul of Cicinna^, and exhorts it to ^ally forth courageously after
her. But from what spring s^ever this pure and glorious effusion arises; it is
certain that Cicinna is penetrated by it: and his soul, which fear had
imprisoned, being now inflamed and attracted by the power of this light,
expects only the fatal stroke which was to set it at liberty.

To give this blow, Arria presents him a Dagger, still warm with her blood and
courage. Love is the mediator of this commerce, and at the same time, and by
the same inspiration infuseth courage into the mind of Arria, and resolution
into the spirit of Cicinna. Take not this Love for one of those nice ones in
whom Poppy causes the headache, and who would not adventure to touch a Rose,
unless it be disarmed: It is one of those courageous and magnanimous Loves, of
those which have produced Heroes and Heroesses, of those which know no other
Garlands but Helmets, no other Posies but Swords, of those which take delight
in Frost and Rain

, in Chains and Prisons. And I am much mistaken if it be not the very same Love
which led Euadne to the flaming pile of her Husband, which sparkled the Sword
wherewith the true Dido guarded her self from a second Marriage: and which
lately also cut off the Hair of the Virtuous Hypsicratea, put the Helmet on her
head, and made a Queen become a Foot-soldier in the Army of Mithridates.

At present this Love plays the Exhorter and Philosopher, it speaks to Cicinna
of liberty and glory, and animates him to follow the Example and Courage of his
wife. You would say, that in guiding his hand to the Dagger which is offered
him, she assures him, that it will cut off the ligaments of his soul without
hurting him; that it has been mollified in the bosom of Arria, and by the
fire of her heart; that her blood has qualified it, and take from thence all
that it had of malignity and sharpness: and that not only so Noble and
Honorable a weapon as that, but even a Cord presented by the hand of so
gallant a woman, would be more glorious then many Diadems wrought by the hand
of Fortune, and presented by those of Messaline.

Cicinna seems fully persuaded by these reasons, and confirms them by his
gesture and countenance. He is no longer the same fearful and irresolute man
as before: He has still the same head and body, but another heart is placed in
this body, and another spirit in this head. He has no longer any blood in his
veins which is not Roman: All his thoughts are triumphant, and all his
sentiments worthy of a Consul: and shortly his soul, greater then Fortune, and
stronger then Death, will depart victorious over both, and reunite it self to
the soul of Arria.

This Example of constancy and conjugall Fidelity is very precious to Rome at
this time: and no doubt but the young Arria and Trascus her Husband, who are
spectators thereof, will make good use of it. They greedily and studiously
collect the circumstances thereof, and look upon it as the principal piece of
their Patrimony. Truly it is wonderful to behold a wisdom at the age of
eighteen; to behold maturity and youth in one and the same head. To see a woman
courageous and constant; a woman grave and serious in an age of divertisements
and pleasures. She conceives her self more rich from the lessons and examples
of her mother, then from the succession of all the Consuls of her House: and
three drops of her blood, and four syllables of her last words have something
in them which is dearer to her then all the Pearls of her Ancestors. She
likewise stores up these words, and lays up about her heart all that she can
gather of his blood, and of the spirit which is mingled with it. Surely this
must needs be her good Genius, who inspires her so timely to arm her self
thereby: and she cannot choose but foresee the occasions wherein it will be
useful to her to have conserved the memory of her Mother, and fortified her
self with her Blood and Courage.

Traseus was no less solicitous to reap benefit by this illustrious Example:
The present misfortune of Cicinna is a presage to him of his future mishap: and
not finding himself so weak as to crouch under the age, nor so powerful as to
alter it; he clearly sees that the least he can expect, is to be ruined by it
after the rest. He restifies at least by his countenance that he will not fall
cowardly, nor expect till they push him on: and all the rules of Phisiognomy
are deceitful, or he will be an Original of his time, and his death will have
one day a place amongst the Heroic Examples.

SONNET.
ARRIA speaks.
ARria instructs her Husband, by her wound,
That in a gallant Death no smart is found:
The Noble Blood, which from her Bosom flows,
Of her Chaste Fire the heat and tincture shows.
Conjoynth with this blood of matchless worth,
A Fate-subduing Love has issued forth;
Who thus Cicinna's coldness does exhort
To close thus gallant Scene with like effort.
Thy Honor now Cicinna, is at slake
No less then is thy Life; then Courage take:
Beware lest abject fear restrain thy hand,
And put thy Glory to a shameful stand.
Arria thy wound upon her self has ta^ne;
To her own Death she has annexed the pain
Of th^^e, and by (...) extremely rare,
Has only le^t it is Glory to thy share.
Elogy of Arria.
IT is true that the Reign of the fifth Caesar was but a perpetual Comedy: But
the Interludes thereof were bloody and Tra^^call: And cruelty was almost
continually mixed there, with the loves of Messal^^, and the Impostures of
Nar^issa. The Spectators grew at length weary of so ill composed and
represented a Scene: And some of the least patient, and most Courageous amongst
them, resolved to force the Republike out of the hands of these Stage Players.
Nevertheless the Conspirators failing in the success they promised themselves,
(...), who was their Head, happened to be killed in (...): And his Accomplices,
abandoned by reason of his death, remained in the power of the Beast, whom they
had enraged.

Afterward (...), who was the most engaged in the Plot, was apprehended and
brought to Rome. The Courageous and Faithful Arria did not deliberate, whether
she ought to follow him. It came not into her thoughts that Adversity was a
Divorce: she did not believe that bad Fortune ought to be more powerful then
Love; nor that it could Lawfully dissolve Marriages. On the contrary, she
believed that she was the Wife of Cicinna, a Criminal and Prisoner, as she had
been of Cicinna's a Favorite and Consul; and that she ought to have as great a
share in his Chains and Punishments, as she had in his Fortunes and Glory. She
accompanied him to the Ship: And at the instant of Imbarking, seeing her self
put back by the Guards: You will permit at least, says she, that a Senator of
an ancient Consulary Race, may have some body to wait upon him, during so long
a Voyage. I alone will supply the Places of his Attendants: And the Ship will
not be the more burdened, nor the more exposed to Tempests.

None being able to persuade these Barbarous People to receive her all entire,
she did not forbear in spite of them, to imbark her spirit and heart with her
Husband; and that she might follow him, at least in part, she put her Body into
a Fishermans Bark, and exposed it to the Winds and Waves which carried away the
rest. Fortune favored so courageous a Fidelity: The Spirit and Body of Arria
arrived at Rome at the same time: And being reunited at their arrival, did
jointly and with mutual cares solicit the freedom of Cicinna. Her endeavors
finding ill success, she resolved to die: And she sufficiently explained her
self, by the reproach she used toward the wife of (...) for surviving the
death of her Husband, slain in her bosom.

Her Son-in-Law Thrascus alleged all that he could devise to persuade her to
live: All that he could invent not prevailing with her: You have a mind then,
says he, that your Daughter should abandon her self to the like despair: And
you condemn her to die with me, when Fortune shall ordain that I must perish.
My Example does not condemn her (replied she:) And when she shall have lived as
long, and with as sweet an harmony, as I have done with Cicinna, she may die
boldly without my coming back to take the sword out of her hand, or the poison
out of her mouth. Her kindred being advertised by this Answer, that her
Resolution was of more force then their Reasons, they renewed their cares and
diligences toward her. She besought them to suffer her quietly to die, and not
to change an easy death into a painful one Having said this, she violently
threw her self against the next Wall, and fell into a swound. Being come again
to her self with much ado: I did tell you, says she, that all you could do,
was but to hinder me from dying quietly and at ease.

All the violent Attempts which Arria made upon her soul, did not loosen the
soul of Cicinna, nor persuaded it to depart Honorably out of the World, and
without expecting the violence of his Enemies. She went at last to see him; And
declared to him, that if he had not courage enough to go first, he ought at
least to have enough to follow her. She represented to him on the one side, the
shame of being continually made a (...) game by a prostituted Woman and an
insolent Servant, who made a Scene of the Court, and a Fantome of his Masters.
On the other side she remonstrated to him the Infamy which the Executioner left
to the Ashes and Memory of those that died by his hands. She often repeated to
him, that death was only terrible to irresolute and timorous persons: That it
does never wound such Courageous Souls, as loosen voluntarily themselves, and
prevent the hand of force. That this last Act would be more looked upon in
History, then his Consulship; and would be more resplendent then the Triumphs
of his Ancestors. And perceiving that he still deliberated between Resolution
and Fear, she plunged a Dagger into her own bosom, which she had provided for
that purpose: And then drawing it forth warm and dropping, she presented it to
him with these words, which were the most Heroic and Victorious that ever
issued from a Romans mouth: Take this Dagger Cicinna, it has done me no harm.
Cicinna received from her hand, with the Weapon, the Spirit and Courage which
came forth of her wound: And died rather by the Magnanimity of Arria, then by
his own Courage.

MORAL REFLECTION.
LEt Christian Ladies learn of this Idolatress, in what dis-interessed Love and
conjugal Fidelity does consist: Let them observe how many Combats she has
fought, and how many Victories she has gained. She had a present and future
Interest in his Possessions and Hopes. She was Young, Rich, and the friend of
Messal^^: She might have left her husband to Justice, and reserved her self for
a better Fortune, and a more happy Marriage. Her Riches, her Beauty, her Youth
were no Criminals: They had not conspired against the Prince: And it was not
against them Commissioners were appointed, and Informations given. She rejected
nevertheless, the Temptations of her Age and Interest. She listened only to her
Fidelity and Love: And taught her whole Sex by her Example, that a good Woman
has no other Interest, then her Hu^band; that to her, there was but one Man in
all the World; and that he dying, Riches, Youth and Beauty die to her.

Arria likewise reads a second Lesson to Women, which is no less important, nor
less useful then the first: she teaches them how that Person is deceived, who
said that Marriage was but a name of pleasure: And that even now adays they
are much mistaken, who believe it to be a community of Goods and Fortunes. It
is a name of Yoke and Affliction, a community of Evils and Troubles; a society
of Cares and Labors. And it is fit that young Women should be advertized on
the day of their Marriage, that they are not to be Married only for that day,
but for all the rest which are to follow, how stormy soever they may prove, and
what unpleasing hours soever they may have. They ought to know, that with the
person of their Husbands, they espouse all their present and future Fortunes;
and that they are obliged to follow them, to what place soever the wind drives
them, in what storm soever the Heavens pours down upon them. But this ve^ity
will be more enlarged in the ensuing Question.

MORAL QVESTION.
Concerning the Duty of Wives toward Husbands in the time of (...) and
Misfortunes.
I Could not as yet Divine, why Married Women are crowned, and (...) celebrated
with so great pomp, and with so much joy. (...) properly, and without a figure;
it is to adorn Slaves and (...) it is to lead them to Prison in pomp and
jollity; it is (...) them with Ceremony and Music. I am well read in the (...)
Custom: I see very well that Time, Example, and the (...) People are for it But
I know also, that Antiquity is neither all (...) Holy. The first Men may have
left us their abuses as well as then (...): And old Errors are not better
conditioned then (...) are not justified by the crowd of those that commit
them* It were (...) to the purpose, and of far better example, that the
Wedding^ of Christians should be grave and modest: That the Ceremony should be
serious and frugal; and that instead of being an object of access and pleasure
for new married Couples, it should be a Lesson of Petience, and a preparative
to Troubles. There would not be seen so many Rich persons ^^umbred, nor so many
Innocent Repentants. There would not so many complain of being caught by a
specious bait; who curse the flowers under which so many thorns have been hid.
They would have at least made trial of the burden before they laid it on their
shoulder^ They would have measured the^ forces with this yoke: They would have
^^epared their courage, and head to bear it cheerfully.

(...) even as I say, and it is profitable to be often said; to the end
Ignorance may not give way to Decent. Marriage is not what it appears afar off
and (...). It has not only more thorns then flowers, and more bad then good
moments: Not only the days of mourning and (...) there longer and more
numerous then the Festival ones: But what is more strange, there is not one
thorn, which causes not a double (...) one single touch. There is not one bad
moment, which is not reckoned (...) No day of mourning or vexation, which is
not double I mean that a married Woman besides her particular thorns and pains
which (...) proper to her, ought over and above, and by the obligation of
(...), to burden her self with the troubles and afflictions of her Hu^band.
She ought to expose her self to the same dangers, and to (...) of the same
storms. It is not allowed her to be at quiet, whilst (...) him: She cannot
handsomely shelter her self from the (...) which are cast against him: She ought
to be tossed up and down with him, to have her share in all the strokes be
receives; to bleed at all his wounds. And this is according to Justice* and
Law, even natural Justice and the fundamental Law of Marriage.

First, If we consider the End which God proposed to himself in the Creation of
Woman; we shall find that she was given to Man to be his Domestique assistant,
a near Co-adjutress, and of the same Birth with him. Now it is certain that
assistances and services are not necessary for any body in time of Prosperity.
Good Fortune has no need of comfort or support; of having her Tears dried up,
or her Blood stanched. It is not for her, Oils and Balm is provided, that
Plasters and Seat clothes are made: She has a sound Body and a free Mind:
She is equally discharged from all that is Burthensom and Afflicting. It is
only to bad Fortune, Charity and Compassion, I eniti^es and Remedies are
necessary. She is always either Sick or Wounded in some part: Her eyes are
never dry; her Wounds are never closed; and at all times, she has need of a
Preparative and Consolation, of a Physician and Philosopher. Women, who are
Naturally Assistants to Men, and their Co-adjutresses by Divine Institution,
appertain more to their Husbands when Suffering and Persecuted, then when Happy
and in Favor. And surely their Offices would not be very important, not their
Cares very considerable and useful, if they should be willing to be
accommodated with their Husbands Riches, and Illustrious with their Dignity and
Glory; if they should freely offer themselves to accompany them in Purple, and
under a Canopy of State; if they should make no difficulty to share in their
Feasts, and to receive with them the gifts of Fortune: And yet when those
Feasts were over, and another Fortune arrived; they should become Strangers in
their Houses, and to their Husbands; they should be unwilling to suffer with
them one drop of rain; they should not speak to them but at distance, and with
a scornful gesture, as if the very ^ight of their Husbands portended mischief,
and that even their shadow were become infectious.

Let us add for a second Reason, That as at the Creation of Woman, God
considered the incommodities of Solitude, and the need man had of a Companion
and Assistant; so he considered what was wanting to his entire Perfection, and
would not that so noble a Work, and begun with so much Art, should remain
Defective, and like those rough-drawn pieces in which there is nothing formed
but the Head. He then Created Woman, and gave her to Man, not only as an
Officious and Affectionate Co-adjut^^^s; but as a second Moity, and as a
necessary part to his Perfection. God having formed and joined together these
two Pieces, he declared in express terms that his Design was, that they should
make but one Body: And it is in this sense the words of Saint Paul ought to be
understood, when he says, Man is the (...) of the Woman. This second Reason is
yet more precise and pressing then the former* And wives thereby are more
straightly obliged to take part in either Fortune of their Husbands. And
certainly if a Calm and Tempest be common to those that sail in the same
Vessel: If all the Persons of one house have the same days and nights and
suffer jointly all the inequalities of Seasons: The Community doubtless ought
to be more entire, and better linked together between the parts of the same
Body: and this would be strange and seem Monstrous, if their Sentiments were
not equal, and their Compassion mutual: But it would truly exceed all that is
strange and exorbitant, if in the Compound, which is made of Wife and Husband,
whilst that part which Governs is in Mourning and Affliction, the other which
is subject should be jocund, and play the Wanton, and would leave off nothing
of her Ornaments or Pleasures: If the Body of a Wounded and bleeding Head were
delightfully adorned, covered over with Perfumes, and loadon with Flowers: If a
Wife would make one at all Meetings of Pleasure, and take her share in all
Divertisements, whilst her Husband suffers the rack of the Sciatica, and the
torture of the Stone.

One may also say, the better to establish this Duty, and persuade it more
efficaciously, that amongst all kinds of Friendships, there is not any so
straight, not better linked together then that of Marriage. It is not exterior
and superficial, like other Amities: Nor is it upheld like those by civil Ties,
which are weak, and break asunder if never so little touched. It is an Union of
the whole Soul and Body; the Ties thereof are firm and solid. There is Nature
and Grace in it: The whole Person is fastened therewith; and Time, which wears
out Brass and Steel, cannot dissolve them. Now Friendship, as every one knows,
is a Community of Sentiments, and Wills, of Joys and Afflictions, of good and
evil Fortunes. We are further advertised by the Wife, that blessings cannot
(...) there but after evils: And that good Fortune ought not to have any place
there, but as succeeding to the bad. Whereupon we may remember the words of
Seneca, who says, that such Persons understand not Friendship, as seek in a
Friend a merry and Table Companion, a Solicitor of (...)* an Agent of favor, a
Mediator of Fortune: That we must seek out a Person with whom we may cheerfully
enter into Prison, whose Bondage and Chains we bear; A man in whose company we
suffer Shipwreck without exclaiming against the Planets, or complaining of the
Tempest; A man for whom we endure the Wrack without pain, for whom we die
smiling and with Joy. And if common Friendship, which is free and superficial,
and supported only by Nature, has so painful Duties, and so heavy and
hazardous burdens, what must be the Duties and Burdens of the Friendship of
Marriage, which is so interior and necessary, which has the assistance of
God, and the Virtue of the Sacrament; which is sustained by Nature, and
fortified by Grace? Can it be either Interessed or Timorous, with any Decency?
can it handsomely express a niceness can it apprehend sorrow and death? can it
avoid bad Fortune?

I might also affirm, that this Duty is reckoned amongst the comely qualities
of a Wife, and the honor of a Family; and that no baser perspective can be
seen in a house, then a sick and afflicted Husband, and a gossiping and tricked
up Wife. This defect wounds generally all eyes: and there are no Pictures in
Italy, not Foreign Landschaps: there are no Ancient or Modern Figures can
rectify it. Honor and decency is not only concerned therein, but even
contentment and satisfaction. And as hands touch tenderly a sick and wounded
head, and as it is a torment to them if they be hindered from easing its pain,
and touching its wounds: so a good wife, who has a heart truly fixed, who is
indu^d and penetrated by the Grace of the Sacrament, cannot have a purer
satisfaction, then to suffer with her husband. And should even good Fortune her
self tie her hands and feet to detain her by force with her, and should hinder
her from following her persecuted and unfortunate husband; good Fortune would
be abhorred by her with all her kindnesses: and were her ties made of Crowns
and Diadems, they would be unsupportable to her.

For these reasons Ar^^a accompanied Cicinna to death after she had followed
him through rocks and tempests. (...) dyed courageously with S^bi^, after she
had lived nine years enterred with him: Hypsicratea hardened the tenderness of
her Sex and condition, made the Graces and Beauty warlike, that she might
accompany Mit^ridates, pursued by the Romans and Fortune: And generally all the
faithful Women in ancient times have performed the famous and exemplar actions
which we behold with applause in History.

EXAMPLE.
Jane Coe^lo, the Wife of Anthony Perez, Secretary to Philip the Second.
THe memory of Anthony Perez ought still to be fresh at Court: We have seen him
there a long time ago in Person: And every day we see him there in his
Relations and Letters* I know not whether the name of his wife be so well known
there: but I know very well that this is the first time she appears in that
place: And peradventure she would never have come, if I had not brought her
thither: It is convenient nevertheless that she should come and make her self
known there: She will there not only contract no bad habits, nor will her
virtue be altered by it: but she will give also good examples to our Ladies,
and read them Lectures of Fidelity and Constancy. She will teach them, that
Marriage is not a society of Pastimes and Traffic; that the Duties thereof do
not alter with seasons; that its Ties ought neither to be broken asunder, nor
loosened by Fortune. She will teach them, that they ought to be the same to
their ruined and unfortunate Husbands, as to those that are raised up to
honors, and in favor; that they ought to love them as dearly under a Chain,
as under a Crown; that they ought to bear respect to their ruins, even to the
pieces of their Shipwracks, and to the instruments of their Punishments.

This wife and Courageous Woman was of the House of Coello, who held an
Honorable rank amongst the Illustrious Families of Spain. But Nobility without
Virtue is but the half of a good Woman. It is a precious matter to which fair
Features and a perfect Figure is wanting. Jane Coello was not one of these
shapeless and defective Nobles: she was none of these rich and rude lumps; of
these Marbles which are only esteemed for the Name and Antiquity of the Quarry
from whence they come: All the features of a good Woman were completed in her,
as the matter was there pure and precious: And her Virtue was properly to her
Nobility, what an exact and regular Figure is unto a rare piece of Marble.

By espousing Anthony Perez, she thought not only to have married a Secretary,
and the Favorite of a Prince, a Minister of State, and a great man in
expectation; but she believed to have Espoused all that Anthony Perez was, and
could be; And prepared her self to Love him, in what condition soever Fortune
might place him. If all wives entered into Marriage with the same foresight and
preparation: If in the Ceremony of their Nuptials, and when they are to
pronounce this word of Engagement and Servitude, this great Word which cannot
be retracted, they did give themselves up in such sort, to what is apparently
Rich and Glorious: that they still reserve themselves for what is poor and
infirm, to which either may be reduced, (...) behind the Favorite and the
Grandee, they did consider the misfortunes and ruins which might happen to
them; there would be found more solid pleasure, and more true satisfaction,
less disgusts out of Fancy, and less considerable complaints in Marriages: Bad
Fortune would not disunite so many Couples, nor make so many Divorces: And
Wives equally prepared for the misfortunes and prosperities of their Husbands,
would not change then hearts toward them upon every blast of wind; no^ would
have so many different faces as are seen in the Moon. Jane Coello was not
subject to this inequality of heart, nor to these varieties of looks. She does
not alter them with bad times, because bad times produced no change in her
Husband: And knowing that it was Perez whom she had married, and not a
Favorite and Minister of State, she was the same to Perez Criminal and a
Prisoner, as to Perez the Confident and Secretary of Philip.

History indeed speaks of the favor and credit of this Anthony Perez, and
gives sufficient testimony that his Credit was not a credit acquired at random,
and by mere chance. He served a long time in the place of Secretary of State to
Philip the second, the ablest Prince of his Age, and the most knowing in the
Science of Princes. He understood all his Policies, and lived near those
Springs by which this King governed so many Kingdoms. He was acquainted with
the secret of that fatal Cabinet-Councel where so many Battles and S^eges were
designed; where Europe was assaulted on all sides, and new Territories invaded.
And without doubt he was not an unprofitable piece in this Cabinet; and his
hand very often set a going, de^terously and with success, those Springs which
gave motion to so many Engines. But as Fortune never makes a gift of her
Person, though sometimes she lends it: And as the Court is not a Heaven in
which fixed Stars are seen; so Anthony Perez fell in his turn from this high
^levation, and passed suddenly, and without ^^dium from favor into disgrace.

Some have written, that the murder of Secretary Escoredo was the cause of his
misfortune. But those have seen but the outside of Affairs, and have taken the
Watch for the Spring. We ought rather to believe the Speculatives of the I
scurial, from whom we have learnt by tradition that the death of Escoredo, made
away by the secret order of King Philip, was indeed the pretense for
imprisoning Perez. But the concurrence of Philip and Perez in the love of the
Princess of Floby was the true cause of it. Nature had accomplished with
extraordinary Care both the mind and body of this Princess: but she had formed
but one of her eyes; whether she disparted to make her a second like to the
first; whether she would have her rese^ble therein the Day, which has but one;
whether as Perez himself spoke it to Henry the Great, she apprehended, if she
had two eyes, she might infi^e the whole World. However it were, this Defect
did not hinder her from subjecting a Prince, who boasted of having two World,
under his subjection, and of reigning as long as the Sun shines. And the
Malignant Constellation of Anthony Perez designed, that his inclination should
concur with that of his Master.

Truly that Concurrence is very perilous; and the danger so much the more
certain, as Fortune appears more favorable, and gives there the ^a^^est hopes.
In all times it has been preached to Courtiers, and in all seasons it will be
unprofitably preached to them without amendment. There are some arrogant and
teme^arious Loves, which give a bold shock to Crowns and Scepters, which take
delight in making Honorable and Sovereign Rivals, which are like that
vainglorious Youth, who would wrestle and run with none but Kings. But these
arrogant and temerarious Loves are subject to cruel Tragedies: And not long
since, remarkable and sad examples have been seen of them amongst our Neighbors.

Anthony Perez, who was in other things so judicious and prudent, did not in
this make use of his Judgment, nor advised with his Prudence. He loved the
Princess Floby with Philip: And perchance* to his misfortune, he was better
beloved by her then Philip. He had a pleasing and affable Wit: he Wrote
gallantly both in Prose and Verse. He had an excellent gift in composing a
Letter: he translated well a Sonnet and Stanza. His Services favored not of
Authority, nor resembled Obligations. The Graces and Muses, which are
attractive and persuasive, spoke to his Mistress in his behalf. And Philip had
for himself but a dazzling, and incommodious greatness; and that Majestly which
tortures Love, and imprisons the Graces. This good Fortune, if I may style it
so, was the ruin of Perez* Philip chose rather to part with a good Servant,
then to endure a Rival more happy then himself. And the death of Escoredo
happening in this conjuncture, he put Perez in a Place, where he had leisure to
learn, that it is a dangerous thing to stand in competition with his Master.

His Courageous and Faithful Wise, did not account her self a Widow by the fall
of her Husband: she did not believe that his Imprisonment had set her at
Liberty: The Princess of Floby was no corrosive to her, and she did not rejoice
in her mind with Philip, for having with one stroke freed her from a Rival,
and himself from a Competitor. These thoughts of Liberty would have become a
tatling Dame, who might have had a loosned spirit, and a Widdowed heart in an
engaged Body: And an ^^^^tated Jealousy might have been satiated with these
bitter imaginations and these desires of Revenge. The prudent Wife, equally
remote from a Gossiping humor, as well as Jealousy, considered that unhappy
and divested Perez was not another Man then Perez in favor, and invested with
the grace of his Prince: That bad Fortune gives no right of retraction, nor
justifies unfaithful Women; And that a heart fastened in good earnest, never
withdraws from any thorns which grow in the place where it is fixed* She
represented to her self, that her Husbands faults did not dispense with her
Duty; that a strange and foreign fire had not burnt her Ties, nor consumed the
yoke of her Marriage; that her Fidelity would appear so much the more Christian
and Heroic, for being stronger and victorious over a more dangerous Adversary.
She persuaded her self, that the most eminent Generosity of a good Woman, and
the perfection of her Virtue consisted in preserving her self all entire to her
divided Husband, and to secure unto him, even to the last, the donation of her
heart, though he should every day withdraw his own by piecemeal; In
accompanying him to what place soever he should be cast by a storm: And above
all in taking as great a share in his adversities as himself, even in those
adversities which are the punishment of his faults.

Fortified by these considerations, she made her self a prisoner with Perez.
and reserved to her self so much liberty as he wanted; to solicit their common
friends; to implore from time to time the goodness of the King; to employ by
intervals the credit and favor of tears and supplications for the enlargement
of her Husband. Behold how many Combats she fought, how many Victo^^es she
gained in this single action! She overcame Jealousy, which is the most
powerful and dangerous enemy of Women She deprived her self of liberty and
repose, which are natural and inherent Blessings; Blessings which are not
parted with, but by extreme violence. She subdued Avarice, by the continual
profusions she was enforced to make, to render the Gaolers and Guards pliable,
in giving them their fill. She was stronger then a Prison, rigorous and
terrible by reason of its incommodity, but far more rigorous and terrible in
respect of the Princes anger, which had banished all pity from thence, which
had reinforced the Gates, and redoubled the obscurities thereof; which had
added a new hardness to the Iron and Walls. In fine, she was victorious over
tortures and death it self, exposing her self as she did to both, by the
boldness she showed in conveying her Husband out of Prison, and in deceiving
the expectation and anger of the Prince. Truly this boldness was very Ingenious
and Witty: And Love was not only resolute in this action, but a Deceiver in
good earnest, and without scandal. Notwithstanding all this, the Courageous
Woman would have answered with her head, both for the Inventions of her
boldness, and the deceits of her Love, if Philip had consulted with the
jealousy he had of his Authority, and of his Mistress.

Anthony Perez seeing all ways barred up against hope; and that not one single
Ray of mercy appeared from the Escurial, resolved by the advice of his Wife to
seek of himself an end to his Miseries, without importuning any more unpowerful
Intercessors, and a deaf Clemency. The resolution was, that Jane Coello should
procure a Woman's Garment to be secretly brought, and that Perez in the evening
might go forth with her disguised in this attire, and mingled with the Women of
her Train. The Plot took effect as they had designed it: Jane Coello went
forth, accompanied with this new Attendant, and entreated the Guards, with gold
in her hand, to permit her Husband to take some rest, who all the last night
could not sleep by reason of his disquiets and discontents. Perez set at
Liberty by this Device, repaired to Henry the Great, who received him with
Honor. And Jane Coello stayed behind in Spain, esteemed by every one for her
Courage and Fidelity.

I am the first that have shown this Courageous and Faithful Woman to France:
And I now present her unto the Court, to the end our Ladies may learn of her,
that great Expenses and studied Excesses do not form a gallant Woman: That so
fair a Figure deserves better Lineaments and Colors: That the Noblest blood of
the World is obscure, and wants luster, if Virtue does not give it. That
Marriage is a Companion as well for bad Times, and rugged Tracks, as for fair
Days, and delightful Roads: And that the affection of a good Woman should
resemble Ivy, which sticks close and inseparably to that Tree which it has
once embraced, never leaving it, what snow soever falls upon it, what wind
soever shakes it, what tempest soever bears it down.

PAVLINE (...)

Paulina.
IS it one of the Graces, or an wounded Amazon who dies there standing, and in
the posture of a Conqueress? She is truly a Grace, even a manly and magnanimous
Grace: No Amazon, unless a Philosophic and long Rob^d Amazon. She is the wise
and virtuous Paulina, who became a Stoic in the house of Seneca; and resolves
to die in his Company, and by his Example.

You may have heard what common rumor has published of Neros ingratitude, and
of the Fatal command of death he sent his Master. This second Parricide no less
scandalized the Senate, and all the People, then the first, which is yet fresh,
and whose blood still reales upon the Earth. And the impiety of the Tyrant
after it had caused Agrippina to be murdered, who had been twice his Mother,
and brought him no less into the Empire, then into the world; after it had put
Seneca to death, the Instructor of his youth, and the Father of his spirit,
could not ascend higher, if it rise not up against God himself; if it fall not
on Religion and holy things. Though this last stroke fell only upon Seneca, yet
he is the only person that was not surprised with it: and having often beheld
the soul of Nero open, and even to the bottom; he ever indeed believed that
figures of Rhetoric, and sentences learnt by roat, would not be more
acknowledged then the Life and Empire he received from his Mother.

He received likewise that barbarous Order with a Tranquillity truly Stoic, and
worthy the Reputation of his Sect. He did not appeal to the Senate, he knew
very well that the Senate is now but a Body divested of Power, a dismembered
Body, and still bleeding of the wounds it had received from the Tyrant. He did
not implore Redress from the Laws: they were all at present either banished or
dead. He was content to obey without noise or delay: and you could not arrive
more seasonably to see a Stoic, dying according to the forms and principles of
his Profession. Paulina would also show, that Constancy belonged to her Sex no
less then to ours; and that Women might be Philosophers without having
commerce with Lycea and Portica, without making Dilemmaes or Sylogismes. She
believed, that being the one half of Seneca, she might be courageous by his
Courage, and dye by the example of his Death, as she had been enriched by his
Riches, and honored by his Fortune.

Their Veins happened to be opened by the same hand and Lancet. Their blood and
spirits were mixed together in their wounds: And that of Seneca, entering into
the Arm of Paulina with the Lancet, penetrated her very heart, and seated it
self about her soul. You see also, that being instructed and fortified by this
spirit, which serves for a second reason, and an accessory Courage, she had the
fortitude to expect death standing, which is the last Act of Sovereign Virtue,
and the true posture of dying Heroes. The blood streamed from her Arm with
violence, as if her soul pressed it to have the glory of going out the first:
And to behold the purest and most spiritual parts thereof, which spurt up from
the Basin into which it fell, you would say that it takes a pride in the
Nobleness of its Extraction, and conceives it self too well descended to be
spilt on the ground. Paulina calmly, and without the least alteration beholds
it trickling down. And saving that her Color vanished away by degrees, and
Paleness succeeded, as it does to the last Rays of a fair day, which dies in a
beautiful Cloud, no change was to be seen in her Countenance.

Her Constancy is no savage Constancy: It has a serenity and Grace; but it is
a pale serenity, and an expiring Grace. She is more covetous of her Tears and
Sighs, then of her Blood and Life: she prohibited her Eyes and Mouth to show
the least sign of weakness: And a Statue of white Marble, which should make a
Fountain of its artificial Veins, could not have a more peaceable stability,
nor a more graceful confidence.

This example is very rare: but it is sad, and cannot instruct the mind, but by
wounding the heart. The steam of so Noble Blood draws almost tears from your
eyes: And it afflicts you, that you are not able to save the fair remains of so
beauteous a Life. Let it no longer torment you: The Tyrant advertised of
Paulina's generous resolution, sends Soldiers to hinder her Death, and enforce
her to live. Not that he takes care of the Virtues, or is willing to preserve
the Graces, which are ready to dye with her. He is Nero in all his actions, and
does no less mischief when he saves, then when he ki^s. It is because he
delights to sever the best united hearts, and to divide the fairest Couples: It
is because he takes pleasure in forcing inclinations, and violating sympathies:
It is because he has a desire to exercise upon friendships and souls an
interior and spiritual Tyranny: It is because after the death of Seneca, he
will have the heart of Seneca in his power.

The Balisters of Porphiri^, upon which you see him leaning, is the same, as
they say, on which lately at the noise and light of flaming Rome, he sung the
firing of Troy. He speaks from thence to the Soldiers he sent to Paulina, and
commands them to make have. Though she had but two steps to make, yet they will
enforce her to retreat, and fasten her again to life, by binding up her wounds.
It were to be wished, for the good of Rome, that they had done as much to
Seneca: But if they had Swathes and Remedies to apply to him, Nero could wish
that they might be impoysoned Swathes, and killing Remedies. The last year he
caused the same Remedies to be applied to gallant Burrus his other Governor:
And doubt not but he will shortly send the like to Seneca, if (...) Soul make
not the more haste to expire.

It is not the good old man's fault, that his soul is not already at liberty: he
presses it with vehemence enough; and has made for it Orifices large enough
in all his Veins. But Seneca must be long a dying, that his lingering death may
be a lasting Instruction, and a Pattern of a large extent. Surely this Seneca
is not the man of whom Envy and Detraction has made so many false Pictures. I
perceive nothing of weakness or vice wherewith they reproach him. And this
Death, what ever ignorant and traducing spirits say, cannot be the Tragedy of a
seemingly Virtuous person, of a masked Philosopher, of a Counterfeit and
Sophistical Doctor.

His calm and settled Constancy, shows outwardly the stability of his mind. He
seems to confirm with his eyes, and brow, whatsoever he has written concerning
the contempt of Fortune and Death: You would say that he alleges himself for
the proof of his Doctrine. He Philosophizes by as many mouths, as there are
wounds: And every drop of his blood is a Stoicall Demonstration: A proof of his
Opinions, and a testimony which he renders to the Courage of his Sect. His
weeping and mourning friends receive with his last words, the last spirit of
Philosophy, and the pure lights which already his almost loosned and descryed
Soul diffuseth.

The attention they give him is full of respect, and has something, I know not
what, of Religion: It would be hard to say, whether it be to his voice or blood
they are attentive: whether it be the dictates of his mouth, or those of his
wounds which they write.

In this extremity this severe man, who so boldly looks upon Death, as if he
were seeing a Mask, dares not fix his eyes upon Paulina. I think that he
apprehends lest friendship might soften his spirit, and the Husband be found
more powerful in his heart then the Philosopher. But ^e not scandalized at
this tenderness. It is not unseemly in a wise man. He may with credit afflict
himself for another: And the Tears which friendship has expressed, may decently
trickle down on his Face.

SONNET.
PAULINA speaks.
PAulina meets Death's Launcet, with a Mind
No less of Stoic, then of Roman Kind:
A Philosophic Love, which charms her Heart,
Will give the stroke to sweeten all her smart.
Inhumane Fortune, through remorse, or hate,
Runs to rebuke her, and repair her Fate:
But her great Soul resists a forced stay,
And with her Blood makes haste to slide away.
You daring Sages, who for Truths promote
Your high fictitious Dreams, and from us Vote
Our Noble Passions; Learn of this Heroique,
And Famous Woman, to be truly Stoique:
And know this truth (whatever you in vain
Have learned from your fantastic Founder's Brain)
That the most Tragic Deaths delightful grow,
When Love himself shall give the fatal Blow.
Elogy of Paulina.
IF there were great Vices in Nero's Age, there were also eminent and very
exemplar Virtues. The darkest nights have their Planets: And in the worst
Seasons, the Sun has his good Intervals, and fair hours. This Monster enraged
against Reason, which made him see his Errors, fell upon Seneca, who had
cleared and disciplined that faculty in him; As if it had proceeded from the
Masters fault, who polished the Glass, and not from his own Deformity, that he
was hideous. He then gave order for his death: And this excellent Man, who was
grown old under another Mistress then this slight fencing Philosophy, which is
only bold in a School and against Fantosmes, was ready to submit to this
barbarous Command for proof of his Doctrine, and to put in Practice what he had
set forth in Propositions and Opinions.

When it was time to depart, he did not so much as turn his head to listen to
Fortune, who solicited, and called him to the Empire. He departed out of a
house more worth then ten Millions, as if he had gone out of a thatch^d (...).
He showed himself only sensible for Paulina, whom he le^t young, and exposed to
the outrages of a bad season, and the insolences of a Tyrant, who had caused
it. He endeavored to persuade her to live, and take comfort in her own Virtue,
and the Goods he had left her. But she remonstrated to him, that these
indulgent and careful persuasions were not fit to be used to the Wife of
Seneca. That his Example counseled her better, then his Reasons: That it
taught as well as Philosophy, how to die resolutely and with courage. Their
veins were opened with the same Lancet: they mingled their Blood, their
Spirits, and Examples: And the soul of Paulina would have followed that of
Seneca, if it had not been detained at the last step she was to make. Nero
apprehending, lest the death of so illustrious a Lady, and of so high a
Reputation might complete the drawing on him a public hatred, sent Soldiers,
who bound up her veins, and used violence to make her live. But she retained
all that she could of death, which was then kept from her: And ever after
conserved the desire of it in her heart, and the paleness of it upon her face.

MORAL REFLECTION.
PAulina who is still victorious over death in this Picture, informs us that
Philosophy has no Sex; that it communicates it self without making any
distinction between Garments and Faces: That the Graces themselves may become
Valiant, and Courageous under her Discipline: And that Cowardice proceeds from
the corruption of the heart, and not from the tenderness of the temper, nor the
dispositions of Fortune. It likewise informs us that Virtue must needs be very
weak, and Christianity superficial in the greatest part of Christian Ladies,
who perplex themselves about a Necklace and a few Pearls; who have their hearts
fixed on a laced Petticoat, who are slaves to a small Fortune, which to express
it well, is but a figure of gilded dirt. The least they can expect, is to be
condemned by this Heathen woman, who had a soul dis-ingaged from Riches which
may vie with those of Kings; who had a free heart even in the arms of a Fortune
which was as large as the Empire; and which raised jealousy even in the
Fortune of the Emperor himself. The ensuing Question will manifest, whether
Paulina could be a Philosopher and a Stoic; and whether I had reason to say
that Philosophy has no Sex.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether Women be capable of true Philosophy.
A Woman has been heretofore seen playing the Orator in public places, who
did with unprofitable and studied Discourses, what the Mountebanks now adays
use to do with their Drugs, and Antic faces. There was also a lewd Woman, who
affected a brutish and impudent Freedom: who braved Fortune and Nature with a
Staff and Wallet; who was Beggarly and Arrogant; and who had, under a ragged
and tottered Garment, a worse Pride then is found under cloth of Gold and
Purple: Both the one and the other was called Philosophy; But both had but the
name and a false mask, which drew Spectators to them. And certainly if no other
Philosophy had descended from Heaven, then from this bawling and Arrogant
Creature: I should have presently concluded, that a good Woman could have no
commerce with Philosophy. There is a third, which is the true Mistress of Life,
and the Directress of Manners: which has the general charge of Virtue and
Sciences; and is no enemy to the Graces: which is endowed with a modest
Capacity, and a Courage without Pride or Fierceness. And if the Question be
concerning this Philosophy, we must boldly say, and without fearing to do her
injury, that she has no Sex, no more then the Intelligences: that she is come
as well for Women as Men; and she being the last perfection of the
Understanding, and the compleatment of Reason, all rational Souls are equally
capable of her Discipline.

And to the end this Decision may be established with Method, it is to be
noted, that there is Philosophy Speculative and Scientifical, and a Philosophy
which is Moral and Active: Both are within the Sphere of Women's understanding,
and have no Functions, which exceed their forces. The Speculative does
contemplate the Works of God, and the secrets of Nature: She studieth the
Harmony of the World, and the mavelous Agreements both of the superior and
inferior parts composing it. And the end of her contemplation and study is the
satisfaction she receives from known Verities, and acquired Sciences. The Moral
flies not ordinarily so high, but her study is Practical, and her Knowledges
are applied to Action. Her Office is to govern the Liberty of Man, to mark him
out Bounds, and regulate his Actions; and her ^^nd is to guide those to
Happiness who observe these Orders, and keep within the limits thereof.

Surely in all this, there is nothing, which the Understanding of Women may not
attain; nothing which is above their reach, and the tracts which Nature has
laid open to them. Why should they not be as capable as our selves of
Contemplation, and of the Sciences belonging to Speculative Philosophy? Are
their souls more Terrestrial, and more fastened to matter then ours? Are they of
a different Temper, and of another Extraction? Has Nature clogged them with
some ponderous load? Has she tied them with some chain to keep them from
ascending? Are they absolutely incapable of those wings, which Plato has
observed in Contemplative souls? All things then are equal between Men and
Women, in respect of the soul, which is the Intelligent part, and makes Learned
men and Philosophers: And if there be any Inequality in relation to the body,
as the same cannot be denied, Women have the advantage, and it Perfects in them
the Capacity whereof I Discourse.

Some reproach them with the Humidity of their Complexion; but no Man will
reproach them of it, when he shall remember that moistness is the matter of
which those Images are formed which are useful to Sciences; That it is the
proper temper of the Memory, which is the Depository and Nurse thereof; that it
can contribute to the light of the Understanding, as it does to that of the
body; that the moist Stars and Planets, have no less brightness, then the
other: And that dry heads are not reputed to be the most replenished, and best
furnished.

As for tenderness, without doubt they that make it the subject of their
Accusation, have not advised with Aristotle. They would then know, that the
most delicate Temper, is the least burdened with matter; the most pure, and
apt to be penetrated by the Lights of the Understanding: The best prepared for
fair Images; and for the Impression of Sciences. Saint Thomas also, being to
prove the Natural Excellency of the mind of Jesus Christ, conceived that he
could not allege a more pertinent Reason, then the Delicacy of his
Complexion. And generally the most tender and frail matters are particularly
covered in most subtle and perfect Forms. And the rarest and most accomplished
pieces of the Arts, are ordinarily framed of Silk, engraven on Crystal, and
turned in Ivory. Nature has but one soul intelligent and capable of
Discipline: And this Soul is the form of the weakest parts of the whole Body.
And even in this so frail Body, the seat of the Understanding and Reason is not
in the Bones and Nerves, but in the Brain, which is the softest and most tender
part. Whereunto one may likewise add, that in Politic Bodies, the more knowing
sort of Men are not composed of Tradesmen and Laborers; of those ignoble
Members, who are of strong complexion, and hardened by Labor: They are
Studious and Sedentary Persons; such as have been brought up in Repose and in
the shade.

Quickness is only remaining, which malicious Persons call Lightness, and
whereof they think to compose a strong piece against Women, who pretend to
Sciences. But to weaken this piece, and unnerve its force, A question is only
to be asked of those who busy themselves about it, Whether Ponderosity arises
from the mind, and Ag^^ty from matter? Whether the Angels and Planets,
Intelligence, and Light, make things heavy and immovable? And whether amongst
Men, the able be the slow, and the quick the stupid? Sciences require the wings
of Eagles, and not the feet of Tortuses. This is the reason why the Seraphins,
who are the most knowing and Theological Intelligences, have wings up to their
heads. The very word Discourse is a word of agility and quickness: And not to
say, that the eyes which are in us, the only parts capable of Study, cannot
Study, but by a continual motion: The Animal spirits, which are assistants of
Reason, and the material Springs of an immaterial Action, are the lightest, and
the most agile part of our substance.

Let us then acknowledge, that Women may share with us in the possession of
Sciences. Nature had no design to exclude that Sex from them: And the reasons
themselves which are alleged against their Right, confirm it the more, and
have the force of new titles. It is known also that since the time of the
Muses, which were Female Sages erected into Goddesses: there is no Age which
has not had a sufficient number of most capable Women. (...) has left us a
long Last of Ancient and Modern ones, whose reputation he found to be already
perfected, and so many names as he had collected in this Last, are as many
efficacious and apparent proofs for the Capacity of Women for Sciences.

But these dead proofs, and remote from our sight, are not necessary for us. We
have some which have life and spirit, which persuade our eyes and ears: And
when all other proofs should fail us, the sole House of Ram^^^^-l^t, would have
in this point all the Authority, which an approved and renowned Academy might
have. There is in that House a Mother and a Daughter, in whom the pure tincture
of the Roman Spirit is preserved, with the good Blood and Generosity of the
Ancient Republic. They are both of them knowing in the Science of the (...)
the Iulia's, and the Paulina's their Progenitresses of these judicious and
lovely Women, who were the Cabinet-Councel, the Domestique Theater of Consuls
and Dictators. But let no man believe that there is a pride and presumption in
this Science: That it is one of those which turn the brain and cause
Convulsions in the mind. Let no man take it for a Mass of indisgested and
tumultuary Notions, for a collection of Fables and Histories learnt by roat. It
is Modest and Civil with vigor: It is solid without ostentation and rudeness:
It conduces to the conduct of life, and the regulation of manners: And it
wants nothing of that which may give employment and adress to the Muses,
Comeliness and Ornament to the Graces. And of these two rare and learned
Persons, there may be made an illustrious Demonstration, concerning the
Capacity of Women: And by the same reason that heretofore it has been said,
that Athens was the Greece of Greece, one may well say in reference to them,
that the House of (...) is the Court of the Court: I do not say of the
interressed, ambitious, and corrupted Court; I say of the ingenious and
spiritual, of the Gallant and Modest Court. Nevertheless, whatever I have said,
it is not my intention to summon Women to the College; I intend not to make
Graduats of them, nor convert their Needles and Distaffs into Astrolabes and
Spears I bear too much respect to the bounds which fever us: And my question
is only in order to what they may, and not unto what they ought in the
condition wherein things have been placed, whether by the Order of Nature, or
by an immemorable Custom, and as old as Nature her self.

But surely, as I would not hold with those who should perform in their Closets
all the Exercises and Functions of a College: Who should discourse only in
Enthymema's and Syllogisms: And should have nothing in their heads but the
Ideas of Plato, and the Atoms of Epicurus: So cannot I sufficiently praise
those which put themselves under the Discipline of that other practical and
active Philosophy, which illuminates the mind with her lights, and fortifies
it with her principles: which establishes Decency in Manners, and Stability in
Life; which adjusts all Conditions and all Fortunes to her rules. First, if
there be a question concerning Capacity, it cannot be brought in dispute in
relation to them: Some have been found amongst them, who have followed as close
as any man the most sublime and speculative Philosophy; who have run through
all that may be open to Humane reason, and have been more eminent then S^^rates
and Plato, and more ancient then Aristotle and Theophrastes.

Moreover this practical Philosophy is not of an unknown Country, nor out of
the Common Road: It is not needful to have the wings and sight of an Eagle to
approach her; one may go thither a foot-pace, and from all the Regions of the
World: from all the degrees of State, and from all the orders of life. She has
Disciples that are Sovereigns, and Disciples that are Slaves. And in her
Schools King and Subject, Rich and Poor, Master and Servant, have their
assigned places according to the diversity of their Conditions, and the
difference of their Offices. Besides, the perfection of this Philosophy is not
cumbersom, nor subject to disorder. She allows all other Lawful professions,
and accommodates her self to all degrees of Fortune: she gives Lessons for
affairs, and for the whole world: she gives them also for repose and solitude:
And to learn these Lessons, it is not necessary that a Woman should abandon the
managing of her household affairs: That she should be divorced from her Husband;
that she should renounce honest Pleasures, and Civil Society, That she should
shut her self up in a Chamber hung with Maps, and furnished with Spears and
Astrolabes.

Let us add, that Moral Philosophy has been given us to order our Passions, to
distinguish our Duties, and Offices, to teach the exercises of Virtue, to guide
us as by the hand to Beatitude. And have not Women's Passions need of a
Governess as well as Ours? May they not be mistaken in their Offices and
Duties? Are they born so well instructed, and perfect, that they can learn
Virtue without a Lesson or Method? Are they so happy that they can attain to Be
atitude by their own address, and without a guide? The injustice would be then
extreme to deprive them of this Philosophy, the Governess of Passions, the
Mistress of Virtues, and the necessary Guide for all those that pretend to
Beatitude.

In fine, Women as well as we are to defend themselves against the Gifts, and
Outrages of Fortune: They are apt to Swellings and Convulsions, which follow
good and bad Accidents: And no man has a head so naturally strong, that be can
bear Prosperity without the Vertigo, or Adversity without fainting and
weakness. Ought we to expect that Women should be preserved from all these
infirmities by the mere strength of their Constitution; that their heads should
not turn round upon the top of the Wheel, and amidst the perfumes of good
Fortune, that their hearts should not change their seats, when they themselves
shall change their Posture; and that those hearts should stand after their
owners fall? There is no Constitution so well prepared, nor of so good a
temper, from which this Constancy and Equality ought to be expected without the
help of Moral Philosophy. And therefore we must conclude, that Philosophy is
not only neither against the Decorum, nor beyond the capacity of the second
Sex; but that she is an Ornament and a necessary support to it; and that
neither good nor gallant Women can be formed, but according to the Designs,
and by the Rules of Morality.

All the virtuous and magnanimous Women, which we admire in History, have been
modelled according to these Designs, and completed by these Rules. We have
known, and do know also some, who have the same features, and are composed
after the same manner: And if I did not fear that some might accuse me of
Flattery, and Affectation, I would here manifest, that France has at this time
her Cornelia's and Por^^^s, her (...) and her (...). But let us yield obedience
to the Wiseman, who forbids us to praise living Virtues. And let us end this
Dispute by an Example, within the Memory of our Fathers, in which we shall
behold a learned Princess overcoming with an equal Courage, both the
temptations of good, and the outrages of bad Fortune, and by a more then
Stoical Constancy, bearing upon a Scaffold, the same countenance, which she had
born upon a Throne.

EXAMPLE.
Of Jane Gray of Suffolk, Queen of England.
HEnry the Eight being dead, stained with the blood of those Martyrs which he
had made; and amidst the Ruins of the Church of England, which he had
overthrown, Edward the Son of Scymer his third Wife, succeeded to his Crown and
Dominions: But as there is no Seed so unhappy, nor of so short a durance as
that of wicked men; so the Excommunication and Curse, which had been Fulminated
against the Father, being fallen upon the Son, this poor Prince died before he
knew well how to live. And by a Will which he made, through the perswassions of
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, Jane Gray was declared his Heir. It may be said,
without detraction, that this Will was dictated by Ambition: But it may also be
said without flattery, that it was made in savor of the Graces and Virtues, to
the advantage of the Sciences and Muses: And the Crown of England could not be
placed upon a more beautiful head, or which could do it more Honor, then that
of the Lady Jane.

She was born with those Attractives and Charms, which seat a kind of
Sovereignty upon the face of the most beautiful Persons, and which give a
Natural Unction to them, and a Diadem without gold or precious stones: Her
mind was endued with far more sovereign Attractives, and with Charms of far
greater force then her face. And these native and adorning Graces, were
accompanied with other acquired and profitable ones, which much increased their
value, and gave them a second tincture of goodness, and a new luster. She spoke
both Greek and Latin as if she had been of Athens and Rome: she had an exact
knowledge of the Liberal Sciences, and perfectly understood both kinds of
Philosophy. But that which is more to be esteemed then all her Philosophy, more
th^n all these Sciences and Tongues; is that during the Reign of Vice and
Liberty in the time of Henry the Eighth, and after the scandal of Anne of
Bullen, she was possessed with the Modesty and Virtue of these blessed days,
when England was called the Country of Angels.

Nevertheless we must speak the truth: All these so rare and highly p^^^ed
qualities, were not considered in the Will, which was made in favor of Jane.
Edward died as weak as he had lived: He abandoned his last Testament to the
will of the Duke of Northumberland, as he had done all the rest, and the Duke
abused him in his death, as he had done in his youth. This ambitious Minister
of State, not being content with having Reigned without a Crown by the
toleration of his Master to whom he had left but a specious Regality, and a
colored Dignity; perceiving a gate open, by which Jane, who was married to the
Lord Guilford his fourth son, might bring the Crown into his House, he
undertook to take it from the Kings sister, and to set it upon her Head, either
by Right or Force.

To this effect he besieges the mind of this poor Prince, already spent with
his sickness, and disquiered at the presence of death. He was made believe that
he could not in Conscience call to the Succession, either Mary the daughter of
Katherine of Aragon, or Elizabeth daughter of Anne of Bullen. He alleges
against the first, that being cut off the Royal Family by the Divorce of her
Mother, she could not be restored to it without condemning the Memory of the
deceased King, and without giving Credit and Authority to the Roman Tyranny. He
opposed against the other that being stained with the Adulteries and the
punishment of her Mother, she would fully the Honor and Dignity of the Crown
if she had but touchd it. From thence he concludes, that Jane Gray descended
from Henry the seventh by Mary, heretofore Queen of France, being the last drop
of Royal blood, which was sound yet pure and without stain; he could not make
another Heir, without casting Fire into the Royal Family.

The Declaration was made for these reasons in favor of lane: The Council of
four and twenty approve it, notwithstanding the opposition of the Archbishop of
Canterbury: And two days after, the King rendering up his soul, Jane is
declared Queen of England. Her Father the Duke of Suffolk, and the Duke of
Northumberland, Father to her Husband, went to acquaint her with this news, and
prepare her to receive cheerfully so great a Fortune. This Fortune was the
first dangerous Temperess, against which Jane had need of Inspirations, and
helps from Philosophy.

And here it will be confessed, that one ought to be supported by Philosophy;
That one ought to have a heart extremely good, and a strong head piece, not to
fall into a Trance at such news. Reason ought to be very clear, and the
understanding very pure to recive without amazement so sudden and surprising a
vapor. I might also apprehend that I should not be believed, but rather
accused of an Hyperbole, if I said, that Jane received one of the greatest
Crowns of the World, with the same Moderation, as if she had received a Posie
of Violets. Regality is not a present to be taken with heaviness, and a
negligent hand. It is a kind of humane Deification: It is the (...) between
God and Man: And even the Philosophers and Sages, I mean austere Philosophers,
and unbyassed Sages, have in all times esteemed it so much, that Pythag^ras and
Zeno, the Patriarks of Stoics, and the most zealous Preachers of Indolence and
Aspirity, seeing themselves not called to Sovereignty by Fortune, and not
knowing how to attain to it by a straight and lawful way, were so bold as to
use violence, and aspire to it by Tyranny. However I will not descend from so
high a proposition: I intend to go yet higher, and will rise to something which
is more eminent and more Heroic. Jane would have received at least civilly,
and with thanks a Posie of Violets: She absolutely refused the Crown of
England: And this so gallant and generous a refusal proceeded from a more
Stoical soul then that of Zeno, from a more Philosophical heart then that of
Pythagoras.

Not that she did not well understand the value of this Crown which she
refused: Nor was she affrighted with so resplendent a Fortune, as she would
have been terrified by a luminous Fantosme presented before her eyes. But she
knew also that there was Weight and Thorns in this Crown* And this Fortune
with all its Glory, and all these Charms did not tempt her, not appeared to her
so lovely, as Justice, Tranquillity, or Philosophy. Solicited by the
Supplications and Reasons of her Kindred and Husband, who pressed her to
consent to her greatness, and not to reject a Felicity which is rare, and never
presents it self twice to the same Gate: She answered, t hat the Laws of the
Kingdom, and Natural right standing for the Kings Sisters, she would beware of
burthening her Head and Conscience with a Yoke which did belong to them: that
she understood the Infamy of those who had permitted the violation of Right to
gain a Crown. But it were to mock God, and deride Justice to scruple at the
stealing of a shilling, and not at the Usurpation of a Crown. Besides, went she
on, I am not so young, nor so little read in the guiles of Fortune to suffer my
self to be taken by them: If she enrich any one, it is but to make him the
subject of her spoil: If she raise others, it is but to please her self with
their ruins. What she adored but yesterday, is to day her pastime. And if I now
permit her to adorn and Crown me, I must to morrow suffer her to crush and tear
me in pieces. Besides, with what Crown she does present me? A Crown which has
been violently and shamefully wrested from Katherine of Arragon, who dislikes
the punishment of Arm of Bullen, and of others, who wore it after her. Why
would you have me add my blood to theirs, and to be the fourth Victime, from
whom this Fatal Crown may be ravished with the Head? But in case it should not
prove fatal to me, and that all its venom were consumed: If Fortune should give
me warranties of her Constancy; should I be well advised to take upon me these
Thorns which would delacerate, though not kill me outright; to burden my self
with a Yoke, which would not fail to torment me, though I were assured not to
be strangled with it? My Liberty is better then the chain you proffer me, with
what precious stones soever adorned, and of what gold soever framed. I will not
exchange my Peace for Honorable and Precious Jealousies, for magnificent and
glorious Fetters. And if you love me sincerely, and in good earnest, you will
rather wish me a secure and quiet Fortune, though mean, then an elevated
Condition exposed to the wind, and followed by some Dismal fall.

These Reasons were powerful, and must needs be persuasive, yet they took not
effect: The ambition of the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk was more
prevalent. The Lord Guilford fortified her with his reasons: And Jane overcome
by so many pressing Solicitors, and in Authority, resigned to them her Freedom
and Life. This resignation, proceeded from a Sovereign Virtue, and a
consummated Philosophy: And not doubting but a Scaffold was prepared for her
behind the Throne; and that the Crown which was offered her might not cause
the loss of her Head, she submitted her self to Fortune, and consented to
accept of Sovereignty with more courage and moderation, then she had refused
it. Matters being thus concluded, they brought her to London, where she was
solemnly acknowledged Queen, and received with Ceremony, the Oath of Fealty
from all degrees. But this Oath held as little as her Sovereignty. And scarce
had she spent ten days in the Tower, according to the Ceremony observed by new
Kings, but the Parliament and People retracted them Oath and Acclamations, and
delivered her up to the Princess, Mary, her Rival, and the Lawful Heir of the
Crown.

A more Eloquent man then my self, would say, that Fortune irritated by her
Refusals, played her this Prank to humble her Virtue, and to take revenge of the
cruelty of her Philosophy: I had rather say, and I will speak it more
Christianly, and with more appearance of truth, that it was God who permitted
this revolution, to save Jane by her fall; and to draw to himself by a
Scaffold, so pure and courageous a Virtue, which evidently had perished if she
had grown old upon the Throne. There are dangerous Prosperities, and scandalous
^levations, which God grants us in his wrath. There are wholesome Adversities,
and edifying Falls: And those happen to us when God resumes for us his thoughts
of Peace, and disposes us to Grace. Material men, who only behold the present
and outside of things, judge far otherwise of them: But this Judgment, to
speak properly, is a Judgment of frantic men, who had rather dye with
Ragou^s, then to be cured with Rhubarb; They triumph in the danger of their
Souls, and praise God for the marks of Reprobation. They deplore the presages
and earnest of their Salvation: And they desire so unhandsomly, they pray so
propostrously, and in so bad terms, as if God were to punish them, he could not
do it more severely, then in hearing their prayers, and g^anting their
Petitions.

Jane judged more solidly of Gods designs, and of the course of his Providence:
And albeit so great a Revolution was a very distasteful Remedy, yet she
courageously resigned her self thereunto, and took it with much cheerfulness.
Being sent prisoner to the Tower of London, it was observed that she entered it
with as Serene a countenance, and with the same dignity of look and action, as
she had done the first time to begin the sad Ceremony of her fatal Reign. While
she remained there, she remitted nothing of her Constancy, and her usual
Studies. Vigor and Authority appeared in all her words: all her actions were
free through the freedom of her Mind; which was enriched with a mild Grace,
and a confident Modesty: And even in the Palace, and upon the Throne it self,
she could not have more Majesty, nor appear more Resplendant and Sovereign.

The Sentence of Death being pronounced, she Courageously submitted to it, and
answered nothing else, but That her Crime was not for having laid her hand upon
the Crown, but for not having rejected it with force enough. That she had less
erred through Ambition, then out of respect and reverence to her friends: That
her respect, nevertheless, was a Crime, and that her reverence deserved
punishment: that she would willingly admit of death* and that she could do no
less then render satisfaction to the State, and voluntarily take off, and in
obedience to the Laws, the Scandal which she had given by a forced Obedience
and rendered by constraint to her kindred.

Her Husband condemned to the same punishment, having sent to give her the last
visit, to the end he might arm himself with the example of her Constancy, and
by the virtue of her last words. She sent him word, That he demanded a
lenative, which would put fire into the wound; and that it was to be feared,
her presence would rather weaken, then strengthen him. That he ought to take
courage from his Reason, and derive Constancy from his own heart, and that if
his soul were not firm and settled, she could not settle it by her eyes, nor
confirm it by her words: That he should do well to remit this interview to the
other world: That there, indeed friendships were happy, and Unions
indissolvable; and that theirs would be ^^ternal, if their souls carried
nothing with them of Terrestrial, which might hinder them from rejoyning.

As she was led to the place of Execution, she passed by a Gallery from whence
she saw her Husbands body carried to the Chapel of the Tower. This unexpected
Object somewhat moved her, and begot compassion in her. But it was a manly, and
well becoming compassion; and this Emotion did not so strongly invade her mind,
as to hinder it from furnishing her in repose with three Sentences, in three
Languages. She wrote them down in her Table Book, which she gave to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, with an excuse for the trouble she had given him. The
Greek expressed, that if his Executed body should give testimony against her
before men, his most blessed soul would give an Eternal proof in the presence
of God, of her Innocence. The Latin added, that humane Justice was against his
Body, but the Divine mercy would be for his Soul. The English concluded, that
if her fault deserved punishment, her youth at least, and her imprudence, were
worthy of excuse; and that God and posterity would show her favor.

Constancy, Grace, and Majesty, which had ever accompanied her, ascended also
upon the Scaffold with her. One would have said that all that was seen there
could be nothing else but a mere representation of her punishment; And that all
this Tragical preparation, was but a fiction, and a mere Ceremony. She rendered
thanks to the Catholic Divine, who had assisted her, and comforted her
dispairing servants, with so well composed a manner, and with so vigorous and
Noble words, so full of Judgment and Courage, as it seemed to some, that if
Philosophy her self had been to dye, she could not have dyed more courageously,
and with more Dignity.

She made her self ready for the stroke of the Executioner; and to humble her
beauty, though it were innocent of her Misfortune, she made a Wreath or
Head-band of her own Hair, whereof it seemed Nature had formed her a Diadem.
They offered to strike off her head with a Sword, as if the Sword could have
diminished the shame of her punishment, and Dignified her Death, and the hand
of the Executioner. But she rejected this unprofitable and superstitious
Ceremony: And resolved to be Executed with the same Ax which newly came from
the Execution of her Husband: Whether that she desired to mingle her blood with
his; Whether she believed that a more painful death would be a more just
Expiation of her faults: And that the Iron of the Ax would better purify her
soul, then the Iron of the Sword.

Such was the end of the Reign and Life of Jane Gray, who was an Athenian and
Roman in England many Ages after the ruin of Athens and Rome. She showed our
Predecessors an Image of the ancient Constancy, and primitive Virtue. And
taught us that the Graces may be learned, as well as the Muses; That Philosophy
belongs to both Sexes; And that even in our days, under the Purple, and upon
the Throne, she might be as vigorous and courageous, as she was heretofore
under the Wallet, and in the Tub of the Sunck.

VNE Dame chrestienne et Francoise combat iusques a la mort pour sa chastete
(...) parcille a celle de Judith, egale la France a la Iudee. (...)

Gallant Christian Women.
The French Judith.
HEre we must beware of a bad Calculation by our Fancy, and of a mistake in our
sight; if we believe them in this point, we are in the Age of Nabuchodonosor,
and in Judea: And the Tragic* Action we behold, is the death of Holyfernes,
and the victory of Judith. Nevertheless we are far remote from that time, and
see indeed another Country, and other things. It is not credible that
Holyfernes is returned so many years after his Death. It is also less credible
that Judea has removed from Asia into Europe. If whole Races, and even the
Ages themselves do not revive; if Cities change not Regions, and cross the
Seas, assure your self there is nothing in this of the Adventure of Bethulia.

Know then, that you are in France, and upon the Territories of Gontran King of
Burgundy: and that this Maid which you see with a naked and bloody sword in her
hand, is a Native of Champaigne. Do not ask me concerning her Birth: This well
beseeming Anger, and this modest and composed Fierceness will confirm you
better then my self, that she must be of a good Family: And though her
Phisiognomy may not induce us to believe it, her blood must needs be as noble
as her countenance.

As for this man who loses his blood through two great wounds, which will be
perchance more beneficial then they are honorable to him; his Domestiques,
who hasten to his ^yde, ca^l him Duke Amolon. I dare not tell you that he is
(...) a French man: there is too much of savageness in his manners and says.
And it would be too great a shame for France, which is so noble a Mother, so
Generous, so Civilized, and to Christian, to bring forth Scythians and Tartars;
and that under so temperate a Climate, and so benign Planets, there should be
found souls of the same temper with those which are born under the Pole. But
let him be a French man by birth, and a Tartar or Scythian by nature, it does
not hunder Virtue, which plays the principal part in this Action, from being
French. And this second Judith will one day more honor her Country, then this
second Holyfernes could disgrace it.

You see the boldness of her Countenance, and the Virtue of her Face. There is
much of Judith in both. But there is more then the Look and Face; more then the
boldness and Virtue of Judith: It is no common chaste woman you see: It is a
Virgin, nay a victorious Virgin which newly fought, even to the effusion of her
blood. And by these two features wherein she transcends Judith, the French Copy
exceeds the Original lew, and the Modern obscures the Ancient Judith.

After a long and obstinate battle fought against this Tyrant, she was carried
away by his people, and laid with violence upon his Bed: but this was no longer
his Bed, but a Sca^^old made of Silk and Feathers: it was the place ordained
for the end of his Tyranny, and for the punishment of his Crimes. Wine and
Sleep had already closed up his eyes, and tied his hands, and there wanted but
a Sword and an Executioner to make a great and celebrious example of him. His
Arms being near at hand, the chaste French woman, inspired by the same Angel
who inspired the chaste Jew, took advantage of the Sleep and Sword of her
enemy, and made of Amolon an Holyfernes.

The two great wounds which you see in his head, were given by that fair and
chaste Hand. Pain awakened his bound up, and benumbed Reason: and the first
drops of his blood extinguished the dishonest fire which the Tears and Prayers
of this innocent Maid had enkindled. He is no longer the same brutish and
furious person as before. The wanten flames of his heart, and the impure
imaginations of his head are all fallyed forth at his wounds: Judgment and
Respect are entered in their Room: you would say that he awakes with new eyes.
Those at least retained no longer any thing of that sulphur which was
enkindled by the smallest Rays of Beauty, and which was set on fire by every
lovely glance which issued from it.

He seems to endure with torment the sight of his chaste and courageous Enemy:
He suffers it nevertheless, and his confusion mixed with astonishment, his
shame accompanied with reverence, make a silent Declaration upon his face, by
which he justifies the attempt, and acknowledges it for a lawful Victory: He
does consider that the same person is in his power who had newly plunged him in
blood, and who had heretofore inflamed him; who had pierced his heart, and
newly wounded his head: He no longer remembers his Love, he resents not his
injury. His eyes and mind are too much dazzled by something, I know not what, of
Lummous, which di^^uleth it self from the countenance of this beautiful Maid.

I cannot inform you whether it be an Impression of the Angel who stands by
her, whether it be a Diadem (...) left to her, by the ardour of her Prayer,
whether (...) and spiritual flame which her soul did (...) lence of her last
Attempt. But whatsoever (...) upon it with a kind of worship and relig^^^ (...)
doubt not, but being dazzled by this armed (...) Beauty, he takes it either for
an exterminat (...) by God, or for divine Justice it self, which his Crimes had
drawn upon him, and which is descended from Heaven in person with a revenging
Sword, to make him an Example.

However I much fear that this Imagination of Amolon may not be powerful
enough to protect our Judith, if we do not defend her against those furious
Attendants, whom their Masters blood has irritated. I see her in eminent
danger, if she be only guarded by her Graces, and the light which environs her.
These people do not acknowledge the Graces: and the fire of anger which they
have in their eyes, diverts their sight from his light. They stretch out their
arms against this innocent Woman, and before they touch her, they tear her in
pieces afar off with frightful cries and gestures, por^ending Cruelty. You
would say, that their looks would be first with the prey; And that they had a
mind to taste it with their teeth and nails.

This precipitated and barbarous fury, does astonish you. It would amaze bolder
men then you are: But this confidence of mind, and this Heroic Constancy in a
Maid, is to me a far greater astonishment, and Posterity which shall read her
History will be no less amazed. The former Complacencies and Offers begot much
more fear in her, then the present Cries and Threats. And because her Honor is
now in safety, and that her life is only assaulted, she conceives the danger
wholly past, and that all this tumult threatens some other Person. Having heard
of the victorious Virgins and Martyrs of Chastity, she regards not the mischief
these furious People intend against her. Her thoughts are only fixed on the
good she may receive from their fury; and looks upon them as People, who will
bestow upon her a second Crown.

Zeal, Boldness, and Modesty, are, I know not how, either associated, or
confounded upon her Brow and Cheeks. It is indeed rather a confusion then a
superficial Alliance. But it is a pleasing and luminous confusion; and a fire
reflects from thence, like that which streams from the richest Scarlet. Will
you not believe that it is from this fire the Chamber is enlightened, and that
the splendour of those branched Lights, pendant from the seeling, is overcome
thereby? It seems also that some Rays are fallen from thence, which give a new
luster to this Sword, and which are as it were a recompense for the service it
has rendered in this danger to forsaken and unarmed Virtue.

The astonishment and respect of Amolon increased, and being more confirmed
then before in his first idle fancies, he gives a sign to his people to convert
their anger into Religion, and to adore her, whom they desire to tear in
pieces. But it is to require too much of furious men: Let them withdraw their
hands and fury: Let them offer no violence to Innocence, and we will discharge
them of their Religion and Worship.

SONNET.
ORonta weeps, her bleeding mouth appears
To mingle Coral with her Crystal Tears;
Her sad Heart powers it self into those streams,
Lest Amolon should scorch it with his flames.
On this rich Bed now snores the Tyrant, blind
with her bright Rays, and to her Griefs of mind:
Here Wine and Sleep into a Stock have turned
That sparkling Brand whom lust full ardors burned.
Oronta hear Instructions of concern;
Thy Angel tells thee this proud Holyfern
Must have a Judith; that the case requires
To arm thy self with Steel against his fires.
The Virgin B^e can sling, and valor show;
If then thou causest not the blood to flow
From this Inglorious Head, no other Art
Can quench the Coal of his Ignoble Heart.
Elogy of the French Judith.
THis Picture is of a Judith, but of a Virgin Judith, and born in France.
History which has conserved so many scandalous names, and made so many
Portraictures of ill Example, might at least leave us the name of this
Heroesse, which France may oppose to all the valiant Women of (...) and Italy.
All the certainty we know of her, is, that she lived under the R^^gn of (...),
which was a Reign alike famous for great Virtues and (...): That Nobility,
Beauty, and Virtue had an equal share in her; and that she was born in (...),
which has shown by the Birth of this (...), and the Maid of (...), that this
Province was reckoned amongst the number of the Heroic Mothers: And that it
had a more generous (...) ^^ndity, then the Territory of the ancient Amazons.

This Virgin innocently, and against her will inkindled love in Duke Amolon,
and the Duke received it greedily, and to his ruin. He pursued her by all
manner of ways, and by what way soever he followed her, he found himself still
the further off. He sent her magnificent Presents, accompanied with far more
magnificent Offers. And his Presents were turned back with his Offers.
Irritated to see his Services rejected, and his Magnificence despised, he had
recourse to open Violence, and resolved to force that Virtue which he could not
corrupt* But he assaults a place which was not to be taken by Force no more
then by Composition: And his threats had as little Success as his Courtships.

Despair and Rage succeeding his Love, he let loose his People upon her: And
the outrages which were done her by his Servants, found her as immovable as did
the Presents which had been offered her by the Master. Her heart is not softened
at all, nor does it wast away with her blood; her mind does not so much as
suffer by the wounds of her body: Her very sighs, as if they feared to be
suspected of weakness, remain within her mouth. These barbarous Villains
wea^^ed with her Constancy, cast her all bloody and half dead upon (...) bed,
and (...). The Tyrant was no longer in a condition to do her harm: (...) and
sleep had boun^ (...) fast enough: And to make an end of this second (...),
there wants nothing but the arm of our second Judith*

Inspired from God, she lifts up her eyes to Heaven, and (...) sword hanging
near his bed; Thou insensible Instrument, says she) (...) up in blood and
Murders, to day at least thou shall perform an act of Justice and Piety. Thou
shall free me from thy (...), and preserve (...) either by his death, or by my
own. (...) a sho^^ and (...) to her words: and drawing (...) which (...)
followed her generous hand, and received as (...) from the fire of (...) and
Courage; she (...) with all her (...) upon the head of (...) The blow which was
both Mortal and beneficial, awa^^ (...) to his sen^es before it took away his
life. He acknowledged his fault, commended the virtue of his Murtheress, and
commanded her to be set at Liberty. She went to cast her self at the feet of
(...), who was ravished with so extraordinary a Virtue, and treated her more
like a Conque^ess then a Criminal. He honored her with Prai^^ and Presents,
and in lieu of the Pardon she required, caused an (...) composed of her, which
was of greater value then a Crown.

MORAL REFLECTION.
THose understand not Chastity who give it a place amongst the virtues of (...)
No virtue is more (...) no^ ought to be more Warlike. There is not any to (...)
and Courage are more (...) And to my (...), the (...) armed and full of
prickles, is a more true and natural Symbol of (...) which has only a
whitness without weapons (...) we must keep to Custom, and leave the (...) have
one, since Custom will have it so But let it be (...) mentioned in the (...)
let it be a ^^lly (...) signifying that Chastity will be always armed.

Our French (...) was one of these (...) as well as the Hebrew (...) And all
chaste Women who (...) willing to imitate them, have need of a Warlike Spirit,
and of a resolute Soul disposed for War, even for an obstinate War, without
(...), says St (...) for a War where Neutrality has no place, and where one
must necessarily either overcome, or be vanquished* The War which Tyrants, and
Executioners have made against ^aith, was (...) on with more State and Pomp: It
was done with more noise and preparations of Engines and Punishments:
Nevertheless it was not so dangerous, and though Tertullian said, that a head
accustomed to precious stones and pearls, hardly exposes it self to the sword:
Yet some have been seen, who have fought less happily for their Chastity then
for their Faith; And having been overcome by an Enemy who only assaulted them
with flowers, God has showed them the favor to rise again, and overcome
Tyranny and Cruelty, armed with all their Engines.

There must be nothing saint or weak in a chaste Soul; there must be nothing of
Languishment or ^ffeminacy: But there must not be the least (...) o^
ostentation, there must be nothing lo^ty or savage Her courage ought to be
modest without oftentation; her resolution tempered with sweetness and
Civilitie: And in a word to draw her Picture, she must resemble a Rose which is
bashful and armed, which defends it self with blushes, and p^^cks only those
that rudely touch it.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether more Resolution and Courage be required to make a Man Valiant, then
to make a Woman Chaste.
WHo will believe that Chastity is more vigorous then Valor, and that to make
a chaste Woman, more Courage (...) needful, then to make a valiant Man* The
Valiant will believe it, they persuade themselves that there is no true Courage
but then own, and that Resolution cannot act but by their hands, nor have any
right employment but in War. Then persuasion nevertheless (...) from Truth, and
were it not so dangerous to meddle with (...) I might say to them, that they
are deceived. One might well agree with them, that courage is a Virtue fit for
the ^^eld, and that it is by the assistance thereof, Towns are taken, Battel^
fought, Crowns gain^d, and enlarged* But they ought to confess also* that this
courage does not always act amids Fire and Sword; that all the occasions
thereof are not bloody, though they be all laborious: and that there are
Domestic Combats, in which the Victory is more difficult, and requires more
labor then in the Field. The conflicts of Chastity are of that (...) though
they be not performed like those of Valor with a show of terro^^^, and
preparations formidable to the eye, yet are they not less to be feared, not
less dangerous; And if we set aside the address and to^ls of the body, and this
(...) appearance which makes a noise and astonisheth. ^here remains nothing
which hinders us from concluding, that to ^ender a Man valiant, less resolution
and courage is (...), then to ^ender a Woman chaste.

There are many solid and weighty Reasons, which should persuade it* And to
begin with the Enemies against whom Chastity and Valor are to fight, it is
certain that those of Chastity are stronger, and more numerous, then those of
Valor. It seems to (...) that Chastity is a (...) quiet virtue, because
ordinarily it has only to do with passions which seem sweet and pleasing* But
these sweet and pleasing passions are harder to overcome, then the ^ough and
formidable: Whether by reason we less distrust them, and that the senses and
Nature hold Intelligence with them* Whether because then ^a^ed sweetness and
Artifice (...) their entry into the heart* Whether in respect that no passion
being established to resist them, Reason is left single to contest against
them* And Reason which is not upheld by passions, fights faintly, and without
vigor* It is not (...) with these troublesome passions, which are enemies to
Valor. They (...) find Nature upon her guard: The Senses cannot grow familiar
with them, nor fashion themselves to their rudeness. They would not know how to
enter into the heart, but openly, and with violence* And the proper Function of
anger, which is a Warlike passion, being to serve Reason against them, War with
them cannot be near so painful as with (...), not the Victory so difficult and
doubtful.

We see also, that the number is far greater of brave Spirits, who have
overcome Fear, then of valiant chaste Women who have vanquished Love. And
amongst so many Heroes whom Poesy has made, and History ^ound out: We can
hardly name three or four who have not been Mastred by it: Some one will say,
that this comes home to the Fable of the ^^on, who was vanquished by a Wasp:
but whether Love be a Wasp or (...) leave that Dispute to others. It suffices
me, that those People who were subduers of Monsters, have been vanquished by
Love. And I cannot (...) more ancient Authors to give Credit to the power of
pleasing pas^ions, and to conclude in sequel, that Chastity, whose part it is
to overcome them, ought to be more Resolute and Courageous then Valous.

More^^er the strength of Passions, of what Order soever they be, proceeds from
the (...) of those Objects which irritate them. Now the goods which provoke
Love and Desire, and fight Externally against Chastity, are more hard to
overcome then ^^vils which beget fear and despair, and are opposite to Valor.
This at first sight appears incredible: And the Ignorant will suspect it for a
Paradox and an Hyperbole. It i^ true nevertheless, and the proof will be easy
to those who know the different Impressions of Good and Bad, and the several
instincts of the Will. The first Action of Good is like that of the Loadstone;
it attracts the Will, and forcibly fastens it self to it: It does yet more; it
Dilates the Will which it has fastened to its self; and penetrates it with a
pleasing and violent sweetness, which has wherewith to gain and overcome it.
Nevertheless, it has no need of violence against the Will: She renders her
self up freely to what is Good, and expects not to be forced from it. She
embraces all that resembles it: She ever gapes after the Odor and Shadow
thereof. And her happiness consisting in being united to it, she cannot repel
it without suppressing or suspending her instinct, without acting against her
self, and offering violence to Nature. Her instinct and disposition in respect
of Evil, are far different from the other. As it is an Object of Terror, which
wounds by (...) presence, the Will also cannot endure the Reproaches of it*
She flies eagerly, even from the appearances and presages thereof* and for this
she needs neither new vigor nor force but her own instinct contrariwise she
would have need of a second vigor more powerful then the first; and it would
be necessary that she should offer violence to her instinct: If she were, I do
not say, to follow Evil, but even to expect it quietly, and to suspend the
hatred she bears it. It is then more easy to fight against Evil. and to
overcome it by a propense and natural resistance, then to repel Good, and
obtain such a forced victory over it, as is offensive to Nature, and constrains
her Inclinations. And this truth being supposed, I leave unto others to judge,
whether the Combats of Valor be more hazardous and painful, then those of
Chastity: And whether to support Nature, and to repulse with her by joint
Forces a danger which affrights and threatens her, it be necessary to employ
more Vigor and Constancy, and act more courageously, and with more resolution,
then to force her Inclinations to suppress her instinct and desires; to snatch
from her a Good which is Interior, and Adherent to her; a pressing and
obstinate Good; a Good, which is supported by many other Goods, which are her
Solicitors and Agents, which render it valuable and sustains it.

This is a third Reason, which much increases the dangers of Chastity* and the
need she has to be well armed with courage and warlike Discipline. She is not
only to defend her self from voluptuousness, which is an obstinate and pressing
Enemy: And which can hardly be vanquished, either by open force, diversion, or
stratagem. But she is likewise to overcome Avarice, Vanity, and Ambition: She
is to resist Engines of Gold and Silver, Batteries of Diamonds and Pearls, and
generally all the Assaults which a potent Love, assisted by Fortune is able to
give. Some Men go about to Debauch even Reputation and Honor from the service
of Chastity, and to employ them some times against her with better Success then
Pleasure and Riches; nay, then death it self and punishments, as it happened in
the fall of (...). Now it is certain that Gold and Silver are the Engines which
overcome all things; with them Towns are taken which have held out against
Canons and Mines: By them Armies have been defeated, which had resisted Fire
and Sword, the injuries of Weather, and the fury of the Elements: And a Woman
has need of far greater force then that of the Heroes, to maintain a Battery,
which has broken whole Legions, and overthrown C^tadels. There are also but
too many of them who surrender to it. And in these sorts of Combats, Victories
are daily gained with Gold and Pearl. Nevertheless that which is remarkable,
even Riches, Honors, Presents and Hopes, which have so much power to weaken
Chastity, are helps which encourage valor, and Fortify it: And the valiant
raise themselves great and resplendent Fortunes, out of the same things, which
turn chaste Women.

There is much more then this; And as if Chastity had not enemie^ enough of her
own, she is to contest with those of Valor and Constancy. She is not only
assaulted by voluptuousness, and battered with pieces of Gold, and Silver, with
Presents and Offers, with Weapons which wound the soul by (...) the senses, and
vanquish the heart by delighting the Body But she is also assaulted by Tyrants
and Executioners with a preparation of (...) and Engines of Punishments: And
the (...) which they propose to her is not a resplendent and specious death,
and Honorable and Glorious death, like that of valiant Men, but a hideous and
Tragic Death* a Death accompanied with Torments, and like those which are
bewailed upon Theaters. The chief thing is, that she is not to contend with
this death, and these Torments by resistance, and by repelling them with the
Sword, as in War: This Combat would be easy, and Nature would both side with
her, and support her. But she must overcome by Patience, and in suffering all
that an Irritated passion and become furious, can make one suffer. And Nature,
to which sufferance is averse, not assisting her in this kind of fight: She
must have a strong resolution, and a very Heroic Courage to resist all alone
Fire and Sword, and hold out against the Rack and Tortures.

Those are truly to be esteemed, who expose themselves freely to so many Deaths
as there be Grains of Lead, and Pikes of Iron in the Army of an Enemy; who
remain firm before artificial Thunders which strike at a greater distance, and
cause more Murders then those of Nature. But the end of those Persons, how
resolute soever they be, is not to put back the Goods which are offered them,
and less also to abandon themselves to the Evils which appear and threaten
them: She is to acquire all that they see of Riches and Crowns in the hands of
Victory: She is to retort death upon their Enemies, and with Death, all the
evils which accompany it, as well as those that follow it. Chastity has
Objects and Pretensions quite opposite to these: And it is her duty to vanquish
equally things delightful and formidable: The delightful, by a generous
refusal; the formidable, by an immovable Patience, and both by an Heroic
Magnanimi^^.

The courageous Susanna was to fight and overcome all these sorts of Enemies,
drawn together against her in one single Occasion. She vanquished Pleasure,
which has put so many Heroesses under the yoke, and so many Conquerers in
chains. She overcame Infamy, which is the great Bugbear of her Sex: She
overcame Death, even the Death due to Sacriledges; And that which exceeds all
Expression: She chose rather to undergo innocently the shame and punishment of
Adulterers, then to preserve her Life and Honor by a Stain easy to be washed
out, and far easier to be concealed. Certainly the Victories of Sampson, though
Heroic and Miraculous, if compared with these, will pass but for May-Games,
and Fictions: And whatsover is said of it, he showed less strength in tearing
up Pillars, and bearing the fall of a Ruined House, then Susanna did in
offering her self to the snares which were prepared for her. Let us add now
Example to Discourse; and to Inculcate also to the Understanding the advantage
which the courage of Chaste Women has above that of Valiant Men, let us
present here to public view the Picture of a Warlike and virtuous Chastity.

EXAMPLE.
Blanch of Rossy.
THat Mezentius whose Memory even at this day is exemplarily punished, was
peradventure but a Fiction of Virgil, made to chastise (in Effigy at least)
both Tyranny and Cruelty; and to read a Lesson of Justice and Clemency to
Princes. Nevertheless this Fiction so notoriously punished, and cried down for
so many Ages, has not wanted bad Imitators, who have drawn Copies of it so
much the more deformed as they more resembled the Original. And not to produce
others here, which belong to other Subjects: Accidin was in flesh and bone, in
mind and action, what Mezentius was but in Paper and Figure. This Exterminator
who was sent about the end of the twelfth Age, to chastise insolent and
debauch^d Italy, renewed all the ancient Cruelties, and abolish^d Punishments;
And verified all that was strange in Fables, all that was seen Tragical, and
surprising upon Theaters. His Cruelty extended so far, that to lengthen the
punishment and impatience of those wretched men whom he tormented, he caused
them to be laid upon half putrified bodies, to the end the dead might by little
and little stifle the living, that they might be eaten up by their Worms, and
become corrupted by their Putrefaction.

This Cruelty of Accidin was accompanied with a barbarous and brutish
Incontinency. And albeit tenderness and sweetness be a Natural Ingredient to
Voluptuousness; His nevertheless was ordinarily Savage, stained with Blood, and
like a Fury. It appeared such during the whole course of his life, and
particularly in the Sacking of Boss^^^, which he took by Storm. (...) Baptista
of (...), who was either the Governor or Lord of the Place, having been slain
upon the Wall, Blanch of Rossy his Wife, who fought completely armed by his
side, after a long resistance, and Heroic Endeavors, was taken and led in
Triumph before the Tyrant, as the most rare and precious piece of his Conquest.

Certainly also she had in her self alone wherewith to merit the enterprise and
labors of three just Conquerors. And the famous Grecian who was so often stolen
away, and for whom so many Battles had been fought, was but a third part of
this Italian Lady. Her Beauty was no solitary Beauty, and ill attended like the
others. It was accompanied with all the Virtues which make the Honor of her
Sex; and even those which Honor ours, were not wanting in her. She was very
Beautiful, but far more Chaste, and little less Valiant. She had Charms and
accomplished Graces: but those Charms were Innocent, and without Affectation:
those Graces were Continent and Military: And generally in all her Attractives,
there appeared a tincture of Modesty, and Spirits mixed with bashfulness and
courage.

As soon as Acc^din had viewed her thus gracefully set forth in Armor, covered
over with a certain dust steeped in sweat, which appeared like a Military
painting, and such as they give to Victory: A black and violent flame suddenly
seized on his heart: And the smoke thereof ascending to his head, extinguished
all that was found there of light. It was neither Affection nor ^steem; it was
neither Inclination nor true Love. Flames of this Nature do not fasten on all
sorts of matter: And although the Sun does illuminate Comets as well as the
Planets; yet it is not from the fire of Planets that he illuminates the Comets.

The relation which was made him of the Valor and Chastity of Blanch, added
new fire to his brutish Concupiscence; he was likewise by Nature one of these
lustful Devils, who are less lascivious by an appetite they cannot have, then
by the inclination they have to defile and corrupt. Rapes and all debauchery,
injurious to Virtue, were most pleasing to him; And he took a particular
delight in spoiling those Flowers which were Consecrated to her. At first he
constrained his Humor, and took upon him a flattering and complacent
Countenance; but this look was a very improper Mask: And his rude and forced
complacences were far from softning the Virtue of Blanch. She knew very well
that Tigers never grow familiar in good earnest with their Prey, and that
though they hide their teeth and claws, yet they seldom make much of them,
without scratching or biting them.

Afterward he discovers himself, and declares to her his passion with arrogant
entreaties, and in a style of Command. His entreaties, though violent, finding
not themselves powerful enough, he came to armed threats, full of death and
tortures: And his threats, with all their weapons, proved as weak as his
Entreaties. There nothing remained to try but force: And as he prepared himself
for it, the Chaste and Courageous Blanch slipped out of his hands; got into the
window, and transported by her Virtues and Courage, and perchance also by her
good Angel, she precipitated her self from thence. This boldness astonished all
that were present: And even Accidin acknowledged himself overcome by the fall
of his Captive: They that were sent to help her, believed her dead: She was
only in a swound, and had one shoulder out of joint, and an arm broken. She
being come to her self, there was neither care not remedies spared for her
Cure: But as she apprehended more her Cure then death, the same Remedies which
assuaged the pain of her body, augmented the grief of her mind* and every
moment she prayed against the Virtue of Remedies, and bewailed the ease which
she received by them. The Remedies had notwithstanding more Virtue then either
her Prayers or Tears: They restored her health, and the restoration thereof
proved the Crysis of her misfortune.

Accidin no sooner saw her recovered, but he presently renewed his pretensions
and pursuits. He assaulted her Soul in every part, where it might be assaulted.
Having in vain contested against hope, he contested against fear; And caused
far greater Threats to succed larger Offers. But this second Assault found not
a more prosperous Success then the former. His great Menaces and Offers were
tendered without effect; and there was sound nothing base or weak in this great
Soul. Persuasion not prevailing with her, he used a Tyrannical and Barbarous
Violence; and not being able to gain upon the Spirit of Blanch, he caused her
body to be fastened upon a Table, which was more detestable to her then a
Torturing Wheel.

This action only sullied the Tyrant who did it; The Virtue of the Patient, who
endured it with so much regret, was not defaced by it: Her very Name received
not any stain thereby: Nevertheless being transported with pain, and become
odious, and almost unknown to her self; she withdrew to the place in which her
Husband Interred: Where having discovered what remained of his body: where
having made a short and interrupted, yet Courageous and Manly Complaint to his
Ghost; and where having besought him to come and deliver her soul out of a
Prison stained by Accidin; she cast her self upon these dear and pitiful
Relics: And in this state, able to beget Emulation in all the Virtuous Women
of Antiquity, she rendered up her Soul, not upon the Body of her Husband, (who
was no more) but upon his Shadow and Memory.

ISABELLE de Castille su^e le ^enin et le peril de la play de son Mary
desespere des (...) par sa ^ueris^n que l'Amour est le Maistre de la vie et de
la mort (...)

Eleonor of Castile Princess of wales.
ALL England is dangerously sick upon this Bed with Prince Edward. The Fortune
of the Public being wounded to the heart by the wound he brought from the Holy
War, endures the same Convulsions as he feels: And the Physicians give them
but one day of life, if God send not an Angel, and a Miracle to cure them.

Surely it is very strange that the hearts of a whole Nation should be wounded
by one blow, and that one shaft which has hurt but one Body, should draw Blood
from so many Souls. But such is the condition, and as it were the destiny of
good Princes: They have a heart and soul in every one of their Subjects: Their
blood and veins disperse themselves throughout all the parts of their
Dominions, and their least wounds are followed by public Symptoms, and
popular Maladies.

Prince Edwards wound is one of those: The King his Father, and all his
Subjects lament it, and their Tears are the Blood of their Souls, which have
been wounded by his Body. You will believe notwithstanding, that in this
general sickness, and amidst these common lamentations, the Princess his wife
is the most sick, and most to be lamented. There is also a good half of the
Prince in her; and reciprocally more then a good half of her in the Prince. Her
love at least is there entire; and with her love there is more of her Life, and
more of her Soul then is left behind. Though far remote from the fight, yet she
was wounded there to death with him: Her heart found it self just in the
offended part: and ever since her soul and life have issued forth by the same
wound with her Husbands blood.

At present hope is returned to her, but it is a doleful hope, and such as may
come from despair. The Physicians have declared to her, that the Prince might
yet be cured, and that to cure him, it was necessary to seek out some
affectionate and courageous person, who would expose himself to take in his
Death by sucking the poison out of his wound. Her Love, which was present at
the Consult of the Physicians, persuaded her that this affection could not be
expected but from a woman, nor this Courage but from a Princes: That this
fatal wound could not have a more sovereign Salve then her Tongue: and that if
it were her Husbands destiny to receive a second Life, he could owe it to no
other then her Spirit and Mouth.

This inspiration greedily received by her heart, drew from thence this bold
and vigorous heat, and this tincture of hope and joy which you see in her Face.
There appears in her Countenance something, I know not what, of fierce and
stately, which seems to require respect, and yet begets affection. It is
peradventure a certain Air of Spain which passed the Seas with her, and
followed her into England. It is perchance a visible expression of her Heroic
thoughts, and an exterior sign by which her Soul declares what she newly
concluded. For whatever this little fierceness may be taken, and what name
soever they give it; it sets a harmless edge upon the sweetness of this
Princess: It is to her Beauty and Graces a modest and well-becoming boldness:
It is as it were a reflection of her Heart upon her Face, and as a
demonstration of the greatness and vigor of her Soul.

But whether it proceed from the greatness and vigor of her Soul, or from the
force and greatness of her affection, she valueth not death, to which she is
going to expose her self, nor is affrighted at this great train of Terror which
the people set before her; She considers, and hearkens to nothing but her Love,
which calls her to an action which will equal Spain to ancient Greece, and old
Italy; which will efface the glory of renowned men and women; and infuse
jealousy into both Sexes: which will be the honor of this Age, and the
admiration of Posterity; and will manifest that Charity no less then Faith has
the gift of Cures, and the virtue of Miracles.

Her Imagination was full of these great Objects. But her Husband is the main
one, and approaches nearest to her heart: In her mind she renounceth
Reputation and Glory: and by an express Oath taken upon the name and picture of
the Prince, which you see in her hand; She dedicates her self to his Cure, and
obliges her self to suck in her own Death, or to give him Life. Let us
accompany her to the Execution of this business, and place our selves behind
this piece of Arras with the Princes servants, who observe her in silence, and
with gestures of astonishment. Virtue cannot have too many witnesses in like
Enterprises. And this would merit that time past should return, and the future
advance to convey to her Spectators of all Ages.

Behold her already upon the Princes Bed, and couched upon the wound she has
discovered. You would say that her Soul to accomplish the Transport she has
vowed, and to pass from the subject she animates, to that she loves, flows
away by her Eyes with her Tears, and drop by drop penetrates the Body of the
sick Prince. Do not fear that these Tears should inflame his wound; or that the
Ardour of his Feavour be augmented by them. These Tears indeed are very warm,
and come from a scorching spring: but they are gentle and benign; and I
believe that not a Tear does fall, which carries not with it some part of the
Princesses Soul, and some drop of her Life distilled therein.

What do you think of this Love, who exhorts her with his very looks and
action? Does he not seem to be newly come out of her Heart to declare himself
the Author of this great Design, and to enjoy it nearer and in an open way? He
is not one of these Interested and Propriatory Ones that will ingross all to
themselves, and aim merely at their own private satisfaction. Less also is he
one of those Discontented and Contentious Ones, who are armed on all sides with
teeth and nails; who carry not a Flower which is not accompanied with Thorns;
who make not so much clear fire, as they do noise and smoke.

You see no Shafts nor Torch about him, because he is a Saving and no
Tyrannical Love: He is come to cure an old wound, and not to make new ones: And
there enters nothing but a pure Spirit and Light into the Flames which he
inkindles. He is not of the Country of Romances, nor of the Region of Fables:
His Origin is from Heaven, even from the most Luminous, and highest part of
Heaven. He is next to God the Mediator of holy Marriages, and well united
Pairs: He is the common Spirit of Christian Sympathyes, and the Moderator of
Chaste Agreements, and Virtuous Harmonies.

Such an Exhorter is most powerful, and his Inspirations leave nothing to be
acted by Reason. However he is not the sole perswader of the Princess. Her
Husband though fast asleep, is no less Persuasive nor Eloquent them he. If
Prince Edward speaks not with his mouth, he speaks by the paleness of his face:
He speaks from the Ardour of his Fever, and the Palpatation of his heart. He
speaks from his wound which has a Voice of Blood and words of Passion. In
silence the Princess yields attention to this Voice and to these Words: And
Answers them with her Sighs and Tears, which are no less Eloquent, nor less
Passionate. And ere long when she shall thrust her Tongue and Mouth into this
VVound, her Heart will descend upon her Lips to bid the last adieu to the
Princes Heart, and to transmit into it her last Flame, together with her Life.

But fear nothing in her behalf: This Love her Inciter, will preserve them
both. He put a secret Antidote in to her Mouth, and gave her Spirit the gift of
Healing. Her Lips which he purified with a Spiritual and Sacred Fire, will
Exorcise Death, and dispossess it of this Body, without taking it into her own:
And one day, Edward Cured, and Eleonor Preserved, will be reckoned amongst the
miracles of Heroic Charity.

SONNET.
ON some Exploit, Prince Edward, Dreaming lies,
With Death in's Wound, and slumber in his Eyes:
His Spouse, to Cure him, is resolved to Die,
With Heart like those of her brave Ancestry.
Love, more then Nature, skilled in Life's repairs,
Makes him a precious Balsome of her Tears:
Whose Soul already heals him in Design,
And, at his VVound, does with his Soul conjoyne.
Approach thy Mouth and Heart courageous Wife,
It Is that must save thy gallant Edwards life;
That Heart of thine, with true Affection Crowned,
Shall make thy Tongue a Plaster for his Wound.
To Cure thy Prince, employ no other Skill;
The Fire, the Blood, the Spirits that Distill
From thy fair Soul, shall from his Body drive
The empoyson'd VVound, and keep thy Prince alive.
Elogy of Eleonor.
Heroic Virtue does not always Kill; not imploys Fire and Sword in all she
takes in hand. All her Exploits are not stained with Blood: she knows how to
perform them of more then one fashion and color; and acts not everywhere with
Noise, though in every place with Force. There are Obscure victories without
witnesses, wherein she has need of no less boldness, then in those which are
gained in the view of whole Nations, and with the noise of Canons and Trumpets.

The victory represented in this Picture, is one of these. Edward, Prince of
Wales, was come back from the Holy Land, with a wound he had received from an
Impoysoned Arrow. The Physicians had allayed all their speculations and
practices, and all those ways having been unprofitably tried, they declared to
him, that he could not be cured but by the destruction of some Person who might
have the courage to suck in death with the poison of his wound. Being condemned
by this Declaration, he prepares himself to dye, resolving not to preserve
life, by the death of another, nor to make a remedy of an Impoysonment. The
Princess his Wife, Daughter unto the King of Castile, conceiving her self
condemned by the same sentence, received it, as if love it self had pronounced
it to her: And seeing her self necessitated to dye, either by the death or cure
of her Husband; She resolved to choose of these two deaths, that which seemed to
her the most Honorable, and least bitter; and which ought of the two moyties
of her life to conserve to her self, that which was most dear and precious.

This resolution taken with her love, she defers the Execution to the next
night; And as soon as the Prince was prepared for it by rest, she gently
discovers his wound, and begins to cure it by the purest blood of her soul,
which she pours into it with her Tears: That done, she set her mouth to the
wound, and with her tongue plunged her heart into it: By little and little she
sucks out the Poison, and so seasonably casts it forth, as she drew from thence
all that was Mortal, without ret^^ning any part thereof to her self.

Whether that this malignant humor were consumed by the subtle and
penetrating fire, which her heart diffused by her mouth: Or whether God, who is
Life and Charity, had laid his Spirit upon her lips, she preserved her Husbands
life without loosing her own; and by one act cured two sick Persons, and
wrought two Miracles.

MORAL REFLECTION.
THere is a large (...) in this Picture; and an excellent lesson for married
Women This courageous Spaniard added to the Romans, Greciams, and even to those
Barbarians, who dyed for their husbands, will speak Eternally for the constancy
and fidelity of their Affections: And will highly prove, and in an Heroic fule,
that the loving portion of the heart is more vigorous and courageous in their
Sex, then in Ours. But she will also prove for their instruction, that nothing
is impossible to well ordered Charity: That her hands have the gift of Cures,
and that the virtue of Miracles resides on her Lips: That she single and
unarmed, has more Force then Death with all his swords and poisons: and that
Barbarous and heathenish Love, which knew only how to dye vainly, and with
Audacity, was but an impatient and desperate Love, compared to a Chaste One,
which knows how to save in dying, and to reap benefit even by its Dangers and
Losses.

But this saving and Wonder-working Love, ought not to be a busy and
Effeminate Love, or a Love of Interest and propriety. It must be a Philosophic
and Courageous Love, Extatick and Prodigal; Elevated above all that pleases
and affrights. This Torch must be like that, represented in the Canticles, not
a wandering and Volatile fire, but a fire ever Equal and Active; A fire which
consumes all the little threads of Interests; all Foreign ties; all Chains and
Fetters; even those precious Chains which Fortune frames; nay, those very
Fetters which are more worth then Diadems, and which fasten Princes on Thrones.
Some will have it, that it consumes even the ties of the Soul and Body; And
allege that place of the Canticles, where the power of Love is equalled with
that of Death. This point is both important, and instructive: And because one
might be dangerously mistaken therein, it is fit to make a Question of it apart.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether it appertains to the Duty and Fidelity of Women, to expose themselves
to Death for their Husbands.
IF in this point we believe Antiquity, Conjugal Love was heretofore very
Tyrannical: And married Women, who subjected themselves to it, ought to be well
resolved. It was not satisfied, that they should bear with the ill humors, and
bad Fortunes of their Husbands, but it would have them sick of their Maladies,
and die of their Deaths: And as if it had not been sufficient to make them
slaves, and undergo the yoke, It made them also Sufferers and Victims, and put
ordinarily either a rope about their necks, or a dagger in their throats: The
chief thing is, that there was a necessity of taking that course to acquire the
title of a gallant Woman: And such as were able to endure life after the death
of their Husbands, could not pretend to the acclamations of their present Age,
nor to the Eternity of History. Besides, even in these days this cruel Custom
is used in some parts of the Indie: No Widows are seen in those Countries: And
Families are not prejudiced there by Dowries which issue out of them: A Father
of a Family being dead, the Law of the Country ordains, that he be put in an
Equipage for the other World: And that such things as had been most dear unto
him, should be burned with him. The best beloved of his Wives has this
advantage by his last Will, and the Right which Custom allows her. She dresseth
her self more richly, and with more care for death, then she had done for her
Wedding-Feast: The whole Kindred in Festival Garments, and adorned like her,
Conducts her Solemnly and in Pomp to the flaming Pile: And there she suffers
her self to be burnt in Ceremony, and with a more Natural and less affected
Constancy then did the (...) Philosopher, who would counterfeit Hercules dying;
And presented a Spectacle of his death to the Army of Alexander. I know indeed
that this Superstitious, and regular Cruelty of the Indians; And that other
tumultuary and precipitated Despair of the Romans and Grecians, are equally
reproved by the Laws of Christianity. But I am not ignorant also that conjugal
Love has its Meritorious and Virtuous Deaths: And there is some ground to
doubt whether such kind of deaths may happen by way of obligation, and concern
the Duty of a good Wife.

To this Question, which is not of mere Curiosity, but Instructive and
Profitable: I answer, First, that desperate and passionate Women, who kill
themselves to follow their deceased Husbands, transgress against conjugal Love,
and violate the Fidelity they owe them. This Proposition draws near to a
Paradox; Yet exceeds not its bounds; and Truth is there well balanced. One or
two Reasons may Justify it, and draw the assent of the most devoted to the
Memory of the Pant^^^^^ and the Porcia's.

In the first place it will be granted me, that the prime care of Lovers should
be to nourish their fire, and to keep it still in heat and action; To delend it
from all that might extinguish it: And the least neglects therein are
Temptations: Doubts are Dispositions to change and commenced Infidelities. Now
this fire is smothered in blood, and by the violence of desperate Widows. It is
a great folly to believe that nothing remains after death: The earth of
Churchyards is too cold to preserve a single spark thereof: An such as thunder
out so great Oaths, that their Ashes will retain everlastingly the heat
thereof, are highly guilty of Perjury, unless they vent them by way of Poesy.
And if it be an act of Infidelity by tract of time, and by piecemeal to
suppress ones love from day to day, and to deprive it by degrees of
nourishment, what will it be to smother it violently and on a sudden; not to
leave it a single spark which may inkindle it?

I know not how they will take what I have to say in this particular. It is
true nevertheless, and must be spoken, in what sense soever it may be taken
Conjugal Fidelity is more hainously violated, and the dead are far more injured
by the delusive Courage of the falsely Constant Women that destroy themselves,
then by the weakness of those which will open their hearts to new Affections,
and run to second Marriages. These at least preserve the Memory of their
Husbands; They still retain their Rings on their Fingers* They keep their
Pictures in their Closets and Hearts: And the second fire which ^^^^eth on them
is not so incompatible, nor so much an enemy to the first, that it permits not
some sparks thereof, and a little heat in the remaining Ashes. On the contrary,
furious and despairing Widows in what manner soever they voluntarily die,
reserve nothing of their first fire: They destroy it even to the Matter, to the
very Ashes and Harth: And their Husbands, who might live long and quietly in
their hearts, perish a second time by the impetuosity of their Despair, or by
the obstinacy of their Grief.

Hence I infer a second Reason against the Falsity of impatient and despairing
Love. It is an opinion generally received, and supported both by the Sense and
Nature, as well as by Speculation and Philosophy: That Persons beloved have a
particular Being, and as it were a second Existency in the Imagination, in the
Soul and Heart of the Persons that love them. They live there intellectually,
and by their Images: And those Images are not dead Figures, nor Impostures of a
deceiving Art. They have Life and Spirit; they are true and Natural: They
possess all the Perfections and Graces of their Originals, and have neither the
Defects nor stains of Matter. Now a Woman who kills her self out of a blind
and precipitious fury, or who consumes her self with an obstinate and voluntary
Affliction, takes from her Husband this second Existency; and this intellectual
Being and Love, by which he survived himself She voluntarily annihilates, and
violently destroys that which death had left her: And if she ought to make a
scruple of defacing his Picture, with what color and pretense can she justify
the violence she offers to an Image, which was her second Life and Felicity
in this World?

It is evident thereby that Constancy is not furious, and that Fidelity is
another thing then Despair: That the greatest Love is not that which makes the
most haste to poisons and precipices: That Wives cannot more Religiously keep
the Faith they owe to their Husbands, not give them stronger proofs of their
Affection, then in rendering their Fidelity, and Love, durable and lasting: Then
in procuring them in their mind a life full of tranquillity and satisfaction:
Then in espousing their Memory, and making a new Contract with their Images:
Then in carefully preserving those things which have been dear unto them: And
if they be good Wives, they will not doubt but they were more dear to them then
any Worldly treasure.

Let it not be said, that this Philosophy is too remiss and indulgent: That it
pleads the cause of Nice and Effeminate Dames; That it gives credit and
authority to self Love. This cannot be spoken but rashly, and at random; And
surely as one may kill himself out of self Love, and through an excess of
tenderness; so one may preserve his own life for the Love of another, and by a
particular Effort of Courage. Seneca affirms, that for this much Virtue is
required: and that the bravest men ought to employ therein, the whole vigor of
their Souls. And this Stoack, who was as severe by his own inclination, as by
the Genius of his Sect; who had been inured to the Axioms, and opinions of the
strongest Philosophy; who had so frequent trials of himself against grief and
death, freely confesses, and in good earnest, that he was become a thrifty
dispoler of his bad remainders; and had spared the dirt and dreggs of his Old
Age, to the end he might preserve the Spirit and youth of Paul^^s, who lived in
him.

To this first Decision, Which allows not to Women the use of poison, and
Steel; and imposes an absolute necessity on them to survive their husbands; I
add a second, which replaceth them in the freedom, even in the Right and Duty
of dying for them: And the strength of this second Decision, is not repugnant
to the moderation of the former. I say then, that albeit the Law, which forbids
murder, and especially all self-murder, be express and general: Yet in a
perilous occasion, where the life of a husband should be in danger, his wife
would be obliged to expose her self for him to this hazard, and to give her own
life for the preservation of his, if there were an occasion of making this
exchange. I do not ground this obligation upon the right of Common Justice, nor
on the Duties of Charity in general. Common, and Universal Charity, does not
extend so far: I ground it upon the Right and Duties of Conjugal Love, which is
of greater rigor, then the most rigorous justice, and imposes more Obliging
and strict Laws, then the strictest Charity.

And to begin with what is more particular and essential: We know that the
proper effect, and the specifical Function of Conjugal Love, is to reunite two
Moyties, which the Creation has severed: and to reassemble Man and Woman into
one body. Moreover we see in all Natural bodies, that the less Noble parts
expose themselves by instinct to fire and sword, in the defense of the Nobler.
We see that the Arms and Hands stuffen and extend themselves to meet the danger
which menaceth the head; to receive the blows directed against it: To protect
it even by their wounds, even by their death and torture, What our Members do
by this instinct, which is a more ancient duty then all Laws and Law makers,
which is a blind Love, and a Natural Charity without merit; a married Woman
ought to do it freely, and by election, through the duty of this strict and
rigorous Charity, which Conjugal Love imposes on her. She is but the second
part of the body, composed by marriage. Man, to whom the Command belongs, is
the Head thereof: and the Law which from the beginning was imposed upon Woman,
to apply her self to this Head, not only ordains her to take light and Conduct
from thence, but also wills, that to preserve this principle of her Conduct, and
this source of her light, she should lay aside the care of her own safety, and
repose: that she should take upon her self his dangers and wounds; and even
save him by her death, if it will be received in Exchange.

Besides, Love of its own Nature is a general Alienation of the whole Person
that loves. It is a Transport without Contract or Hope of a Return, by which
one gives himself all entire, and makes a free Donation of all that he has,
and is, to the Person he affects. Now if this Alienation and Transport may be
valid and of force in any kind of love, it is doubtless in Conjugal Love,
which leaves no right of reserve in Married Persons* Which takes from them even
the free use of their Bodies, and engages them in a mutual Dependency. And
this Dependency is yet more strict and indispensible on the Wives part, who
owes unto her Husband even the hairs of her Head, and the very Dreams and
Fancies which are within it: Whether by Reason the subjection is greater, and
the Duties more Natural and necessary of the Body toward the Head, and of the
Accessory toward the Principal, then of the Head toward the Body, and the
Principal toward the Accessory; or whether because Wives give themselves with
less reserve, and love more Sincerely, and with more Fidelity then Men This
Alienation, when it is free and complete, does not only establish on a Husband
a just Title over all the Cares and Affections of his Wife; but it also
establishes in him, a new Right over her Blood and Life. And albeit, this Right
cannot be exacted by Justice, yet it may be done by Love, which is a far less
severe and vexatious Exacter, but yet more pressing and more efficatious then
Justice. Nevertheless this Exacter ought to know, that he cannot make use of
this Right but in the Extremity of Hope, and after the Trial of all other
Remedies. An arm of a Man is not cut off to cure him of Rhume and Headache: And
one may say truly, that this kind of Love would play the Tyrant, and
Executioner, and even cut the throat of a Wife, to make a Bath for her Husband,
sick of the Sciatica or the Stone.

In the third place, Love is a true and sensible Transmigration of the Soul, or
as some define it, grounded on the Doctrine of St. De^ys: It is an Ecstasy by
which the Soul cease to live in the Body, which she animates, to live in that
which she Loves. Upon which it is not necessary to make a Commentary in this
place; nor to say by way of gloss, that the Word to live ought not to be
understood of the first and Substantial, but of the second and Active Life; of
this sweet and sensible Life, which affords Gust and Delight to the first.
Every one ought to know, that Love is the Original, and, as it were, the
Fountain of Joy, Pleasure and Satisfaction, and of whatsoever has a share in
the sweetness of Life: And therefore the sweet life of Lovers cannot subsist,
but in the place where they love: Their minds are sick and languishing, every
where else: All their thoughts, which tend not thither, are heavy and
Terrestrial; are Melancholy and burdened with Anxiety: Their Musings and their
Cares can follow no other Track: And of those Souls, it may well be said that
they are Aliens, and Incommodated at home; And that their Bodies are to them as
bad Innes, nay Prisons and Sepulchers.

Hence it grows, that it does not only belong to the Duty, but also to the
Interest and Repose of a good Wife, to Sacrifice her own life for her Husband;
and that the gain which may be made thereby, is by two thirds greater then the
loss. Thereby she only hazards the most unquiet and worst part of her two
lives. She exposes nothing but her Sorrows and Vexations, for the preservation
of her Joys and Pleasures. Of the two places where her Soul lives, she only
forsakes that which is sad and Melancholy: And by the ruin of her Prison, she
secures her Palace. And that by the choice of a death which lasts but a moment,
and is sweetened and purified by Love; She avoids a Widow-hood, which is to
Lovers a long and bitter death; A death of the Heart and Mind; a death which
endures and makes it self felt as long as it lasts. Thereby in fine, her Love
enjoys the purest and highest satisfaction whereof it is capable: Which is to
produce it self entire: To fill up the whole Extent that lies open to it; to
pass even to the utmost bounds, and to the last Trials. Now so long as it
advances not so far as death, there still remains a great Vac^^^^ before it.
And the most important and persuasive point is yet wanting to Trials. Being
assured by the Testimony of Holy Writ, that Perfect and Consummated Love, is
only found in such as Sacrifice their Lives for those who are dear unto them.

Moreover this last and Supreme Duty which Conjugal Love imposes on Wives, and
which it may also impose on Husbands, is not one of those Duties in (...) and
Speculation, whereof no Example is seen but in Romances. The Courageous Spanish
Princess, whose Picture I have newly drawn, was not a Fantome of that Country:
And so many others, so well known in true History, were not born in the same
Places as the (...) and (...) I leave the Ancient and Foreign Dames to seekers
of far-fetched Curiosities: The French Lady, whom I am to produce, is of a
Family, good and rich enough to be an Honor to her Country, and Age: And such
as treat of Modern Virtues, as of the younger b^ood, will learn at least by
this Example, that the younger Daughters of France are nothing inferior to the
eldest Daughters of Greece and Rome.

EXAMPLE.
Margaret of Foixe Duchess of Espernon.
IT is no new thing to hear me Discourse of the bad Intelligence which is
between Friendship and Fortune It has always been believed that Greatness was
too much Interessed, and Propriatory, to love really; and that it had a certain
Pride and Rigor, which left no room for Tenderness and soft Passions. It has
been said, that Love and Majesty never dwell together: That it rather affects a
mean and quiet Condition, then an elevation exposed to Winds and Tempests. And
they that have resembled it to a Bird, have not made it fly with Eagles, nor
placed it upon the top of Cedars, and the summet of Mountains. They have ranked
it amongst Bees, which are Armed, and live like it, of the quintiscence of
^owers, and of the pure Spirit of the Planets. They have lodgd it amongst Rose
Trees, where there is Fire and Thorns like its own. But whatever has hitherto
been believed or said, Friendship and Virtue are not equally at variance with
all great Fortunes: There are Grandeurs very Affectionate and wel-Natured, as
well as Rude and Intractable. And if the Lizard, which walks only upon his
hands, as Solomon says, be so bold as to ascend even to the Palaces of Kings,
and to dwell with them as their Domestique: We must not believe that Love,
which is Nobly Descended, and to whom so excellent wings are given, is only
born for Cottages. There are no Houses shut against it: And it shall appear by
this Example, into what House soever Virtue introduces it, there is no
Greatness which gives not place to it, nor any Interest which obeys it not.

The Fort^ne of the deceased Duke of Esper^on has been long admired throughout
all France: It was likewise Extraordinary and Wonderful; and there was not only
color in the pieces which composed it, but also Force and Solidity; they were
all great and Illustrious. In my Judgment nevertheless the decealed Lady his
Wife, was the greatest and most Illustrious of all those pieces; nay, the
strongest and most solid, though it lasted not so long as the rest This great
Lady possessed in an eminent degree all the Qualities which may conduce to the
glory of a Family, and the happiness of a Husband. Her Nobility was of the
first rank: And I know not whether in all Europe there were any Sovereign Title
or Crown wherein she had not a share. But there is a Nobility which is proud
and insolent; yet hers was Modest and Civil: The Titles of her House did not
puff up her Mind And the Crowns of her Allies and Predecessors made her not
receive others with scorn. To this Nobleness of Blood was added the Nobleness
of her Countenance, and that Sovereignty of Natural Right and Ancient Descent,
which begets Majesty in Beautiful Persons; but she was not of those fair Ones
who erect their Sovereignty into Liberty and Tyranny: Hers still remained
within the limits of a lowly and exemplar Sobriety. Detraction, which is so
bold in lying, and finds out stains in the most Beautiful Planets, had not one
word to say against her.

Nevertheless, her Virtue was no sullen Virtue; she was none of those cursed
ones, who have not a drop of good nature; who know only how to scratch and
bite: She was naturally mild, and cultivated by study* and the Graces had so
well tempered what might perchance have been over tart in her, as she gave
content even where she was severe.

But all these rare qualities do not concern the subject we now treat of: my
Question is about Conjugal Love: and the deceased Duchess of Espernon has
given an Example thereof, which equals the force of ancient Models There are
even in these days Illustrious, and Remarkable witnesses, which speak not of it
but in terms of Praise. But what ever they say of her Esteem, and respects of
her Obedience and Cares; of her good Offices and Complacences; though they
speak nothing thereof which is not Great and Exemplar, yet it leaves not so
high an Idea of this Love, as the action of Angou^^^^.

In that General Revolution which happened at Court in the year 1588. The Heads
of the Leag^t raised all their Engines against the Duke of Espern^^; and used
both openly and privately, all sorts of endeavors to destroy him. However, he
was not shaken; so that these Engines did only assault the favor and good
will of his Prince. But as soon as Calumny took hold of his Fidelity, and that
he was accused for holding intelligence with the King of N^varre, his good
Master, who till then had defended his own benefits, and interposed between his
Work and those envious Persons who designed his ruin; withdrew his Protection,
and consented to the Plot which was laid to seiz on him in Ango^leme.

The enemies which he had in the Cabinet Council, intended the Kings consent
even to his destruction: And Orders were sent from the Court to the Magistrates
of Ango^leme, to bring him alive or dead: The execution of this dangerous Plot
was deferred till the tenth of August, and that day the Magistrate, who was not
ignorant how hard a chase he had to follow presented himself with two hundred
selected and armed men to seiz on the Duke at the hour he should go forth to
hear Mass. I know not whether one ought to believe what is spoken of his good
Fortune: but indeed I have heard say, That she was more diligent about him,
then the most diligent of his Guards: And that his enemies never laid any
s^ares to catch him, which she did not break asunder; that they never prepared
a Pitfall for him, over which she laid not a Plank. However it were, it is
certain, there had been an end of him that day, if she had not caused
dispatches to arrive to him, which busied him very happily all the morning, and
diverted him from going forth to expose himself to death, which was prepared
for him.

The occasion passing over with the morning, the Conductors of the Enterprise
resolved to begin by the seizure of a rich pawn; and to secure the Dukes
Person, by laying hold on the good Lady, his Wife, who was at Mass. Mean while,
one of the Magistrates, accompanied with twelve resolute and stout men, entered
the Castle: Their Arms were hid under their Cloaks; but their bad Intention
being easy to be discovered by their ill looks, one of his Guards had some
distrust of them, and ran to shut the Gate against those that followed to
second them: the party began hotly to discharge their Pistols before the Dukes
Chamber: some of his friends overpowred with number, were slain in the place:
but his Domestics and Guards hasting to the noise, and he himself appearing
with a Sword in his hand, the end of the Pray proved as unhappy for the
Assailants, as the beginning. The Magistrate, and one of the boldest amongst
his Troop, made Payment for the attempt, with their persons; and the rest who
were not resolved to lose so much, rendered up their Arms, and abandoned the
party.

This first Troop being defeated, the Duke was not for all that out of danger.
He was enforced to defend the two Gates of the Castle against fire and the
Pe^ard; and then to repulse those who began to Scale it. His greatest danger,
nevertheless, was in the Church, where furiously entered an armed, and incensed
multitude, which seized on the Duchess. Her quality and Sex deserved at least
some respect: but qualities are not distinguished in a Tumult; and no Sex is
Privileged against Fury. Of two Gentlemen that led her, one was killed at her
feet, and the other being dangerously wounded, was in little better condition.
This Barbarous Act did not affright her: the blood which sprinkled her Gown,
and Death it self, which passed over her, wrought no change in her Countenance.
Her soul was always Erect, and Elevated above danger; She conserved even the
comeliness of her gesture, and the dignity of her looks, even words of
Authority, and tone of Command: and whereas another less Courageous Woman,
might have submitted to Insolency, and have flattered Fury* She treated them
with Command, like a Mistress, astonishing Audacity it self by her Constancy.

They advertise her that she was Arrested for her Husband; and that if she had
a mind to live, and preserve Him, she must consider of disposing him to remit
his Person and Citadel into the hands of the Magistrate.

At this Declaration, which was made to her with threats, and a dagger at her
throat, she answered, That she would not enter into any Treaty with Murderers:
That she knew not how to give ill Counsels: nor in what terms a Wise may
persuade her Husband to be a Coward: that it troubled her she had but one life
to expose for the honor and safety of his: that she was so far from lending
them her prayers and tears against him, that she would joyfully shed even the
last drop of her blood, if that might add either a moment of new luster to his
reputation, or half a days space to his life: And therefore let their fury
finish on her, what it had begun. That nothing of weakness should proceed
either from her mouth or hands, that they too well accorded with her heart; and
that it would better please her to dye at the Castle Gate for her Husband, then
to live without him upon a Throne.

She made large promises; she found her self also as well disposed to make good
what she promised; and her Constancy being put to the Test, was found as great
and vigorous as her words. I learned from an Illustrious Person, and who has
narrowly looked into the affairs of that time, that she was brought before the
Castle; and that they might there take the Husband by the fear and danger of
the Wife, the same Propositions were renewed to her, with the same Threats and
Violencies.

The Courageous Woman reduced to this Extremity, considered nothing but the
danger of her husband; and had no fear, but of his Affection and Tenderness.
She was not ignorant that all his weakness lay on that side: and that there was
no place so strong, which would not be hard for him to defend against her
tears: She also cried out unto him, the better to fortify this weak part: That
she came not to persuade him to a dangerous Piety; and to betray him by her
Entreaties: That she came rather to make her Body serve him for a new Barricado
against his Enemies. That if he loved her truly, and had a desire to save her,
he should love and preserve what was of her in him; that on him depended her
safety and danger; her good and bad Fortune: that out of him, she could have
neither life nor death, nothing to hope or fear; that he should take heed of
trusting Traitors, who assaulted his head by his heart: who would soften it to
his overthrow, and raise a Compassion in him, to gain his life at a cheaper
rate: that he should beware of listening to the suggestions of a Timorous and
Apprehensive Love: that he should rather give ear to that Affection which spoke
to him by her mouth: that it were lost labor to preserve her, if he lost
himself: that it would be of no advantage to his Enemies to destroy her, if he
were safe: that in despite of them, and what death soever they should make her
suffer, she should always live most happy, as long as she should live in his
remembrance.

She pronounced these words with so Graceful a Confidence, and so Noble and
Generous a Tone, as it clearly appeared, that at this instant her heart
ascended to her mouth to express it self by its own Language. This eminent
Virtue dazel'd the furious Soldiers, who environed her, and made their Weapons
fall out of their hands. The Duke was relieved by his frinds, who came thither
from Xaintes, and Ca^gnae: And the Capitulation being concluded between him and
the Inhabitants, the Duchess, impatient to see him again, could not expect
till the Castle Gate was cleared, but commanded a Ladder whereby to enter at
the window. Certainly after so Illustrious and Glorious a Victory, it had been
fit the Gate should have been thrown down before her, and that she should have
entered the Castle in Triumph, and by a Breach.

(...)

The Maid of Orleans.
HAD you known that this day was to be a day of Miracle and Safety to France;
and that you should have assisted at the most Heroic action which has been
ever seen, since Sieges and Battles have been in use; you would be sorry to
have come too late: But here is yet enough to give you a right prospect
thereof. The adventure is wonderful in all its Parts; there is something great
and prodigious in all its Circumstances: And that which remains for us to see,
exceeds by much, whatever can be regularly imagined, and with any true
resemblance.

You are no strangers to this Country, and need not learn from me to know
Orleans by her Steeples, and the circumference of her VValls. Likewise you are
not ignorant of the Constancy and Fidelity which this great City had showed,
when it was besieged by the English, and reduced to the extremity of hope. But
that which you do not yet know, and what no man dares hope for, is, that in
despite of the English, and in the very sight of their Camp and Works,
Succors, safety and liberty happened to enter into this Place, under the Conduct
of a Maid. Not only hope was not so bold as to advance so far; but even belief
it self, fortified by the sight, has much ado to reach unto it.

Yea as a Maid, even a Country Maid, and a Sheperdess, has wrought this so
little expected Miracle. The importance is, that this Country Maid is a
Prophetess; and that this yesterdayes Sheperdess is to day the General of an
Army, and will be to morrow a Conqueress. The same God who loosned from the
Mountain the little Stone wherewith the great Colossus was overturned, who drew
from amidst stocks of Sheep a youth victorious over Lions and Giants, made
choice of this Maid to force France out of the hands of strangers, and sent
her to the King laden with Warlike Commands, and promises of Victory.

The King, by the advice of his Counsel, after an exact and juridicall
Inquisition into her life and words, furnished her with Arms and Troops, to
chase away the English before Oreleans. She but now forced their Camp with two
hundred Lances: and behold her already with Victory and safety at the Gates of
the City. This first prosperous Action is an efficacious and famous
justification of her Innocence; It is a powerful and victorious answer to
false Rumors, and passionate Calumny: And suddenly the Coronation of the King
followed by the total defeat of the Enemy, will be a more solemn and
authentical proof of the authority of her Mission, and of the verity of her
Prophesies.

I could wish that we had seen her in the heat of Fight handle her first Arms
by Efforts of consummated Valor. But if we are come too late to be spectators
of this Valor, to behold the lightnings, and impetuosity of this Heroic fire,
which gave an action so lively to her Arms, and so sudden motions to her whole
Body; we may at least discern the light thereof upon her Face; and a remnant of
hear which still excites not with so much violence as before, but with more
dignity and due proportion. Combat and Victory have left a pleasing mixture of
a scarlet dye upon her Cheeks, and on her Brow: and the spirits of boldness
receive a kind of sweetness from thence, and a new Grace from the spirits of
joy, which were mingled with them. Nothing of the air of her Birth, nor of the
manners of her Education is seen in her. There is nothing even in her
Countenance but appears Noble and Warlike: And this sudden Metamorphosis which
is made in her, from a Sheperdess into an Amazon, has something, I know not
what, which resembles an Illusion, and savors of a Prodigy and Fable.

Would you say that the very thoughts of grazing, and the inclinations of a
Sheperdess had ever entered into this head, which is so free and graceful under
an Helmet? Would you say that the Sheep-hook had hitherto the charge and
employment of these hands which handle so vigorously, and with so much
dexterity the Banner and Sword? Would you not say that she is born in a
Magazine of Arms, and that she is trained up in a Camp? That she is come to us
from the Country of Amazons? That she is animated with the same Spirit which
animated heretofore the Hipolita's, the Rodoguna's, and the Zenobia's? Beware
of saying it. This were to praise her injuriously, and to dishonor her in
handsome Terms: This were to scandalize Innocence, and profane a Person whom
God has particularly Consecrated.

The Spirit which possesses her is another Spirit then that of the Zenobiars,
and Rodoguna's: It comes farther off then the Country of Amazons: It is of a
much purer and higher Region. You have heard some discourse of that double
Spirit which inspired Debora with Truth and Valor, and equally replenished the
two parts of her double Ministry: Of this double Spirit, which was a Spirit of
Fire to David a Conqueror, and a Spirit of Light to David a Prophet. It is the
same Spirit which descended upon our Maid; which filled her with his Light and
Heat; which gave her the science of Predictions, and the virtue of Victories.

The Sword which you see in her hand, makes me remember that Meteor with two
Faces, that famous and mysterious Fire which an Angel-conducter carried before
the People of God. Like that Meteor, it is luminous, and stained with Blood;
like that Meteor, it summons on the one side safety and liberty, and on the
other side it threatens death and destruction. Nevertheless it has not like
that a light only for show; Its splendour is not presaging: It were
inconsiderable, if like Lightning, it wounded nothing but the sight; it ruins
and destroys like Thunder: And they say also, that like Thunder, it was drawn
out of the bosom of the Earth. For this Sword, if you know it not, is a fatal
Sword, and resuscitated by Miracle: It belonged to another Age then this: And
the Maid divinely inspired, caused it to be taken out of an ancient Tomb,
where it rested quietly with the Ashes of its old Master. Scarce had it felt
the virtue of this glorious hand, but the agedness thereof fell off with its
Rust. It has received a new luster, which gives it a new force, and a second
life: and behold it already stained with the Blood of strangers, and thoroughly
heated with this first prosperity.

Two hundred Lanciers march bravely, and in an handsome order after this Maid.
Had Fortune her self, or Victory led the Party, they could not have done more
gallantly, nor given more terror to the Enemy. To behold the confidence and
boldness of their looks: To behold this Noble and courageous joy, which appears
on their Faces, and in all their motions, you would not say that they intend to
cast themselves into a beleagured City, but that they rather march to some
Triumph. The enemies still affrighted by the impetuosity wherewith they passed
along, retreated disorderly into their Forts, conceiving that it would not be
safe for them to remain in their Tents.

Nevertheless the number of those that have no longer any need of Tents or
Works, is great enough. And apparently, if the landed Troops had given on at
the same time upon all sides, this days work had put an end to the Siege: And
this so stately Camp, which had been for seven months the Prison of Orleans,
would become at present the Sepulcher of a good part of England. But so great a
work well deserved to be shown distinctly and at leisure: And to the end this
imprisoned and despairing City might behold all the Valor of its Deliveress,
it was necessary that its Prison should not be broken but by track of time, and
by parcels.

This happy beginning is a certain presage of a far more fortunate Issue. And
the Earl of Dunois, whom you see under the Gate with Lahire and the other
Commanders, is gone forth to congratulate with her aforehand. Peradventure you
may have never seen the face of this young Prince: You have never then beheld
the greatest Ornament of this Age, and the fairest hope of Posterity. Take time
to observe him well; Behold his graceful carriage, and the dignity of his
whole Person; Behold those Rays of Majesty, which have something, I know not
what, of Royal, and are dyed with the Purple of his Blood. Behold the Nobleness
of Aspect, and air of a Warrior, which demonstrates his exterior Courage,
and his remarkable Valor, and acknowledge that he adds much to the name of
Orleans, and worthily supports the Greatness and Fortune thereof. It is hoped
that his Virtues will not die with him: They will serve for other Ages, and
under other Reigns: And all Predictions are false, and Physiognomy is
deceitful, or Princes shall be born from him, who will be Heroes by Race, and
Valiant from Father to Son; who will be one day the Honor of their Family, by
rendering Honor to France.

SONNET.
The PUCELLE speaks.
FAtal to England, Fortunate to France;
Of the one I curbed the surly Arrogance;
And with my Lance the tottering Throne sustained
Of the other Realm, whose Freedom I regained.
The smoakie Ordures of the burning Pile
Could not my spotless Innocence defile;
And my opprobrious Death more mischief brought
To those that cans'd it, then my Arm that fought.
With Heart which did Heroickly aspire,
I under verdant Laurels kept entire
My Body's flower, and not unlike the Be,
Was rich in Courage, and in Chastity.
On the English Lions I did boldly press,
And chased them often, a Virgin Conqueress;
And gallantly defended with my Lance,
The Flowr-de-Luce, which Crowns our Kings of France.
Elogy of Pucelle.
HISTORY, which causes it self to be styled true and exact, scatters nothing
almost in every place, but far fetched Falsehoods, and Fables Magnificently set
forth, and with Pomp. It only proposes Pictures exceeding Natural Proportion,
nothing but Colosseses, which seem to be made only to affright the belief of
Readers, and weary their sight. There is nothing here of this Model or Statute:
All pure and naked Truth, without exaggeration; and ornament is here more
taking then these Fables, more magnificent and stately then these Colosseses.

The Maid of Orleans is not the Work of an Inventive and Deluding Fancy. She is
not composed of the same Matter with those Valiant Women set forth in Romances,
and by Poets. Her Virtue was Sensible and Substantial: She really effected in
the Field all that others have done in Picture, and in the brain of their
Inventors: Her Victories have not been like theirs which spoke only by black'd
Paper, and spilt Ink. The same Spirit which called from the Sheepfold the
Conqueror of Gelia; which chose a weak and unarmed Woman to defeat the
Assyrians broken into Judea, and to tear its People out of the claws of
Holifernes, took this Maid from amidst the Flocks, and sent her Fortified by
his Virtue, to raise up ruined France, and to free it from the bondage of
Strangers, who would have dishonored that Kingdom, after they had pillaged it.

He infused into her a Prophetic Spirit, and a Conquering Heart: He made a
Deb^^^ and Judith of her: And heaped together in her life all that in the time
of Miracles appeared most rare and ^^^ustrious. It did not suffice him to give
her Courage and Conduct: He sent her an Angel who laid his hands on her; and
this Imposition of hands was to her what the Ceremony of Instaulment is to new
made Knights: He instructed her in all the Exercises of War, and taught her
more in a moment then (...) and Pot^^^ had learnt from Occurtences and Fortune.
The English also stood not before her: Their Fortune, which conceived it self
already Victorious, gave way to her Angel; and what forcible endeavors soever
they used to hinder her entry into Orleans, she entered it in despite of them,
and deprived them of France by taking this City from them.

After several Fights, wherein she was still Victorious, she fell into the
hands of her Enemies, who treated her as a Criminal both in point of Religion
and State, and made her undergo the punishment of Heretics and Sorcerers. God
was pleased thus to permit it, to the end she might accomplish all the Duties
of a gallant Woman, and finish that part of a perfect Heroesse, which she had
begun: That she might overcome by her Patience as she had done by her Valor;
And that the English might be no less defeated by her Death then by her
Victories. Besides, this barbarous Injustice heightened their sins, and drew
upon them the wrath of God, the Avenger of oppressed Innocence. The Spirit of
the Maid, and her good Angel re-inkindled the War after he death. Ever since
the English had them on their backs, they were vanquished by them in all
Battles, and beaten off in all Sieges. And in fine to preserve themselves from
these exterminating Spirits, they were enforced to quit all that they (...)
^^vaded.

MORAL REFLECTION.
THere is a great difference between the Judgments of God, and those of Men:
And we see few places where this difference is more express, and better marked
out, then in the History of the Maid of Orleans. God drew her out of a Village,
to inform us, that he makes no distinction either of places or names: that he
esteems not men for their Coats of Arms, and ancient Titles: that the blood of
a Prince and a Shepherd, are of the same color and matter: That a Sheep-hook
in his sight, is of the same value as a Scepter: And that both high and low, as
well as the Palm and Bush, spring from the same Earth. He chose her out of a
weak Sex; because he has ever loved to overcome Pride by Weakness; to throw
down Colosseses with grains of Sand, to fell Giants with Reeds. He would
manifest, that the weakest and least Warlike hands are able to defend Scepters,
and support Thrones when he has blessed them: that the safety of States
depends upon his Providence, and not in the hands of Armies, nor on the heads
of their Ministers. And to teach Conquerours, that Victories are gained more by
his Favor then by their Forces, it was his good pleasure that a Shepherdess,
who had never handled but a Sheep-hook, should give more then ten times chase
to above ten thousand Lances. In fine, God was pleased that a Maid, bred up in
a Village, should perform all the Functions of Heroic Virtue: that she should
undergo all the Trials, and obtain all the Crowns thereof. And thereby he has
taught us, that this sublime Virtue is not always found in elevated Fortunes,
nor still lodged in Palaces: That no body is received by her for his own
Condition: That no body is rejected by reason of his Name or his Countenance:
that she only considers the heart which has its Sex apart, and Qualities
differing from these of the Body: And that Women, who are more then Women by
their Courage, can ascend as high, and approach as near to Virtue as Men. This
Verity is important, and very useful; And the ensuing Question, which I am
going to defend, must needs Instruct, with Delectation and benefit, by way of
Divertisement.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether Women may pretend to Heroic Virtue.
THE Heroes, of whom there is so much mention made in History, were not of the
Giants Race: And their strength reached not so far as to root up Trees, and
remove Mountains. Common people nevertheless, who can comprehend no other
greatness then that which tires the sight; who know no other force then what
begets noise and ruins, frame Colosseses in their imaginations, when we speak
to them of those persons who are called Extraordinary: And because they hear
that men esteem their strength, and prize their valor, they believe in good
earnest that these persons had Arms of Steel, and ^egs of Brass; and that with
their Fists they did beat down the Walls of such Towns as they had a mind to
take.

I think it necessary to reform this imagination of the Vulgar, and to reduce
it to a more just proportion. It is not the height of Statute, nor the
strength of the Body which makes Heroes: It is the greatness and elevation of
the Soul: It is the Courage and Resolution of the mind: And there may be very
elevated Souls, and of the first Magnitude, in little Bodies; a mind extremely
vigorous may be found in very infirm flesh. On that side then there is nothing
which can diminish the right of Women, or hinder them from pretending to
Heroic Virtue.

And finally, to render this right of Women more perspicuous, and to support
the pretensions of such as shall have the courage to raise themselves to that
Pitch; It is to be supposed that Heroic Virtue, to define it rightly, is but
an excellent Virtue, and elevated above common Virtues. This excellency arises
to her, first from the Dignity and Eminency of her object, which is Good,
considered in the highest elevation it may have. Secondly, it is derived to
her, from the perfection of the Faculties by which she acts: and these
Faculties receive their perfection from a spiritual and penetrating Fire, which
inlightens and purifies the Intellectual part, which warms and transports the
Appetitive. Thirdly, it arrives to her from the Nobleness of her principal
functions, which are to act vigorously, and with resolution, and to suffer
courageously, and with constancy. And because Action, how vigorous and resolute
soever it be, even the most courageous and constant sufferance, cannot attain
to this eminent and prime Good, but by a certain transport of the Soul; which
the Grecians call Enthusiasme, this Transport is the fourth Cause, which
produces the Excellency of Heroic Virtue.

Let us say also, to leave nothing unsaid, that the most beautiful and
excellent form which Heroic Virtue gives to Love and Anger, is a fifth Cause,
which adds to her a fifth degree of Excellency. I speak here according to the
opinion of the Ancients, who believed that Love and Anger were the predominant
Passions of Heroes: whether because they are of a more subtle and combustible
matter, and that there enters more interior fire into their temper, then into
that of other men: Whether because these two Imperious and Sovereign Passions
cannot be well purified but by a more Sovereign and Imperious Virtue then
themselves, nor can receive elsewhere, and by an ordinary effort their last
perfection, and the fair forms whereof they are capable. All these conditions
contribute to the dignity of Heroic Virtue, and raise it to a superior Order,
where common Virtues are not admitted.

This Order nevertheless is seated in a place to which one may approach from
all the conditions of life: All great Souls are equally summoned to it: On what
side soever one ascends, Women may ascend thither as well as Men. (...), the
most Eminent and Sovereign gallantry, which is the proper object of Heroic
Virtue, is not out of their sight, and cannot be above their Pretensions Nature
has not assigned them an end beneath That: There is no bound beyond which,
they are exempted from cares, and abandoned to their own sense. There is no
space wherein Good may not be to them more Good; wherein Duty cealeth to oblige
them; wherein Virtue looses the rights she has over them. The Careir of Honor
is to Them as great as to Us: And in this Careir there is not one single place
which is not marked out, in which it may be permitted them to make a false
step; to suffer themselves to be overcome; to abandon Gallantry, to reject a
Crown. Moreover they are called to perfection as well as we: And the Son of
God, who proclaims to the Saints and Just, that they must not grow weary in
sanctifying themselves; and that they ought every day to add some new luster
to their Righteousness, has not discharged Women from this labor, nor marked
them out bounds, beyond which they may be unjust, and far from Saints. Not only
then this Eminent and Sovereign Gallantry, at which Heroic Virtue aims, is
not out of their reach, but is within the limits of their right, and enters
into their duties: And there may be occasions found which will not leave them
the freedom of adhering to an inferior Good. Such Encounters and Enemies may
come in the way, as will excite them even to the last degree of Virtue, or
cause them to fall into Vice.

As for what concerns the perfection of the Intellectual, and Appetitive
portion, which is as it were the head and heart of Heroic Virtue: It is
certain that these faculties are not different where there is diversity of Sex.
They have everywhere the same matter, and are capable of the same forms. The
lights which descend into men's minds, are not purer, or of a higher Sphere then
those that descend into the Souls of Women: And from these equal lights,
derived from the same spring, a like fire, and of the same force, may be
kindled in the heart of them both. There are some men who have not so much as
the first glimmerings of sound judgment. You would swear that they had been
made out of the Lees and Dregs of Matter: You would say that not one single
spark of this Celestial Fire is entered into their Constitution: And their
souls are so burdened, the rind which incompasseth them is so obscure and
thick, as no light can penetrate them with on single Ray of Truth, which can
give them a beginning of any virtuous heats. On the contrary, there are some
Women who seem to be only made out of the pure Extraction of rectified matter.
The superior portion of their souls is so pure, and so lively reflects all the
luminous impression it receives, the Inferior has two so noble fires, and
moves so regularly, and with so measured and just a swiftness, that it would
not savor of flattery to compare them to those fair Compounds, which are formed
of the Intelligences and Planets. It is not then the difference of Sex, which
makes any difference in the faculties of a soul: and since they have the same
perfection both in Man and Woman: since both may be imbued with the same light,
and penetrated by the same fire, let us descend freely step by step to the
consequence to which this discourse leads us; and let us agree, that Women may
be disposed by this light and fire, to the principal Functions of Heroic
virtue.

History is as knowing and persuasive in this point as Philosophy: and the
Examples she alleges are as just and formal demonstrations, as those which are
framed according to the Rules of Logic. If it be showed by these Examples,
that Women are capable of the most vigorous and illust^ous Actions, it is
consequently, and of necessity proved by the same Instances, that they are also
capable of an Heroic Transport of this Enthusiasme, without which we cannot
pass beyond the bounds which Moral Philosophy has prescribed to common Virtues.

Judith indeed must needs have been transported with this Enthusiasme, when she
ran the hazard of her Life and Honor; when she passed over Walls and Trenches;
when she cast her self single and unarmed into the midst of more then one
hundred thousand Combatants to redeem Judea out of their hands, to take off
their Generals Head by one blow of a Sword.

Susanna must needs have been stimulated by the same Enthusiasme, when being
solicited to her Dishonor, by Pleasure and Fear, she courageously rejected
them both, and hastened to her Duty through (...), and Death, and a whole storm
of stones heaped up against her. There must needs have been much of this
Transport and Enthusiasme, in the Mother of the (...), when she exposed her
self to Hatchets, and burning ^^^drons; when she marched over the skins, and
bloody limbs of her ^^ead and dilacerated children; when she gave up her heart
and entrals, her soul and spirit unto seven different Deaths, to gain the
eight, which was worthy the memory of the (...), and suitable to the Reputation
of her Race.

But without going so far from our Age, and Modern History; was there not a
Transport in that Maid of Agria, who preparing her self to fight upon a breach,
by which the Turks endeavored to bring fire and sword into the bosom of her
Country, when her Mother joining in the same duty with a great stone upon her
head, was born away by a Canon shot, appeared no ways surprised with this
Accident, and quitted neither her resolution not post* Her heart did not so
much as tremble at the blood, which might have demolished even the strongest
wall; and with unchanging countenance she took up this stone, still warm with
the blood and death of her Mother, and rolled it upon the heads of the first
that entered the brea^h.

Was there not an Enthusiasme in the action which a young Woman of the same
Town performed at the same Siege? She fought completely armed between her
husband and mother: and when her husband after a long and obstinate fight was
killed by her side, her mother advising her to withdraw, and render him her
last duties: God defend me, replied she, from so unseasonable a piety. Now is
the time to revenge his death, and not to deplore it: his ^uneral may be well
performed afterward, if we live, and if it be ordained for me to dye upon his
body, mine will be a Tomb glorious enough for him; and my blood mixed with his,
will do him more honor then my tears. These courageous words were followed by
a far more glorious action. She threw away her own sword, and took up that of
her husbands; whether she esteemed it better then her own, and most accustomed
to overcome: or whether she thought it might have retained some remnant of his
Valor and dexterity, which would fight with her, and bring her good fortune:
And fortified by this imagination, she cast her self fiercely, and with order
upon those enemies that were the farthest advanced; She killed t^ree with her
own hand; made the rest give back; and that done, she retired with her husbands
body, and the satisfaction to have revenged his death, which was to her as just
and manly a satisfaction, as that which is sought in a spruce and flaunting
mourning in a sorrow as Ambitious and Vain as the Excess.

Besides this Transport, which is a visible and commendable excess of Valor
and Constancy, there is another kind of excess which Magnificence seeks in its
actions, and which also appertain to Heroic virtue And we must not forget to
affirm by the way, that Women have gone as far, and raised themselves as high
as Men by this second kind of Excess. One cannot speak without vast terms of
the Egyptian Pyramides: And the abreviated draughts which Antiquity has left
us of them, do even tire our sight. Nevertheless, the highest and most stately
of these Pyramides, were built by the boldness and Magnificence of Women. The
Ma^sol^um exhausted the skill of all Architects, and of all the Sculptors of
Greece; and left neither Marble not precious stones in Asia and this Monument
was the invention and enterprise of a Woman.

The pendent Gardens of Babylon, and those Walls so famous for their matter and
structure, were the work of a Woman: And this self same person who was filled
with nothing but vast thoughts, and unlimited designs, resolving to have her
Statue erected in a place where she had gained a battle, caused it to be made
out of a whole Mountain cut out into a humane Figure, and seated upon a Throne.
And because it would not have been decent to see a Queen alone, she commanded
the Artist to dispose the outward and superfluous pieces of the Mountain with
so much Art, as there might be wherewith to make out of them half a dozen of
Guards. Without dis-interring ruins, buried under so many Ages, there are in
France sumptuous proofs enough of the Heroic Magnificence of Women. But being
exposed as they are to public view, it is not necessary to exhibit them in
this Place, my Design not being to Write for Strangers or blind men.

As for what concerns these two Sovereign and predominant Passions, which are
the Noblest matter Heroic Virtue can employ, the Constancy and Force of
Conjugal Love, even the Transport and last Perfection thereof, will never be
brought in Dispute against Women by any man that has entertained himself but
for one quarter of an hour in History. They are not less capable of making good
use of anger, of purifying its fire by a more spiritual fire, of guiding it to
the supreme degree of Honor, by an Heroic transport. And to conclude this
point by a single Example, but a remarkable and crowned one; you will find
nothing but Blood, Sallies, and a hasty and precipitate Impetuosity in all that
is related of those Heroesses whom we know, if compared to what Semiramis did
in this kind.

A Province which she had newly conquered, having chased away her Lieutenants,
and shaken off its yoke by a public Revolt; The news of it being brought to
her at the instant her head was dressing, She did not presently Proclaim that
Ropes and Gibbets should be prepared, as some Princes have done in like
occasions; But without the least raising of her voice, or uttering one tart
Word; without making show of my alteration or surprisal, she took an oath that
they should never finish the dressing of her head, till she had chastised these
Rebels* This Oath taken with a tone of Rallery, and with a Majestical and
graceful sternness, she commanded her Women to lock up her perfumes and jewels;
sent for her Arms, and gave out Orders for the marching of her Troops; Took
horse with her hair half pined up, and half discheveld: And the not only began,
but finished the War in this posture. And if my memory fail me not, it was
after the end of the War, she caused that vast and stupendous Statue to be
erected, which I formerly mentioned. Let us acknowledge, that there was much of
Magnaminity and Gallantry in this Transport* Let us confess that this half
dressed head, was upheld by a great heart* That there was not a stronger nor a
more capable One: And that a Crown could not be found too great or too glorious
for it.

Hitherto I have taken Heroic Virtue by lights purely humane, and have scarce
spoken of any other then That which has been known to Philosophers. But if the
Question be concerning an Heroic Virtue which is Christian, and sanctified by
Grace; which has been illuminated by the Rays of Jesus Christ; which has
been imbr^^ by his blood, and penetrated by the Spirits thereof upon Mount
Calvery; which is called to that Divine and Sovereign Good, which is of a
degree infinitely raised above all the goods of Nature, there can be no doubt
but that Women may pretend to it as well as we; and that their Pretentions are
as Lawful, and grounded upon as good Right as ours. Jesus Christ has given his
Blood and Spirit in common. He calls us in common to the participation of his
Cro^^, and to Mount Calvery. And it is particularly noted, that when he was
there in Person, many women, and but one single man ascended thither after him.
I am unwilling to say that there was some Presage in this, and that it
prefigured what was to come* I will only say, that ever since they have been
seen to ascend thither in greater numbers, and with greater ardour then we; and
to throng more about the Cross, which is the (...) Throne of Heroic Virtue.
There have been Heroesses then, according to all forms, and in all the degrees
of Heroic Virtue; in the degree of Patience, in the degree of Magnificence, in
the degree of Magnanimity, in the degree of Courage and Valor: And without
further enlarging our Reasons, the Example I am going to produce, will be an
universal and abb^^^^ated proof thereof.

EXAMPLE.
Isabella Queen of Castile.
THe Design of the Monarchy of Spain is not of Plates time, nor according to
the Model of his Republic. It is Modern, and even within the Memory of our
Fathers. Nevertheless the Author thereof is not known so generally; And even at
this day men Dispute it, as they would do about a half defaced piece of
Antiquity. Some attribute this ^nterprise to Ferdinand, who was a Politic, yet
Timorous and Sedentary Prince, who managed not Affairs, but with his Mind and
Counsel; and acted all by the hands of his Captains and Lieutenants. Others on
the contrary, will have it to be set a foot by Charl^ the Fifth, that Fortunate
and bold Workman, who was as good for the Field as for Council; who put his own
hand to the Work, together with his Fortune, who was both the Con^^^ and
Undertaker of his Designs. But whatever may be alleged on either side, This
so vast and enormous Design, to speak the truth, (...) neither of a Timorous
Person, nor of a Conqueror: It is neither of the Head of Ferdinand, nor of the
Arm of Charles: it springs from the War and Courage of Isabella of Castile. This
single word serves her for a great abbreviated Elogy: It is the abridgement of
a long History, and the subject of many Volumes: And the Heroic Virtue of this
great Queen cannot have a more magnificent and ample proof, then a Structure
which has the extent of two Hemisphears, and comprehends as well Nature
already discovered, as that which is to be discovered.

This so great an Enterprise was of a far greater Soul, and assisted by all the
en^^oent Virtues; Such as ingeniously Project, such as consult with Prudence;
such as execute with address, and such as act with force, labored therein
conjoyntly with her. Nothing but Great and Heroic, was observed in all the
parts of her life: All her days were days of labor, or preparatives to it: And
before she arrived to the Age of overcoming by Action she learnt to overcome by
Sufferance. Divine Providence having made choice of Her to manifest to these
last Ages, how far a great Virtue, assisted by efficacious Grace, may Advance,
deprived her early both of Father and Mother, and placed her single and without
support in the way of Virtue, as soon as she could support her self. It was no
^mall advantage to her to have been severed so soon from softning Tendernesses,
and corrupting Pleasures. At least she resembled thereby the Ancient Heroes,
and to use the terms of that Age, There was less of the Milk, then Marrow of
the ^^on, in her nourishment. Her Childhood also was Disciplined, and became
the sooner Active thereby. She was Serious and Discreet, Temperate and Severe,
from the Age of Childish Toys and Pastimes: And when other Maids play with
Babbies, or are flattered by their Nurses, Adversity made her Warlike, and
taught her to vanquish Fortune.

This Severe and Disciplined Childhood, was followed by a Youth full of Storms
and Troubles: And God, who would not suffer her to have other then grave
Satisfactions, and solid Contentments, permitted that the first Roles of her
Marriage should be overspred with Thorns. She had made choice of Ferdinand
Prince of Aragon, and King of Sicily, before Alph^^s^ King of P^^tugal, and
Charles Duke of ^uiev^^, brother to Lewis the Eleventh: And this Choice,
wherein Inclination was fortified by Interest, had been generally approved by
all the high Degrees of this Kingdom. The King her Brother, who ought to be the
first in purchasing Honors to his Crown and House, singly opposed this general
Approbation, and blasted the public joy by the sharpness of a private Grudge.
He spread snares of all sorts upon the ways of his Sisters Innocence: He used a
great deal of Art to dissolve the knot of her Marriage. He endeavored to break
it by violence: But this Tie not being to be broken or loo^ened; and his snares
being too visible, and too grossly laid to catch the prey which he pursued; he
turned his forces and anger upon the Places which belonged to the Patrimony of
Isabella: And if his malice had been more prosperous and better conducted; if
Defenders of the Right of Innocence had not risen up, he would have turned her
naked out of the Kingdom.

But God, who delights in defeating the Designs of Iniquity and ties up at his
pleasure the hands of Usurpers, did not permit that Injustice, though
Powerful, and assisted by Authority, should prevail against disarmed Right,
and forsaken Innocence. He was pleased to make use of Henry to exercise
Isabella, as Nature makes use of Wind to fasten young Palms: as Artists employ
Fire and Iron to purify Gold, and to give a kind of Sovereignty with the
Image of the Prince. And after that the Virtue of Isabella made Warlike, and
Fortified, Instructed and Beautified by this exercise, had received the last
form of Heroic Virtue; he sent death which snatched the Crown from the
spiteful and usurping Brother, and placed it upon the head of the Sister,
ordained to the glory of Spain, and to the discovery of the new World.

It cannot be said with what Designs she ascended the Throne; with what
Dextenty and Force, with what Purity of Intention, and Capacity of Mind she
set her hand to the Helm. Policy was never more able, nor more found, or better
Designed; Reason of State was never more extended, or powerful: the Graces were
never more vigorous, nor efficacious then in this Princess. She was the
Domestic Oracle of Ferdinand, and the visible Intelligence of his Council; The
Wise and Speculative of his Kingdom received from Her their purest Lights: They
deliberated of nothing but in her presence, and by the clarity of her Mind.
And ordinarily the uncertainty and doubts of Consultation were not cleared but
by her Councels, which dis-intangled confused opinions; which Fortified the
Timorous and Irresolute; which gave the being and consistency to Affairs. She
held likewise the Place of the first Cause and principal Agent in the conduct
of this great Engine: And the History of Spain acknowledges that Ferdinand, I
say, that able and wise Ferdinand, did act nothing but by the direction, and as
subaltern to Isabella.

Her first care was to rally the parts of the State, which the past troubles
had dis-joynted. Having rallyed them, she used much Art to link them together.
And her Art was so efficacious and successful, as she set them all in their
former places, and rendered to every one their first Settlement and Natural
Functions. Scarce had she restored Health and Repose to this great Body, but
she was necessitated to put her self in Arms to defend it. Alphons^ King of
Portugal invited by Disgusted and Factious People, invaded Castile with great
Forces, and greater Pretenses. Certainly the fire must needs be great which was
stirred by Domestics, and inkindled by Strangers* Isabella hastened to the
noise and smoke, and did not return till she had quenched it with the blood of
those who had prepared either the Bait or Matter of it*

Her Crown being settled, she applied her thoughts to the Expedients, how to
enlarge it, and to add new Hours and Titles thereunto. And because there are
no Conquests more Just, more Illustrious, nor more Heroic then those which
enlarge the bounds of the Church, and Religion, and give new Subjects and
Kingdoms to Jesus Christ; She undertook the destruction of the Empire of the
Moo^s, who for so many Ages had been the Dishonor, Scandal, and Yoke of Spain.
It is true that this Enterprise was her Master piece. She performed therein all
that an exact and expert Commander could have done with all his Wit and
Understanding. She was always present in the Field: she assisted at the taking
of principal Places: And after many years of Toil and Agitation, she caused
that great Col^^^us to ^all, which so many Ages and hands had raised; and
returned with (...) added to her Crown, and the Title of Catholic, which she
^cquired to her self, and the Kings her Successors.

Not content to reign in a known World, and to overcome by the sun of Europe,
she desired to vanquish and reign in another World, and under other Planets.
For this end she contributed with her Courage and Treasure, to the resolution
and designs of Columba: She sent her Fortune with him in quest of a concealed
Heaven, and of an unknown Nature. And if Europe at present be enriched with
Gold, and precious Stones out of new Countries: if the new found Lands be
enlightened by the Faith and Religion of Europe, both Europe and the new
Discovered lands ought to serve as an Ornament and Luster to the Magnanimity of
Courageous Isabella.

This Understanding and Magnanimity, were accompanied with an exact and severe,
an incorruptible and Disinterelled Justice. Whereupon I call to mind that
being solicited to pardon a Criminal of quality, who offered a very
considerable sum for the maintenance of some Troops which marched against the
Moors; She made these Solliciters fully understand, that she was not raised to
the Throne to make Traffic of Favors and Pardons, and to set Impunity and
Crimes to sale And to the end there might not seem to be any thing of Interest
in her Integrity, or that she aimed at the Confiscation of the Criminals
Estate, she gave it all entire to his Children, and would not suffer their
Succession to be in the least measure diminished by it.

So far was she from grating upon Crimes and Penalties; so far was she from
laying up in her Coffers the price of blood, and the revenue of tears; that
this good Princess took no greater pleasure then in giving with liberal hands;
then in making men rich and happy. She measured the felicities of her Kingdom
by the extent of her good deeds: She counted her Revenues by the gratifications
which issued forth of her Exchequer; and her chief stock, her most dear and
precious Treasure, consisted in the hearts and affections of her people. Never
were any liberalities more natural nor less restraind, more obliging, or better
disposed then hers. Never did Magnificence act more gallantly, nor after a more
Heroic manner, then in her hands: it was never more universal, nor extended to
more uses, nor to a larger compass.

Her Profusions did not slide away in unprofitable and transitory Pomps: They
were not like Torrents which are only for show, and last but a day^ They
resembled Rivers, which are fertile and durable: they afforded sta^e and solid
riches, and brought happiness to Nations, and plenty to Ages: And to say
nothing of those which remained in Spain, where they are still looked upon with
astonishment: The great Bible of (...), which has been so long the most ample
and rich spectacle of learned men; the most profitable and stately Ornament of
our Libraries, is no less the work of Isabella, then of Cardinal Ximenes her
Councellor. This Eminent Princess first advanced this great enterprise; and
furnished of her own stock to those preparations which were requisite, long
before the Work was begun.

But as there has never been so bold an Undertaker, who has not had more bold
Successors then himself; and besides, as the same Time which ruins on the one
side the works of art, does perfect them on the other; so the Bible of (...)
having reigned near upon threescore year, and held the first (...) in (...),
was deposed of its place by the Royal Bible, which (...) the second caused to
be printed at Antwerp: And very newly the Royal happened to be degraded by
that which Monsieur Le lay after the labor of thirty years has published with
the general Applause of all the learned*

It is true also, that this enterprise was not the undertaking of a particular
Person, and of a mean Fortune: It was of a Monarch, nay, of a sumptuous
Monarch, and addicted to Noble expenses: It was of a Sovereign and Magnificent
Fortune. And if this great Body of seven Languages remains (...) to be shown
all entire to Posterity; I know not whether the most credulous Posterity will
ever believe that a single private Person of this Kingdom, assisted only by
his Revenue and Generosity, has affected more then a King of Spain with all
his Mountains of Silver, and Springs of Gold, with all his Mines and Indies.

But great Souls, not great Estates, are the things which perform great
Actions* It was requisite that the Regency of Anne of Austria should have (...)
advantage above the Reign of Isabella, and Philip her Predecessor: It was
necessary that a moderate Fortune should give Emulation and Instruction to all
the great Fortunes of Europe; and that Princes and then Ministers should learn
from a Private Person, to be Christianly Magnificent, with the Benediction of
God and Men.

Isabella was not only Wise and Courageous, Magnanimous, Just, and
Magnificent: But her Public and Active Virtues were accompanied with other
Domestic and Peaceable Ones, which were not the less vigorous for making the
less noise; and had not the less merit in being less Regarded. I set down her
Devotion in this Last, which had been remarkable in a Religious Woman: her
modesty and Civility, which savoured nothing of the height of her quality: her
Patience, which might have made a Heroess in a private Fortune.

Her Court was a School of Piety, Purity, and Modesty for the Maids of Honor
which were Educated near her Person. She was an Academy of Spirit, and Honor
for Cavaliers: And from this Academy came that famous Gonzales of (...), to
whom Spain, so liberal in Titles and Elogies, gave the name of Great Captain,
as a reward for driving the Fortune of France out of the Kingdom of Naples.
Besides, her Virtue was not one of those Stage Virtues which act not handsomely
but before the World, and in the eyes of men.

It was not one of those Mercenary and Interessed Virtues, which serve not but
upon good Terms, and for great Wages and Pawn: It was likewise sincere, and
acted as soveraignly, and with as much order in Private, as in the eyes of the
Public It was likewise steady, as well during a storm as in a calm, and had
not a different Countenance and Heart in Affliction, then in Prosperity.

It has been known by the report of her Attendants, that in all her Child
beds, the pain of Delivery, which is the Natural Torture of their Sex, did
never force a word of Complaint from her mouth: Mavelous was the Moderation
which made her suffer with the death of her Son, the death of her Name, and the
Extirpation of her Race: And certainly since there is no Tree which does not
bend and complain when a Branch is torn off from it by a Tempest; though it be
a wild Tree; though the Branch which is taken off be half rotten: How much
courage were necessary for a Mother, not to be cast down by the blow which
deprived her of such a Son; which tore from her so noble a shoot, and of so
great hope: A shoot which was to have extended it self to new Worlds, and a new
Nature. She was so far from being dejected by this Accident, that it ^earce
g^ve her the least disquiet: The gallant Woman prevailed in her mind above the
good Mother* And the news of this deplorable death being brought her in the Eve
of her Daughter Isabella's Marriage with (...) King of Portugal, she knew so
well how to seal up her heart; She so handsomely fitted her Countenance to an
Action, for which so great Preparations were made, that not a sigh escaped out
of her Heart, not a Tear fell from her Eyes, which might cloud the Serenity of
the Feast.

Her Constancy appeared no less by bearing with the public Extravagancies of
the Princess (...) her Daughter, who was sick of the Love of her Husband
Philip. His, truly was a Lawful Love, and had received the Benediction of the
Church: Not only Bastard Loves are those which appear Monstrous: but even
Lawful Ones, which are Enormous and Irregular, have scarce a better Aspect:
And the Fires which the Church has blessed, if they be not entertained with
Moderation, may no less offend the head and dazzle with their smoke then the
other. The Love of Ia^^ was one of these Lawful disordered Loves: It was one of
these honest fires which heat too much and da^^ with their smoke. And surely
she must needs have been much dazzled, when she resolved to Imbark her self in
the most bitter Season of the year, and to expose her life, her great belly,
and the hope of so many Kingdoms, to the Winter and the Ocean, that she might
meet with her Husband, who was (...) into Hander^. But Fons^^a Bishop of
Burgos, and (...) of (...), Governor of (...), having hindered her Imbarking,
neither Entreaties nor Reasons could prevail to bring her back to her Lodging:
She remained whole days and nights without Food or Sleep, exposed to the Air
and all the injuries thereof: And assuredly she would have died on the ground,
if the Qu^een her Mother had not brought her in all haste a License to commit
her self to the pen^ of the Sea; Nevertheless she escaped the Sea and
Tempesluous Season: But Jealousy escaped with her, and followed her into
Hand^^s, where she renewed her Wounds and former Maladies of Spain, adding a
kind of Tragical Action to her Extravagancy. To say no more, there was a touch
of both in the Treatment used toward one of her Women, of whom Philip was
e^^moured: She tore her Face with Scourges, as if she meant to punish the eyes
of Philip upon the Face he loved: she made her ear to be cut off to the root,
as if thereby she had cut asunder the ties which held the Heart of Philip. And
the News of this Extravagancy, being carried into Spain, Isabella needed little
less Courage to overcome her Affliction them to vanquish the Moors.

The last Victories of Isabella were peaceable Conquests, and without Tumult:
Yet if we consider them with eyes cleared from the dust raised by the Tumult:
If we remember that the same Alexander, who had vanquished so many Barbarous
Nations, was defeated by the death of his Favorite; And that this Augustus who
had resisted the Forces of the East, was ruined by the bad Reputation of his
Daughters; We shall find that Isabella alone without Arms, overcame more
powerfully then Alexander and Augustus have done with all their Armies.
Concerning her Death, it was Magnanimous, and answerable to the Courage of
Heroes. It came to her by a secret Ulcer, which the toys and agitation of
Riding had caused in the War of (...). Her Courage occasioned this Disease; her
Modesty entertains it; and having resolved never to expose it either to the
hands or eyes of Physicians, she died at best of her own Virtue and Victory.

VNE Dame de Chipre, me^ le seu aux Galeres des Turcs chargees du butin de
Nicosie, et par la (...) mort (...) rue Armee (...), et ^enge le sac et la
servitude de sa Patrie. (...)

The Victorious Captive.
BE not astonished to behold ruins flaming upon the water: to behold a
shipwreck suffered in the very Haven, and without a Tempest. The Accident is
strange, and not to be paralleld; and I know not whether the Sea, which is the
Theater of great Adventures, which is the Element of Monsters and Prodigies,
has ever brought forth a greater VVonder.

This Coast is the Eastern part of the Isle of Cyprus. The Turks, spectators of
this devouring Fire, belong to the Army which came newly from the Sacking of
Nicosea: And these flaming Galleys were appointed by Mustapha to bring to Selim
the news and testimony of his Victory. But Fortune deriding his vanity,
suppressed this News, and detained his Deputies. A generous Captive, more
worthy of a Crown then a Chain, not being able to submit to the infamous
slavery which was prepared for her in the Seraglio, fired the Powder in one of
the Galleys; and the fire dispersing it self from this Gally to all the rest,
set the Captive at liberty, and revenged the injury done her Country, both
pillaged and made a slave to Infidels.

This Resolution required a most Heroic Soul, and of the first Order: And
there needed a daring and inventive Courage without Arms, and by one single Act
to defeat a whole triumphant Army: to take away the fruit and sense of Victory,
even in the fruition of Conquerours, and not to leave so much as a mark, or
news of their triumph unconsumed. It is wonderful that so high a design, and
which might have satrated the Souls of four Conquerours, could enter into the
Heart of a Captive Maid. But the wonder is yet greater, that from the Soul of
this Captive there issued forth such a flame, as made the Sea appear all on
fire, which burned the goods and inhabitants of a taken City, which consumed
the mourning of an absolute Conquered People, and the joy of a whole Victorious
Nation.

If we had arrived but one moment sooner, we should have beheld the first light
of this flame. We should have seen it sally forth all pure out of this great
Soul, which could not be taken with N^^cosia; which remained victorious even
amidst ruined Towers, and forced VValls; which has preserved liberty amongst
so many Chains and Guards. But if this flame appear no more, we see at least
its effects; And Posterity will see them also after us. We behold a City which
revengeth the violence of men by the violence of fire; which is burnt upon the
Sea after it had been pillaged on the Land. We behold a vindicative and
officious death, a death which punishes Pirates, and disinchaineth Captives.

These flaming Chests were filled with the Treasures of many Races. The
Parsimony of covetous Men, and the Excess of the Magnificent were laid up in
these Packs of Merchandise, which you see thus smoking: And Captive N^^cosia
in these Galleys, with her Daughters, was to be unto Scli^^ and the Sultanesses
a precious Ensign of Mustapha's Victory. But there is now nothing remaining,
saving the Ashes and Smoke of this sad countenance of Rapine: And Mustopha
loses with it the marks of his Victory, and the Ensigns of his Triumph. The
Flame devours the Presents which were designed for Sclim, and the waves swallow
up what was provided to adorn the Sultanesses.

You would say that these two Elements, otherwise so incompatible, agree in the
division of the prey which is fallen to them. The Fire has for its share all
that is light, and swims above water; and all that is heavy and slides to the
bottom, belongs to the waves. Many Loads of curious and rich stuff equally
perished there, and make a common smoke. Those pieces of Purple, and Cloth of
Gold, are become as black as the Cordages and Sails: And the Ashes of those
excellent pieces of Ebony and ^vory, are colored like the consumed Masts, and
the burnt Oars. But neither the burnt Oars, nor the consumed Masts, nor the
bulks of five Galleys, all on fire, afford not so Tragic a spectacle as the
unhappy People, who suffer two deaths at once, and are drowned at the very
instant they are burnt.

The Fortune of the Victorious is equal to the Fortune of the Vanquished: And
the self-same flame melted the Chains of the Captives, and the Weapons of their
Guards. Some carried up into the air by the first violence of the Fire, had
not a taste of their Liberty, nor so much as saw the Death which freed them.
Others less suddenly assaulted, cast themselves into the Sea, and extinguished
their life, thinking to extinguish the Fire, which had as yet but seized on
their Garments. Those were not more happy who trusted to severed Planks, and
floating Oars. People are not thus preserved from a shipwreck which the Winds
and Rocks have not caused. The devouring Fire followed them; and what ought to
have been a Plank of safety, proves to them a floating Pile; and brings nothing
to Land but their Ashes: Certainly it is a lamentable spectacle to behold so
strange and new asport of Fortune; to behold burning Waves and foaming Flames:
To behold unhappy wretches who are drowned in Fire, and burnt in Water, who
approach to Death through two contrary Elements, who fall at once into two
opposite extremes.

I perceive that you are troubled about the Courageous Captive, who saved her
self by this Fire. You could wish that it were in your power to finish her
deliverance, and to pluck her out of the hands of Death, as she forced her way
out of bondage and shame. In vain do your eyes seek her in this confusion of
variously shaped and colored Deaths. The fire begins its effects by her: and
as if it had a mind to fire her all entire, it left nothing but her Soul and
Reputation, which are no longer in a condition to be either inflamed, or
stained. So chaste and generous a Beauty ought not to be disfigured, or to dye
by parcels: and it was not only necessary to preserve the Honor and Purity of
her Body, but even the Comeliness thereof: It was requisite to conserve even
the Grace and Dignity of her Countenance: and her Death ought to be at least
graceful and glorious. Let us speak more justly, she must not dye: she must
only disappear, like those Heroes who were carried away all entire: And nothing
ought to remain of her but a name of good odor, and a most Illustrious Memory.

At present her Soul discharged of the burden of Matter, and freed from the
Chains of Fortune, enjoys in repose the fruit of the Tempest which she newly
raised, and offers to the God of the Christians a Sacrifice of four Turkish
Galleys, and of more then four hundred Innocent Souls which she redeemed from
Slavery, and saved from Apostasy. All these beautiful Souls, glorious by their
Liberty and Innocence, ascend with the fire and smoke of this great Holocaust.
Doubt not but in ascending they applaud their Deliveress; and look down with
joy upon their broken Fetters, and the pieces of their burnt Prisons which
float upon the waves with the bodies of their Guards.

Meanwhile Mustapha overcome in his turn, beholds from the shore the spoil of
his Victory and Galleys. He knew not as yet upon whom to lay the blame: And
before hand, out of despite he bites his lips, and blasphemes against the
Alchoron, and his false Prophet. The confusion appears barbarous, and stained
with blood in his eyes: And the disorder of his mind augments the fierceness of
his Action, and the cruelty of his Looks. If he were not so far off, you might
hear the reproaches he vents forth against Heaven, for permitting the fire to
seize upon his Fortune; and suffering the Ensigns of his Valor, and the
subject of his Triumph to be burnt. The Captains and Soldiers which accompany
him, are in no less disorder, nor less furious then himself: And their despair
is no less, to see the treasure of their Souls, and the recompense of their
blood and wounds thus perishing.

The People of the neighboring Towns, and the Parents of the Captive Women
ordained for the S^raglio, have very different resentments. The People
assembled upon the Wall, look with astonishment upon the Smoke of then
Spoils, and the confusion of the Barbarians Avarice: and they that clap their
hands, seem willing to add force to the fire which is come to punish them. The
surprised Fathers, and astonished Mothers suffer on the shore all that their
Children endure in the fire, and upon the waves. Tears of joy distill from
their eyes for the deliverance of their Daughters: Tears also of compassion and
sorrow flow from them for their loss: And the one mingled with the other, make
upon their Cheeks an expression answerable to their Courage and Tenderness.
These Tears nevertheless have not extinguished the sense of Honor. Even the
Mothers render Thanks for the adventure which they deplore: And you would say,
that on the shore they expect to receive, with the Ashes of their Daughters,
their unstained Memory, and their most pure and glorious Souls.

SONNET.
Upon these flaming Piles with billows tossed,
Nicosia saves her self by being lost:
A brave revenging fire, which in the Main
Blows up this Fleet, consumes her Thraldom's Chai^.
The boiling Fla^^s, and the inflamed waves,
Of Slave and Lord, become the common graves:
A world of various treasures, and of fair
Rich movables, are turned to smoke and air.
In this (...) heat of waves and fires,
Eudoxia flies to the Celestial Quires;
And in repose enjoys, with just renown,
The flame that melts her Chains, and makes her Crown.
By nobler Act no Hero ever flew
Above the Stars; ^o not the gallant Jew,
Who with an Arm, whose vigor much out-vy'd
A Pillars strength, slew thousands when he died.
Elogy of the Victorious Captive.
THis Picture represents a generous Captive who burnt her chain which she could
not break; and took revenge for the pillaging of her miserable Country, by
firing the Booty with the Pirates which were carrying it away. Within the memory
of our Fathers, the loss of Cyprus began by the taking of (...): And God
permitted it to advertise Christian Princes that they ought to stand upon the^^
Guards, and to mistrust any Peace made with the Common Enemy. It is a wild
Beast, which seems sometimes to be glutted, and sometimes to be ^ul'd asleep,
but is never tamed in good earnest. His very Freindships are deceitful and
dangerous: And even his Kindnesses leave behind the print of his claws: And
when all other Pretenses fail him, his Greediness is his Common Right, and the
General Wrong of his Neighbors. This City which was so rich, so ancient and
renowned; which contained more then Sixty Thousand Inhabitants, and no less
stately by an immemorial Magnificence, became a Prey to Mustap^^^ and his Army.
And that Greatness which so many Ages and Generations had raised, being ruined
and cut in pieces in one Day, satiated with its Spoil and Blood, the Avarice
and Cruelty which shared therein.

After that the fury of the (...) was extinguished by the Ruins it had made,
the Bas^^ caused the Booty to be brought before him still moist and dropping
with the Blood of the Dead, and Tears of the Living which were more to be
pittyed then the Dead. He culled out of these sad Remnants all that was
precious. He caused all the rare and entire Booties either taken in the Town or
in the desolate Country, to be put into four great Vessels, and sent them to
(...) as the most glorious and certain Dispatches he could receive of his
Victory. These unhappy Innocents did imbarque with fears, and were with tears
carried from the sight of their Mothers, who knew not what Wishes to make for
these unfortunate Creatures, who ought equally to fear both a Calm and Tempest,
who could not arrive but to an infamous servitude by a prosperous Wind, who
could gain nothing but a deplorable Death by Shipwreck.

The Signal of putting to Sea was given, and the Vessels were already under
Sail; when the fairest and most courageous of this miserable ^^oop, reflecting
on her Liberty, her Honor, and her captive and ^alf-burn^ Country, left in the
Rear, and seeing nothing before her but Bondage, Infamy and ^dishonest Prison,
to which she was carried by the wind; after a thousand Maledictions breathed
forth both against Fortune who had unhappily preserved her from the fire and
ruins of her House: and against her Sex which had rendered her unworthy of an
honorable Death^ it came into her mind, that the Genius of her Co^ntry required
some action from her which might make more noise then her Fall had done.

As this Maid was wholly taken up with this thought, she perceived a Soldier
entering into the Magazine of Powder, she went in readily after him: and having
found fire ready at hand, assisted by her good Angel (as One may believe) and
inspired by God, jealous of the honor of Virgins, she took hold of this fire,
and cast it into a barrel of Powder which was ready to receive it. The Effect
was sudden. At the very Instant the flame disperseth it self with an incredible
noise through the whole Gally, and from thence spread it self amongst the other
three which drew near to assist it. The Courageous Virgin being first carried
away, had not the leisure to be sensible of her Liberty and Victory. But
doubtless her fa^^ soul issuing forth of her body, stayed at least some time to
have the (...) of them both: And her first Joy was to behold these devouting
and statel^ flames, which revenged the sacking of Nicofia upon the Victorious;
and burnt with the prison and bondage of her Companions the S^rag^o and
voluptuous present which Mu^tap^a had embarked for Selum.

MORAL REFLECTION.
WHat I have said in Verse, is true; and I can say it also in Prose. The strong
Hebrew who threw down a Palace, and overwhelmed a whole multitude at his
Death, did no more then this Maid. If she had not so much strength in her
Arms, she had peradventure more in her Heart and Mind. At least she overcame
Love and Pleasure, which vanquished Sampson. And the Captives death which was
no less then hers, a bloody Victory without Combat, has manifested in these
latter Times, that Virtue becomes not decrepid with Years; that it is now the
very same it was in the Time of Heroes; and that the alteration we observe
therein, proceeds from its Subjects, and not from its vigor and strength.

But this chaste and victorious Maid speaks chiefly to those that pretend to
Chastity, and are jealous of the flower and glory of their Sex. She teaches
them, that perfect Chastity has her Enthusiasmes and Raptures, that she cannot
endure to be tied, how rich soever her chains may be: that Fortune has no
Mountains of Gold, nor Rivers of Silver which she does not pass over: that
Ambition cannot build her so elevated a Palace from which she does not
precipitate her self: that Excess and Voluptuousness cannot tie her with so
sweet chains which she does not break: that even Death it self cannot present
to her, Obstacles which she does not overcome.

It would be a great Shame to a Woman who should profess Chastity, to be
fastened to a Trifle: if she could not break a silken thread: if she dare not
oppose her self to a few Thorns. And I know not how she would dispose of her
Honor, if to conserve It, she were necessitated to set fire on her house, to
leap down into a Precipice, to expose her self to Swords and Wheels. Tender
Women and such as Love their ease, will make answer to this, that these
Raptures belong not to the Virtue of their Sex; And that Chastity is not
reduced to so great necessity as Despair must defend it. The subsequent
Question will show what weight this Answer carries, and whether Christian
Philosophy be on her side.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether an Heroic Transport be necessary to the Perfection of a Woman's
Chastity.
THe Question does suppose a Transport to be Essential to Heroic Virtue: And
that there is an Enthusiasme which forms Heroes as well, as there is one which
makes Poets: This Transport to define it distinctly, and to give an Express,
and pure Notion of it, is an extraordinary Effort by which the Soul is
violently carried to Objects, which transcends the common reach of Men. And
because our forces be not proportionable to those high Objects; and that the
best disposed, and most able amongst us, can hardly advance much further
without being born up; it has been always believed, that there necessarily
entered into these extraordinary Efforts something, I know not what, Divine,
which transported Nature; and of this I know not what, whether it be a Spirit
or Divine Fire, the word Enthusiasme is composed, which the Grecians have
expressly formed for these Transports.

Here nevertheless we must call to mind that Enthusiasm^ and Transports are
diverse, and of a different Species according to the different Faculties which
are Transported; and according to the different Objects to which they are
Transported. If the Rapture comes only from the Intellectual and Imaginary part
which is Subalte^, it tends to luminous and elevated Ideas, to Noble and
Specious Fantomes and Imaginations: It is effected by glorious Visions, and by
bold and magnificent Expressions: And this Enthusiasm^ is properly That which
Ignorant and Profane Men style the folly of Poets. But if the Rapture be from
the whole Person; if the Intellectual part carries away the Appetitive, if the
Soul Transports the Body; and if by a joint effort they all tend either to the
Divine or Sovereign Good, or to that eminent Honor which is in this life the
last point of consummated Virtue; this general Transport, being a Transport of
Action, is the same Enthusiasme which they attribute to Heroes, and which
Philosophers seek in Heroic Virtue.

And surely it is absolutely necessary to it, whether by reason of the (...)
and difficulty of its Object, whereto we arrive not by ridding way, and
numbering our steps, or by reason of the Thorns and Obstacles wh^^h Invi^on it*
And to raise ones self above these Thorns, to surmo^^^^ these Obstacles, it
were almost requisite to have a winged Heart: One ought to have at least a Soul
to carry it as swiftly, and as high as win^^ could do. It is not likewise
doubted for these reasons, but that a (...) sport is necessary to Heroic
Virtues; yet there is much ground to do^bt whether Chastity be one of these
Virtues; whether it be called to the Communication of this Spirit; whether it
may not advance to its Good but with violence and by (...).

And ^f we believe at first sight, the appearance and common notions thereof^
we will stand for the Negative. First, the Spirit of Modesty, being (...)
Spirit of Chastity, is an Apprehensive and Fearful Spirit; a Spirit which
^^dles and Restrains; which Apprehends much noise and (...) which shuns the
Stage and Spectators; which affects Privacy, and (...). Now there is nothing
more opposite to this timorous and (...) Spirit, then the Spirit of Transport,
which is Bold and Attempting^ Imp^^ient and Active, an Enemy to Reservedness
and Constraint; (...) of Bounds, and yet more incapable of Chains.

Moreover all the Masters of Morality teach us, that Chastity ought not to
fight but in retiring: that she puts her self in danger when she takes upon her
to be Valiant, and shows her Face to her Enemies: that she cannot attain to
Victory but by a Retreat, even by Flight, and a very quick and sudden Hight:
All this agrees with the Spirit of Transport, which (...) no kind of Enemie^,
and attaqu^s them all without knowing them: which measures no Dangers not
Precipices, and fully casts it self upon both, which (...) not to any thing
whatsoever, no not to terrifying Death it (...), in which all other things
submit.

Thirdly, Chastity is not one of these Virtues which are born for Action (...),
and are only serviceable in a Tumult and Storm: she is one of the Peac^ble and
Sedentary Virtues: she is a Lover of Repose and (...) she has the Innocence of
Lambs, and the meekness of Turtles: she has a Temper contrary to Lions and
Eagles. Of what use would then this Spirit of Transport be to Sedentary Virtue?
Of what use could it be in time of Repose and Retirement? What would that Lamb
do with this Heart of a Lion? What would this Turtle do with the Violence of
(...):

All these Reasons are very good proofs, that Chastity is a Virtue of its own
Nature, Reserved, and a Friend to Repose: But they do not prove, that she is
never Armed with Boldness; that she never takes Courage; that she is a ways
concealed, and still possessed with Fear: There are some Occasions wherein she
must of necessity alter her Humor and Carriage; wherein she must express
Resolution and Courage; wherein she must Act, even elevate her self, and
elevate her self with a Transport. Doves which (...) Sweet and Innocent, have
yet their Sallies and Angers. Patience which is at least as calm as Chastity,
becomes Furious when it is Wounded And that Spotless and Silent ^amb which came
to Teach us Chastity and Patience, cease yet sometimes to be a Lamb, and
becomes a Lion when he is provoked.

Let us say, that this Heroic Spirit of Rapture is not necessary to Chastity,
when she is not assaulted, and proposes no Enemies to overcome, not Crowns to
obtain. She is then permitted to remove far off from the Tumult; She may
decently affect Repose, and participate without blame of the benefit of Peace.
Her condition in that State does not differ from that Valor it self, which is
not continually provoked and Furious, always covered over with Sweat and Blood:
And which uses not every day her Warlike hands and countenance, her Spirit and
Garments of Battle* But when this Peaceable Chastity is Assaulted; when Dangers
and Enemies press her: when she is reduced to the necessity of either rend^ing
up her self, or of vanquishing by some Extraordinary and Supernatural ^ffort;
where will she find wherewith to carry on this extraordinary and Supernatural
Violence, if the Hero^ck (...) whereof I speak, do not inflame her; if the
Spirit of (...) do not possess her, it both do not transport her, to what place
would not her Fears and Restraints hurry her? And even in this, her Condition
is likewise equal to that of true Valor, which has an other Countenance, and
an other Heart upon a Breach then in a Closet; which march^^n with an other
kind of Action and Look to a day of Assault, then to a day of Ceremony.

Let us only oppose hereunto, that the Comparison is not equal between Chastity
and Valor; between a Peaceful and Sedentary virtue, and one that is Warlike
and Tumultuary. Chastity has her Wars and Combats: And her Wars are more
lasting and ob^^inate; her Combats are more dangerous and labonous then those
of Valor. She has likewise more need of Courage and Resolution, as I have
already shown: And consequently the Spirit of Transport which is the Spirit of
Courage and Resolution, is more necessary to her, then to this Virtue of Fire
and Sword.

And here the Bravo's, and great Pretenders to Valor, must not flatter
themselves, not think to obtain it by the fierceness of their Looks, and the
greatness of Words. The honor of Chaste Women is not in a place of easier
Access, nor less Elevated then theirs. Nature cannot (...) thither by her own
Forces: The Senses know not the way to it; and on what side soever this way
lies, it is possessed by Enemies who use violence even in their satisfactions
and terrify by their Complacences and Ca^esses. On all sides and at every step
there are Gins, which are so much the more to be feared, as their B^^^s are
more rich, and their threads wrought with more silk, and covered over with more
Flowers.

Besides, if we were to beware of nothing there but Flowers and Silk; if we
were only to defend our selves against Complacences and Caresses: Yet there are
sometimes Daggers hid under these Flowers; and these Silken Threads become
strangling Ropes. These Enemies are not always Complacent and Courting. They
change their Art and Posture according to the Resistance which is made to them.
They employ Iron, where Gold is not powerful enough: and where Sweetness is
weak, and Presents effect nothing, they practice Cruelty: they display terror
and punishments. I mean that Chaste Women have not only pleasing, but even
terrifying and bloody Temptations. They are not only to defend themselves
against Ava^ice and Voluptuousness, but they are to overcome both Torture and
Death it self; I say Torture, which is the invention of Tyrants, and the
practice of Executioners; I say Death armed with all its Fires and Engines.

Is it credible that Chastity, without using any extraordinary violence,
without moving or changing place, can overcome all these Enemies whether
Complacent or Barbarous? That she is able to loosen her self from all these
eyes and snates, whether from those which allure, or those which strangle? That
she is able to master all these temptations whether sweet or sparkling, in
which Gold and Precious Stones are employed; whether cruel and terrible
practiced with chains, like those which Joseph suffered; with stones, like
those shown to Susanna; with a Scymitar, like that which vanquished the
Daughter of Paul (...), Beheaded by Mah^^et at the taking of (...) Again, is it
credible that Chastity can be victorious over so many Adversaries, and in so
many Conflicts if she be not filled, if she be not Penetrated by this Divine
Fire, by this supernatural Instinct, by this Spirit which begets an (...), and
the Ecstasies of Heroic Virtue.

Nature is strong and Attractive: Chastity must resist her Forces, and loosen
her self from her Allurements. The senses stick close to those Interests which
are Commodious to them; and the Body has a strange adherence to pleasure,
where flesh and blood bears a part. Chastity must either sever the senses from
these Interests, and must break all that fastens the Body to these pleasures,
or she must voluntarily separate her self from the senses, and break violently
with the body. Death has cruel and frightfull Weapons: It is accompanied with
terrible and furious Attendants. Chastity must be prepared to rush through all
these Weapons: and to Essay the Teeth and Nails of these Attendants, rather
then suffer the least stain. Whatever may be said, the Reputation of valor is
not so precious, nor environed with so many Difficulties. Her Crowns, even
those which are made by the site of Canons and Grenades, cost not so much: and
Heroes are formed at a less expense amidst Pikes and Breaches.

I forget not what has been said of Modesty. She is the proper spirit of
Chastity: and they affirm that she is Timorous and Apprehensive: that she has
Moderation and Reservedness. I confess that for the most part she is not
Precipitous: and that she is never Impudent. But she is not more fearful then
Fear it self: and Fear has its sallies as well as Anger and Boldness have
theirs. Some courageously endure Pain, for fear of another Pain. Some cast
themselves into the Sea, for fear of falling into it: And to avoid one Death
but apprehended, they precipitate themselves into another*

Let us remember that the Ermine, which is the Symbol of Modesty, and the
silent Mistress of the Chastity which Nature has given to Women. Concerning
which, to say thus much by the way, she has Treated them more Honorably then
men, to whom she has only given an Ant as the Emblem of Labor and Industry.
The Ermine is extremely fearful, and has neither strength nor weapons: and
yet this unarmed and timorous Creature had rather dye then be sullyed. And when
she is pursued, rather then to expose her whiteness to a stain, and save her
self by a little d^^t, transported by the Instinct she has in point of Purity,
she casts her self into the nets of Hunters, and perishes with Courage. Behold
a Transport, and a Transport of Modesty; behold a Sally, and a Sally of Purity
in an Innocent and Fearful Animal* And shall We deny the same Transport and
the like Raptures to chaste Women? Without doubt they are capable thereof. An
Heroic spirit and possessed with Enthusiasm, mingles it self sometimes with
their Virtue, penetrates their hearts, and in them inkindles a fire, breaks all
the fetters of their souls, tears them from their bodies, and carries them away
with main force.

By this Spirit was that Pelagia of Antioch Transported, of whom S. Ambrose
has left us so fair a Picture. Perceiving her self besieged by Enemies which
attempted more upon her Chastity, then her Faith; she threw her self down into
a Precipice, with all the Ornaments and Jewels wherewith she had Adorned her
self, to render Honor to her Death, and add Grace to her Courage. With the
same Spirit her Mother and Sisters were possessed, when pursued by the same
Enemies, they cast themselves into a River, and there quenched by Death the
wicked Fires of their Lascivious Pursuers. A Maid of Alexandria possessed with
the same Spirit, having been informed of the mischief which her Eyes, though
otherwise reserved and modest, had done to a young Man, she tore them out of
her Head, and sent them to the sick Person, to the end he might inflict such
punishment on them, as he should think good; or at least that he might heal
with their blood, the wound they had given him.

Blanch of Ros^^ Transported with the same Spirit, wrested her self out of the
hands of the Tyrant Acciolin, and cast her self headlong from a Window.

The same Spirit blew the flaming Firebrand which Mary Cornelia, the Wife of
John C^rda, thrust down into her body to quench a dangerous Fire, which Age and
Occasions began there to inkindle: And this Example of Virtue was given to
Spain in the time of Peter the Cruel, and Mary Padilla, That is to say, under
the Reign of Adulteries, and in the Age of Liberty.

We ought to believe for the love of Virtue, and in Honor of these Christian
Heroesses, that there was some Spark of Divine fire in these bold Attemps; and
that the Spirit which transported them, came from above, and from a purer
Spring then that which forms the Raptures which we may follow, and the Examples
which are lawful for us to imitate. Those are not for every day; nor for the
use of all sorts of Persons. Besides, God does not send Angels to all sorts of
Persons; nor every day creates new Stars: And unless we have an Angel for guide,
and a new Star to follow, it would be a rash attempt to walk upon the Sea, and
to choose a Precipice for our way. The ensuing Example is not of these
Extraordinary Ones; yet is it of the great and Heroic* And if there be any
thing of Transport, it proceeds from an even Spirit, and which is not raised
but regularly, and by usual and beaten Tracks.

EXAMPLE.
The Chaste Venetian Woman.
IT is true that Virtue finds Adversaries everywhere: and even in those places
where she is in este^m and habituated, her Peace is full of trouble and
agitation; and her Repose unquiet and interrupted. Nevertheless there are
Countries of War, and as it were Frontier Regions, where she is exposed to the
Incursions and attempts of her Enemies. And in these Regions she ought to be
more Resolute and Warlike, then elsewhere: She ought to be expert in all sorts
of Combats, and prepared for all manner of Events: She ought to be almost
continually upon her Guard, and in Arms. Faith and Chastity, which are
neighboring upon Infidels and Barbarians, have need of this preparation of
Courage, and of this exposed and continual Discipline.

It is likewise from those Countries these Heroic and Victorious Virtues come
to us, which Triumph every year in the Church, and do honor to our Annals* And
a great number of other Virtues, besides those, are come from thence, which
have not fought less Courageously, nor overcome with less Force; though their
Combats have not made so much noise, no^ the Church has Celebrated their
Victories. I place amongst this number the Victorious Captive, which has been
newly represented in this Picture. And because she was a Subject to the
Republic of Veni^^, I conceived that to fit her with a known Companion suitable
to her, it was necessary to join with this Gallant Woman, the Daughter of Paul
(...), who trumphed over Ma^omet, and the S^raglio, at the taking of (...), as
this other had done over Mustapha and Porta, at the taking of (...).

It is credible that Gods indignation was great when he abandoned (...) to the
Ottomans. And Iniquity must needs have been Enormous and Consummated, which
deserved that the Mistress of Arts and Sciences, and the Mother of so many
Saints should be put in Chains. Yet this was her Lot; and hitherto no man has
been found to set her at liberty. Moh^met the Second slept not in this
occasion; he managed all the moments thereof, and made so good use of the
division amongst Christians, as in a short time be disarmed all his Neighbors,
and made himself Master of those places which might restore liberty to Greece.
The Island of N^grepont which belonged to the Venetians, was first assaulted.
Basha Ma^^^^t begirt it with a Fleet of three hundred Sail: and Mahomet
followed by sixscore thousand men, entered it by a Bridge which he commanded to
be made over the ^^rippa, and Besieged the Metropolitan City by Land. It was to
defend it self against Treason, and force Intelligences and Assaults. And
doubtless strength would have overcome as well as Treason, and the Assaults
would not have proved more successful then Intelligences, if General Ca^^^^^,
who commanded the Venetian Fleet, had but let Fortune alone, and made use of
the Courage and Vessel of two Ca^lea^ Gentlemen, who offered themselves to go
break down the Bridge which was erected over the ^^rippa.

The City then was taken in the sight, and by the error of this Faint-Hearted
and Timorous Wise man. ^he dust and noise of the Demolishe^d Walls, the Cries
and Blood of the Citizens went to reproach him as Far as his ship. And the
unhappy Spectator of the Peoples Ruin, whom with a little Courage he might have
saved, retired, turning his back to the Reputation he abandoned, and to the
Smoke of the Island which followed him afar off upon the sea. The Booty was
very great for the Conquerors: but the Cruelty of the Victorious was far
greater upon the Vanquished. Pyramides were made of their Heads at the Gate of
the Church, and in the public places: and their Bodies being cast into the
Channel, spread far with their blood a doleful and pitiful relation of their
Misfortune.

Paul (...) Governor of the Island, had done and undertaken during the Siege,
all that an Expert and Disciplined Valor was able to Effect; all that Courage
could attempt when Religion enflames it, and Despair transports it: He held out
longer then the Towers and Bulwarks: and stood upright after their Fall. He
fought upon the Ruins and Ashes of a Conquered City: And they could not have
gained it but by Composition and promising him life. But Mahomet was so far
from keeping this promise, that he had the Cruelty to command his body to be
saw^^ a two. Besides he added Rallery to his Cruelty, as Tyrants cast Salt into
Fire, and Vinegar into Wounds: And said to him, with a bitter and barbarous
Equivocation, that leaving him his head, for which he stood engaged, he might
dispose of the rest at his discretion without any breach of Faith.

This so strange and Tragical Punishment was the Triumph of Paul ^rici, and
afforded him more solid Glory, then four Towns taken, and as many Battles won
could have done. It may be well believed, that having overcome like a Martyr,
he received also the Palm of Martyrdom; and that the saw of the Turkish Tyrant
fashioned him a Crown of the same Form like those which heretofore were made by
the Racks and Wheels of Heathen Tyrants. His Glory nevertheless was not without
confusion: And what Faith soever Fortified him against Death, he dyed not
without great Apprehension. The honor of his Daughter, whom he left a Prisoner
mixed confusion with his Glory: And he more feared the love and kindness of
Mahomet toward her, then his Fury and Tortures against himself.

This excellent Maid had not then her Equal in any kind of Perfection: And all
the treasures of the Republic could not have ransomed her at the ^^ate of her
Worth. Nature produces every day precious Stones and Pearls: She works every
day in gold and silver: But rarely is it her chance to ^orm accomplished
Persons: and her Work merits praise, when she makes but one in a whole Age.
Even when her Designs were most neat and regular, and that Matter retained
still its first purity, she was not so exact, nor expressed so much care in
perfecting her Works. And when now adays she finishes some rare piece, Men
ought to come in crowds to see it, as they do to see Miracles: it ought to be
in History a mark of Honor to her Age. This Noble Venetain Woman was one of
these extraordinary Works: And the eyes of the greatest Critics in the World
could observe nothing in her but rare and accomplished: nothing which was not
becoming with Dignity, and Majestical with Grace.

On a sudden likewise she dazels the eyes of those that offered to sei^e on
her: and this dark mist being followed with a kind of veneration, was like to
have made them adore their Prey. But as soon as this amazement was over, they
approach to her with barbarous respects, and a stupid and stammering Civility.
They strive to make her understand that no hurt should be done* that they would
conduct her to a place where she should be free and honored; And as they
advanced to lay hands on her: Barbarians, says she, in thrusting them back,
whither will you lead me, and for what new adventure do you reserve me? I
should die here more nobly and better contented: And my Blood will not be more
pleasing and grateful in another place. Be not more merciless concerning me,
then you have been in massacring so many Innocents: Commit at least a murder
handsomely after so many perpetrated with cruelty: And permit one stain of
Clemency in your Victory, and upon your Arms. They will receive no dishonor
by it, nor will the Spoil become less precious.

She had persisted farther, but two Basha's arrived, who remonstrated to her
that she was not strong enough to resist Fortune, nor to alter the right of
War, which had given her to their Prince: That she need apprehend nothing in
his Victory: That it was not against those of her Sex and Merit he was armed:
That he knew how to punish and pardon seasonably, and to place Rigor and
Clemency in their just postures: That it would be her best course to permit
them to bring her before him, and to remit the rest to the disposure of
Fortune. These words did not persuade her* but she submitted her self to the
present necessity, which she could not enforce; and suffered her self to be led
before Mahomet.

Not being ignorant to what danger they exposed her, and what assistances she
needed in the conflict she was to undergo, she prayed in silence and with tears
by the way: And besought of God the Spirit of Fortitude and Council, which make
Martyrs, and reserve Virgins. The voice of her tears was heard: God sent her
the Spirit she desired: And fortified by this succor, she marched with a
confident look, and a resolute countenance and more like a Conqueress then a
Captive.

She lost nothing of this confidence before Mahomet; and there was no more
alteration in the resolution of her Countenance then in that of her heart. On
the contrary, she appeared with a more then usual Majesty. And the presence of
her Enemy made a certain haughty and disdainful blush come upon Her, together
with a Fierceness, yet Modest, and becoming, which contributed Force to
Sweetness, and added Dignity to Grace. This Fierceness wrought not the same
effect as she intended. Mahomet, whom she thought to Irritate, esteemed her the
more; and took this alteration for a Tincture of Noble Blood, and for an
effusion of those Spirits which beget Courage.

At the taking of Constantinople there was found a young Grecian Woman called
(...), who had triumphed over the Conqueror, and rendered him Her Slave The
Basha's disliked this Triumph of a Captive, and this Servitude Victorious over
their Master; and complained of it with injurious Terms, and mixed with Rallery.
Mahomet to procure a cessation to these complaints of his Basha's, and to
evidence to them that he knew as well how to overcome his Passions as to take
Towns, in the sight of the whole Army, at one blow, struck off the Head of his
Innocent and Unhappy Mistress. And this Tragical Execution, followed with a
barbarous sadness, induced him to take an Oath, by which he obliged himself to
^ex a guard upon his Heart for the future, and to preserve it from a second
Bondage. This Tragedy and Oath returned into his mind at the sight of this
Chaste Vanetian But this Object was more powerful then the fidelity of his
Oath, and the apprehension of a second Tragedy. He valued not the taking of
Nygrep^^^ but by the taking of the Maid: And though he were passionatly
enamoured of Rh^^es and fair Italy; yet the Conquest of them both, could not
have given him more satisfaction.

To the end he might make a breach into her Heart, and become Master of her
Soul, as he conceived himself to be of her Body: he said to her in Magnificent
terms which rellished both of a Conqueror and Pretender: That it being her lot
to Fall with a City which had a mind to be destroyed, she could not Fall more
happily then into his hands: And that Fortune knew no better way to raise her,
then by this Fall: that he desired nothing but her consent, to render her the
most happy of her Sex and Age; and to exalt her to a Seat, where she should
have all the Sergnory of Venice and all Italy under her Feet. That Riches and
Glory were at her disposure: that he was the Distributer of Scepters and
Crowns: that God and his Prophet had sent him to rule the Destinies of Kings,
and the Fortune of Nations: that she must bid adieu to the resentment which the
loss of her Friends had caused in her: that such was the order of the World,
and the disposition of Affairs, as little losses were to usher along great
Advantages: that she must not expect that Fortune should be more Indulgent then
Nature, which causes not Harvest to arrive till after the Seed.

The Courageous and wise Captive forced her Patience till then: But as soon as
he came to boast to her of the Magnificence and Pleasures of his Seragl^^; of
the Glory and Felicity of his S^^tanesses; and when he added, That if she were
disposed to comply with his Will, he would make her the Mistress of his
S^^tanesses, and the Queen of his Seraglio. I am a Christian, replied she very
pertly, and a Gentlewoman, I know no hope of Rega^^^y, nor fear of Punishments
which can persuade me to do any thing contrary to the Promise of my Baptism, or
against the Dignity of my Virtue. To this Profession of Faith, and of Honor,
delivered in so Affirmative terms, and with a Tone of Protestation and
Authority, Mahomet replied* I perceive very well the cause of all this; you are
yet astonished with your Fall: and the Smoke of this Unfortunate City, which
you still retain in your Eyes, hinders you from seeing the Good which is
offered you; But I hope you will recover this Amazement; and that after the
Dissipation of this Smoke, you will look more cheerfully upon your good
Fortune. Having said this, he retired, and left her to his Eunuchs, who were
commanded to have a great care of her and to dispose her to better Councels.

They conducted her to a Pavilion, where all I^dia seemed to be with all her
Gold and Precious Stones: having about them so Magnificent proofs of their
Masters Power, they failed not to use far more Magnificent Exaggerations; and
to add Immense and Unlimited Promises to so glorious a Spectacle. They gave her
in little, a Model of the Seraglio: but this Model in little, was greater then
the real one: It was composed of sumptuous Delusions, and glorious Dreams: and
it cost them nothing to build it with Carved Gold, and Fosset Diamonds. The
most Magnificent Poesy could not describe so much as these Vain people had set
forth in Hyperboles and Promises. And according to their words, if she would
consent to the Will of Mahomet, she should tread upon Scepters and Crowns; she
should be possessed with all the Goods of Fortune. But all these Painted and
Boasted Riches coming out of their mouths, were Dissipated by the Wind which
formed them, and reached not so far as the Ears of the Victorious Ca^^^ve. Her
mind was fixed on more Transcendent Promises, and more Solid and durable
Grandeurs: And Faith had so deeply imprinted in her imagination the Wedding of
the Lamb, the Crowns prepared for prudent Virgins, and the Eternal Rejection
of the Foolish, that she saw neither the Pomps of the Seraglio which were shown
her, nor the Delights of the Sultanesses wherewith they endeavored to Enamour
her.

These troublesome people being retired to leave her a little Repose, it came
into her thoughts, that perchance the moment of Liberty was procured for her by
her Good Angel, to the end by an advanced and Courageous Death, she might break
her Chain: she might Triumph over Mahomet and Fortune, and rid her self in an
instant of those Fears which possessed her, and of those Vain Hopes which they
labored to infuse into her. The Occasion was fair, and the Means Specious and
Magnificent. There was a Table in the Pavilion Composed of Precious Stones, and
certain great Vessels Enameled with Gold: therewere about her Red some Silken
strings which might serve for this Execution, and offered her a Death as
Complete and Noble, as a Dagger, Fire, P^ecipice, or a Cord could have effected.

She uses up with this thought, and viewing those stately pieces of Barbarous
Excess, as if she deliberated upon the choice of that which was to set her at
liberty* For what, says she, do thou Captive and Inchained Virginity reserve
thy self? Do thou reserve thy self for Martyrdom? and do thou think thy
self strong enough to overcome Death, accompanied with all its Torments, and
armed with all its Engines? But what if the occasion of Martyrdom be taken from
thee? What if thou have no Death to Contest with? What if the Tyrant does only
attempt upon thy Honor? What if he attaqu^s with violences, which stain,
without taking away thy life? O Captive and Inchaind Virginity! With what
Weapons will thou defend thy self against these Violences? Why will thou remit
thy Liberty to an uncertain Death, which perchance will not arrive till thy
Honor be lost, having so assured and ready, so Innocent and pure a Means in
thy power? This vain show of Riches, is a Snare laid for thee: go no farther to
seek thy Freedom: it expects thee there. Gold is as hard as Iron. A blow from
these Vessels may as well break thy Chain in pieces, as the stroke of a Sword:
and if thou art well resolved to dye, there are Rocks for thee; there is a
Precipice at the corner of this Table. God will pardon necessity; and excuse so
just a Violence. He has heretofore Inspired and Crowned the like. And the
Church Honors those Saints which drowned themselves to purchase Salvation, who
have ascended into Heaven by a Precipice. But what am I, that attribute
Inspirations to my self, and rank my self amongst the Saints? From whom have I
learned to discern Spirits and their Motions? Do I know of what color that
Spirit is who sollicites me? And if he be a Spirit of Imposture and indisguise;
If what I take for Zeal, be Despair; Whither will this Despair carry me, and
under the Conduct of this Spirit of Imposture, but to the Unhappy end of the
Foolish Virgins? Let us leave Uncertainty to the Providence of God: since he
is a Jealous God, he will take into his care the Honor of his Spouses. And if
heretofore he deprived Fire of Heat, and suspended the hunger of Lions, well
may he extinguish, if he please, the Ardour of the Tyrant, and suspend his
Concupiscence.

This Resolution was followed with a Prayer, which came more from her heart
then her lips, and into which there entered more Faith then Words. However she
was quickly interrupted by the Eu^a^chs, who came to bring her to Mahomet,
whose new Passion could allow him no Repose. The contempt of his Captive had
incensed him: it troubled him that amongst the Ruins and Ashes of a Sacked
Town, any thing should be found more powerful then his Victory; greater and
more sublime then his Fortune. And he would not have it said, that a Maid, nay
an Unarmed and Inchained Maid, had held out against him, after the taking of so
many places, after the Defeat of so many Fleets and Armies.

Nevertheless he tempered himself in her Presence, and renewed to her the same
Promises, augmented with boundless and unreserved Additions: But this second
Battery shook her as little as the former: and as the Tyrant prepared himself
to add Violence to his Promises, the Courageous Maid put him back with a
fierceness both in Countenance and Action, which manifested that she was able
to hold out against his Violence, as against his Promises; and that he could
neither gain her by Composition nor Force. It is very true, that Love is
Impatient and Stately upon Crowned Heads: that it is soft, and easily wounded
in hearts accustomed to Overcome. The Heart of Mahomet being mortally wounded
by this Action, gave way to Anger, which is never more Furious or Terrible,
then when it comes in the Rear of a Potent Love And Mahomet Transported with
this second Passion, laid his hand upon his Cymeter, and with one blow Crowned
the Captive, broke her Chain, and struck off her Head.

This Victory was not in the time of the Primitive Church: yet it is no less
Illustrious then those of that Age. Mahomet the Conqueror was as Redoutable as
Nero the Esseminate: and his Tent was a Field of Battle no less dangerous then
an Amphitheater. Ladies ought to learn from hence, that Heroic Chastity has
her Enthusiasms and Raptures: And these Enthusiasms and Raptures ought to
master all Fears and Hopes: These Raptures ought to surmount all that is both
Delightful and Terrifying: But they ought never to Precipitate her, if the Holy
Ghost does not transport her, and if she be not excited by a Foreign Violence.

MARIE Stuart Reyne d'Escosse seussre le Martyr pour la Foy: et par la
constance (...) temps, les exemples de l'ancienne E^hse. (...)

Mary Stewart.
YOu will scarce believe what you are going to see: And what testimony soever
your eyes render to the truth of this Tragical Spectacle, you will give them
more then once the lie, and suspect something of Illusion or Imposture. Truly a
holy Criminal, and an executed Queen, is a strange Fantome: And it is a more
prodigious thing then all the Prodigies in Fables, to see three Kingdoms
dishonored upon a Scaffold: To see a Head which has born two Crowns, laid
under the Ax of an Executioner. The Tragedy is not only Inhumane but Monstrous:
And yet England applauds this horrid Act, which will be deplored by all Europe.

Mary, heretofore Queen of France, and at present Queen of Scotland, goes to
die upon a Scaffold, after she was grown old in Prison. Insolent and furious
Heresy respects in this fair Head, neither Regality, which is a kind of
visible and commanding Divinity, nor Beauty, which is a Sovereignty by natural
Rights, and a Domination without violence. And what the most Barbarous
Antiquity may not perchance have ever seen; what the most credulous Posterity
will peradventure never believe; all the Virtues and Graces are violated in her
Person, and condemned to the same Punishment.

She goes courageously to it, and with a Countenance, which bears still the
mark of her Dignity, and the Declaration of her Innocence. She preserved them
both after the loss of her Kingdom and Liberty; and Fortune, which deprived her
of her Subjects, and is going to deprive her of Life, cannot deprive her Heart
of Sovereignty, nor her Looks of Authority. They are not fastened to Her, they
are born with Her; and create a Majesty independent on a Crown and Purple: And
thereby she will be no less a Queen upon a Scaffold, then she has been upon a
Throne.

You do not behold in her those fair Rays of Beauty and Youth, which were
heretofore the splendour and spectacle of the Lo^vre, which were the joy and
serenity of all France. But at least you see her not dejected by her mishap,
nor obscured by her bad Fortune. Her greatness appears all entire, now that the
steps and footstool are taken from her: And if her lights were then more
pleasing and lively, those at present are more vigorous, and less apt to be
extinguished: Her Adversities have not only fortified, but rendered her far
greater: and the Admirers of her Beauty, who heretofore called her the Sun of
the North, and the Planet of the Sea, did not foresee that her Virtue would
resemble the Sun and Planets, which appear greater through a Mist, then in a
most pure serenity, and without a Cloud.

Her white Hairs which you see, are not occasioned by Age, they proceed from
Afflictions and Persecutions. They are caused by unkind Kindred, and bad
Subjects. They come from Elizabeth and her Ministers: And if this be very
unworthy, it is little less strange, that so beautiful a Head should grow
white before its time, under so many hands employed to darken it. But this
whiteness is no dishonor to her, nor lessens any thing of her Grace. Innocence
and Wisdom are of this color: And even Majesty it self is seen sometimes
adorned thereby, and rendered more Venerable and August.

Would you believe that those persons who brought her to this violent Death by
a precipitated old Age, do not he bitter upon her heart, nor disturb the Calm
of her mind? So clean contrary, that she has laid the very remembrance of
their Injuries at the foot of the Cross: She has retired her thoughts from all
objects which might exasperate them: She called them back from all places
whence any succor or pity might arrive to her: and has deposited them all
with her Heart and Faith, in the wounds of the Sovereign Patient, who assisted
her during her imprisonment, and at present assists and fortifies her against
Death, by the Image and Virtue of his Passion.

He encourages her with the Voice of his Blood, and speaks to her by as many
Mouths as he has wounds. He arms her with his Thorns and Nails: He covers her
with his Cross, which is to her an invincible and sacred Shield; a Shield which
could not be pierced by all the Darts of her bad Fortune; nor shall it be by the
Ax it self of the Executioner which will chop off her Head. Under the
protection of this Shield, and at the sight of this Example, she marches
courageously to Death: And though a Queen, and Innocent, it seems not harsh to
her to pass through the hands of an Executioner, having before her eyes, a God
executed, and Innocence Crucified.

Can you confide so much in your eyes, as to expose them to this lamentable
spectacle? Mine, wounded before the stroke, fly back, not to behold any more
of it. Yet I must enforce them to see All. The last Rays of the setting Sun
are the fairest: And the last drops of blood great Souls pour forth, are more
sparkling then the rest; and have something, I know not what, of more Vigorous
and Noble. Surely this Action must needs be extremely black, since endeavors
were used to hide it from the light. But the obscurities to which they exposed
it, will not give it a better gloss; and doubtless if they were capable of
sense, they would fear to be stained by it. You would say that these Torches do
not contribute thereto their light but with regret: You would say that in
despite they produce nothing but shadow and smoke.

The Hall is full of Spectators, and hung with black Velvet: And not so much as
the fatal Scaffold, but is set forth with the stately mourning of this
barbarous. Tragedy to which it served. The cruel Ministers of so cruel an
Action, thought to sweeten Injustice, and civilize Cruelty; they thought to
appease violated Majesty; and to abuse the Patient by this vain and sumptuous
Hypocrisy. They ought to know, that Pomp and Ostentation do not justify
Crimes; that artificial and specious Cruelty is no other Fury then naked and
unpolished Cruelty: And that the voice of blood causes it self to be no less
heard upon Velvet Carpets then upon the bare ground.

I need not show these cruel Ministers unto you. They are discernable enough by
the greediness of their eyes thirsting after blood, and by the impatience and
fierceness of their looks. To see the attention they afford this spectacle, you
would say that every one of them is the Executioner: That every one is ready to
give the blow with his eyes: and that this blow was designed against the Head
of the Catholic Church, and not against the Queen of Scotland.

All the other Spectators, in whose hearts there remains some tincture of
Humanity, detest this cruel Example. And as many Tears as they shed, are as
many Voices and Imprecations against those that both advised, and put it in
execution. But the voice of just blood unjustly spilt, will shortly make a
greater noise. It will be heard by all People and Ages; it will be the eternal
malediction of that person who so unworthily violates Nature in a Kinswoman,
Majesty in a Queen, Hospitality toward a Refugiate, and Adversity it self in
an unfortunate Creature, consecrated by more then twenty years of misery.

You see her kneeling before the Executioner: but you see not her soul already
elevated in the presence of God, where by advance it takes possession of the
^hrone prepared for her. Her despairing Women are on their knees with her, as
if her condemnation were theirs, and that they were to die by her Death. The
fatal Ax has pierced their souls, and the blood tricles down by their eyes
upon the ground. Their sorrows are none of those which disturb, and make a
noise: It deprived them of motion and voice, even of the sense of their Sighs
and Tears: And in the condition they remain, I see nothing which resembles
them, but those ^igures of Marble, which seem to weep no less then Fountains.

The noble and courageous Patient, with a serene Countenance beholds this
sadness in her Women. Her Soul elevated above the inferior portion, is no
longer subject unto its tempests and showers, to its sighs and tears. The
Clouds of Matter begin to clear up about her, and she already casts forth
certain Rays of advanced glory, which mingle themselves with those Angels who
are come both to guide her, and give a beginning to her Triumph.

The Crown which they brought her, is not of the same matter as the other two
which are taken from her: No Thorns or Reeds enter there: There is nothing
sharp or brittle; nothing which offends or burdens: And it is not an Ornament
of the same stuff and weaving like our Diadems, which serve only to make Slaves
glorious, and proud Mortals miserable. It is a Crown of solid and pure Glory:
It is independent of Fortune, and stronger then Time: And the wise Queen, who
understood the value of it, would have given all earthly Crowns to possess but
one flower of it.

Behold with what stedfastness of mind she presents her Head to the
Executioner, to receive from his hand this glorious Crown. But stay, do not
stain your eyes with the murder of the Innocent. God will have an account of
the least drops of her blood: And woe to the Hands and Hearts; woe to the Mouths
and Ears; woe even to the Eyes, in which any stain of it shall be found.

SONNET.
SHall we, unmoved, behold the Tragic Sight,
Where Death puts out this fair Scotch Planet's light?
Shall Honor, Justice, Law, see Virtue bleed
In Mary's Death, as for some heinous Deed?
Her Grief's Heroic; the Ax no Paleness brings
Upon her Blood, sprung from so many Kings:
Her Graces speak, when, words her Tongue denies,
Her modest Pride endears her to (...) Eyes.
To what renowned Inchanter do we ow
This piece of wonder? From this Picture grow
Joy and Regret, while there the gazing sight
Does from a torment entertain Delight.
Art, by a gentle force, surmounteth clear
The pitch of Nature, in this Pourtraict; where
A Queen that is Innocent is made sustain
An Endless Death, without affront or pain.
Elogy of Mary Stewart.
I Might have a scruple, if into the Elogy I am going to make of Mary Stewart,
my Pen should insert her Nobility, her Beauty, her Wit, her Graces and
Magnificence. Her Picture requires far better Colors and more Artificial
Touches. It must be drawn after another manner then that of (...) and
Cleopatra: Other Incense must be burnt, and other Crowns placed before a
Martyr, then upon the Altar of an Idol. Besides, all these Titles are equivocal
Terms; and properly signify neither Virtue nor Vice. Magnanimous Persons are
not always Nobly born: And a great Courage is not ever of a great House. Cedars
and Palms grow in Valleys: Broom and Fern-Brakes are found upon Mountains.
Beauty is rarely Innocent: And Graces are Flowers which may have an ill odor
and grow in a bad Soil. Concerning the Elevation and Lights of the Mind, they
are common both to Virtuous and Wicked Persons: And oftentimes we see Comets
which have more Fire, and are more elevated then great Planets. In like manner
Magnificence is a Virtue which may prove unfaithful and Heretical which may be
Imprudent, and condemned with the Foolish Virgins: And we know that the
Piramides of Egypt, and other like Wonders have been erected by debauch^d Women.

Let us then lay aside equivocal Titles and ambiguous Elogies: We have Proper
and Formal ones. Let us not say that Mary Stewart was descended from a
continued Line of Kings. But let us say that she had a more generous Heart, a
more Royal Soul, and Sovereign Reason, then all the Crowned Kings from whom she
derives her Extraction. Let us not esteem her for Beauty, which is common to
the Rose and the Poppy; to Chaste, and Lascivious Women; but for a Virtuous and
Disciplined Beauty of good Odor and Example. Let us neither praise her Graces
nor her W^t: but let us commend the Reservedness and Modesty of her Graces: Let
us praise the Discretion, Sweetness, and Moderation of her Mind: And let us
not speak of her Liberalities, or say that they were judicious and well
Ordered: that they were choice, and disposed with Method. Let us say, that she
understood the Art and Secret of a Benefit; that she knew how to give with
Heart and Spirit, with her Countenance and Looks. And that after Fortune had
taken all from her, she continued to be magnificent in Desire and Affection;
and to make great Presents with slight things.

The French Muses, who lived in her time, failed not to praise this part of her
Virtues, which had been beneficial to them, and done honor to Learning. And
truly they would have showed themselves very ungrateful if they had not
praised Her. It was no fault of this good Princess, that they were not all
Rich, and at their Ease, that they were not all Apparelled in Cloth of Gold,
and lodged in the Lourre. She Treated them familiarly and as her Companions:
she recreated her self with them in Prose and Verse; and the Sport never ended
without some Present which closed up the Cadence and Periods, and rendered the
Stan^a's harmonious.

Concerning Courage which was her Predominant Virtue, and gave her a place in
this Gallery, it appeared in France, Scotland, and England. In France she
resisted Prosperity, and vanquished Excess and Pleasures, which some have
conceived much harder to overcome then Grief and Afflictions. She preserved her
self from the Corruptions of the Court, and from the unwholsom blasts which are
engendered by ease, and which attend a plentiful ^ortune. She conserved her
Innocence in Greatness: And what is little less then new Created Planets, she
showed much Modesty under a great Crown, and upon the highest Throne of the
World a most eminent Devotion and a Consummated Piety.

But because Virtue happy and at ease, is in a continual Violence; and that
violent things cannot last but by Miracle: God who made choice of this
Princess, and would have her all entit^, withdrew her out of Prosperity, which
in length of time might have corrupted her; and delivered her up to Adversity,
which Treated her as a Carver Treats Marble: And depriving her sometimes of one
thing, and sometimes of another, completed the ^igure of the Heroic Woman,
which was yet but rough-drawn in her.

Being returned into Scotland, a Widow to Francis the Second, and to his
Fortune; And her Youth, joined with the Supplications of her People, and Reason
of State, having obliged her once more to Marry; that which ought to have been
her Support, proved the cause of her Ruin. Heresy imaged at the Zeal she bore
to the Conservation of the Catholic Faith, cast Fire into the Royal House to
make it pass more easily from thence into the Church. Calumny, Ambition, and
Jealousy, prepared the Fuel for this Fire, and inkindled the Matter. But the
good Queen having quenched it by her Prudence and Address; Heresy which sought
to Reign by some one of its Faction, blew up the King her Husband by a Mine.
Besides some endeavored to blemish her with being the Contriver of this Fire
and Mine: And they slandered her very Mourning; and made her guilty of her
second Widowhood.

This Calumny proved a harsh Trial to her: Yet it was but an Essay, and as it
were an Advance of the Disorders and Mischiefs which ensued: And no Tragedy
appears so Confused, as the life of this good Princess. All her days were
marked with some Revolt and Conspiracy. They were Celeb^^ous by some Combat or
Flight. There was nothing wanting to her but a Crown of Martyrdom, and God gave
it her in England, after a Conflict of nineteen years, rendered in several
Prisons, and determined at last upon a Sca^^old, which was more Glorious to her
then the Thrones she had lost.

MORAL REFLECTION.
THis Picture moves Compassion, and is of great Example: There is much to
Deplore, yet more to Imitate: And for the Instruction of eminent Fortunes, and
the Consolation of mean Ones, Greatness is there Innocent and Unhappy. Mary
Stewart conserved her Innocence under two Crowns: And in the Vastness of two
Kingdoms, which she lost one after the other, she was much longer a Christian,
and with more Constancy then a Queen.

On the one side this teaches elevated Persons, that there is no Condition
estranged from God, nor any Fortune rejected by him, provided it be just. That
the Unction which makes Kings and Queens, does not efface that which Forms
Saints and Holy Women: That Palaces and stately Mansions are not out of the
Road of Heaven. That though Piety, Modesty and Patience reside not usually at
Court, yet they are no strangers there: And that Virtue is more Persuasive and
Exemplar upon a Throne, then in the Tub of the Cynick.

Likewise on the other side they should learn, from the Afflictions of this
great Queen, to make less Account of Diadems which are torn in pieces, of
Scepters which are broken, and of Thrones which tumble down, if never so little
touched by Fortune, then of the Grace of God, which was a Purple Robe that
remained to this divested Queen, an Unction which is not obscured in her
Prison, nor effaced with her Blood: A Crown which cannot be taken off with the
Head.

She was not only an Innocent and Virtuous, but an Unhappy and Persecuted
Queen: And thereby she teaches both Great and Rich Ladies, that there is no
Quality Privileged in this Life. The Purple of Sovereigns has its Thorns, as
well as that of Roses: Great Fortunes and great Structures have their Storms:
Elevated Heads have their Tears, as Mountains have their Waters: And whatever
Ambition makes us believe, the greatest Sufferers are not upon Wheels: They sit
upon Thrones environed with Ballisters.

In fine, the ill Rumors which have been spread of Mary Stewart, and the
Insolence of Calumny, which has disfigured her, teach those of her Sex and
Condition, that no Virtue nor Crown is free from detraction. Dogs indeed bark
against the Moon which is so pure: Frogs croak against the Sun which is so
beneficial and resplendent. Monstrous Figures, and the names of Beasts have
been imposed on the Virtues of ^eaven: And there is no Illustrious Plane^,
which has not been accused of some Crime. However they take no Revenge: And
what stains soever are laid upon them: What Vapors soever arise to them from
the Earth, they cease not to do good to the Impostors which dishonor them:
they forbear not to inlighten the Earth which obscures them.

There are other Considerations to be made here upon the Providence of God;
upon the Adversities of suffering Virtues and a^^^isted Innocence; upon the
Blessings and Advantages of these Adversities. But these Considerations are too
Important, and too useful to be shut up in so narrow a compass. They require
more Leisure and Extent: And if whole Volumes should be employed therein, I
need not fear that the subsequent Question would be cast away.

MORAL QVESTION.
Whether Great Ladies in Prosperity, be not in a better Condition then Those in
Affliction.
IT is not only now adays that men find something to allege against the Works
of God, and that his Providence has need of an Apology. In all Times there
have been Impious Censurers and Blaspheming Critics. who have sought out
Defects in the Fairest Pieces of the World; and Disorder in the Conduct and
Motions thereof. The greatest and most ^nsupportable Disorder in the opinion of
these conceited Men, is that which they observe in the distribution of the
Blessings and Misfortunes of this Life. If we believe them in this Point, there
is nothing but Trouble and ^onfusion; nothing but unjust and irregular Hazards;
nothing but tumul^u^ry and misplaced Fortunes. Hail fall^s equally upon the
Harvest of the Good and Wicked: Thunder beats down Churches, and spares Place^
of Debauchery Winds are not more propitious, nor the Sea more calm and
favo^^ble to Pilgrims of the Holy Sepulcher, then to those of (...). And it
often happens that a Turk escapes the same Rock upon which a Christian suffers
Shipwreck. They add hereunto, that Violence is always Rich and Honored, and
Integrity ever Necessitous and Despised. They discover under the Feet of Proud
and Prodigal Rich men the Blood, Substance, and Livelihood of the Poor, which
dye of Hunger. They show the Places, and quote the Times where happy and
Crowned Injustice made advantage of its Impiety, and Reigned with the contempt
of God and Men: whilst Innocence, laden with Chains, and Executed, exhibited
upon a Scaffold a Spectacle of its own Dishonor and Punishment.

It is true that such Tragedies have been often seen: And lately also (...)
produced one very like in the Person of Mary Stewart; England and Scotland
(...) thereto with very different Passions: And France saw it (...) off with
Sighs and Tears. The Picture of this History with which this Gallery is
finished, gives me occasion to justify here the Divine Providence in the
Conduct of this Innocent Princess; to disclose to great Ladies under Affliction
and Sufferance the Riches which are hidden in Tribulations; and to persuade
them that they are more happy, and in a better condition in sufferance, then if
they remained in a continued prosperity.

I suppose that it is more advantageous to Women, for whom I write, to be
apparelled with Virtue then Vice: to be of the chosen number: Of those whom God
particularly cherishes, and prepares to Glory; then to be left in the Crowd,
without mark or degree, without right or pretense to the future: And I believe
that I have reason to suppose it because I write not under the Law of the
Al^^oran, nor in the time of Fables: I write under the Law of the Gospel, and
in the Age of Truth: And what I write will be read by Christian Women, and not
by Sul^^^esses: It will be read by (...) and (...), by (...); and not by
Strat^nic^^s, by Cl^opatra's, by Messa^^^s. Now Adversity is the proper state
of Virtue, and Virtuous persons: It is the most commodious and favorable
Treatment which God can use toward those precious Souls which he cherishes
with Paternal Love, and which he has withdrawn out of the Crowd. It is the
Legal Ornament and preparation of that Righteousness which he requires in his
Spouses. And these their Advantages of Adversity deserve at least that we
should not cast an ill look upon it, if we have not a mind to cherish it: They
will deserve that we should receive it with patience, if we have not the
Courage to meet it, and rejoice at its arrival.

First, it is certain that bad times are the most proper for Virtue: Her good
seasons are produced by Hayl-storms and Wind, by War and Tempests: And if
Adversity be not her Mother, she is at least her Nurse and Governess. You may
see some smooth-faced, adjusted, and simpering Dame set out with holyed Grains
and Chaplets; disguised with a constrained Modesty, and with Tears squeezed out
by force: And this dissembling Creature would have her self taken for Virtue.
But you must not be mistaken in her, she is not Virtue: She is a counterfeit
which would fain imitate her, but does it unhandsomly; which Apes her, yet has
not one hair of her Head by which to resemble her. Virtue, as some imagine, is
not an idle quality, and addicted to case: A habit made for show, composed of
Countenances. It is a laborious and active quality: It is a Warlike and
Victorious habit: And wise men, to whom heretofore she appeared, never saw her
unarmed; they never saw her but amidst Thorns, and upon Mountains: They
conceived that her Palace was built with shipwrackt pieces, with the remnants
of burnt house, with great Oaks blacked and beaten down by storms of Thunder.
She must be furnished then with Contrarieties, that she may labor; She must
find resistance which may exercise her, and give force to the vigor of her
action: And if she had no Adversity nor Adversaries; if all her hours were
serene, and all her days, days of Peace, against whom would she offer Combat?
In what season would she gain Victories? Upon what Title would she demand
Crowns?

This concerns the general duty of all sorts of Virtues; I say even of those
which are only industrious; which only labor exteriourly, and in a Mechanic
way; which are limited by Time and Matter. The Virtue of a Pilot has its chief
action amidst the tumult of turbulent Waves, and boisterous Winds; amidst the
confusion of the melting Heavens, and the townng Seas. The Virtue of a
Physician, and of Drugs, express their force upon mutulated members, and
wounds, through which the blood slides away with life. By the same reason a
Wrastler is as no Wrastler at a Table^^ and a Soldier is as no Soldier at a
Ball. The Virtue of them both must be assaulted. It requires Resistance and
Adversaries: it is achieved by Sweat and Dust, with Blood and Wounds.

It is the same with Moral Virtue, nay with Christian Virtue, which is of an
Order transcending all the rest. Her condition is to labor and fight, to part
with her blood, and to receive wounds. And if this condition seem troublesome
to her, she must remember, that in the list of this life the Prize and
Acclamations of the Combat are not reserved for Spectators; for those lazy
persons Crowned with Flowers and Perfumes, who are content to look on quietly
and at their ease. They are for those that fight Courageously, who mingle their
blood and sweat with the dust of the lists, who show great Hearts and great
Souls by great Wounds.

But Virtue is Innocent: And the wounds of the Innocent are more painful then
those of the Culpable. Such persons as are wounded and overcome in the L^sts,
such as endure Rain and Wind in the Trenches, such as leave their Arms and Legs
upon a Breach, or in a pitched Battle, are not Criminals drawn out of a Dungeon
or a Gally. And after all, if Wounds do so much torment this innocent Virtue,
she may lay down her Arms, and depart out of the Lists: She may also settle her
self if she thinks good near to Voluptuousness; paint and adorn her self like
her, take half of her Nosegayes and Perfumes; borrow her Looking glass and Fan.
But this once done, she must no longer call her self Virtue, nor pretend to
Glory, and her Crowns. Besides, Virtue never yet appeared effeminate, and
voluptuous, nor painted or perfumed: And no person was ever seen to pretend to
Glory, and run after her Crowns with a head covered over with painting, and
laden with Flowers, with a Fan in her hand, and a Looking glass at her Girdle.

Afflictions and Adversities are then the proper state of Virtue: as War is the
proper season of a Soldier; as the Lists is the proper place for him who
pretends to the Prize. And therefore let us no longer say that Innocent and
Virtuous Women are unjustly afflicted: Let us no longer impute to hazard and
tumult, what is according to natural order, and placed in a just proportion.
And let us learn once for all, that if Virtue be in her right place, when she
is in Adversity: if she does her duty when she suffers; Ladies who follow her
freely, and in good earnest, cannot complain of their ill Treatment, when God
obliges them to the same duty, and ordains them to remain in the same state.

On the contrary, he cannot afford them a more important trial of his Love,
not more efficaciously testify that he has the thoughts of Salvation, and the
heart of a Father for them. Thereby he purifies and frees them from vicious
superfluities: He deprives them of what adulterates and corrupts: He prepares
them for Crowns, and the Inheritance of a Future Life. It is certain that there
is no Virtue so pure, which has not some stain: There is not any so sound,
which has not some part either infected or indisposed: And if this be true of
Virtue, which saved her self in the Desert; which put off her shoes, and
forsook with them the dirt and High ways at the foot of the Mountain: What will
become of that Virtue which resides at Court and amongst the great Ones; which
has been nourished with a dangerous and corrupted Fortune; which has
Domestiques as much cried down as Riches, as Scandalous and Debauched as
Pleasures? Is it possible that she should be so sound, and have so good
Preservatives as the Air of the Court cannot corrupt her? that she should
suffer nothing from the Opinions and Customs of Men? that she should not be
infected by the Contagion of Fortune? that Riches should not puff up her Heart
and Head* that Pleasures should not beget in her Infirmity or Corruption? And
if there be no Virtue so Vigorous, not Reason so well Fortified, which is able
to resist so many things which spoil and corrupt; I ask of a Lady, what usage
might be best for her in that state, and what choice she would make, if God had
left it to her self? I hardly believe that she would choose to be given over by
the Physician. The Election would not be much better, then if she should make
choice of a Precipice: the Dispute would not be about the End, but the way to
it: And if she had rather perish by a Precipice, she cannot do it more
certainly then by sickness. It remains then, that she put her self into the
hands of the Physician, and rely on him for the ordering of her Maladies and
Wounds.

But she should be very ignorant, if she expected to be cured by him with
divertisements* with leaving her to her ease, with making her laugh. Do the
Maladies of the Body become obedient to such Remedies? Do they heal her wounds
with Leaves of Roses, and the Oil of (...)? Do they not proceed against them
with Bitterness and Pain, with Irons and Fire? Nevertheless these Wounds remain
only in the Superficies; and these Maladies are often caused by a grain of Sand
which pains them, or by a drop of Humor slipped out of its place. And shall we
likewise believe that Interior and Spiritual Maladies; that voluntary and
inveterate Wounds will be cured with Ragouts and Perfumes, that they will pass
away at Play or at Table? Shall we believe that the Friendly and Domestic
Pa^sions of the Soul, that Vices avowed by the Will, and habituated in the
Heart will fly at the sound of Music; will be chased away by the ^n oak of a
Persuming Pan? They will need bitter Potions and painful Incisions: They will
require Remedies of Iron and Fire: And these Remedies of Iron and Fire are the
Adversities which God Ordains them; and which are profitably and successfully
applied to them by Patience. It is much better then, for Ladies to be Purged
and Cured by Adversity, how distastful soever her Medicines may be, then if by
an unfortunate Indulgence they were abandoned to Contagious Prosperity, which
would complete their Corruption.

This so harsh Treatment, and painful in appearance, will be yet found more
wholesome and beneficial; if we add, that thereby they are prepared for the
Wedding of the Lamb, and for the Crowns of the other Life. We are not received
at this Feast with soul Garments, and hands fullied with d^t* And the fauest
Head of the World which should have but one stain will never be Crowned there.
It is necessary then for us to be purified before we present our selves to this
Feast: And those Souls doubtless are the most happy which arrive there
perfectly cleansed. Besides that, they are not made to wait at the Gate, they
have Purity here at a cheaper rate then in that Country. The fire of Adversity,
what hand soever inkindles it, what wind soever blows it, is not by much so
ardent as the Fire of Purgatory: And we are better Treated by Tribulation, nay
by the most severe and harsh can be imagined, then by these purifying Devils,
which, as a Holy Father says, Act the same thing upon Souls, as Fullers do
upon Stuffs which are put out to be Dyed.

This so entire and perfect Purity ought to be accompanied with all the
Features of an exact and complete Beauty: And this Beauty also ought to be
Royally endowed, and to have a large stock of Riches. Now the Beauty of a
Soul, which is beloved of God, and his Holy Angels, is not formed with Paint
and Plaster, with Silk and Flowers: She is framed by Maladies and Wounds: and
her most delicate Painting ought to be composed both of Blood, Tears, and
Ashes. The Beauty of St. Te^la was formed by Fire and the Claws of Lions: That
of St. Apollo^^^ by Flines, with which her teeth were broken: That of St.
Cicil^^ by the boiling water of a Furnace: That of St Cath^rine by a Sword and
a Wheel. And generally there is no Beauty in Heaven, which Adversity has not
made, and Patience adorned.

As for those Riches which should make up the Dowry of this Beauty; they are
not the Fruit of a sweet Life, nor the Revenue of Pleasure and Pastime. The
very Riches of the Earth; even those gross and Material Riches which belong to
the lowest Story of the World, are Fruits of Adversity, and arrive to us from
the Tribulations and Afflictions of Nature. Pearls and Coral are found in the
Element of Tempests and Bitterness: Precious Stones are taken out of Precipices
and Rocks: Gold and Silver are born Prisoners and in Dungeons: And if they be
drawn out of their dark holes, it is to make them pass through Iron and Fire:
it is to make them suffer all the Punishments of Criminals. Certainly, if
Terrestrial and mere Imaginary Riches are the Fruits of Labor, and the
Daughters of Adversity, it would not be Just, that the Riches of the Mind,
which form the Great Saints of the Kingdom of God, and the quiet Possessors of
Eternity should be the reward of Idleness, and the Heritage of Delights. These
Spiritual Riches then are the Inheritance and Revenue of Adversity: And
consequently this harsh and Laborious Adversity is more Beneficial to great
Ladies then Prosperity, which stain's and infect's them; which sometimes even
impoyson's, and strangles them.

Surely they would be very nice, if they did bear their good Fortune
impatiently and with complaints: if they were wounded by their Ornaments: if
they groaned under the Matter of their Crowns. Since Adversity is sent them by
the Bridegroom to prepare them for his Wedding; It is very just that at least
so good an Office should make them relish the rudeness of its Hands, and the
severity of its Countenance. Surely they would weep with a very ill Grace, if
they lamented that pressure which adornes them; Because it loads them with Gold
and Jewels: because it pricks them by fastening on them Garlands and Crowns.
They suffer indeed the Fortune on their Heads, and the Rack on their Bodies;
they expose themselves to Iron and Fire to appear Beautiful in the eyes of men:
And it would be truly a great shame that they should please God with less
Trouble, and more at their Ease. But here is enough to justify the Providence
of God; and to show to Virtuous and Afflicted Ladies how highly they ought to
esteem the Grace and Riches of Tribulation. It remains to confirm them by a
second Example, which has the same Features, and almost the same Colors as
the first; and I hope it will have no less Force, nor prove less persuasive,
though it be less fresh, and more remote from our sight.

EXAMPLE.
Margaret of Anjou, Queen of England.
IT is true, that Crowns are great Ornaments to Beautiful Heads. Nevertheless
they are Ornaments which Pain more then they Adorn. And I very much doubt that
no Person would burden himself with them, if their Thorns were visible.
However their Thorns are not so well hid, but that some of their Points still
appear: And besides the secret Rack, and Interior Crosses which great Fortunes
endure; there are likewise Exterior and Public Ones, upon which by a
particular Order of Divine Providence they are Tormented in the sight of the
World for the Instruction of the People, who are present at their Sufferings.

And in this Point the People ought to be advertised, that these Punishments of
Great Persons are not always Ordained for great Crimes Riches are seen without
Vice, as Gold without Brass. There are Great Persons, who like Great Planets
have much Light, and very few Blemishes. And yet very often the Crosses of
these Grandees are more harsh and heavy then those of Violent and Impious Rich
Men; then those of Bloody and Tyrannical Great Ones. God Ordains it in this
manner, as I said before, to prepare them for Crowns by Patience, and to leave
unto Great Men under Persecution, and to Great Ladies under Affliction,
Examples of their Rank, and Models of their Condition: And because there is an
unmovable Patience which suffers quietly and without Action; and a stirring
and labor^ous Patience, which adds Action to Sufferance; it is just, that after
the having given a Queen of Scotland for a President of the first, I should
give a Queen of England for the second.

Margaret of (...)* Daughter to Re^^ King of Sicily, was one of the most Ra^e
and Perfect Princes^es of her Age: And her Perfections most Rare as they were
received, not respected from adverse Fortune. She was descended from the most
eminent Race of the World. Reeds are not beaten down by Tempests, but the
Branches of great Trees: She was one of the Fairest and most Spiritual. But the
Planets which are so Beautiful and Governed by pure Spirits have their
Defections and Eclipses: they are persecuted by Mists and dark Clouds, by
Imprecations and Calumnies. She was Liberal and Beneficent. Is there any Bounty
more lasting then that of Springs? more delated then that of Rivers? Is there a
greater Inclination to do good then that of the ^arth? And yet we see that
stones are cast into public Spring^; and that all sorts of Ordures are thrown
into Rivers: We see that the ^arth is beaten with Storms, trodden upon by
Animals, torn up by men, impoverished and denuded once every year. There was
nothing then strange and against the course of the World in the Afflictions of
^o Noble, so Beautiful, so Able, and Magnificent a Princess: and Fortune did
nothing against Her, whereof she had not Public Examples in Nature.

She was Married to Henry the Sixth King of England: and by this Marriage the
Truce was continued between two Neighbors, the greatest Enemies in the whole
World, the most jealous of each other. The poor Princess did not long enjoy the
Repose she give to the Public: and it happened to her as to Victims, which bear
the Sorrows of the People for whom they are Sacrificed. The Nuptials were
Celebrated at Nancy with great Preparations of Car^ousels and Tournaments,
according to the Mode of the (...) of that time, who were only acquainted with
Valiant and Manly Delights; with Pastimes which equalled Battles, and produced
(...) Victories. Wherein surely, to speak this by the way, they were more
Cavaliers, and Men at Arms then those of our days, who know no other (...) then
Racing, nor other Tournaments then Dancing, who have ^ffeminated Magnificence,
and taken away from Sports and Diverti^ements, all that they had of Noble and
Military.

Margaret being passed into England, found not there the same Sweetness and
Tranquillity she had left in France. Not that she was one of those ill lodg^d
Persons, who have always either Rain or Smoke in their Houses. And Her Marriage
was none of those Tyrannical Yoaks and Torturing Chains, which a certain Person
wished to his Enemy instead of a Gibbet and ^alter. She enjoyed at Home a most
pure Calm, and without Confusion: and her Marriage felt nothing Heavy or
Incommodious. The King her Husband had all the Qualities of a good Man, and a
good Prince: But being born under a very Contagious Constellation, and of a
very Mal^volent Influence, the Queen his Wife failed not to he involved
therein, and to have her share of the Poison and bad Fortune. She patiently
received all that fell upon her. Besides, she joined Grace with Patience: And
being indu^d with a pleasing Humor and a Gallant Spirit, she made Answer to
such as lamented her Condition, That having taken upon her Marriage Day the
Rose of England, she ought to bear it entire, and with all its I horns.

Moreover King Henry had a great inclination to Repose, and no Aversion to
Pleasure. The Mildness and Indifferency of his Spirit did not Correspond with
the Functions of Regality, which required Courage and Resolution Noise and
Stirs made him w^y his Head; and when things were in his own choice, he
contented himself to have Ease and Repose for his part, and left to his
Favorites and Ministers of State, the Authority with the Trouble, and Affairs
with the Tumult.

This Soft and Slothful Life afflicted the Queen, who had a High and Active
Spirit, Noble and Manly Thoughts; and a Head as Capable to fill a Crown as any
Prince of Her Time. Not that she did not affect the Repose of her Husband, and
wished him his Hearts Content. But her Love being Magnanimous, and of the
Complexion of her Heart, she would have rather liked in him a Glorious
Activeness, and accompanied with Dignity, then this stupid Repose, and these
mis-becoming Eases, which Dishonored him. Truly this Prince, though otherwise
good, was not beloved by his Subjects: And his Reputation bore the brunt of all
the Faults of his Favorites and Ministers of State. The Revolt of the
Grandees, the Seditions of the People, the Mutin^es of the Mayor of London (who
was then a Popular Sovereign, and a King of the third Estate) and generally all
the Disorders of his Kingdom were cloaked with this Pretense.

All these Commotions grieved the Queen: But they did not affright her* She
hastened still with the first to the most wavering Places: and where Power and
Authority might stop any Disorder. Her principal Effort was upon the Kings
Spirit: She continually represented to him, and with Pressing and Efficacious
Terms, that the Repose of Kings consisted not in the softness of their Bed, but
in the stability of their Thrones. That the Throne could not be secure, if
Esteem and Authority do not Support it: And that Esteem which arises from
Action and Authority, which grows from Courage, are lost by Sloth and Softness:
that Affairs are truly very ponderous; but that this Weight procures the
Stability of Affairs: And that there could be nothing more Fickle and Tottering
then a King, who discharges himself of all that lies heavy upon him. That it
were to Act a very bad part, to play the Titul^r King; and to Reign by Agents
and Deputies: That Authority Substituted, and out of its Place, is weak, and
without vigor: And the Scepter which has Force, and begets respect in the
Hand of a Prince, is easily broken in the hands of a Subject, and Resembles a
Scepter in a Play.

These and other like Remonstrances, accompanied with the Eloquence of Beauty,
and the Persuasion of Love, Fortified the Kings Spirit, and made him take a
firm Resolution to Reign for the Future without a Substitute, and to Act of
himself. He Resumed that Authority, which he had con^erred on his Uncle,
H^^p^^y Duke of Gloucester: And he called back all Affairs to his own Conduct:
And thereby it appeared how Employments Protect those whom they burden: And
how Authority Supports and Settles those whom it Loads. The poor Duke of
Gloucester was no sooner put out of Office and Authority, but his Enemies, which
before did not so much as shake him, did now overthrow him: And within a short
time after his ^all, he was strangled in Prison by a Sudden and Illeg^l
^^^cution.

The Faction of the White Rose, which could not endure the Odor of the ^lower
de ^u^e, and beheld with regret a French Woman so absolute in England, ^ailed
not to charge her with the Contrivance of this Death. And^while after, the
Danger of Richard Earl of Warwick, who was Assaulted near London by the Kings
Guards, and thrust into the T^ames, gave Occasion and Authority to this
Calumny. The ^arl of Salisbury, his Father, and Richard Duke of York, Head of
the White Rose, made thereupon several Manifests by Word of Mouth, and
Published in the Country and Cities, that this piece was devised by the Queen,
who had undertaken to cut off the Arms of England, and to deprive it, with its
best blood, both of Strength and Spirit, to the end she might deliver it up to
France. That she began not her Work amiss. And that if the end of the
Enterprise should Correspond with the beginning; if the Great Ones did not look
better to themselves, then the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of Warwick had
done, in a short time not one drop of good Blood, not one single Noble part
would be left in the Body of the State.

The good Queen was very far from entering into these Tragical Thoughts: And
though she truly wished Authority and Power to the King her Husband, yet she
did not wish him such an Authority, as might be hated and lamented, not such a
Power as might cause Desolation and Ruins. Besides, less was it in her
Thoughts to procure the Destruction of that ^ree upon which she her self was
Grafted. And if she bore much Affection to the Stem of her Race which was in
France, she had much more for its Flower and Fruit which were in England. She
opposed nothing to these Rumors, but the voice of her own Conscience, which
spoke louder then Calumny, and justified her before God, against the Impostures
of Men.

Nevertheless Calumny found so much Matter prepared to take Fire; and blew so
hotly, and effectually upon this Matter, as it grew into a great ^lame, which
was like to burn all England, if France had known how to entertain it, and make
Advantage of this Occasion and Disorder. The Accident befallen the Earl of
Warwick, and the new Authority of the Duke of Somerset, served for a Pretense
to Ambition; and were the Specious and Superficial Causes of the War. The Duke
of York, accompanied by the Earl of Salisbury, and followed by all the Faction
of the White Rose, raised a powerful Army; and ordered it to march directly to
London. The King took the Field on his part, with the Party of the Red Rose,
and with all the Forces he could draw together. The Battle was Fought at
Northampton: And God who is not pleased that just Right should always prevail;
and that Fortune should follow Virtue every where, permitted the Royal Army to
be Defeated, and the King himself to be taken Prisoner by the Rebels.

The Duke of York grown insolent by his Victory, brought him in Triumph to
London, and caused him to be shut up in the Tower* Seeing himself secured on
that side, he put off his Mask of colorable Pretenses, wherewith he began the
War: And Represented to the Parliament the double Right his House and Fortune
gave him to the Crown. Force in like Occasions is a powerful Piece, and Victory
an Eloquent Advocate. However the Parliament yielded not wholly to Force and
Victory: It respected the Vanquished Right; and durst not Degrade Majesty,
though divested, and laden with Chains. The Resolution of the Parliament was,
that during the Life of Henry, the Duke should rest satisfied with the Title
and Functions of Lieutenant General of the Kingdom; and that the Crown should
pass by Succession to his Son* Edward Earl of Ma^^^^, to the Exclusion of the
House of Lancaster.

A greater Affliction could not befall the Queen; she saw her Enemies upon the
Throne, the King her Husband in Prison, and under the hands of an Executioner;
the Prince her Son publicly Degraded, and Excluded from the Crown by a Solemn
Decree. All that could have Supported her in this Revolution, was either fallen
or tottering: And except her Courage and Hopes, which Fortune was not able to
cast down, there was nothing about her but Shipwrack'd pieces of a ruined
Greatness. But afflicted Virtue does not waste her self in outcryes and tearing
her hair: She knows how to Discipline Affliction, and animate Grief: she knows
how to set together broken pieces, and contest with Ruins.

The Courageous Queen made this use of it: And instead of exhausting her self
by vain Complaints, and Superfluous Tears: Instead of Imputing her Mishap to
the Planets, or accusing Fortune, she thought to overcome in Despite of the
Planets and Fortune; and began to Levy new Troops. To supply the Defect of
Money which she wanted, the grace of her Speech and Countenance served in lieu
of Pay to the Soldiers: And this Honorable Payment left a sting in the most
benumbed Souls, and infused Boldness into the most Fearful. Not believing that
she might handsomely commit to Lieutenants an Affair which concerned the Freedom
of the King her Husband, and the Destiny of her House; she resolved to take
part in the Danger, and attempt in Person against Fortune. She put her self
then in the Head of her Army, and marched directly to York, where the Forces of
the Enemy were Encamped.

England never saw an Army which had a more Beautiful Leader: No^ did it ever
see any one Fight with more Courage. The Duke of York, who Mustered above Ten
thousand Men, persuading himself that he might purchase a young Queen at a
cheap Rate, went to meet her against the advice of his Commanders, and
presently exposed the Business to a general Battle. It cannot be expressed what
the Queen effected by the Greatness and Courage of her Words; by the fire of
her Eyes, by the boldness of her Looks, and of her whole Person. She infused
Courage, Ardour, and Impetuosity into her People: She seemed to give even
Sense, Activity and Address to their Weapons. If Victory her self had Marched
before them, in the Equipage and Lightnings which our Imagination ascribe to
her, she could not have done more. The Rebels received a total Overthrow: The
Duke of York taken with his Son, the Earl of Rutland, and the Earl of (...)
passed through the hands of the Executioner. Their Heads were exposed upon the
Walls of York on the point of three Spears; To the end the Example might make a
greater show, and be the more Famous; and that Rebellion might be instructed
afar off, and with the more Terror. A Crown of Paper begitting the Dukes Head,
was the particular Mark and Punishment of his vain Pretensions.

This first Victory raised the Queens Heart without Impriding it: And the new
Greatness she added to it, was a Solid and Modest Greatness; a Greatness of
Designs, and Hopes, and no puffed up and vainglorious Greatness. Not being
able to think her self Victorious, as long as the King her Husband remained a
Prisoner, she resolved to pass through all Dangers to break open his Prison, or
expire at the Gate. This Resolution taken, she steers her course toward
London: Meets the Earl of Warwick, who led a gallant Army, and augmented by the
Defeat of the Earl of (...): Courageously Attaqu^s and Routs him, enters
London, Crowned with two Victories: draws her Husband out of the Tower; and
replaceth him upon the Throne with the general Applause of the People.
Certainly if there be no Victories so pleasing, as those which are blessed by
the Unhappy; and whereat Captives rejoice even in their Prisons, and ^^ons*
surely it was with a sweet and pleasing Transport, that this Victorious
Princess broke her Husbands Chains, drew him out of Prison, and replaced the
Crown upon his Head. And whatever is said in order to the Glory of Ancient
Triumphants, though they entered Rome with more Pomp and Tumult, yet certainly
they did not enter with a more Pure or Lawful Joy, then that of Margaret when
she entered the Tower of London.

But the Joy of this World has wings as well as Fortune: And like her, rides
much way, and lodges in few Places. Scarce was Henry well acquainted with
Liberty and his new Kingdom; scarce was he replaced upon his Throne, when he
understood that all the Thorns of the White (...) were not plucked out* And that
Edward Earl of March, Heir to the Ambition of his Father the Duke of York, and
Successor to his Enterprises, advanced with a Powerful Army to finish what his
Father had but roughdrawn* He was not advised to expect him, not to confide in
the People of London, an uncertain and Cap^icious Monster which had too little
Courage, and too many Heads: And he was induced to hope, that he should find
better Terms from Fortune, then from so Inconstant and Wild a Beast. He
Marched forth accompanied by his Wife, the Duke of Somerset, and all the Body
of his Party. And doubtless, if he had not made the more haste to get out, the
least that could happen was to be shut up in the Tower of London, and to behold
from thence the Coronation of his Rival, and the same Applauses which were
before given him by all the People.

Edward himself, though newly Crowned, did not trust to the new Affection of
this People; and did not believe himself sure of any thing, if he had not
Fortune and Victory on his side* He followed Henry by long Marches: And Henry
facing about, the Armies gave each other so rude and forcible a Shock, as
Thirty thousand men fell on the Place. Henry being totally Defeated, saved
himself in Scotland with the Queen: And the Queen whose Heart was still Armed
and Courageous, passed over into France, from whence a while after, she
returned into Scotland with two thousand Men, commanded by Brezel Seneschal of
Normandy. Henry strengthened by this Succor, and that wherewith Scotland, his
new Ally, furnished him, returned again into England, with more Right and
Courage, then good Success. He was again Defeated by the Marquis of Montagne,
who Commanded King Edwards Forces: And his Overthrow was so great, that the
Queen was enforced to save her self in a Wood, with her Son the Prince of Wales.

The Event showed, that Fortune expected her there to offer her an Affront; Not
being able to overcome her Honorably, and deprive her of Courage by a fair
War, she undertook to dispossess her of it by the hands of a Murderer: And
peradventure she had been there Assassinated, if Fortune had not meant to sport
yet longer with her, and reserve her for other Outrages. It was no novelty with
her to Dispoil a poor Queen: It is her usual Pastime in all Countries, and at
all times: And nothing is seen every where but Ransack't Kings; nothing but
denuded Princes, nothing but Rich Men impoverished, who complain of her
Robberies. But it has not yet happened that a King, much less a Queen, should be
so unworthily Treated. Certain Villains, who found her in a by-corner, drawn by
the Dignity of her Countenance, and the sparkling of her Jewels and Garments,
Robbed her with so little Compassion, and used such Brutish Violence toward
her, that if any thing delivered her out of their Hands, it was the Quarrel
which arose amongst them about the division of the Spoil.

Whilst they were fighting, the Queen whom all these frightful Faces, and so
many naked Swords could neither Terrify nor Amaze, took up the Prince her Son
in her arms, and cast her self with him into the thickest part of the Forest.
Another was found there, whom evidently Fortune had placed in Ambush to do her
more Injury, then all that she had already suffered. But the Grace: and
Majesty, nay the Afflicted Graces, and half naked Majesty, were for this once
more Powerful then Fortune. The Queen seeing him approach, advanced with a
steadfast pace, and a Countenance of Authority; And presenting to him her Son,
whom she carried, said to him in Sovereign Words, and with a Commanding ^one:
Friend, receive from my hand the Son of thy King, and the Heir of the Kingdom;
I give thee the whole State to be carried with him: save them both from
Rebellion and Fortune, which pursue them. She said no more; the Graces and
Majesty spoke the rest: And what is wonderful, the Graces without Ornament,
and Majesty without a Crown and Precious stones, humbled this Barbarous Fellow,
and persuaded him that it was a Queen who spoke to him. He took the little
Prince into his Arms, and going before the Queen guided her so happily through
by-ways, as he presently brought her to the Sea side.

Truly this was a strange Game of Fortune, or to speak more Christianly, it was
a pleasing Spectacle to Providence, to behold a Great Queen, Grand child to so
many Kings a Fugitive, half naked, and straying in a Forest like a Vagabond;
following on foot a Thief, who alone served for her Querries and Guards, who
was all her Train and Court; and in this deplorable Condition, which begot
pity even in Barbarity it self, to conserve her Hopes and Resignation, and
still bless Providence in whose ^ight she had been Despoiled.

As soon as she came to the Sea shore, she put her self with her Son into a
Fishermans Boat, which carried her to Sl^ce; from thence she passed into France
and Lo^^^^e And through all places where she passed, she was shown to the
People as a Celebrious May Game of Fortune, as a Rich piece of Shipwreck, as a
great Head fallen off from a great Collossus. But though this great Head were
fallen; yet it remained Entire. The Wind which threw it down, had only
displaced it: And likewise after her Fall she kept the Dignity of her former
Features, and the Majesty of her Countenance.

Edward also feared her more thus Fugitive and Divested, as she was, then he
did all the House of Lancaster, Supported by all Scotland, and by an entire
Mo^e^e of England. She raised all the money she could in France; and repassed
the Sea under the Conduct of the Earl of Warwick, who Irritated by the Attempt
Edward had made upon the Chastity of his Daughter, released Henry out of that
Prison into which he had cast himself, out of the Impatience he had to return
into his Kingdom before his time, and in a disguised Habit.

This second Voyage of the poor Queen, was not more Fortunate then the first
she Arrived not in England but to be present at the Defeat of her Son* and at
the punishment of her Husband. Her Son was overthrown in his first Advance, and
perished in the Battle of Te^xbury. Her Husband was strangled in the Tower of
London, and had the Duke of Glacester for his Executioner. As for the Queen,
Edward Confined her to a Prison, where her Courage and Constancy Acted their
last Part, which was no less painful then the former, though done with less
Noise, and in Repose: And it lasted till her Father King (...) sent fifty
thousand Crowns for her Ransom which set her at Liberty.

For my own part, I could not close this Gallery with the Picture of a more
Gallant and Courageous, more Active and Patient, more Resplendent or Exemplar
Virtue. You may find Instruction there, both for Low and High Conditions, for
Prosperous and Afflicted Fortunes, for Men as well as Women. Such as are upon
the Earth, and in the Low Story of the World, will learn from hence to Content
themselves with the Repose and Security of a mean Fortune, which is not subject
to Agitations and Falls; and not to Affect Tumult and Storms which pass over
their Heads. Such as remain in the high Region, will learn, not to make so
great Account of an Embroide^ed and Tottering Greatness, exposed to Tempests
and Precipices, Famous by its Shipwracks and Ruins. And when they shall
perceive, that only Glittering things are subject to be broken, that elevated
Ones are liable to Falls, and such as are swollen up, do only burst asunder; they
will be affrighted with that which is the matter of their Vanity, and will
apprehend their Splendour, Elevation, and Pride. Moreover Prosperous Fortunes
are advertised hereby of their own Inconstancy and Frailty; and the Unhappy, of
the Patience they ought to have, and of the Merits they may Acquire.

In fine, Men and Women of what Gold or Earth soever their Fortunes are
Composed, and in what Story soever of the World they are lodged, ought to be
instructed by this Example, that no Condition or lazy Virtue can be Privileged
in this Life: That the Carreer of Adversities is open to all sort of Persons:
That Providence Assigns to every one the Rank and Function which is proper to
him: That there is no Victory which is not preceded by some Combat; and that it
is a very great shame, that Christians should endure so many Afflictions, and
expose themselves to so many Dangers for a handful of Flowers which last but a
day; for a Perfume which is dispersed by the first blast of Wind; for a Crown
of Glass which may break every moment: And that for Insatiable and endless
Delights, and for a Solid and Eternal Glory, they should fear to endure but the
pricking of a Thorn.

THE END.
A TABLE Of the Pictures, Moral Questions, and Examples.
The Gallant JEWS.
D^^ORAH Page 1. Her Elogy p. 5. Moral Question, Whether Women be capable of
Government? p. 7. Examples, Isabella (...) of Spain, Arch-Dutchess of the
Low Countries p. 9. Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Parma, Governess of the
Low Countries p. 17.

JAEL p. 19. Her Elogy p. 22. Moral Question, Whether there were Infidelity on
the Acti^^ of Jael? p. 24. Example, Jone of Beusort, Queen of Scotland, and
Catharine Douglas p. 26.

JUDITH p. 29. Her Elogy p. 34. Moral Question, Concerning the choice which God
has made of Women for the preservation of States reduced to Extremity. p. 36.
Example, Marulla of Scilimena p. 38.

SALOMONA p. 41. Her Elogy p. 46. Moral Question, Whether Religion be the
principal Virtue of a gallent Woman? p. 47. Example, Margaret Moore the
Daughter of Sir Thomas Moore, Lord Chancelour of England p. 49.

MARIAMNE p. 53. Her Elogy p. 57. Moral Question, Why the most perfect Women be
commonly the least Fortunate? p. 59. Example, Blanch of Bourbon, Queen of
Castle p. 61.

The Gallant Barbarian Women.
PANTHEA p. 63. Her Elogy p. 68. Moral Question, Concerning the order which a
gallant Woman ought to observe in Conjugal Love. p. 69. Example, Indegonda and
Clotilda of France p. 72.

CAMMA p. 77. Her Elogy p. 81. Moral Question, Why Conjugal Love is more
Faithful in Women th^^ in Men? p. 82. Example, Sanchia of Navar p. 85.

ARTEMISIA p. 91. Her Elogy p. 95. Moral Question, In what manner a gallant
Woman should mourn, and what ought to be the Duties of her Widdowbo^d? p. 96.
Example, Blanch of Castile, Queen Regent of France p. 98.

MONIMA p. 103. Her Elogy p. 108. Moral Question, Whether it appertains to the
duty of a gallant Woman to expose her life to satisfy the mind of a jealous
Husband* p. 110. Example, the br^ve H^^garian p. 112.

ZENO^IA p. 115. Her Elogy p. 120. Moral Question* Whether Women be capable of
Military Virtues? p. 122. Example, Jone of Flanders, Cou^tes^ of Mon^fort p.
125.

The Gallant Roman Women.
LUCRECIA p. 1. Her Elogy p. 7. Moral Question, Whether Chastity belongs to the
honor of Her^^sses and great Ladies? p. 8. Example, Gondeberga of France,
Queen of Lombardy p. 11.

CLOELIA p. 17. Her Elogy p. 23. Moral Question, Whether the Virtue of Women
^e as beneficial to the Public as that of Man? p. 25. Example, Theodelinda,
Queen of Lombardy p. 29.

PORCIA p* 33. Her Elogy p. 38. Moral Question, Whether Women be capable of
an eminent Generosity? p. 39. Example, Francis Cezely the Lady of Ba^^y p. 42.

ARRIA page 49. Her Elogy p. 55. Moral Question, Concerning the Duty of (...)
Husbands, in the ^^ne of their Distresses and Misfortunes p* 58. Example, Jone
Coello, Wife of Anthony Pe^ez, Secretary to Philip the (...) page 61.

PAULINA page 67. Her Elogy p* 72. Moral Question, Whether Women be capable of
(...) Philosophy? p. 73. Example, Of Jane Gray of Suffolk, Queen of England p.
78.

The Gallant Christian Women.
THe French JUDITH p. 85. Her Elogy p* 91. Moral Question, Whether more
Resoluti^n and Courage be required to make a Man Valiant, then to make a Woman
Chaste^ p. 93. Example, Blanch of Rossy p. 97.

ELEONOR of Castile, Princess of Wales p. 101. Her Elogy p. 107. Moral
Question, Whether it appertains to the Duty and Fidelity of Women, to expose
themselves to death for their Husbands? p. 106. Example, Margaret of Fo^xe,
Duchess of Elpernon p. 114.

The Maid of ORLEANS p. 119. Her Elogy p. 125. Moral Question, Whether Women
may pretend to Heroic Virtue? p* 127. Example, Isabella Queen of Castile p.
132.

The Victorious Captive p. 139. Her Elogy p. 145. Moral Question, Whether an
Heroic Transport be necessary to the Perfection of a Woman's Chastity? p. 147.
Example, The Chaste Venetian p. 152.

MARY STEWART p. 159. Her Elogy p. 165. Moral Question, Whether great Ladies in
Prosperity, be not in a better Condition, then those in Adversity? p. 168.
Example, Margaret of Anjo^, Queen of England page 173.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
IN the Add^^^^ to the (...)* Page 2 (...) 10. for (...) of. In the Book, Page
41. line 9 for (...). p* 50. l. ^8. (...) all (...) that (...)* p. 50 l. 32.
after (...)* p. 5^* l. 5^ (...) p. 107 l* ^^. for returning ^* re^^ining, p.
109 l 39^ In the Blood p. 116 l* 23* (...) p. 110. l. 3. (...) p. 130. for
(...) p. 1^1. l. 43. for (...) p. 135. l. 36. for (...) Ibid. for (...) p. ^4.
l. 23. (...) to the word (...). p. 164* (...) for (...)* p. 171 l. 28. for
(...) p. 174* l. (...) by p. 153. l* 5. for (...)* p. 153. l. ^^. (...).


