THE DUTY and BENEFIT OF Frequent Communion, IN A SERMON Preached at St.
Peter's Church in Lincoln, upon Passion Sunday, 1688.

By WALTER LEIGHTONHOUSE, A. M. Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Huntingdon; late Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxon. and now Rector of
Washingburgh nigh Lincoln.

Published at the Request of many that heard it Preached.

(...) Basil. Epist. 289. ad Caesariam Patriciam. Quotidie Eucharistiae
Communionem percipere nec laudo, nec reprehendo; omnibus tamen Dominicis
diebus, s^adeo and hortor. Aug. in lib. de Eccles. Dogm. LONDON, Printed for W.
Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, nigh Devereux Court. 1689.

Imprimatur,

Concio cui titulus (The Duty and Benefit of Frequent Communion.)

GUIL. NEEDHAM.
October. 26. 1688.
To the Right Honorable THEOPHILUS Earl of HUNTINGDON, One of His Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
ALthough the following Discourse be, for the most part, built upon that
Authority that needs no Patronage to defend it; yet I no sooner agreed to the
making of it Public, but I saw a necessity of affixing your Lordship's great
Name before it: Not to remind you, My Lord, of your Duty, of which you need no
Monitor, but your own Active Piety; but to let the World know, That whatever of
Worth it carries in it, has had its Origin from your Lordship's Encouragement
and Support, and therefore must justly become your Votary. I confess, My Lord,
it is too slender a signification of that unfeigned and undelible Gratitude I
owe to you; but if your Honor please to make an Addition to your former
Favors by the acceptance of this first Testimony of my Regards, I hope, My
Lord, if Success crown my undertakings, to acknowledge them very shortly in
some greater Instance. In the interim, the great Importance of your Public
Charge making me sensible that your minutes are sacred, and that therefore
'twould be a Piacle to invade them with a tedious Address, I shall only add,
That the height of the Honor I most passionately aspire to, is, that my
deserts may give me the Title of,

My Lord, Your Honor's most affectionately devoted, and most humble Servant,
WALTER LEIGHTONHOUSE.
October. 30. 1688.
LUKE XXII. ver. 19. -- This is my Body which is given for you: do this in
remembrance of me.
AMongst all those Blessings in which Mankind seems to take satisfaction, there
is none with which we are more deeply affected, than Deliverance from
Calamities: For as the Passions of Fear and Grief are (according to (...).
Alcin. de Doctr. Plat. p. 72.
Philosophers) more impressive upon our Senses than those of Hope and Love; so
it must needs fall out, that the release from the former will be more
satisfactory than the completion of the latter.

For let our Hopes be buoyed up with the rapid Torrent of an expected Felicity,
and let our Love swim in the full Stream of our Desires effected, the first is
but the glimmering of Satisfaction, and the latter quickly dies or grows
languid by fruition. But on the other hand, let our Thoughts be benighted with
the sad Apprehensions but of an imminent Danger, with what a busy activeness
do we bestir our selves to the evading of it? And if by chance we lie under the
heavy Pressures of a present Grievance, with what regret do we shrink under our
Burden, Curse our ill Fate, and repine and murmur at the Author and
Instruments of it?

All which being so, What (...). Phot. Epist. 46.
Transports of Passion must we needs be in, when we compare our past with our
present state? Impendent Danger on one hand, exquisite without a parallel,
inexpressible Deliverance on the other, effected without our assistance: Fallen
Man grovelling in Sin, and hastening to eternal Ruin; a gracious God speeding
our Rescue by his own Misery. Here Is in one Scale Mankind distracted through
Fears, and racked with the sad Thoughts of a future state: Here Is in the other,
an innocent Redeemer, no less so through the sense of our Sins and
Transgressions: Here Is the Raptures of Joy succeeding the Pangs of Despair, and
Mercy seated where Judgment ought to have taken place. Here Is Sin in one
expiated by the innocent Death of another; and here is a kindness freely
dispensed, which Men and Angels could not otherwise have purchased: Here Is our
Holy Jesus giving his Body for the Redemption of our Souls, and requires
nothing for the kindness, but that we will not forget it. This is my Body which
is given for you; This do (...), for my Commemoration.
in remembrance of me.

Which words import as much as though our Savior had said thus:

My beloved Friends and Followers, that you were brought into a low miserable
Condition by the Sin of your first Parents, you cannot but be sensible; and
that you were out of a capacity of freeing your selves from those Chains of
Darkness, your are no less sensible; which dreadful Condition of yours, I your
Savior being touched withal, was highly concerned which way to snatch you out
of this Fire of Affliction; and seeing that nothing less than mine own Blood
could effect it, and that too by being shed upon an accursed and disgraceful
Tree, I resolved to go through that direful Scene, and to offer up my Body as a
Sacrifice for you, of which this Bread which I now break, is a Sign or Emblem.
Now I see you pretend (as indeed you ought) to have a great Value and Esteem
for me your dying Savior, you seem very sonsible of my being clothed with
Misery, and wrinkled with sable Cares for your sakes: And withal, you seem to
be desirous of some opportunity whereby by you may attest your Gratitude and
thanksulness to me for those galling Calamities which I have suffered for your
Redemption: This you seem mighty zealous in, and very desirous of: for my part,
it is not any pleasure to me, nor is it my desire to lay any severe (...).
Plat. Dialog. de reb. divin. p. 255.
Task, or heavy Impositions upon you; but yet I am now about to leave the
World, and to die a bitter, an accursed, and shameful Death for the completing
your Salvation, and I am unwilling, I must confess, that you should lock such
signal Favors as these out of your remembrance, and therefore I resolve to try
whether these your great Pretenses have any thing in them besides Ceremony and
Complement.

I will lay one easy Injunction upon you, which is this: You see that I am now
quitting this earthly Station, and ascending to Heaven from whence I came, so
that I cannot afford you my bodily presence any longer; however, when I have
left this World, all ye that have any hearty respect for me, be so kind as to
meet lovingly together at my House, and eat and drink this representative of my
Body and Blood in my Name at my Table, (...). Constable. Clem. l. 8. c. 12.
still remembering, discoursing of, and laying before you the Agony and bloody
Sweat, the bitter death, Cross, and Passion, and all the meritorious Sufferings
of me your Master and Redeemer. And now certainly you must needs acknowledge
that this is no very severe Penance which I enjoin you; and therefore if (after
all your specious Pretenses) any of you should either wilfully or carelessly
neglect this small piece of Service, which I so earnestly enjoin you, I shall
then really believe that all your Protestations are nothing but Noise and
Shuffling. If you have any Value therefore for this Body of mine, which is
given for you, This do in remembrance of me.

This is the substance of our Savior's words in my Text, from which (thus
briefly explained) I shall endeavor to show you the great reasonableness of a
frequent Communion, and the monstrous Indiscretion, as well as Disobedience, if
we refuse to perform this Injunction of our Holy Jesus, denying or neglecting
to do this in remembrance of him. And this I shall do, first, from the easiness
of the Service, and the slender returns which Christ requires of us for those
great Favors he has conferred upon us.

2ly. From the vast Advantages which will accrue from a frequent reception, in
order to the increasing those Graces which are absolutely necessary to
Salvation.

The first shows us our Duty, the second, the great Benefit of receiving the
Holy Sacrament. The latter of which being a Topic not frequently inculcated,
may perhaps be the more grateful to you for its Novelty.

I begin with the first, viz. to endeavor to show you the great reasonableness
of a frequent Communion from the easiness of the Service, and the slender
returns which Christ requires of us for so great Favors bestowed upon us.

Had our God, like those of the Heathens, required us to Porphyr. de
abstinentia ab esu animal. Plutarch. Pausanius.
eat our own Children in Sacrifice, or by way of Atonement to Clem. Protrepti.
Dionysius Halicarn. lib. 1.
offer up our dearest Friends, or the (...). Justin. Mart. Apol. 1.
noblest of our Relations; had he bid us cut and slash our beloved Flesh, and
bathe our selves in our own Blood; had he bid us lay down our life for him, and
commemorate his Death by rushing our selves into our own: Nay, had he required
but the first Fruit of our Flocks, and of our Herds, of our Oil, and of our
Meal; these perhaps to some would have seemed hard Sayings, and grievous
Commandments; and the kindness of our Redeemer, though inexpressibly great, would
have seemed to have been purchased by us at too dear a rate.

Nay, if we reflect upon the state of our Forefathers, and therein view those
almost (...). Vid. Justin. Mart. in Apol. 2. Eusebius. Them. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
and lib. 5. c. 23. and vid. Weems Exercitat. vol. 2. p. 55.
innumerable Sacrifices and Offerings which were enjoined them under the
Economy of the Law, the lazy humor of our days would repute that too severe a
Task for us now, although our Reward do vastly transcend theirs.

But that the Mercy of God may surmount not only our Merits, but our
Expectation too, we have a Savior who has delivered us not only from the
Curse, but from the Burden of the Law likewise. He has fully absov'd us from
one, and has laid no Injunction upon us in the room of the other. He only
tells us, that he thinks that we have some reason to remember this kindness,
and not to bury his Favors in oblivion; and therefore in order thereunto, he
invites us to come now and then to take a small Repast with him, as a
Memorandum that he has been our Friend and Benefactor.

He requires nothing of us, but that we will let him have our Company at
Supper, there to think, to meditate and discourse of those obliging Favors
which he has long since done for us; the effects of which do yet, and will for
ever continue with us. And now is this such an hard piece of Service? Has not
our Blessed Redeemer merited as much at our hands as this comes to? Does he not
however deserve something as an acknowledgment? And if he do, what less can we
do for him? Should he have left it to our selves to have made choice of some
Method whereby to attest our acceptance, what easier, what cheaper way could we
have invented? It Is but what we do every day at home; Eating and Drinking, and
at a cheaper rate too, it costs us nothing; and therefore if we refuse doing
this which is so mighty facil, it appears we will do nothing for him.

For indeed (as Author of the whole Duty of Man: Laaies Calling, p. 134.
one very well observes) this is not only a Disobedience, but an Unkindness
which strikes not only at the Authority, but at the Love of our Lord, when he
so affects an Union with us, that he creates Mysteries only to effect it; when
he descends even to our Sensuality, and because we want spiritual Appetites,
puts himself within reach of our natural; and as he once veiled his Divinity in
Flesh, so now he Sacramentally veils even that Flesh under the form of our
corporal nourishment, only that he may the more indissolvably unite, yea,
incorporate himself with us. When I say he does all this, we are not only
impious, but inhumane if it will not attract us. Nay farther, when he does all
this upon the most endearing Memory of what he has before done for us, when he
presents himself to our Embraces in the same form wherein he presented himself
to God for our Expiation, when he shows us those Wounds which our Iniquities
made, those Stripes by which we were healed, and that Death by which we are
revived; we shall be strangely rude and impious if we turn our Backs, and
refuse to commemorate so great a Blessing. But,

2ly. If we be not so ingenuous as to be moved by Gratitude and Obedience, let
us be so wise as to do it for Interest, for advantage; and therein let us
consider, that,

1st. Our Faith is hereby confirmed. 2ly. Our Hope is by this strengthened. 3ly.
Our Charity is thereby enlarged. 4ly. Our Thankfulness to God is by this
enflamed: And, 5ly. Our Repentance is hereby promoted.
Which five Topics, if I can make out, may, methinks, be sufficient to evince
the reasonableness of this our Blessed Savior's Institution, and be Engagement
enough to incite us to do this in remembrance of him.

Of these therefore in Order, and,

First, By a Participation of the blessed Sacrament our Faith is confirmed.
It Is, I confess, the Accusation that a Mr. Hales of Eaton's Tracts. p. 57.
Great Man of our own lays upon our Church, that through a too unreasonable
fondness of this great Mystery we abuse it to many ends, amongst which he
reckons this, That we teach, That it confirms our Faith in Christ; whereas
indeed, says he, the receiving of it is a sign of Faith confirmed; and men
come to it, to testify that they do believe, not to procure that they may
believe. But by the favor of that Learned Person, we acknowledge with him,
that it is a sign of Belief, and that no man ought to approach that Sacred
Ordinance (...). Liturg. S. Chrysostom. and S. Jacob. and vid. Chrysostom. Homil. 24. in
1. ad Cor.
without Faith in Christ's Merits: But yet we insist likewise, that there are
degrees of that Faith. For that all habits are increased by being exercised, a
slender Philosopher will inform you; and that this Ordinance requires great
Exercises of the Grace of Faith, a Novice in Divinity will inform you likewise.
For we have in this action the most lively Emblem and Representation of God's
love to Mankind; we see God in the most severe instance of Trial (even that of
sacrificing his own Son) faithfully accomplishing his Word; and therefore what
ground of distrust can we have, that he will not in concerns of an inferior
nature, approve himself to be a God that cannot lie, nor deny himself? How can
we in any case distrust his Mercy, or suspect his Bounty, when in the highest
instance we have experienced his Fidelity? If therefore our dependence on the
Almighty Goodness begin to faint, or our Faith begin to stagger; if the
greatness of our Sins deter us from the hopes of his Mercy, let us in the
Blessed Sacrament view him shedding the Blood of his own Son to advance our
Interest, and to redeem us from the Curse, Gal. 3.13. and then certainly we
cannot choose but argue thus with the Romans 8. v. 32.
Apostle, If God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us, how shall
be not also with him freely give us all things?

2ly. Our Hope is by this strengthened.

There is nothing which does more deject a considering man, than the Thoughts
of his fallen Condition: For what can such Meditations suggest less unto him,
than the frowns of an angry God, together with the fatal loss of happiness in
this World, and eternal Felicity in the next. And such dreadful Apprehensions
as these must needs ruffle and discompose our Spirits, and cause a Regret and
Dispondency through the whole man. Now when our Souls are put upon the rack by
such tormenting Fears: when the heinousness of our Sins reminds us of the
sadness of our Condition: When our Hope is well nigh lost, and Desperation has
almost swallowed us up, will not the sight of Christ crucified recruit our
dying Hopes, and summon together our scattered Spirits? May we not entertain
comfortable hopes of Mercy, when even before our Eyes we see the Lamb of God
groaning, bleeding, dying for our Sins? Will it not highly encourage us to
consider, that those Agonies by which our Sins were expiated, were sufficient
to content the most rigorous Severity? Must it not needs abate the Wounds of
our Conscience, and diminish out Fears whilst we are Eyewitnesses of his
Crucifixion, and do in the blessed Sacrament even Behold the Lamb of God that
took away the Sins of the World? John 1.19.

'Twould certainly be a disparagement to the Efficacy of our Lord's Passion,
should we after all this (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 5.
despair of Mercy, be utterly disconsolate, and thereby be moved away from the
hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. But,

3ly. Our Charity is by this enlarged, and that,

1st. To the whole Church. 2ly. To each particular Member.
First, Our Love and Charity is by this enlarged to the whole Church. It Is
observed by Glanvil on the Sacrament, p. 2.
one, That the neglect of the Sacrament has occasioned not only the
Debauchery, but the Division of the times; and that the frequent observance of
it, would reduce us not only to Sobriety, but to Union likewise. And in the
Council. Apostol. (...). Can. Apost. 9.
Infancy of Christianity well as Council. Antioch. Council. Agath. (...). Syn.
Antioch. Can. 2.
some Ages since those Persons were looked upon as Disturbers of the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Church, who refused these sacred Mysteries. And the word
(...), which the Greek Fathers do so frequently use for the Blessed Sacrament,
seems to intimate no less than a gathering together of Christians in Love and
Amity, to return thanks for a common Benefit. And that this Interpretation is
genuine, we may reasonably guess from that Practice of the Primitive Christians
of sending some part of the Analects or Remains to absent Friends, though of
other Parishes, as Pledges and Tokens of Love and Agreement in the Unity of the
same Faith, as Hist. Eccl. lib. 5 c. 26.
Eusebius tells us in Irenaeus his Epistle to Pope Victor; which Constitution
continued in force till it was interdicted by the (...). Can. 14.
Council of Laodicea, which was after the middle of the fourth Century. And
although that Canon was for some reasons abrogated, yet all along those who
refused to join in such sacred Assemblies, did (in the opinion of all good men)
tacitly accuse themselves to be Enemies to the Church, and (...), etc. Ignat.
in Epist. ad Ephesians.
Renegado's to Christianity. And this was the very reason why, (as (...). Apol.
2. p. 97.
Justin Martyr tells us) the absent in his time communicated as well as the
present; each absent Parishioner having the consecrated Elements carried home
to him, to testify, that although some important Affairs, or bodily Indisposition
intervened, yet they were of the same Mind, and of the same Heart, Acts 4.32.
Nay, so absolute a necessity they thought there was for the reception of the
Holy Sacrament, that in one of the Canons of Timotheus sometimes Patriarch of
Alexandria, you may see these words, Vid. Mede's Works, p. 30.
(...). If any of the faithful be a Demoniack, i.e. a Lunatic or Madman, he
ought (in his lucida intervalla) to partake of the holy Mysteries. For this is
the great Qui in natali Domini, Paschate and Pentecoste non communicant
Catholici non credantur, nec inter Catholicos habeantur. Council. Agathen. Can.
18.
Test of our Religion, and the only (...) that can give any Evidence that we
are none of those that cause Divisions amongst us, Romans 16.17.

But, besides all this, methinks when we see the Spouse of the Church
sacrificing himself for the Peace and Unity of it; when we see himself bequeath
this as a Legacy with his dying breath, John. 14.27.
My Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. When we hear him
enjoining it to his, Mar. 9.50. Romans 12.18. Heb. 12 14.
Church, and see him bleeding to accomplish it, we cannot for shame make those
Wounds wider by our Divisions, and only for an (...), something perhaps in it
self indifferent, rent the seamless Coat of Christ. No, we are Dissenters from
the Harum and aliarum ejusmodi disciplinarum, si legem expostules Scripturarum,
nullam invedies, sed Traditio praetenditur auctrix, consuetudo conservatrix,
and fides observatrix. Tertul. in lib. de Coron. Militis.
excellent Rules of Primitive Christianity, if for such niceties as these, we
play away the Peace of the Church; and it is a great sign that our Wounds are
very putrid, if the Blood of Christ himself will not cement them.

2ly. The receiving of the Sacrament is a strong Engagement to the Practice of
Charity toward every particular Person.

And this Charity I shall branch out into 1st. Love. 2ly. Beneficence.


And first, That the receiving of the Sacrament must needs enhance our Love one
to another, and unite us with the Bond of Peace and Charity, cannot be doubted
by any who will but give himself time to consider, that in Holy Writ it is
entitled a Jude 12.
Love-feast, and a 1 Cor. 11.
Feast of Charity; and pursuant to this in the beginning of this Christian
Service, the Deacon was anciently wont to cry, (...). Let no man have ought
against his Brother; and then followed the Osculum sanctum, the Kiss of
Reconciliation. And thus the Fathers of the first Council of Nice took
Sacrificium purum, as appears Canon 5. where they expound (...), to be that
which is offerred, (...), all Malice and Hypocrisy being laid aside; agreeable
to that of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5.23. When thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, etc. go first and be reconciled to thy Brother, etc. And indeed, how it
can be otherwise, I do not well see; for we have there the Emblem of a
pardoning God, and a loving Savior; we there see Mercy triumphing over
Justice, and a compassionate Jesus advancing our Felicity beyond our Hopes. And
can we then insist upon the slender nicety of an offense, rigorously exacting
Satisfaction from our Fellow Servants, when we hear our great Lord say, I
forgave thee all thou owe? Matthew. 18.28. Can we do less than pardon those
little Reproaches and Indignities from our Brother, when we know (...). Epict.
Enchir. c. 48.
we deserve far worse, and yet see that our innocent Redeemer when he was
reviled, reviled not again? 1 Pet. 2.23. How can we do less than love him for
whom Christ died? Romans 14.15. And since we see that God so loved us, as to lay
down his life for us, surely we must needs conclude with the Apostle, 1 John
4.11. That we ought also to love one another. But above all, how can we who are
by the natural frame of our Constitutions, Hiero. in carm. Pythag.
subject to the same Passions, do otherwise than forgive our Brother, when it is
upon that very condition that we are in this Sacrament to receive our own
Remission, Matthew. 18.33, 35.

2ly. Our Beneficence is hereby likewise enlarged.

For what can more create a Respect and Esteem in me for my indigent Brother,
than to see in the Sacrament Omnipotence it self veiled with Misery, and clad
with scanty Poverty? to see my Redeemer disrobed of his Glory, and (as it were)
sanctifying a poor disgraceful Condition by his own Longum iter per praecepta,
breve and efficax per exempla. Sen. Ep. 6.
Example? How can I contemn my poor Neighbor, when I see my Redeemer and my
God willingly for my sake embrace the same state? In a word, How can it but
open the Bowels of my Commiseration, when I consider, that had it not been for
one (...), 2 Cor. 8.9.
poor Beggar, I my self had been eternally miserable?

Such Considerations as these, no doubt, the Apostles and Primitive Christians
had, when they were so (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 98.
universally charitable as to seek out, and send Relief to every indigent
Member. Agreeable to which, we retain an (...). Just. Apol. 2.99.
ancient laudable Constitution of contributing at the Lords Table to the
necessities of our Brethren; plainly intimating, that we think that a mighty
proper season, and a most convenient place for such acts of Piety, as if we
there see our Redeemer's low Condition, and were sensibly affected with his
Indigency; and therefore since it was too late to do it to himself, yet we were
resolved by way of Gratitude and Obedience to relieve him in his poor Members,
which he takes as done to himself; for Matthew. 25.35.
I was an hungry, and ye fed me, etc. inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these
my poor Members, ye did it unto me.

And indeed, were there nothing in it at first farther than the bare Offering,
yet I dare be bold to say, That the frequent Practice of it would beget so
great an Esteem and Value for the action, that it would upon all occasions
exert it self. For Humanity and Beneficence are so suitable to our Nature, that
they win upon the Soul by every repeated Act, and do insensibly ingratiate
themselves in our Affections by an habitual Practice. But then they must do
much more so, if that be true, which an ingenious Ladies Calling, 139.
modern Writer of our own asserts, That there is not in all the Mystery of
Godliness, in all the Economy of the Gospel, so expedite, so infallible a
means of the growth in any Grace, as a frequent Participation of this blessed
Sacrament.

For, Fourthly, Our Thankfulness to God is by this enflamed.

And for evidence of this, we need go no farther than to look into the design
of its Institution, Ecclesia immolat in corpore Christi sacrificium laudis.
Aug. lib. 1. in adv. leg. ^^ p. 20.
which our Church-Catechism tells us, was for a thankful Remembrance of the
Death of Christ, and of the Benefits which we receive thereby. And accordingly
St. Cyril tells us, That when the People began to bring their Offering to the
Altar, the Priest was to say, Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5. Chrysostom. in Hom. 18. in 2
Cor. and Liturg. Basil.
(...), Lift up your Hearts: To which they answered, (...), We lift them up
unto the Lord. (...), Let us give thanks unto the Lord. The People answered,
(...), It is meet and just we should do so. Which Versicles our English Liturgy
in her Communion Service does (you know) without any alteration retain to this
day, to denote to us how proper a season that has been thought in all Ages of
Christianity, to offer up a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving. And for this
reason, no doubt, it is frequently called by the Fathers, the Eucharist, to
intimate, that as it is a Sign of that second Covenant which God made with man,
so it ought to be received with (...). Justin. Apost. 2. (...), etc. Liturg. S.
Marc. in Eccl. Alexandr.
Blessing and Thanksgiving. But besides, methinks it is preposterous to
imagine, that this action which assaults our very Senses, and strikes our Heart
by the most lively representation of God's greatest Mercy, should not (if we
have any Gratitude) move us to a cheerful acknowledgment.

To see God (as one expresses it) send down his very Bowels amongst us to
witness his Compassion, to satisfy for us by his own Death, and attach himself
for our liberty, to see our Redeemer and our Friend clad with Beggary and
Disgrace, that we may thereby abound in Wealth and Honor; To see him executed
on a Cross as a Malefactor and a Slave, that we may thereby be freed from the
dominion of Satan; to see him humbly stoop from the Joys of Heaven, that we may
be nobly advanced thither; to see him who knew no Sin, to be made Sin, and a
Curse for us, and that not whilst we were his Friends, but when we were in open
hostility with him: Vid. Dr. Barrow's Passion Sermon.
These are such Acts of kindness, as none could, none would perform, but he
whose Goodness is as extensive as is his Greatness; and therefore if we have
any spark of Thankfulness in us, the visible Proof of these things must needs
blow it up into the Ardours of Affection, and make us more and more mindful of,
and thankful to that God that saved us.

But then when we farther consider our own Demerits, and the miserableness of
our former Condition, being Romans 3.9.
under Sin, Romans 5.16, 18.
under Condemnation, Gal. 3.10.
under the Curse: When we are reminded of the consequent of these things, and
consider that nothing but that blood which we see now shed, could expiate for
us; and when we withal consider that there are still many thousands, who,
whilst we are surrounded with the Sun of Righteousness, are wrapped up in
Darkness and Idolatry; that they starve with Hunger, or surfeit with
Profaneness, whilst we are partaking of that Bread that came from Heaven.
Certainly such Thoughts as these will nobly advance our Thankfulness, and make
us daily more and more to thirst after those Eucharistick Bowls, and fill our
Hearts with passionate Eulogies to the Author of our Redemption.

Fifthly, Our Repentance is hereby promoted.

We usually hate and detest the fawning Treachery of Judas that betrayed our
Savior, the black Suggestions of the Jewish Priests that did impeach him, the
rude Carriage of the Populacy that did abusively insult over him; we abhor
those poisonous Tongues that reviled him, and those bloody Hands that smote
him. How can we then reflect on those Sufferings which are there represented to
us, without extreme Displeasure against those Sins of ours which were the
occasion of them? For, alas! the Jews were but the Instruments of his Passion;
the long train of our Iniquities were the chief, the real Actors of that
direful Tragedy. Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities. Romans
4.25.
He was delivered for our Offenses, and became a Gal. 3.13.
Curse for us; that is, It was we, who by our Sins did impeach, did adjudge,
did sentence him to death. 'Twas our Obscenity which besmeared his glorious
Face with Spittle, and our profane Oaths, Cursing and Blasphemy were the false
Witnesses that forged the black Indictment against his sacred Person. 'Twas our
Wantonness that exposed him naked; and our Surfeiting and Drunkenness that gave
him Vinegar and Gall to drink. 'Twas the Virulency of our Psalm. 57.4.
Tongues which was the Spear that gored his precious Side, and our deep Sleep
of Sin made him give up the Ghost. And can we then choose but hate those Sins
which were the perfidious Betrayers of our dearest Friend? Shall we not utterly
detest those unjust Slanderers, who have abused the Lord of Righteousness?
Shall we not for ever abhor those barbarous Murderers that have slain our own
Brother?

I remember it is recorded in Hist. Imper. Romans a Pedro Mexia. Vit. Jul. Caes.
ancient Story, that when Antony was in a Funeral Oration rhetorically copious
in persuading the Romans to revenge the Death of Caesar, he expatiates of the
great excellency of the Person, shows that he was crowned with Valor, Wisdom,
and Industry; recounts his many Victories, shows his Conduct, and the several
Stratagems he made use of, aecyphers the vast kindness he had for that
flourishing City, and how he had attested it by Vid. Testamentum Caesaris in
Pedro Mexia.
ample Legacies at his Death, as well as by his Courage and Resolution whilst
he lived; and that after all this, he should be barbarously murdered by his own
Senators, was a Crime so heinous, that the Gods themselves stood amazed at the
horribleness of the Fact. All this they hear, though with a mixture of Wrath and
Pity, yet with somewhat of Patience. But when he shows them the Princely
Vestment, and in it the Holes and the Blood which were occasioned by those
murdering Instruments; When they see the Purple changed into Scarlet, and read
the violence of his Enemies by the number of his Wounds which they see in his
Garment; This adds Wings to their passionate Resentment, and spurs forward
their enflamed Indignation, they presently snatch Instruments of Revenge out of
his own Funeral Pile, and destroy, if not the Persons, the Habitations of the
Murderers. Now to being this to our selves: We may perhaps hear or read the
Passion of our Savior elegantly decypher'd, and have the greatness of his
Sufferings, and the vastness of his Love described to us with all the
Flourishes of Rhetoric, and not be much transported at the Discourse: But can
we in the Blessed Sacrament see his Wounds gaping, his Blood pouring forth, and
his Flesh broken in pieces, without Indignation against our selves, who were
the direful Actors of this Scene? No sure, if we have any love for our dying
Lord, or any respect for a crucified Redeemer; if we have any regard to the
Sufferings of a beloved Friend, or any kindness for our greatest Benefactour,
unless we design to re-act Judas his part, and to crucify afresh the Lord of
Life, Heb. 6.6. (...). Orig. con. Cells. lib. 5.272.
Unless, whilst we boast our selves Christians, we design to practice and
espouse the manner of the Jews; Briefly; unless all our Pretenses to Religion
and Christianity be but Ceremony and Complement, we shall at such a spectacle
as this, be stricken with hatred of our Sins, and a full purpose to decline
them for the time to come.

But if we do not proceed thus far, there will however by our receiving be one
step made toward a new Life: For let the Debauchees of the Age disregard the
Methods of Salvation, and put the evil day never so far from them, yet if upon
any account (be it Political or other) they appear at the Wedding of the Lamb,
they dare not approach without something of a Wedding Garment, some more than
ordinary Preparation for this great Interview; there will be at least some few
Prayers, and faint Resolutions, some superficial Repentance, or Ahab-like
Humiliation; and who knows but these small beginnings, may, like the Cloud of
Elijah, overspread the whole man? Who knows but this almost-Convert may find so
much Pleasure and inward Comfort from this interval of Impiety, as may occasion
a Perseverance? For indeed these weak Intentions do usually continue for some
few days after they have received; for the most stout-hearted Sinner cannot so
far conquer his Fears, as to rush from the Lord's Table into a Brothel-house,
or to remove from the Cup of Blessing to the Cup of Devils. No man, I dare say,
is such an accomplished Sinner, as to resolve, when he has a view of his
crucified Savior, that he will by his Sins and Impieties, recrucifie that Lord
of Life. No; Men have however, good Resolutions at such a time as this: It Is at
least like Seed sown upon a Rock, where it has some Earth; and who knows but a
peculiar influence of Heaven may enable it to bring forth Fruit? However there
will accrue from this piecemeal Preparation this advantage, that it will in
some measure bring us to a recollection of our selves, and for some little time
stop the career of our Sin, which is always the first Fruits of Repentance.

Thus having, I hope, plainly convinced you of the great reasonableness of this
our Blessed Savior's Institution, and shown you the great inducements which we
have of doing this in remembrance of him; and that, if not as we are obliged by
Duty, yet as it tends so vastly for our Interest, and the improvement of those
Graces, without a large share of which, it is impossible for us ever to see
God; I should now proceed to draw some few Inferences by way of Application;
but before I do that, give me leave to declare, that I desire not to be
mistaken in what I have already delivered, as if I went about to encourage men
to receive the Holy Sacrament remissly, or without preparation. No, the sum of
what I have said is only this; That if my great Lord and Master absolutely
command me without restriction, to do such or such a piece of Service for him,
I think I more highly affront him in the careless neglect and never attempting
of it, than I can do in the performing of it, though there be some Defects, some
Sphalmata and Errata in the doing of it; I had better show my good Will and
Obedience to a known Command, though I am not thoroughly cleans'd according to
the Purification of the Sanctuary, than disavow my blessed Redeemer by a
thorough neglect of so positive a Command. And now what I have to say by way of
Application, shall (lest I should abuse your time) be summed up briefly in
these two Inferences.

First, That the dark Heathen World may more reasonably expect Salvation, than
those Christians who wilfully neglect the holy Sacrament.

It Is St. Paul's Rule not to judge those that are without the Churches: But yet
if we adhere to the common square of human Opinion, we may justly conclude him
to be in a better Condition as to his future state, who has lived up to that
shadow of Reason and Conscience, which was the bare dictate of Nature, than he
who has known the way of Truth, and yet has departed from it. Sins of Ignorance
are not clad in so black a dye, as those which are accompanied with a stiff
premeditated Knowledge: Nor are we so angry at the impertinent peevish actions
of little Children, as at the resolute Affronts of him who falls not under the
denomination of a Minor. And can we then judge less, but that God will more
unkindly resent the wilful Abuses and Neglects of Mankind, than the frailties
of human Infirmity, or the mistakes of blind Ignorance, or a misguided Zeal? He
does not desire to reap where he has not sown, but where his hand has been
plentiful in dispersing the Seeds of a pure Knowledge and enlightened Religion,
there he expects a large increase of his Glory, or else the end of that People
shall be Fire and a Curse. Now have we not read and heard of the superstitious
bravery of the Pagan World, in the Adoration they pay to their Gods and Pagods?
And can we then refrain blushing at the lazy temper of a profane Christian, who
will do nothing for the sake of his Redeemer? Can we without disdain against
our selves see them rigorously oppose Nature it self in offering their own
Bodies in Sacrifice to appease their supposed angry Deities? And can we at the
same time so highly abuse our Maker, as to deny a performance to those
Injunctions which he has laid upon us? Could the Pagan World be satisfied, that
their false Gods required nothing of them but what was mighty facile in its
observance, with what Io's of Joy would they receive such glad tidings, and
readily endeavor a performance? And then may we not highly presume that they
will rise up in Judgment against, and condemn that People (be they who they
will) that will not do as much in the Worship of the God of Israel? who will
not approach his Temple, though at hand, and in the corners of the Streets,
whilst the dark Pagan cheerfully undertakes the severity of a long and tedious
Pilgrimage, who will not fall down in 'H (...). Clem. Alexand. lib. 7. Stromat.
And (...).
a commemorative Sacrifice to the Holy Jesus, whilst, the other offers not only
whole Hecatombs of Bulls and Goats, but even sacrifice their own
Infant-offspring, the Fruit of their Body, for the Sin of their Soul?

And this is the first Inference I make, That the dark Heathen may more
reasonably expect Salvation, than those Christians who wilfully neglect the
Holy Sacrament.

Secondly, We may, from what has been said, infer, That if we neglect this
easy Injunction, we do thereby sufficiently denote to the World, that we value
our worldly Interests, our Pleasures, or our Profits beyond the means of Grace,
and the hopes of Glory.

For let our Employment be what it will, do we not upon all occasions fit and
prepare our Affairs by a previous consideration, and put them into such a
posture as shall tend the most to our Advantage? Do we suffer every little
diversion to cut off the entail of our Profit? Will the Northern Blasts of a
severe Winter, or the scorching Sunbeams of the Dog Days, detain the Merchant
from his Voyage and the Exchange, or the Tradesman from his Market? Will a few
drops of Rain, or a visit from a Friend, divert any of us from the prosecution
of a good Bargain? And yet all and any of these are, we think, excuse enough
for our not coming to the Sacrament. I am not worthy, says one, and therefore
I cannot come. What man, I pray you, ever used the like expression, when he had
the tender of a fair Estate, or some worldly Emolument? I have not time, says a
second, to prepare my self, and may not come without my Wedding Garment. But
have thou not at the same time extravagantly wasted as many opportunities inter
vinum and oleum, or betwixt the Comb and the Glass, the dressing thy decaying
Body, as would, had they been well employed, have fitted and prepared thy Soul?
My Wife, my Husband, or my Child is sick and indisposed, and therefore, says a
third, I cannot leave them. Would this really keep thee from the Prosecution of
thy worldly affairs? Would thou not beg thy Friends pardon for some few hours
absence, being to make a very advantageous purchase, or to take possession of
some large Estate? Would thou quit thine Interest rather than thy
Compl^sance, and die poor and a Beggar, rather than ^e thought uncivil or
ungenteel? In a word, let us put such Interrogatories as these to our selves,
and if our Consciences answer them in the negative, we must needs confess our
selves inexcusable, whilst that which will not palliate our neglect of any
worldly Entertainment, shall yet be thought excuse enough for our rude and
negligent behavior toward the Son of God. To conclude; we had much better be
plain and ingenuous in the matter, and declare once for all, That we will not
obey the Commands of our dying Savior, than thus to shuffle, and make pitiful
Evasions in a matter so momentous. Our Damnation would be much easier, would we
so far divest the Hypocrite, as to declare, that we would not serve the Lord;
rather than to demean our selves under the pretext of Christ's Disciples; and
yet to tax him of such severity, as to declare by our continual neglect, that
we cannot do this in remembrance of him. To whom with the Father and Holy
Spirit, three Persons and one God, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor,
Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

