COPY Of the SPEAKERS LETTER To the VICE CHANCELLOR AND The Heads of Houses of
the UNIVERSITY of Oxford, together with the PROTESTATION and DECLARATION with
it.



OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Anno Dom. 1642.

TO THE VICE-CHANCELLOVR, and the HEADS of HOUSES of the University of OXFORD.
Mr Vice-chauncellour,
IT is now some months since that the Protestation taken by the Lords and
House of Commons, was sent down into the Country with an expectation that it
should be generally taken throughout the Kingdom, for a Testimony of their
good Concurrence with the Parliament. But through the remissness of some of
those that had the care of recommending it to others, very many there be that
have not hitherto taken it.

Now the House of Commons (having discovered many dangerous designs, plotted
against the Parliament, and especially, that of the fourth of this instant
January, which had it taken effect, would have stricken, not only at the
Privileges, but the very being of Parliaments, as will more appear by the
Declaration herewith sent unto you, which the House desires you to publish
through all parts of the University of Oxford,) have thought fit once again
to recommend the taking of this Protestation, and have therefore commanded me
in their name to desire you, and all, and every the Heads of Houses in the same
University, to meet together in one place, as soon as possibly you may, and
there to take the Protestation your selves, and then to call together all, and
every the Masters, Scholars, and Servants of the same University, being of the
age of 18. years or upwards, and tender unto them the Protestation, to be
taken in the presence of you, the said Mr Uice-chancelour, and the said Heads
of Houses; and to take the names both of those that do take, and do refuse to
take the same Protestation, and to return them unto the Burgesses serving for
that University, before the 20th day of February next, wherein the House
desires your greatest care and diligence, as a matter very much importing the
good, both of the King and Kingdom, which being all I have in Command, I rest

8o. Febr. 1641. Your very loving friend William Lenthall
SPEAKER.
Die Mercurij: 5o. Maij. 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
That the Preamble, together with the Protestation, which the Members of this
House made the third of May, shall be forthwith Printed, and the Copies Printed
brought to the Clark of the said House, to attest under his hand, to the end
that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses may send them down to the Sheriffs
and Justices of Peace of the several Shires, and to the Citizens and Burgesses
of the several Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, respectively. And the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are to intimate unto the Shires, Cities,
Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, with what willingness all the Members of this
House made this Protestation: And further to signify, that as they justify the
taking of it in themselves, so they cannot but approve it in all such as shall
take it.

WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parliament,
finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests
and Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more
boldly and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and
danger of the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion in His Majesty's
Dominions established: And finding also that there have been, and having just
cause to suspect that there still are, even during this sitting in Parliament,
endeavors to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most
pernicious and wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots, and Conspiracies: And that
the long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And
that diverse Innovations and superstitions have been brought into the Church;
multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions, Iealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and His people, a Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the Bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown, and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of Jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force
to bring to pass those wicked Counsels, Have therefore thought good to join
our selves in a Declaration of our united Affections and Resolutions, and to
make this ensuing Protestation.

I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; As also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Counsels, Plots,
Conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of anything in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
Honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation.

Whereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House,
concerning the meaning of these words contained in the Protestation lately made
by the Members of this House, (viz:) The true reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against all Popery and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same doctrine; This
House does declare, That by those words, was and is meant, only the public
Doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and
Popish Innovations; And that the said words are not to be extended to the
maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline, or Government, nor of any Rites
or Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

H. ELSYNG. Cler. PARL. De COM.

A Declaration of the House of Commons, touching the late breach of their
Privileges; And for the Vindication thereof, and of diverse members of the said
House.
WHEREAS the Chambers, Studies, and Trunks, of Master Denzill Hollis, Sir
Arthur Haslerigg, Master John Pym, Master John Hampden, and Master William
Strode Esquires, Members of the House of Commons, upon Monday the 3. of this
instant January, by color of His Majesty's warrant have been sealed up by Sir
William Killigrew, and Sir William Flemen, and others, which is not only
against the Privilege of Parliament, but the Common liberty of every Subject:
Which said Members afterward, the same day were under the like color, by
Sergeant Francis, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, contrary to all
former Presidents demanded of the Speaker, sitting in the House of Commons, to
be delivered unto him, that he might Arrest them of high Treason. And whereas,
afterward the next day, His Majesty in His Royal Person, came to the same
House attended with a great multitude of men armed in a warlike manner, with
Halberts, Swords, and Pistolls, who came up to the very door of the House, and
placed themselves there, and in other places, and passages near the said House,
to the great terror and disturbance of the Members then sitting; and according
to their duty in a peaceable, and orderly manner, treating of the great
affairs of England and Ireland. And His Majesty having placed himself in the
Speakers Chair, demanded of them the Persons of the said Members to be
delivered unto him, which is a high Breach of the Rights, and Privileges of
Parliament, and Inconsistent with the Liberties, and Freedom thereof. And
whereas, afterward His Majesty did issue forth several Warrants to diverse
Officers, under His own hand, for the apprehension of the Persons of the said
Members, which by Law he cannot do; there being not all this time, any Legal
charge or accusation, or due Process of Law issued against them, nor any
pretense of charge made known to that House; all which are against the
Fundamental Liberties of the Subject, and the Rights of Parliament. Whereupon
we are necessitated, according to our duty, to declare; And we do hereby
declare, that if any Person shall Arrest M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, M.
Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, or any of them, or any other Member of
Parliament, by pretense or color of any Warrant issuing out from the King
only, is guilty of the Breach of the Liberties of the Subject, and of the
Privilege of Parliament, and a public enemy to the Commonwealth. And that
the Arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or of any other Member of
Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a legal Proceeding against
them, and without consent of that House, whereof such Person is a Member, is
against the liberty of the Subject, and a Breach of Privilege of Parliament;
And the Person which shall Arrest any of these Persons, or any other Member of
the Parliament, is declared a public enemy of the Commonwealth.
Notwithstanding all which we think fit, further to declare that we are so far
from any endeavors to protect any of our Members, that shall be in due manner
prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament for Treason, or any other misdemeanors, That none
shall be more ready and willing then we our selves, to bring them to a speedy,
and due trial, being sensible that it equally imports us, as well to see
Justice done against them that are criminous, as to defend the just Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects, and Parliament of England.

And whereas upon several Examinations taken the seventh day of this instant
January, before the Committee appointed by the House of Commons, to sit in
London, it did fully appear, that many Soldiers, Papists, and others, to the
number of about 500. came with His Majesty on Tuesday last, to the said House
of Commons, armed with Swords, Pistolls, and other Weapons; and diverse of them
pressed to the door of the said House, thrust away the door Keepers, and placed
themselves, between the said door, and the ordinary attendants of His Majesty;
holding up their Swords, and some holding up their Pistolls ready cocked near
the said door; and saying, I am a good Marksman, I can hit right I warrant you,
and they not suffering the said door, according to the custom of Parliament to
be shut, but said they would have the door open, and if any opposition were
against them, they made no question, but they should make their party good, and
that they would maintain their party; and when several Members of the House of
Commons were coming into the House, their attendants desiring that Room might
be made for them, some of the said Soldiers answered, A Pox of God confound
them, and others said, A Pox take the house of Commons, let them come and be
hanged, what a do is here with the House of Commons; and some of the said
Soldiers did likewise violently assault, and by force disarme some of the
Attendants, and servants of the Members of the House of Commons, waiting in the
Room next the said House, and upon the Kings return out of the said House, many
of them by wicked oaths, and otherwise, expressed much discontent, that some
Members of the said House, for whom they came were not there; and others of
them said, when comes the word, and no word being given at His Majesty's coming
out, they cried a lane, a lane; afterward some of them being demanded, what
they thought the said company intended to have done, answered, That
questionless in the posture they were set, if the word had been given, they
should have fallen upon the House of Commons, and have cut all their throats.
Upon all which we are of opinion, that it is sufficiently proved, that the
coming of the said Soldiers, Papists, and others with His Majesty to the House
of Commons on Tuesday last, being the fourth of this instant January, in the
manner aforesaid, was to take away some of the Members of the said House; and
if they should have found opposition, or denial, then to have fallen upon the
said House in a hostile manner. And we do hereby declare that the same was a
traitorous design against the King and Parliament. And whereas the said M
Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, upon report of
the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists, and others in the warlike and
hostile manner, aforesaid, did with the approbation of the House absent
themselves from the service of the House, for avoiding the great, and many
inconveniences, which otherwise apparently might have happened: Since which time
a printed paper in the form of a Proclamation, bearing date the sixth day of
this instant January, has issued out for the apprehending, and imprisoning of
them, Therein suggesting that through the conscience of their own guilt, they
were absent and fled, not willing to submit themselves to Justice; We do
farther declare that the said printed paper is false, scandalous and illegal,
and that notwithstanding the said printed paper, or any warrant issued out, or
any other matter yet appearing against them, or any of them, they may and ought
to attend the service of the said House of Commons, and the several Committees
now on foot. And that it is lawful for all persons whatsoever to lodge,
harbor or converse with them, or any of them; And whosoever shall be
questioned for the same, shall be under the Protection and Privilege of
Parliament.

And we do further declare, That the publishing of several Articles
purporting a form of a charge of high Treason against the Lord Kimbolton, one
of the Members of the Lords House, and against the said, M. Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, by Sir William Killigrew, Sir
William Flemen, and others in the Innes of Court, and elsewhere in the Kings
Name, was a high Breach of the Privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to
His Majesty, and His Government: A seditious Act manifestly tending to the
subversion of the Peace of the Kingdom, and an injury, and dishonor to the
said Members, there being no legal charge or accusation against them.

That the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject so
violated and broken, cannot be fully and sufficiently Vindicated, unless His
Majesty will be graciously pleased, to discover the names of those Persons, who
advised His Majesty to issue out Warrants, for the sealing of the Chambers, and
Studies of the said Members, to send a Sergeant at Arms to the House of
Commons, to demand their said Members, to issue out several Warrants under His
Majesty's own hand, to apprehend the said Members. His Majesty's coming
thither, in His own Royal Person. The publishing of the said Articles, and
printed paper in the form of a Proclamation against the said Members in such
manner as is before declared; To the end that such Persons may receive condign
punishment.

And this House does further declare, That all such persons as have given any
Council, or endeavored to set or maintain division or dislike, between the
King and Parliament, or have Listed their names, or otherwise entered into any
combination or agreement, to beayding or assisting to any such council or
endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do, or that shall do any the
things above mentioned, And shall not forthwith discover the same to either
House of Parliament, or the Speaker of either of the said Houses respectively,
and disclaim it; are declared public enemies of the State and Peace of this
Kingdom, and shall be enquired of, and proceeded against accordingly.

Die Lunae 17. Januarii. 1641.
It is this day ordered, by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith published in Print.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. De Com.




