THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER SENT BY Mr SPEAKER To the Sheriffs of several
Counties.

NAMELY: Worcester, Cambridge, Huntington, Lecester, North-hampton, Warwick,
AND Rutland.


Which have not as yet paid in the Poll-Money.

With the Copy of an Order sent from the LORDS and COMMONS now assembled in
PARLIAMENT to these several Counties before-named, for the speedy
transportation of that Money to York for disbanding of his Majesty's Army.

And they that are found faulty, shall incur both the ill-opinion and severe
punishment of both Houses of Parliament.

August 24. 1641.

Printed for John Thomas, MDCXLI.

A LETTER SENT FROM Msr SPEAKER TO THE SHERIFFS OF SEVERAL COUNTIES, By the
Command of the HOUSE of COMMONS.
THe House of Commons did hope that in so great a time, and so visible a
Necessity of present money, no private person, much less any public
Officers, would have bin so slow, in contributing their assistance to the
Poll-money, but by the not coming in of this, from the slow and slender
coming of it, from others; together with more particular Informations; We are
forced to believe, that both Payers, Assesso^^^, Collectors, and Returners, are
in fault concerning it.

I am therefore comm^nded, to let you know from the House, that as you tender
your own, or the public good, you make all possible haste in returning such
moneys as you have ready, and that you make known to the Commissioners, that
(if we be not by them prevented) the House intends to make a Revenue of the
Assesments, to the end, that wherein the Assessors either through partiality;
should be found either to have left any uncharged, whom the Act charge, or to
have charged any lower then they are charged by the Act: those that should be
found faulty, may incur both the ill opinion, and severe punishment of
Parliament, as Contemners of the greatest Authority, in a time of greatest
necessity; and by that Contempt, being causes of the Armies less speedy
disbanding, to the danger as well as the unsupportable, and unnecessary Expense
of this Kingdom.

AUGUST the 24. 1641.
August the 24. 164^. AN ORDER OF The Lords and Commons in Parliament,
concerning the more speedy Transportation of the Poll-money to York, for
disbanding of His Majesty's Army.
WHEREAS it is enacted, that the Sheriffs of the Counties, and Cities
hereafter named, shall amongst others, pay such sums of Money, as they shall
receive for Poll-money, to the Treasurer, in the Act named in the Chamberlaines
Office, within the City of London.

Now forasmuch, as their long delay, and slow payment is very burdensome and
dangerous to the Kingdom; because the Kings Army in the North, by this means
remains undisbanded, to the insupportable charge of the Commonwealth.

For the more speedy relief of the Kingdom, the LORDS and COMMONS in this
Parliament assembled, do hereby order and ordain, that the several Sheriffs
of Worcester, Cambridge, Huntington, Liecester, North-hampton, Rutland,
Warwick, and of the Cities that are Counties within those Countries, and
every of them respectively: shall forthwith upon notice of this Order, send
such Moneys now in their hands, or shall come to his hand, or any of their
hands respectively, or to the hands of his under Sheriff or Deputy, or to the
hands of any of their under Sheriffs, or Deputies, respectively under a
sufficient Guard and Convoy to the City of York, to pay the same to Sir
William Vindall, Knight, Treasurer of his Majesty's Army, now thee residing,
taking his Acquittance for the same: which Acquittance the said several
Sheriffs respectively shall send to the Chamber of London; and that the said
Treasurer in the Act named, shall accept of the same, as if so much Money were
paid in the specie, and shall deliver an Acquittance or Acquittances for the
same, which shall be as sufficient a discharge to the said several Sheriffs,
as if the Money had bin paid there.

And the said Treasurer of the Army, is hereby required, that he shall as
speedily as he may, after the receipt of any such sums from any of the
Sheriffs aforementioned, send up to the said Treasurer of the Chamberlain of
London, present and distinct Certificates of the same.

(...) is further ordered, that the several Sheriffs of the Counties through
which these Moneys do pass, shall provide a sufficient Convoy to guard the
same through the several Counties: and that the Sheriffs under whose charge
the money is, shall have allowan^e for Transportat^on the^eof in their several
Accounts.

Lastly, it is ordered, that a strict Account be taken of the proceedings of
the several Sheriffs; As also, the Treasurer of his Majesty's Army, and of
the Treasurer appointed by the Act, and of their obedience, and conformity to
this Order: and if any shall fail therein, it shall be interpreted as a great
neglect of the safety of the Kingdom, and contempt of both Houses of
Parliament; for which they shall be called to answer, and make satisfaction
as well for their offense, as for such damage as the Commonwealth has
under-gone by their default.

FINIS.

