THE CENSVRE OF THE ROTA. On Mr DRIDEN'S Conquest of GRANADA.

OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Fran. Oxlad junior. An. Dom. 1673.

THE CENSURE OF THE ROTA.
UPON Mr DRYDEN'S CONQVEST of GRANADA,
AMonst several other late Exercises of the Athenian Vertuosi in the
Coffe-Academy instituted by Apollo for the advancement of Gazeti Philosophy
Mercury's, Diurnalls, etc: this day was wholly taken up in the Examination of
the Conquest of Granada; a Gentleman on the reading of the First Part, and
therein the Description of the Bull-baiting, said, that Almanzor's playing at
the Bull was according to the Standard of the Greek Heroes, who, as Mr. Dryden
had learnedly observed ( Essay of Dramatique poetry, p. 25.) were great
Beef-Eaters. And why might not Almanzor as well as Ajax, or Don Quixot worry
Mutton, or take a Bull by the Throat, since the Author had elsewhere explained
himself by telling us the Heroes were more noble Beasts of Prey, in his
Epistle to his Conquest of Granada, distinguishing them into wild and tame, and
in his Play we have Almanzor shaking his Chain, and frighting his Keeper. p.
28. broke loose. p. 64. and tearing those that would reclaim his rage. p. 135.
To this he added that his Bulls excelled others Heroes, as far as his own
Heroes surpassed his Gods: That the Champion Bull was divested of flesh and
blood, and made immortal by the poet, and bellowed after death; that the
fantastique Bull seemed fiercer then the true, and the dead bellowings in
Verse, were louder then the living; concluding with a wish that Mr. Dryden had
the good luck to have varied that old Verse quoted in his Dramatique Essay.

Atque Vrsum, and Pugiles media inter Carmina pos^unt Tauros, and Pugiles prima
inter Carmina posco. and praefixt it to the front of his Play, instead of --
Mayor rerum mihinascitur Ordo,
Majus opus moveo.
Another Virtuoso said he could not but take notice how ignorantly some charged
Almanzor with transgressing the Rules of the Drama, vainly supposing that
Heroes might be confined to the narrow walks of other common Mortals, not
considering that those Dramatick Planets were Images of Excentrio Virtue, which
was most beautiful, when least regular: that Almanzor was no less maliciously
taxed with changing sides, then which charge what could be more unjust, if they
looked on him as Achilles and Rinaldos's countryman, and born with them in that
Poetical Free State, (for Poets of late have formed Vtopia's) where all were
Monarchs (without Subjects) and all swore Alleagiance to themselves, (and
therefore could be Traitors to none else) where every man might invade another
Right, without trespassing on his own, and make, and execute what Laws
himself would consent to, each man having the power of Life and Death so
absolutely, that if he killed himself, he was accountable to no body for the
murder; that Almanzor was neither Mr Drydens Subject, nor Boabdelins, but
equally exempt from the Poets Rules, and the Princes Laws, and in short, if his
revolting from the Abencerrages to the Zegrys, and from the Zegrys to the
Abencerrages again, had not equally satisfied both parties, it might admit of
the same defense, Mr Drydens Outcries, and his Tumults did, that the Poet
represented Men in a Hobbian State of War. A third went on and told them that
Fighting Scenes, and Representations of Battles were as necessary to a
Tragedy, as Cudgells, and broken Pates to a Country Wake; that an Heroic Poem
never sounded so nobly, as when it was heightened with Shouts, and Clashing of
Swords; and that Drums and Trumpets gained an absolute Dominion over the minds
of the Audience: (the Ladies, and Female Spirits) Here an Aquaintance of the
Authors interposed, and assured the Company, he was very confident, that Mr
Dryden would never have had the Courage to have ventured on a Conquest had he
not writ with the sound of Drum and Trumpet; and that if there was any thing
unintelligible in his rants, it was the effect of that horror those Instruments
of War with their astonishing noise had precipitated him into, which had so
transported him, that he writ beyond himself. But he was interrupted by a
grave Gentleman that used to sup in Apollo and could tell many Story of Ben.
Johnson, who told them, that in his opinion Mr Dryden had given little proof of
his Courage, since he for the most part combated the dead; and the dead -- send
no Challenges; nor indeed need they, since through their sides he had wounded
himself; for he ever played the Critic so unluckely, as to discover only his
own faults in other men, with the advantage of this aggravation, that the
Grammatical Errors or older Poets, were but the Errors of their Age, but being
made his, were not the Errors of this Age: since he granted this Age was
refined above those Solecismes of the last: thus the Synchoesis, or ill placing
of Words, a fault of B. Iohnsons time, was an usual Elegancy in Mr. Drydens
writings, as in the Prologue to his Indian Emperor Such easy Judges, that our
Poet may
Himself admire the fortune of his Play.
Himself in the second verse, which should have been placed before may in the
first. In the Indian Emperor, Guyomar says, I for my Country fought, and
would again,
Had I yet left a Country to maintain.
left should not have preceded Country, but followed it. In Granada, second
part. I Will sooner trust th'Hyaena then your smile;
Or then your Tears the weeping Crocodile.
And again. Yet then to change,' it is nobler to despair. Thus the using be for
are the vice of those dull times, when Conversation was so low, that our
Fathers were not taught to write and read good English, was frequent with Mr
Dryden in this politer Age; In Granada, second part. Allmanzor. Madam, your new
commands I come to know,
If yet you can have any where I go,
If to the Regions of the dead they be.
In the Indian Emperor. Things good, or ill, by circumstances be. In Maximin.
The Empress knows your worth, but, Sir, there be
Those who can value it as high as she.
And again; And so obscene their Ceremonies be,
As good men loath, and Cato blushed to see.


In all these places he observed the Rhyme hid the false English. The placing
of the Preposition at the end of a Verse or Sentence, Mr Dryden had confessed was
common to him with Johnson, but not discovering where, the Gentleman obliged
the Company, by pointing at that in Maximin. your Brother made it to secure his
Throne,
Which this man made a step to mount it on.
and more conspicuously in his Elegy on Oliver. (one who was as great a
contemner of Kings as Almanzor, and as great a defyer of the Gods as Maximin)
Fortune (that easy Mistress of the young
But to her ancient Servants coy and hard)
Him at that Age her Favorites rank't among.
When she her best loved Pompey did discard.
To all which, he added that ire an obsolete word of B. Johnson was antiquated
now, but inthrall and oph in Mr Dryden were words antiquated in Ben Iohnsons
time, that Johnson only wrote English in good Latin, but Mr Dryden was so
accomplished as to write English fluently in all Languages, Greek, Latin,
Italian, Spanish, and what not; in him he met with Escapade, Mirador, Bizarre,
torrents winding in volumes, Trumpets Clangors, Venus's Cestos, besides
unthinking Crowd, bladder'd Air, and such like Poetical Iargon; and to
demonstrate that this Age (or Mr Dryden, which is the same) made some
improvement in falls English as well as the last (if at least we have not
received a newer English Grammar then Ben. Iohnsons) he desired them to weigh
these verses in his Granada. Obeyed as Sovereign by thy subjects be
But know that I alone am King of me.
me, for my self. again, I for her sake thy Scepter will maintain,
And thou by me, in spite of thee shall reign.
Thee, for thy self.

As for Mr Drydens cavil at the lines in Catiline. Go on upon the Gods, kiss
lightning, wrest
The Engine from the Cyclops, and give fire
At face of a full Cloud --
His mistaken Image of shooting (since the Cyclops Engine was a Thunderbolt)
recoyl'd upon himself in his Maximin, where he supposed Sulphur to rain down in
fiery showers on Charinus, a clearer image perhaps of shooting, unknown as much
in Maximin's days, as Catalin's. A Critic continuing on the discourse, said,
he was sorry that Mr Dryden when he charged every page of Shakespeer, and
Fletcher with some Solecism of speech, or notorious flaw in sense, did not read
their writings and his own with the same spectacles, for had he, he would never
have left so incorrect a line as this in that Epilogue, where he taxes the
Ancients so superciliously; Then Comedy was faultless, but 'twas course. it is a
favor to call this but a flaw; nay, in the threshold of his Granada. Thus in
the Triumphs of soft peace Ireign,
And from my walls defy the powers of Spain.
which two verses agree as ill, as if one were a Moor, and the other a
Spaniard. again in the First Part, As some fair Tulip by a storm oppressed,
Shrinks up, and folds its silken arms to rest;
And bending to the blast, all pale and dead,
Hears from within the wind sing round its head.
This Tulip that could hear the wind sing its Epicedium, after it was dead; you
may be sure grew no where but in a Poets Garden. in the Second Part, So two
kind Turtles, when a Storm is nigh,
Look up, and see it gathering in the Sky,
Each calls his mate to shelter in the Groves,
Leaving in murmurs their unfinish't Loves;
Pearch't on some dropping branch, they sit alone,
And cooe, and hearken to each others moan.
Where because a Turtle was a solitary Bird, he made two of them sit alone.

Again, speaking of Almanzor: -- a gloomy smile arose
From his bent brows, and still the more he heard,
A more severe, and sullen joy appeard.
Here is a Smile described with so much Art, that the description my serve
indifferenly either for a Smile, or a Frown, any other Smile, but a gloomy one,
rising from bent brows, would have looked too effeminately pleasant in
Almanzor's grim face; a clear proof this of the* Epistle, that dimples may not
misbecome the stern beauty of a Hero:

These he found in Annus Mirabilis. So sicken waning Moons too near the Sun,
And blunt their Crescents on the edge of day.
Compared with these in Maximin. My flaming sword above them to display,
Allkeen and ground upon the edge of Day.
From which he inferred, that the Edge of Day was capacitated indifferently
either to blunt, or Sharpen, according to the Poets pleasure, as from that
verse in his Astraea Redux: A horrid stillness first invades the Ear, he
observed that to invade the Ear (in Mr Drydens Dictionary) signified any
violence offered to the Ear, either from Noise, or Silence.

In another place in Maximin, he seems fully to have answered his Prologue, in
not servilely stooping so low as Sense; To bind Porphyrius firmly to the State,
I will this day my Coesar him create,
And, Daughter, I will give him you for wife.
here, in making Porphyrius a Bride, he has reached an excellence, and justified
his representation of big-belly'd Men in the Wild Gallant, a greater
imposibility, then any Shakespeare can be censured for (for imposybility's in Mr
Drydens charge are sense, but in another nonsense) though he wants not these
smaller indecorum's neither; such as his introducing Donna Aurelia in the
Mock-Astrologer, retrenching her words, which how consistent'tis with the
Spanish Gravity, the great Dons of Wit can best resolve him, and such is that
indecency, committed in his Maiden Queen, where the Queen and Courtiers stand
still, to hear Celadon and Florimell with a great deal of cold mirth absurdly
usurp the Queens Prerogative in making new Marriage-Laws.

That Mr Drydens wit was as much advanced beyond that of the Ancients, as his
sense and Language; was Evident from these Clenches (to omit that of
Pulpit-Quibling finding the benefit of its Clergy since he was so mannerly, as
to ask leave to cleanch there) in his forecited Elegy on our English Maximin.
Though in his Praise, no Arts can liberal be. In his Rival Ladies, a Serving
man threatents to beat the Poet with a staff of his own Rhymes.

In his Maiden Queen, little Sabina tells Florimell, well my drolling Lady, I
may be even with you: to which Florimell wittyly, not this ten years by thy
growth yet: and after, tells her taller sister Olinda, she cannot affront her
because she is so tall. and to parallel B. Iohnson's, Forty things more, dear
Grand, which you know true,
For which, or pay me quickly, or I Will pay you.
Celadon (in the same Play) tells Florimell; I shall grow desperately constant,
and all the tempest of my love will fall upon your head: I shall so pay you: to
which Florimell makes this reply; Who you, pay me? you are a bankrupt, cast
beyond all possibility of recovery. This when repeated by Loveby in that
incomparable clenching Comedy, the Wild Gallant, Mr Dryden, and the Tailors
Wife called a Jest, but is far from Wit in all Languages. To be short, that
his wit depended often on a ridiculous chiming of words, was evident from such
instances as these, Under Almanzor prosperously they fought,
Almanzor thesefore must with prayr's be sought.
Know that as Selin was not won by thee,
Neither will I by Selins daughter be.
Forbear dear Father, for your Ozmyns sake,
Do not such words to Ozmys father speak,
But what is the cause that keeps you here with me?
Tbat I may know what keeps me here with you.
Would you your hand in Selins blood embrue,
Kill him unarmed, who armed shund killing you?
much after the rate of that old Tick-tack A Pie, a Pudding,
A Pudding, a Pie,
A Pudding-Pye.
A Pie for me,
A Pudding for thee,
A Pudding for me,
A Pie for thee,
A Pudding-Pye for me and thee*
A modern Poet stepped up next, and said, he observed Mr Dryden passed no better
a Complement on the Poets of this Age in his Prologue to his Granada, then on
those of the former in his Postscript and Epilogue; for these he tax't as
liberally with writing dull sense, as those with writing incorrect; and
preferred his own gay nonsense equally to both. That his Play was the best
comment on his Prologue, and his Tulip with silken arms, and two verses. But
silkworm like, so long within have wrought,
That I am lost in my own webb of thought.
sufficiently displayed his gayety of nonsense: and 'twas for this reason he
supposed that he upbraided Beaumont and Fletcher with meannesse of expression
in their Scenes of Love, because those dull unthinking men never had their
thoughts so well dres't, as to transform their Lovers into such gay things, as
Silkwormes and Tulips; but this was the unhappiness of their Education, they
were not so well bred, nor kept so good Company as Mr Dryden; nay had Johnson
(who was more conversant in Courts) converst (as our Poet) only with Persons of
Honor, he had never disgraced the Stage with Tib in her Rags, but attired her
more like a modern Comoedian in a broad-brim'd Hatt, and wast Belt: but 'twas
plain, his Humor discovered more of the Mechanique and the Clown, then the
Gentleman; thus Otters Horse, and his Bear, and his Bull, might be entertaining
to a Groom, or a Bear-ward, but nothing in nature and all that (to english Tom.
Otters in rerum natura) was more odious to a Man of Garniture and Feathers: in
those days they regaled their Audience with the Acorns of Poetry, and no
marvel then if Cobs Tankard quenched their thirstno less then pure Helicon:
in sine, Iohnsons wit had too much Alchymy, and their best too much allay to
pass for that of the Golden Age, an honor only due to the Poets of these
times, that bring old Iron on the Stage. The honor of the Golden Age (replied
another) belongs justly to Mr Dryden, who ever returned home richly fraught
from Spain and America; to his Catholic Conquests Poetry ow's its Indies, and
its Plate-Fleets: and after such Voiages and Discoveries, he could not but
wonder a little at his modest excusing his ignorance in Sea Terms in his Annus
Mirabilis; since he was very confident that his Muse that had so often crossed
the Seas, and endured so many Storms and Shipwracks could not but be Tarpawlin
sufficient enough to make an Heroic Poem on Star-boord, and Lar-boord. His
blustering Metaphors would more then acquit him of Horace his Censure, Serpit
humi tutus, nimium timidusque procellae.

The boldest of the old Poets never raised such Tempests as he, though they
labored to swell their Poetical Sails with all the four winds blowing at once
(as Mr Cowly ingeniously, on, V^a Furusque; Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis
Africus, etc.) He was the man Nature seemed to make choice of to enlarge the
Poets Empire, and to complete those Discovery's others had begun to shadow:
that Shakespeare and Fletcher (as some think) erected the Pillars of Poetry is a
gross error; this Zany of Columbus has discovered a Poetical World of
greater extent then the Natural, peopled with Atlantic Colony's of notionall
creatures, Astrall Spirits, Ghosts, and Idols, more various then ever the
Indians worshipped, and Heroes, more lawless than their Savages. The-already
discovered habitable world (joined with Sr Thomas Moor's, and the Lord Bacon's)
was too narrow a Compass for his Geography of Thoughts, which would admit of
no unpeopled Solitudes, nor Terra Incognita; this Poetical Coryat would
travel beyond the Poles of Nature and Opinion; sometimes we have him mounting
his Pegasus, and taking a flight to the Mountains of the Moon, and the Bed of
Nyle, then (having baited first at Heaven) making his Journey through the lower
Fields of Air, to Spencers Bower of Bliss, and Tasso's Enchanted wood (both
lately discovered in Fairy-Land) there visiting such wandering Souls* as
flagging fluttered down from the middle Sky, and dispossessing the Swallows of
their Winter Quarters, lay leiger for Mortal frames in Trunks of hollow Trees.
Thus has he out travall'd the Sun, and made his flights on the wings of his
own fancy without the assistance of Ganza's, or Bottles of May-Dew. In short,
did Mr Cowley, or any others dislike this Fairy part of Poetry, (though Mr
Cowly had answered himself by making use of Angels visions in his Davideis,
where the Argument required it) the Poet had prettily excused his fantastique
Scenes, and Visionary Pageants, in that Apologetick Verse, Ast opere in tanto
fas est obrepere Somnum. With him joined a phlegmatic heavy Gownman, who hoped
that that Verse was a frank confession of the Poet, that he composed several
of his Raptures in a Dream, of which nature was this in his Maximin. Thou
treadst the Abyss of Light, Abyss is a word so inconsistent with Light, that
it is scarce Bright enough for its Shadow. In Granada,
Heavens Outcast, and the Dross of every Star.
Compare this with another in Maximin, -- None, will be so bright,
So pure, or with so small allays of light,
and you will say it is all pure refined nonsense, without the least allay of dull
Sense. In another place in Maximin, I reel, and stagger, and am drunk with
light. this Verse the Poet made, when he was shut up in a dark room and not
suffered to see the light. Again. So may thou live thy thousand years in
peace,
And see thy Aerie Progeny increase.
Here it may be a Quaere, whether Spirits (since amongst them there is no
distinction of Sexes) get all Sons, or all daughters. And following those, So
may thou still continue fresh and fair,
Fed by the blast of pure Aetheriall Air.
How the Ether, that yields a nourishment so thin (scarce distinguishable from
none at all) that it would starve a Cameleon, should fatten a Spirit, seems a
Paradoxe: now after all this, the World may judge whether the notions of Poets
(the Fathers of his Church) concerning spirits and Specters, were more
satisfactory, then those of Philosophers and Divines; and whether Mr Dryden was
not stark Inspiration mad, and in one of his Enthusiastique fits, when he
objected it as laziness, or dullness to the Clergy, that they did not preach
in Verse; That Reformation this Age must not be so happy as to expect, since
the Objector had altered his resolution of exchanging the Sock and Buskin for
the Canonical Girdle Here a great Patron of Rhyme interposed, and said, he
could heartily wish that not only Divines would preach, Lawyers plead,
Philosophers dispute, and Councellers debate, but even our Ladys and Gallants
would converse in Rhyme, for besides that this would take off the Argument of
the the unnaturallness of Rhyme,

It would be a means of exalting our thoughts, and raising Conversation above
the vulgar level, for what can be supposed more indecent then for Ladys and
Persons of Quality to walk on foot in Prose with the Rabble? Without the
sweetness and cadency of Rhyme our quick Repartees in discourse lose much of
their Beauty, when as if he that spoke last be nicked by another, both in wit
and sound, nothing is left desirable. Nay, Mr Dryden that writ ill in Rhyme,
would have writ worse without it, for such Redundancy's as this in Granada,
First Part, This is my will, and this I will have done. which is a handsome way
of saying this is my will twice such mean Couplets as this in Maximin. O my
dear Brother, whom Heaven let us see,
And would not longer suffer him to be!
and such precipitations from such heights, as, Say but he is dead, that God
shall mortal be:
See nothing, Eyes, henceforth, but Death and woe,
You Have have done me the worst Office you can do.
would never have been passable, were not many cozn'd with their sound; in a
word, many things were charged upon the Poet, of which the Rhymer was no ways
guilty, but there needed no greater Argument for the efficacy of Rhyme above
Blank Verse, then that of blowing a Candle out, and blowing in again, in two
Verses. Granada. Like Tapers new blown out the fumes remain,
To catch the light, and bring it back again.
where the snuff expires so sweetly, it cannot be offensive to the most
critical Nose. To this a Favourer of Blank verse with some heat replied, that
these verses in Granada, Second Part, You see Sir, with what hardship I have
kept
This precious gage which in my hands you left.
These in the Indian Emperor, But I me so far from meriting esteem,
That if I judge, I must my self condemn.
And these in Maximin, Porphyrius. Too long, as if Eternity were so.
Berenice. Rise good Porphyrius (since it must be so.)
proclaimed the Rhymer no less faulty then the Poet, and evidently proved that
Mr Dryden enslaved his sense as little to Rhyme, as elsewhere to Syllables; and
both to sense. Who after this will deny that the way of writing in verse; is
the most free and unconstrained? in which the Poet is not tied up to Language,
sense, Syllables, or Rhyme, but even, sweet, and flowing numbers, and smart
Repartees (in plain English, playing with words) atone for the want of all.
With what impudence can the Adversaries of Rhyme object its difficulty? when
those that are formed neither by Art nor Nature, may write whole plays, such as
Mr Dryden's in it, without easing themselves on pace and ^rot. It is but
framing the character of a Huff of the Town, one that from breaking
Glass-windows, and combating the watch, starts up an Hero: him you must make
very saucy to his superiors, to show he is of the same stamp with Achilles and
Rinaldo; then tame the savage with the charming sight of the Kings Daughter (or
wife) whom this St George is to deliver from the Dragon, or greater dangers: to
heighten his character the more, bring in a sheepish King with a Guard of
poultrons to be kick't by him, as often as he thinks fit his Miss. should be a
witness of his Gallantry: if this be not enough, let him play prizes with
Armies, still Tumults with one look, and raise Rebellions with another. The
Language is no less easy then the characters, it is but stuffing five Acts
with Fate, Destiny, Charms, Charming fair, Killing fair, heavenly fair, the
Fair and Brave, the Lover and the Brave, etc. an allusion to two kind Turtles,
foisted in, an impertinent Simile from a Storm, or a Shipwreck, and a senseless
Song of Phillis, and the business is done: the descriptions may be borrewed
from Statius, and Montaigns Essays, the Reason and Political Ornaments from Mr
Hobs, and the Astrologicall (and if need be, the Language too) from Ibrahim, or
the Illustrious Bassa. To conclude all, he said, a barren Invention must ever
be provided with such necessary helps, as the following Forms, to which he
might have recourse on all occusions.

Some Forms and Figurative Expressions of solarge an extent, that they are
adjusted to all Characters in all Plays, Tragedys, Comedys, and Tragi-Comedys,
whether written in Rhyme, Blank Verse, or Prose; suitable to all Prologues,
Epilogues, and Dramatique Essays that are, or shall be written. For magnifique
Sound As when some dreadful Thunderclap is nigh,
The winged Fire shoots swiftly through the Sky, Indian Emperor.

Strikes, and consumes, e're scarce it does appear.
Or varied thus: -- As when Winds and Rain together crowd,
They swell till they have burst the bladder'd cloud: Granada. 2. part.

And first, the Lightning flashing deadly clear,
Flies, Falls, Consumes, e're scarce it does appear.


For gentle verses, that do not shake us in the reading. Maiden Queen.
-- Heaven, which moulding Beauty takes such care,
Makes gentle fates on purpose for the fair;
And Destiny that sees them so divine,
Spins all their fortunes in a silken twine.


Translate the Fair to the Brave, it may be thus, If fate weaves common Third,
he will change the doom, Granada. 1. part.

And with new Purple spread a nobler loom.
for a Rant I Will grasp my Scepter with my dying hand. Indian Emperor.
Or thus, higher: -- I Will grasp it
Even after death. Rival Ladys.

Higher yet I Will hold it fast
As Life, and when life's gone, I Will hold it last. Granada 2. part.

For generous Love: Though to my former vows I must be true, Maximin.

I Will ever keep one love entire for you,
That love which Brothers with chaste Sisters make.


Or with a more poynant brevity: Take friedship, or if that too small appear,
Granada. 1. part.

Take Love, which Sisters may to Brothers bear.
For sharpness of conceit. He es'd his half-tir'd Muse on pace and trot.
Epilogue to Mock Astrologer.
That is, Sometimes upon Rhyme, sometimes upon Blank, Verse, Essay of
Dramatique Poetry.

Like an Horse, who eases himself upon Trot and Amble.
For pleasant folly, -- in the prime
Of Easter Term, in Tart and Chees-cake time. Epilogue to Maximin.



Easily resolved thus into prose: In Easter Term, when the Country Gentlewomen
come up to Sr Martin Mariall.

the destruction of Tarts and Chees-cakes.



