THE Saints Encouragement IN EVIL TIMES: OR OBSERVATIONS Concerning The MARTYRS
in general, with^some memorable Collections OUT OF Foxes three Volumes. Martin
Luther. The Covenant and Promises. Living and dying by faith.


By EDWARD LEIGH Esquire.

REVEL. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the LORD,

Mori timeat qui ad secundam mortem de hac morte transibit. Cyprian de mortal.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Lee and Thomas Underhill, 1648.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
READER,
THe Church even in her Infancy, the Christian Church was under the Cross,
Stephanus lapidatus, Jacobus trucidatus, says Austin, Stephen was stoned, and
James beheaded. The Church has had two kind of persecutions, When any common
calamity befell the people or State, as famine, dearth, pestilence, they
straightway imputed it to the Christians, saying, that they and their wicked
religion were the cause thereof. Christianos ad Leonem. Tertul. Away with them
to the Lion, to the stake.
one from Rome ethnicall, the other from Rome Papal. After the Apostles what a
continual storm arose against Christians, which lasted three hundred years
under the ten monsters of men those bloody Emperors, Nero, Domitian, Trajane,
Antoninus, Severus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclesianus,
whose rage was such as a man could not set his foot in Rome, but tread on the
graves of Martyrs* Nero was the Author Consule Commentarios vestros, illic
reperietis primum Neronem in hanc sectam^tum maxim Romae orientem Caesariano
gladio ferocisse: Sed tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae gloriamur. Qui enim
scit illum, intelligere potest non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum.
Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
of the first grand persecution, wherein Saint Peter (as it is said) and Saint
Paul were martyred at Rome, with others innumerable, and Jacobus Iustus at
Jerusalem, whence Tertullian inferred, That the Gospel must needs be a precious
thing, because Nero hated it.

Dioclesian raised the tenth and extremest persecution Vide Eusebius. lib. 8.
, wherein Churches were overthrown, Bibles burnt, whole Cities razed, women
hanged upon trees naked with their heads downwards. The Christians yet in that
time under the Heathen Emperors had many lucida intervalla, many breathing
spaces under Princes not altogether so bloody. But the Popes have persecuted
the Protestants for six hundred years together, and that without any
intermission.

I might exemplify in many of their cruel practices*

1. In their wars against the Waldenses and Albigenses.

2. In the Massacre of France, in which the rivers were died with blood.

3. In our tempora Mariana Queen Mary's days; Who has not heard of bloody
Bonner and Gardener?

4. In the rebellious insurrection in Ireland, and the cruel butchery of above
200 thousand Protestants there. Platina writes of seventeen thousand martyred
by Dioclesian; but Meterane writes of 50 thousand slaughtered by the Pope only
in the Low Countries, and that in the time of Charles the 5th* Natalis Comes of
sixty thousand in France only in one year. Julius the second in seven years
shed the blood of above two hundred tho^sand Christians.

Antichrist is drunk with the blood of the Saints, Revel. 17. 6. and 18. 24. In
her, that is, Babylon, now Rome, was found the blood of Prophets, that is, of
all those that preached the Word of God, and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the earth; They were put to death by the authority of the Pope. Some
hold that the bitterest persecutions of the Church of God are yet to come, but
two considerations may much support the spirits of Gods people.

1. The shortness of the Persecutours lives, and their miserable ends for the
most part.

2. The good that comes to the Church of God by affiction and persecution. I
will not speak of the short lives of many Popes, and the short reign of Queen
Mary Of all since the conquest her reign was the shortest, only excepting that
of Richard the tyrant, but much more bloody then was his. Speeds Chro. in Q.
Marie.
, nor of the miserable end of many persecuting Emperors, but shall out of
Foxes Martyrology, instance in the exemplary punishments of some of the
persecutours of our Martyrs. George Eagles (alias, Foxes Acts and Monum. 3d
vol. page 1023.
Trudge over the world) hid himself in a Corn-field, and by the benefit of the
height of the Corn, and breadth of the field he had escaped, had not Ralph
Lurdane one of his persecutours with more malicious craft, climbed a high tree
to view over the place, and so descried him.

This persecutour a lewd fellow of life for theft and whoredom, within a few
years after he had apprehended the foresaid George Eagles for gain of money, he
himself was attached of felony for stealing a horse, condemned and hanged in
the same place and Town of Chelmesford, where George Eagles before suffered
martyrdom. A Bishop coming to Stephen Gardener (Bishop of Winchester) on his
deathbed, put him in remembrance of Peter's denying his Master; Foxes 3d vol.
p. 95.
he answering again: said, That he had denied with Peter, but never repented
with Peter, and so both stinkingly and unrepentantly died. See also in Fox a
notable story of the death of Dr Whittington a persecutour.
Doctor Story was a great enemy to the Protestants in Queen Mary's days, but
in Queen Elizabeth's reign he being beyond sea was by a handsome wile brought
over into England, Fox ubi supra
and suffered as a Traitor, on whom the boys sung these verses, D. Story for
You I am sorry,

The hangman must have Your gown:

Your father the Pope, could not save You from the rope;

For all his triple crown.

Secondly, The people of God like Commomile, the more they were trod on the
more they did spread, and (like Rabbets in frosty weather) did thrive under
persecution. One Mr Manton on Rev. 2. 3.
says, Martyrologie and catechizing were the great engines by which the
reformers battered down Popery. Jerome compares the state of the Church under
Constantine and some Christian Emperors with that under Dioclesian and some
persecuting Emperors: under the former the Church increased much Potentia and
divitiis, in power and wealth, but diminished virtutibus, in virtue* How
strangely was that promise accomplished in England and France, Mat. 25.
Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life
for my sake, shall find it.

William Wolsey Martyr being in prison sent by another a noble to Richard
Denton with this commendation, That he marvelled he tarried so long behind
him, seeing he was the first that delivered him the book of Scripture into his
hand, and told him that it was the truth, desiring him to make haste after as
fast as he could. Foxes Acts and Monum. 3d vol. p. 433
This money and message being delivered to Denton almost a year after Wolsey
was burned, his answer was this. I confess it is true, but alas I cannot burn.
But he that would not burn in the cause of Christ, was afterward burned against
his will; for his house was set on fire, and while he went in to save his goods
he lost his life. On the contrary, some that were in prison, and purposed to
suffer for the truth, were ^y the death of Queen Mary happily preserved, that
being a true observation which Dr Hall.
one has, As good husbands do not put al their corn to the oven, but save some
for seed, so does God ever in the worst of persecutions.

When Henry the fourth of France had conquered his enemies, he turned Papist,
and gave this reason of it, That he might settle himself in peace and safety.
Ravilliak who slew him, confessed that the reason why he stabbed him, was,
because he was of two religions. It is well noted by a Reverend Divine Dr Gouge
on Exodus 13. 13.
, That the book of martyrs was in high esteem all the days of Queen Elizabeth:
All Churches by authority were enjoined to have it, so as all that would might
read it. There was scarce a family of note that had it not, it was usual to
spend the long winter evenings in reading it. By the constancy of Martyrs
therein set out, people were much encouraged to stand to that faith which was
sealed by their blood. Whether the killing of the two Witnesses be near at hand
or no, I determine not, but sure there is likelihood enough of troubles and
persecutions to Gods people, therefore I conceive these several Tracts, Of the
Martyrs in general, and Concerning our English Martyrs, Of Martin Luther a
courageous Reformer, Of the Covenant and Promises, Of living and dying by faith
may be very suitable to our times.

But some may urge, that for the first subject concerning the Martyrs, there
was a book long since published, styled, The Mirror of Martyrs, useful that
way. I deny not but that book might be profitable to diverse Christians, who
either wanted money to purchase or leisure to read the large book of Martyrs:
But my drift in this work is to excerp only (among the many dicta facta of
the Martyrs) those speeches and acts of theirs, which were specially
observable. Master Co^ton (who composed the book before mentioned) has
confusedly jumbled diverse things together: some of which are ordinary, though
others may be remarkable, and I believe he mistakes in that which he has of
Voes, it being not consonant to the original whence he took it. He has also
the same thing twice of John and Christopher Waid. I hope therefore (though I
have many things the same with Cotton, that this work will be of special use
to those, who would not be ignorant of the living speeches of dying Christians.
The Saints are best toward their end; so it was with Jacob and Moses, as
appears in his excellent song made a little before his death, Deuteronomy. 32.
so David, Solomon, what an excellent Sermon and prayer did our Savior make a
little before his death. John 14. 15. 16. and 17. chap.
I have likewise long since put forth a Treatise of the Covenant and Promises,
yet having collected diverse new Observations of that excellent subject, (for
some of which I was beholding to two of our worthy Lecturers Mr Marshall and Mr
Strong.
at Westminster) I thought good to add this Tract to the rest, it being of
special use always for Christians, especially in evil times. Thus hoping God
will bless these my endeavors for the good of his people, I rest

Thy true Christian Friend EDWARD LEIGH*

THE SAINTS Encouragement IN Evil Times.
CHAP. I.
Observations concerning the Martyrs in general.
A Martyr in common use of speech, Vide Bezam in Act. 22. 20 Heb. 12. 4. Rev.
2. 13. and 6. 9.
means one which seals his witness to the Gospel with his blood, suffers death
for Christ. That Is a Martyr, (...) in the highest Martyru^ nomen body duntaxat
illis attribuitur qui mortem pro Christo perpessi sunt. Olim vero and
potiss^mum aetate Cypriani, etiam illis qui a confessione nominis Christi nulla
tormentorum atrocitate abduci poterant; quos eleganter Tertullianus lib* ad
Martyrs, designatos martyrs nuncupat. Pamelius ad Cypriani* epist. 9.
degree. But the word in Grammar sense, means but a witness. Tertullian calls
confessors to Christ, Martyrs.

He must suffer in a good cause for the name of Christ, 1 Pet. 4 14. Causa non
poena facit martyrem. Non debet quid quisque patiatur, sed quare patiatur,
attendi. Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 4. cap. 46. The cause not the punishment
makes a martyr. When I consider the cause of my condemnation (said Mr Bradford)
I cannot but lament, that I do no more rejoice then I do. For it is for God^
verity and truth, so that the condemnation is not a condemnation of Bradford
simply, M^ Bradford to all that profess the Gospel in Lancashire.
but rather a condemnation of Christ and of his truth Bradford is nothing but
an instrumen^ in which Christ and his doctrine i^ condemned.

How early did martyrdom come into the world? D. Halls contempl.
The first man that died, died for religion.

One says, M. Pinkes fourth Sermon on that Text* Luke 14. 26. See more there.
None are saved but Martyrs; martyrs either actually or habitually; having
faith enough to encourage, and love to constrain them to be martyrs, if the
honor of their profession should require it. The habit of martyrdom is
included in the most fundamental principle of Christianity, love of Christ
better then our selves, self-resignation or denial.

To suffer death for Christ is the greatest honor which can befall a man,
Phil. 1. 29. Careless in his letter to Agnes.
and such a promotion that the highest Angel in heaven is not permitted to
have. Glascock. Foxes 3. vol p. 29. And Guide Bree 3 vo. p. 38.


In the primitive times they were wont to call martyrdom by the name of Corona
Martyrij, the crown of martyrdom, and Stephen the protomartyr had his name in
Greek from a crown. Magnificus martyrij titulus (...).
One woman martyr having her child in her hand, gave it to another, and
offered her self to martyrdom; Grot. in 21. Joh. 19.
Crowns (says she) are to be dealt this day, and I mean to have one.

Luther writing to those which were condemned to death, says, the Lord will
not do me that honor, I who have made all this busle: It was very strange Hic
(sc. amor spon^^) leonis faucibus (...) eripuit, and ^uod merito stupebat
mu^dus, in medio tot ac etiam potentum hostium, infimo homuncioni and longam
vitam prorogavit, and placidam mortem intra domesticos parictes concessit.
Brightman in cant. 6. 2
that one who had so provoked the Pope and all his potent party, should die
quietly in his bed.

Bernard says there are three sorts of martyrs, 1. Martyrs voluntate solum, in
will only, so all the godly are martyrs. 2. Voluntate and opere, in will and
act; those who cheerfully lay down their life for Christ's cause. 3. Opere
solum, in act only; so the children of Bethlehem, Spanhom. Dub. Evan p^r ^. Dub
84.
Mat. 2. 16. This was rather a passive then an active martyrdom, and
improperly so called, since to true martyrdom not only slaughter and a good
cause are requisite, but a will and intention of undergoing death for Christ's
sake.

It is a question among the Schoolmen why Christ should so complain in his
sufferings, as in the garden and on the cross, and yet the martyrs suffer so
cheerfully.

1. They suffered for God, and Christ from God.

2. They suffered in their bodies, Christ in his soul, and the wrath of God,
Isa. 43. 10.

3. Their sufferings were mixed with joy and comfort, exuberance of joy
sometimes. Christ's sufferings on the cross were void of all comfort, Mat. 27.
46. and there was a suspension of divine influence.

M. Ball in his catechism says, The testimony of conscience is a strong
argument to prove that there is a God, and the constancy of the Saints Ex illa
tanta multitudine omnis generis sexusque hominu^ tot locis ac saeculis
distinctorum, qui pro hac religione mori non dubitarunt, colligendum, magnam
aliquam tantae constantiae fuisse causam, quae alia cogitart non potest, quam
lux veritatis Grot. de veritate Rel. Christ. l. 2.
is a good reason to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God, both these
main principles of religion may be then confirmed from the carriage and courage
of the Martyrs.

First, See Foxes 1. volume in Bilney, and 2. vol. p. 300.
How forcible was the working of conscience in some of them! Bilny and Bainham
at first recanted, but what a hell did they feel in their consciences till they
returned to God and bewailed their abjuration! On the contrary, what ravishing
comfort did Robert Glover enjoy a little before his martyrdom? Dear wife
(says Sanders In a letter to his wife Fox. 3. vol. p. p. 138.
) riches I have none to leave behind me, wherewith to endow you after this
worldly manner, but the treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is unto hungry
consciences (whereof I thank my Christ I feel part, and would feel more) I
bequeath unto you, and to the rest of my beloved in Christ to retain the same
in sense of heart always.

Secondly, See Rawlins and William Sparrow.
The Martyrs constant suffering may much establish us in the assurance of the
Scriptures coming from God.

1. Observe the number of those which suffered for the truth, of all sorts and
conditions, stout and tender, noble and base.

Famesius departing out of Italy is reported to have said, Sleid con^ l 17.
That he would make such a slaughter in Germany that his very horse might swim
in the blood of the Lutherans. So much blood of the Protestants was spilt in
France that the very rivers in the streets flowed with blood. The Duke of Alba
sitting at his Table Meter. hist. de reb. Belg. l. 15.
said, that he had taken diligent pains in rooting out the tares of heresies,
having delivered 18000 men in the space of six years only to the hands of the
hangman. From the beginning of the Jesuits to 1580. (being the space of 30
years) almost 900 thousand Protestants were put to death in France, England,
Spain, Italy, Germany, and other parts of Christendom. Reverend Cranmer,
learned Ridley, Down right Latimer, zealous Bradford, pious Philpot, patient
Hooper. Fuller. on Heb. 9. 10.


Within the compas^e of less then four years continuance, there died in
England in Q. Mary's reign 277 persons, without regard Speeds chron. in Q.
Mary. Neither in Q Elizabeth's reign, nor in the reign of K. James, nor King
Charles, was any Papist put to death merely for his conscience.
of degree, sex or age. In the heat of those flames were consumed five Bishops,
one and twenty Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred
husbandmen, servants and laborers, twenty six wives, twenty widows, nine
virgins, two boys, and two infants.

Secondly, The persecutours could neither by torments nor pleasures induce them
to deny the truth.

When Valens the Emperor coming to Caesarea commanded Basil to assent to the
Arians, and threatened to banish and punish him if he obeyed not, Pueris (says
Basil) illa terriculamenta proponenda sunt, sibi vero vita eripi potest, sed
confessio veritatis eripi non potest. Those bug-bears were to be propounded to
children, but for his part (said he) though they might take away his life, yet
they could not hinder him from professing the truth. When King Lysimachus
threatened Cyrenaeus Theodorus with hanging, Cic quest. Tusc. l. 1.
Istis quaeso (says he) ista horribilia minitare purpuratis tuis: Theodori
quidem nihil interest, humine an sublime putrescat. Threaten those terrible
things to thy brave Courtiers, Theodorus cares not whether he rot in the air,
or on the ground. Cyprian said Amen S. Cyprian^^ senten^i^m in se latam
audiens, dixit gratias ago Deo omnipotenti, qui me a vinculis hujus corporis
dignatur absolvere* Pont. in vita Cypriani.
to his own sentence of martyrdom, and the Proconsul bidding him consult about
it, he answered, In re tam justa Aug Ser. de Cypr.
nulla est consultatio.

Bonner said, A vengeance on them, I think they love to burn.

When the Proconsul threatened Andrew the Apostle with the cross, if he left
not off his preaching, I would never (said he) have preached the doctrine of the
cross, if I had feared the suffering of the cross.

Jerome in the life of Paulus the Heremite recites a story of a certain
soldier, whom when the Praetor could not otherwise with torments remove from
his Christianity, he devised another way, which was this: he commanded the
soldier to be laid upon a soft bed in a pleasant garden among the flourishing
lillies and red roses; Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 1 p. 8^.
which done, all others being removed away, and himself there left alone, a
beautiful harlot came to him, who embraced him, and with all other incitements
of an harlot, labored to provoke him to her naughtiness. But the godly
soldier fearing God more then obeying flesh, bit his own tongue with his
teeth, and spit in the face of the harlot, as she was kissing him, and so got
he the victory by the constant grace of the Lord assisting him.

Thirdly, See in Io. Hus. Ierom of Prague. Hen. Voes. Pet. Serre. Ia. Bainham.
Anth. Person. An. Askew
The Martyrs suffered with much comfort, courage and assurance of their
salvation, going to the fire as to a feast, calling the coals roses, and the
day of their martyrdom, their marriage day.

I am to die (said Bishop Ridley In a letter to his kindred and friends at his
farevvel. Fox. vol. 3. pa. 506.
) in defense of Gods everlasting truth and verity, which death I shall by Gods
grace willingly take with hearty thanks to God therefore, in certain hope
without any doubting to receive at Gods hand again of his free mercy and grace
everlasting life.

Rowland Taylour departing hence in sure hope without all doubting of eternal
salvation, D. Tailour in his last will and testament. Fox. vol. 3. p. 175.
I thank God my heavenly Father through Jesus Christ my certain Savior. Amen.

They thanked their Judges for condemning them, Sententiis vestris gratias
agimus, Crudelitas vestra gloria est nostra ^ert. ad Scap. c. 5.
cum damnamur a vobis a Deo absolvimur. Tertul. Apol. c. 5.

The Martyrs were eminent in many graces.

1. In humility. They neither called themselves martyrs, nor did they give way
to others so to entitle them, Eusebius. eccles. hist* l. 5.
but if any in epistle or speech so named them, they did sharply reprove them,
saying, That this appellation was due to Christ alone, which only is a
faithfall witness to the truth.

Ignatius in his Epistles says, I salute you, who am ultimus, the last and
least of all: and so in another Epistle, Tantillitas nostra.

Lord (said Hooper) I am hell, In a praie^ a little before his death.
but thou art heaven, I am a sink of sin, but thou art a gracious God, and a
merciful Redeemer.

2. In love to God and Christ. F^xes vol^ 3. p. 154. See the subscriptions of
Brad^ord^ lett^rs.
Ignatius called Christ his love, Amor meus crucifixus est, said he, My love
was crucified.

None but Christ, none but Christ, said John Lambert.

They offered to some of them gifts and honors to take them off, to which one
well answered, Do but offer me somewhat that is better then my Lord Jesus
Christ, and you shall see what I will say unto you.

3. In love to the brethren, and one another. Tertul. Apolog. c, 39.
Ejusmodi vel maximae dilectiovis operatio notam nobis inurit penes quosdam,
vide inquiunt, ut invicem s^ diligant. In the primitive times the cry of the
Heathens was, See how they love one another, See how they are ready to die for
one another. How did they express their affection to one another likewise by
their gilt pence, nutmegs, and other tokens which they sent to one another, and
by their hearty prayers?

4. In See M. Kerby, Io. Rogers, D. Farrar,
patience, Victi sunt Gentiles, and eorum Idololatria, non a repugnantibus, sed
a morient^bus Christianis. Aust.

5. In liberality to the poor. See in B. Hooper


6. In fidelity, John Bradford had often leave of his keeper, while he was in
prison, to go see a friend, and he returned to his prison again rather before
his time.

7. In zeal and fervency in See B. ^ati^er*
prayer.

8. In mildenes See Archbishop Cran^er.
and forgiving their enemies.

CHAP. II.
Some memorable Collections concerning the Martyrs, especially out of Foxes
three large volumes.
Polycarpus.
EVsebius Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 19.
says he was wont to say when he fell into the company of heretics: Bone Deus
in quae me tempora reservasti? Good God what times have thou kept me for?

When Marcion the heretic casually met him and said, Cognoscis nos? Do thou
know us? Polycarpus answered, Cognosco primogenitum diaboli, I know the first
born of the devil.

Being urged by the Proconsull to deny Christ, he answered: I have served him
86. Hilarion morti proximus dixisse fertur, egredere, quid times? egredere
anima mea, quid du^itas? septuaginta prope annis serviisti Christo, and mort^m
times? Hier. epist. ^am. lib. 3. and in ejus vit^*
years, and he has not once hurt me, and shall I now deny him?

When he should have been tied to the stake, he required to stand untied,
saying: Euse. hist. Eccles* Permi^tite me sic, inquit, Qui enim mihi dedit
velle larg^etur and posse; atque ipsum tollerabilem faciet voluntati ignem
ardentem. Smyrnensis Ecclesiae epistola, de S. Polycarpi Martyrio.
Let me alone (I pray you) for he that gave me strength to come to the fire,
will also give me patience to abide in the same without your tying.

Ignatius.
Being led from Syria to Rome, A Syria Romam usque terra marique cum testiis de
pugno, noct^ ac interdiu alligatus de cem Leopardis (quae est militaris
custodia) qui and beneficio affecti pejores. fiunt, utinam fruar bestiis mihi
paratis, quas opto veloce^ mihi inveniri, quas and blanditiis demulcebo, ut
citius me devorent, non ut quosd^m me^uentes non attigerunt, sed and si ipsae
aversae nolint, ego illas vi adigam. Ignatii epistola ad Romanos.
there to be devoured, he wished by the way as he went, that he were in the
midst of those beasts which were ready to rent him in pieces, and that their
appetites might be whetted to dispatch him quickly, fearing least it should
happen to him as to some other Martyrs, that the beasts out of a kind of
reverence and humanity, would not dare to approach unto him; being ready, he
said, rather to provoke them to fight, then that they should suffer him so to
escape.

It is reported of him, by some popish writers (quam vere ipsi viderint) that
he was so frequent in roling the name of Jesus in his mouth, that when he died,
there was ingraved and written in his heart the character of that name in
golden letters: This may be fabulous, but Christ was very dear unto him, he
called him his love, meus amor crucifixus est Ignatii epistola ad Romanos.
, my love (said he) is crucified.

When he heard the lions roaring, he said; I am the Lords wheat Fr^mentum sum
Dei, dentibus ferarum molo^ ut mundus panis Dei inveniar. Ignat ep* ad Romans
that must be ground with the teeth of wild beasts, that I may be found pure
bread.

Ignis, crux, ferarum concursus, (sectiones, lanienae) ossium discerptiones,
membrorum concisiones, totius corporis contritiones and diaboli tormenta in me
veniant, tantummodo ut Jesum nanciscar. Id. ibid.

Come (says he) fire, gallows, wild beasts, breaking of bones, tearing of
members, contrition of the whole body, and torments from the devil, so that I
may gain Christ.

After all his sufferings he said, now I begin to be a Disciple.

John Hus.
Martin Luther in his preface to Daniel, calls him, sanctissimum Martyrem, a
most holy Martyr, where he rehearses also this prophecy of his: They shall
now burn a Goose (for Hus in the Bohemian tongue signifies a Goose) but a Swan
Luther in the Bohemian language signifies a Svvan. Foxes Acts and Mon. 1. vol
p. 820.
shall come after me, which shall escape their burning.

The Bishops caused to be made a certain crown of paper almost a cubit deep, in
the which were painted three devils of wonderful uglyshape, and this title set
over their heads, Haeresiarcha A Ring leader and Captain of an heresy.
. The which when he saw, he said, My Lord Jesus Christ for my sake did wear a
crown of thorns, why should not I then for his sake again, wear this light
crown, be it never so ignominious? Truly I will do it, and that willingly.

You knew how before my Priesthood (which grieveth me now) I have delighted to
play oftentimes at chesse, Foxes 1. vol. p 830. John Has repents his playing at
chesse.
and have neglected my time, and have unhappily provoked both my self and
others to anger many times by that play.

Hierome of Prage.
He being condemned by the council of Constance, thus prophesied, Et cito vos
omnes, ut respondeatis mihi coram altissimo and justissimo judice post centum
annos. Foxes 1^ vol. p. 830
Here I cite you to answer unto me before the most high and just Judge within a
hundred years.

He said thus to the Executioner, make the fire in my sight, for if I had
feared it I had never come hither.

Henry Voes and John Esch.
Henry Voes and John Esch Friars, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2 p. 102. K. Hen.
being burned at Bruxels, one of them seeing that fire was kindled at his feet,
said, Me thinks ye do straw rooses under my feet.

Peter Moice.
One of the Martyrs which suffered in Germany, being called before the Senate
at Dornick, they began to examine him of certain articles (...) religion. To
whom as he was about to answer boldly and expressly t^ every point, Foxes Act,
and Mon. in 2. vol. Henry 8. p. 122.
they interrupting him* bad him say in two words, either yea or nay: Then said
he, If ye will not suffer me to answer for my self it matters of such
importance, send me to my prison again among my toad^ and frogs, which will not
interrup^ me while I talk with my Lord my God.

Peter Serre.
One of the Martyrs which suffered in France, Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol p 143.
Plures efficimur quotiesme timur a vobis. Ter.
being put to the fire stood so quiet, looking up to heaven all the time of his
burning, as though he had felt nothing, bringing such admiration to the people,
that one of the Parliament said, that way was not best to bring the Lutherans
to the fire, for that would do more hurt then good.

Bartholmew Hector.
A French Martyr at his death, Foxes ib* p. 155.
praying and speaking heavenly to the people, and taking his death patiently,
many of the people wept, saying, why does this man die which speaks of
nothing but of God?

Pomponius Algerius.
An Italian Martyr, Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol p. 183.
thus underwrites a comfortable letter of his to some of his Christian friends,

From the delectable Orchyard of Leonine prison.

Patrick Hamelton.
Certain faithful men being present the same time when this Scottish Martyr
was in the fire, Foxes 2. vol. K. Henry the 8. p. 238.
they heard him to cite and appeal the black Friar called Cambell that accused
him to appear before the high God, See the like prophetical speech of Philbert
Hamlin in Foxes ^. vol. p 151. And of a poor man in Calice, p 565. And of Roger
Holland, 2. vol. p. 145.
a^ general Judge of all men, to answer to the innocence of his death and
whether his accusation were ju^^ or not, between that and a certai^ day of the
next month, which h^ there named. By the same witness^ it is testified, that
the said Friar died immediately before the day came without remorse of
conscience, that he had persecuted the innocent.

Thomas Bilney.
His first conversion was by reading the new Testament set out by Erasmus, and
particularly, 1 Timothy 1. 15. At the last (says he) I heard speak of Jesus, even
then when the new Testament was first set forth by Erasmus, which when I
understood to be eloquently done by him, being assured rather for the Latin
then for the word of God (for at that time I knew not what it meant) I bought
it even by the providence of God, as I do now well understand and perceive:
And at the first reading (as I well remember) I chanced upon this sentence of
St Paul (O most sweet and comfortable sentence to my soul) in his first epistle
to Timoth. chap. 1. verse. 15. Foxes Acts and Mon in 2. vol K He. 8. p. 268.
It is a true saying and worthy of all men to be embraced, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief. This one sentence
through Gods instruction and inward working, which I did not then perceive, did
so exhilerate my heart, being before wounded with the guilt of my sins, and
being almost in despair, that immediately I felt a mavelous comfort and
quietness, in so much that my bruised bones leapt for joy. Psalm 50.


After this, the Scripture began to be more pleasant unto me then the honey or
the honeycomb.

Latimer calls him in his Sermons, Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol. K He. 8. p. 271,
27^. And 3. vol. p. 450.
blessed Saint Bilney, and shows how he was converted by him, and in what
anguish of soul Bilney was in after his abjuration, and that he returned again
and suffered for the Gospel.

Being in the prison he diverse time proved the fire by putting his finge^ near
to the candle: At the first touc^ of the candle, his flesh resisting, an^ he
withdrawing his finger, did afte^ chide his flesh in these words, Qu^ (inquit)
unius membri inustione^ far non potes, Soultet. Annal. Anno 153
and quo pacto cras t^^tius corporis conflagrationem tolerabi^ What (says he)
can not tho^ bear the burning of one member and how will thou endure to more
row the burning of thy whole body* The night before his execution, diverse of
his friends resorted unto hi^ in the Guild Hall where he was kep^ amongst which
one of them findin^^ him eating an Alebrew with a cheerful heart and quiet
mind, said, that he was glad to see him at that time so shortly before his
painful an^ heavy departure, so heartily to refresh himself: Foxes 2. vol p.
277.
Whereunto he answered, O said he, I follow the example of the husbandmen of
the country, who having a ruinou^ house to dwell in, yet bestow cos^ as long
as they may to hold it up* And so do I now with this ruinous house of my body,
and with Gods creatures, in thanks to him, refresh the same as ye see. Then
sitting with his said friends in godly talk to their edification, some put him
in mind, that though the fire which he should suffer the next day, should be
of great heat unto his body, yet the comfort of Gods Spirit should cool it to
his everlasting refreshing. At this word the said Thomas Bilney putting his
hand toward the flame of the candle burning before them (as also he did diverse
times besides) and feeling the heat thereof, O (said he) I feel by experience,
and have known it long by Philosophy, that fire by Gods Ordinance is naturally
hot, but yet I am persuaded by Gods holy Word, and by the experience of some
spoken of in the same, that in the flame they felt no heat, and in the fire
they felt no consumption: and I constantly believe, howsoever that the stubble
of this my body shall be wasted by it, Fox ubi supra.
yet my soul and spirit shall be purged thereby, a pain for the time whereon
follows (...) unspeakable. And then most co^fortably entreated of Isa. 43. 1,
2. well in respect of himself, as app^^ing it to the particular use of friends
there present, of whom for took such sweet fruit therein, the they caused the
words to be (...) written on tables, and some in the books. The comfort whereof
((...) diverse of them) was never tak^ from them to their dying day.

James Bainham.
As he was at the stake in the mid^ of the flaming fire which had ha^ consumed
his arms and legs, Foxes ^. vol. K. He. 8. p. 301.
he spak^ these words: O ye Papists, behold (...) look for miracles, and here
now y^ may see a miracle, for in this fire I f^^^ no more pain, then if I were
in a bed^ down: but it is to me as a bed of rose^*

William Tyndall.
For his notable pains and travel he may well be called the Apostle o^ England
in this our later age. Foxes Acts and Mon. 2. vol. p. 361.


He translated the new Testament, and five books of Moses; for his
faithfulness therein, observe his own words, I call God to record against the
day we shall appear before our Lord Jesus, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2. p. 367.
to give our reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one syllable of Gods
words against my conscience, nor would do this day, if all that is in earth,
whether it be honor, pleasure or riches, might be given me.

There was at Antwerp on a time amongst a company of Merchants, as they were at
Supper, a certain jugler which through his diabolical enchantment of art
magical, would fetch all kind of viands and wine from any place they would,
and set it upon the table presently before them, Fox ib. Tindall said I will go
and see this, but I will set my faith to believe the contrary.
with many other such like things. The same of this jugler being much talked
of, it chanced that Master Tindall heard of it, he desired certain of the
merchants that he might also be present at Supper to see him play his parts.
The Supper was appointed, and the Merchants with Tindall were there prese^^*
Then the jugler being required (...) play his feats, The power of Gods Saints
against the devil.
and to show his cuning, after his wonted boldness began to utter all that he
could d^ but all was in vain. He said, I cannot do it, for there sits the man
(pointing to Tindal) who holds my hands.
At the last w^^ his labor, sweating and toili^^ when he saw that nothing
would (...) forward, but that all his encha^^^ments were void, he was compell^
openly to confess, that there w^^ some man present at supper, whi^^ disturbed
and let all his doings.

He cried at the stake with a fe^vent zeal and a loud voice, He was burned at
Filford in Flanders.
Le^ open the King Fox ib.
of Englands eyes.

John Lambert.
After that his legs were consum^^^ and burned to the stumps, he lifti^^ up
such hands as he had, and his fi^^gers ends flaming with fire, Foxes Acts and
Mon. 2. vol. p. 427.
cri^ unto the people in these words, No^ but Christ, none but Christ.

Anthony Person.
He being come to the place of ^^^ecution, with a cheerful countenance
embraced the post in his arms, and kissing it, Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. vol p.
554.
said, Now welcome mine own sweet wife; for this day shall thou and I be
married together in the love and peace of God.

Henry Filmer.
He said to Person and Testwood, two other Martyrs which died with him, Foxes
^d. vol. p. 555. The like words spoke the L. Cromwell to the L. Hungerford,
they both going to their death.
Be merry my brethren and lift up your hands unto God, for after this sharp
breakefast, I trust we shall have a good dinner in the kingdom of Christ our
Lord and Redeemer. At the which words Testwood lifting up his hands and eyes to
heaven, desired the Lord above to receive his spirit. And Anthony Person
pulling the straw unto him, laid a good deal thereof upon the top of his head,
saying, This is Gods hat; now I am dressed like a true soldier of Christ, by
whose merits only I trust this day to enter into his joy. Many which saw their
patitient suffering, confessed that they could have found in their hearts (at
the present) to have died with them.

Adam Damplip.
He understanding from the Keepe^ that he should soon suffer, was ye^ merry and
did eat his meat as wel^ as ever he did in all his life, in so much that some
at the board said unto him, that they marvelled how he could eat his meat so
well, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d. p 564.
knowing he was so near his death. Ah master* quoth he, do you think that I
have been Gods prisoner so long in the Mar^ shalsey, and have not yet learned
to die Yes, yes, and I doubt not but God wi^^ strengthen me therein.

Kerby.
Master Wingfield said to Kerby (...) prison, Remember the fire is ho^ take no
more upon thee then tho^ can perform, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d p. 586.
the terror is great the pain will be extreme, and life (...) sweet: Better it
were betime to sti^^ to mercy, while there is hope of lif^ then rashly to begin
and then to shrink. To whom Kerby replied, Ah, Master Wingfield, be at my
burning and you shall say, there stands a Christian soldier in the fire: for
I know that fire and water, sword and all other things are in the hands of God,
and he will suffer no more to be laid upon us then he will give us strength to
bear.

Anne Askew.
Pray, pray She said so twice. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. ^d. p. 576, 578.
Sanders says the some twice. George Marsh says, pray, pray, pray, never more
need. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 235.
, pray.

To her confession in Newgate she thus subscribes.

Written by me Anne Askew, that neither wishes death, nor fears his might,
and as merry as Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. ^d. p 576. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol.
2d. p. 580.
one that is bound toward heaven.

Wrisley Lord Chancellor sent her letters (being at the stake) offering to her
the Kings pardon if she would recant, who refusing once to look upon them, made
this answer again, that she came not thither to deny her Lord and Master.

Sir George Blague.
He being one of the Kings privy Chamber, was condemned and appointed to be
burned, Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. vol p. 586, 587.
but being pardoned by the King, and coming after into his presence; Ah my Pig
(says the King to him, for so he was wont to call him) Yea, said he, if you^
Majesty had not been better to m^ then your Bishops were, your Pig had been
roasted ere this time.

Mr John Rogers.
That morning he should be burned he was found asleep, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol.
3d p. 130.
and could scarce with much jogging be awaked: At length being raised and
waked, and bid to make haste, the^^ said he, if it be so I need not to ti^ my
points.

The sunday before he suffered, he drank to Mr Hooper, being then underneath
him, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 130.
and bad them commend him unto him, and tell him there was never little fellow
would better stick to a man, then he would stick to him, presupposing they
should both be burned together, although it happened otherwise, for Mr Rogers
was burnt alone.

He was the Protomartyr of all the blessed company that suffered in Queen
Mary's time, He was a bold Israelite that first s^t his foot into the red sea
says D. Hall. Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol p. 131.
that gave the first adventure upon the fire. His wife and children being
eleven in number, ten able to go, and one sucking on her breast, met him by the
way as he went toward Smithfield; this sorrowful sight of his own flesh and
blood could nothing move him, but that he constantly and cheerfully took his
death with wonderful patience in the defense of Christ's Gospel.

Laurence Sanders.
He seeming to be somewhat troubled at his lodging, one which was there about
him asked him how he did: Foxes Acts and Mon.
In very deed (says he) I am in prison till I be in prison: Meaning, that his
mind was unquiet until he had preached, and that then he should have
quietness of mind, though he were put in prison. He that did lie with him in
prison in the same bed, reported that he heard him say, that even in the time
of his examination he was wonderfully comforted, in so much as not only in
spirit but also in body, he received a certain taste of that holy communion of
Saints, whilst a most pleasant refreshing did issue from every part and member
of the body, unto the seat and place of the heart, and from thence did ebb to
and fro unto all the parts again.

At Coventry (where he was burned) a poor Shoemaker which was wont to serve him
of shoes, came to him and said; O my good master, God strengthen and comfort
you Gran mercy good Shoemaker, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 140.
quoth Master Sanders, and I pray thee to pray for me, for I am the unmeetest
man for this high office, that ever was appointed to it; but my gracious God
and dear Father is able to make me strong enough.

When he came to the fire he fell to the ground and prayed, then he rose up
again and took the stake to which he should be chained, in his arms, Id. ib.
and kissed it, saying: Welcome the cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life:
and being fastened to the stake, and fire put to him, full sweetly he slept in
the Lord.

In the beginning of Q. Mary's time, there being a communication between
Laurence Sanders and D. Pendleton, the Doctor took upon him to comfort Mr
Sanders all that he might, admonishing him not to start aside, Foxes Acts and
Mon. vol. 3. p. 140, 141.
having put his hand to Gods plough; I will see said he (being a fat man) the
utmost drop of this grease of mine molten away, and the last gobbet of this
flesh consumed to ashes, before I will forsake God and his truth. Sanders on
the other side seemed so fearful and feeblespirited, that he seemed rather to
fall quite from Gods word which he had taught, then to stick to his profession
and abide by his tacle, but after Sanders suffered most willingly, and
Pendleton played the Apostata.

Mr John Hooper.
Being at Zarick with Bullinger, at his parting with him he promised to write
unto him how it went with him. B. Hooper prophesies of himself.
But the last news of all I shall not be able to write: for there, said he
(taking M. Bullinger by the hand) where I shall take most pains, Foxes Act, and
Mon. vol. 3d. p. 145.
there shall you hear of me to be burned to ashes, and that shall be the last
news, which I shall not be able to write unto you, but you shall hear of me.

When Mr Hooper being made Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester should have his
Arms given him by the Herald, as the manner is for every Bishop to have his
Arms assigned unto him (whether by the Bishops or Heralds appointment is
uncertain) the Arms to him allotted was a Lamb in a fiery bush, Fox ibid. p.
146.
and the sunbeams from heaven descended down upon the Lamb, rightly denoting as
it seemed, the order of his suffering, which afterward followed.

His life was so pure and good, that no kind of slander (although diverse went
about to reprove it) could fasten any fault upon it. I know not one of all
those virtues and qualities required of St Paul in a good Bishop, Epistle to
Timothy.
lacking in this good Bishop.

Bishop Ridley and he differed about the ceremonies, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol.
3d p 147.
yet both being in prison for the truths sake they were reconciled.

Every day his manner was to have to dinner a certain number of poor folk of
Worcester by course, While he was Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester in K. Edw.
time.
who were served by four at a mess, with whole and wholesome meats: and when
they were served (being before examined by him or his Deputies of the Lords
prayer, the Articles of their faith, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 148.
and ten Commandments) then he himself sat down to dinner, and not before.

Sir Anthony Kingston his friend coming to him a little before his death, Foxes
Acts and Mon. 3d. vol p. 153.
used these words, Life is sweet and death bitter, to whom he replied, that the
death to come was more bitter, and the life to come more sweet.

A blind boy being brought unto him, who had not long before suffered
imprisonment at Gloucester for confessing of the truth, Master Hooper after he
had examined him of his faith and the cause of his imprisonment, beheld him
steadfastly, and (the water appearing in his eyes) said unto him: Id. ib.
Ah poor boy, God has taken from thee thy outward sight, for what
consideration he best knows; but he has given thee another sight much more
precious, for he has endued thy soul with the eye of knowledge and faith: God
give thee grace continually to pray unto him, that thou lose not that sight,
for then should thou be blind both in body and soul.

Being at the stake, and having entered into his prayer, a box wa^ brought and
laid before him upon* stool with his pardon (or at least fained so to be) from
the Queen if he would turn: At the sight where of he cried, Foxes Acts and Mon
vol 3d. p. 154.
If you love my soul away with it, if you love my soul away wit^ it. The box
being taken the Lord Shandoys said, Seeing there is no remedy dispatch him
quickly. Master Hooper said, good my Lord, I trust you will give me leave to
make an end of my prayers.

Doctor Tailor.
He told the Sheriff and others (who labored to turn him to the Popish
religion) that he had been deceived himself, and was like to deceive a great
many of Hadley of their expectation. I am (said he) as you see, a man that has
a very great carcass, which I thought should have been buried in Hadley
Churchyard, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 176.
if I had died in my bed as I well hoped I should have done; but herein I see I
was deceived: and there are a great number of worms in Hadley Churchyard which
should have had jolly feeding upon this carrion, which they have looked for
many a day: but now I know we be deceived, both I and they; for this carcass
must be burned to ashes, and so shall they loose their bait and feeding that
they look to have had of it.

Having light off his horse in his journey to Hadley a little before he
suffered, Id. Ibid. 177.
he leapt and fet a frisk or twain, as men commonly do in dancing: Another
Martyr said, hold out faith and patience your work is almost at an end.
Mr Doctor quoth the Sheriff, how do you now, he answered; well, God be
praised good Mr Sheriff, never better, for now I know I am almost at home, I
lack not past two styles to go over, and I am even at my fathers house.

The same morning in which he was called up by the Sheriff to go to his
burning (about three of the clock in the morning) being suddenly awaked out of
his sound sleep, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 179.
he sat up in his bed, and putting on his shirt, had these words, speaking
somewhat thick after his accustomed manner: Ah horson thieves, ah horson
thieves, rob God of his honor, rob God of his honor.

Afterward being risen and tying his points, he cast his arms about a balke
which was in the chamber between Mr Bradfords bed and his: Id. ib.
and there hanging by the hands, said to Master Bradford: O Master Bradford,
quoth he, what a notable swing should I give if I were hanged?

William Hunter.
His mother said to him a little before his suffering, that she was glad that
ever she was so happy to bear such a child which could find in his heart to
lose his life for Christ's name sake. Then William said to his mother, Foxes
Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 193.
for my little pain which I shall suffer, Christ has promised me mother (said
he) a crown of joy, may you not be glad of that mother? with that his mother
kneeled down on her knees, saying; I pray God strengthen thee my son to the
end, yea I think thee as well bestowed as any child that ever I bare.

Being at the stake, he said, Son of God shine upon me, and immediately the sun
in the firmament shone out of a dark cloud so full in his face, Fox ibid. 193,
194.
that he was constrained to look another way, whereat the people mused because
it was so dark a little time before.

John Lawrence.
He being not able to go (because his legs were so worn with heavy irons in
prison, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 200.
and his body weakened with evil keeping) was born to the fire in a chair, and
he sitting in the fire, the young children came about the fire and cried as
well as young children could speak, saying, Lord strengthen thy servant and
keep thy promise, Lord strengthen thy servant and keep thy promise.

Dr Farrar Bishop of St David's.
One Richard Jones a Knights son coming to M. Farrar a little before his death,
seemed to lament the painfulnesse of the death he had to suffer, unto whom the
Bishop answered again to this effect, saying, that if he saw him once to stir
in the pains of his burning, Foxes Act^ and Mon. vol. d^2.
he should then give no credit to his doctrine. And as he said, so he right
well performed the same; for so patiently he stood, that he never moved, but
even as he stood, holding up his stumps, so still he continued, till one
Richard Gravel with a staff dashed him upon the head, and so struck him down.

Rawlins White.
The Bishop of Landaffe asking him whether he would revoke his opinions or no.
Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. 219.
Surely (said Rawlins) my Lord, Rawlins you left me, and Rawlins you find me,
and by Gods grace Rawlins I will continue.

The night before he was to suffer, he sent to his wife, and willed her by the
messenger that in any wise she should make ready and send unto him his wedding
garment, meaning a shirt, which afterward he was burned in.

As he went to the place of execution, in his way his poor wife and children
stood weeping, Fox ib. p. 220. See before in Rogers.
and making great lamentation: the sudden sight of whom so pierced his heart,
that the very tears trickled down his face, but he soon after, as though he had
misliked this infirmity of his flesh, began to be as it were altogether angry
with himself, in so much, that in his striking his breast with his hand, he
used these words; Ah flesh, staiest thou me so? would thou fain prevail?
well, I tell thee do what thou can, thou shall not by Gods grace have
victory.

Thomas Hawks.
Darbishire Bishop Bonners kinsman said unto him, that he was too curious, for
he would have nothing but his little pretty Gods book. And is it not sufficient
for my salvation? said Hawks: Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 257.
Yes (said he) it is sufficient for our salvation, but not for our instruction:
God send me the salvation (said Hawks) and you the instruction.

Some of Hawks his friends privily desired him, that in the midst of the flame
he would show them some token if he could, whether the pain of suffering were
so great, that a man might not therein keep his mind quiet and patient. Which
thing he promised them to do, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 265, 266.
and so secretly between them it was agreed, that if the rage of the pain were
tolerable and might be suffered, then he should lift up his hands above his
head toward heaven, before he gave up the ghost. Having continued long in the
flame, and his speech being taken away by the violence of the flame, and his
fingers consumed with the fire, so that now all men thought certainly he had
been gone, suddenly and contrary to expectation the blessed servant of God,
being mindful of his promise before made, reached up his hands burning on a
light fire (which was mavelous to behold) over his head to the living God,
and with great rejoicing, as seemed, struck or clapped them three times
together: At the sight whereof there followed such applause and outcry of the
people, and especially of them which understood the matter, that the like had
not commonly been heard.

John Bradford.
He did not eat above one meal a day; which was but very little when he took
it: and his continual study was upon his knees. In the midst of dinner he used
often to muse with himself, having his hat over his eyes, from whence came
commonly plenty of tears dropping on his trencher. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d.
p. 181.
He was very gentle to man and child, and in so good credit with his keeper,
that at his desire in an evening (being prisoner in the Kings bench in
Southwark) he had licenc^ upon his promise to return again that night, to go
into London without any keeper to visit one that was sick lying by the
Still-yard: Neither did he fail his promise, but returned unto his prison
again, rather preventing his hour then breaking his fidelity. He slept not
commonly above four hours in the night; and in his bed till sleep came, his
book went not out of his hand. He counted that hour not well spent wherein he
did not some good, either with his pen, study, or in exhorting of others.

Whosoever (says he) has not learned the lesson of the cross, Qui non est
Crucianus non est Christianus. Luth.
has not learned his A, B, C, in Christianity.

He was not content till he found God coming into his spirit with several
dispensations, according to the several parts of his prayer.

The keepers wife came up suddenly to him (he being in the keepers chamber) as
one half amazed, and seeming much troubled, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol: 3. p. 282.
being almost windelesse, said, O M. Bradford, I come to bring you heavy news,
what is that, said he? marry quoth she to morrow you must be burned, and your
chain is now a buying, and soon you must go to Newgate; with that M. Bradford
put off his cap, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, said, I thank God for it; I
have looked for the same time, and therefore it comes not now to me suddenly,
but as a thing waited for every day and hour, the Lord make me worthy thereof.

Creswell offering to make suit for M. Bradford: He thus answered, I^ the Queen
will give me life I will thank her, if she will banish me I will thank her, if
she will burn me I will thank her, if she will condem^ me to perpetual
imprisonment, I will thank her.

Some of the subscriptions of his letters were observable, Foxes Acts and Mon.
vol. 3d p. 356, 357.


The most miserable, heardhearted, unthankful sinner, John Bradford.

A very painted hypocrite, John Bradford.

Christopher Waid.
As soon as he was fastened to the stake, he spoke (his hands and eyes being
lifted up to heaven) with ^ cheerful and loud voice, the last verse of the 86.
Psalm. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 382.
Show me ^ token for good, that they which hate m^ may see it and be ashamed,
because thou Lord have helped me and comforted me.

Fire being put unto him, he cried unto God often, Lord Jesus receive my soul,
without any sign of impatiency in the fire, till at length after the fire was
once thoroughly kindled, See a strange token also upon Robert Smith in the fire,
Fox ib. 410.
he was heard by no man to speak, still holding his hands up over his head
together toward heaven, even when he was dead and altogether roasted, as though
they had been staid up with a prop standing under them.

Robert Samuel a Minister.
He would often in prison have drank his own water, but his body was so dried
up with his long emptiness, that he was not able to make one drop of water:
After he had been pined with hunger two or three days together, he then fell
into a sleep, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 414.
as it were one half in a slumber, at which time one clad all in white seemed
to stand before him which ministered comfort unto him by these words, Samuel,
Samuel, be of good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee, for after this day
shall thou never be either hungry or thirsty. Which thing came even to pass
accordingly, for speedily after he wa^ burned, and from that time till b^
should suffer, he felt neither hung^ nor thrist.

Robert Glover.
After he was condemned by the Bishop, and was near his death, tw^ or three
days before his heart being lumpish and destitute of all spiritual^
consolation, he felt in himself ^ aptness nor willingness, but rathe^ a
dullness of spirit, full of much dis^comfort to bear the bitter cross o^
martyrdom ready to be laid upon him. Whereupon fearing in himself least the
Lord had utterly with drawn his wonted favor from hi^ he made his moan to
Austen Benh^^ a Minister, and his familiar frien^ signifying how earnestly he
had pra^ed day and night unto the Lord, an^ yet could receive no motion, no
sense of any comfort from him: unto whom the said Austen answerin^ again,
desired him patiently to wai^ the Lords pleasure, and howsoeve^ his present
feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just and true, he exhorted him constantly
to stick to the same, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 427.
and to play the man, nothing misdoubting but the Lord in his good time would
visit him, and satisfy his desire with plenty of consolation, whereof (he
said) he was right certain, and therefore desired him whenever any such
feeling of Gods heavenly mercies should begin to touch his heart, that then he
should show some signification thereof, whereby he might witness with him the
same, and so departed from him. The next day when the time came of his
martyrdom, as he was going to the place, and was now come to the sight of the
stake, although all night before praying for strength and courage he could feel
none, suddenly he was so mightily replenished with Gods holy comfort, and
heavenly joys, that he cried out clapping his hands to Austen, and saying in
these words, Austen he is come, he is come, and that with such joy and
ala^rity, as one seeming rather to be risen from some deadly danger to liberty
of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of death. Such was
the change of the mavelous working of the Lords hand upon that good man.

Bishop Ridley.
He offering to preach before the Lady Mary (being made Queen) was refused. He
was after brought by Sir Thomas Wharton to a room, and desired to drink. After
he had drunk, he paused a little while looking very sadly, and suddenly brake
out into these words; Surely I have done amiss, Why so? quoth Sr Thomas
Wharton. Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. vol. p. 788.
For I have drunk (said he) in that place where Gods Word offered has been
refused. Whereas if I had remembered my duty, I ought to have departed
immediately, and to have shaken off the dust of my shoes for a testimony
against this house. These words were spoken by him with such a vehemence, that
some of the hearers afterward confessed, that it made their hair stand upright
on their heads.

The night before he suffered, his bear'd was washed and his legs, and as he
sat at supper the same night at M. Irishes (who was his keeper) he bad the
hostess and the rest of the board to his marriage; Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d.
p. 502.
for, says he, tomorrow I must be married, and so showed himself to be as
merry as ever he was at any time before. M. Ridley looking (as he was going to
the stake) espied Master Latimer coming after, Id, Ibid.
unto whom he said, O be ye there, Yea, said M. Latimer, have after as fast as
I can follow: After they came both to the stake, D. Ridley with a wondrous
cheerful look ran to M. Latimer, embraced and kissed him, and as they that
stood near reported, comforted him, saying: Fox ubi supra.
Be of good heart, brother, for God will either assuage the fury of the flame,
or else strengthen us to abide it.

D. Smith preached at the burning of Bishop Ridley and M. Latimer on the first
of the Corinth. 13. 3. wherein he railed against the Martyrs (and these two
especially) crying still to the people to beware of them, for they were
heretics, and died out of the Church. Dr Ridley (after the Sermon was ended)
desired liberty to speak, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p 502, 503.
but could not obtain it, unless he would revoke his erroneous opinions and
recant. To which he answered, so long as the breath is in my body, I will never
deny my Lord Christ, and his known truth: Gods will be done in me, and said
with a loud voice, Well, then I commit our cause to Almighty God, which shall
indifferently judge all.

M. Hugh Latimer.
In King Edwards time he did so evidently fore-shew and prophecy o^ all those
kinds of plagues which afterward ensued, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 461.
that if England ever had a Prophet, he might seem to be one. And as touching
himself h^ ever affirmed, that the preaching of the Gospel would cost him his
life.

When the Lieutenants man upon a time came to him in prison, Fox ib.
the aged He was called father Latimer* viz. Not burn, but starve for cold.
Father kept without a fire in the frosty winter, and well nigh starved for
cold, merrily bad the man tell his master, that if he did not look the better
to him perchance he would deceive him.

He prayed fervently, and oftentimes so long continued^ kneeling, Foxes Acts
and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 463.
that he was not able to rise without help. The three principal matters he
prayed for, were

First, That as God had appointed him to be a Preacher of his Word, so also he
would give him grace to stand to his doctrine until his death, that he might
give his heart-bloud for the same.

Secondly, That God of his mercy would restore his Gospel to England once
again, and these words, Once again, once again, he did so inculcate, as though
he had seen God before him, The Lord did most graciously grant all these
requests.
and spoken to him face to face.

His third request was for the preservation of Queen Elizabeth, whom in his
prayer he was wont to name, and even with his tears desired God to make her a
comfort to this comfortless Realm of England.

Upon new years day every Bishop was used to present the King with some
handsome new years gift, Latimers new years gift sent to K. Hen. the 8.
so they did some with gold, some with silver, some with a purse full of money,
and some one thing, and some another: but M. Latimer being Bishop of Worcester
then, Foxes Act, and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 486.
among the rest presented a new Testament for his new years gift with a napkin
having this posie about it, Fornicatores and adulteros Heb. 13* 4
judicabit Dominus, Fornicatours and adulterers God will judge.

To some that asked him why one that preached his Sermon did not preach as he
did, They both suffered together in Oxford against Baily College Martialis Epig.
he answered, he had his siddle and stick, but wanted his rozen.

Quem recitas meus est O Fidentine, libellus:
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
He spoke to M. Ridley at the stake with him in this manner; Foxes Acts and
Mon. vol. 3d p. 503.
Be of good comfort M. Ridley, and play the man, we shall this day light such a
candle by Gods grace in England, as I trust shall never be put out.

M. John Philpot.
Bishop Bonner said thus to him, What say you to the omnipotency of God? Foxes
Act^ and Mon. 3d. vol p. 555.
Is not he able to perform that which he spoke? This is my body, I tell thee
that God by his omnipotency may make himself to be this carpet if he will. To
whom Philpot answered, God is able to do whatsoever he wills, but he wills
nothing which is not agreeable to his Word: Non potest Deus facere quae sunt
naturae suae contraria. It is contrary to the nature of God to be a carpet, for
a Creator to be the creature. A messenger from the Sheriffs coming to M.
Philpot, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 593.
and bidding him make ready, for the next day he should suffer and be burned at
a stake with fire. Master Philpot answered and said, I am ready; God grant me
strength, and a joyful resurrection. And so he went into his chamber, and
poured out his spirit unto the Lord God, giving him most hearty thanks, that he
of his mercy had made him worthy to suffer for his truth.

As he went with the Sheriffs to the place of execution, entering into
Smithfield the way was foul, and two Officers took him up to bear him to the
stake. Fox ibid.
Then said he merrily, What? Will ye make me a Pope? I am content to go my
journies end on foot. But first coming into Smithfield he kneeled down there,
saying these words; I will pay my vows in thee, O Smithfield. And when he was
come to the place of suffering, he kissed the stake, and said, Shall I disdain
to suffer at this stake, seeing my Redeemer did not refuse to suffer a most
vile death upon the cross for me?

Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury.
He was so mild to his enemies that if any of them (who had wronged him) would
seem never so slenderly to relent or excuse himself, His life is written in
latin (out of Fox) by Melchior Adam.
he would both forget the offense committed, and also evermore afterward
friendly entertain him, insomuch that it came into a common proverb, Foxes Acts
and Mon. 3 vol. p. 63^.
Do unto my Lord of Canterbury a displeasure, a shrewd turn, and then you may
be sure to have him your friend while be lives.

He was a means to bring some learned men from beyond sea into England, as
Bucer, Paulus Fagius, Peter Martyr, Tremellius Hom^ (...), nec minus (...)
(Thomas Cranmerus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus) me non solum excepit, sed etiam
in aula sua aliquandiu detinuit. Sed quid aulam invidioso verbo nomino? Schola
certe fuit, vel palaestra pietatis and literarum. Tremel. epist. in Hos*
enarrat.
, being very hospitable to learned and pious men. And there are in Calvin's
Epistles letters between Calvin and him.

When the fire began to burn near him, Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. book, p. 671.
he stretching out his arm put his right hand to the flame, which he held so
steadfast and immovable (saving that once with the same hand he wiped his face)
that all men might see his hand burned before his body was touched. His eyes
were lifted up into heaven, and oftentimes he repeated his unworthy Because by
his right hand he had formerly subscribed his recantation.
right hand, so long as his voice would suffer him; and using often the words
of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; in the greatness of the flame he
gave up the ghost.

William Tyms.
He being brought and examined before Bishop Boner and the Bishop of Bath, The
Bishops began to pi^y Tyms case, and to flatter him, saying; Ah good fellow
thou art bold, and thou have a good fresh spirit, we wish thou had learning
to thy spirit. I thank you (my Lord) said Tyms, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p.
682.
and both you be learned, and I would you had a good spirit to your learning.

Hugh Laverock an old lame man, John Apprice a blind man, Martyrs, burned at
Stratford the Bow.

At their death Hugh Laverock after he was chained, casting away his cr^tch,
and comforting John Apprice his fellow martyr, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p.
701.
said unto him; Be of good comfort my brother, for my Lord of London is our
good Physician. He will heal us both shortly; thee of thy blindenes, and me of
me lamenesse.

Bradbridges wife.
When she was condemned of the Bishop to be burned, she had two children named
Patience and Charity. Who then said to the Bishop, That if he would needs burn
her, yet she trusted that he would take and keep Patience and Charity, Foxes
Acts and Mon. vol. 3d. p. 2, 7.
meaning her two children. Nay, quoth the Bishop, by the faith of my body I
will meddle with neither of them both.

Elizabeth Folks.
She being a young maiden and examined, Foxes Acts and Mon, vol. 3d. 832. Id.
ibid. 833.
whether she believed the presence of Christ's body to be in the Sacrament
substantially and really o^ no, answered, that she believed it was a
substantial lie, There is no use of faith and hope in heaven, love and joy
remain. See 1 Cor. 8. 13.
and a real lie.

When she was at the stake, she said, Farewell all the world, Farewell faith,
Farewell hope, and so taking the stake in her hand, said, Welcome love.

William Sparrow.
He said thus to Bishop Boner, that which you call truth I do believe to be
heresy, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 557.
and that which you call heresy is good and godly, and if every hair of my
head were a man (said he) I would burn them all rather then go from the truth,
etc.

John Rough.
Master Rough being at the burning of Austen in Smithfield, and returning
homeward again, Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol. p. 862.
met with one M. Farrar, a merchant of Hallifax who asked him where he had
been. Unto whom he answered, I have been where I would not for one of mine
eyes, but I had been. Where have you been, said M. Farrar? Forsooth (says he)
to learn the way. And so he told him he had been at the burning of Austoo,
where shortly after he was burned himself.

Roger Holland.
He said thus to Bishop Boner. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3d p. 877.
This I dare be bold in God to speak (which by his Spirit I am moved to say)
that God will shorten your hand of cruelty, that for a time you shall not
molest his Church. And this shall you in a short time well perceive, my dear
brethren, to be most true. For after this day, in this place shall not there
any by him B Boner, after which day no man suffered in Smithfield for the
testimony of the Gospel.
be put to the trial of fire and faggot.

William Pikes.
Somewhat before his apprehension, he sitting in his garden, and reading in a
Bible, suddenly there fell down upon his book between 11, and 12 a clock of the
day four drops of fresh blood, and he knew not from whence it came. Foxes Acts
and Mon. 3d. vol. p. 879.
Then he seeing the same was sore astonished, and could by no means learn from
whence it should fall, and wiping out one of the drops with his finger, he
called his wife, and said. In the virtue of God wife what means this? will
the Lord have four sacrifices? I see well enough the Lord will have blood: his
will be done, and give me grace to abide the trial. Afterward he daily looked
to be apprehended of the Papists, and it came to pass accordingly.

Alice Driver.
D. Gascoin and she conferring, she asked him whether it was Christ's body that
the Disciples did eat over night. Foxes Acts and Mon. 3d. vol. p. 887.
He answered, yea. What body was it then (said she) that was crucified the next
day, he replying, Christ's body, How could that be (said she) when his Disciples
had eaten him over night? Except he had two bodies, as by your argument he had.
Luke 22. 19.
One they did eat over night, and another was crucified the next day. Such a
Doctor, such doctrine: She put all her examiners to shame, that one looked on
another, and had not a word to speak, whence she brake out into these words,
Have you not more to say? God be honored, you are not able to resist the
Sperit of God in me a poor woman. I was an honest poor man's daughter, never
brought up in the University, as you have been, but I have driven the plough
before my Father many a time, I thank God, yet notwithstanding in the defense
of Gods truth, Fox ubi supra.
and in the defense of my Master Christ, by his grace I will set my foot
against the foot of any of you all, in the maintenance and defense of the same;
and if I had a thousand lives they should go for payment thereof.

Prests Wife.
In her trouble she would take no money, Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 891.
for she said, I am going to a city where money bears no mastery whiles I am
here God has promised to feed me.

Elizabeth Young.
She being committed to close prison, the Keeper was charged by Doctor Martin
in her hearing, to give her one day bread, and another day water, to which she
made this answer: If ye take away my meat, I trust that God will take away my
hunger.

CHAP. III.
Martin Luther.
HE was born on St Martins day, and therefore called Three Martins have much
opposed the Papists, Martin Luther, Martin Bucer, and Martin Chemnicius.
Martin Luther. He was though strong in body, yet sparing in diet; I saw him
(says Melanct. Praefat. ad ^dum volumen Lutheri.
Melancthon) when he was in good health, four whole days eating and drinking
nothing at all, I have often seen him at other times to be content many days
with a little bread and herring daily.

When he recreated himself, and took his mind off his studies, he was
delighted with the play of Chesse, and was skillful at it.

He was almost beyond measure liberal toward the poor: it happened once that a
student asked some money of him, he bad his wife to give him something, but she
excusing the matter in regard of their penury at that time, he took a silver
cup which stood near to his hand, and gave it to the scholar, wishing him to
sell it to the Goldsmith, and take the mon^ to himself.

Erasmus says, Homo affectibus suis nimium indulgens, qui ipse animi suiaestum
praeproperum saepe agnoscit. Rai^ol. de lib. Appoc. praelect, quarta vide
Gesner* B^bliothecam.
Lenitatem se in (...) desider are, He wished him more moderation and temper in
his writing Erasmus also often said, That God gave to this last age a sharp
Physician because of the greatness of their diseases. Intemperans aeger
crudelem medicum fecit.

He was by nature fiery but placable; therefore when Melancthon came once to
him being vehemently moved, he rehearsed this verse to him the rest being
silent,

Vince animos iramque tuam qui caeter^ vincis.

Overcome thy mind and anger* which overcomest other things.

Calvin Saepe dicere solitus sum: etiamsi me Lutherus diabolum vocaret, me
tamen hoc illi honoris habiturum, ut insignem Dei servum agnosca^: qui tamen ut
pollet eximiis virtutibus, ita magnis vitiis laborat, Vehementian autem quae
illi est ingenita, utinam in hosts veritatis semper contulisset, non etiam
vibrasset in servos Dominitutinam recognescendis suis vitiis plus operae
dedisset. Call. Bull.
says, Though Luther should call him a devil, yet he would honor him as a
famous servant of God, who as he excels with great virtues, so he has also
great vices, but I would (says he) he had always exercised his vehemence
which was imbred in him on the enemies of the truth, and not also on the
servants of God, and that he had spent more pains in acknowledging his own
faults.

He was of a just stature, a strong body, of such a Lion-like vivacity of eyes
that many could not endure to look directly upon him. He had good health,
except that toward his later end he was often troubled with a pain in his
head; whence he: Valemus omnes praeter Lutherum ipsum, qui corpore sanus, foris
a toto mundo, intus a Diabolo patitur and omnibus angelis ejus. We are all well
save Luther himself, who being sound in body suffers outwardly from the whole
world, inwardly from the devil and all his angels.

A great deal of money was given him by Dukes and Princes, so that I began
(says he) to fear least God would herereward me, sed protestatus sum me nolle
sic satiari ab eo, but I protested that I would not so be satisfied by him. As
for sedition, for ought I know me thinks I should not need Christ if I might so
say.


He says somewhere of himself, that he was never in all his life tempted to
covetousness, one that was so great a reformer as he was, had need to have a
spirit disingaged from the world.

When upon a time one Papist demanded of another, Latimers 3d Sermon. before Edw.
the 6
why do you not stop the man's mouth with gold and silver? The other answered,
Hem, Germana haec bestia pecuniam non curat. See, this Germain beast cares not
for money.

He was the first that opposed the Popish Indulgences. Rivet. Jesuit. vap*
Occasion nundinationis Indulgentiarum pretio numerato,Lutherus initio fuit
permotus ad hoc quod suscepit reformaetionis opus.

In the same year About the year 1517.
when Martin Luther began, Pope Leo the tenth did create one and thirty
Cardinals: In which year and day of their creation, there fell a tempest of
thunder and lightning in Rome, which so shook the earth when the Cardinals were
made, Foxes Acts and Mon. 2d. Tom. out of I. Bale.
that it removed the little child Jesus out of the lap of his mother, and the
keys out of S. Peter's hands, which thing many then did interpret to signify
and foreshew the subversion and alteration of the Sea of Rome.

Erasmus told Frederick Duke of Saxony, The spirit of Luther was raised by
opposition. Concurrimus utrinque, illi extremo ^urore, and ego summo co^temptu,
and vincet mea audacia.
That in Luther were two great faults: First, That he would touch the bellies
of the Monks. Secondly, That he would touch the Popes Crown, which two matters
in no case are to be meddled withal.

Luthers friends dissuading him from going to Worms, some crying that by the
burning of his books it appeared he was condemned in the judgment of the
Papists: others instancing in the examples of John Hus and Savanarola: Luther
thus answered Melch. Adam. Si scirem tot Wormatiae esse diabolos quot tegulae
in tectis* tamen essem ingressurus.
, As touching me, since I am sent for, I am resolved and certainly determined
to enter Worms in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea although I knew there
were so many devils to resist me, He might more fitly be called Doctor
resolutus then the schoolman
as there are tiles to cover the houses (...) Worms.

Whose undaunted mind, mos^ fervent zeal, great learning (sait^ Tom. 2d l. 16.
c. 15.
Chamier) stirred up many who armed themselves against the errors and commonly
received superstitions, among which were Zuingllus Famous writers of the
reformation, Luther and Melanctho^ in Saxony, Oecolampadius in Helvetia, Calvin
and Beza in France, Peter Martyr and Zanchi^s from Italy
Oecolampadius, Melancthon, B^cer, Calvin, and many others, whos^ labors and
endeavors that way^ God would not suffer to be frusta^neous.

Albertus Crantzius an Historia^ of the Vandales is reported to have said to
Luther, Frater vade Sculter. Annal Fox. Acts and Mon 2d Tom. p. 83.
in cel^lam, and dic Miserere mei Deus. Brother go into thy cell, and say, Lord
have mercy upon me, insinuating that an Aust^n Monk should in vai^ dispute
against the Pope.

His prayers were so ardent unto Christ, that (as Melancthon writes) they
which stood under his window where he stood praying might see his tears falling
and dropping down.

He prayed every day three hours, Tanta reverentia aliquid petit, ut cum Deo:
tanta spe and fide ut cum patre and amic^ se loquisentiat. Melc. Ad.
and then when his spirits were most lively, Pertres horas easque ad studia
aptissimas.

When he preached they which heard him thought every one his own temptations
severally to be noted and touched, whereof when signification was given unto
him by his friends, and he demanded how that could be: Mine own manifold
temptations (said he) and experiences are the cause thereof. He said (...)
things make a Divine, meditation, prayer, temptation.
For from his tender years he was much exercised with spiritual conflicts, and
vexed with all kind of temptations.

He regarded not the threats of his adversaries the Papists, he said to
Melancthon, Si nos ^uemus ruet Christus una, His motto was, Sit miser, qui
miser esse potest.
scilicet ille regnator mundi: and esto ^uat, malo ego cum Christo rue^re, quam
cum Caesare stare. If we fall Christ the Lord and Ru^er of the world falls
with us, I had rather fall with Christ then stand with Caesar.

When any evil news was brought to him, he called for the 46. Psal^ to comfort
him.

He says in one place, odi istud v^cabulum paenitenti^ Prius non fuerit ferme
in Scriptura tota amarius mihi verbum quam paenitentia, nunc nihil dulcius aut
gratius mihi sonat qua^ paenitentia. Lutherus Stupitio.
there was one no word so terrible unto him (while he was a Papist) and which
his so^^did more hate then that, Repent, b^^ after no word was more sweet, when
he understood the Gospel.

When a certain Jew was appointed to come to destroy him by poison yet it was
the will of God that Luther had warning thereof before, Foxes Acts and Mon 2d.
tome. p. 88.
an^ by the face of the Jew sent to him by picture, whereby he knew him, an^
avoided the pill.

In the garden of his houses the devil appeared to him in the form of (...)
black bore, but he regarded it not.

Cajetan asked him whether (...) thought the Duke of Saxony would make war in
his behalf* he said, Quid (inquit) putas princi^em Frideri^u^ propter tearma
sumturum dixi? hoc nollem prorsus, and ubi manebis? Respondi, sub caelo.
Lutherus praetat. ad Tom. primum.
(...) would not have him: Where will you be then said Cajetan? Luthe^
answered, I shall be sub caelo under heaven.

Erasmus wrote that there was more solid Divinity contained in one folio of
Luthers Commentaries, then in many large writings of the Schoolmen and such
like.

He said and taught many things truly and gravely, as concerning the sacred
Scripture and its authority, Solis canonicis libris debetur fides, Ego ipse odi
meos libros, and saepe opto eos interire, quod met^o ne morentur lectores, and
abducant a lectione ipsius Scripturae, quae sela omnis sapientiae fons est*
Luth. in Genesis 19.
caeteris omnibus judicium. We must believe the Canonical books only, and may
judge all others.

He was so zealous to have the Scriptures read, that he professed, if he
thought the reading of his books would hinder the reading of the Scripture, he
would burn them all before he died.

His saying was, Ecclesia sanguine and oratione totum mundum convertit. When
something concerning a business was concluded amiss at Norimberg, he said,
Long aliter in caelo quam Norimbergae hoc de negoti^ erat conclusum: It was
far otherwise concluded in heaven then at Norimberg concerning that matter.

He took a liberty to himself t^ speak stoutly when he was brought before the
Emperor, till he hear^ the pen go behind the hangings.

He has some high expressions in^ in his writings, fiat volunt as nostra, let
our will be done. Cave non tantum a peccatis sed etiam a bonis operibus. Take
heed not only of sins but also of good works. Hic me prorsus renatum esse
sensi, and apertis portis in ipsu^ Paradisum intrasse ibi ^ontinuo alia mihi
facies totius Scripturae apparuit. Lutherus praesat. ad pr^mum opus.


He being in an agony, and (...) glimpse of Christ's righteousness being
discovered to him out of Romans 1. 17. and perceiving that it was not meant, de
justitia puniente, but justificante, not of his punishing justice, but that
which justifies the ungodly, he says, I perceived my sell regenerate, and to
have entered into Paradise, the Scripture presently appeared in a new hew.

He would have been content at the first if they would have taken away
indulgencies. He said, Brevi efficiam ut anathema sit esse Papistam: I will
shortly cause it to be a curse to be a Papist. A young man about Wittenberg
being kept bare and needy by his father, was tempted by way of sorcery to
bargain with the devil or a familiar (as they call him) to yield himself body
and soul unto the devils power, upon condition to have his wish satisfied with
money, so that upon the same an obligation was made by the young man, written
with his own blood, and given to the devil: upon the sudden wealth and
alteration of the young man, the matter first being noted, began afterward more
and more to be suspected, and at length after long and great admiration he was
brought unto Martin Luther to be examined. Foxes Acts and Mon. vol. 2d. p. 88.
The young man whether for shame or fear long denied to confess, and would be
known of nothing, yet God so wrought being stronger then the devil, that he
uttered unto Luther the whole substance of the cause, as well touching the
money, as the obligation. Luther understanding the matter and pitying the
lamentable state of the man, willed the whole Congregation to pray, and he
himself ceased not with his prayers and labor, so that the devil was compelled
at last to throw in his obligation at the window, and bad him take it again
unto him.

He held Consubstantiation, but confessed to Melancthon that he had gone too
far in the controversy of the Sacrament. Paulo ante mortem a gens cum Philippo
Melancthone, fatetur in negotio cae^ae ni^^um esse factum. ^^^nold* de lib.
Apoc prael quarta
Melancthon persuaded him by the publishing of some mild writing to explain
himself. Luther replied to that, that by this means he should cause his whole
doctrine to be suspected, but Melancthon might do what seemed good to him after
his death.

When they said he had recanted, he writing to his friend Stupitius, says,
Omnia de me praesumas praeter fugam and palinodiam: Presume any thing of me
sooner then flying and retracting.

Luther so much esteemed of his book de servo arbitrio, that he gloried in it
as unanswerable and wrote to Wolfangus Fabricius Capito: They offered him a
cardinals hat if he would be quiet and not speak against the popish
indulgencies, he answered, he would not though he might be Pope.
Nullum se agnoscere justum suum librum, nisi forte De servo arbitrio, and
Catechismo, that he acknowledged none of his books for his, but those two, that
de servo arbitrio, and his Catechism.

If any of his books be to be disliked, surely that de sermonibus Convivalibus
is most faulty, of which Gerhard Loco primo de sacra Scriptura.
(a Lutheran) says thus, Liber ille Convivalium sermonum a Luthero nec visus,
nec lectus, nec approbatus est, quin multoties privato quorundam arbitrio
mutatus, mutilatus, auctus.

He said of the Pope, non habeo argumentum robustius, that he should fall, then
quia sine cruce regnat.

Luther speaks slightly himself of his first labors. Above all I beseeeh the
godly Reader, and for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that he would read my
writings judiciously, and with much compassion, and let him know that I was
formerly a Monk and a most furious Papist, when I first entered into the cause
undertaken by me. Lutherus de primis conatibus petit, ut ea legatiector cu^
magna commiseratione and meminerit authorem fuisse aliquando monachum and
Papistam insaniffimum. Luth. tom. 10. operu^ in praefat. Vide Melc. Ad.


He fitly called the Popes bull bullam, a bubble in respect of its vanity.

Being reproached, he said, Prorsus satan Lutherus sit, modo Christus vivat and
regnet, Let Lurther be counted a devil so Christ may live and reign.

His saying was, Turcicum imperium quantum quantum est, mica tantum est quam
pater-familias pr^jicit canibus, The whole Turkish Empire is but a crumme that
the master of the family throws to a dog.

He said he learnt more by one fervent prayer, then he could get by reading of
many books or most intent Ipse ^go in una aliqua ardenti oratione mea plura
saepedidi^i* quam ex multorum librorum lectione aut accuratissima meditatione
co^sequi potu^s^em. Luth. tom. 1.
meditation.

Melancthon in his preface to his 3d Tome reports this of him.

When he often seriously thought of the anger of God, or the wonderful
examples of punishments, suddenly he had such terrors that he was almost dead
with them, and in disputing once about some points being much amazed, he lay
upon a bed in the next room, where he often inserted this sentence in his
prayer: He has concluded all under sin that he might have mercy on all.

His prayer a little before his death was this, Melc. Ad.
Paeter mi caelestis, Deus and Pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi, Deus omnis
consolationis, ago tibi gratias, quod filium tuum Jesum Christum mihi
revelasti, cui credidi, quem sum professus, quem amavi, quem celebravi, etc.

My heavenly Father, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of
all consolation, I give thee thanks, that thou have revealed thy Son Jesus
Christ to me, whom I have believed, whom I have professed, whom I have loved
and celebrated.

When he lay a dying, this was his will for his wife great with child and his
little son.

Domine Deus, gratias ago tibi, quod volueris me esse pauperem super terram and
mendicum. Non habeo domum, agrum, possessiones, pecuniam (...) quae relinquam.
Melch. Ad
Tu dedisti mihi uxorem and filios, tibi reddo, nutri, doce, serva, ut hactenus
me, O Pater pupillarum, and judex viduarum.

O Lord God, I thank thee that thou would have me to be poor upon the earth,
I have no house land or money that I should leave them. Thou have given me wife
and children, I restore them to thee, do thou O father of Orphans and Judge of
widows, nourish, teach, keep them, as thou have hitherto me.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Covenant and Promises. Dicitur Hebraeis foedus (...) Berith vel a (...)
Barah id est, eligendo, quod Foedus est ut Abenezra scribit mutuus co^sensus
super aliqua revel a (...) Bara id est exscinde^do, e^ quod in foederibus
semper ali ^uid occide^^atur* Genesis 15 10, 17. Foedus Latinis a ferie^do* Paul.
Fag. Armot. in Deu. ^9. 11.

I. Of the Covenant.
THE Hebrew word (...) Berith, is derived from (...) Barah, elegit, to choose,
because God in the Covenant of works did choose out man especially with whom he
made the Covenant, and because in the Covenant of grace he chooses out of the
multitude the elect, and because a Covenant is a thing which two choose, and of
which they mutually agree and promise betwixt themselves, although the word be
used where ore alone does promise with a simple promise, and so it may be
referred to the Testamentary disposition. Or else it may come from (...) Barah,
comedit, to eat, as if they should say an eating, because they used in the
Eastern countries to establish Covenants by eating and drinking together. The
condition was about eating in the Covenant of works. (...) Bara, signifies to
slay (whence some derive a Covenant) because God made the first Covenant of
grace and sealed it by sacrifices Berith quasi Cerith, because sacrifices were
slain in making of Covenants, and therefore it is often construed with the verb
(...) Carath fecijt, he s^ruck, vide Su^kii, Antiq. Conviv. l. 1. c. 30, See
also M^ Mede on Mal. 1. 11. and M. Cudworths discourse concerning the true
notion of the L. Supper chap. 6.
of beasts slain and divided.

The Covenant in general may be described a mutual compact or agreement
betwixt God and man, whereby God promises all good things, specially eternal
happiness unto man, upon just, equal and favorable conditions, and man does
promise to walk before God in all acceptable, free and willing obedience,
expecting all good from God, and happiness in God according to his promise,
for the praise and glory of his great name.

A Covenant is a solemn compact or agreement between two chosen parties or
more, whereby with mutual, free, and full consent they bind themselves upon
select conditions tending to the glory of God and their common good. It differs
from a promise gradually and in the formalities of it, not naturally or in the
substance of it.

A Covenant usually is the collection of many promises, as a constellation is
the collection of many stars, though it be but one promise, I will be thy
God, yet it is such a one as comprehends many.

There is a difference between a Law and a Covenant. A Superior may give a law
whether the inferior consent to it or no, but a Covenant is ratified by the
consent of both parties. A Covenant is something unto which two persons by
mutual consent do freely bind themselves.

There are diverse distinctions of Covenants.

1. A Covenant of nature. 2. A Covenant of grace. 3. A mixed Covenant consisting
of nature and grace.
Others make these three Covenants,

1. Foedus natura, the Covenant of nature made with Adam. 2. Foedus gratiae,
the Covenant of grace made to us in Christ. 3. Foedus subserviens, a preparing
Covenant to make way for the advancement of the Covenant of grace in Christ.
Others say, there were never any but two Covenants made with man, one Legal,
the other Evangelicall, of works or grace, the first in innocence, the other
after the fall.

Foedus operum, when it was first made with man, was foedus amicitiae, God and
man were then friends, foedus gratiae is foedus reconciliationis inter i^imicos.

1. The Covenant of works wherein God Covenanteth with man to give him eternal
life upon condition of perfect obedience in his own person.

2. The Covenant of grace which God makes with man, promising eternal life
upon condition of believing.

We read not in Scripture the Covenant of works and of grace totide^ syllabis,
the nearest we come to it is Romans 3. 27. the law of works opposed to the law of
faith, which holds out as much as the Covenant of works and the Covenant of
grace.

The Covenant of works was

1. That Covenant wherein God was the author and the ground of it, was Gods
free grace, it was reciprocal betwixt him and Adam. We call not the second
Covenant a Covenant of grace, because there was no grace in the first Covenant,
but in opposition to the condition of the first Covenant which was works, and
because greater grace is manifested in it then the first,

2. It was the same Covenant under which the best of the creatures the Angels
now stand and enjoy their happiness, and Adam should have been happy by
observing this Covenant if he had stood. Christ was made under this Covenant.

3. The promises of this Covenant were very glorious.

1. For natural life, in the body there was perfection without defect, beauty
without deformity, labor without weariness.

2. For spiritual life, Adam should not have had terrors in his conscience,
sorrow, fear, shame.

3. For death, he should have been translated without dissolution.

The Faederati were God and Adam together with all his posterity. God made a
Covenant with Adam as a public person, Omnes nos eramus ille unus. Aug.
which represented all mankind.

The reasons of it may be these,

1. From the imputation of Adams sin to all mankind, Romans 5. 12. In whom, or
for as much as all have sinned, they sinned not all in themselves, therefore in
Adam, see verse. 14. In him all died, 1 Cor. 15. 47.

2. Those on whom the curse of the Covenant comes, they are under the bond and
precept of the Covenant, all mankind is directly under the curse of the
Covenant, Deuteronomy 29. 21.
Romans 8. 20. 21. Gal. 3. 13.

Adam did consent to it and understood the terms of the Covenant, for God dealt
with him in a rational way, and expected from him a reasonable service. Either
he knew the tenor of the Covenant, or else he broke it out of ignorance, but
the first sin could not be a sin of ignorance, he knew whatsoever was necessary
to know in a way of duty.

God dealt with Adam not only in a way of sovereignty but in a way of Covenant,
God did this for diverse reasons.

1. For the special manifestation of his free grace. 2. That it might be the
greater obligation to Adam to obey, God made a promise and he gave his consent.
God required man's service, non ex indige^tia, sed ex abu^dantia.
3. To sweeten his authority to man, Deuteronomy. 6. 24. 4. To encourage man to
obedience, Heb. 12. 2. 5. That this might be a ground to Adam to exercise His
faith in believing whatsoever God had revealed or should reveal. 2. His love, 1
John 4. 19. 3. His hope.
6. To leave man inexcusable if he sin, that a clear way might be made for Gods
justification and man's conviction.

Objection,

God is a free Agent, how can it stand with his honor and absolute liberty to
be bound to the creature?

Answer,

In a strict sense, 1. God cannot be said to be bound, but promittendo s^ fecit
debitorem, says Austins, and he is rather bound to himself, Aquinas.
and his own faithfulness, then the creature.

Objection,

How can it stand with Gods justice to involve Adams posterity in a Covenant,
which themselves never consented to.

Answer,

It is not an injustice among men for parents to conclude their children, their
acts bind them and their heirs. 2. God has reserved to himself a liberty to
visit the sins, not only of the first, but immediate parents on their children,
Genesis 9. 22. 1 These. 2. 26. The Sodomites children were punished with their
parents. 3. Adam was our parent, there was the will of the nature, which was
enough to inwrap them in original sin, the sin of the nature. 4. This Covenant
was made with Adam and his posterity out of free grace, therefore all his
posterity was bound by way of thankfulness to consent. 5. They ought to
rejoice in Adams exaltation being so advanced, and to agree to the Covenant
made with him. 6. God made the best choice for them in the first Adam (as he
did in the second) in so doing, seeing he made him so perfect.

The first Covenant consists of three parts.

Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12. 1. The precept, that continues not in all things. 2. The
promise, live, the man that does them shall live. 3. The curse in case of
transgression, cursed in every one.

The precept requires perfect and personal obedience.

The condition of the Covenant on man's part was

1. Perfect obedience.

1. The commandment then did (and still does as it refers to the first
Covenant) call for perfect obedience, Lev. 18. 5. Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Ezekiel
20. 25.

2. Because there is a curse denounced against the least transgression, Gal* 3.
10. One sin and that but in thought, broke the Angels Covenant, Romans 5. 17.

3. Gods holiness is such, that he requires from the creature perfect
obedience, Job 4. 18. Heb. 1. 13.

4. There are two things in the law,

1. The principal part of it, the precept.

2. The accidental, the curse: man is bound to the precept, jure creatoris, to
the curse, jure judicis.

5. He gave us a perfect ability to obey in our creation, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23.
Eccles. 7. ult.

6. He requires perfect obedience in Christ, Romans 8. 4.

2. Personal obedience.

1. There is a perfect obedience to the law required of every particular man,
Gal. 3. 10.

2. The curse is denounced against the person, the soul that sins shall die.

3. This was required of Christ our surety, Gal. 4. 4.

4. It was required for the acceptance of our persons and salvation of our
souls.

5. The righteousness of the first Covenant might easily be lost by
transgression, Dan* 9. 23.

CHAP. V.
Of the Covenant of grace.
AFter man by his fall had broken the first Covenant, God our of his free grace
did enter into a better and second Covenant.

1. All the persons in the Trinity did enter into Covenant with man, they have
all the same nature, essence, will, and this is an act ad extra, 2. Sin was
against all the persons in Trinity, therefore all they were to be reconciled,
but the person that chiefly made the Covenant with man was God the Father, the
other persons have their peculiar office^ in the administration of this
Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. Ephesians. 13.
the persons that God would take into Covenant were designed by the Father,
John 17. 9. Rev. 13. 6, 8. He imploies Christ as Mediator of the Covenant, Isa.
49. 8. Matthew. 12. 18. He appoints how much grace and glory he will give to
every one in this Covenant.

2. The fountain from whence this Covenant flows is the free grace of God, Genesis
17. 2. I will make (Hebrew, I will give) my Covenant. Ephesians. 1. 6. Isa. 41. 1,
2. 2 Samuel 7. 21. Free grace is here exalted in these particulars. 1. From the
consideration of the person that enters into Covenant, Genesis 17. 1.
God Alsufficient. 2. Of^ the persons with whom he enter^ into Covenant, man
fallen, Gal. 4. 21. 3. In that this Covenant was made with some of those that
fell, and not others, Ephesians. 2. 12. 4. In that the Lord hereby exalts our
persons and services, Hos. 2. 19. 5. In that sin can never spend the
righteousness of this Covenant, Hos. 3. 2, 3.

The Covenant of grace is that free and gracious Covenant which God of his free
mercy in Jesus Christ, It is called the Covenant of grace, because God of his
mere love and favor made it with man when he lay wallowing in his blood, Ezekiel
16. 6. It does not exclude all conditions, but only those which will not stand
with grace. It is called a new Covenant, Heb. 8. 8, 10. The Covenant of life,
of salvation and grace, Romans 4. 16. Gal. 3. 18. Isa. 42.
made with man a miserable and wretched sinner, promising unto him pardon of
sin, and eternal happiness, if he will return from his iniquity and embrace
mercy reached forth by faith unfeigned, and walk before God in sincere,
faithful, and willing obedience, as becomes such a creature lifted up unto
such enjoyment, and partaker of such precious promises.

God himself plotted this Covenant, Ephesians. 1. 9, 10. He spent infinite thoughts
about it, Psalm. 40. 7. took infinite delight in it, Isa. 53. 10. The main end
of Christ's coming into the world was to bring in a new Covenant, Mal. 3. 1.
Heb. 7. 22. an^ 12. 24. The spirit belongs to the se^cond Covenant, Isa. 59.
ult. his glo^rious works, a witness, seal, earnest, belong to the spirit of
the second Covenant.

The Covenant of grace is more glorious then that of works.

The first Covenant was made with the first Adam a mutable head, As the first
Adam Caput cum faedere, so the 2d, Adam, Isa. 42. 6.
the second with the second Adam an unchangeable head, Gal. 3. 16.

Secondly, The Covenant it self was a changeable Covenant, it gave place to the
Covenant of grace, Genesis 17. 7. 2 Samuel 5. 23.
but this second Covenant was an everlasting Covenant.

Thirdly, Isa. 54. 10.
The righteousness of the second Covenant is far more glorious then the
righteousness of the first Covenant, Hos 2. 19. Vide Ames. Medul. l. 1. c. 24.
that of the first Covenant was the righteousness of a creature, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
this the righteousness of God.

Fourthly, The condition of the second Covenant was more glorious then that of
the first, the condition of the first Covenant on man's part, was perfect and
personal obedience of this Covenant-faith, The first Covenant offers no
surety, it is a Covenant without a Mediator.
to sin against God in Christ, is the highest way of sinning, and to glorify
God in Christ, is the highest way of glorifying him.

Fifthly, The power of performing it is more glorious, now we have a constant
supply of the spirit, Ephesians. 1. 19. and 4. 13. then we had none to assist us.

Sixthly, The promises of the second Covenant are more glorious then those of
the first, Heb. 8. 6. All the promises of the law were conditional, This do
and thou shall live, Those great ones of the Gospel, of pardon of sin, of
giving a soft heart, are absolute: 2. Those of the Gospel are mighty promises,
they can give the mercy promised, and grace required, the law is weak through
the flesh.
I will be thy God, I will give thee my Son, my Spirit, God did not tell Adam
that he would be his God in that way that he promises himself to his in the
second Covenant. God promises a more glorious manifestation of himself, God in
the second Covenant set forth as it were a new edition of all his attributes.
Repentance is a fruit of the second Covenant Act. 2.
and union with himself in Christ, a higher manifestation of his wisdom,
holiness, power, and also of his mercy, which was not before discovered, a
higher union, under the first head there was only a moral union of love, under
the second a mystical union, we are the same person with Christ; the second
Covenant brings repentance and pardon upon repentance. The first Covenant said,
If thou do well thou shall be excepted. We have a higher Sonship. Adam was a
son by creation, we by Christ, our ground of the acceptance of all our
services is higher, God looks on us as being one with Christ, we have a greater
ground of perseverance, we have a higher title to our inheritance, Adam was
made King of this low world, Christ was made heir of all things, and we coheirs
with him.

Question,

How can the Covenant of grace be called a Covenant Faedus dicitur, quia firma
est promissio in Scripturis e^im quodlibet firmu^ statutu^, qua^ vis sit de
rebus inanimis, dicitur, faedus Ier. 33. 20, 25. Quia tamen gratuita donatione
constat, and morte donantis confirmatur, non tam proprie faedus quam
testamentum vocatur, Heb. 9 16. quod cum in priori non invenitur, illud non tam
proprie testamentum vocatur quam foe^us. Ames* Med The. l. 1. c. 24.
, as Ier. 31. 34. since it contains a mere absolute free promise, whereas a
covenant requires mutual conditions. Now no condition can be required to this
covenant, which the covenant it self does not work; For I will write my laws
does denote all things done by grace.

Answer.

Though God do perform, and in his Covenant promise to perform what he
requires, yet still there is something required which man consenting to, and
promising to perform (though not of himself by his own power) it is a covenant.

The Covenant of grace is mentioned an hundred times directly in the Scripture,
and a thousand times by consequence.

In general it comprehends all the blessings which God can give from election
to glorification.

Particularly he gives;

1. His own self, God spared not his own Son, To us a Son is given, I will be
thy God, thy reward, thy portion, thine inheritance. He is their reconciled
God, theirs in a league of love and friendship. (...) Scripture uses to
express this (...) some peculiar relations, as of King^ Husband, Father, He
will do (...) the offices of a good King, of a ^^ving Husband and Father.

2. He does actually with himse^^ put the soul into the possession (...) many
other things.

1. He brings reconciliati^^ with God. He is their shield, Ge. 15. a wall of
fire round about them Zech. 12.
2. Justification, the pardon (...) all their sins, and covering (...) their
deformities with the (...) of Christ's righteousness. 3. Adoption, makes them
(...) heirs with himself. 4. Sanctification, He gi^^ his Spirit to dwell in
them.
Thirdly, He gives them infin^^ wealth in bills and bonds, in promi^^ 1. For
this life,

1. Of preservation and de^^^verance from all evils, they (...) either be
prevented that (...) come not, or sanctified if (...) do come, or removed. 2.
Of a constant supply of (...) good things they stand in need of, for soul,
body, name, Ps. 34. He will prosper and give success to all the works of their
hands, Psalm 1. 2. Job 22. 28. 2. For life to come. In the new Covenant there
be three great Promises. 1. I will be your God. 2. I will pour out my Spirit on
^ou. The goodness of duties lies inadverbs, and the sweetness of the covenant
lies in possessives.
3. I will give you my Son. His giving his Son is the ground of both ^he
rest, He is a God to none but (...) whom Christ is a Savior, we ^ave the
Spirit also by interest in Christ.
First, I will be your God, Genesis ^7. 7. Psalm. 48. This God is our God, Deus
quantus, quantus (...) noster est* Toll De^ and nullus ero.
Psalm. 144. ult. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. ^^at is, you shall have as true an in^erest
in all my attributes for your ^ood, as they are mine for my glory, ^y grace to
pardon you, my power ^o protect you, my wisdom to di^ect you. This is a
comprehensive ^romise for God to be our Substantia foederis, Iun.
God it includes all, Anima foederis. Pare. Caput foederis, Mus.
Deus meus and omnia, said Luther. The Covenant of grace is both Faedus
amicitiae and conjugale, a Covenant of friendship, and a conjugall Covenant.
Abraham was in covenant with God, and God styles him his friend; also it is a
conjugall league, Hos. 2. 19, 20.

Secondly, Isa. 44 3
God promises his Spirit, Ier. 31. 33
Joel 2. 28. John 14. 16, 26. and 15. 26. Ezekiel. 36. 26*
and 16. 7. Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4. an accomplishment of which promise we have,
Act. 2. 23.

The Spirit is called, The Spirit reveals and applies the promises. Christus
impletio legis spiritus impletio Evangelij.
Ephesians. 1. 13. The holy Spirit of promise, because this was the great promise
which Christ from the Father has made unto us, the giving of the holy Ghost to
work in us all the good which he requires and apply all the good which he has
promised. The giving of the Spirit is a great and excellent promise of the new
Testament. The great promise of the old Testament was the promise of Christ,
Genesis 3. 16. of the Messiah, all the ceremonial Law was but a typical
enlargment of that promise. Christ when he was to go out of the world promised
his Spirit.

1. That in this last age of the world there might be a more full discovery of
the great things of the Gospel, Veritas a quacunque est a spiritu sancto est.
the Spirit reveals truth and stablisheth us in the truth, that Gods people
might know more of himself and his Son, and pry more into the mysteries of the
Gospel.

2. There are more glorious conquests to be made in this last age of the world,
all the great enemies of Jesus Christ are to be vanquished, Ze. 4. 7. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 9. the sharpest sufferings are reserved for these times, therefore Christ
has provided the most sovereign cordials.

What undaunted courage, what invincible patience, what ravishing consolation
had the martyrs in the flames? God made good this promise to them in sending
his Spirit.

We should put our bond in suit, turn promises into prayers, press God with
much importunity for more of the Spirit.

3. God has promised to give us his Son.

The whole Covenant of grace i^ purchased, Abraham saw Christ's day a far off,
and rejoiced. Anna, Zacharias, and Elizabeth waited for the consolation of
Israel, L^. 2* 25, 30.
founded, sealed, ratified in Christ's blood, Mat. 26. 28. Heb. 9. 14, 15. and
13. 20. It was Gods plot from all eternity to save man in such a way, as should
advance all his glorious Attributes, his wisdom, power, justice, mercy,
compassion, wrath, vengeance.

The Covenant of grace is the most free and gracious tender of Christ, and all
his rich purchases to all the lost and undone sons of Adam that shall believe
in him.

All other particular promises found in the book of God receive their
confirmation by the promise of Christ. God promises sometimes to deliver from
a particular affliction; to assure them that that shall be kept, he makes a
promise of Christ, Isa. 7. 14.
Behold a virgin shall conceive.

There are three things in the promise of Christ to confirm all other promises.

1. Because there may be made more objections against the Lords giving of
Christ, then against any other promise whatsoever, in that the great provoked
God must come to be a suter to his vassal, Jehovah must lie in a virgins womb.

2. More love and compassion is showed in that one promise of Christ then in
all other promises whatsoever.

3. Because this is the mother promise, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Romans 8. 20


Some say, The conditions of the Covenant of grace, are repentance, faith and
new obedience. Sincerity alone (or Evangelicall perfection) is the only
absolute condition of the Covenant of grace, Genesis 17. ^. It is called an
upright heart, that is, straight: It is also called Integrity, a body that
wants no members, a sound heart, a pure or sincere heart, a single heart, a
simple and honest heart. Evangelicall perfection is a work of Gods Spirit
whereby the whole inward man is applied to God and his ways without the
mixture of strange intentions or affections.

2. Sincerity of singleness, purity, perfection is the whole substance and
metal of all graces which God works in the soul; it is not any one grace,
as patience, meekness, but the substance of every grace, faith and love
unfeigned, Prayer which comes not out of feigned lips; we must worship God in
spirit and in truth, Ephesians. 4. 34.

3. God and the Saints have ever judged of men by this, Judge me, O Lord,
according to mine integrity.

4. The promises are made to this, Ps. 119. 1. Mat. 5. 8. See those Greek words
(which have an emphasis in them) (...), Mat. 10. 16, and (...) Phil. 1. 10.
explained fully in my Greek Critica.


Characters of sincerity.

As preparatory or a motive to the rest, to be willing and desirous to have his
heart thoroughly tried and searched, Joh. 3. 18, 19, 20. Psalm 139.

There are three real marks,

1. It makes the work of grace universal.

1. In regard of the subject: therefore it is called a new creature. 2. In
respect of the object, abstains from all sin, and performs all duty.
2. It is constant.

3. It presses on to have more till it be filled with God and his ways, Phil.
3. 8, 9, 10, 11.

It is a matter of great concernment for a man rightly to understand the nature
of the Covenant under which he is, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4.

Reasons.

1. Because it is the covenant which God has respect unto in all his dealings
with you, Psalm. 105. 8. and 111. 5.

2. Else we shall never be able to understand our own state, 1 Cor. 11. 28. and
2 Cor. 12. 5. Galat. 4. 23, 24, 25.

3. Else we shall never be able to judge a right of any of our actions, neither
of Gods ways to us, nor ours to him, Genesis 4. 4.

4. Without knowledge of the nature of the Covenant we can never understand our
own sins, we are not only breakers of the Law, but transgressors of the
Covenant, Hosea 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 21. Lev. 26. 24, 25.

5. According to our Covenant, such is the Spirit by which we are acted, and
such is our law and practice, one under the first covenant is acted by the
spirit of bondage, one under the second is acted by the Spirit of adoption.

6. We cannot else understand our mercies or afflictions, whether they come
from Gods love or displeasure.

7. Without this we cannot understand the riches of Gods grace in the second
covenant.

1. That he should enter into a covenant at man's creation. 2. When man had
broke that to enter into a new covenant. 3. To find out such a glorious way to
abolish the first covenant. 4. To make it with such a glorious Head, Christ. 5.
That the promises of this covenant should be better then those of the first
covenant.
8. All our terror or comfort comes from our covenant under which we are, Isa.
34. 5.
Heb. 6. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 9. Ephesians. 2. 2.

We are under the covenant of grace.

1. If we be in the second Adam, if we be willing to accept of Christ upon his
own terms, Hos. 2. 18.

2. If sin have not dominion over us, Romans 6. 12.

3. If the Lord put his laws into our mind, and write them in our hearts, Heb.
8. 8. God discovers four things to his people by writing the law in the heart.
1 His holiness, that a conformity to this law is a conformity to his
holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. 2. A perfect pattern of that glorious image our first
parents had in innocence. 3. A perfect pattern of the law of God in Christ's
humane nature. 4. A pattern of that perfection they shall attain unto, Hebrews
12* 24.
It is an allusion to the two Tables of the Law. They were first written by the
finger of God, and then put into the Ark: so God first writes the Law in our
hearts, and then puts it in our minds. The writing of the Law in the heart
signifies, 1. Similitudinem, a conformity, an inward principle and disposition
in the heart answerable to the doctrine in the book. Heb. 8. 10. It is not
barely said thus, You shall not teach every man his neighbor, but that clause
is added, saying, Know the Lord, not as if you were ignorant, but my law shall
be in your hearts and you shall be taught as a knowing people.
2. Permanentiam, continuance, it is not a flitting but a binding principle,
Litera scripta manet.

All the errors almost of these times may be confuted from the doctrine of the
covenant, Heb. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12.

1. Merit and supererogation of works, Satisfaction given to justice must be
commensurate to that justice which it must satisfy, infinite.

2. The Popish and Arminian doctrine of Free Will. Can man work in a way of
grace so as to determine and make it effectual before he have grace, a
principle of working? Can a man receive grace offered without a special work
of grace stirring and exciting him? I will write my laws in their hearts, the
promise then written in the heart is the foundation of all our faith, and the
precept of all our obedience.

3. For in vocation of Saints. Christ is the Mediator of the new Covenant; Job
9. ^3.
He is touched with our infirmities, and yet clothed with majesty, to his
Father he gives his merit for us, from his Father he gives his Spirit to us.

4. That Arminian doctrine of universal grace and redemption, that Christ
should die intentionally for all. Where ever the merit of Christ's death goes,
there goes his Spirit, the price and power of his death are equal; all have not
the Spirit of Christ, therefore not his merit.

The Socinians deny the satisfaction of Christ's death, justice must have
satisfaction. Christ (they say) came into the world to be an example, and give
us a pattern of virtue, as the Pelagians say we have Adams sin by imputation.
They deny all infused habits of grace, and would only have moral persuasions.

The Antinomians also are hence confuted, there must needs be a work of grace
in a man else the death of Christ will be ineffectuall, then some principle of
grace must be put into us. The old rule may stand still, though there be a new
principle put into the heart, because the holiness of God is not varied.

The Anabaptists, the covenant is with the house of Israel, and Gods children
born in the covenant are of the house of Israel.

Some say men are miserable two ways by Adams fall.

1. As we stand under his covenant, and so come short of conformity to the Law
which requires perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience.

2. As we bear his image, life and eternal salvation is offered on impossible
terms, therefore (say they) in conversion there is required a double change.

1. Moral, which is the change of a man's covenant.

2. Physical, the change of a man's image. So that as a man's covenant is, such
is his state, if under the first covenant, he is in a state of sin, of bondage
and death, if he be under the second covenant, he is in a state of grace, of
liberty and life, because he is no longer a son of the bondwoman, but of the
freewoman. Gal 4. 24. Partu^ sequitur ventrem.
A man in Christ is freed from the Law as a covenant, in these respects.

1. For justification, Gal. 2. 21. in respect of condemnation, Gal. 4. 4.
Christ was not only under the ceremonial law as he was a Jew, but under the
moral as a man, for it is under the law under which we were, and from which we
were redeemed. See Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law being made a curse for us,
Gal. 5. 23. against such (persons, not works) there is no law.

2. He is freed from the Law in respect of irritation, there is a power in it
to stir up the lusts of men, To. 6. 14. For ye are not under the law, as a
covenant (whether we understand it of its condemning or irritating power) but
under grace.

3. In respect of coaction the law causes him not to do duties or forbear sins
out of fear of the curse of it, Gal. 5. 18. Ye are not under the Law, viz.
constraining, 1 Timothy 1. 9. A godly man is perfectly freed from the Law as a
covenant in respect of justification and condemnation, he is freed by degrees
from the irritation and coaction of the Law, al those that are out of Christ
are under the law for justification, condemnation, irritation and coaction.

The covenant of grace is the same for substance now to us since Christ was
exhibited, and to them before he was exhibited, but the manner of
administration of it is different, because it is,

1. Now clearer: things were declared then in types and shadows: heaven was
typed out by the land of Canaan, we have things plainly manifested, 2 Cor. 3.
12. in this respect it is called a better testament or covenant, Vid. Ames.
Medul. l. 1. c. 39.
Heb. 7. 22. not in substance, but in the manner of revealing, and they are
said to be better promises, Heb. 18. 6.

2. Of greater extent: Then in Judah was God known, now to all Nations.

3. Abundance of the Spirit is poured out now: some few men then had a great
deal of grace, but Romans 4. 18. Heb. 11. 17.
generally now men partake of abundant more grace, Isa. 11. 9 and 54. 13.
both for knowledge and holiness.

CHAP. VI.
2. Of the Promises.
CHristians have many and great Promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 4. whereby are
given to us, Romans 9. 4.
(...), great and precious promises.

1. God makes them, they are the Promises of a great God: Great persons make
great promises.

2. They are made to Gods people, his elect: a King will not bestow mean things
upon his Favorites.

Reasons,

Why God makes great Promises to his people.

1. Hereby God sets forth his love to them, Tit. 1. 2.

2. That we might have ground for our faith and hope: here in this world we are
in a state of expectation, Heb. 11. 39, 40.

3. That hereby he might support them in their many troubles, Genesis 15. 1. Heb.
10. 35, 36. This is a merciful administration of the Lord, Adam had all his
good things in possession, he soon lost them, by the Promises they are as
certain as if we had them already, Though 1. The matter was exceeding great,
yet God made good his Promise, as in that of Christ, Genesis 3. 15. who was more
worth than heaven and earth, yet in the fullness of time Christ came. 2. Though
it exceeded all humane reason as the Promise of a child to Abraham and Sarah
when so old. 3. Though it was a cluster of good things, and that to a nation.
4. Though he has taken a great time to make it good. 5. Though humane policies
have stood in the way, as in the case of the people of Israel and David.
1 Pet. 1. 3.

The Promises are sure and certain,

God has confirmed them,

1. By the Sacraments.

2. By oath, the strongest confirmation that may be, Heb. 6. 17, 18.

The faith of Gods people is built upon two pillars, his power and
faithfulness resembled by those two pillars, 1 King. 7. 21. Bo^^ in it is
strength, Jachin, he will establish.

1. Gods power, that is often given as a prop to uphold our faith in his
Promises, Mat. 22. 21, 29. Romans 4. 20. and 11. 23.

2. His faithfulness, Heb. 10. 23. 1 Pet. 4. 19.

When Gods Promises come to be fulfilled to his people, they find twice as
much in them as they expected, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The Promise is the shell wherein
the kernel is contained, Ephesians. 1. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 4. That Promise in the
covenant of grace That God will be our portion, there is a great deal more in
it then we can understand; God will put his fear in his peoples hearts, Job 28.
16, 17. Prove. 3. 13. They shall enjoy eternal life with him in heaven, 2 Cor.
12. 4 Psalm. 16.
when this Promise comes to be accomplished, it will be far greater then we
can now imagine. They find the mercies of this life double many times to what
they expect.

Reasons,

1. From our weak capacity, we are not able to understand how much is laid up
in a Promise, the experience of Gods people is a great proof of this, the
longer they chew the Promise the sweeter it is.

2. The infinite goodness and bounty of God joined with his omnipotency and
all sufficiency, because God has set his heart on his people he will give them
abundantly more then they think of.

The Promises of God are of two sorts.

1. Absolute, those which the Lord has undertaken to perform of his own free
grace, not only citra meritum, but also citra conditionem, without all supposed
or pre-required conditions in us: of this kind are all those great promises of
the new covenant, Genesis 3. 15. and 17. 7. Isaiah 43. 25. Ezekiel 11. 19.
Jeremy 31. 33. Hosea 14. 4. Joel 2. 18. M. Strong on 1 Samuel 2. 30.
I will be thy GOD, I will give my Son, Gods promises are of two sorts, such
as are absolutely, and such as do run conditionally according unto the nature
of that good thing which he promises; some good things promised are absolutely
good for us, as pardon of sin, grace. Thus Gods promise is made absolute to
the elect in Christ: some good things are but conditionally good for us, as
degrees of grace, comfort and outward blessings: and concerning these Gods
promise is made conditionally, which condition if he break, he is at liberty.
M. Bridge on Lam* 5. 2. Numb 14 34 q^d I have p^omised to bring you into the
land of Canaan upon such and such conditions, if you do not perform the
condition I am free.
I will pour out my Spirit, I, even I am he who blot out your iniquities for my
Names sake, I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give an heart of
flesh, I will put my Law in your inward parts, and write it in your hearts; I
will heal your backesliding, and love you freely, for mine anger is turned away.

2. Conditional, which shows what God will do upon the performance of such
duties and conditions by the creature, which conditions without Gods grace he
is never able to perform; Ier. 17. 8, 9, 10. These are made for the
encouragement of the creature in the ways of obedience, and to show a man's
inability, that he may fly to Christ for strength, but they do not always
show the purpose of God to give the condition or reward.

When once God makes a Promise, though it may be a long time before it be
fulfilled, yet it yields comfortable fruit from the day of his making of it.

All agree that a Promise is a certain pledge of performance in due time.

Four other fruits grow from a Promise before it come to be accomplished.

1. It is a certain evidence of Gods love, Promises are a manifestation of the
covenant of grace, the covenant of love.
a declaration of his heart and good will; outward administrations come all
from Gods hand, but his Promises come all from his heart, his affection is set
on them who have an interest in the Promises.

Reason,

All the Promises are made in and through Christ, to Christ and then to those
who are united to him.

2. A Promise from the day of the date of it is a sufficient pledge to the soul
to whom it is made, that God will never do them hurt, but his purposes and
thoughts to them are always good, notwithstanding the outward administrations.

3. It brings preservation to the soul, 1 Pet. 1. 5. It will preserve it from
the assaults of the devil, and the world.

4. It brings present consolation to the soul: in Peter, The consolations of
the Gospel differ from all other comforts, 1 They are unutterable, 1 Pet* 1. 8,
Phil. 4 5. 2. Real, Ioh. 14 27. 3 Great and strong, Ephe. 6. 18 4 Reach to the
inward man, 5 Comfort in the saddest distresses. Mic. 5. 5. 6. Are everlasting,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 18.
where the Apostle speaks of great and precious promises, he says, We rejoice
with joy unspeakable.

An engagement of God in a Promise is a special means to support Christians in
times of distress.

God was ever wont to bear up the spirits of his people rather by Promises then
providence.

First, A great part of the Bible is spent in reporting Gods engagements to his
people by promise, and the exemplification of his people in performing his
Promises.

Secondly, The Saints of God were wont to live by faith, Ps. 56. 4. They ever
fetched consolation from the Promises, as Jacob, Have thou not said? and
Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 2.

Reasons,

1. The end of God in making the Promises was to give security.

2. They are a ray of his power for the creating of help: he that has a
promise has a blessing in the root of it.

3. Promises issue from the love, the grace and goodness of God, and are as
unchangeable as his love, they are founded upon the truth and Allsufficiency of
God.

That in Heb. 13. 5. is as full a promise as any is in the Bible, it is
applicable to particular cases, made in the hazards of war and difficulties
of reformation, it is double to show it is a fixed truth, and for time to come
in the future tense, in the Hebrews there is more said then is to Joshua. Josh.
1. 5.
God says, He will not leave him nor forsake him, Heb. 13. 5. there are five
negatives in that little sentence.

All the subjects of Christ's Kingdom of grace inherit all the Promises of the
Covenant, they are their portion.

1. It is a great privilege to be the heirs of Gods Promises, and the Saints
have gloried in it, David says, Thy Promises have I claimed as mine heritage,
by faith they embraced the Promises, Heb. 11.

2. Every child of God has a right to all the promises, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Gal. 3.
16. Romans 9. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

1. They are all made in and through Christ, as branches of the Covenant of
grace.

Objection,

Particular Promises were made to this or that man in a special case.

Answer,

No particular Promise was ever made to any for his own sake, but for Christ's;
Therefore those Promises which at first uttering of them were made to some
particular person on a particular occasion, were after pressed on all Gods
people, as that, Josh. 1. Heb. 13.

This is a peculiar privilege to Gods people, none but those under Christ's
dominion have interest in the Promises.

We should therefore,

1. Study the Promises, and know for what use and time they serve.

2. Beware of weighing them by our own carnal sense and reason.

3. Set faith awork, let the heart rest on Gods Alsufficiency, his truth,
wisdom, faithfulness.

A good man fetches contentment* and satisfaction to his soul in all
conditions.

1. From the Covenant of grace in general, 2 Samuel 23. 5. This Covenant of
grace, which God has made with his people is Gods assurance office, and the
Saints in all their fears may and ought to go to the Covenant to assure all
things to them, to assure their estates and their lives.

2. For particular Promises in the Covenant of grace, Those that are driven
from their houses, spoiled of their goods, should remember the hundred fold
promise, and that Mic 4. 6, 7
a gracious heart looks upon every Promise as coming from the root of the
Covenant of grace in Christ. See Psalm. 34. 10. and 37. 6. and Isa. 58. 10. and
elsewhere^ where there are diverse Promise^ which may bring Christian
contentment.

It is the greatest honor that (...) creature is capable of to be taken in^to
Covenant with God, Levit. 26. 18, 19. Jer. 11. 11. Zach, 11. the staff of
beauty, that is the Covenant, and you sin against offers of a second Covenant
which the devils never did.

Those who are in Christ and have their covenant changed are in a happy
condition.

1. By this means God and thou art reconciled, thy covenant is a covenant
of^peace, Ezekiel. 37. 26.

2. Being once taken into the covenant thou have interest into glorious
relations; God is become thy Father, thy Husband, thy Friend, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

3. Thou have interest into a most glorious inheritance by becoming the son of
a free woman. When David was driven from house and harbor, he encouraged
himself in the Lord his God Toll meum and toll Deu^. Aug.


4. Thou have a foundation for thy faith and a ground of all thy prayers, the
covenant contains all the privileges a believing soul can expect, it is the
ground of all thy prayers, Jer. 31. 18. Isa. 64. 9. The people of God still
plead it, it upholds the soul from sinking. When David came to die, God has
made with me an everlasting covenant. So Christ, My God my God, Psalm. 89. 26.

5. It is a covenant that can never be broken, 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. Isa. 50. 7.

CHAP. VII.
Of living and dying by Faith.
I. Of living by Faith.
FAith is a staying, What faith is. Justifying faith is a spiritual habit, by
which a regenerate man having in himself, upon a Divine testimony, an evidence
of the truth and goodness of the promise, and covenant of eternal salvation
through Jesus Christ, relies on him only for everlasting life. Mr White.
resting, depending and relying upon the merits and satisfaction of our blessed
Savior, by the virtue and merit thereof to obtain remission of sins and
eternal life, and all good things promised in the new covenant, at the hands
of God.

That there is such a life as the life of faith, is plain, Habak. 2. 4. But the
just shall live by his faith. The just shall live the life of grace here, and
of glory hereafter, in and by faith.

Gal. 2. 20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God

Psalm. 74. 13, 14. Thou did divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the
heads of the dragons in the waters: That is, of the chief captains, and
commanders under Pharaoh. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan (that is,
Pharaoh) in pieces, and gave him to be meat to ^he people inhabiting the
wilderness, for their faith, not their bellies. While they were in the
wilderness they remembered Gods mercy to them at the red sea, and lived by the
faith of this providence of God.

It is a life arising from the union of God with us by his sanctifying Spirit,
whereby a man is able to perform actions spiritual, in the Promises is the
life of the spirit of Gods people. Isa 38. 16.
The life of faith (says Mr Perkins) is a true life indeed, the only life.

The Schools dispute of faith, Ministers preach of faith, Professors talk of
faith, M. Ward.
profane men swear by faith, but few men live by faith

None can live, nor rightly understand this life but the Saints of God, a
Promise from God is sufficient for faith to rest upon against all
improbabilities whatsoever.

Many reasons might be given why we should rather live upon Gods Word then any
thing else.

The first reason may be taken from Gods Alsufficiency.

Consider 3. Attributes in God.

1. His Almighty power, he can as easily perform as promise. God urged this to
his people when they were weak at any time, Numb. 11. Is the Lords hand
shortened? Genesis 18. Is any thing too hard for the Lord?

2. The goodness and love of God, his promises are given to his people as
fruits of his love, Jer. 31. 3.

3. His truth, faithfulness and unchangeablenesse, Mal. 3. 6.

The second reason may be drawn from the interest which Christ has in him that
makes the promise, and in him to whom the promise is made.

1. All the Promises are yea and Amen in Christ, Consider,

1. Christ's interest in his Father who makes the Promise, his Father makes them
all for the Sons sake, all the Promises are called the sure mercies of David,
Isa. 55. He being a type of Christ.

2. Christ has bought all the Promises of the Father with his own hearts blood.

2. The interest Christ has in his people, Ephesians. 5. So is Christ, that is,
the Church.
he is one with them, and they one with him.

A third reason may be taken from the nature of faith, the proper object of it
is a Promise from God, Heb. 11. 1. Faith sees things clearly, infallibly,
strongly.

Motives to living by faith.

First, The necessity of it.

1. Take away this and you take away the only principle which distinguishes
the life of a man as a Christian from the life of other men.

2. The only cause of all heartbreaking and uncomfortable sorrows which Gods
people meet with in any condition is the want of this, Psalm. 42.

3. The want of this is one great cause, if not the only cause of the
unevenness found in the conversation of Gods people. Rebecca and Jacob had a
direct Promise that Jacob should have the blessing, yet because Esau was great
with his father they used unjust means.

4. Without this we can expect no benefit from the Promises (though they be
precious) unless we rest our selves upon them, Isa. 26. 3.

Secondly, It is a very becoming, amiable, fitting thing that we should rather
live upon a word of God, then any other help whatsoever. No creature on earth
ever attains to a self sufficiency, one must have something for his support,
therefore it is better to take a Promise from God, then to depend upon the
deceitfulness of creature comforts.

Thirdly, The wonderful gain which comes by it.

1. The soul which has but once learnt to make the Word of God a sufficient
stay to it self, such a one will live the easiest life that any man in the
world lives. It is not easily learnt (for much grace is required to it) but
when thou have once got it, it is comfortable. Such a one lives as a child
when he is in his fathers house, he is never troubled with care for meat,
drink, or clothes: the soul is at quiet when it has learned to center it self
upon the word.

2. It is the greatest engagement (as I may say) to God to help them, we cannot
put a greater obligation upon him, then by trusting in him, God will never fail
such as trust in him, Isa. 26. 3. Psalm. 91. 9, 14.

Means to attain this life of faith.

How may a soul learn to pick a living out of the word, to live by faith.

The life of faith is to fetch the counsel, the portion and comfort of his
life out of the word.

Ten directions how the soul may attain to live this life of faith.

First, Nothing but a sound, true, living faith is a principle of this life,
all the Schoolmasters in the world cannot teach any creature to live by reason,
till it has a reasonable soul. Labor to understand the true nature of faith,
and get it wrought in thy soul, the just man will live by his faith.

Secondly, Every degree of saving faith will not serve a man to live
comfortably and free from distempers, one must have a sound faith, and a
pleropho^y, and a great deal of faith for that end, the least degree of saving
faith will serve for justification, sanctification, adoption, salvation, but
not for consolation: Every blast of temptation overthrew the Disciples while
they were weak believers, they questioned the truth of all, Christ therefore
rebukes them for it, and says, Why are your hearts troubled? Paul when he
could say, I know whom I have believed, though after he was told he should be
whipped, he said, none of these things troubled him.

Thirdly, He gets acquaintance with some things in the covenant of grace which
may take off those objections that usually trouble believers, which are four,
and these do hinder Gods people from living by faith.

1. They find corruption in their hearts, this should no way hinder their
comfort, if they hate it and strive against it.

2. Temptations trouble them, whereas Gods own people are liable to temptations
of all sorts.

3. Afflictions, God breeds them up which are in covenant with him under diverse
and great afflictions.

4. Desertions, They find not the working of Gods Spirit, nor the assurance of
his favor, God many times leaves his best children to great and sad desertions.

Fourthly, Thou must get sound acquaintance with the Promises of the Gospel,
else thou will be to seek in time of trouble. Some general Promises concern
all estates we can be in, all things shall work for good to them that fear God,
and no good thing shall be wanting to such. 2. There are excellent promises in
the Scripture for any condition imaginable.

Fifthly, As the exigents or occasions require, whether to bear afflictions or
go through temptations, act thy faith upon that Promise which suits thy present
need.

A good man having all taken from him, and his wife desiring to know how he and
his family would live, he said he would now put his bond in suit. Think on Gods
power, truth, love, and Christ's interest in the Promises to encourage thy soul.

Sixthly, As a Promise from God must be measured by faith, so only by faith, not
by carnal sense or reason, do as Abrahaem did, he never told his wife Sarah
when he was to go cut his childs throat and offer him a sacrifice to God.

Seventhly, Faith must be helped with a use of all other means which God has
appointed to attain the blessing, 2 Samuel 7. later end. Psalm. 5. 3. Psalm. 119.
Deal well with thy servant according to thy word. Faith made Noah to build him
an Ark, work belongs to us, success to God.

Eighthly, Resolve to wait the Lords leisure in all thy believing, limit him not
to the time or manner of delivering thee, resolve God shall do it in his own
time, if thou have an able good paymaster thou will be willing he should pay
thee how and when he will. He that believes will not make haste.

Ninthly, Get thy will so far subdued to Gods will, that his will may be thine,
as near as it is possible for poor sinners to attain it: learn to say Gods will
is the best will, Romans 12. 3. 4.

Tenthly, Study the life of holiness, let David be an example to thee, he had
great communion with God, and knew how to improve a Promise. Some think one
ought to believe whatever corruptions he gives way to, they say men are
duty-mongers, merit-mongers. Others of Gods people are too much dejected with
the remainders of their own corruption.

CHAP. VIII.
2. Of dying in Faith.
QValis vita, finis ita: He that will die in faith, Heb. 11.
must first of all live by faith, and there is but one example in all the whole
Bible, M. Perkins his right way of dying well
of a man dying in faith that lived without faith, viz. that thief upon the
cross.

To die by faith, is when a man in the time of death, does with all his heart
rely himself wholly on Gods special love and favor and mercy in Christ, Psalm.
73. ^^.
and as it is revealed in the word. Religion is seen in its glory, when one not
only lives but dies in Christ, These were the words of Tremellius a converted*
Jew near his end, Vivat Christus pereat Barabbas. Domini causa, id est* propter
Dominum. Beza.
Phil. 1. 21. For me to live is Christ and to die is gain. And ver. 20. So now
also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or death. If I
live, by preaching, if I die, by suffering. Dr Preston said a little before his
death, I have long^ conversed with Christ in the world, and though I change my
place, I shall not change my company. Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labors, In Domino moriuntur, quicunque perfidem uniti and conjuncti
Christo inunum quasi corpus cum eo coalescunt. Rainold. de l. Apoc. praelect. 80
and their works do follow them. In the Lord, that is, say some for the Lord,
as Ephesians. 4. 1. Which suffer death for Christ, rather in the faith of Christ
being incorporated into him, (...) from henceforth, as Romans 8. 1. and 16, 17.
That constantly hold out in these times of persecution, say some, presently,
says Dr Rainolds, from the very time of their death, they rest from their
labors, of their particular calling, under afflictions from God, and
persecutions from men, under sin, temptations, Beati a modo, statim, e
vestigio, ab ipso mortis tempore. Id. ib.
desertions. And their works, That is metonymically, the rewards of their
works, as 2 Cor. 5. 26. Do follow them, accompany or go with them, the words
well weighed sound so.

When a godly man dies he dies in the lord by virtue of his union with Christ,
There must be a being in Christ before there can be a dying in him, those that
sleep in Jesus.
when there is a dissolution of the soul and body, the mystical union is not
dissolved, as the personal union of Christ was not dissolved when he died.

Before I lay down directions how to die well, and show the benefits that come
to the godly by death, I will show

1. The necessity, or certainty of death, and the misery of it to the wicked.

2. Resolve some questions about death. Of the first,

Death is a common condition appointed for every man first or last to undergo.

Heb. 9. 27. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
judgment. The Greek word (...) translated, It is appointed, signifies, it
lies as a man's lot. Once imploies two things, 1. A certainty, it shall once
be. 2. A singularity, it will be but once, 1 Samuel 26. 8. 1 King. 2. 2. I go
the way of all the earth, says David Job 30. 23. The grave is called the house
appointed for all the living.

Eccles. 12. 5. Solomon calls the grave (...) Bajith Gnolam, domum saeculi, the
house of age: We translate it long home, where he must abide for a long time.

1 Cor. 15. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, that is, death
destroies all and after is destroyed it self.

Psalm. 89. 48. What man lives and shall not see death?

When we would affirm any thing to be infallibly true, we say as sure as death.

A young man may die, an old man must die. It is an Hebrew proverb, In Golgotha
are to be seen sculs of all sizes, that is, death comes on the young as well as
the old.

Omnes una manet nox,
Et calcanda semel via lethi. Horace.

When it was told Anaxagoras that both his sons (which were all he had) were
dead, being nothing terrified therewith, he answered, Sciebam me genuisse
mortales, I knew I begat mortal creatures.

There are three special reasons why all must die.

1. Because God has so decreed it, Heb. 9. 27.

2. All men are made of one mould and matter, Adam of Adamah, homo ab humo.
Job. 4. 19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return, Genesis 3. 19.

3. Because all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin: Some read (...) propterea quod, for as much
as.
and so death passed upon all men, for that, or in whom all have sinned. Beza
prefers that version, in whom, In Adam legally, as they stood under his
Covenant, in him naturally, as they bear his Image. Sin brought death into the
world, either meritorie, as it deserves wrath, or privative, as it takes away
the power of the law to confer life.

Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. The word in the (...) Stipendia
capitur, Lu^. 3. 14. and 1 Cor. 9. 7. pro stipendio militum. de Dieu. in loc.
Vide Grotium. in loc.
Original signifies properly victuals, because victuals were that which the
Roman Emperors gave their soldiers as wages in recompense of their service:
but thence the word extends to signify any other wages or salary whatsoever.

Death is then certain, because no man can eschew it, yet it is 3. ways
uncertain.

1. In regard of time, no man knows when Morte nihil certius, boramortis nihil
incertius.
he shall die, Hezekiah only had a lease of his life.

2. In regard of place Incertum est, quo te loco mors expectet, itaque tu illam
omni loco expecta. Sen. epist. 26.
, no man knows where he shall die.

3. In respect of the kind of death, no man kuows what death he shall die,
whether a natural or violent death.

Objection,

1 Cor. 15. 51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, Christ is
said to be the judge of the quick and dead, Act. 10. 42.
therefore all men shall not die.

Answer,

Cajetan on 2 These. 4. 17. Vide Calv. in 1 Cor. 15, 51,
gives both a succinct and sufficient answer, Statutum regulare est, illos
autem non mori singular est.

Others say that change shall be a kind of death.

Secondly, The misery that comes to the wicked by death.

Every man in an unregenerate estate lies under the fear of death. Death is the
Atheists fear, and the christians desire.


1. The Scripture thus frequently sets forth natural men.

Heb. 2. 15. And deliver them who through fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage.

Job 18. 14. Death is called The King of terrors, an ordinary hebraisme, as
the Lord of glory, that is, most glorious, death has a dominion over them.

Luke 1. 79. Tenebrae metum mortis incutientes.
The shadow of death, that is, such darkness as strikes men with fear of death.

2. All unregenerate men hate the very thoughts of death, Isa. 28. 15.

Lewis the 11th of France straightly charged his servants, that when they saw him
sick they should never dare to name that bitter word, Death, in his ears.

3. Thoughts of death often imbitter all the comforts of this life.

The reasons of this truth may be these.

1. Because death is contrary to nature it self, and to that inseparable desire
of its own preservation, it being a dissolution of the whole man, 1 Cor. 15. 26.
and a separation of two most loving companions, the soul and body, by virtue
of that ancient curse, Genesis 2. 17. Yet it is not an enemy to the godly man's
person, though it be to his natural estate, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Christ did
maledictionem benedicere, paupertatem ditare, ignominiam glorificare, says
Luther.

2. Because they die in their sins they must themselves conflict with the
terrors of death, Lies down with the sins of his youth.
1 Cor. 15. 55. John. 8. 44. Sin in every man brings with it a secret
guiltiness, which makes him fear something worse will follow after death.

3. It puts an end to all the benefits and comforts of this life. Son remember
that in thy life time thou receivedst good things. It deprives him of friends,
goods, pleasures, credit.

4. It puts an end to all his hopes, A great man wrote thus a little before his
death, Spes and fortuna valete.
Job 11. ult. Their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.

5. His conscience shall then be awakened, this is the worm.

6. It brings him to the bar of judgment, Heb. 9. 27. He must go to God to
give an account, in whom he has no interest.

7. All offers of grace shall be at an end.

8. It is the inlet to eternity and puts them into an unchangeable condition.

In the next place I shall resolve some questions about death.

1. Question,

Whether it be lawful to desire death?

We have examples of both kinds, Phil. 1. 23
Paul desired to be dissolved, but Hezekiah mourned, and prayed exceedingly
against it, so did David, Psalm. 102. yet he rashly wished to die for Absalom, 1 Samuel 18. 33. The Israelites offended this way, Would God we had died in Egypt,
and would God we had died with our brethren. Elisha, 1 Kings 19. 4.
Job, and Jonah were to blame this way, Jonah 4. 3.
O that I had never been born, Job 7. 15. and 6. 9.
said Job, O that I had died so soon as I was born, O that I might die out of
hand, for these are the three parts of his desperate words. It is often in the
mouths of wicked people, would I were dead, and I would I were out of the
world. If they were to die indeed they would be loath enough to it. M. Fenner
of conscience.
Like the man in the fable, Summum nec met^as diem nec optes.
who being wearied with his burden of sticks, lay down and called for death,
but when death came indeed to take him, and said, What shall I do man? thou
calledst me: I pray thee, said he, help me up with my burden of sticks.

To answer this question, we must distinguish, 1. Of desire, there is
Desiderium carnale, spirituale, heroscum, a carnal, spiritual, and heroical
desire. If this desire arises,

1. From diffidence of Gods help and succor.

2. From impatience under crosses. Mors non est simpliciter and, absolute
optanda, quia habet in serationem mali, sed primo tanquam medium ad finem
praestantiore^, secundo propter consecutione^ majoris boni.


Or 3. From shunning of those labors and pains which are to be endured for
Gods glory and the Churches good, it is very sinful, but if it arise from a
holy desire to enjoy the presence of Christ, and to be freed from sin, it may
be lawful.

Secondly, We must distinguish of the manner in desiring, which is either
absolute or conditionate, if it be a conditionate one with submission to Gods
will, as long as the Church has need of him, it may be lawful, Domine si
adhuc populo tuo sim necessarius, n^llum recuso laborem.

2. Question,

Whether a godly man may fear to die?

Answer,

He may.

1. For some sin that he is not enough humbled for.

2. For want of the clear evidence of pardon and assurance of interest in
Christ.

3. Question,

Whether may one pray against a sudden and violent death?

Answer,

A violent and sudden death chiefly by some immediate hand of God, is redious
to man's nature: The Apostles themselves in a tempest made bold to waken Christ
with some what a reproving speech, Master, carest thou not that we perish?
Christ told Peter (foretelling a violent death) that he should be led to it as
to that which he would not, meaning by the natural inclination of his will,
this gives us just ground and warrant to pray against sudden and violent death.

4. Question,

Whether may we mourn for the dead?

Answer,

Yes, Because

1. Death is a fruit of sin, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall d^e
the death, and a sign of Gods displeasure against it.

2. It is a separation of friends, and they should not part without some grief,
only we must look that our mourning in such cases, be

1. Serious, not counterfeit.

2. Moderate, not excessive, either for quantity or continuance, which may show
want of hope and excess of love, both naught.

3. Holy, turning our sorrow from the death of our friends to the bewailing of
our sins, the only procurers of that and all other crosses. Egredere, quid
times? egredere anima mea quid dubitas? septuaginta prope annos servisti
Christo and mortem times?


In the last place I shall lay down directions how to die well, and show the
benefits that come to the godly by death.

1. What a Christian should do that would die comfortably.

1. Discharge the place and office which God has called him to with much
diligence and sincerity, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Act. 20. 31. Hier epist. Fam. l. 3.
Non est timendum quod nos liberat ab omni time^, do. Tertul.
Why do fear O my soul (said Hilarion) thou have served God this seventy
years, and art thou afraid to die? Live much in a little time, do all for
eternity, be abundant in serving thy generation, Acts 13. 36. You live no
longer in Gods account then you serve him.

2. Do nothing against conscience for the greatest advantage, this troubled
Judas, he betrayed innocent blood, this made the woeful tragedy of Spira.

3. Take heed of unjust dealing and violent oppressing of others. Samuel before
his death, Deu. 32. 19
Tell me (says he) whose ox or ass have I stolen or taken away? Psalm. 90. 12.


4. Improve thy riches and honors for Gods glory, This will make death less
bitter and terrible unto us, forewarned forearmed.
Luke 16. 9.

5. Spend the time of thy health well, and lay up prayers for death before
hand. Teach us to number our days (that is, to consider how few they are) that
we apply our hearts to wisdom.

6. Get acquaintance with death, Tu mor^e^ ut nunqua^ time as, semper cogita.
Senec It is the act of acts and science of sciences to learn to die.
take notice of all the approaches of it, behold the mortality of others and
consider thine own, do not think to die all at once, the Apostle says, I thank
God I die daily,

So seriously meditate on death, as to draw from thence some wholesome and
profitable conclusions and resolutions for the well ordering of thy life, and
that in respect of four things chiefly; sin, the things of the world, our own
persons, and the persons of others.

For sin, this conclusion must follow, therefore sin is a most hateful thing
to God, and a most harmfull thing to man, for it alone has provoked God to
inflict this heavy punishment of death, yea of eternal death after this upon
the sons of men, unless repentance come betwixt. Sin is the parent and sting
of death, sin brought it into the world and makes it terrible, Moriantur ante
te vitia Sen.
therefore I must hate sin, lament sin, resist and mortify sin, and must
make it my chiefest and in a manner my only care to get my sins forgiven, Our
Savior being at a great feast at Bethanie, sell into meditation and speech of
his death and (...), Ioh. ^^. 7, 8.
my iniquity subdued, and then resolve especially to mortify that sin which
thy heart is most unwilling to reform.

2. In respect of the world, we must conclude and resolve, that wealth honor,
pleasure, friends, are but very vanities, trifles and toies, poor petty short
and vanishing goods, therefore I must, Joseph of Arimathea made his tomb in his
garden, Ioh. 19 4^
and by Gods grace will resolve to pull mine heart from off these things, not
rejoice in them, trust in them, boast of them, seeing I brought nothing into
the world and must carry nothing out, use the present world as if we used it
not. 2. Diligently prepare for the life to come, every man must be for ever in
heaven or hell (there is no middle place as Nemose decipiat fratres, duo enim
loca sunt, and tertius non est visus. Qui cum Christo regnare no^ meruit, cu^
diabolo absque ulla dubitatione peribit. Aug. sermon. 1. de ebrietate.
pargatory) so soon as his soul and body are separated. Labor therefore to get
good assurance of bettering your estate and enjoying eternal life by bewailing
the sinfulness of your nature and lives, and seeking unto, and resting upon
the Lord Jesus Christ alone, and his mediation and obedience and the sprinkl^ng
of his blood for pardon of sin and help against damnation, and lastly labor
and study to reform your hearts and lives more and more.

3. Concerning our own persons, we must thus conclude that we are but mean and
contemptible creatures that must die and turn to dust and be made food for
worms, why should I then be proud, or think my self better then others because
of my strength, beauty, wit, learning, parentage, titles, offices, attendances?
of all which death will strip me and teach me to know they were but borrowed
things.

4. For other men we ought to to conclude thus, they also must die as well as
my self, my husband, wife, my dear and faithful friend, who knows how soon?
therefore it is a great weakness to trust on such, to place my happiness in
them. Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, therefore use al persons
as well as all things, as if thou did not use them.

Lastly, Let the Saints of God take great comfort in the contemplation of the
good that death will bring them, it concludes all their sorrows and evils and
is a beginning of all joies, pleasures, comfort, glory and happiness. Death is
to such a resting from their labors, Rev. 14. 14. A happy change, Phil. 3. 21.
Job 14. 14. calls death a change, it is not an annihilation or extinction, but a
mutation, and that by way of eminency, My change. It is the last change we
shall meet with till the resurrection. 2. A lasting, nay an everlasting change,
it puts us into an eternal condition of happiness or misery. 3. An universal
change, 1. in respect of persons all must meet with it. 2. In regard of the
whole man, body and soul, makes the body a stinking carcass, and puts the soul
into heaven or hell. 4. A different change according to the quality of the
person changed, terrible to a sinner, comfortable to the godly. Death is their
bodies seed-time, 1 Cor. 15. the crowning day to the soul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. the
funeral of all their sins and sorrows, Romans 6. 7.

I shall in the last place mention some of the chief benefits that come to the
godly by death.

By it he is freed

1. From sin, not only the destroying power, but the being of it is then taken
away.

2. From those miseries which follow sin, Isa. 57. 1, 2, 3.

3. From the temptations of the devil, Rev. 12. 8.

4. From the troubles of the world, and vexations of the flesh, Rev. 14. 13.
Eccles. 4. 1, 2.

2. There is nothing in his death but what conduces to make him happy.

1. A godly man dies in Gods love, and mercy,

2. He never dies til he be prepared, See Ioh. 11. 44.
till his graces be perfected and work finished, 2 Timothy 4. 7
Job. 5. 26.

3. He shall in some measure be assured of a better life, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

4. When he dies he shall leave a sweet favor behind him, Prove. 10. 7. The
memory of the just is blessed The Jews when they make mention of any of their
deceased Worthies, are wont to do it with this encomium (...) id est, Memoria
ejus sit in bened^ctionem. Which encomiasticall scheme is taken from that of
Solomon, Pr^. 10. 7. Buxtorf. de Abbreviat Hebr. Fuller. Concord. Hebr. transm.
and Mede on Psalm. 112. 6.
(...)

The Septuagint thus translates it, (...). The memory of the just is with
praises.

Let the godly therefore comfort themselves against death with these promises,
Joh. 3. 16. and 5. 24. and 10. 28. and 11. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 22, 57. 2 Cor. 5. 1.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE.
A.
Anne Askew. p. 29. Aprice. p. 59.
B.
Bainham. p. 24. Believer freed from the law, how. p. 111. Bilney. p. 20, 21,
22, 23. Blague. p. 30. Bradbridges wife. p. 59. Bradford. p. 44, 45, 46.
C.
Covenant, the reason of the hebrew name. 81, 82 What a covenant is, 82. The
several kinds of covenants. p. 83, 84. 1. The covenant of works. p. 85, to
91. The covenant of grace. p. 91, to 113. Cranmer. p. 56, 57, 58.
D.
Damplip. p. 28. Death is common to all. p. 136, 137, 138, 139. The misery
which comes to the wicked by death. p. 140, 141, 142. Whether it be lawful to
desire death. p. 142, 143, 144. Whether may one pray against a sudden and
violent death. p. 145. Whether may one mourn for the dead. p. ib. Whether a
good man may fear to die. p. 144. What a christian should do to die
comfortably. p. 146. Dying in faith. p. 134, to the end.
E.
Error, all the errors almost of these: times may be confuted from the doctrine
of the covenant. p. 108. to 110.
F.
Faith, what it is. p. 124. Farrar. p. 40. Filmer. p. 27. Folk. p. 60.
G.
Glover. p. 48, 49.
H.
Hamelton. p. 19. Hauks. p. 42, 43. Hector. p. 19. Hierome of Prague. 17
Holland. p. 61. Hooper. p. 34, 35. Hunter. p. 39, 40. Hus. p. 16.
I.
Ignatius. p. 14, 15, 16. Indulgencies, Luther first opposed them. 68.
K.
Kerby. p. 28, 29.
L.
Lambert. p. 26. Latimer. p. 52 to 55. Laverock. p. 59. Lawrence. p. 40. Living
by faith. p. 124, to 134. Luther, diverse memorable things of him. p. 65. to 81.
M.
Martin, why Luther was so called. p. 65. 3. Martins much opposed the papists.
ib. Martyr, Observations concerning the martyrs in general. p. 1, to 13. What
a martyr is. p. 1, 2, 3. The great honor of martyrdom. p. 3, 4. The several
sorts of martyrs. p. 4. They suffered cheerfully. p. 5. Constantly. p. 6, 7, 8,
9. With much comfort and assurance. p. 10. The number of them. p. 6, 7. They
were eminent in many graces. p. 11. to 13. Moice. p. 18.
P.
Person. p. 26, 27. Philpot. p. 55, 56. Pikes. p 62. Policarpus. p. 13, 14.
Pomponius Algerius. p. 18. Prests wife. p. 64. Promises. p. 113, to 124
R.
Ridley. p. 50, 51, 52. Rogers. p. 30, 31. Rough. p. 60, 61.
S.
Samuel. p. 47, 48. Sanders. p. 31, 32, 33. Serre. p. 18, 19. Sincerity. p.
103, 104, 105. Sparrow. p. 60.
T.
Tailor. p. 37, 38, 39. Tyms. p. 58. Tyndall. p. 24, 25, 26.
V.
Voes. p. 17.
W.
Waid. p. 46. White. p. 41, 42.
Y.
Young. p. 64.
FINIS.

