THE ART OF FAIR BUILDING: Represented in the Figures of Several uprights of
houses, with their Ground-plots, fitting for persons of several Qualities.
Wherein is divided each Room and Office according to their most convenient
occasion, with their Heights, Depths, Lengths, and Breadths according to
Proportion. WITH Rules and Directions for the placing of the Doors, Windows,
Chimnies, Beds, Stairs, and other conveniences; with their just Measures for
the best advantage both of Commodiousness, Health, Strength, and Ornament. Also
a Description of the Names and Proportions of the Members belonging to the
framing of the Timber-work, with Directions and Examples for the placing of
them.

By Pierre Le Muet, Architect in Ordinary to the French King, and Surveyor of
his Designs and Fortifications in the Province of Picardy. Published in English
by Robert Prick, for the use and benefit of all persons that are concerned or
take delight in the famous art of Fair Building. Licensed Feb. 1. 1670. Roger
L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Prick in White-cross street over against the Cross
Keys, and at the Golden Lion at the corner of New Cheapside next Bethlem; where
likewise you may have choice of other books of Architecture, also Maps,
Copy-books, Italian, French, and Dutch Prints, M.DC.LXX.

TO THE READER.
THat which first gave the occasion to men to build was Necessity; whenas being
oppressed with the untemperateness of the air, and toiled with the excess of
the heats of the Sun, with the extremities of cold, with the tedeous vexations
of the snows, hail, and rains; they endeavored to get under a Covering, even
in the first and tenderest age of the world, as also to defend themselves from
the invasion of fierce and cruel beasts. It may be believed, that the ignorance
of the Understandings of that age did not suffer them to build very stately
buildings, but that by degrees their Successors setting their hands to the
work, (as it happens in every other thing to be refined in process of time)
obtained a far greater skill in the art of building, and that they left
Instructions thereof, which their Posterity have still enriched, even unto
perfection. All the Historians give us to understand, that the Assyrians and
Medes were famous Builders, insomuch as they made both houses and walls of
Cities of an immense and most incredible greatness; as also the Persians. And
the Pyramides of Egypt still do (even at this day) serve for a witness, how
much the people of that Country busied themselves in buildings. That so
renowned Temple of Solomon was the reason, that there is no body can doubt but
that the Hebrews had likewise a very great and most perfect understanding in
Architecture. Nevertheless I shall say, that the Western people, having
continually augmented the Sciences which they received from the Eastern, have
likewise surpassed in the knowledge of Architecture all the Nations that I have
named. The Greeks first became excellent therein; the Italians afterward
framed mavelous works; and the French at this time are able to practice all
that which both the one and the other have known therein; having also upon the
same subject brought to light many singular and admirable Inventions: in such
manner that one may well avouch, that if Art has ever contributed together
with Nature to bring any thing to perfection, its design has more happily
succeeded in the accomplishment of the buildings of our France, then in any
other subject (wherein it has strived to busy it self) whatsoever. For as
Nature (being favored by the temperate situation of the Kingdom) has caused
us to see there almost in every place, that in abundance which she has but
scattered and sown here and there in diverse quarters of the Earth. Even so
Art, by the ornament of sumptuous buildings, has taken care to beautify it,
by these means bringing an unspeakable contentment to the eyes of men; causing
them to lodge most pleasantly and stately, which is one of the most delightful
contents of this life. But it would be a superfluous thing to discourse in this
place of the fair building of such Edifices, seeing that our intention is only
to show to the public view, the manner of building upon any kind of bigness
propounded: to the end that in particular houses one may observe the comeliness
and convenience proportionable to that, which one may behold ordinarily in
public buildings, and other houses of Entertainment. Therefore I have begun
with the smallest space upon which one may build, unto such a greatness as we
find many persons to possess of places of the like measure; and afterward I
shall work upon more spacious places, and declare all that may conveniently be
made thereupon. And herein (Reader) I have conceived my self no less to assist
thee, then if I had discoursed profoundly of Architecture, and set forth all
its rules: which yet nevertheless I do not renounce, as hoping within a small
time to satisfy the curiosity of every one upon this point* which shall be
then when I shall publish my Designs concerning Royal Buildings, where thou
shall see the diverse Orders of Pillars entirely observed, and the Edifices
erected according to them, with such enrichments as are most agreeable thereto.
I hope there shall be found there whatsoever serves for the adorning of
Palaces and Churches, and I shall make as it were an abridgment of all that is
necessary for the raising of great buildings. Receive in the mean time (Reader)
this Work, which I dedicate to the benefit of every one, and thereby you shall
oblige me (by accepting it favorably) to labor more and more for the benefit
of the Public.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE Of all that which ought to be observed in the Framing of
every BVILDING.
IN the framing of every Building we must have regard to the durableness
thereof, to the pleasantness and convenience, to the comely proportion, and to
the healthfulness of each room therein.

The durableness of it consists in the working of it with substantial stuff;
but because that this is different according to the diversity of places, there
can be no particular Rules given thereof. This must be referred to the
discretion and judgment of him that builds, the which shall direct himself by
the knowledge that he has gotten by experience of the goodness of the said
Materials.

To give a do thickness to the Walls, agreeable to the height, and the weight
which one would have them to bear. Now forasmuch as that depends partly on
the goodness of the said Materials, the knowledge whereof cannot be got but
upon the said places, we have also referred this point to the discretion of the
Master Builder: having for this purpose taken within the Work all the
Longitudes and Latitudes of our Designs. And nevertheless the thickness which
we have therein used, may be observed and followed with all safety in the
Buildings, which shall be made at Paris, and there round about: in the which
(as altogether elsewhere) it will be good to observe, that whenas the thickness
of common buildings shall be determined, as concerning that which is to be
under the ground, one must reduce the whole into two thirds, as for that which
shall be above the ground; and this by the means of two Divisions on the one
part and the other.

To cause that the burdens above may be placed upon parts able to bear them
up, and because that the Planchers, and all that one places above, are born up
by the beams; one must take good heed that he place not the said Beams upon
empty places, as upon Windows or Gates. In brief, one must take care that empty
things be placed upon the empty, as the solid upon the solid. He must also take
heed, that he cause not the Beams to pass through the Chimnies, by reason of
the inconvenience that may happen thereby. And he must likewise take heed that
the length of the Beams be not excessive, having regard to their thickness;
upon which, and upon the goodness of the wood, depends the whole strength.

To give to the Joysts a fitting length, according to the proportion of their
thickness; for the longer they are, the more weak they are in their middle
part. And for this cause it is good that the Beams (the which do serve as a
Rule for the length of the Joysts) be separated from between nine to twelve
feet asunder, and (being constrained) unto thirteen; and there is need that
they bear within the thickness of the Wall between fifteen and eighteen inches
on each side, and more if it may be done. And to the end that the Planchers may
have the strength requisite, the Joysts shall be divided in such a manner, as
there shall be as much full as empty, for this also will serve for ornament.

As concerning the pleasantness and convenience, it must be observed
That the Appartments or diverse Rooms be placed the one next to the other,
according to the necessity or use which they have the one of the other, and yet
not encumbred one with the other, or as little as may be possibly.

That the principal Rooms, as the Halls and chiefest Chambers, be accompanied
with a Wardrobe, and also with a Closet, if it may be.

That the Rooms of the same story be placed even with each other, as far as may
be possible.

That every Room be of a largeness convenient for the service for which you
have intended it. And to effect this, it will be convenient, in places where
you are not otherwise compelled, to observe the Measures following.

The Hall shall have from twenty two to twenty four feet of breadth, for which
cause we may allow from thirty four to thirty six feet of length. But in great
buildings it will be convenient to allow for the length twice the breadth. And
when there shall be made Necessary rooms or Cellars under ground, it will be
convenient to allow them about eight, nine, or ten feet under the Joysts, or
from nine to ten feet under the Crown of the Arch of the Vaults in depth.

The height of the first story, upon the lengths and bredths aforementioned for
the Halls, may be from thirteen to fourteen feet, and you shall augment it
according to the same proportion, when you shall allow more for the length and
breadth of the Hall.

For the height of the second story, it will be convenient to allow to it from
twelve to thirteen feet under the Joysts.

To the third story from eleven to twelve feet.

And if one would make Chambers in the Garrets, whether it be in the third or
fourth story, it will suffice to allow them eight or nine feet of height.

For the Chambers, they shall have twenty two or twenty four feet: and it is
always necessary that they be square.

In the framing of the Chambers one must have a regard for the placing of the
Bed, which is ordinarily about six feet square, and the space between the bed
and the wall from four to six feet; as also for the situation of the Chimney,
the which in consideration hereof ought not to be situate just in the midst,
but distant therefrom about two feet, whereby place may be allowed for the Bed,
and by this means the Inequality is less perceived.

The lesser Wardrobe shall have in largeness from nine to ten feet, and having
more room, from fifteen to sixteen feet.

The doors within the Lodging shall have two feet and an half of breadth, and
three feet at the most, in great buildings four feet.

Their height shall be from six feet and an half to seven feet.

The Gates for the Coaches shall have seven feet and an half at least of
breadth, when you are compelled thereto; and from eight to nine, when nothing
constrains you. The height shall be of one breadth and an half; but when you
shall have the height at your pleasure, it will be convenient to allow to it
the double of the breadth.

The Staircase shall have from eleven to twelve feet of breadth; but (being
confined) nine feet shall serve.

The height of the Steps shall be from five inches and an half to six inches.

The breadth of the Step shall be one foot besides the Projector, the which may
be of two inches or thereabout.

And it must be observed, that where it shall be convenient to make the Steps
in turning, we can make no more then ten in the half circle, which are five in
the quarter of the circle. And if the breadth of the Staircase come to
eighteen feet more or less, one may make about twelve steps in the half circle.

The Windows shall have opening from four feet to four feet and an half between
the two Jaums.

For their heights, they shall reach as near to the Planchers or Joysts as can
be made, about six, eight, ten, and twelve inches at the most. For by these
means the Halls or Chambers are the better enlightened, and doing otherwise
they will be darkish and sad.

But if the manner of the building outward should compel to make the top of
the Window lower then the measure aforesaid; in this case you must make the
inside of it with a back arch or bowing toward the Plancher or boarded floor,
to the end that it may be enlightened the more thereby.

The Upholders of the Windows shall have from two feet eight inches unto three
feet at most.

The Transoms or Cross-bars of the Windows shall have the thickness from four
to five inches.

Their Leaf-works shall be from one inch and an half to two inches at the most,
that the more strength may be kept in the hinder part of them, and that the
Frames and Borders of wood, which bear the Shuts or Joyners work to make fast
the Windows, may have convenient strength.

The Jaums of the Windows shall be strongly fastened, and have Projectors about
two inches at least, that the Joyners work may be fastened against the walls,
and within the said Leaves; and it would be needful, that the first Leaves
should be framed after the length of the Shutters in; for by this means they
cause less hinderance, and afford more clearness. And this rule concerns as
well the durableness, as the pleasantness and convenience.

The Chimnies of the Halls shall have within the Work from six to seven feet
between the two sides, and it will be good to make the Funnels of them between
the thickness of the Wall, if it be wholly yours; if not, they shall be backed
over again, in places where they may correspond with those of the Chambers, the
which will be distant but very little from the midst, as it has been said:
and if it be possible, you must make the Chimny to be seen in the front by him
that shall enter into the Hall.

The height shall be between four and five feet, reaching unto the Tossels or
Bend of the Mantle-tree. The Provector of the Jaums shall be between two feet
and an half to three feet from the Walls to the outside of the Mantle-tree.

The Jaums or sides of the Chimnies shall have between seven and nine inches of
thickness at the most, according to the manner of Arcitecture, by which one
shall desire to set them out.

The Chimneys of the Chambers shall have in breadth five feet, or five and an
half, and shall be placed as aforesaid, in respect of the place of the Bed.

Their height shall be four feet, or four and an half, unto the Mantle-tree and
Flat-bands.

Their Provecture shall be from two feet to two and an half, from the back of
the Chimney unto the fore part of the sides or Jaums.

The Chimneys in the Wardrobe shall be four feet, or four and an half, broad.

Their height from four to five feet reaching under the Mantle-tree.

The Provecture two feet three inches.

The opening of the Chimnies generally shall have between eleven and twelve
inches at the top of the Funnel; and for the Chimneys of great Kitchens fifteen
inches, in respect of the great Fires which are made there; and they shall be
brought up as straight as may be possible, because that for want of so doing
one may be often times troubled with smoke.

Their length shall be between four and six feet, if the Chimneys have six feet
below within the work; they shall be lessened within their Mantle-trees by the
slopings of their lower parts, and their Funels shall be drawn by a Plumet.

The sloping or bending within the Chimneys, otherwise called the Tossel or
first bending, begins from the Mantle-tree and reaches unto the Plancher or
Seeling.

The fair Ordering or Comeliness consists in the Symmetry or equal
Proportion, which must be taken according to the breadth or height.
According to the largeness it is fit that the parts equally distant from the
middle be equal between themselves.

That the parts be proportionable to the whole, and amongst themselves.

According to the height, it is fit that the parts, in which a Symmetry shall
be observed in respect of their breadth or largeness, may be also of the same
Perpendicular in their height. For it may happen, that one part of equal
proportion in breadth, may not be also in height: For example, the half-crosses
or meetings of Pillars, the which you may place in an equal distance from the
middle of the Building; nevertheless the Frontlets which shall be put upon
them, shall not reach to the height of those of the whole crosses: so also that
which shall be equally proportioned in breadth, shall not be also in height,
therefore such works are to be avoided.

Concerning the Healthfulness of the several parts of the Building.
You shall provide for the same, by causing the Halls and Rooms of the first
story to be made higher then the surface of the ground they stand on about two
feet or more, according to the moistness of the place in which you shall build:
for in doing this you may provide not only for the healthfulness, but also for
the fair prospect; by this means rendering your building more stately and
better enlightened. For making the Cellars or Necessary rooms under ground, it
will be convenient that the half of their height be within the ground, and the
other half above.

You see here that which we have thought necessary to discourse concerning the
General Rules, the which if they be not entirely observed in the first Designs
of our Buildings, you must not think it strange, forasmuch as the smalness of
space in breadth has constrained us to go out of our own Rules. For the
particular Considerations, they shall be observed in the Designs and Discourse
that we shall make upon each place: upon which we shall give you advice once
for all, that whatsoever is placed on the right hand may be set on the left,
without changing any dimension, according as the largeness of the Aspect, or
some better Light, or the goodness of some Neighboring wall, or some other
important consideration, shall invite you to choose rather the one then the
other.

AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the Measures or Fathoms of the Works, as well for
the Masonry as for the Ground-plots.
ruler The Foot Royal divided into Twelve Inches


THe Measures which are used in measuring all things are either Lineary, or
Superficial, or Solid and Massive.

The Lineary Measures are those which have but one only dimension, in the
which there is only considered the length, without any breadth or thickness: as
when we make mention of the length only of a Hall or Chamber, or of its
breadth only, or else of its height alone, without any respect to its other
dimensions; or else, as when we say, that from such a Village to another is two
leagues, we speak only of the length between them.

Of these Lineary Measures the most common is the Lineary Ell, Fathom, or
Perch, which is divided into six feet Royal, or by the Standard, which is also
a Lineary Measure. The length both of the one and of the other is expressed in
the Chastelet of Paris, and we have represented in the margin the measure of
one foot, whereby every one may know of what measure it is that we have spoken
in our Designs, and that qe may reduce the others to the same, according as he
shall think fit.

The Foot is divided into twelve Inches, and the Inch into twelve parts or
lines, which is the least Measure that is used in Architecture.

The Superficial Measures are those which have two dimensions, Length and
Breadth: as when we say, that a Chamber contains sixteen fathoms square, we
understand thereby that it has four lineary fathoms in one sense, and as many
in another; seeing that if you multiply the length and breadth the one by the
other, you have its Superficies; in such manner as when one lineary fathom
contains six feet, the Superficial fathom shall contain six times six feet,
which will be thirty six feet Superficial. In like manner an Arpent or Acre of
ground contains ten times ten Perches, which are an hundred Perches Superficial.

The Solid or Massive Measures are those which have three dimensions, Length,
Breadth, Thickness, or Depth: as when we say, that in such an empty piece of
ground there are threescore and four fathoms, and that the length, the breadth,
and the depth thereof are equal, we understand that there are four fathoms of
length upon four of breadth, and four of depth; so that four times four make
sixteen, and four times sixteen make sixty and four: so that for to know how
many Solid and Massive fathoms any Work does contain, you must multiply the
length by the breadth, and then multiply the Product of these two by the depth
of thickness, and in this signification one Solid or Massive fathom, or Cube,
contains two hundred and sixteen feet Solid, Gubes, or Massive, which are six
times six Lineary feet.

The Division of the first Place, having of Breadth twelve Feet, and of Depth,
from twenty one feet and an half, to any other which shall be less then twenty
five Feet.
IN this first Ground-plot of twelve feet of breadth, upon twenty one feet and
an half of depth, the breadth of the Hall is of nine feet, and the passage of
three feet; the depth is divided into an Hall or room of fourteen feet, and
into a Court of five feet and an half of breadth: and the rest of the breadth
over all this depth is employed in a Staircase, which shall have six feet in
the square, where under the spreading of the stairs the Privy shall be made. At
one of the corners of the Court, near unto the Hall, is the Well: for the going
down into the Cellar, it shall be made in the passage by means of a Trap-door,
as well in this Figure as in those that follow, unto the sixth division of the
sixth plot.

As concerning the second story, the Chamber shall take up the breadth as well
of the hall as of the passage; and therefore it shall have twelve feet of
breadth, and for the depth it is to be regulated by that of the hall below,
which is fourteen feet. The rest of this plane or second story differs not
from the first.

And when upon this same breadth of building the depth should be found between
twenty one feet and an half and twenty five, the measures of the largeness
remaining in their Entire, you must divide the overplus of the depth in the
court and in the hall, according to the desire of the Master of the work.

And we have thought fit to declare all the measures of the buildings, upon the
particular discourse which we have made of the framing of each of them:
although that we have marked them out by Figures upon the planes or
ground-plot, for the more perfect instruction of them which are less exercised
in the knowledge of the planes or ground-plots.

And as concerning the heights, the first story shall have nine feet under the
Joyst, from the floor of the hall; and the thiekness of the Plancher (the Joyst
being contained) shall have eight inches, which will be more then sufficient
upon so small a breadth; whereof the whole height will be of nine feet eight
inches: the which being divided into eighteen steps, there will be six inches,
five parts of an inch, and two thirds, for the height of each of them. The
which division shall be observed also for the second story, the which is nine
foot high as the first. The third story has eight feet of height under the
Joyst, and eight inches of thickness, the Joyst and Plancher therein contained.
This height of eight feet eight inches, being divided into sixteen steps, we
shall allow six inches and an half of height for each of them, which are two
thirds of a part more then the other steps, and therefore their difference will
not be discerned.

The Garrets shall be above.

And because the coming forth necessary for the Staircase is hindered by the
height which must be given to the Privy, they shall go down from the Court to
the Privy by two steps, whereof one shall be within the Court, and the other
within the Privy, having each of them nine inches of height.

architectural diagram The Groundplot of ye 2d* story,

The Groudplot of ye first story



The Division of the second Place, having the same breadth of twelve feet upon
twenty five of depth; the which shall serve likewise unto fifteen feet of
breadth, and thirty five and an half of depth, the whole inclusively.
EVen as the whole breadth is in nothing different from that of the fore going
Figure, so there shall not be any difference in the parts. Therefore the Hall
shall have nine feet in breadth, and the Passage three; and so for the story
above, the Chamber shall have the whole breadth of twelve feet. But the
dividing the depth may be done in two manners; the one as the foregoing,
without a Closet, allowing the remainder of the depth which this Figure has
more then the former, to the Hall, or to the Court, or else partly to the one
and partly to the other. The second manner is in making a Closet at the end of
the Hall, and of the same breadth of nine feet upon three and an half deep,
which is the least that you can allow to the Closet; and this same depth of
three feet and an half is also the greatest that you can allow to the Closet in
this present depth: For if you make it deeper, you shall not have room enough
for the situation of the bed; and in this manner there will remain fourteen
feet deep as well for the Hall as the Chamber.

And it must be observed, that from this breadth unto that of nineteen feet,
the Closet cannot be made otherwise; but coming to twenty, one may change it,
as shall be showed hereafter.

And where the breadth of the place shall be greater then twelve feet, and less
then fifteen, the remainder shall be allowed to the breadth of the Hall and the
Chamber, leaving always the Passage of three feet.

And as concerning the depth, from twenty five feet unto thirty five and an
half, the remainder thereof shall be added to the Hall, the Closet, and Court,
at the discretion of the Builder.

The heights shall be nine feet under the Joysts, for the first and second
stories, and eight for the third, as in the foregoing Figure: and accordingly
the same height of steps shall be followed in the present work.

The Precaution as concerning the coming out of the Stairs above the Privy
shall be kept, as in the precedent Figure.

The first Division of the third Place, from fifteen feet of breadth unto
eighteen and an half, and of depth from thirty five feet and an half unto forty
eight and an half.
THis may be made in three different manners, to each of which we have
appropriated its Design. The first keeps the division in the breadth of the
former, in the Hall of twelve feet, and the Passage of three, but the depth
adds to the foregoing a Kitchen below, and a Wardrobe above instead of a
Closet. The Staircase keeps its first situation and breadth, but not its
first shape: For its depth, containing the Stairs, is augmented thereby unto
ten feet, which is that of the Court, and the Steps stand for Wards on the
Front to them that enter in; which could not be done in the former Designs. The
Kitchen therefore shall have nine feet in depth, the Hall fifteen, and the
Court ten, as has been said: and in this Division one may change the places of
the Hall and the Kitchen very easily, there being no question of translating
the Enclosure, reserving to each of them its own depth. The which also may be
understood of the story above, as one will; forasmuch as they may leave it in
its own shape, with changing that beneath.

Further, we would represent the shape of the Forepart of the Building Bias
wise or sloping, because that this happens commonly in the Situations of the
Platforms of Towns, to show thereby, that although that one of the Fronts or
Faces be Bias, yet we need not cease to make the Rooms or Appartments with
right angles. The which let it be once said for all.

The height of the first and second story shall have ten feet under the Joysts,
which shall be ten feet eight inches, containing the thickness of the Plancher,
in which height the division in the Staircase may be made two ways. The first,
following the Design, according to which they ascend by nineteen steps; and
therefore every step shall have six inches and nine parts of height. The second
way may be used by allowing eight steps to the turning of the Stairs instead of
ten, to make it more easy; and continuing the Stairs, by turning them even
over against the Chamber, which will raise it four steps, and so we shall have
in all twenty one steps: by the which the whole height of ten feet eight inches
being divided, we shall have for the height of each step six inches and one
part, according to this second manner.

The third story has nine feet in height under the Joysts, which shall be
containing the thickness of the Plancher nine feet eight inches, which being
divided by nineteen steps, will allow us six inches and one part for the height
of each.

Above there may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, from seven to eight feet
under the Joysts.

The inconvenience of the coming out of the Stairs above the Privy, may be
avoided by the manner set down here before.

The second Division of the third Place.
THe second manner of Division of the Ground-plot above mentioned keeps that
of the precedent in the breadth, which is divided in the Hall of twelve feet,
and the Passage of three. The differenee consists in the changing the place
of the Stairs and Kitchen, and in the enlargment of the Court for the story
that is under, and in changing the place of the Chamber and Wardrobe in that
above. The Hall shall have fifteen feet in depth, the Kitchen nine, upon eight
and an half of breadth; forasmuch as the rest is employed in the Staircase,
which has six feet in square. The Court has ten feet in depth upon fifteen of
breadth. The story above is conformable to that below, except the Passage; so
that the Chamber will have fifteen feet in square, the whole within the work,
as above.

The height of the first and second story shall have ten feet under the Joyst,
which will be ten feet eight inches, containing therein the thickness of the
Plancher; the which divided by the nineteen steps of the stairs, will afford us
six inches nine parts for the height of each step.

The height of the third story shall have nine feet eight inches, containing
the thickness of the Plancher: and therefore each step shall have six inches
and one part of height, as in the precedent Figure.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in garrets, from seven to eight feet high
under the Joysts.

The third Division of the third Place.
THe third manner of retaining the former Division in respect of the breadth in
the Hall of twelve feet, and for the Passage three; but we must cause the place
for the Stairs for the Kitchen and for the Hall to be changed.

The stairs therefore must be made on the Front, and of the same breadth of six
feet square. Against the Nuel or Spindle of the stairs shall be made a second
door, which shall be kept shut, when the first shall be opened: on the side of
the stairs is the Kitchen, having in depth nine feet and an half, upon eight
and an half of breadth; the Hall fifteen feet of depth, and at one of the ends
shall be made a little Napery or place for Linen; behind which shall be the
Privy. The Court shall have nine feet and an half in depth, upon ten and an
half of breadth.

The story above the Wardrobe shall be wholly and over all, like to the
Kitchen, and the Chamber shall have fifteen feet in square, in one corner of
which a Closet shall extend the whole depth of the Court.

And from the breadth of fifteen feet unto eighteen and an half exclusively,
you may keep the same division, always allowing three feet for the passage, and
six for the stairs, and enlarging the other parts with the remainder. But as in
respect of the depth from thirty five feet and an half unto forty five and an
half, that augmentation shall be divided unto the Hall, the Kitchen, and the
Court, according to the judgment and pleasure of the Master builder, as also
the choice of one of the three Fashions aforegoing shall be reserved to him.

The height of the first and second story shall have ten feet under the Joysts,
and nineteen steps; and dividing the height of every step, it will be six
inches and nine parts of an inch, as in the Figure a foregoing.

The height of the third story shall be (comprehending the Plancher) nine feet
eight inches, and a like quantity of steps; and dividing the height of each of
them, it will be six inches and one part.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in the Garrets, between seven and eight
feet under the Joysts, of height,

architectural diagram The Groundplot of ye second story,

The Groundplot of ye first story,



architectural diagram the second Story,

Groundplot of ye first Story



architectural diagram Front to the street,

Second story,

First story,



architectural diagram The second story,

The Ground plot of ye first story



The Division of the fourth Place, from eighteen feet and an half of breadth
unto twenty, and of depth from fifty feet unto sixty one and an half.
IN this Division you always keep that of the breadth, still allowing three
feet for the Passage, and the rest for the Hall and other rooms. The difference
from the former consists in a part more, which is made at the end of the
Court, which you may make serve for a Stable, a Larder, or a Chamber, as you
please. The Halls then shall have fifteen feet of breadth upon seventeen of
depth The Kitchen shall have eleven feet and an half of breadth upon nine of
depth, on the side of which shall be the Stairs, always six feet square. The
Court shall have eighteen feet and an half of breadth upon eleven of depth; at
the end of the which shall be a fair Lodging over the whole breadth of eighteen
feet and an half upon ten and an half of depth; and at one of the ends of the
said breadth shall be the Privy, behind which shall be the place of a Bed for a
Boy. The story above shall follow the division of that below, and shall have
more a Gallery of three feet broad, for to go from one part of the house to the
other. The Chamber therefore shall have eighteen feet and an half of breadth
upon seventeen of depth, and the Wardrobe shall be eleven feet and an half
broad upon nine deep.

And from the breadth of eighteen feet and an half unto twenty you may keep the
same division, always allowing three feet for the Passage, and six feet in
square for the Stairs, and enlarging the other parts with the remainder. But as
concerning the depth, from fifty feet to sixty one and an half, the
augmentation shall be divided upon the Hall, the Kitchen, the Court, and the
Lodging room behind, according to the judgment and pleasure of the Builder.

The height of the first and second story of the principal body of the
Building, which is on the front, shall have ten feet under the Joysts, which
will be ten feet eight inches, comprehending the thickness of the floor and
seeling, which height being divided into nineteen steps of the Stairs, will
yield us six inches and nine parts of an inch, for the height of each.

The third story shall have nine feet eight inches of height, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Planchers, the which being divided with the like
quantity of Steps, there will be six inches and one part for the height of each.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in the Garrets, from seven to eight feet
under the Joysts.

The height of the body of the Lodging behind shall have eight feet four inches
under the Joysts, which will be nine feet, comprehending the thickness of the
Joysts and Plancher: and because that the height of every Step is six inches
and nine parts of an inch, you must ascend thither by sixteen steps, whereof
twelve shall be taken in the Staircase, and the four as well in the thickness
of the Wall, as the depth of the Gallery.

The second story shall have nine feet under the Joysts, and nine feet eight
inches, comprehending the thickness of the Joysts and plancher, and above may
be Granaries in Garrets.

The Division of the first Place, from twenty feet of breadth unto thirty, and
upon the same depth, of sixty one feet and a half.
THe greatness of this Ground plot gives us the advantages which we could not
have in the foregoing; it is therefore that its Division is much different from
the other, and we may have two Courts instead of one, and a Staircase with two
bottoms, and the Passage placed in the midst, or in the corner, at our own
choice; whereas in the former Buildings it was necessarily driven into the
corner. The Passage then is appointed in the midst of the breadth of the
Edifice of four feet in breadth, having on the one side the Kitchen and Stairs,
and on the other the Buttery.

The Kitchen as also the Buttery shall have in breadth eight feet upon ten of
depth; the Court shall have thirteen feet of breadth upon nineteen of depth;
and the rest of the breadth, which is seven feet, shall remain for the breadth
of the Stairs, containing also the thickness of the wall. From the Court they
go up two steps to enter into the Hall, which shall have twenty feet of breadth
upon eighteen feet of depth, and the rest of the depth (which is ten feet)
shall be employed in a little Court behind, and in a Closet at one of the
corners of the Hall, which shall have six feet of breadth upon the same depth
of the Court.

For the story above of the body of the Building before, you shall have the
Chamber and Stairs on the one side, and the Wardrobe on the other; the Chamber
shall have thirteen feet of breadth upon ten of depth, and the Wardrobe seven
feet of breadth upon the same depth; and in one of the corners of the Chamber,
between the Chamber and the Steps, shall be the Privy; for the body of the
Building behind the Chamber shall have thirteen feet of breadth upon eighteen
of depth, the Wardrobe seven feet of breadth upon fifteen of depth; the Closet
above shall be like to that below.

This Division may be changed without altering any of the Measures. First, by
leaving the Passage in the middle where it is, the which may be done two ways;
that is, by transposing the Kitchen and the Buttery from one hand to the other,
and not removing the Stairs from their place, or else by making the same
change, and transposing also the Stairs. And this seems to be more
convenient, because that the Kitchen, the Stairs, and the Entry of the Hall,
being on the same side, the service will be made under covert. Secondly, the
change may be made by taking away the Passage from the middle, for to place it
at one of the ends; the which doing, you shall place the Kitchen and the
Buttery one against the other, and you may enlarge the Kitchen unto ten and
twelve feet, which you shall gain upon the Buttery, which has no need of so
great a breadth; the which doing, you have the choice of placing either the
Passage or the Kitchen on the side of the Stairs, according as you shall find
the one more fitting then the other.

This Division may also be changed four ways, according to the Designs set
forth by the Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6, by separating the augmentation of the
place, as well in breadth as in depth, to each room or appartment, as it shall
be found most convenient.

And from the breadth of twenty feet unto thirty you can change nothing in that
Form; but you may well allow seven or eight feet of breadth to your Stairs, and
the rest to the Hall and other parts: and whenas your breadth shall exceed
twenty four feet, you must change the situation of your Beams from the breadth
into the depth; for the depth receives no other changing then that which is
mentioned here above. And the same breadth remaining as above, if the depth
exceeded not fifty eight feet, then we should not speak any more of making two
Courts, but the Division might be made in one of the two manners following.

The height of the first and second story of the body of the Building on the
fore part shall have nine feet under the Joysts, which will be nine feet eight
inches, comprehending the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher: they shall
ascend thither by twenty one steps, and therefore the height of each shall be
of five inches, six parts, and one third of a part.

From the floor of the Court they shall go up by two steps to enter into the
Hall of the chief body of the Building, which is behind, the which Hall shall
have in height from the Floor to under the Joysts eleven feet eight inches,
which will be comprehending the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, eleven
feet eight inches. And because that the steps have five inches, six parts, and
a third of height, there will be need of twenty six, whereof nineteed being on
the Stairs, there will remain seven steps, which shall be taken within the
Turning thereof, which is upon the Court.

The second story of the chief body of the Building shall have ten feet under
the Joysts, and eight inches of the thickness of the plancher, comprehending
the Joysts, and therefore shall ascend by twenty threesteps of five inches and
a half apiece.

The third story shall have nine feet eight inches, containing the thickness of
the plancher, and therefore they shall go up hitther by twenty and one steps,
of five inches and an half apiece.

Above may be Granaries, or Chambers in Garrets, from seven to eight feet high
under the Joysts.

The Division of the sixth Place, of thirty feet of breadth unto thirty eight
feet, and of fifty eight of depth unto an hundred.
IN the first Figure of this Division, which is the eighth in order, the
breadth of thirty feet is divided into a Passage of four feet and an half, and
an Hall of twenty five feet upon twenty in depth; the which is followed by the
Court, which has nineteen feet in depth, and in breadth twenty one. And the
rest of the breadth is employed in a Staircase, which has eight feet in
breadth within the work. The rest of the depth is employed in a body of a
Lodging behind, having fifteen feet in depth, whereof the breadth is divided
into a Kitchen of nine feet, and a Buttery of ten. The division of the second
story follows that of the first, except in the body of the Building before,
where the Chamber shall have twenty feet in square, and the Wardrobe nine feet
and an half in breadth.

And when upon the same breadth the depth should be found much greater, in such
manner as one might have made a Court or Garden upon the back part, he might
have caused that the body of the Building behind might be enlightened on both
sides without changing the division of the parts.

We must note, that in all the Designs aforegoing, in respect of the smalness
of the breadth of the places, we have made use of enclosures of boards, which
have but one inch of thickness. In the following, where we have more
convenience for the breadth, we support them with Carpenters work and
Plastering, whereof the Posts and Summers about the top shall have from four to
six inches, to the end that no man deceive himself with the numbers by which
the breadth and depth are marked; the which ought always to be understood
within the work, as heretofore.

It must also be observed, that hitherto we have always allowed eight inches
for the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, which are three inches for the
thickness of the Plancher, and five for those of the Joysts, which was
sufficient for the small bearing of the Buildings aforegoing. Now for those
which follow we allow nine, whereof six are for the thickness of the Joysts,
and three for the thickness of the Plastering and Boards, which is neither
increased nor diminished.

As for the heights, the Floor of the Hall shall be higher by one foot then the
surface of the Court, to the which Hall they stall ascend by two steps. The
Hall shall have of height under the Joysts twelve feet three inches, and
together with the Joysts and thickness of the Plancher thirteen feet; to the
which height they shall ascend by twenty six steps of six inches each of them,
whereof twenty three shall be upon the turning of the Stairs fastened to the
wall, and three other to that which looks toward the Court.

The second story shall have eleven feet nine inches, containing the thickness
of the Plancher, the which being divided by twenty six steps, it will afford us
five inches and five parts for the height of each.

The third story shall have ten feet nine inches, the thickness of the Plancher
contained, the which being divided by twenty six steps, will allow five inches
for the height of each.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in the Garrets from seven to eight feet
high under the Joysts.

The body of the Building behind shall be also higher by a foot then the floor
of the Court, to which likewise they shall ascend by two steps, and shall have
of height from the floor under the Joysts ten feet nine inches, and with the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher eleven feet and an half: to which they
shall ascend by twenty three steps or stairs, of six inches each. And for the
second story it shall have of height under the Joysts nine feet eight inches,
and with the Joysts and Plancher ten feet five inches, of which height must be
deducted one foot and an half for the height of three steps, which are at the
going up that looks toward the Court. There remain eight feet eleven inches
to ascend by steps, which shall have five inches five parts apiece; and thereby
there will be twenty, whereof division must be made against the Wall.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, from seven to eight feet high
under the Joysts.

The second Division of the sixth Place, having the same breadth of thirty
feet, and of depth fifty eight.
THe second Division of the same space follows in breadth the foregoing
Division, in a Passage of four feet and an half, and the rest in an Hall of
twenty five feet upon twenty of depth, the which is followed by a Kitchen of
seventeen feet of depth upon twenty of breadth: and the rest of the breadth is
employed in the Stairs, which have nine feet of breadth within the work. At the
end of the Kitchen is a Buttery of eight feet broad upon eleven deep, behind
which is the Privy. And by these means we have made the body of the Building
double, by placing the Court behind, which has twenty one feet of breadth upon
seventeen and an half of depth.

There is not any change in the story above, but only that the Chamber has
twenty feet in square, and the Wardrobe nine and an half in breadth, where one
may also make a Chimney, as is showed by the Figure before.

For the heights, the Hall shall have twelve feet three inches under the
Joysts, and thirteen feet, containing the thickness of the Joysts and the
Plancher; to the which story they shall ascend by twenty six feet of six inches
apiece.

The second story shall have eleven feet nine inches of height, containing the
thickness of the Plancher, and they shall ascend by twenty four steps.

The third story shall have ten feet nine inches, contain in the thickness of
the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty two steps.

Above may be made Granaries, or Chambers in Garrets, as in the foresaid manner.

architectural diagram the front to ye street

the second Story,

the first story,



architectural diagram next the Court,

Front next ye street,

of the 2d, story,

Ground plot of the First story,



architectural diagram next the Court,

Front next the street,

the second story

the first story



architectural diagram The Front to the Street,

Front to the

The Ground plot of the first story.

the second Story,



The Division of the seventh Place, of thirty eight feet of breadth or
thereabout, and of depth an hundred feet.
THis Ground-plot has but one only Division, because that all the change which
can be made therein, may be reduced to two precedent Figures. It has therefore
thirty eight feet of breadth upon an hundred of depth, and consistt in two
bodies of a Building; the first on the Front, whose breadth is divided into a
Kitchen of fourteen feet broad upon twenty deep, and a Stable having equal
dimensions with the Kitchen, and a passage for a Coach between the two nine
feet broad. Next follows the Court, being thirty feet deep upon twenty eight
broad, and the rest of the breadth upon this whole depth is employed in a
Staircase, which has nine feet of breadth, and in a Larder of the like
breadth, upon seven feet deep, joining to the Kitchen.

The principal body of the Building, which is on the back part, consists in a
Hall being twenty five feet broad upon twenty two feet deep, and in the rest of
the breadth is a Chamber or little Hall, between which and the Stairs there is
a Passage of four feet, at the bottom of which the Privy shall be placed. In
the rest of the depth shall be a Garden, into which they shall enter by the
hall, or by the little hall, as they please.

The story above has the same divisions with that below, except that on the
Front of the body of the building over the Stable is a Chamber, upon the
Passage a Wardrobe, and upon the Kitchen a Closet.

It will happen sometimes, that the Ground-plot proposed shall have more
breadth then that aforesaid, and less depth then shall be requisite to frame
two bodies of a building, in the situation wherein they are in the Figures
precedent, and then the Order must be changed according to one of the manners
which shall be set down hereafter.

The going down to the Cellar shall be made under the Stairs, as well in the
principal body of the building, as in that on the front; and if one would have
it so, on the side of the street under the Chimney of the Kitchen.

The Upright on the front, and also the Building in the rear, of the seventh
Place.
THe floor of the Body of the Building in the Front shall have the same level
with that of the Court. The first story shall have in height fourteen feet six
inches under the Joysts, and fifteen feet three inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, unto which they shall ascend by three
steps of six inches high apiece, which shall be the level of the foot of the
stairs, and of the body of the building behind, the which shall have of height
under the Joysts thirteen feet, and containing the thickness of the Joysts and
Plancher, thirteen feet nine inches; to which they shall ascend by twenty four
steps, of six inches and ten parts of an inch apiece, which shall bring you as
well into the body of the building before as that behind, seeing that they
have the same level.

The second story, as well of that before as that behind, shall be elevated
twelve feet under the Joysts, and twelve feet nine inches, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, unto which they shall ascend by twenty
four steps, being six inches and five parts each of them.

The third story, as well before as behind, shall have in height ten feet
under the Joysts, and together with the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher
ten feet nine inches, unto which they shall ascend by twenty four steps of
five inches and five parts apiece.

Above are Granaries or Chambers in garrets, from eight to nine feet high under
the Joysts,

The Division of the eighth Place, of fifty feet of breadth upon fifty eight of
depth.
THe Division may be may be made three several ways, in the first of which this
breadth of fifty feet is employed in a body of a building on the Front, of
twenty two feet deep, whereof the breadth is divided into an Hall of twenty
seven feet and an half, a Passage of eight feet, and a Stable of thirteen. The
rest of the depth consists in a Court of thirty two feet broad, and the rest
of the breadth comprehends a Kitchen, a Buttery, and Stairs joining to the
Hall, whereof the Measures are described upon the Platform; and at one corner
of the stairs shall be the Privy. The Division of the second Plane or
Ground-plot shall be seen in the next leaf.

As for the heights, the floor of the Hall, Stairs, Buttery, and Kitchen shall
be one level, elevated one foot above the floor of the Court; from which they
shall go to the Stable on a level, as to the others they shall go up by two
steps.

The first story shall have thirteen feet nine inches, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the which they shall ascend by twenty
seven steps, six inches high apiece.

The second story shall have twelve feet nine inches, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty six
steps, six inches high apiece.

The third story shall have eleven feet nine inches high, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty four
steps, of six inches high.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets.

The second Story of the first Division of the eighth Place.
THe second Story consists in two Chambers and a Wardrobe, the first placed
over the Hall, having thirteen feet and an half in breadth, upon seventeen and
an half deep, the rest of the depth being employed in a Passage of four feet
between the said Chamber and the stairs. The second Chamber joining to the
first shall have nineteen feet in breadth, upon the whole depth of twenty two
feet. The Wardrobe shall be thirteen feet broad upon the same depth. The place
of the bed of the principal Chamber may be set against the Enclosure.

Above the Kitchen and Buttery shall be a Chamber sixteen feet and an half
broad, upon twenty four deep; and it is at the choice of him that builds to
elevate both the bodies of the building equally, or otherwise, as he shall see
it most convenient.

The Elevation of the side that looks to the Court, is here inserted above the
Elevation of the second story: but it has no need of any particular
declaration, because it does not change at all the measure from that aforegoing.

floor plan The Groundplot of the second Story,

The Groundplot of the first Story,



architectural diagram The Upright to the Court,

The Front to the street,



architectural diagram The Front to the street,

The Groundplot of the first Story.



architectural diagram The Face to the Court,

The Groundplot of the second Story



The second Division of the eighth Place, of the same breadth of fifty feet
upon fifty eight of depth.
THe second manner according to which the space above mentioned may be divided,
is by a Body of a Building situate on the Front, having in depth thirty eight
feet and an half within the work upon the whole breadth, the which shall be
divided upon the Forepart into an Hall, being thirty feet broad upon twenty
deep; a Passage of five feet, and a Stable fourteen feet broad. The Back-part
shall contain a Kitchen and a Chamber, the Staircase being between the two.
The Kitchen shall have twenty five feet in breadth upon seventeen deep, the
Stairs nine feet, and one Chamber thirteen feet and an half. At the end of the
Kitchen is a Buttery, having nine feet broad upon eleven and an half deep,
behind which shall be the Privy. One may set at one of the corners of the
Stairs a Privy to serve above. The Court shall be forty feet broad upon
seventeen and an half deep.

The descent of the Cellar shall be taken right under the first turning of the
Staircase.

And if one would within the same depth have the Court a little larger, he may
gain two feet upon the depth of the Hall.

For the heights, the Floor of the Building shall be two feet higher then the
level of the Causey without, and for to ascend thereto you may have diverse
fashions. The first by taking one step or two upon the street, and the rest in
the thickness of the wall, if it may be suffered you; if not, you shall take
all the steps within the Passage, even as they are pointed upon the Platform.
And to descend into the Court, which shall have the same level with that
without (the running down of the water excepted) they shall take two steps
within the Passage of the Staircase, and two within the Court, that there may
be allowed a convenient opening for the Court-gate.

The first story shall have in height thirteen feet under the Joysts, and
thirteen feet nine inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher,
to which they shall ascend by twenty nine steps of five inches eight parts high
apiece.

The second story shall have in height twelve feet nine inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty six
steps, which shall have five feet and one part in height apiece.

The third story shall have ten feet nine inches in height, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty five
steps of five inches apiece.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, from eight to nine feet under
the Joysts.

The second Story of the second Division of the eighth Place,
THe second story consists in two Chambers upon the fore part, and a Wardrobe
or Closet between the two. The first Chamber shall have twenty five feet of
breadth upon twenty of depth; the Wardrobe or Closet ten feet of breadth upon
fifteen and an half of depth, by reason of a Passage of four feet behind the
said Closet. The Chamber shall have fourteen feet of breadth over the whole
depth, and on the back part there shall be two Chambers, and the Stairs between
both; the first of twenty five feet of breadth upon seventeen of depth, and the
Stairs nine feet broad: the other Chamber or Closet thirteen feet and an half
broad upon the whole said depth of seventeen feet. At the end of the first
Chamber over the Buttery shall be a Wardrobe over the whole depth of the Court.

All the parts of these stories are so free from encumbrance, that one may use
them even as they would desire.

You have above the plane of the second story the Elevation of the Front that
looks toward the Court, which, because it has not any separated Measures,
has no need of any particular declaration.

The third Division of the eighth Place, of the same breadth of fifty feet upon
fifty eight of depth.
THis Division consists likewise in a Body of a Building double, having of
depth within the work thirty six feet upon the whole breadth of fifty, which
shall be divided into an Hall, Stable, and Kitchen; the which Stable and
Kitchen shall be separated from the Hall by a Passage and Stairs. The Hall
shall have twenty feet of breadth over the whole depth, the Entry and the
Stairs nine feet of breadth, the Stable eighteen feet of breadth upon fifteen
and an half of depth, the Kitchen shall have the same breadth of eighteen feet
upon twenty of depth, adjoining unto which shall be a Buttery of nine feet in
breadth, and fourteen of depth. Behind the Buttery shall be a Privy. The Court
shall have forty feet of breadth upon twenty of depth. The Passage shall have
from the Entry unto the foot of the Stairs fifteen feet and an half.

The descent of the Cellar shall be taken down right under the turning of the
Stairs.

As for the Heighths, the floor of the Building shall be two feet higher then
the level of the street without; and for to ascend thither you may take one
step or two upon the street, and the rest in the thickness of the wall, if you
may be suffered to make steps in the street; if not, you shall make them all
within the Passage, as they are pointed out within the Platform: and to go down
into the Court you shall take two steps within the Passage of the Stairs, and
two within the Court, thereby to allow to the gate of the Court its Passage.

The first story shall be thirteen feet high from the Floor to under the
Joysts, and thirteen feet nine inches, comprehending the thickness of the
Joysts and Plancher, unto which you shall ascend by thirty one steps of five
inches and eight parts apiece.

The second story shall have twelve feet nine inches, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which you shall ascend by twenty four
steps, of six inches and four parts and half each of them.

The third story shall have ten feet nine inches of height, comprehending the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the which you shall ascend by the same
quantity of twenty four steps, of five inches four parts and an half each of
them.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, from seven to eight feet high
under the Joysts.

The second Story of the third Division of the eighth Place.
THe second story consists in two Chambers, each being accompanied with a
Wardrobe and Closet. The first Chamber on the back part, and upon the Hall
shall have twenty feet in square, and the rest of the depth (which is fifteen
feet and an half) shall be for the Wardrobe upon the same breadth. The Closet
shall be above the Passage, and shall have nine feet of breadth upon twelve of
depth. The second Chamber upon the Kitchen, having eighteen feet in breadth,
and of the same depth with the foregoing of twenty feet: and the Closet shall
be upon the back part over the Larder, upon the whole depth of the Court, which
is twenty feet. As for the Wardrobe, it shall contain the same space with the
Stable, upon the which it is placed.

Above the level of the second story is the Elevation that looks toward the
Court.

architectural diagram The Front to the street,

The Groundplot of the first Story,



architectural diagram The Groundplot of the second story,


architectural diagram the Front to the street

The Groundplot of the first story



architectural diagram to the Court,

The second story.



The Division of the nineth Place, of the breadth of fifty seven feet, upon one
hundred and twenty of depth.
THis Ground plot may be divided in five several manners, each whereof has its
particular Design. The first contains two Bodies of a Building, the first on
the Front, the second on the Rear. That on the Front has twenty feet in
breadth, its breadth consisting in a Kitchen twenty feet broad, a Buttery
eleven, a Passage for the Coach nine, and a Stable fifteen. At the end of the
Kitchen there is a Staircase thirteen feet and an half in breadth, upon
fifteen of depth. Behind the Stairs there is a Gallery twenty six feet deep. At
one of the corners of the stairs shall be the Privy, or at the place marked (A)
The Court shall have twenty four feet in square.

The Body of the Building behind, which is the principal, shall have twenty two
feet in depth, upon the same breadth with that on the Front, and confisteth in
a Hall thirty feet broad, a Staircase ten, and a Chamber fifteen. The Garden
shall be thirty feet deep, upon the whole breadth of fifty seven feet.

The second Story of the first Division of the nineth Place.
THe second story consists in a Wardrobe placed upon the Kitchen, having
fifteen feet in breadth, upon fifteen and an half of depth, by reason of a
Passage of four feet between that and the staircase: one Chamber of twenty
five feet broad, upon the whole depth of twenty; and another Chamber of fifteen
feet in depth. Joining to the Passage abovementioned is the staircase,
followed by a Closet of twenty six feet in depth, which joyneth it to the
principal Body of the Building, which consists in a Chamber and Wardrobe
above the Hall, the Chamber having nineteen feet in breadth, and the Wardrobe
ten and an half. Joining to which is the staircase mentioned in the story
below, and next to that a Chamber of fifteen feet, the whole upon the depth of
twenty two. The Privy shall be taken within the thickness of the wall divided
from the stairs.

The Elevation of the body of the building on the fore part, on the side of the
Court of the nineth Place, divided according to the first manner.
THe Body of the Building on the fore part, except the Stable and the Passage,
shall be elevated above the Floor of the level of the Court two feet, to which
they shall ascend by four steps taken in the Court at the place of the
Staircase.

The height of the first story from the Floor shall be thirteen feet nine
inches, containing the the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which
height they shall ascend by twenty five steps, of six inches and seven parts
high apiece.

The second story shall have of height twelve feet nine inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty five
steps, of six inches one part apiece.

The third story shall have in height eleven feet nine inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty five
steps, of five inches eight parts of height each of them.

And above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, from eight to nine feet
high under the Joysts.

The Elevation of the principal body of the building on the side of the Court
of the nineth Place, divided according to the first manner, which body of the
building is that on the back part.
THe body of the building on the back part shall be elevated above the level of
the Court two feet, to which they shall ascend by four steps taken in the said
Court; and to descend from the Floor of the Building to the Garden, they shall
take two steps in the Passage of the Staircase, and two within the Garden,
thereby to allow to the Gate of the said Garden a coming forth convenient.

The height of the first story from the Floor shall be of thirteen feet nine
inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which height
they shall ascend by twenty eight steps, divided in halves upon the two
turnings of the Staircase, which steps shall have five inches eleven parts of
height each of them.

The second story shall have of height twelve feet nine inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty
eight steps, of five inches and an half each of them.

The third story shall have in height eleven feet nine inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty
eight steps, of five inches apiece.

And he which would keep in the second and third story the same height of steps
as in the first, which are five inches and eleven parts, he should find twenty
six thereof in the second story, and twenty four in the third; which change one
may also make throughout all the other Elevations.

Above shall be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, from eight to nine feet high
under the Joysts.

floor plan The Ground plot of the first Story,


floor plan The Groundplot of the second Story,


front elevation of building

architectural diagram next the Court.


The second Division of the nineth Place, of the same breadth of fifty seven
feet, upon one hundred and twenty of depth.
THe second Division of the space above mentioned consists in two bodies of a
building, the one on the fore part, the other on the back part; the first
having twenty feet of depth; whereof the breadth consists in a Stable,
Coach-Passage, and a Kitchen. The stable with a double rank has of breadth
twenty three feet and an half, the Passage for the Coach nine, and the Kitchen
twenty two and an half; on the side of which is the Buttery of ten feet broad
upon eleven deep, at one of the corners of which shall be the Privy. Next to
the Buttery is the staircase, upon the same breadth of ten feet, and twenty
four of depth. The Court shall have thirty four feet in breadth, upon the whole
depth of the Stairs and the Buttery, which make thirty six feet, therein
containing the thickness of the Wall between the Buttery and the Stairs. The
rest of the breadth is employed in a staircase joining to the stable, and a
gallery at the end: the staircase has ten feet in square and the gallery
twenty five in depth, upon the like breadth, within which one may put the
Coaches, and behind the Coaches at the place marked (A) may be set the Privy.

The body of the building behind, which is the principal, which shall have in
depth twenty two feet, upon the whole breadth of fifty seven; it consists
in an Hall thirty six feet broad, and a Chamber nineteen and an half. At the
two corners of this body of the building may be made, by the outside within
the Garden, two small Advances for Privies, which shall be raised only to the
second story. The Garden shall be thirty six feet deep upon the whole breadth,
into which they shall descend by stone-steps.

The second Story of the second Division of the nineth Place.
THe second Story consists in two Chambers, in the midst of which is a
Wardrobe; the first is placed over the Kitchen, being twenty three feet in
breadth, the Wardrobe twelve, upon fifteen and an half deep. In respect of the
Passage it shall be for to serve for one of the two Chambers, and the second
Chamber over the stable shall have twenty feet in square. Joining unto the
first Chamber, and above the buttery, shall be a Portal of the same bigness and
shape that the buttery is; and on the other side of the Court shall be a
Gallery, between the stairs and the principal body of the building, which shall
have twenty five feet in depth, and shall consist in two Chambers and a
Wardrobe. The first joining to the Gallery shall have nineteen feet and an half
in breadth, the second twenty three, and the Wardrobe thirteen, upon seventeen
feet and an half in depth. In respect of the Passage of four feet, at the two
corners of the body of the building, within the garden, shall be made two
Advances for the Privies.

The Elevation of the body of the Building on the Front, which looks to the
street, of the Ninth Place, distributed according to the second Manner.
THe Body of the Building on the Front has the same level with that of the
Court. It shall have of height from the floor or level unto under the joysts
nineteen feet, the which height shall be divided above the Kitchen and the
Stable, by an Enter-joyst or Girder, which shall have ten feet under the
joysts, from the floor, which shall be with the thickness of the joysts and
plancher, ten feet nine inches at the Enter-joyst or Girder, above the Stable,
they shall ascend by fifeeen steps, which shall have eight inches, and seven
parts of height each of them. The rest of the height from the plancher of the
Enter-Girder, unto that of the first story under the joysts, shall be eight
feet three inches, and containing the thickness of the joysts and plancher nine
feet, to the which height they shall ascend by thirteen steps, which shall have
of height eight inches and four parts each of them. To the Enter-joyst or
Girder above the Kitchen, they shall ascend by three steps, which shall be in
the Court of six inches each of them. For to come to the floor of the bottom of
the principal Staircase, and to the turning thereof on the side of the Court,
shall be taken seven steps of six inches apiece. For to come upon the bottom of
the Staircase joining to the Hall, and within the other turning against the
Wall, shall be taken fifteen steps, of five inches eleven parts apiece, which
shall ascend to the height of seven feet four inches and an half; which being
added with the five feet, unto which the steps of the Court do ascend, and of
the other turning, there will be twelve feet four inches and an half. But to
ascend to the Enter-joyst we had but ten feet nine inches; wherefore they must
descend unto the said Enter-joyst two feet four inches and three parts, by the
means of four steps, which shall be taken above the Buttery.

The Floor of the body of the Building behind shall have five feet above the
level of the Court, by reason of Cellars or necessary Rooms which shall be
underneath: and to this height they shall ascend by the three steps mentioned
above in the Court, and by the seven of the turning of the staircase, as it
has been said hereabove.

The first story of the body of the Building behind, shall have from the Floor
to under the Joysts, fourteen feet, and containing the thickness of the Joysts
and the Plancher, fourteen feet nine inches: to the which they shall ascend by
thirty steps, having five inches eleven parts of height, each of them: the
which shall be divided by the half upon each Turning, and in this Manner the
chief staircase shall afford communication to the principal Body of the
Building, and to the Enter-Joyst of that on the forepart. But it shall not
afford it to the first story on the forepart, and nevertheless the smaller
stairs does afford it to the one and the other, forasmuch as the two bodies of
the Building before and behind are of one level.

But if one would have Communication of the one body of the Building with the
other, as well by great stairs, as by the small, from the level of the Hall
they should go up to the second story, by twenty five steps, adding thereto
five steps upon each Turning, and each of them should have seven inches and one
part of height; and for the second story which has twelve feet nine inches,
containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the which they shall
ascend by twenty five steps, of six inches and one part of height, each of
them. But in this manner the great staircase shall not have any communication
with the Enter-Joyst above the Kitchen, the which has not any also by the
lesser stairs, and by this means the said Enter-Joyst would remain wholly
unuseful: therefore to make it useful we must take its communication by the
lesser stairs, by the means of the Enter-Joyst above the Stable, by passing
over the Gate, the which has thirteen feet of height, and with the thickness
of the Joyst and Plancher, thirteen feet nine inches, and by consequence three
feet above the floor of the Enter-Joyst: we must therefore use steps coming to
this height in the one and the other Enter-Joyst the one to ascend, and the
other to descend.

The second story, shall have of height twelve feet, under the Joysts, and
containing the thickness of the Joyst and Plancher, twelve feet nine inches, to
the which they shall ascend by twenty two steps in two Revolutions, and
therefore every step shall have seven inches and one part.

The third story shall be in Garrets, and shall have of height containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, ten feet nine inches, to the which they
shall ascend by one Revolution, by sixteen steps of eight inches four parts
each of them.

The Elevation of the body of the building behind, which looks toward the
Court of the nineth Place, divided according to the second Manner.
THe Body of the Building behind shall have its Cellars underneath the
Building, which shall have nine feet under the Joysts, or under the Vault,
whereof four feet nine inches shall be above the level of the Court, and they
shall descend thereinto by nine steps of six inches and four parts each of
them, by reason of their steps which shall be ascended from the Court. The
other four feet three inches above, will make with the thickness of the Joysts
and Plancher five feet, the which they shall ascend by ten steps, whereof three
shall be in the Court, and the other seven in the Turning of the staircase,
which is upon the Court, as has been said here above.

The first story from the floor of the Hall unto under the Joysts, shall have
fourteen feet, and containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher fourteen
feet nine inches, to the which they shall ascend by thirty steps, having five
inches and one part of height each of them: the which shall be distributed by
the half upon each Turning, as has been said in the elevation of the Body of
the Building before.

The second story shall have of height twelve feet under the Joysts, and
containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, twelve feet nine inches,
to the which they shall ascend by twenty six steps of five inches, and eleven
Parts each of height.

The third story shall have of height ten feet nine inches, containg the
thickness of the joysts and Plancher, to the which story we shall ascend by
steps equal in height to those of the second story of five inches eleven Parts,
and thereby those shall be twenty two thereof.

Above may be made Granaries.

floor plan The Groudplot of the first Story,


floor plan The Groundplot of the second Story,


front elevation The Front to the Street,


architectural diagram The Upright to the Court,


The third Division of the nineth Place, of the same breadth of fifty seven
feet, upon one hundred and twenty of depth.
THe third Division of the same space of fifty seven feet in breadth, upon one
hundred and twenty in depth, consists in two Bodies of a Building, the one
upon the fore part, the other on the hinder; the first having twenty feet in
depth upon the whole breadth, the which is divided into a Stable of nineteen
feet, a Passage for the Coach of nine feet, a Staircase of nine feet, and a
Kitchen of seventeen feet, at the end of which is a Buttery nine feet deep,
upon twelve and an half broad, and a Passage four feet broad to go into the
Kitchen. And these two breadths making seventeen feet, do cause that of a
Chamber next to the said Buttery, the which has fifteen feet and an half in
depth; and at the end of that is another Staircase, the breadth of which shall
have its situation according to the depth of the building, considering it in
its whole extent: and therefore we shall use this word of Depth, which shall be
of ten feet upon seventeen of breadth. The Court shall have the rest of the
breadth, which is thirty eight feet and an half, upon thirty six deep.

The Body of the Building behind, which is the principal, shall have twenty two
feet deep upon the whole breadth. It consists in a Hall of thirty four feet,
and a Chamber of twenty two in square. At the corners as well of the Hall as of
the Chamber, there shall advance into the Garden two Closets of eight feet
broad upon ten deep. The Garden shall be thirty six feet deep upon the whole
breadth, to which they shall descend by four steps.

The second Story of the third Division of the nineth Place.
THe second Story consists in a Chamber above the Stable, having in breadth
nineteen feet upon the whole depth of twenty feet, a Wardrobe of nine feet
broad upon fifteen and an half deep; in regard of a Passage of four feet which
is behind, a Staircase of nine feet broad, and a Chamber of seventeen; on the
side of which is a Wardrobe of the same breadth upon nine feet deep, and a
Chamber of sixteen feet likewise upon the said breadth of seventeen. At the end
of the which Chamber the Staircase is placed, and then the body of the
principal building, which consists in two Chambers, each of them adorned with
its Closet, and the Wardrobe in the midst.

The first joining to the Stairs shall have eighteen feet and an half in
breadth, upon seventeen and an half deep. The Wardrobe shall have fifteen feet
in breadth, upon seventeen and an half deep; and behind the said Chamber and
Wardrobe shall be a Passage of four feet for their disengagement: the other
Chamber, which is the principal, shall have twenty two feet in square; and at
the corner of each of the Chambers shall be put forth within the Garden a
Closet of eight feet broad upon ten deep.

The Elevation of the Front, to the street of the body of the Building of the
Ninth Place, distributed according to the third Manner.
THe body of the Building on the Front, excepting the stair case, has the
same level with that of the Court, and shall have of height from the floor,
fifteen feet, and with the thickness of the Plancher, fifteen feet nine inches;
the floor of the staircase shall have one foot above the said level, to the
which they shall ascend by two steps within the Court: there will remain
fourteen feet nine inches, whither they shall ascend by twenty eight steps of
six inches, four Parts each of them.

The second story shall have twelve feet, containing the thickness of the
Joysts and Plancher, twelve feet nine inches, to the which they shall ascend by
twenty eight steps, of five inches and an half each of them.

The third story, which consists in Chambers in Garrets, shall have ten feet
nine inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the which
they shall ascend by steps of equal height with the foregoing, to wit, of five
inches and an half, and therefore there will be twenty four of them.

The Elevation of the body of the principal building, which is on the back
part, and faceth the Court of the nineth Place, according to the third Division.
THe Floor of the body of the building on the back part, together with the
Chamber joining to the stairs, is raised two feet above the level of the Court;
the which shall ascend by four steps being in the said Court.

The first story from the floor of the Hall shall have thirteen feet under the
Joysts, and with the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher thirteen feet nine
inches; to which they shall ascend by twenty seven steps, of six inches and one
part apiece.

The second story shall have twelve feet nine inches, containing the thickness
of the Joysts and Plancher; to which they shall ascend by twenty seven steps,
which shall have five inches eight parts apiece.

The third story shall have eleven feet nine inches, containing the thickness
of the Joysts and Plancher; to which they shall ascend by steps of equal height
to those of the second story of five inches eight parts, and therefore there
shall be twenty five of them.

Above the third story shall be a Granary or Chamber in the Garret, from nine
to ten feet under the Joysts of elevation, if one will have it.

We must also observe, that although it seems that we make the first stories
of the body of the building on the fore part more elevated then needful;
nevertheless that is not done without reason, for it is to equal the two Floors
of the two bodies of the building, to the end that one may go evenly from the
one to the other, and that he be not forced to ascend nor descend.

floor plan The Ground-plot of the first Story,


floor plan The Ground-plot of ye second Story,


front elevation The Front to the Street,


architectural diagram The Upright of the Chief Building, next the Court,


The fourth Division of the nineth Place, of the same breadth of fifty seven
feet, upon one hundred and twenty of depth.
THis fourth Division of the same space of fifty seven feet in breadth, upon
six score of depth, consists likewise in two bodies of a Building, the one on
the front, the other on the Rear, the first having twenty two feet of depth
upon the whole breadth, the which is divided into a stable, with a double Rank,
of twenty two feet and an half; a Passage for the Coach of nine feet, a Kitchen
of twenty three feet and an half; on the side of which is a Butterie of
fourteen feet of breadth, upon seventeen of depth; and according to the depth of
the said Butterie, is the staircase of eighteen feet of depth, upon the same
breadth of fourteen feet. This staircase has four Nuels or Spindles adorned
with Ballisters or little pillars, and must have about three feet empty within
the midst, for to afford it the more pleasantness. The Court must have thirty
six feet of depth, upon forty one and an half of breadth, and from that they
must ascend by four steps to the bottom of the staircase.

The body of the building on the Rear, which is the principal, must have the
same depth of twenty two Feet, upon the same breadth of fifty seven Feet, and
consists in an Hall of thirty six Feet of breadth, and in a Chamber of
nineteen Feet and an half, upon seventeen Feet and an half of depth, by reason
of a passage of Four Feet, which is between the said Chamber and the stair
case; and within a corner of the passage shall be the privy. At the two corners
of the Garden, joining to the Hall and the Chamber, there must come forth two
Closets of ten Feet of breadth, and there must be a descent at your choice,
either from the Hall or the Chamber to the Garden, of four steps.

The second Story of the fourth Division of the nineth Place.
THe second Story consists in two Chambers, in the midst of which is a
Wardrobe: the first over the Stable shall have of breadth twenty two feet and an
half, upon twenty two of depth: the Wardrobe twelve feet and an half, upon
seventeen and an half of depth, by reason of a passage of four feet: behind
that, another Chamber of twenty feet of breadth upon the same depth of seventeen
feet and an half, and above the Buttery shall be a Portal of the breadth and
depth of the said Buttery.

The body of the Building on the Rear, consists in two Chambers, and one
Wardrobe: the first Chamber near unto the staircase, having the same breadth
and depth with that of the Story below: the second joining to the first above
the Hall, having twenty two feet in square, and the Wardrobe fourteen feet and
an half of breadth, upon the same depth of twenty two feet, at the two corners
of the Chamber, and of the Wardrobe, shall be likewise two Closets, jetting
forth over the Garden* as those of the first Story.

The Elevation of the Front to the Street, of the body of the building of the
nineth Place, divided according to the fourth Manner.
THe body of the building on the Front, has the same level, with that of the
Court, and shall have height from the Floor, fifteen feet and an half, and with
the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, sixteen feet three inches, to the
which they shall ascend by thirty one steps, to wit, four in the Court, which
shall ascend two feet, and twenty seven in the staircase, which shall have six
inches and four parts each of them.

The second story shall have twelve feet under the Joysts, and twelve feet nine
inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher; to the which they
shall ascend by twenty seven steps of five inches, eight parts each of them.

The third story shall have ten feet and an half under the Joysts, and eleven
feet three inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher; to the
which they shall ascend by twenty four steps of equal height with those of the
second story, which are five inches eight parts.

And above shall be made Chambers in the Garrets, about nine feet of height
under the Joysts, or else Garners, if one will have it.

The Elevation of the body of the principal building, which is on the back
part, that looks upon the Court of the nineth Place, according to the fourth
Distribution.
THe floor of the body of the Principal building, together with the bottom of
the staircase, shall be elevated two feet above the level of the Court, to
the which they shall ascend by the four steps, which we have said to be in the
Court.

The first story shall have thirteen feet and an half from the floor under the
Joysts, and fourteen feet three inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts
and Plancher, to the which they shall ascend by twenty seven steps of six
inches four parts each of them.

The second story shall have twelve feet under the Joysts, and twelve feet nine
inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the which they
shall ascend by twenty seven steps, of five inches eight parts each of them.

The third story shall have ten feet and an half under the Joysts, and eleven
feet three inches, containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the
which they shall ascend by twenty four steps of equal height of five inches
eight parts.

And above may be made Garners or Chambers in Garrets, of nine feet under the
Joysts of height.

floor plan The Ground-plot of the first Story,


floor plan The Ground-plot of the second Story,


front elevation The Front of the Building to ye Street,


architectural diagram The Upright of the Chief Building next the Court,


The fifth Division of the nineth Place, of the same breadth of fifty seven
feet, upon one hundred and twenty of depth.
THis fifth Division of the nineth Place of fifty seven feet in breadth, upon
one hundred and twenty in depth, consists likewise in two bodies of a
building, the first on the Front, of twenty feet deep upon the whole breadth,
the which is divided into a Stable of thirteen feet broad, in the corner of
which is a Coach-house, behind which is the place for a bed. On the side of the
Stable is the Gate for the Coach of nine feet broad, and a Kitchen of twenty
three feet: at one of the corners of which, half within and half without the
Work, is the staircase, in the shape of a Vice or winding stair, having ten
feet in square, and at one of the corners of the said stairs shall be the
Privy. The Court shall have thirty nine feet in depth upon the whole breadth,
and from the Court they shall ascend by six steps upon an open Gallery, which
shall be separated into two by the staircase situate in the midst, which
shall be sixteen feet in square, and in the midst of it is the Passage to
enter into the Hall. Each part of the open galleries shall have nineteen feet
broad upon seventeen deep.

The body of the building behind, joining to the said open gallery, shall have
twenty two feet deep, and consists in an Hall and a Chamber. The Hall shall
have thirty six feet broad, and the Chamber twenty. And within the garden, at
the two corners as well of the Hall as the Chamber, shall be advanced two
Closets of twelve feet deep upon nine of breadth. The garden shall have the
rest of the depth upon the whole breadth.

The second Story of the fifth Division of the nineth Place.
THe second Story of the body of the building in the Front consists in two
Chambers, a Wardrobe, and a Closet. The first over the Kitchen having the same
breadth of twenty three feet upon fifteen and an half deep, by reason of the
Staircase and Passage. The second Chamber shall be twenty two feet broad, upon
twenty of depth. The Wardrobe shall be ten feet and an half broad, and the
Closet ten feet in square.

The body of the building behind consists in two Chambers and a Wardrobe in
the midst: the first being over the Hall shall have twenty two feet in
square, the Wardrobe thirteen and an half of breadth upon seventeen and an half
deep, by reason of the Passage of four feet, which is before. The other Chamber
shall be twenty feet broad upon the whole depth. Each Chamber shall have its
Closet jetting out upon the garden, as has been said.

The Elevation of the Front toward the street of the body of the Building, on
the fore side of the nineth Place, divided according to the fifth Manner.
THe Body of the Building in the Front has the same surface or superficies
with that of the Court, and shall have in height from the Floor under the
Joysts twelve feet, and twelve feet nine inches comprehending the thickness of
the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty five steps, of
six inches one part apiece, which will take one revolution or turning wholly,
and a quarter of another.

The second Story shall have eleven feet under the Joysts, and eleven feet nine
inches comprehending the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they
shall ascend by twenty five steps of five inches eight parts apiece.

The third Story shall have the like height and the like division of Steps.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets, like as aforesaid.

The Elevation of the Upright to the Court to the body of the building behind,
of the nineth Place, divided according to the nineth manner.
THe open Gallery shall be raised above the Level of the Court three feet, to
which they shall ascend from the said Court by six steps of six inches apiece.

The Floor of the Body of the Building shall have the same Level with the open
Gallery, and shall have in height fourteen feet under the Joysts, and with the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher fourteen feet nine inches, to which they
shall ascend by twenty eight steps of six inches four parts apiece.

The second shall have of height thirteen feet under the Joysts, and thirteen
feet nine inches containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the
which they shall ascend by an equal quantity of twenty eight steps, which
therefore must have five inches eleven parts of height each of them.

The third story shall have in height ten feet under the joysts, and ten feet
nine inches containing the thickness of the joysts and plancher, to which they
may ascend by twenty four steps of five inches five parts high apiece.

Above may be Granaries.

floor plan The Ground-plot of the first Story,


front elevation The Front to the Street,


architectural diagram The Front of the Chief Building toward the Court,


The Division of the second Place, having seventy two feet of breadth, upon
seventy four of depth.
THe depth of this Ground-plot is divided into a Court on the Front, and a body
of a building and a garden on the hinder part. At the two sides of the Court
and of the body of the building shall be built a Stable with a Coach-house, and
on the other side a Kitchen with a Buttery: each of them must have fifteen feet
broad; and the depth of the Stable and of the Kitchen must be nineteen feet,
the Coach-house and the Buttery eight. The Court shall be thirty nine feet
broad upon twenty seven deep, from which they must ascend by twenty four steps
to the body of the building, which has twenty two feet deep upon the whole
breadth of seventy two, and consists in a Hall and a Chamber, between which
there must be placed the Staircase. The Hall shall have in breadth thirty six
feet, the staircase ten, and the Chamber twenty three; and at the end, as
well of the Hall as of the Chamber, shall be continued within the Garden two
little Galleries, having each of them ten feet broad, upon the whole depth of
the garden of twenty one feet. The which garden shall have forty nine feet of
breadth, and they must descend into it by the passage of the staircase with
two steps, and with two steps within the garden, which make the four steps
whereby they ascended from the Court to the body of the building: the which is
so done, that thereby a convenient raising might be allowed to the gate. The
Privy shall be placed within the thickness of the wall, against the middle
division of the staircase.

The second Story of the Division of the tenth Place.
THis second Story contains a Chamber over the Stable, and another over the
Kitchen, having each of them fifteen feet broad upon twenty seven of depth. And
as for the principal body of the building, it consists in two Chambers and a
Wardrobe; the first over the Hall shall have twenty four feet broad upon the
whole depth of twenty two feet. The Wardrobe joining to the said Chamber shall
have twelve feet broad upon seventeen and an half of depth, by reason of the
Passage of four feet which is on the Front. On the side of this Wardrobe shall
be the Staircase, and joining unto that the Chamber, having the same breadth
and depth with the first. And at the two ends of the two Chambers shall be two
Closets, having the same breadth and depth with the galleries of the story
below. You may make Chimnies in these Closets if you please.

The Elevation of the body of the building, of the tenth Place, as well in that
which looks toward the Court, as the two Wings over the Street.
THe Floor, as well of the Stable as of the Kitchen, shall be of the same
Plumb-Line with the Court; and that of the Body of the Building shall be raised
two feet above the Floor or Level of the said Court, to which they shall ascend
by four steps placed in the said Court.

The first Story shall have thirteen feet under the Joysts, and containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, thirteen feet nine inches; to which they
shall ascend by thirty steps, of five inches and an half high apiece.

The second Story shall have twelve feet nine inches, containig the thickness
of the Joysts and Plancher; to which they shall ascend by twenty eight steps of
the like height of five inches and an half.

The third Story shall have eleven feet nine inches, containing the thickness
of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by twenty six steps of
the like height of five inches and an half apiece.

Above may be Granaries.

floor plan The Groundplot of the first Story,


floor plan The Groundplot of the second Story,


architectural diagram

The Division of the eleventh Place of seventy two feet of breadth, upon an
hundred and twelve of depth, without the Garden.
THis Place may be divided according to the five ways of the ninth place by
augmenting the part as well in breadth as in depth, according as it may be found
most convenient, and further also according to the Manner that follows.

It must have two bodies of a Building, the one upon the Front, the other upon
the Rear, with a Gallerie, which must join the one to the other, and the Court
in the middle.

The body of the Building on the Front must have twenty feet of depth, and
its breadth must be divided into a Stable of eighteen feet, a staircase of
nine, a Coach-house of eleven feet, a gate for a Coach of nine, another
Coach-house of eight feet, and another Stable of eleven feet and an half.

Next unto the first Stable on the left hand there must be another body of a
Building, which must join before unto that behind, upon the same breadth of
the Stable of eighteen feet, the which must be divided into two Chambers,
whereof each must join to its body of the building, and that which must join
to the stable must have eighteen feet in square, and that which must join to
the body of the Building on the back-part, must have twenty four feet of
depth, upon the breadth of eighteen. The two Wardrobes must be between the
Chambers of eleven feet of depth each one. The Court must have fifty two feet
of breadth, upon forty eight of depth.

Next unto the Court, and before the principal body of the Building, must be
an open gallerie of fifteen feet of depth, upon the whole breadth of the Court;
and next unto the gallerie must be the principal body of the Building of
twenty two feet of depth, upon the whole breadth of threescore and twelve feet:
the which is divided into an Hall upon the left hand, a staircase, and a
Chamber. The Hall must have thirty eight feet and an half of breadth, the stairs
twelve, and the Chamber eighteen feet and an half, and under the principal
body of the building, may be a Vault or Sellar, whereof the height must be the
one half under the level of the Court, and the other half above it.

The second Story of the eleventh Place, according to the precedent Division.
THe second story of the body of the building on the front, consists in a
Chamber upon the first stable, a staircase, and two other chambers; the first
must have eighteen feet in breadth, the second and third twenty feet in square.
Next to the first Chamber is a Gallerie, having sixty four feet of depth upon
eighteen of breadth.

The second story of the principal body of the building consists in a Closet
and a Chamber over the Hall, a staircase, and another chamber. The Closet
shall have sixteen Feet and an half of breadth, upon the whole depth of twenty
two feet: The Chamber shall have twenty two Feet in square, and the other
Chamber eighteen feet and an half of breadth.

The Elevation of the body of the Building on the Front of the eleventh Place,
which looks toward the street.
THe floor of the body of the Building on the Front, and of the first Chamber
and Wardrobe thereof on the left hand, must be of the same level with the
Court: and must have of height eighteen feet and an half under the Joysts, the
which must be separated by an Enter-Girder in all the Rooms or Apartments,
which must be on the left hand of the Gate. The height from the floor under the
Joysts of the Enter-girder must have ten feet, and containing the thickness of
the Joysts and Plancher ten feet nine inches, to the which they must ascend by
twenty one steps of six inches and two parts each of them, and from the floor
of the Enter-girder to under the Joists of the first story, there must be
seven feet nine inches; and containing the thickness of the Joists and Plancher
eight feet and an half; unto which they must ascend by seventeen steps of six
inches of height each of them.

The second story must have twelve feet under the Joists, and containing the
thickness of the Joists and Plancher, twelve feet nine inches, to the which
they must ascend by twenty four steps, which must have of height six inches
four parts and an half each of them.

Above may be garners or chambers in Garrets, from nine to ten feet under the
Joists.

The Elevation of the principal body of the building, of the eleventh Place, on
the Front next the Court.
THe open gallerie must be raised above the level of the Court two feet, as
also the Chamber and Wardrobe joining thereto; to the which they must ascend
from the Court by four steps; and the floor of the body of the principal
building must be raised above that of the gallerie two feet and an half, to
which they must ascend by five steps of six inches each of them* so that the
floor of the body of the building must be raised above that of the Court four
Feet and an half, whereof are nine inches for the thickness of the Joists and
Plancher; so there will remain under the Plancher three feet nine inches; But
we do allow nine feet of height under the joists to the Offices or Sellars; it
will remain then to take under the floor of the Court five feet three inches,
and we must have to descend nine feet nine inches. The which will be
convenientlie made by nineteen steps of six inches and two parts each of them,
whereof five shall be taken within the passage for to go to the garden, the
which shall serve to allow to the gate of the garden a convenient raising, the
other fourteen shall be taken under the Turning-stairs on the right hand. They
shall descend into the garden by four steps to come back to the Floor of the
Court.

The first story shall have of height from the Floor to the bottom of the
Joysts fourteen feet, and containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher
fourteen feet nine inches, to the which they shall ascend by twenty eight
steps of six inches and four parts apiece.

The second story shall have thirteen feet nine inches containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by the same
quantity of twenty eight steps, of five inches and eleven parts high apiece.

The third story shall have eleven feet under the Joysts.

Above may be Granaries.

floor plan The Groundplot of the first Story,


floor plan The Groundplot of the second Story,


architectural diagram

The Division of the twelveth Place, which is a double Pavillion, having of
breadth seventy feet, upon thirty six of depth,
THis Pavilion consists in a Chamber upon the left hand, a Staircase, and
Hall, having the Prospect of three sides, a Portal behind the Staircase, and
Wardrobe joining to the Chamber, the which Chamber shall have twenty two feet
in square; the Stairs shall have in breadth twenty two feet upon nineteen of
depth, in the midst of which is a Passage of six feet, the hall shall have
twenty two feet of breadth, upon the whole depth of thirty six, the Portall
shall have the same breadth with the stairs upon eighteen feet of depth, and the
Wardrobe thirteen feet and an half of depth, upon the whole breadth of the
Chamber.

The second and third story shall be like to the first, except that over the
Hall, there shall be made a Wardrobe of the same depth with that below, and
above the Portall shall be made Chambers.

For the heights, the floor of the body of the Building, shall be raised three
feet above the level of the ground without, to which they shall ascend by six
steps, as well before as behind: and shall have from the floor to under the
Joysts fourteen feet, and containing the Joysts and Plancher fourteen feet nine
inches, to the which they shall ascend by thirty steps, of five inches eleven
parts each of them.

The second story shall have thirteen feet nine inches, containing the
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to the which they shall ascend by the
like quantity of thirty steps, of five inches and an half each of them.

The third story shall have twelve feet under the Joysts.

The Division of the thirteenth Place, of an hundred and one feet of breadth,
upon forty five of depth, which is a body of a building between two Pavillions.
THis Body consists between two Pavillions on the two sides, and an Hall in
the midst. Each Pavillion divided into a Chamber on the back part, a Wardrobe
and Staircase on the Front. The Wardrobe shall have thirteen feet of breadth
upon twenty of depth; the Stairs ten feet of breadth upon the said depth of
twenty feet; the Chamber shall have twenty four feet in square; the Hall shall
have forty eight feet of breadth upon twenty four of depth, and before the Hall
shall be an open Gallery of fourteen feet deep upon the whole breadth of the
Hall, which is forty eight feet. Underneath both the Pavillions and the Hall
shall be Vaults or Cellars.

The second Story shall differ in nothing from the first, except that over the
Hall you may make two Chambers and a Wardrobe, as you shall find it most
convenient.

For the heights, the Floor of the Vaults shall be the Plumb Line even with
that without, into which they shall enter upon even ground under the open
Gallery, and shall have in height under the Joysts nine feet, and thereby the
Floor of the Body of the Building shall be raised above the surface of the
Street nine feet nine inches, to which they shall ascend from without by a
round Staircase, which is on the Fron^ of the Gallery, and shall have on each
side seventeen steps, of six inches and two parts apiece, for to come to the
Floor of the Gallery, from which they shall ascend still by two steps of the
like height, as well to enter into the Hall, as to the two Stair-cases; and
these nineteen Steps will make just the nineteen fee^ nine inches. And from the
Cellars or Vaults they shall ascend under covert to the two Stair-cases of the
Pavilions, by seventeen steps of six inches and eleven parts high apiece.

The first Story shall have of height fourteen feet nine inches containing
thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend by the two
turning Stairs, by thirty three steps of five inches and four parts apiece.
Above the Hall shall be Chambers, which shall be from ten to eleven feet high.

The second Story of the Pavillions shall have thirteen feet nine inches,
containing the thickness of the Joysts and Plancher, to which they shall ascend
by the same quantity of thirty three steps of five inches high apiece.

Above may be Granaries or Chambers in Garrets.

A Description of the manner of framing the Timber-work Buildings, with the
Names of the particular Members. Also Directions and Examples for the Placing
of them.
HAving hitherto largely discoursed of Buildings of Masons and
Brick-layers-work, it seems also fitting for us to discourse likewise of
Carpenters and Plaisterers work, which may serve for the Places where such
Building commonly is made, and for other also in the which one may be compelled
thereto, in respect of the small space that one may have. The Carpenters Work
then of a Building shall be set upon the Masons or Bricklayers work, about two
feet or two and an half of height, above the level of the street, for to hinder
the putrefying of the first mortering, the which shall be placed upon the stone
or brick-work, with an inch or an inch and an half of setting off with this
observation, in respect of the Masonry, to set out with freestone, or hard
gray stone, or the like, the Places where Gates close together. The Summers
shall be joined together upon the ends of the chief Posts which divide the
rooms, with half an inch of in-bearing, and it is good, that these chief Posts
have in thickness and breadth the double of others. Upon these chief Posts shall
meet the second, third and fourth Summers, whereof the second and third are
placed about the Planchers, and within these Summers the Posts, as well of the
doors work as the Cross-bars of Windows shall meet by Tenons and Mortaises, as
the Pieces and Posts that fill up shall be in the midst, together with the
parts of Braces: and within the Posts of the Crosses shall meet that which
upholds underneath, and the head-pieces above, and underneath the said Crosses
shall meet by Tenons and Mortaises, at the Summer and prop of the Cross-bars,
the small Posts and quarters, and above the said Crosses, do join by Tenons and
Mortaises, at the Summer and lintel of the Cross, three small posts or cross
rafters. Now the spaces which are between may be filled up three several ways,
that is, with single bars and a post in the midst, or else with cross-braces
and posts by the side, the third with little bars and posts on the side: And
above the door-works shall meet three small posts within the Summer, and above
the Boarding shall be made a small Pinnacle of Timber-work for covering of the
Tyles or Slate, according to the Manner set forth hereafter, the which Pinnacle
shall be made by the means of two rafters and Spars above, the which rafters
shall meet below within the Summer of the Boarding, and above within the King
Post, and within the said rafters shall be fixed with Tenons and Mortaise upon
the middle of the King Post. Within the which wedge, and within the Summer
below shall meet the Posts of the Crosses, and the spaces filled so as has bin
said, and above the said Wedge there shall meet two Counter-fixt pieces with
the Posts that fill up; and before the Kings Post, or small Pinnacle and pannell
of wood shall be made a round Shutter, bearing out about two feet or two feet
and an half, born up below upon the raising-piece, and three stays with three
Cattoozes underneath.

And in case that one would make the spout on the side of the panel of wood,
one may do it, but in stead of the filling up that between the Crosses, there
will be need to add thereto posts of cloven-wood or shingles, by the means of
which they may change their Beams in their situation, making them to be born
upon the said posts, having Cattoozes for the straight bearing up of the said
Beams for the inside, by Tenons and Mortaises, and an under-Top above about the
midst of the King Post, likewise meeting in the said King Post with two
quarters by Tenons and Mortaises, and within the said King Post underneath the
under-top shall the Bands meet together cut into two about the place of the
said under-Top, the which shall be bound as well with the said King Post, as
the Top and under-Top by Tenons and Mortaises, and they shall be so spaced
above, that they shall divide the Top into three parts; and the one of those
three parts being again divided into two, we must allow three of the like to
the space from below the Top unto the end of the Band. And in case that the
Band and under-Top may happen to be confounded together in the King-post, we
must take the joining of the Band and King-post lower, at the discretion of the
Workman, so that we do not weaken the body of the King-post. And the Tops shall
be bound the one to the other, by the means of long joints with notches, right
with the King-Post, and pinned with pins of wood, and the under-Top-pieces,
Bands and King-Post, shall be fastened with two moldings which encompass the
King-Post, under-Tops and Bands at the place of their Meetings. These moldings
shall be pinned the one with the other, and to the under-Top by pins of wood,
crossing over from part to part, and the rafters must be spaced upon the tops
and gutter-pieces from two feet to two feet, if the rafters are of a good
bigness, or of sixteen inches, if they be weak; for by this means the lath,
which is commonly four feet in length, shall bear upon three rafters from two
to two feet, and upon four from sixteen to sixteen inches. Here is what may be
said, as well concerning the Compass-rafters, as the Top of the
Common-Coverings, according to the first Manner, but the whole may be seen more
distinctly in the designs then can be expressed in words.

architectural diagram The Ground plot of the first Story,


architectural diagram

architectural diagram 1 The Summers 2 The great Posts 3 The Window Posts 4 The
small Quarters 5 The Cross Braseis 6 The single Braceis 7 The Quarters and
Braceis 8 The Door Posts 9 The Door and Window heads 10 The small bearing
Blocks 11 The Braceis and Quarters 12 The Collar Beam 13 The Counterfixt
pieces 14 The Compass rafters 15 The Raising pieces 16 The Stays 17 The
Cattoozes




architectural diagram

The manner of framing the Roofs which are made for the Covering, and first of
those in which there is a Raising of the Boarding above the last Plancher or
Floor, as when Chambers are made in Garrets.
HAving hitherto discoursed of the Order, Measure, and Framing of Buildings, of
Masons work, Bricklayers, and Carpenters, from the Foundation unto the
Boarding; it remains for us to speak of the Coverings or Roofs, which ought
to sustain them. Now these Coverings must be either of Tiling or Slate; which
are the most common and usual Materials. The Tiling, that it may be
conveniently upheld, has no need that the Triangle of its Roof have an equal
elevation with that of the Slate; but it is sufficient that when its Basis
(that is to say, the breadth of the whole Building) shall contain eight parts,
the two sides, which meet at the top, may have seven apiece. The Roofs, which
are made for Slate, must have more elevation, both in respect of the wind,
which would carry away the said Slate, as for the return of the water, which
rots it. Some are content with the Equilateral Triangle for the shape of the
Roof for slate; Others having the wood at Command do raise it yet more, to wit,
in such manner, that when the Basis, which is always the breadth of the bulk of
the Building contains eight parts, the two sides which meet at the Top
contain each of them nine. Now whether you make your Covering of Tyle or Slate,
you may use indifferently the following fashions, there being no difference
between the one and the other, but that which the framing of the Triangles of
their Roofs does cause, and such Coverings, as well of Tyles, as of Slate, are
made either with raising of the Boarding above the last Plancher, or without
the Raising: if it be with raising up, such work may be made yet in two
manners, that is to say, between two small Pinacles, or with a Top, and each of
these is varied still in two sorts, the first with the kneeling Rafters, the
second with the Platform. According to the first manner the kneeling Rafters
are placed upon the bearings of the Beams, which are the ends of them which
bear upon the body of the walls; and it suffices that there be between four
and five inches from the end of the beam unto the outside of the wall, and the
said kneeling Rafters meet within the beams with Tenons and Mortaises. And it
must be observed, that the said kneeling Rafters must be kept as straight as
can be made, to the end that the inside of that place be not hurt thereby,
having also regard that we keep them not so straight that they may hinder the
Covering. The kneeling Rafters do uphold the Choler-beams, to which these are
joined likewise with Tenons and Mortaises, and bound above also with Struts
meeting together with Tenons and Mortaises, in such manner as for two parts
taken within the Choler there be three taken in the kneeling Rafters; and upon
this beam may be also made a later Plancher. Above this beam, and at the ends
of it do meet also two kneeling Rafters by Tenons and Mortaises, as well within
the Choler, as within the top of the King-post, of which the bottom bears
straight upon the midst of the Choler. This King-post shall be set out with
Embosses both above and below, and at the ends of the Counter-fixt pieces and
bands. These kneeling Rafters are also bound to the King-post with little
Struts, bearing right upon it; and they meet as well with the Choler as with
the kneeling rafters with Tenons and Mortaises. And within the King-post and
the kneeling Rafters are also the Counter-fixt pieces meeting by Tenons and
Mortaises: and the Counter-fixt pieces are joined to the kneeling Rafters just
even with the Gutter-pieces, which Gutter-pieces are upheld with pieces pinned
fast with pins of wood; and those pieces are also sustained by Brackets,
indented about an inch, or three fourths of an inch below within the body of
the kneeling Rafters, coming to decay to nothing above or under the knob. And
there shall be placed two other Gutter-pieces upon the heads of the said
Chollers, and at the ends of the said kneeling Rafters, and upon the said
Gutter-pieces, as well above as below the rafters shall be placed, which shall
meet the one with the other, with Tenons and Mortaises above, and be indented
within the outward ridge of the said top-piece within an inch, and shall be
placed below upon the Boarding, within an inch or an inch and an half inward
upon the thickness of the wall, to take without, except the Projector. And the
said rafters shall be pierced, or otherwise fastened and pinned with pins of
wood, over-thwart the bodies of the said Gutter-pieces; and upon the feet of
the said rafters shall be set small Spars nailed upon the said rafters, and
where the bottom shall bear unto the edges of the Projecture of the Boarding,
to the end to cast back the water behind the walls. All that is above is for
the description and ordering of the fermers. There remains to discourse of
the upper pieces, which are from quarter to quarter; for the framing of which
the top does meet within the end above of the King-post.

The second manner, which is made with the Elevation and Platform, is framed
thus: upon the two ends of the walls are placed two Summers, in such manner
that not any part of them bear amiss. They shall be joined the one to the other
by Mortis and Tenant upon their whole length, with a space between them from
six to six feet. Upon these Summ^rs are Planks with blocks or pieces to hold
fast, and a tail of Iron fastened within them, about an inch or an inch and an
half, so that the upper part of the said raising-peece come even: and above the
ends of the raising-pieces shall be placed the chief rafters, and meet together
by Tenons and Mortaises within the said raising-peeces, and above within the
Body of the King Post: and upon the ends of the raising-peeces within, shall be
born small legs or peers, meeting with Tenons and Mortaises, and at the height
that you would allow to the story in the Garrets shall be drawn a Beam, from
one rafter to another, meeting with Tenons and Mortaises, and bound below by
Struts, having space between, even as we have said of the Braces, and above the
small legs or peers, and in the midst of the Beam shall be the King-Post
placed, whereof we have spoken heretofore, with Tenons and Mortaises, and pins
of Iron under the Beam, if need be, and about the midst of the said long piece,
shall meet another small Beam of two pieces by Tenons and Mortaises, joined and
upheld by Struts as the foregoing. That which above is the description of the
chief rafter. Now the small rafters which are between the chief rafters, are
called the filling up Fermes, and have space between them from two to two feet,
from midst to midst, and are set out with equal parts to the chief rafters, and
likewise placed besides the King-Post, and that the Beams nor the rafters are
not so thick. That which is said above in respect of the rafters or sides, as
well the chief, as the fillers up. It remains to speak of the Top-pieces,
which are framed by Tops meeting together above within the heads of the
King-Post, and two Mortaises and tenant, the one below, the other above,
carried upon the even Beams, and meeting by the two ends, within the bodies of
the said King-Post. And within the Top being between two King-posts, do meet
together above two Bands, cut into two, the which below do meet with Tenons and
Mortaises, as well at the Mortis and tenant, as at the body of the said
King-post, and as concerning the ridges, there shall be made an half ferm, or
side-post within the midst, in like manner as unto the foregoing chief rafters,
except that it shall be a little more stiff or strong, and of the one side and
the other of the said half ferme, there shall be in spaces, other half-fermes,
or fillers up, or pannels from two feet to two feet, or from sixteen to sixteen
inches, from midst to midst, whereof the Branchings shall meet with Tenons and
Mortaises within the body of the Struts, and within the pannels or small
rafters; the which order shall also be kept on the side of the long panel from
the outward ridge unto the meeting of the chief rafters. And within the
raising-peece, which is in the Angle athwart upon the Platform, is the outward
ridge-meeting, whereof the Top is joined to the opening within the ridg of the
King-post above, and this ridge does meet below with one small leg or piece,
within the said raising-peece, and within the body of the said ridge, as also
within the Bracers near to the King-Post, shall meet by Tenons and Mortaises
two Struts, the one below, and the other above, and there shall meet two great
Stays or Esseliers within the said girder and the outward ridg, so that the
little Stays which shall reach thither, may meet together within. In like
manner also shall meet the pannels, as well within the raising-piece, as within
the out-ridge, as also the peers, the whole with Tenons and Mortaises, with
space, as is said from two to two feet, or from sixteen to sixteen inches. Here
is that, we judged needful to be said for the places, where there is elevation
of the Boarding above the last Plancher. It remains to speak of those, where
there is no elevation, which may also be framed by the second Manner, which we
are about to set forth, and by the third and fourth following.

The third Manner has very much resemblance with the first, except that in
stead of the Ashlins and of the Rafters applied above them, there are none but
single Rafters, continuing from the bottom to the Top, and which bear upon the
Beams, and upon the body of the walls below, and within the King-post above.
The which King-post descends even unto the midst of the Beam, to the which it
is joined with Tenons and Mortaises, and in case that the Beam has a great
Bearing, one may also bind the King-post with the same, with plates and pins
of iron, so that the rafters be well joined together within the body of the
King-post, with the ends. But if the Beam has not a great bearing, one may
make the Beam of one piece, and cut the King-post above the same, which shall
meet with the said Beam, with Tenons and Mortaises, and by this means the
Garrets shall be freed from the inconveniency of the King-post.

The fourth manner is not much unlike to the second, except that the King-post
descends upon the midst of the Beam, and that the Boarding has not any
elevation upon the last Plancher or Floor: and besides this, that there are
Enterlaces over the breadth of the sides, upon the ends of the great Beams, the
King-post is joined with the Beam by Tenons and Mortaises. And if it chance
that the Beam has a long bearing, one may support it with the King-post, with
plates and pins of iron: but if the Beam has no great Bearing, they may make
it of one piece, and within it the King-post shall meet, without any need to
continue it lower.

There remains yet two other manner of small roofs, for to cover the
passages, stairs, galleries, and other conveniences, whereof the first is made
with small fermes, and single fermes, The small fermes or rafters joined are
composed of two spars or rafters, a King-post in the midst, and a Beam or small
piece indented within another, the two rafters meeting together above within
the head of the King-post, by Tenons and Mortaises, and born below upon the
Summers, if they be of Board, or upon the Platform of it if it be Masons work.
The Beam meets in the rafters, and in the King-post by Tenons and Mortaises.
The single Roofs are composed of two Rafters coupled above with Tenon and
Mortaise, and with a Beam made of two pieces, meeting within the rafters, and
within the body of the cross-quarter, which goes from one quarter to the
other, and shall bear up the rafters below, upon the Summers or upon the
Platforms, as has bin said.

The single fermes or quarters, must have space between from two feet to two
feet, or from sixteen inches to sixteen inches. The top-piece, or cross-bar on
high between the two small quarters, must be upheld by two bands meeting
together, as well within the piece of the top or upper part, as within the
Body of the King-post by Tenons and Mortaises, unto the which we may join an
overthwart rafter, or cross-brace through the midst, if the bearing be
overlong. The Top must be composed of a Beam on the top, meeting within the
great beam of the ferme, and within the rafter of the top, and with two braces
likewise meeting within the said wedges, within the which braces must meet two
rafters, the which likewise shall go to meet within the outside ridges. And
within the rafters must meet also small wedges, having space between them from
sixteen to sixteen inches, or from two to two feet, as has bin said, and they
must come again to meet within the pannels, and the said pannels shall meet
below within the Summers or Platforms, and above within the outside ridges.

The other Manner of small roof is that which they call a Pent-house, the which
is composed of an half ferme, which consists in a Closer or Tirant, born
within the two bodges of the wall, upon the which Tirant or Closer is made to
meet the great King-post, upon the length of the great wall, and within the
Tirant or Closer, there meets a Strut, or bearer upheld by its middle with a
Counter-fixt piece, likewise meeting as well in the said Strut as in the body
of the King-post. At the end of the Counter-fixt piece, and above the strut
must be placed a panel or piece sustaining a gutter, upheld by Tasseau and a
bracket, and between the two half fermes shall be the top or upper-piece,
composed of a piece of wood; meeting, and born upon the heads of the King-Post
by tenons and mortaises, and upheld below by bands. And upon the upper-piece
the panel, summer or platform, the rafters shall be placed, having spaced
between each, from two to two feet, or from sixteen to sixteen inches, and the
said rafters shall be pierced and fastened with pins of wood, as well upon the
gutter-props as the upper-piece, and below the said rafters shall be applied
rafters feet, nailed upon the said rafters.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some Books and Prints, as are Printed for Robert Prick and are
to be sold at his Shop in White-cross-street, and likewise at the Golden Lion
at the Corner of New-Cheapside near Bethlehem.
A New Treatise of Architecture, according to Vitruvius. Wherein is discoursed
of the five Orders of Columns, viz. The TUSCAN, DORICK, IONICK, CORINTHIAN, and
COMPOSITE. Divided into seven Chapters. Which declare their different
Proportions, Measures and proper Names, according to the Practice of the
ancient Architects, both Greeks and Romans; as also of their Parts general and
particular, necessary in the building of Temples, Churches, Palaces, Castles,
Fortresses, and all other Buildings, with their Dependents: As Gates,
Arches-Triumphant, Fountains, Sepulchers, Chimneys, Cross-hard Windows,
Portals, Platforms, and other Ornaments; serving as well for the beautifying of
Buildings in Cities, as for necessary Fortifications of them. Designed by
Julian Mauclerc, Lord of Ligneron Mauclerc, Brossandiere and Remanguis.
Whereunto are added the several Measures and Proportions of the famous
Architects, Scamozzi, Palladio, and Vignola: With some Rules of Perspective.
The whole represented in fifty large Prints, enriched with the rarest Ornaments
of Antiquity, and Capitals of extraordinary greatness, with their Architraves,
Frieses, and Cornishes proportionable.

A New Book of Architecture, Wherein is represented forty Gates and Arches
Triumphant, Composed of different Inventions, according to the Five Orders of
Columns, viz. The Tuscane, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite. By
Alexander Francine Florentine, Engineer in Ordinary to the French King: With a
Description of each Figure.

A Book of Architecture, containing Cieling-pieces, Chimney pieces, and several
sorts useful for, Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, invented by J. Barbet.

GETHINGS Redivivus: or the Pens Masterpiece. Being the last Work of that
Eminent and Accomplished Master in this Art. Containing Examples of all curious
Hands Written, and now in Practice in England, and the Neighboring Nations:
With necessary Rules and Directions toward the attaining of Fair Writing. Also
Directions for making the best Pens, and several sorts of very good Ink, as
Black, Red, Green, Yellow, and Purple; And how to write with Gold and Silver,
and to polish it to make it glister. Likewise how to Etch or Engrave a Coat of
Arms, Figure or Posie, on Silver, Copper, Brass, Iron, or hardened steel. With
an Appendix, Showing the exact manner of making all sorts of Bonds, Letters of
Attorney, Releases.

A New Book of the Art of Drawing, containing several plain and easy Examples,
fit for Learners to practice by, Collected out of the Works of some of the most
eminent Masters of this famous Art, Albertus Durer, Abraham Bloemaert, and
diverse others, so plain, that any one of reasonable capacity may learn to draw
all parts of a man several, as head, arms, legs, hands and feet by themselves,
also in whole Proportion, etc.

A Book of Mauntlins.

A Book of Sheilds.

A Book of Anticks.

A large Map of London before the Fire, with a Description of the Antiquities
and Customs.

Another Map of the aforesaid City, as it lay in its Ruins, wherein may be seen
what Churches, Halls, and Places of note, with a multitude of Houses that were
burned and ruinated in four days time, by that dreadful and lamentable fire
which begun in Pudding-lane Dec. 2. 1666.

Jupiter and Venus of Sir Anthony Van Dike's Etching.

The Anatomy of the inward parts of Man and Woman, lively set forth, and
diligently, declaring the principal Veins, with the use of letting Blood: very
necessary for Physicians and Chyrurgions, and all other that desire to know
themselves.

The New and pleasant Game of the Goose.

The five Senses in large Royal sheets.

The four Seasons in large sheets.

Scripture-stories in large sheets, as Adam and Eve, Abraham offering up his
Son Isaac, Elisha fed by Ravens, with the woman of Samaria, the Judgment of
Solomon between the two Harlots, Susanna and the two Elders, Queen Esther, etc.
even all others of the old and New Testament.

BOOKS of Land-skips, Sea-pieces, Birds, Beasts, Flies, Flowers and Fruits,
these with several others, black and white or colored, are to be sold at the
above said places.

roof diagrams

architectural diagram

roof diagrams


