THE SCOTS SCOVTS DISCOVERIES: BY THEIR LONDON INTELLIGENCER.

And presented to the Lords of the Covenant of Scotland. Anno Domini. 1639

LONDON, Printed for William Sheares, 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MOST WORTHY and Noble Lords, the Noblemen, and
others of the Covenant of Scotland.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your honors directions, the Scouts (which were sent into
England, to discover the estate of things there) came unto me their
Intelligencer at London, who have collected together all such observations, as
they in their several travels have found, or my self observed, either in my
own abode now two years at London, or in my returning home: But by reason of
all passages now shut up at sea, and all Land ways belayd, I was forced to put
my self in Arminian Attire, and so came home through England, and so remained
some certain time in the Camp Royal, where my Collections may manifest my
love to my Country, and care of the trust by your Lordships imposed upon me.
But if my observations be not answerable to your Lordships expectations, I am
heartily sorry: Yet, ye may see, I have not bin altogether idle, nor will be
more careless hereafter (as occasion is offered) then formerly I have been,
and shall in my Northern news (which is also now in collecting) make good what
is omitted, and in confidence of your favorable acceptance hereof, I rest,

Your Honors most humble servant, D. L.

THE FIRST SCOVTS DISCOVERY.
I Came to Dover in a Flemish Botom, where (after a days rest) I went to see
the Castle, but I was forced to feign my self one of Madam Nurses kindred, and
spoke nothing but french, or else I had not been admitted.

This Castle is called the Key of the Land, but its grown rusty for want of
exercise, for most of the Ordnance are dismounted, their carriages standing one
half in the ground, and the other out; here lay one wheel, and there lay
another: In the Eastern out-worke lay one Piece all overgrown with grass,
and hard by that lay another along by the wall on two Logs of Timber; I wondered
to see such a confusion in so eminent a place; but I was told that the last
great wind was the cause thereof; and if the Lieutenant were once able to walk
round the walls to see it, all would be made good and mended; but till then it
must stand as it does: Their Lord is at London to be cured of the Gout, the
Deputy Lieutenant was at Downs seeing the Kings ships, and most of the men were
at bowls on the green Beach: I came down to the Town, and left the Castle
with a Memento to look to it self, lest the French do it for them; this I
observed, that if the French had been as provident as the Dutch, to have
seated themselves in Dover, then the most Christian King might have had this
Castle at his Command, and so might have been Master of the narrow Seas, and
have had Calice and Dover for two Bul-workes, and Block-houses, and so kept the
Dunkirke from domineering on the seas. All the news I could learn here, was
that six of the Kings ships lay ready for a Convoy of sixty Vessels with
provision for Dunkirke.

The next day I came to Canterbury, where I went to view the glass windows,
and see Sir Thomas a Beckets Tomb, to which the people had prayed so often, as
they had made two holes in the stones with their knees: the next day being
sunday I went to hear a Sermon where (they said) the Archbishop of St.
Andrews was to preach, I was in amaze to see him there; but the noise of the
Organs soon put me out of my dumps. Now (thought I) he is in his Kingdom,
for he has danced a long time after this music: when service was done; I
thought to have heard him tell the people some news out of Scotland, but the
old Carle spoke not one word thereof. The next morning I took a Charcoale, and
drew on the white wall in the Church Porch these three words, (Archi: Cant:
Auli) and so departed out of the town, lest I should have been apprehended for
the Author of it: All the news that I could learn in the Town, was that the
Archbishops Grace was too great to dwell amongst them, that he loved Croyden,
better then Christ-Church. That he had some Engineers to see if they could
remove Christchurch to Croydon by land, or to Lambeth by water, for he meant
it should stoop to him, and not he to it: But lest it should fall to be
forfeited; for non Residency he has put the other Archbishop there for his
Deputy.

As I came through Kent, I saw much mustering, and preparing of men and Arms
to send into Scotland: This had almost made a mutiny amongst them; some said
it was done purposely to weaken the Country, others said it was an il example
for other ages: And an old 88. Captain said they might well retain the name
of Kentish Long-tayles, but to be called any more men of Kent, they could not
claim it.

As I came a long, I saw the Kings Storehouse at Chatham, and some of the
Kings ships which are of such bigness, as a small ship may be built, ere they
can be rigged, and brought to the sea to do any service. When I came to
Gravesend, I saw the great Fleet ryding in the Hope, ready to carry the
Marquess and his men for Scotland: But there fell out a foul fray between
the Parson of the Parish, and the Pursers, for demanding double duties, for
burying such soldiers as dyed on shipboard. On the way toward London, I saw
Stone-church which was burnt down with thunder last winter: And Erith, Micham,
and many other Churches (for all their high Altars) did not escape scot free.

The next Sunday I went to Lambeth to hear a Sermon, and see what form of
worship was used there; when I came, I was in hope to have seen the little good
man of Lambeth there, but I saw no such man in all the Kirk; for I could have
kend him by his white sleeves from all the men there: but I well wot, there he
was not. I speerd for him, and some said, he was either at White Hall or
Somerset house, others said that he was at home choosing of a new
Churchwarden, because the old one had presented him for not coming to Kirk
these 7. years. After preaching was past, I went up the River side to see Guy
Faux his Manor house, the fatallest house, that ever was built; for there was
the plot laid, and powder provided for blowing up the Prince and Peers of the
Realm, in the Parliament house by the Papists conspiracy. There was the
Leather Ordnance invented, there was the white soape and blew starch first
made, there was the most part of the projects and Monopolies hatched, which
have so much troubled the whole Kingdom. There was a new rare invention,
lately set on foot for blowing up of Castles and Forts, but for a conclusion it
was first blown up it self: And now an Engineere has begged it of the King,
and has new built it, for which he has promised to blow up all the Islands in
the Frith in Scotland, that the Kings ships may have sea-roome to besiege
Leeth: from thence I came cross the River, where a Duchess like a
Dive-dapper was a swimming, but the water was so cold, as it made all her body
shiver, and put her in sick a fit of a fever, as no Physician could cure her,
but a German. On the Sunday before Easter I went to St. Margarets anent the
Abbey, where the Minister mistook himself, and instead of a Prayer read a
Preface, forbidding all people to beg at White Hall, for the King was gone to
York Welaway (thought I) now, I have mist a mandy, which I thought to have
had, to have carried me again home into Scotland. Well, I could hardly eat my
dinner for grief thereof: But a country man of mine would needs have me in the
afternoon be Goffer to a Girl, where when I came the women fell to quarrel
for the name; one would have it Maudlin, and another would have it Mary, now
out upon it says another, we have too too many of that name already; pray let
us have old Elizabeth again: by my soul says another, if this were spoken in
Scotland, it would be counted reason when I heard that, I stole away, and left
them to look another Goffer: upon good Friday as I came through White Hall, a
country man had me in to give me a dish of drink, and to show me the dancing
Barn, and then afterward carried me to the Kings Quire to hear a men's of
matins, when I came there the people were al grovelling on the ground as though
they had bin picking pearls out of the pavement: Well, down I was driven on
my maribones amongst the rest, and about half an hour after they al stood up
again, turning their arses to the East, and their snouts to the West to hear
an Anthem, which being done a tall slim Carle in a long Gown made the people
turn their faces to the East, where I spied a curious wrought Crucifix hanging
over the high Altar, with two women kneeling to it, to teach the rest of the
people their duties: Upon Easter day I went thither again, and then the
Crucifix was taken down, and the Resurrection set up in the same place, the
Music went so loud, and the old droaning dunces, and young fry of Quiristers
made such a noise as I could not hear, nor understand one word was spoken, and
so came away for fear of deaffing: About a week after my Countryman would
needs have me go thither again, and then I saw in the same place over the
Altar a fine old man riding on a bonny Nagge, hunting a wild Beast, many a long
leg, and low courtesy was made to the man on horseback: I asked what he
was, and my Countryman told me, it was St. George, and they were all praying
to him to make haste, for they had need of him in the North, when I saw him so
ready on horseback with his spear in his hand, and his spurs on his heels:
Well St. George, thought, I, ride as fast as you can, I will be in Scotland
before you, and so I departed, and left him to end his quarrel with the Beast
he had before him: When I was gone out of the Court, my Countryman told me,
I had some reason to be afraid. For St. George having formerly broke his Spear
with the Spaniard, and rebated his sword at a foil with the French; therefore
he had now his hands bound by the one, and his tongue by the other: And having
taken a truce with them both, he had vowed to be revenged on St. Andrew, whom
he threatens to turn into a Wind-will, where his Cross shall serve for the
sweapes: Alas, and woes me (quoth I) poor St. Andrew is so weary with carrying
his Cross on his back, and a Bishops Bonnet on his head, as he will never be
able to encounter this man, who being so bravely mounted, will run over him
before he come at him. This made me so afraid, as I went home to supper for
fear of fainting; the next morning I got up betimes, and went to the Exchange
to meet our Intelligencer; when I came the news was at an end: For their
Packets were opened, and their Letters taken away, which made a mighty
muttering amongst them, in so much as one of them in a mad humor said that
they were quite disgraced, and thereupon made these verses following.

London's disgraced, Lincoln's displac't,
York now has the golden bag,
The Clergies gift, the Papists thrift
Maintains the English Flag:
The Clergies curse, Rex minat mors,
Ere Bishops be put down:
The gain is great, though far unmeet,
A Myter for a Crown.
THE SECOND SCOVTS Discovery.
I Went out in a Dunbarre Boat, and sailed all along the Northern coasts, where
we met two ships laden with Ammunition for Barwicke, and fix Colliers with
provision for Newcastle. When I came to Hull, I went on shore to see the
mighty Magazin there, from thence we were driven to the Downs, where the
Kings Fleet lay at Anchor: in which the Mermaid Marquess, (being changed from
true blew to all the colors in the Rainbow) was there cabbined up with a
Cable for fear of the French, where like a Kite in a windy day with seventeene
smaller birds at her tail, he was hovering up and down the seas to surprise
all such shipping as should pass for Scotland.

When we came near unto Dover, a Dunkirke set upon us with two French, and a
Fleming releeved us, or else (for all the ship money paid in, for guarding of
the seas) we had been carried to Dunkirke instead of Dunbar: But having escaped
that scouring, we landed in Sussex near old Arundell, where we went to see
the Castle, the strongest defense whereof, is the number and greatness of the
owners titles; It Is kept by four Priests, two Porters, and a Ratcatcher, but
it has above a hundred Watchers and Warders belonging to it; who (before ever
we came near it) came flying over our heads crying, Ka, Ka, Ka, Ka, which made
us so afraid of being clapped up in the Castle, that we returned and left them to
look to their charge.

The people of the Town were all crying, every tear as big as a Millstone,
lest their Lord should love the North Country better then theirs: And because
he is gone to conquer an other Country, and left his own to the mercy of his
enemy, I quickly left this place of mourning, and sailed by the I Will of Wight,
where they were very hot at their Musters, in so much as the smoke thereof
made such a mist on the sea, as we mistook our course, and landed at
Portsmouth, instead of New Castle, where we heard, those Ilanders are as hot
in their Barrels, as the French in the Breech: so as if they come there, it
will prove a hot piece of service, ere they can enter: Portsmouth is but
meanly provided with Ammunition, and therefore they were all in amaze, for
fear the French should come in a Fog.

Southampton was the next place of (...) I came at, and there the Aldermen were
busy begging a benevolence for the wars: But because I had none for them, I
thought it better to show them my backside, then to be called Rebel for
refusing: From thence I came to Winchester, where I was afraid of a Goose.

This Town I left and came to Bagshot, and so to Basing-stoke, where a lordly
Lowne swear me out of ten shillings with his merry conceits of his questions
and answers, amongst which these were a part.

What hunting is most in use? The Fox in the Forest, and the Conie in the
Court.

What profession is most in practice? Buffe Coats in the Camp, and black Coats
in the Church-Campe.

What is that which few men love, and most men hate. The curse of a Cuckold,
and the pride of a Prelate.

What are the two worst evils in the Commonwealth. Covetousness of the Clergy,
and contention of the Commonalty.

I left this place, and took my way to wards Gilford, in hope to have seen
Arundels Earl, but he was gone to Court; yet I did not loose my labor, for
there I saw the finest and best governed Almeshouse in the Kingdom, built by
old George of Canterbury, for a President for his successors, to do like.

The next day I came to Croydon, thinking to have seen the little man, that
makes so mickle matter, but he was at Lambeth; whereupon I came along toward
London with a Colliers Cart of Croydon, where after some whistling and merry
tales, I heard these mystical Novelties.

That of late some are so much for Church Ceremonies, as they do nothing in
true fincerity: And that others are altogether for pride and prodigality, and
nothing for love and charity; That the Owl counterfeits the Eagle, the Buzzard
the Blackbird, the Cuckoo the Nightingale, and the Wren would fly with the
Faulcon, but for fear his wings should fail him.

That the Fox would feign lap himself in the Lions skin, the better to
terrify the other Beasts.

Thus the Wolf would feign be chief Shepherd, that he might the better feed
his flock, and the Ass must have the Hearts skin on his back, to keep him
from the Northern storm.

When they had made an end of their Parables, they fell to singing: And asked
me if I could help them to sing a three man's song: I told them I would do my
best, then they began, and the bearing of the song was this, with which I end
my Relation.

O'good King Charles blame not my pen,
Spare your purse, and save your men,
Give Laud to the Scots, and hang up Wren,
The Echo answered still, Amen.
THE THIRD SCOVTS Discovery.
I Came in Kirk Patricks Boat, all about the Irish seas, where we saw some
soldiers sent from thence, to the Lord Clifford at Carlisle.

We landed three of our men in Wales (being Papists) but they were quickly
snapt up for Covenanters, and called Rebels, for refusing the oath of
Supremacy, and shortly after were learned Traitors by open Proclamation.

We viewed all the English Islands as we past along, as Man, Garnsey, Silly,
and the like: The Inhabitants had need be honest, for they are entrusted with
keeping of the three greatest Enemies of the Clergy, viz. Divinity, Law, and
Physic: In all our voyage we saw but only two of the Kings ships, which were
sent to scour the seas, we did veil our Bonnets unto them, and bid them good
day, and so departed undiscovered.

We put in at Portsmoth, where there is a good Harbor, and good Forts, but
sorrily kept; their Governor (that Baggage Bag) having taken a surfeit of a
Star Chamber suite, and being a little overshadowed with the Moon, gave them
the bag and dyed, whose Successor will never fill the bags he has left
empty behind him.

As I came through Somersetshire, I saw great mustering: They are notable
windy fellows, and strong breathed, with eating of Beane-bread, they mean to
show you a Taunton trick, and fart in your faces: you may ken them from all the
Camp, by the Beans rattling in their bellies, a mile before they come at you.

In all the Country as I came along, there was a great complaint of the decay
of Trading: The Farmers and Sheep-masters blame the Clothiers, the Clothiers
the Merchants and Drapers, and they lay the fault on the troubles in Scotland,
which hinders their traffic, but some of them say, they could find it out
nearer home, if they durst discover it.

I came down by Reading, where little Laud was borne, his Father was a
Clothier, his Mother a Spinster (he being the worst thread that ever she
spunne in her life:) He was from his Cradle ordained to be a Punisher of poor
people: For he was borne between the stocks, and the cage, which a Courtier
one day chanced to speak of; whereupon his Grace thought himself so
disgraced, as he removed them thence, and pull down his Fathers thatcht house,
and built up a fair one in the same place, because none should say hereafter,
that he was descended of so mean a house.

The next day I came to Windsor, which is the worst place that ever I came in.
For the Knights are poor, and the Priests rich, the Prebends proud, and the
Deane deaf, for a poor man has called a long time to be released, and cannot
be heard.

Away I came toward London, and landed at Hampton Court, in hope to have seen
the Prince and Duke Iemmy, but the Dupper Doctor had carried them to St. James
to see the Queen Mother, where he left them, until he himself went to
Lambeth for Canterburies blessing to a better Bishopric, in which if he
behave himself well, and please his Patron, in bringing up his pupil, he
shall be promoted to a better Bishopric.

When I came to Westminster, a country man of mine had me to see the Tombs,
where (amongst many other Kings and Queens) I saw King James, and Queen
Elizabeth conferring about the troubles in Scotland, which they said was
plotted in Spain, ratified at Rome, and agitated by the Jesuits in England, to
be acted in a tragical procession in Scotland, but it was not so in their
days, and they hoped it would not long continue as now it is.

The next morning I got up betimes to go to our Intelligencer; but ere I came
at White Hall, I was pressed for the Kings service: whereupon I presently fell
lame of my left leg, and with a pitiful look I said, Mess Constable I am a
poor lame Passenger, I pray you let me pass, but if I must have your money,
then change me one shilling for an other; with that I blessed my self with a
good Angel, and then gave it him for his shilling, which he perceiving put it
up, and so out of pure love let me pass.

When I came to the Exchange, our Intelligencer, and two or three more of my
country men went to dinner, where I was relating my Reading Journey and news,
whereupon one of them pulled a paper out of his pocket, saying, now by your
Relation, I understand the meaning of my verses, which were bestowed on me: And
before now I did not well know what they meant: A Copy whereof he gave me to
end my Discovery withal, which are as follows.

The King wants coin, the Bishops blood,
The Church is changed, none dares do good,
The three chief Arts in all the Land,
In Pillory at once did stand:
The Welsh may run, the English ride,
To kill the Scots for Prelates pride;
Which makes men cry, and curse that Age,
Hatched little Laud, twixt Stocks and Cage.
THE INTELLIGENCERS own Discovery.
AT my first coming to London, I heard little news of any Scots grievances,
but within a little while after, when I saw Burton, Bastwick, and Pryn promoted
to the Pillory, for speaking against the power of the Prelates, then I began to
smell a fox.

They rejoiced as much in their sufferings, as their Adversaries did in their
sentences; but because they should not prate, nor talk to one another, as they
did when they stood in the Pillory.

Therefore they were sent first into three several Castles in three remoted
counties, and afterward removed to three several Islands, every one of them at
their departure from the Pillory to their Prisons, made two verses.

Pryn.
Tryumphing I return, my face discryes
Lauds scorching scars, Gods grateful sacrifice.
Burton.
A painful Pastor I have been, my flock I truly fed,
And now in honor of Christ's cause, my blood I freely shed.
Physician's for soul and body, and Lawyer for the State, Bastmick.

All here now have lost their blood, to please a proud Prelate.
The next Term after this, the Bishop of Lincoln came to his sentence in the
Star Chamber, where he received a sharp sensure, but he may thank himself
for it, in keeping two prime places in his hands, when others want preferment.
But he stood too much upon his trumps, thinking that King James his Patents
had been now as good, as when he had them: Alas good man, though he be a
great Scholar (not a better in the Kingdom) yet he had forgot the little
Man's Motto (Sic volo, sic Iubeo) The original cause of this was never heard;
but this I learned, that two flesh flies having fed at his Table for a long
time together, had purposely laid a train to entrap him, and then they
combined with one Kilvert (A Caniball) who having devoured his own Master (Sir
John Bennet) undertook to do the like with him, and has hunted him so hard,
that the Tower is become his Tabernacle, where he is like to remain, unless
he will pull off his Miter, and give it for his Ransom.

Long he had not lain there, ere he was roused up again for a second course,
pretending that he had given a false exposition on the great Leviathan, (false
Mediator) and the like: whereupon (through the means of a false Steward, a
faithless Secretary, and a foolish Scribe) he was ( Acteon-like) pulled down
with his own hounds, which he had fed at his trencher in his prosperity, but
had now fallen upon himself in his adversity, yet his own patience, and the
peoples prayers may one day be a comfort to him.

That when the news came first of the troubles in Scotland, Archie the Kings
Fool was questioned for something against the Prelates, whom he thought was
the cause of it. For which he had been had up in the Star Chamber, but that
the Fool told them he would plead the privilege of his Coat. For (quoth he)
if neither Fool nor wife man must escape this Court, I will be neither. But for
all this Archie could not escape scot free, for he was led to the Porters
lodge, where (albeit he found favor in his lash) yet he lost both his Coat
and his place by it.

That about a week after I met Archie at the Abbey all in black: Alas poor
fool (thought I) he mournes for his country; I asked him about his Coat, O
quoth he, my Lord of Canterbury has taken it from me, because either he, or
some of the Scots Bishops may have use for it themselves: But he has given me
a black coat for it, to color my knavery with, and now I may speak what I
please (so it be not against the Prelates) for this Coat has a far greater
Privilege then the other had: when I heard him say so, albeit (thought I) a
Fools bolt is soon shot, yet perhaps he may hit the mark: whereupon I went
and bought me a canonical Coat, and put my self into an Arminian habit, which
has kept me freer from danger, then if I had been all clad in buffe.

That about Christmas last, all the passages of your Assembly were presented to
the King, and all the names of the Lords and others that had subscribed the
Covenant, or consenting to the putting down of the Prelates were given in:
whereupon a Convocation of the Clergy of England, was once resolved to be
called, and to have the matter disputed, but the Bishops were busy, and could
not attend it, and advised that (ipso facto) you should be proclaimed Rebels,
and all your Lands should be confiscate to the King, which made some of the
Courtiers mouths so water (in hopes of a Lordship) that they looked as if they
had been troubled with the scurvie.

That about Candlemas the news was nothing but war, and that the King would
go in person into Scotland, and had promised to gratify those that adventured
with them, for cutting off the Covenanters: And therefore to make them the more
contemptible to the English, Proclamation (...) made in all market Towns, and
read in all Churches: That you were base fawning fellows, and people of broken
fortunes, and would feign repair your ruined estates, by the spoils of the
good subjects of England; which Proclamation (notwithstanding the fair and
true declaration of your intentions) so animated many of them (as like Hogs in
the wind) they ran on (but knew not whither) to fight, (but knew not for what)
hoping to be rewarded (but knew not when) and they may return, but know not
how.

That of late every man at London has been in his humors. The Courtiers were
learning how to toss tennis bals, instead of Bullets. The Captains were
preparing to see the tragedy of traitors, the Clergy were studying a Masque for
a Myter; the Ministry were drawing the map of misery, the Jesuits were at wily
baguilie, and the Scots Bishops were at Boe peep with the Kirk.

That one day I went to see the Tower, which is newly rapaired, there are forty
new beds and lodgings provided for entertainment of the Scots traitors: well,
let me advise ye to look to your selves; for if ever you be lodged there,
the next news after will be your coming out to Tower Hill, where either your
heads must lop, or your Crags crack.

I came home by the custom House, where there was such an outcry with
Merchants, concerning their new Impositions: As it made the old Farmers (...)
for a court Lord, and a city Captain to assist them, who came ruffling into
their offices with such violence, as (for fear of Goring) it made all the
Virginian Merchants to run away, and leave their Plantations. For Tobacco was
grown so cheap, as the Kings customs came to more then the Merchants had for
it. For it was taken by a worse name, and sold by the measure of Jacobs staff,
whereupon, when the old Pinder saw such shavers, come to share in his office,
he gave over, and left the Dawes, to shift among the Rooks, which the common
people seeing, they prayed that their Court Customer might dye drunk in his
new Impositions of Wines, and the Crispe City Captain might break as fast as
does his glass beads.

Whilst I stayed at Custom House, I heard a muttering of a red Dear Pie, full
of gold going to the Nuns of Nancy, from the holy sisters in England, under
color of a piece of Venison sent to the Prince of Peymont from Catholico
Mariano: But they said, a wily Wayter had put his finger further into the Pie
then was fitting, and after it was discovered it was hushed up, no man can tell
how.

Likewise, I heard that the Cardinal of Cordel^ being cast away in crossing of
a River, his hat came floating up to the custom House, where it was taken up
for a miraculous monument, and carried to the Lord Treasurer for a wreck, who
has order to keep it, until some fitting person be found to wear it. This
accident makes good the old Proverb, Quot homines, tot sententia, for some
says our country man Con: (the Popes Legate) must have it; others say, Sir
Tobit Mathewes does better deserve it, some say, that as soon as the King has
established Bishops again in Scotland, St. Andrew shall have it instead of a
blew Bonnet, and others say Canterbury must be served before him. But some say,
its kept until St. Paul have a new coat, and then he must have it for his
hat, or else when Paul's is quite built, it must be carried round about it
procession, and then left on the high altar for a religious Relic.

That all Lent long His Majesty's Chaplains, instead of Fasting preached
fighting; and instead of Peace preached punishing of Rebels, amongst whom wily
Warner of Rochester having got a Bishopric for making one Sermon, he gave
the King an other gratis, wherein he so rayled at the Rebels, as his Patron
has promised a better Bishopric, when it falls.

That such time-serving Clergy men, as have not the gift of Preaching, seek
preferment by railing; as one Harison, who looks for a Deanery at least, for
calling Judge Hutton Traitor, when he sat on the seat of Justice, for
speaking his conscience for the subject against Prerogative.

That the case of ship-monie was fully argued, first by four Counselors, and
afterward by the twelve Judges, whereof the Gold-finch, Vernon, and five
punies past for the King, and five Seniors, (whereof two were capital) stood
for the country, but what can withstand fortune; for most voices mis-carried
it: Nevertheless, the Lord Say would feign have had another assay at the
matter, but could not be heard.

That about Mid-lent, the names of all strangers, as well French and Dutch, as
Scots, were collected in and about London, and sent to the King, viz. 60000.
French, 40000. Dutch, and 900. Scots, but if Priests, Friars, Jesuits, and the
rest of the Romish Rabbis, had been also collected, they would have exceeded
the number of the Scots, and if the Papists and Protestants of the French and
Dutch had been likewise collected, the number of the Protestants had stood but
for a cipher to the other.

The voice went that all the Protestant strangers should have been sent into
New England (if the King could have spared shipping) and the others should have
made a catholic Army, to have gone against the Scots: But now the Scots
taking their new oath to fight against their consciences and country, and the
rest paying in their money without grumbling, they may all stay in Old England
if they please.

That albeit, with the pilling and polling of the Commonalty, England is fallen
into a very dangerous disease, which grows every day worse and and worse, in
so much, as one Sunday at one Master Shutes Parish Church, a Bill was
delivered, that John Commonwealth of England being sick of the Scots disease,
desires the prayers of the Congregation, for calling a Parliament, the great
Physician of the Kingdom, to cure their infinite infirmities.

That all men must contribute to this holy, and zealous expedition; whereupon
the City of London having made a collection of, at least 6000. l. presented it
to the King, who thankt them for their loves, but would not receive it, because
some say, it was too little, others say, that he will come home by them, and
then they must present him with a golden Calfe, and a greater gift for a peace
offering: But in the mean time its said, that York must be made the Royal
City of the Kingdom; but when no man knows, yet the Merchants care not if
both Court and Town be carried thither, so long as they cannot carry Thames
with them also: For if their wives loved Courtiers no better then they do,
their rooms were far better then their company.

That the King being resolved upon his Journey, wrote his Letters to all
Noblemen in the Kingdom, to attend his Royal Standard at York. The first
day of April with fitting men and furniture, according to their birth and
qualities, degree and honor, where by the Papists report his Majesty will be
with 100000. English. 20000. Welsh 20000. Irish 20000. chosen Catholics, all
in complete armor, and that the King of Spain would send him 20000. of his
old soldiers (if he had no use for them himself:) The King of Denmark would
send him 20000. of his Drunkards, if he could spare them: The King of Morocco
would send him twenty tun of Barbary Gold, if Argier and Tunnis stood not in
his way, and the Pope would send his Benediction, if he thought it would do
him any good.

That the King was by the Prelates so exasperated, and made so eager on the
business, as he took his Journey on his Coronation day, which some think
unfortunate: But the Papists Proverb prevailed, The better day the better deed.

At this departure he had Canterburies blessing, and a book of Remembrances
what is fit to be done to such a rebellious people.

That all things are much altered, since the Kings departure from London,
White Hall is become an Amazonian Castle, St. James an Hospital for strangers,
Somerset House a Catholic College, Westminster a receptacle for Seminary
Priests and Iesutis, London is like a private friend in close mourning, Coaches
and Carts are half idle for want of employment, and great Horses, Sedans, and
wherries fight for their employment, Porters are taken up for Gentlemen Vshers,
and Clergy men (by reason of their pastoral protection) clap in with all the
good matches about London.

That my country man Con: the Popes Legate, is fallen lame of late, and is
writing an invective against Abernathy, for discovering his coming into
England: he says, that if these troubles had not been, he had got as much
money in seven years, as (with the help of a Letter or two, from the Court to
the Conclave of Cardinals) would have made him Pope; and then if you had not
yielded to the King on any conditions, he would have cursed you with Bell, Book,
and Candle.

That the seven Champions of Christendom are now (this critical year) all up
in Arms, St. Anthony is enchanted by the Pope in S. Angelo, S. James, and S.
Dennis are this summer to try their strengths in a simple combat: And S.
George, S. David, and S. Patrick, are all ryding into Scotland, against S.
Andrew, but the quarrel against him is unknown; some say because he will not
wait upon S. George his Ceremonies, but others say, its because he dare
maintain that there was neither Pope, nor Prelate in the Primitive Church.

That one Baker, the Bishop of Londons Chaplain, being one morning desired to
present a Petition from a Minister to his Lord for a Prebends place, carried
the matter so craftily, that he had it for himself, together with the
Ministers curse, for cozening of him; but to prevent that, the Bishop gave him
his blessing; yet it did him no good, for ere night he was so puffed up with
pride, and grown so great, that the weight of his body broke his leg, and so
laid him and his honor in the dust, yet theer be some that attribute this
accident to another thing, for they say, that this Baker was so over-joyed with
the death of some good Divines, and the going away with others, that he made
verses of them, and the same day he made them he broke his leg, and his
verses were answered the next day following.

Baker.
Dike is dead, Davis is fled,
And Symmons is run away,
Carter is flying, Stanton is dying,
And Good wyn is left to pray.
Carter.
Carter is at hand, Baker cannot stand,
With a fall he has broke his leg,
Our Bishops are flying, their cause is a dying,
And the Scots will make them beg.
That when the King lay at New castle, Fleetwoods news came fleeting to
London, with as many lies, as lines in it, but that is no matter, Colonels may
lie by commission: It tells us of your Iron Flailes, Harrowes, Knives, and the
like, taken going to you from Sheffeild, and threatens to beat you with your
own weapons: Now as for your men he never mentions them, because he means not
to meddle with them: But when he comes to relate the valor of your women, he
cries out, the Lord be merciful unto us, for we shall have a bloody business
of it, yet he declares his resolution, is to fly in their faces, and concludes
with a Protestation, that his father may tell it for truth.

That albeit you were offended with that Proclamation, which terms you people
of broken fortunes. They have made another against you, its just like Ianus in
the head; and in the body like a Scorpion with a sting in his tail. For first
you are pardoned if you subscribe Jgnoramus, but if you do not, you are
condemned before you are convicted, and your traiterous obstinacies are to be
cured with the sharp sword of Justice, which being put into the hands of
Papists, they swear by Peter's Keys, Paul's sword shall be put in practice.

The body of the Proclamation breeds a Scorpion in your bosom to devour you.
First your debtors must pay your money to His Majesty, who (because he can
give no lawful discharge) will give them a good share back again. Next all
your lands are given away to such as will fight for them.

Lastly, your tenants must pay you no more rents, for His Majesty will turn
Landlord, and let them their lands for a third part abatement of their old
rent, and promises to put them in possession before Pentecost next, unless you
prevent it.

That there was some whispering news about the town of a dissension, between
the spiritual Lords: whereupon a great Politician had drawn His Majesty to
command all the temporal Lords attendance (purposely to be revenged on the
Nobility) whilst others lie lurking at home laughing in their sleeves, to see
how they made their enemies take up Arms to defend their quarrel: In which if
any of the Nobility, and Gentry be slain, their sons may prove Wards, and so
bring in much money to maintain the wars.

That if the Prelates project succeed well, it is thought Wren and Warner should
have the keeping of the great and little seals, and London now (like John hold
my staff) being Treasurer, the Clergy will have a golden time of it, but let
them remember this Admonition.

That spiritual pride brings temporal war,
And temporal war brings peace,
That Lords and Lawyers end the jar,
And Prelates pride must cease.
That there is a new counsel Table erected at London, where the Catholic
Lords, Knights, and Superiors of the Roman Clergy, meet to consult upon
fitting means for raising of money toward maintenance of this holy war,
which they hope will either procure a dissolution of your Religion, or a
tolleration of their own.

At this meeting diverse motives, and advises were drawn up for certain
Priests to move the Catholics to contribute in a large manner toward the
maintenance of those wars, to the 8. 9. 10. part at least of their Annual
means, according to the true and just value; for which, besides the benefit,
which may redound to them by their Religion: the King has called in his
Commission against Recusants: The Queen has undertaken to secure all those as
shall be Contributors herein, and the Pope has promised, that no man which
dies in this quarrel shall ever come in Purgatory.

That these advises and motives being discovered, the Pope has written to his
Nuncio, not to be too forward, until they see time, for fear of discovery,
nor to let the Laity know too much of the Provincials minds, lest they fall
off, nor that the Catholics bestow so much on the society of Jesuits, as other
the Orders can have no part.

That there is a Feast of fancies at London free for any man, that has a mind
to it.

The first dish is a Redshanks sermon, instead of a sallad, the second a
pickled Projector, the next a piping hot pigge, and next a handsome hog,
there was a red Dear Pie, but that is past, instead of that, they mean to have
a Bishops head and bacon, which will serve for a grand dish: and albeit it be
somewhat out of fashion, yet it is like to be in season. Their bread is Bishops
Biscuit, and Burtons bayte.

Their drink is Britain's tears, their dyning Room the Castle of care.

Their attendants Tom Tell-troth, and Bastwicks younger brother.

Their Music has for Tenor Vox Regis.

For their Base, Vox Clerici, for their Discords, Vox consilij, for their
Treble, Vox populi; for their Counter, Uox pauperis: for their Mean, Vox
pueri: for their Consort, Vox Cali: for their comfort, Vox Dei.

The voice of this Music has been heard throughout all England, and is like
to grow louder, unless some course be taken to stop it.

That, there are a kind of Beadles runs up and down about the town, yelping
out your destruction, crying, Oh the valor of the Welsh-men! which are gone to
kill the Scots: well, look you have Leeks, and causbobby, and give them good
words, and call them bold Britains; and then you may do with them what you
will.

That Halter, and Ballad-makers are two principal trades of late: Ballads
being sold by whole hundreds in the City, and Halters sent by whole barrels
full to Barwicke to hang up the Rebels with, as soon as they can catch them.

That old Johnson the Poet being dead, great moan is made for one of that
quality, to write the Bishops wars: yet two have petitioned for the place, and
each of them have something for trial, which because you may see their
strain, I thought fit to insert, as follows.

1. POET.
The Doughty Dane, the force of Spain,
Morocco rude and rout,
The Irish wild, the English mild,
And Welsh men bold and stout,
Are taking Arms, and vows great harms,
To Scotland they will bring,
For Bishops right they mean to fight,
To please their Royal King.
2. POET.
The Englishmen both bold and strong,
The Irish stout and hardy,
The valiant Welsh-men will be first,
To take the Scots men tardy,
Our ships by sea, our men by land,
Will pull their courage down;
And make men know, King Charles will keep,
The Myter next the Crown.
The trial of these verses were put to two John's poetically affected, who
allowed of the Latter, for two reasons.

First because the former makes them fight for Nations to one, which is too
much odds, where the other mentions only three, being somewhat unequal too.

Secondly, because the former forgets the Kings ships: whereupon depends the
hopes of the success, and honor of the Kingdom, which the latter observing
he shall therefore write the history, but he must not begin until he hear
the success of the first Battle, which if it proves unfortunate, then it
spoils a Poet.

That the news at London is so uncertain, that no man believes it, sometimes
we hear of Peace, and then the Papists storm and fret, saying, the King is
too merciful. For my Lord Howard (not the chief of the Howards) has three
sons, all Colonels newly come over from the Cardinals Camp, who threaten, if
the King will give them leave, they will pluck the Scots out of their trenches
by the ears; but when news come they must fight, and that we shall have
blows for blows, then they tell us, that the Kings forces are two weak for
the Covenanters, but as soon as the Irish will come over Dunluce, and his
Dimilances will drive them all into the Mountains.

That such news as this comes out by owlelight in little Books or Ballads to
be sold in the streets. And I fear its held a prime piece of policy of state,
For otherwise, how could so many false Ballads, and Books be tolerated: yet
the next morning Sun exhales all their vain Evening vapors: As that news
of taking Lesley Prisoner, killing of Colonel Crayford, and imprysoning most
of the Nobility, but I never believed it, because if it had been true Ballads,
would have been sung by day light, Books printed, Bonefires made, and a
solemn Procession with a Te Deum, at least, had not been wanting at Lambeth.

That I went one day to the Star Chamber to see what Lords where left at home,
where I heard Colonel Crosby and others fined, for reporting that the Lord
Deputy of Ireland going to Knight a poor man, Sir Knave, with a Cane, he hit
him so hard as he killed him, when in truth, he died not until three days
following.

At which sentence, little Laud made a Sermon of an hour long, telling them
how the Deputy had cozened the Scots in Ireland of all their arms, and was
providing men to wear them into Scotland against their own Contrymen; And
that it was a fortune that follows all men in high places and authority to
be evil spoken off.

But it was not so of old, for then the man whom the King did honor should
ride in his Chariot, be apparelled with the Kings Roabes, and esteemed the
second person in the Kingdom; but now, if the people might have their wills
(quoth he) those whom the King honors, should have Hamans reward: with this
he concluded, keeping the application to himself; whereupon, I went out and
wrote these Verses following, and left them in the window: Now wicked Will does
reign as King,
And Finch sing sweet by Windybanks,
The Priests placebo still do sing,
But the Scots if crossed, will play mad prancks.


The next day, I took my journey homewards, and left one to take notice of
passages in my absence; And a first night I lay at Ware where my host showed
me the great bed and told me that 24. Captains lay altogether in it, and
named it the bed of honor; If (said I) honor could be go with lying in
fether-beds few would be without it. But sure (said I) they will lie both
worse and further asunder before they return home again.

When I came at York, I heard the King was bravely entertained there, and that
the Recorder had so tickled his ears with flattery and fables that both he
and the Major were knighted, well thought I this makes good the old Proverb;
Some may better steal a goose, then others stick down a feather; For if the
Scots had done so, they had been called fawning fellows by open Proclamation.

When I came to Durham, all the Drummers were drunk, for the Bishop had
bestowed good store of wine upon them to forbear beating, because the noise of
the Drums should not drown the sound of the Organs.

I needed no guide to Newcastle for whole troops of soldiers lay lame by the
way; This Town is now called little London albeit it hardly deserve the name
of Coale-Castle. I went round their Town to see the works, and thought to
have seen a Castle in it, but mine host told me that the Scots had long ago
laid the Castle level with the ground, and least they should do the like with
the Town, the King had sent a garrison to defend it.

When I came first to the Camp, I was examined what I was, I told them, I was
Chaplain to the Lord High Crowned Howard, and was come on a message to his
chief. Upon this, I had a fair pasport, but never came near him.

The first news I heard there was, that the Marquess was sent to find out the
floting Islands, and that he had been round about England, and most part of
Scotland, but could not find them, and in the Interim, most of his men falling
Sea sick; A pinke was dispatched to Apolloes Oracle, to know their destinies.
Answer was made, that they were all unsanctified people, and not fit to be
employed in so holy a war, until they had done penance, and made their
confessions in some fitting Land. This made them more amazed then before,
until a subtle Sphincks expounded the riddle and told them it was meant by
the holy Island, unto which he would prove their Pylot and bring them thither,
where if their men died as fast on Land as they did at Sea, then they might
save a labor of digging of Graves, and bury them in conyborowes; unto this
they all agreed and weighed anchour, hoised up sails, and in short time
arrived in the harbor where they landed their men. And the Marquess himself
after he had made his Orizons at Saint Cutberts shrine, he posted to Apollo
for further direction.

That when I came to the Camp, I saw diverse troops of voluntaries, who (like
so many prodigals) having got their patrimonies, are come thither to spend them
in hope to return richer. They have taken with them three horses a piece, one
to carry the Ass himself, an other to carry a Prisoner if he can take any;
and the third, to carry his provision.

But its commonly seen in all Lotteries (this being the like) that there are
above ten Blancks to one prize.

I met with a great many Gamsters there, and with some Players and Poets, but
all out of employment, yet a Poet told me, that because he would keep his
hand in ure, he made every day a few lines in Verse; a parcel whereof he
gave me as follows: No enemies face yet have we seen
Nor foot set on your ground,
But here we lie in open field
With rain like to be drowned.
The Earths my Bed, when I am laid
A Turfe it is my Pillow,
Our Canopy is the sky above,
My Laurel turned to willow,
Then mighty Mars withhold thy hand
And Jove thy fury cease,
That so we may, as all do pray,
Return again in peace.


About the end of May, either a Fool, or an unskilful Physician, told the
King, that the Scots Camp had such stinking breaths, as the English durst not
come within ten miles of them for fear of infecting, whereupon a
Proclamation was made, that the King did respect the safety of his subjects of
England. So as the Scots Camp under pain of displeasure, should not come
within ten miles of the English borders, or Camp, wheresoever it lay; but if
they did, then the Generalissimo was to kill all they could catch, wherein they
should do his Majesty good service and honor.

Shortly after this; a vain man persuaded the King, that all the Scots were
retired above 14. miles from Barwick, and that 5000. would be able to take
them all in their trenches. This being granted, upon Ascension day, the English
army went out of Barwick very early to put this design in execution, but ere
they had marched two miles, news came, that General Lesley was coming
toward them, whereupon, they returned, saying, they went out but only to go
in procession round about the bounds belonging to the Town of Barwick.

About two days after, there happened a great mistie morning, in which the
Cowes coming down the Hill toward Barwick seemed like so many men, and the
white horses like so many colors, which put the Town in such a fright that
the Scots were coming, that they barrocaded their Gates, ran up their
Rampires, mounted their Ordinance, and made ready for a defense: But when the
day grew clear, and that they heard Cowes low for their Calves, they opened
their Gates, and let them in to Suckling.

That I observed in the Camp, that both the French and Spanish factions (like
to Caiphas and Pilate) are now agreed to your overthrow in this expedition, who
were always, opposite enemies one to another, even in their very apparel,
which I will decipher unto you, because if you see them, you may know them.

The Frenchmen be known by their Curld Perriwiggs, Franciscan Cap, short
wasted Dublet, long arsed hose, and curtall Cloak, with boots as though they
meant to be buried in them. And the other may be known by his Spanish hat,
Armenian band, long bellied Dublet without a belt, trunk hose, start up
stockings, buskin boots, and large cloakes, which is the general fashion now
in the Army.

That when I was in the Camp, Proclamation was made, that every man upon pain
of death should observe these Laws and Ordinances of war, which all the
Camp were sworn to as sacred and good, out of which ten of the most
material were collected, and set up to be observed as truly, as they do the
ten Commandments.

1. Whosoever shall speak any thing in favor of the enemy, or say that this
army in unlawful or unnecessary, shall suffer as a Rebel.

2. All such as have intelligence with the enemy or shall relieve them, or give
them any thing (saving blows,) shall die without redemption.

3. That all such as disparage or speak against the actions of any chief
Commander, or refuse to do what they desire, shall suffer death.

4. That all such as forsakes their Colonels, leave their Captains, or draw
of sword against any, but the Scots, shall suffer death without mercy.

5. That no man lift his hand, wag his tongue, or stir a foot against his
Commander when he shall correct him, upon pain of death.

6. That whosoever shall see a Commander in danger, shall venture his own life
to save the others, upon pain of death.

7. That when the enemy is driven out of the field, no soldier leave his rank
to fall to pillage, until license be given them, upon pain of perpetual
imprisonment.

8. That all such spoils as shall be taken above the rate of ten shillings
shall be brought undiminished to the Lord General to be rewarded for a
memorial of victory, and after it is proclaimed with sound of Drum and
Trumpet it is to be sold, and the money to be kept to build an Hospital for
old Casheer'd Captains, and such Soldiers as shall be lamed or spoiled in
this expedition.

9. That he which can take any of the Lords, or principal Covenanters
Prisoners, shall bring them to the Lord General, where he shall have an
honorable reward for his pains.

10. That whatsoever any man can spare unspent of his pay, he is at his
return to London to offer it up at the high Altar, at Paul's, toward the
repayring thereof, where his name shall be enrolled, as a valiant Warrior against
the Scots, and a brave Benefactor too.

Per Generalissimo.
Some of the Captains, and soldiers being displeased with these orders, the
next night pulled them down, and put up these other ten in their places.

1. That no man be too forward to fight, until he know the quarrel, and
that such correspondency be kept with the Covenanters, as they do with us,
upon pain of the next Parliaments displeasure.

2. That such soldiers as use any unlawful gaming, or cousening, shall suffer
imprisonment, and such Captains and Commanders, as by the cog of a Dye could
set forth whole troops of horses (but lost their luck since they came from
London) shall likewise loose their credit in the camp, and their colors in
the field, if they do not maintain their troops in the same manner they set
them out.

3. Item if any soldier learn, or use more terms of Art in his exercise, then
his Captain can teach him, shall have three blows with a Bastinado for his
presumption.

4. Item, If any Captain cannot understadd his colonels command, he shall
forfeit a Goose for his slender judgment.

5. Item, That no Sutler trust the soldiers with too much meat, for fear of
surfeiting, upon pain of non-payment thereof.

6. Item, if any Trooper be kept short of his pay, then it shall be lawful
for him to sell his great cart Horse, and furniture, and to fight on foot,
until by his valor he can get a Galloway Nag to ride upon.

7 Item, that no soldier set foot further in Scotland, then their General,
Colonel, or Captains dare lead the way, lest when they come to employment
they be left in the lurch.

8. Item, that whatsoever any soldier can bring away out of Scotland, without
molestation, he shall keep it to himself, without any account rendering.

9. Item, that after the Camp is broke up, that every man that has not money
to bear his charges home, shall have license to beg into his country; and if
the peoples charity will not supply him, then it shall be lawful for him to
take what he can by way of borrowing, with promise of repayment the next
Northern Journey.

10. That if any sluggish soldier get nothing by his Journey in this
expedition, he shall at his return lie three nights in the Savoy, in a straw
bed, and at his departure have three lice for his labor, if he bring none with
him.

By Authority under his Excellency.
Hereby you may perceive there is no great Unity in the Camp, but there is far
less edge in the Kingdom toward this action, for take this for a general
observation throughout England, that many of the best Nobility, and prime
Gentry, a Commonalty are well Wishers to the cause; albeit they be not openly
seen in it. So as I may truly tell you, that though nature have provided two
hands to one heart; yet God has prepared two hearts to pray for you, for one
hand that is to fight against you.

That the most of the common soldiers in the camp, are such as care not who
loose, so they get, being mere Atheists, and barbarous in their resolutions.
And indeed they are the very scum of the Kingdom, such as their friends have
sent out to be rid of, who care not if both Kingdoms were on fire, so they
might share the spoil.

Upon this I thought good, to try if I could take off the edge of their fury,
by making a Quere of the quarrel, and a Declaration of your intentions, by the
verses following, which I put up under the Orders:

English.
What will you fight for a Book of Common Prayer?
What will you fight for a Court of high Commission?
What will you fight for, a Myter gilded fair?
Or to maintain the Prelates proud Ambition?
What will you get, you must not wear the Myter?
What will you get, you know we are not rich?
What will you get, your yoke will be no lighter?
For when wee'r slain, this rod comes on your breech.
Scots.
We fight to have our true Religion stand:
We fight to keep our Laws unvilified,
We fight to preserve our lives and land,
Our only ayme's to beat down Prelates pride:
Our King is wise, and so we hope heel hear us,
Our cause is good, we will seal it with our blood,
Our conscience that does perfect witness bear us,
That what we do, is for the general good,
Then learn in time to ease your heavy state,
Lest one day you repent, when it is too late.
The next morning these verses were taken down, and carried to the General,
who gave order for apprehending the Author, but Mumbudget for me: And about
noone, a Comptroller came and put up an Answer to them, as follows:

Thou Rebel Scot, we fear thee not,
Our quarrel is to fight:
Lashley we will lash, dear Sandy slash,
And Douglas put to flight.
By Kings command, we have your land,
As soon as you are slain,
Then with all speed we will do the deed,
Else call the bragger Vane.
By Authority.
By this you may perceive they think it a won game, yet I see no miracles they
have done, since they went out; only I observed a wonder, that is, to see their
pride and patience have agreed so long together, expecting an end of this
action.

That I saw the Regiment of Giants sent out of Yorke-shire, under the command
of Don Quicksot, who threatens, that after they have carbonadoed the Scots like
so many capons, then Sanco Panco his Page shall cut off their heads, and carry
them to the Prelates for a present; but the Enterprise will prove worse, then
the Wind-mills was, that the third day after, all the forces were drawn into
Battalia, where the Welsh-men had the Vauntguard the Irish the Reere, and the
English the maine Battle, and the Papists were purposely backwardly placed, to
see that none forsook their colors, and the Bishops could willingly have
desired to bear the Banner; but that they feared their white sleeves were such
fair marks, and the Scots such good Marksmen, as they could not miss them.

That when the Muster roll was cast up (of their 100000. English. 20000.
Spaniards. 20000. Irish. 20000. Welsh. 20000. Danes, and 20000. choice
Cotholikes) it was found in toto not above 1600. If I be mistaken in the
numbers, London news misled me: Now if all these, with the help of three
bordering counties, after three days Battery with the great Ordinance, and
three months labor of the Engineers cannot make a breech big enough for the
Generals greatness to enter Edinburgh, and cut off all the Covenanters, then
they mean to take an other course with you, viz. First they mean cunningly,
under the color of a parley to catch you in a purse-net, and if that fail,
then they mean to yield to a Parliament; and in the Interim possess
themselves of all the strong Castles, and then on the sudden to catch you all
napping, as Moss caught his Mare: But if your wisdoms do prevent that, then
they mean to starve you by land, and by sea; for which purpose the Marquess
has surrounded the seas, and has entered the Frith; where like Swallows after
Flies he will so fight with the Fisher-boats, as you shall not have a Whiting,
a Haddock, nor a Herring to relieve you: And all the frontier Towns between
Carlisle, and Barwick shall be laid full of soldiers to keep you from catching
any thing out of England: But here is your comfort, winter will come, and then
our rough rocks, and shelvy seas will force the ships to retire homewards, and
our cold clymate will quickly cool their courages, if they continue their
intended courses.

That upon the first of June, news was brought to the English Camp, that all
the Scots Army was blown as far as Edinburgh, with the wind of the last
Proclamation: whereupon order was given for an Inroade into Scotland, within
two days after thinking to have taken in the two market Towns of Kelsey and
Duns, but they proved dunces in their designs, for they went fiercely on the
monday morning, as some of their Commanders had put on Perriwigs instead of
Helmets, and the rest had no time to take their leaves of their friends, but
hastily marched with such a fury, that they raised such a dust with their
fifteen hundred horse, and 3000. foot, Nota.
that they were almost choakt with it: But when they came toward Kelsey, there
appeared 400. Horse on the top of a Hill; whereupon the English Commanders gave
order for a charge, which the other perceiving retired down the hill on the
other side, and then wheeling about with a foot Army, they encompassed the
English Army round about ere they knew of it. And after some small pawse on the
business, a Trumpetter was sent to the Scots to submit, who returned answer,
that if they meant to fight, they should see their submission, and demanded of
the English the cause of their coming to invade them in such hostile manner,
who replied, that they came out to see how the Scots Markets were furnished
with flesh, for the English soldiers were almost surfeited with eating of
fresh Salmon, to which a Scots Captain replied:

Most Gentle General, our Markets are well stored with provision, and if you
will but take the pains to march into our market with your Army, you may see
almost 5000. English Calves, which our friends have sent us for a Prey this
morning, but we never mean to hurt them, but intend to send them safe back
again for a present to his Majesty, as a token of our Loyalty to him, and our
loves toward you. When the English had considered how the case stood with
them, they fell to a parley and parted loving friends, and so sounded a
retreat, and returned homewards again; every man carrying in his hand, instead
of a (Rosemary, branch the Emblem of Death.) An Olive branch the Emblem of
Peace, all of them singing: Fight who will, we will not draw our swords,
Against those that for bad deeds, return good words,
We found their love, and know they mean no ill,
Then lets shake hands, be friends, and brethren still.


When the English Army saw their fellows return in this manner, it caused a
great confusion amongst them, but when they truly understood the matter, Let us
have Peace, Let us have Peace, the most cried with the news; I was so far
overjoyed, that I came poasting to your Lordships to tell you the same, whose
wisdoms can well tell how to take the opportunity offered for the peace and
prosperity of this Kirk and Kingdom, the welfare whereof is the hearty desire
of him, who has adventured himself to bring your Lordships these few
Intelligences.

FINIS.

