REASONS HUMBLY OFFERED WHY THE NAME OF WILLIAM LENTHALL Should be Left Out of
the EXCEPTION in the ACT of OBLIVION.
1. THere is no action of mine that expressed me at any time averse to the King,
and his affairs; for many years since I was violently prosecuted before a
Committee of Parliament for sending money to his Majesty at Oxford, and for
suffering both Persons and Intelligence to pass to him by my Authority. This
was so violently pursued against me, that when the Committee could not make it
against me, the Council of War appointed a Committee of theirs, and I was
prosecuted by Col. Venables, and one Col. Cook.

2. Her Majesty being near the time of Her lying in, could not obtain license
from hence for conveniences for her use; and by my power and by a servant of my
own, I conveyed to Her all things necessary for that occasion, which Her
Majesty was pleased to take particular notice of. And for this I was also
accused.

3. I was not wanting in the duty I owed to His Majesty's Children, the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Lady Elizabeth that were here, and that there was no
opportunity, but I made it my care to get necessaries and conveniences for
them; and this will be testified by several that attended them.

4. There could be no Person more desired and endeavored his Majesty's honor
and happiness then my self, and in order thereto advised some of the
Commissioners that attended the Treaty, to labor all that could possibly be
done to effect that; and that His Majesty should make no reliance on the Army,
for they would deceive him. And this I signified in a Letter to the Speaker of
the now-House of Commons.

5. That at all times when any thing came to my single Vote (and then only I
could express my Opinion) I never consented to any violent action, but rather
showed my dislike to any such thing, or any proceeding that was not regular.

6. How it was my labor (and not in vain) to break the Army, and to divide the
Soldiers from the Officers, which I effected, in such a time, when if the other
party had got the better, I must have suffered both in my Life and Fortune.

7. I gave and held Intelligence with my Lord General, by Letters from hence
when he was in Scotland and at Berwick, and got privately such Officers
conveyed to him as he wanted there.

8. My refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration, which if I had not particularly
at that time discountenanced, it had been taken by a great part of the Army and
many others, which would have engaged men to be more desperate in their
resistances to His Majesty.

9. I did not only refuse to sign any new Writs, but absolutely obstructed the
going out of any to fill up that House, which if it had been done, had answered
the desires and expectations of most; and would have so settled men's minds, that
I do think it might have prevented His Majesty's coming in, and continued the
Nation under a form of Government, diametrically opposite to His Majesty's.

Lastly, the often attendancies I have made on his Excellency, to give him my
humble advice for the speedy bringing in of His Majesty, and this when it was
not publicly known that there would be any such thing: And it was also the
result of many pri^^te advices that I had with diverse persons that agitated His
Majesty's coming to His Dominions.

There are only two things objected against me: The one is, My going to the
Army; The other is, My sitting in the House.

To the first, I do protest in the presence of God, I did think at that time
the Army did intend the bringing in of His Majesty, and the settlement of the
Kingdom, and that deceived me.

For the other, I do acknowledge my weakness; and yet even in that I was led
to it with a thought that I might do a great deal of good, and prevent all
persons interest from running into a confusion, which I much labored, and
prevented many inconveniences. And this I can say, that in all this time I have
countenanced a learned Ministry, and always heard such, whose opinions were
for the establishing the King and the Church.


