THE SPEECH OF MASTER SPEAKER BEFORE HIS Majesty, AND BOTH THE HOUSES OF
Parliament, after his return from Scotland, upon passing the Bill for Tunnage
and Poundage, on Thursday the 2. of December.

Also, relating the present distempers of England and Ireland.

Whereunto is annexed his Majesty's Speech in Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Henry Twyford, at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street. 1641.

MOST DREAD SOVEREIGN,
THe observation taken from the unlike Compositions, and various motions of the
world, made the Philosopher conclude, Tota hujus mundi concordia ex discordibus
constat.

The happy conjuncture of both these Nations in the Triumph and Joy of your
Sacred presence, extracted from the different and divided dispositions and
opinions, gives us cause to observe and to admire these blessed effects from
such contrary causes. We may without flattery commend your Sacred Majesty, the
glorious Instrument of this happy change, whose piety and prudence, directed by
the hand of God, has contracted this union from these various discords.

The Story of these times will seem paradoxes in following generations, when
they shall hear of Peace sprung from the Root of dissension, of union planted
upon the Stock of divisions, two Armies in the Field both ready to strike the
first blow, and both united without a stroke.

Nothing can reduce these truths into a belief, but the knowledge of your
piety and Justice, who has accomplished these acts of wonder, by goodness, and
gentleness, without force and violence.

This way of conquest, this bellum incruentum, has been the Rule of the most
valiant and puissant Monarchs, advancing your glory, in safeguard of one
subject, more then in the death of a thousand enemies.

Thus have you erected a Monument of glory to your Sacred memory for all
generations.

And as your care and piety for the welfare of your Northern Kingdom called
you to that work for the great comfort of your people which your wisdom has
so happily consummated: So now the distemper of your other kingdom (Fomented
by the same spirits, whose presence admits no peace in Israel) Calls on your
providence to heal the diseases of that Nation.

The one from whence you returned, has with Abell (though the elder brother)
offered an acceprable Sacrifice; The other with Cain has erected altars of
blood and revenge (the old Immolations of Jesuitical priesthood) which invokes
the necessity of your Justice.

The one to a natural, has added a politic brotherhood.

The other of brothers (I am sorry to say it) are become strangers.

The fidelity of the one has written a Story of admiration to the world.

The disloyalty of the other has paralelled that horrid Design (matchless
before amongst all generations) First in their intention, the destruction of a
Kingdom, even then when Unity and Peace was tying the knot of Religion and
safety.

In the Discovery a moment of time prevented the execution.

In the actors (Jesuits and Priests) without whom the malice of the Devil
could not have found a party in the world fitted to act over the like bloody
tragedy.

But this amongst our many Joys we receive by your happy return is not the
least, nay the greatest, That that providence which protected that gracious
King, your most religious Father, from that bloody Attempt, and increased the
blessing of a long and happy Reign, has also defended your Sacred throne from
all rheir Machinations.

Thus we see Religion is the greatest policy, the never-failing support of King
and kingdom, that which Firmes you and your posterity to your Throne, and our
duty and obedience to it.

Give me leave here most gracious Sovereign to sum up the sense of eleven
Months observation without intermission (scarce) of a day, nay an hour in
that day, to the hazard of life and fortune, and to reduce all into this
Conclusion, he Endeavors of your Commons assembled, guided by your pious and
religious example, is to preserve Religion in its purity without mixture or
composition, against these subtle invadors; and with our lives and fortunes to
establish these Thrones to your Sacred person, and those beams of Majesty,
your Royal Progeny, against treason and rebellion.

The ways that conduce to this end are the defense of the Land and Sea, for
the one, we have already voted to raise moneis; for the other, this Bill in
some measure will accomplish for a little time, and to that end I (by the
Command of the Commons) humbly beseech your Royal assent.

His Majesty's SPEECH the 2. of December.
I Am to speak a word unto you, since I have been so long absent from you; It
is no way in answer to the Learned Speech of Master Speaker: But yet I shall
touch one point of it concerning Ireland; But first I must tell you, though I
have been absent longer then indeed I did expect, or could have been expected
by you, yet I stayed no longer in Scotland then the necessity of those affairs
would absolutely permit, and indeed I have therein done so much good, that I
will boldly affirm unto you, that I have left the people a most contented and
happy Nation: So that if I did misreckon a little in time, I do not misreckon
in the end.

Now though I have deceived you a little of your expectation in point of time,
I confess you have deceived my expectation in finding of business here; for I
had thought to have found things in quietness, and settled both for Religion
and peace of this Kingdom, But I found distractions, such as I could not
expect, In so much, as the Parliament was thought fit to be guarded, this I
speak not any way to seek out a fault, or to have any distrust of the hearty
affections of my Subjects, but on the contrary when I came here (as you all
see) I found the affection of my people unto me, to my great comfort.

Now I assure you, I come with the same affection that you or any good people
of the world could wish, for I am so far from disliking any thing that I have
done hitherto, that if it were to do again (in the favor and good of my
people) that I protest I would do it again.

And whatsoever may be justly expected of me for the securing of Religion and
Liberty of my people, I shall not fail to do it, and therefore I shall
mention no particular at this time, but only that great particular of Ireland,
which Mr. Speaker did mention, of which I do not doubt, but you have had a
great care, yet me thinks, things go on slowly; and I mention this more
reasonably, because a couple of Noblemen are come out of Scotland according to
the Petition and Instructions, which it pleased both Houses to send unto me at
Barwicke, which I instantly dispatched to the Chancellor, who now have the
disposing of all things. I spoke to them this morning, and I decreed both
Houses to appoint a select Committee, and make and end of that business with
them.

I have but this word more to say, that I assure you, I have no other end but
the happiness of my People, for their flourishing, is my greatest Glory, and
their affection, my greatest strength.

FINIS.

