A Summons TO THE GRAVE OR. The Necessity of a Timely Preparation for DEATH.
Demonstrated in a SERMON Preached at The FUNERAL of that most Eminent and
Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. JOHN NORCOT.

Who Departed this Life March 24. 1676

By BENJAMIN KEACH, a Cordial and an unfeigned Lover of the Deceased.

MIC. 7. 2. The good man is Perished out of the Earth. LONDON, Printed for Ben.
Harris at the Stationers Arms in Sweethings Rents, near the Royal Exchange.
1676.

To all Sincere Christians that were the Hearers of this Sermon, but more
especially to that poor, afflicted, and sorrowful Congregation, which is in God
the Father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, meeting in Old Gravel-Lane, near
Wapping, London.
WHEN I think of that Separation Death has made between you and your beloved
Pastor (my dear Brother) it causes sadness to seiz my spirit; Sure, such
Strokes of the Almighty should bring us upon our Knees; I wish you are not
hereafter made more sensible of the Nature of these sore Rebukes, then at
present you can be; however let us learn this Lesson by it, not to overprize or
value any thing or Person short of Jesus Christ; It Is good in all things to
labor against inordinateness of affection; We cannot, it is true, love God too
much; nor Christ too much, but we may love Ministers too much, nay, idolize
them, esteem them above what is meet, as many in former times have done, or we
may esteem them not enough; whether any of you have bin guilty herein or no,
will now I am persuaded be discovered; if duty to God, our solemn Vow and
Covenant with God and the Church, and our Love to Jesus Christ, will not make
us to know and keep our Places, what may we judge of our selves, or others
judge of us: I am not without fears I speak of some in respect of temptations
of this kind, I pray God deliver them from it, lest they bring up a reproach
upon the good ways of God; You had or would be looked upon all of you, to have
a real and cordial love for him that is now taken from you, O then do nothing
after his death that would have grieved his soul were he alive; Labor to live
in love, and strive to keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; I
having this opportunity, thought it not amiss to give a hint or two of this
Nature

And now beloved, as concerning this Sermon, had it not been Preached in part
to fulfill the desire of the deceased, I should not have presumed to have taken
so weighty a work upon me, especially in the Presence of so many able and
worthy Ministers, as I am not so, (the Lord knows, I look upon my self no ways
meet, or fitly qualified and capacitated for such a weighty work I am called
to) And truly, brethren, it is not any excellency and worth that is in this
broken Sermon that is the cause of its Publication, it is the desire and
importunity of several amongst you, and some others, that has brought it
forth; I do think, nevertheless, for the sake of him at whose Desire and at
who'e Funeral it was Preached, you will entertain it though never so poor and
mean a work.

I told you what sorrow had seized my spirit, I Preached with a heavy heart,
and with a mournful spirit, I know you fate under the hearing of it; alas, I
cannot blame you for your mourning, he was a most sweet and choice Preacher,
most excellent skill had he to dive into Gospel-Mysteries; he saw, if I may say
without offense, as far into a Text of Scripture, as most men now surviving,
and as careful in dividing of the Word that every one might have a portion in
season; O how sweetly has this Trumpet sounded in your ears, what spiritual joy
has it raised in your hearts! O how powerful in Prayer has he been! Has not
his prayers and Tears over sinking sinners, tended to melt their Adamant
hearts! O the thronging there has been about him, no marvel he had precious
bread always to break unto the children; he knew how to feed with milk, and how
and when to feed with strong meat; It was his delight, I am satisfied, to do
his Masters work, and in doing of it, I may say, he loved not his life unto the
death.

He is gone to eat the fruit of his labor, and I wish, that all those Choice
Sermons you have heard from his lips may not be buried with him, I hope the
fruit of them will be seen in your lives; and could some of them be made
public, they might be very serviceable unto the People of God and others in
general. I shall at present say no more, but earnestly desiring the Lord to
continue the Labourer you have, and send some other in due time amongst you, to
the making up that great loss which at present you do sustain, so that sinners
may be in the midst of you converted, and true believers strengthened,
encouraged and comforted, and all built up together in love, to the end that
you may be found without blemish in the day of Jesus Christ, and that it may be
so, is the desire, and shall be the Prayer of him

Who is willing to serve you to his Power, for Christ and his Truths sake,
BENJAMIN KEACH.

To the READER.
Impartial Reader,
SVpposing thee to be One that was not at this late Funeral; or if thou were
there, could not have the opportunity to hear the Sermon (by reason of the
straightness of the place, and the multitude of People) and perceiving it is
partly for thy sake, the Printing of it has bin so much desired, I thought it
might not be unnecessary to offer a word or two briefly unto thee, whether it
deserves such a Publication or not, it will come now under thy Censure;
however, if thou know the Person that taught it, I am satisfied, thou will
not lose thy expectation, nothing excellent thou do expect, considering the
weakness and shallowness of the Preacher, how should thou; yet if thou have
nothing of Prejudice in thy heart against him, from that contemnable
apprehensions thou and others have of that he is not wholly without hopes, but
that some small profit thou may gain hereby; Let the consideration of the
subject prevail upon thee, however to give it the reading; it is, you hear, a
Summons to the Grave: thou can never hear too often of death; and sure this
Sermon will not offend thee, if thou art one that do live, I mean, live
indeed, in the sight and steadfast belief of a future life, an eternity of
happiness or misery; I have read, that Philip King of Macedon, commanded one of
his Pages to awake him every Morning and call aloud to him, Sir, remember you
are a man: This great Monarch did not disdain to be rouzed every day from sleep
with the News of death, though it was but by the Mouth of his poor sorry Page,
and shall any of us slight the Message, through want of affection to the
Messenger; but perhaps, thou may be one that likes neither, may be thou do
not care to hear of the tidings of dying, and art ready to judge them
melancholy fools that break their sleep about it; These who are indeed prepared
for it, have no cause to be disquieted in thoughts of it; but what will thou do
when death comes, that have a guilty conscience; have you not heard of that
poor soul, who cried out in horror and distress of spirit upon his deathbed,
O what shall I do, I am so sick that I cannot live, and yet so unprepared that
I dare not die: Remember, that the thoughts of death, when it comes, will abate
thy courage, 'twill make the proudest heart to stoop; It Is a pretty Passage
that I remember of a certain King of Hungary, who being on a time very sad, his
Brother (a Jolly Courtier) would needs know what ailed him, O Brother (said he)
I have bin a great sinner against God and I know not how to die, nor appear
before God in Judgment; These are (said his Brother) melancholy thoug^^, and
withal made a Jest at them; the King replied nothing for the present but the
custom of the Country was, that if the Executioner came and sounded his
Trumpet before any man's door, he was presently to be led out to the Place of
Execution; the King in the dead time of the Night, sends the Headsman to sound
his Trumpet before his Brothers door, who hearing it, and seeing the Messenger
of death, springs in pale and trembling into the Kings Presence, beseeching him
to tell him wherein he had offended; O Brother (replied the King) you have
never offended me, and is this Executioner so dreadful, and shall not I that
have greatly and grievously offended God, fear to be brought before the
Judgment Seat of Christ; Death amazes none more when it comes, as it does them
who think not of it; the Egyptians used to carry about the Table a Deaths Head
at their Feasts; it is good in the midst of all our delights and enjoyments, to
be put in mind of the Grave; And if this Sermon spoke no more power fully to
thee then a Deaths-Head to awaken thee, it may be worth thy Pains to read it,
God may bless weak endeavors to great advantage; Jesus Christ could make five
Barley leaves and two Fishes to feed five thousand men, and yet the fragments
that were left might saetisfie many a poor hungry soul: what though thou art
afterly served, God can heat it by his Spirit, God can make it wholesome food
for thy soul: if thou have but an appetite I do not much fear thy relishing of
it, for though the full stomach loathes the Honeycomb, yet to the hungry soul
every bitter thing is sweet.

But because I would not weary thee, I shall only now give thee a summary
Account of the particular things insisted upon, and then commit thee to God.

1. Thou have the certainty of Death amplified, or brieftly enlarged upon.

2. Some awaking Considerations and Motives to a speedy and effectual
Preparation for it.

3. Several Directions and Cautions in order to it.

4. You have dying Ministers lamented, or several sad grounds of Lamentation
upon that account.

5. Then fifthly and lastly, you have comfort against Death, or how true
Christians may stay and support themselves in the hour of death, or in parting
with godly relations: and because nothing is more effectual in order to this,
then that comfortable assurance of present enjoyment, or being with Christ at
that very instant, when the breath leaves us; something was offered to confirm
the souls immortality, it was but a little which was said, had it been more it
would not have bin too much: It was not delivered as it is matter of
controversy, to grieve any who are differently persuaded: but as it is matter
of comfort, suiting with the occasion, that so sorrowful spirits might be
consolated, having for several years found the usefulness and sweetness of the
doctrine under the like dispensation my self: What is more plainly laid down in
holy Scripture then this: and those Arguments that so much establish me in the
belief hereof are many, one is taken from our Saviors own words, Because man
cannot kill the soul Mat. 10. 28. If men cannot kill it then it is not mortal:
As also the consideration of its nature being spirit, might I not reason thus,
If the noble part of man sometimes called soul be spirit, then it is immortal:
but it is called spirit in several places: and again, does not the name of
spirit declare its nature: a spirit in its nature is invisible, and its very
essence is life, if it should cease to live, if would be spirit no more.
Thirdly, the Scripture shows, that at death the body goes one way, and the
spirit goes another, namely, to God that gave it: we may judge also of the
nature of the spirit or soul of man, if we consider how nothing but God himself
can satisfy it, lives upon divine and immortal food, and therefore sure must
be of like nature: what does show more clearly that our bodies are earthly, or
made of earth, as the consideration of their being fed, and sustained from the
earth, so say I on the contrary hand in respect of the soul; it is sed with
spiritual and immortal food, ergo such is its nature; but not to trouble you
with things of this kind further, Reader, let it be thy Chief care to prepare
for thy eternal state, for be sure it will be but a little while, and thou will
find either to thy everlasting joy and comfort, or else to thy everlasting woe
and sorrow: the truth of this doctrine of the Souls; Immortality, and the
effects thereof; And that this broken Sermon may prove, through Gods blessing,
someways for thy Souls advantage and profit, is the sincere desire of

Thy Affectionate and Cordial Friend and Servant in the Lord Jesus B. K.

An ELEGY on the Death of that most Laborious and Painful Minister of the
Gospel Mr. JOHN NORCOT, who fell asleep in the Lord the 24th of this instant
March 1675-76.
HOW does my troubled Soul amused stand,
On thoughts of God's most sore Chastising hand
Let Heaven assist my Pen, and help indite
This Mournful Elegy I Am moved to write.
My grieved heart knows not what way to take,
Its love to show and lamentation make.
David for Jonathan was sore distressed,
And in like so't has sorrow seized my Breast.
Beloved John is gone, dear Norcot's dead;
That Man of God, who has so often fed
Our precious Souls with Manna from above:
Whose powerful preaching did engage our love
To Jesus Christ. O! h^ had care and skill
To feed poor souls and do hi^ Master's will.
But is he from us also took away,
What, breach still upon breach! Lord Jesus stay
Thy band such strokes are hardly born,
Here Is cause for hundreds to lament and mourn.
The loss is great the Churches do sustain,
Poor sinners too live cause have to complain.
There Is few like him surviving to arouse
Their fluggish souls cut of their sinful drouse.
They now may sleep secure and not awake,
Until they fall into the Seygian Lake.
This Golden Trumpet's stopped, 'twill sound no more,
To warn them of what danger's at their door.
To win sinners to Christ he did not spare
His strength nor time, thought nothing was too dear.
To part withal, if any ways he might,
Their Souls turn from false ways unto the right,
Like as a Candle which much light does give,
Does wast itself, whilst from it we receive
Much benefit; so did he clearly burn,
To the wasting of himself unto the urn.
This godly Preacher in a little space.
Much work did do, he swistly run his race;
With His might performed what ever he found to do.
God graciously did bless his work also,
Yea few (I think) have had the like success,
In turning sinners unto righteousness.
O were the worth of this good man but known,
It might produce an universal groan.
Let Brethren dear of different minds lament,
For he for you in prayers much time has spent;
He loved you all, though I have cause to fear,
The like affection some did scarcely bear.
'T would pierce ones heart to think in such a time,
Obedience unto Christ should be a crime:
Or that offense should in the least be took,
'Cause from Gods word he durst not turn nor look.
He would own naught but what thus faith the Lord,
Add would not he nor minish from Gods Word.
Come let us live in love, we shall agree,
When at his Port we all arrived be.
Let sinners mourn, who shall their loss repair,
Who for their Souls so naturally did care.
Well may ye fear God will proclaim new wars,
When he calls home his choice Ambassadors.
What may a Sodom look for from above,
When such who stood in the gap, God does remove,
O tremble City, what is God about
Look for new flames, thy Lots are calling out.
And now chastized flock a word or two,
I Have double sorrow when I think of you.
When that the Harvest does for Reapers call.
To lose your Labourer, this wound's not small.
O who shall bear the burden of the day,
If God does take the Laborers thus away.
When Pylots dye, how shall the Seamen stear,
Amongst Rocks and Sands, when storms also appear.
Have we not cause to think the crafty Fox,
We Will out abroad and play upon the flocks.
And Ravening Wolves also will grow more bold,
And scare some silly Lambs out of the fold;
If God proceed to call the Shepherds home,
O what will of so many flocks become.
Ith midst of all, in this does comfort lie,
The chiefest Shepherds lives when others dye.
And he be sure who for the Sheep did bleed,
Will stick to them in times of greatest need.
Come cease your grief, don't you know very well,
Then care God has on his own Israel.
And its no more which now is come to pass,
The what by you some time expected was.
And what is done is but our Fathers will,
Therefore be silent every one be still:
For should we yield to passion I have fears,
We should grieve Christ and wound our Souls with tears.
The narrow Sluices too of dribling eyes,
Would be toostreight for those great Springs that rise.
But since our Vessels fills up to the top.
Lets empty them, for every sin a drop.
For it lets wish we were composed of Snow,
Instead of flesh yea made of Ice, that so
We might in sense of sin and its loathing,
Melt with hot love to Christ, yea, thaw to nothing.
And should our sins deprive our Souls of him,
Let tears run from our Eyes till Couches swim.
Yet let us not grudge him that most happy bliss,
Who now in glory with Christ Jesus is.
He did his work apace, his Race is run*
He as touched the Gole, yea, and the Prize has won.
AN EPITAPH.
A Sweet and Godly Preacher does lie here,
Who did his Master Jesus love so dear;
And Sinners Souls, that he his strength did spend.
And did thereby (it is thought) hasten his end,
He brought himself by Preaching to the Grave,
The Precious souls of Sinners for to save.
He lies but here asleep, he is not dead:
To God he lives, to Christ his Soul is fled,
And over a while must he awake again,
And evermore with Christ in Glory reign.
By B. K.

Another Elegiack POEM by a Young Man that dearly loved him.
WAves upon Waves, Methinks, begins to roll,
Some strange Alarm afflicts my troubled soul,
Which grieves my heart, by founding in mine Ears
And makes my Eyes to flow in Brinish tears.
What Tragedy is this: Death hold thy hand,
Why, must the good man perish from the Land.
Is NOBCOT dead, suffer me then to mourn,
For now he is gone, but never well return.
Oh father father, whither do thou fly,
And leave, my soul, in this perplexity.
And if that I dear Lord must stay behind,
A portion of his Spirit let me find.
Oh find thy Spirit no^ into my heart
That it may Gospel grace, to me Impart
And that it may, likewi^ anoint mine Eyes,
For to Conceave those glorious mysteries.
Of thy most sacred Kingdom, heaven above,
Where NORCOT s swallowed, in Eternal Love,
Faith Love and Zeal, did his brave Soul adorn,
And this did manifest, he was new born.
NORCOT (a Boanerges) was Indeed
Could make the heart, of sturdy sinners Bleed.
And yet and Evangelic^s, did prove
With Sovereign Balm of sweet Gospel Love.
Great reverence dear soul, he used to Bear
To things that sacred, and Celestial were.
Oh with what gravity and Zeal did he
Declare to sinners their sad misery.
In Praying Preaching, Christ alone he Fyed,
And when he had done, the will of God he dyed.
A Panegyric, I do not intend
Neither with Parasites, for to Contend.
Yet much as to his Virtues, I might say
Did I not know, the humors of the day.
Doubtless on whom. God honor does confer,
In our affections we highly should prefer.
Dear NORCOT's gone, that worthy man of God,
Lord this aloud; bespeaks our Ichabod.
My Soul Cease for to mourn, he is not dead,
He into Everlasting Bliss is fled.
Whole troops of Angels, did his soul attend,
When he to Jesus Christ, did it commend.
He now is swallowed up, in Glory above,
Embraced in Arms of Everlasting love:
And now dear soul he is gone, his race is run,
And faithfully his Fathers work he has done.
The veil of Enmity has been removed,
He could not love more then he is Beloved.
The veil of Blindness that is taken away,
And now with his dear soul it is perfect day,
The veil's Removed he sees, as he is seen,
And praises him that did his soul Redeem.
He now sings Halleh jahs heavenly hymns,
Amongst Coelesticall glorious Seraphims.
He has fought the Fight, the Crown has gained,
Yea, and to perfect Visions has attained;
And you his Mourners here, the Word does say.
The Righteous from bad times are snatched away;
A Prince and a great man you all can tell
This day is fallen in our Israel.
Oh Israel mourn, thy Chariots flee away,
Thy Horsemen leave thee in an evil day.
The Godly fail, and cease for to be,
Lord, is not this for our iniquity?
Let Us tremble then, black Clouds hang over our heads,
Whilst we securely lie upon our Beds:
Rouse, rouse my soul for shame, what sleepy still,
Have thou not of luke-warmness had thy fill?
Hark, do not hear the Bridegroom very nigh,
Oh then, by faith, thy self to him apply:
Get oil, more oil, thy heart to purify,
For now, methinks, I hear a louder cry,
Thousands there are which to the form attained
Of Godliness, yet without grace remained:
They cry and howl, Lord, Open Heavens Gate,
But he says, No, you now are come too late.
Oh Norcot, Norcot, if it were but free
To envy any, I would envy thee,
Because thou now invested art with glory,
Whilst I behind do write this mournful story.
But stay my soul, pray why so passionate grown,
Will thou not suffer him to reap his own?
He sowed in tears, but now he reaps in joy,
Don't then by murmuring thy self annoy;
Must he all day be laboring in the Field,
And now it is night* do grudge him Rest to yield:
Rather lament and mourn for thy own sin,
And that is the way for thee to follow him;
Do hear him call, Mourn for thy self, not me,
I from Death, Sin, and Sickness now am free.
Farewell, blessed Saint, farewell; thou art fled away,
And left us in a black and stormy day;
And yet we hope to see thy face again,
That so with thee in glory we may reign.
ACROSTICK.
I s Norcot dead? (No) he is fallen asleep,
O h then my soul, cease to lament and weep;
H e now in Glory clearly does behold
N ought else but Joys that never can be told:
N ever more grieve for him: what is thy loss,
O it is his gain, for he has left but dross.
R epent, oh England, I filled am with fears,
C ompel me not to mix my thoughts with tears.
O Gospel Grace will haster, if you scoff;
T o a Nation bringing forth the fruit thereof.
E. P.

AN EPITAPH on his Tombstone.
HEre underneath this Stone lies the Dust
of NORCOT; whilst the R^si^g of the Just.
His Soul to Heaven is sled, and there does stand
With Christ and all the Saints at his Right Hand.
And when on Earth he was, he did not spare
His Life for Christ, it was his daily care,
To Pray and Preach, and unto God to crave,
That Sinners might repent their souls to save;
His Work was done, his Glass is run, and we
May all conclude he is Blessed t'Eternitie.
B. H.

A SERMON ^^^ached at the Funeral of Mr. JOHN NORCOT, March the 28th. 1676.
I Need not tell you the ground and occasion of this present Meeting; Certain I
am this is a sorrowful Assembly: Whether I am fit to preach or no I cannot
tell, but sure I am ripe to mourn. May I not on this occasion use the words of
David upon Abner's death, 2 Samuel 3. 38. Know ye not that there is a Prince and
a great man fallen this day in Israel? Who more worthy of honor than those God
confers honor upon (and to be employed as Christ's Ambassadors) to treat in his
stead with poor sinners about their eternal estate and condition, is no small
dignity; and to be deprived of such a one, what greater ground for grief and
mourning? But not to take up your time in a way of Introduction, I shall
commend to you that portion of holy Scripture, which shall be the ground of my
present discourse;

Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah. The Psalmist in the verses
that does precede is pleading with God under great afflictions and the hidings
of Gods face, upon consideration of the shortness of his days: How long will thou hide thy self? for ever shall thy wrath burn like fire? and ver. 47.
Remember how short my time is; as if he should say, Lord I have but a little
while to live, my time on earth is short; let me therefore enjoy thy favor: let
the remainder of my days (the days of my pilgrimage) be good days: Let me see
thy face, have the light of thy countenance; let them not be days of sorrow
and darkness. From hence note this, That a gracious soul, whilst on earth,
desires nothing more than the enjoyment of Gods favor. Communion with God is
the only thing his soul longs and breaths after. They having a sense of the
shortness of their days, resolve to live well and to make good improvement of
their time: They would not only have the full enjoyment of God hereafter, but
a sight of his presence and favor whilst here. And indeed those who would live
with God in heaven, must first live to God on earth. Now it is not thus with
the unregenerate, if wicked men have a sight of the shortness of their lives,
it has not this effect upon their hearts; they many times the more pursue
their lusts: they endeavor to get as much pleasure as they can, and to gratify
their covetous, ambitious, and carnal appetites, and suck out what sweetness
they can out out of this perishing world; they resolve to have it as sweet as
outward enjoyments can make it; they know no higher or better good then what is
earthly and sensual. Oh miserable deceived Creatures, how is their
understandings darkened, having never attained a saving knowledge of God, nor
spiritual relish of his grace and love, nor a sight of his favor and kindness
toward them. They are dreadfully involved in Egyptian darkness, they are
ignorant of the satisfaction, joy and sweetness that is in him; hence they cry
not after God, nor seek after him here, that they might be made happy with him
hereafter.

But that I may come to the words that I have read to you, in the Text you have
a twofold Interrogation or Negative Questions.

1. What man is he that lives and shall not see death?

2. Can he deliver his soul from the power of the grave? Selah.

The meaning is no man can avoid it, none can escape the grave, whatever he be.
Many such kind of questions are put forth and thus answered in Holy Scripture.
Here are two terms, before I proceed to any observation, that I judge needful
to speak to by way of Exp^ication:

First, What is meant by the word soul in this place? Does the soul go to the
grave? I answer, Soul in holy Scripture bears diverse acceptations; sometimes by
it is intended one thing, sometimes another; and from hence I judge it is, that
so many persons miss in their understandings about the noble and superior part
of the Creature.

1. By it is intended the whole man, Genesis 46. 27. And the sons of Joseph which
were born him in Egypt, were two souls; all the souls of the house of Jacob,
which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten souls; the like you have in Acts
7. 14. And Joseph called his father Jacob to him and all his kindred,
threescore and fifteen souls; that is so many persons: in Acts 27. 37. all that
were with Paul in the ship, are said to be two hundred and threescore and
sixteen souls.

2. It is taken for the life of the body, Psalm. 7. 5. Let the wicked persecute
my soul and take it, yea let him tread down my life upon the earth.

3. It is taken for the affections, desire, or heart of the Creature, 1 Samuel 1.
15. And Hannah answered and said, no my Lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful
spirit; I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul
before the Lord. And in chap. 18. it is said, the soul of Jonathan was knit to
the soul of David; that is, his affections were set and fastened upon him. In
many other places, by soul we find some one or more faculty of the soul is
intended.

4. It is taken for the stomach, Prove. 27. 7. The full soul loatheth an
honeycomb, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

5. By it is meant oftentimes the noble and superior part of man, distinct
from the body; for this see Psalm. 19. 7. The law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul; Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which can kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul. But probably some may say, if the word soul has
so many various acceptations, how may we know when the spirit or principal part
is in Scripture meant hereby. Answ. I shall briefly lay down three or four
Rules, whereby you may know:

1. When you read of soul, as that wherein couversion is wrought, it can intend
nothing else save the noble or immortal part; for Conversion is a change only
of the evil qualities of man's better or superior part; Psalm. 19. 7. The law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Conversion to God changes not the
defects and qualities of the outward man. If a man be attended with such and
such a disease, or distemper before Conversion, he may be truly converted, and
yet retain the same diseases; the same lameness, blindness, deafness,
crookedness, or what ever other blemish he may have of the like nature.

2. When you read of soul as that which rejoices in God, delights in God,
longs and thirsts after God, lives and feeds upon God and Christ, and united to
and has communion with God, clothed and adorned with the holy Spirit; it
always holds forth the glorious spirit or soul of man: let me only direct you
to one or two Scriptures upon this account, Luke 1. 46. My soul does magnify
the Lord and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, Psalm. 94. 19. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Psalm. 42. 1,
2. As the heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God; my soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and
appear before him. Psalm. 73. 26. My heart and my flesh fails me, but God is
the strength of my soul, and my portion for ever.

3. When you read of soul, as that which men cannot kill or destroy, is always
intended this excellent part; see Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not them that kill the
body but cannot kill the soul.

4. Lastly, When you read of soul, as that which lives when the body dies, or
is commended into the hands of God at death; you must always take it in those
Scriptures for the same.

6. By soul sometimes is meant only the body distinct from the spirit or
immortal part; see Josh. 10. 28, 37. And the king thereof he utterly destroyed,
and all the souls that were therein; and they smote the king thereof and all
the souls that were therein; and in this sense soul is to be taken in this
place. But that I may proceed, a word to explain the other term, to wit, the
hand of the grave. By hand, beloved, often in Scripture is meant power, Isa.
50. 2. Is my hand shortened, that it cannot redeem? that is, Have I lost my
power to redeem? so Acts 4. 3. My Text thus briefly opened, I shall proceed as
most suiting with our present occasion, to take notice of one Doctrinal Truth
from the words* which take as follows.

Doct. That all men must die.

Or thus, That no man whatsoever, can escape the power of the grave.

I shall, God assisting, endeavor to demonstrate and confirm the truth of this
Proposition. The holy Spirit does not slightly pass it by, but puts a Remora to
it; viz. that Emphatical signal word Selah, which shows us that this word calls
for meditation and our diligent attention; it does lay a kind of an arrest upon
our spirits, not passing from it till we have seriously weighed the matter.
What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Death will be too hard for
him, and too powerful to resist; there is no withstanding the strength of this
King, he will bring all into subjection: he is said in Romans 5. 12, 14. to reign
over all, and so he is called the terror of Kings as well as King of terrors,
he is so to the wicked; and what King has as many subjects as Death has? And
that I may demonstrate it, consider Age cannot rescue any man from the hand of
Death; the oldest man must die. All those that lived before the Flood are dead.
Methuselah lived nine hundred sixty nine years, Genesis 5. 27. but alas at last
the words tell you, and he died; he lived near a thousand years, but at last
was forced to subject to the grave.

2. As the oldest man must die, so must the strongest. Sampson was a mighty
man, yet Sampson must die. Death will make the stoutest hearts to faint, and
the strongest legs to tremble. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at
ease and quiet; his breasts are full of milk and his bones are moistened with
marrow, Job 21. 23, 24. If any were likely to encounter or grapple with Death,
we may suppose that this is the man; he who is in his perfect strength, free
from distempers; signified by that word, wholly at ease and quiet: yet alas
all will not do, this man was forced to yield, he is made Deaths Captive.

3. The wisdom and policy of man cannot deliver from the power of the grave.
The wisest prince that ever late upon a Throne was forced to stoop to the
sovereign hand of Death. Wise men die, faith the Psalmist, likewise the fool,
Psalm. 49. 10. In death there is no remembrance of the wise more than the fool,
Eccl. 2. 16. The most grave and politic in all ages of the world, after all
their famous and deep contrivances, have been overcome by death.

4. Riches cannot deliver from Death, if it could we should have few rich men
die; doubtless they would give their all to save themselves from the grave:
they would leave but little to Friends or Executors, could they but bribe Death
with their Silver and Gold. I have read of one who would make a trial, and so
called for a Bag of Gold, when on a Sickbed, and laid it to his trembling
heart; but presently cried out, Away, away with it; it will not do. Oh my
Beloved, Riches will not avail you in the day of wrath, Prove. 11. 4. and as it
will not in the Day of Judgment, so it will not in the hour of Death. The
brutish person dies and leaves his wealth behind him, Psalm. 49. 10. The
Cardinal of Winchester, who procured the death of the good Duke of Gloucester in
the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, was shortly after taken with a grievous
Disease; who understanding by his Physicians that he could not live, murmurring
and repining thereat, he cried out, (Fie) will not Death be hired? Will money
do nothing, must I die, that have so great riches? If the whole, Realm would
save my life, either by policy I can get it, or by riches I can buy it. But yet
all would not do, the proud Cardinal must submit to death.

5. As Riches will not deliver from the power of the grave, so likewise earthly
power and worldly sovereignty and greatness, cannot do it; all the mighty
Potentates and Monarchs, the holy Scripture and ancient Histories acquaint us
of, where are they? has not Death subdued them all? After all their grandeur
and pomp they were all cut down by Deaths all-conquering hand, and now their
glory lies in the dust. Augustus Caesar one day triumphs in the greatness of
his strength, the next day is stabbed to death with Bodkins Herod King of the
Jews, one hour is admired as a God, the next hour is made a Feast for Worms,
Acts. 12. 22, 23. The great Conqueror Alexander. who subdued he greatest part
of the World, is at last overcome by Death. Death makes no difference between
the King in his Royalty on the Throne, and the Beggar in Rags upon the Dunghill
Alexander having received 2 wounds at the siege of great City in India, finding
himself to be sore wounded, was in some measure made sensible of his own
fragillty; and cried out to his flattering followers, You call me the Son of
Jupi^er, but I perceive I am subject to wounds and death as well as other men.
Death brings down the loftiest looks of man. I have read that in the Library
of Dublin there is a Globe at the one end and at the other end the picture of
Death, to show that though man was Lord of the whole Universe, i.e must submit
to Death. Thus you see that all the pomp and glory of the world has been cut
down by the power of the grave. But again,

6. As Worldly Dignities cannot deliver from the power of the Grave, so
glorious Titles will not do it.

Those Worthies that God conferred glorious Titles upon, yea so far as to give
his own name unto them; to be called gods. One would think that this, if any
were the most likeliest to exempt a man from the grave, and yet it will not do,
Psalm. 82. 6, 7. I have said ye are gods, but with the same breath adds, ye
shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes. But,

7. Eminency in grace and spiritual endowments, or divine qualificacations,
will not be able to rescue a soul from the power of the grave. All the
Patriarchs of old they are gone; where are all those choice and renowned in
grace that we read of, who shined in their day like the stars in the firmament?
Oh! where are those Troops of Israelites that excelled in patience, chastity,
temperance, holiness and humility? these could not deliver themselves from
death. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men
are taken away: none considering that the righteous are taken away from the
evil to come, Isa. 57. 1.

8. Lastly, No spiritual Dignity, Office, or Place, can deliver from the hand
of the grave; though a person be never so much in the favor of God, and
honored by Christ Jesus; though never so laborious for the good of souls, as
to be an Ambassador of Peace and Minister of the Gospel, yet these will not
exempt from death: your Fathers where are they and the Prophets, do they live
for ever? Zech. 1. 5.

Thus you have heard the Doctrine made good and confirmed, That there is no man
living that shall not see death, or be able to deliver himself from the power
of the grave. I shall only give you two or three reasons of the point, and so
proceed to the Application. If you question why all must die, take two or three
things for an Answer.

1. Reas. Because all have sinned. Sin and Death came into the world together.
Death came by the fall in the Garden, it is part of the punishment due to us for
that transgression; Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, so death passed upon all men; for that all have
sinned; the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. We may cry out in the words of a
holy man, O sin, sin, it is thou, which by thy just deserts have caused all the
funerals that ever have been. Thus you see all must die, because all have
sinned.

2. Reas. Because God has decreed that all men must die, Heb. 9. 27. And as it
is appointed for men once to die, and after that to judgment. Though death be
natural and the punishment of our sins, yet we die by Gods appointment. We let
in death by our sin, and God causes death to proceed upon us, to make good the
justice and severity of his own threatening. I know, says Job, thou will bring
me to death, to the house appointed for all living, Job 30. 23. On the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die; dust thou art, and to dust shall thou
return; Genesis 2. 17. 3. 19.

3. Reas. Lastly, Why God will bring all men to the grave; and I shall add no
more, Because he would thereby magnify his glorious Attributes; as first out
of infinite grace, commiseration and goodness, he brings his own children to
the grave, knowing the miseries, sad afflictions and troubles that does attend
them in this life. Here most times poor Saints, with Lazarus, have their evil
things; many are their afflictions, and this way God takes to deliver them out
of them all. Death opens a door to glory to every gracious soul; and secondly
God by death prepares the bodies of his Saints for eternal bliss and happiness.
He brings the body to the grave, that it may be purified and made a glorious
and most amiable body; it is sown, that it might be raised more glorious, 1 Cor.
15. 42, 43, 44. God does with the bodies of his Saints, with reverence be it
spoken, as they do with their Earthen Vessels in China, they bury them in the
earth for many years, and when they take them out, the nature and worth of them
is far transcendent. 2. The ungodly must die, that God may magnify on them his
own infinite Justice. Death having seized their body, their souls must go to
its place, to suffer the intolerable pains and incensed wrath of the Almighty;
and that their bodies also, with their souls, when they shall hereafter meet
together again, might he made fit fuel for eternal flames to kindle upon: for
now as they are in this mortal state they cannot endure the terrible wrath of
God, but would soon be freed of all bodily pain and extremity, were they cast
into that Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

Thus much for the Reasons of the Point; more might be said, but I must hasten
to the application.

I have only four Uses to make of it, as first an Use of Exhortation, secondly
an Use of Direction, thirdly an Use of Lamentation, fourthly an Use of
Consolation.

First, By way of Exhortation, Is it so Beloved, must all men die? Can none
deliver his own soul from the power of the grave? Must every Mothers child of
us take up our Lodging there? Is the dark grave the appointed house for all
living? Shall the proudest and loftiest be brought down to the dust? Must that
little cool house under ground hold us all? Then poor sinners shall I prevail
with you to prepare for death? Let me exhort you to look about you and get
ready. I remember, when the Prophet came to good King Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 1.
with that doleful tidings (as upon some consideration and circumstances it
might then appear to that holy man) he bids him set his house in order, make
provision for eternity: and this is the message that is brought to you this
day: You must die and not live. And that I might enforce this word upon you,
let me lay before you a few Motives and awakening Considerations.

First, Consider what a great favor and mercy it is that God has let you and
I live so long. Others are long ago cut down and sent to the grave; he has not
it may be given many half of those days which thou have had: Look upon this as
a mercy indeed, considering thy life was forfeited before thou were born. Sirs
we came into the World with the Sentence of death upon us; and if Jehovah had
cut us down in our sins many years ago, it would have been but a piece of
Justice. And what is the end of God in sparing of us, but that we might be
fitted for the place whither we are going. Oh how unwilling is God to strike
the fatal blow, to cut men down before they are prepared for death. He is not
willing they should perish, and that is the reason of his patience,
long-suffering, and forbearance, sinners lay it to heart.

Secondly, Consider what dreadful provocations you and I have given him to take
us away, and command death in his name to arrest us. Have we not grieved,
burdened, yea even wearied him with our iniquities? Nay, have we not pierced
him? May he not cry out, as being pressed as a Cart is pressed that is full of
sheaves, Amos 2. 13. Is it not a sad and most lamentable thing, thus to deal
with a loving and gracious God?

Thirdly, How often has the Lord called you, and yet you have rebelled? Has
not he stretched out his hand all the day long, and yet you have not hearkened;
but have rejected his counsel and cast his word and reproofs behind you; yea,
and often resisted his Holy Spirit in the common motions and workings thereof?
Have you not many of you refused his Grace, Son, and diverse sweet and precious
Calls and Offers of Love. And certain I am, you have had many of these in this
place, Nay, how many warnings have you had of the near approach of death? Nay,
awakening summons to prepare for the grave, as you would answer it before the
dreadful Judge of Heaven and Earth; by my dear Brother that is fallen asleep;
whom we shall hear no more? Oh what pains did he take with some of you, that so
you might be ready? Have not you and I notwithstanding all this hearkened to a
base deceitful heart, and inticeing and tempting Devil? Have you stouted it out
against all Pains and Endeavors used for Spiritual awakenings, and are you yet
alive? Then consider how much this calls upon you to be ready to die? Will any
dare, that are sensible of the worth of their Immortal Souls, neglect this
concern any longer?

4. Consider, That the abuse of Mercy and Goodness will greatly aggravate thy
misery in the day of wrath: Oh remember what it is to sin against Light, Love,
and Patience. Shall the goodness of God, that should lead to repentance,
encourage and harden thee in thy iniquity? How do thou think to escape the
Judgment of God? Or despisest thou, as says the Apostle, the rich's of his
goodness, forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance; but aftey thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God; who will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.
4. 5, 6. Sentence is past against a sinner, but because it is not speedily
executed, therefore the hearts of men are fully set within them to do wickedly,
Eccl. 8. 11. Christ knocks at the door and yet sinners will not hear. Christ
may speak of sinners as God speaks of Israel of old, My people will have none
of me, Psalm. 81. 11. Oh what have you to answer for abused mercy and favor!
What What will you do hereafter, when Christ, who waits upon you now to save
you, will then turn his face from you in the day of your calamity, and plead
against you to condemn you? see Prove. 1. 28.

5. Consider for Christ's sake of those advantages you have had and still have:
If some had the like, we may conclude they would have made better use and
improvement of them then some of you have done. Has not God afforded you the
Gospel beyond what he has to diverse parts of the world? Nay, what a gracious
and powerful ministration of it has there been continued for some time in this
place? You have had helps above thousands, God has taken much pains with you
that have attended upon the word here. Where God gives many talents, he
requires the improvement of them; what will become of Jerusalem and Capernaum
in the day of Judgment? And has not Gods spirit striven with you also? Nay,
and has not Conscience endeavored to awaken you? Have you not had Summons and
Calls from thence? Has not that often reproved you for neglect of Seasons,
flighting of Sermons, and indulging your selves in iniquity and secret lusts
and omissions of duty? Oh! how many sharp checks and rebukes have you had from
within? Nay, and besides all this, what awakening Judgments to prepare for the
grave, have you and I had; dreadful Plague, Fire and Sword: and what further
means could God make use of in an ordinary way for allarming and stirring of us
up to prepare for our change, and turning of our souls to himself, and fitting
of us for Eternity? And shall none of these work upon you? Shall all means
fail? Shall the Gospel be preached in vain? Shall Ministers spend their study,
their breath, nay their strength, to no purpose: what will you do then in the
end?

6. Do you know that you shall have all these helps continued to you? Will God
still suffer his holy Spirit to strive with you? Alas, Death may soon have
Commission to seize you and carry you into the other world; but should you
live, are you sure God will still wait upon you: upon such rebels, who have
slighted and undervalued his Grace, Son, and Gospel? Sirs, I must tell you,
alluding to that in Genesis 6. which has often been upon my heart; that the
blessed Spirit shall not always strive with man: Means and advantages are like
to be taken away. God ere long may say to Conscience, Be still, reprove that
man, that woman no more: You may be left to commit wickedness without remorse
or trouble. God may give you up to a hardened and sordid heart, to a seared and
filthy Conscience, yea, and refuse in mercy to afflict you any more; see Hosea
4. 14. May not he that has taken away a Minister, an able one, a sweet and
precious Labourer, take away ere long a sweet and precious Gospel; and what
will become of your souls then?

7. Do you know for certain the Gospel shall be continued to this Land? Be you
sure you shall hear the joyful sound? Let me tell you my thoughts freely,
though I pretend not to a spirit of Prophecy; yet mark what follows: I tremble
to think what is coming upon us as a punishment of our sins. I fear, Beloved,
the Gospel is a going. Ephraim has gray hairs here and there, though he know
it not; and gray hairs are a sign that our morning or best days are gone;
secondly, they commonly bring a wrinkled face, or a decay of Beauty; our
goodness, like Ephraims, are even like the morning dew: thirdly, they bring
feebleness, or a decay of strength: fourthly, they show that death and
mortality draws near. We have heard, some of us, that he was gray a great while
ago; I doubt he is white, by this time. There are sad symptoms upon us, I know
not how soon we may have cause to cry Ichabod, because the glory is departed.
Are we not in danger to be overspread with Popery, Confusion, and Darkness;
for if the Gospel should continue, and Gods people resolve to do their best, by
their prayers and prizing of it, to hold it fast; yet are you sure you shall
have Ministers to prcach unto you? Many have been taken of late away, and one
at this time before your eyes is gone, a faithful and able one; whom now you
shall hear no more. But should there be Ministers and opportunities, yet you
may be left to your selves, to ripen for Hell and ruin? Nay, Is not Christ
already crying over you, as he did over Jerusalem; Oh that thou had known in
this thy day the things that belongs to thy peace; but now they are hid from
eyes; Luke 19. 42. Oh that these things might take hold and touch your
Conscicnces.

8. Consider of the shortness and uncertainty of your days? Alas, what is your
life, you know not how soon death may come and knock at your doors, or look in
at your windows? It may be some of you have had many years, but this consider
of, you know not how few the rest may be behind; you have no promise from God,
no lease or assurance that you have one year more; where has God told you that
you shall? nay one half year? You cannot assure your self you shall have one
month, no not one week, no not one day. You may be stricken by death before you
return home. Boast not thy self of too morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth, Pro. 27. 1. Many that are young, hope that they may have many
years; the child thinks to be a youth, and the youth to be a man, and a man
till he is full of days: But alas, they consider not how brittle they are;
they do not lay to heart the uncertainty of their lives. David desired to know
his end and the measure of his days, that he might know how frail he was, Psalm.
39. 4, 5. Many do not take a right measure of their days, they measure not by
a lawful Rule. What say some, my Father and Grandfather lived to a good old
age, and I hope to attain to their years. Others measure by their present
health; they are not diseased nor sickly; but of a good healthful Constitution:
but alas, this is no sure Rule, thou may notwithstanding all this be
quickly in the grave; such sometimes death makes to stoop on a sudden, they go
many times before sickly persons. Others measure their days by their present
strength, they fear not death upon that account; yet they die as you have
heard; though wholly at ease: these do not go by the Kings Standard neither.
Let me tell you what is a right and true measure for your days, account them
then by the morning dew and flower of the field. Man that is born of a woman,
says holy Job, is but of few days; he comes forth like a flower and is cut
down: and flies away like a shadow and continues not. Job 14. 12. Naturalists
tells us of a plant that lasts but for a day, this plant thou or I may be. The
Heathen has observed that the Rose grows old in its very budding. Mankind is
like Jonah's Gourd, that came up in a night and perished in a night. Nothing
fades sooner than a flower, oh measure thy days by that and by the vapor that
appears for a little while and then vanishes away; the Spiders Web, the
Swift Post, the Weavers Shuttle, or a Ship under sail. Persons never so rich or
great, never so beautiful, never so weak of strong, wise or foolish, virtuous
or vicious, as thou have heard must die. May not the thoughts of this move thee
to a preparedness for the grave?

9. Consider how you have loytered hitherto and lost much of your precious time
which God has lent you to prepare for the grave. Upon the improvement of your
present time does your eternal happiness depend, and if it be squandered away,
what will become of your immortal and never dying souls? If a man has much
work to do, work of the weightiest concern that must be done, or the man
undone: business that would take up all his day, and it should so fall out that
he had lost the morning, nay above half his day; would it not concern him to
set about the work with all his might, so as if possible to do two hours works
in one; lest the Sun go down before the work is finished. Redeem the time,
because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5. 16. Alas Sirs, are not the shadows of the
evening upon some of you? the Lord help you to lay it to heart. Do not think
the whole work of your lives can be done upon a Dying Bed. Oh consider Old age
is unfit for labor, and it is folly with a witness to think it is time enough
to sow when thou should reap. Delays proves the ruin of many thousands; The
night comes, says Christ, when no man can work.

10. And lastly, Consider what will become of your precious souls, if death
takes you before you are ready; for it will not stay for you: Will he be bribed
or persuaded to come another time? I remember a young Maid in the Country that
was sick, and as she grew near her end, she cried out to be spared one quarter
of a year, one month; but when that would not be granted; rather than fail, one
week: but die she did, greedy death will have no denial. Oh what a sad sight is
it to see a Christless soul a dying! When death sits upon your trembling lips,
and you not prepared, what would you give for peace and pardon then? When pale
death comes upon thee like a sturdy Sergeant, and does arrest thee in the name
of the great King of Heaven and Earth, he will hale you along; to prison you
must go. Death comes upon a wicked man like a hungry Lion, tearing their souls
from their bodies; to such he is indeed the King of Terrors: He comes on them
like a fiery Serpent, with his venomous sting; with which he wounds them and
lays them a bleeding to all Eternity. Oh to have the soul dragged out of the
body and cast into hell, is of a dreadful and amazing Consideration. With this
I shall conclude the Use of Exhortation.

The next is an use of Direction to poor sinners and all others that would be
prepared for the grave, if this be so.

First, Does not some poor soul hear say, Oh what shall I do that I may be
prepared for the grave? Have you a heart, a mind, a desire indeed to be fitted
for that hour? Then in the first place labor to get a full sight and sense of
your sins, and of your lost and undone condition by nature. Oh what a miserable
creature has sin made man, or rather man by sin made himself? That must needs
be the greatest evil, that deprives man of the greatest good. God is man's chief
good, sin deprives man of this good; sin makes man hated or God, and causes
man to resemble Satan; who is the opposite of God. The carnal mind is enmity
against God, this enmity must be removed, Unless a man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3.

Secondly, Labor to get Brokenness of heart, oh strive to melt in the sight
and sense of your iniquity. Sinner what have thou done, will thou sin away thy
mercies, sin away thy Ministers? Gods hand is lifted up, we are under sore
rebukes of the Almighty, though I fear few are sensible that it is the fruit of
their transgressions. May we not say with the Prophet, No man repents him of
his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Jer. 8. 6. God expects and looks for
tears of Repentance, A broken and a contrite heart is a sacrifice that he will
not despise. If you are not broken in the sense of the odious and abominable
nature of sin, broken into pieces now, you are like to be broken with horror
under the weight of the punishment hereafter. Oh! Is it not better to be
smitten and broken in a way of mercy, in order to healing; then to be broken in
a way of wrath and judgment, when there will be no help nor cure for you.

Thirdly, Labor so get an interest in Jesus Christ. Oh that this opportunity
might have some tendency this way! Unless ye believe that I am he,says Jesus
Christ, you shall die in your sins. Soul never rest and be satisfied, till thou
can say with Thomas, My Lord and my God, John 20. 28. Can you still stand it
out against such precious patience and offers of grace? Will you not yet open
to Christ? Shall he call and cry to you and will you give him no entertainment?
Can you close in with a better friend? How long has he stood knocking at the
doors of your hearts? Was he not graciously calling upon you the last Lords
day? and now in mercy he is giving you another knock. Oh fear lest he depart!
Is he not ready to take his farewell of you? Have you not let him stand till
his head was wet with the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night?
Sinner, sinner, hasten to him, and open the door, do not hear that lovely
voice that was spoken to the blind man, Be of good comfort, rise, he calls
thee, Mark 10. 49. It may be you will ask where? I Will tell thee, if thou art a
weary and burdened soul, that feel the weight of thy sin, there is a
precious word spoken for thy sake, take hold of it; Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me
all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and you shall find
rest for your souls. Oh the sweetness of that word, take it and receive it down.

Fourthly, Labor in the strength of Christ to oppose every sin. See that there
be no sweet morsel hid, no Dalilah, no pleasant nor profitable lust spared. O
cry with David, Search me, O Lord, and try my heart; prove me, and know my
thoughts; Psalm. 139. 23.

Fifthly, Take heed you do not sin against Light. Neglect no Conviction either
of Sin or Duty, if you would be prepared for the grave: Then shall I not, says
David, be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy commandments; Psalm. 119. 6.

Sixthly, Never be satisfied until you have all your sins subdued. Sin must be
crucified, or the soul must die, Romans 8. 13. To this I might add (for I cannot
enlarge) make it your business also to get your sins pardoned; so that you may
have the feeling sense of the forgiveness of them in your own hearts.

Seventhly, Labor after a pure Conscience. What will stand your souls in
greater stead, when you come to die than this? Paul's great care and endeavor
was, to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, Acts 24.
16. I must tell you, An accusing Conscience will be a bad Deathbed Companion.
I remember what our dear Friend spoke to me in the time of his Sickness. Oh
Brother, said he, a good conscience is the best refuge. That was his rejoicing,
alluding to that Text, 2 Cor. 1. 12. the testimony of his conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity; not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God he had his conversation in the world. It matters not who reproach us, if
Conscience does not? Conscience, as I told some of you lately, will be your
best friend; if a friend, a friend indeed, a friend in adversity; a friend at
death, and a friend in the day of judgment. Oh what would some men give for
such a friend? But if Constience be an enemy, he is the worst of enemies.
Conscience is a secret enemy, an enemy that is privy to all we have done; he
knows all our thoughts, yea those secret lusts and evils, that lie in our
hearts; and he will not be flattered. He will tell the truth and all the truth.
Conscience will lay all open in the dreadful day of Account before Angels and
Men, Romans 2. 15. Holy Job resolved to hold his integrity fast and not to let it
go; his heart should not reproach him as long as he lived, Job 27. 5, 6.
Sincerity of heart and a good conscience will be a good sanctuary at the hour
of death. The Lord help you to lay these things to heart. I might give you more
directions which I am forced to omit, because of time. Only this, if thou
would be prepared for the grave, take this one, which was not then delivered;
which I am sorry I did omit.

Eighthly, Beware of resting in the form of godliness without the power. It Is an
easy thing to conform to the outward part of Religion; to take up Ordinances
and come into Churches: but oh what will become of the foolish Virgins. Sinners
in Zion ere long will be afraid, and fearfulness will surprise the hypocrites.
Many of you heard those excellent soal-searching Sermons of your dear Pastor
now deceased on 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Oh that you would labor to call them to mind! and those upon a well-ordered
Conversation; from Psalm. ^50. and the last verse. What pains did he take with
you, that you might not deceive your selves and miss at last of eternal life? I
think there was never more formality amongst Christians and carnality amongst
Professors in the Churches, than in these days: No marvel if God bring a day
of dreadful trials and afflictions upon us, that those that are approved, may
be made manifest. Tremble sranners, for God is a coming forth to refine his
people; he will search Jerusalem with candles; Zeph. 1. 12. And woe to them
that are at ease in Zion; however you appear now to men, your sins ere long
will find you out.

I now must come to the third Use, which must be an Use of Lamentation; and
indeed I know not well how to enter upon it, my heart is full. Is it so? Must
all die? Can none deliver their own souls from the power of the grave? Must
Husbands die, dear Husbands? Must Fathers die, yea tender Fathers? Must
Friends, our dearest Friends die? Ministers, nay, our choice and godly Pastors,
must they die too? Oh greedy Death! oh cruel Tirant! Oh that ever we sinned!
This may well be for a Lamentation. Samuel died, and Israel made great
Lamentations for him. Your Samuel is gone, but no asking for him again, he
cannot come. In Acts 8. 2. it is said Devout men carried Stephen to his burial,
and made great lamentation over him.

O spare me a little, you have lost one who labored to do the work of his
generations in faithfulness. Let me lay down some grounds that we have for a
Lamentation.

1. Oh it is grievous to loose a godly Preacher, a Pastor, a faithful Labourer.
It Is a day of Mourning, my soul as well as yours is full. Alas there is but few
of them! We have need of more, and Lord do thou take away these we have?

2. But if any should say we have many yet left behind, I must say not many
such, who make it their main work and business to bring souls to Jesus Christ.
There are but few who naturally care for the Flock: Few preach Christ for
Christ's sake, that are willing to spend and be spent for his Name sake; like
our dear Brother, now with the Lord. May I not say with Paul, some preach
Christ out of envy, and some of strife; only with this variation, Are there
not many who preach Jesus Christ not sincerely, but have self and sinister ends
at the bottom. But to leave that, however, if God proceed and go on after this
rate to take our Preachers away, there will be few enough ere long.

3. You have not only lost a Pastor, a Shepherd, a tender one, but you have
lost a Father. Many of you must follow your Father this day to the grave. You
have many Instructors in Christ, yet not many Fathers. He has been an
Instrument through the Word and the operation of the Spirit in his Ministry, to
beget many of you to Jesus Christ. May you not cry out with Elisha when Elijah
was taken up from him, My father, my father, the horsemen of Israel and the
chariots thereof; and he saw him no more, 2 Kings 2. 12. He is now gone, you
will hear him no more, see him no more. This golden Trumpet is now stopped, you
will hear it sound no more.

4. Consider the time in which God has taken him away, when the harvest is
white, or when the fields are ripe to harvest; when many sinners are ready to
be brought in to Jesus Christ. The loss is great, oh how shall it be repaired?
How shall the harvest be gathered in, when the chief Labourer in this field is
gone?

5. Ministers are and fitly may be compared to Pilots; the Church to a Ship
passing through a troublesome Ocean, amongst many Rocks and Sands; and when
such die, how shall the poor Mariners steer, especially, considering the
dangerous and grievous storms that do now appear: is not this a ground of
lamentation*

6. Ministers are compared to Shepherds, that are to keep the flock and watch
over them to take care of the tender lambs; and let me tell you, ravenous
wolves are abroad, yea and the cunning Fox, nay as crafty Foxes as ever were in
the world; and the Shepherd being gone, may we not fear that which will follow;
is not the flock in danger to be scattered.

7. Ministers of the Gospel may be compared to Captains, to encourage us in our
spiritual warfare, and now alas your Leader is gone, he is taken from you, and
are we not surrounded with enemies? May we not say with Leah in another case,
Genesis 30. 11. a troop comes; a troop of troubles, a troop of afflictions, a
troop of temptations, a troop of miseries and persecutions; I wish improve not
a troop of division to the scattering of us: the Lord I hope will prevent it.

8. Ministers of the Gospel are compared to Trees, the trees of the Lord are
full of sap. Psalm. 104. 16. the lip of the righteous feed many (says Solomon;
and this was a fruitful tree. Oh the sweet fruit it did bear, most precious
fruit it yielded us for many years. Oh what good have many gathered out of the
branches thereof. But now alas it is ( cut down) it will bear fruit for you no
more; you shall hear him pray no more, preach no more, and is not this a ground
of lamentation.

9. Saints and Ministers of the Gospel are the interest of the Nation, City, or
Place where they live. Was not Lot the interest of Sodom? I cannot do any thing
till thou be come thither, Genesis 19. 22. Till Lot was gone, fire and brimstone
could not come upon that miserable City. Oh what love has God to the poor
Preachers of righteousness. But again, Was not Jacob the interest of Labans
family? How did God bless him for Jacobs sake? The like might be minded of
Joseph to the Egyptians* Ye, says our blessed Savior, are the light of the
world and the salt of the earth. To whom did he speak but to his Disciples, his
holy Apostles, that he sent forth to preach glad tidings of great joy unto the
Nations. I might show you wherein they are the interest of the place where they
are, but I must hasten: Take only two or three brief hints.

1. They stand in the gap or in the breach. Ours is a great one, the Lord look
upon us. They plead with God: When Moses hands are up Israel prevails, and when
he lets down his hands Amalek Prevails, Exodus 17. 11. Oh how does he cry out
for a provoking generation. When Jehovah cries, Let me alone, that I may
destroy them, Exodus 32. 10. Oh, says Joshua, what will thou do for thy great
name? If thou will not forgive their sin, says Moses, blot me out of thy Book*
Nay* though God promised to make of him a great Nation, yet he still lifts up a
cry for them, Exodus* 32. 10, 11, 32.

2. They are the interest of the Nation where they are, by counselling,
warning, and admonishing.

3. By their holy and exemplary conversations. Except the Lord of hosts had
left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom and should have
been like unto Gomorrah, Isa. 1. 9.

10. Ground of Lamentation, is because sin usually is the cause why God removes
his faithful Ambassadors. He sends to treat with sinners about the concerns of
their souls. I wish this stroke be not in judgment to some of your souls. The
Message they bring is often slighted, and thereby sinners slight and reject the
King himself. They cry and lift up their voice like a trumpet, fore-warning of
danger; but none lays it to heart. They spend their strenght and weaken their
bodies for the good of sinners souls; but sinners slight it* Nay, if they
should sweat drops of blood it would not do, it would not work in them remorse
of Conscience and repentance unto life. Well, says God, now I Will wait upon
thee no more, him that you despised and contemned, or neglected to hear, or
whose counsel you did not regard, you shall hear no more. The taking (...) of
faithful Preachers is one of the greatest judgment that can come upon sinners.
But alas, it may not onl^ be for the sins of the ungodly world ^^on unconverted
sinners, but a punishment upon Professors and Church Members* for their
inquiry; they may not prize the mercy nor walk worthy of the blessing. They may
not carry it as they ought to do to the Labourer that is amongst them: They may
grieve and wound his heart by their disorderly walking; and God may from hence
be provoked to take him a way. Nay they may on the other hand overvalue him,
they may idolize their Teachers and look upon them above what is meet; though
sinful, yet it is possible to eye man more than God by man. God may remove them.
Upon this account the Apostle speaks of some that had men's persons in
admiration. I am satisfied there is too great extremes in the world. We should
have a care we do not receive the Truth for the sake of a man, or to please
men, because such and such says it; but out of Love to Jesus Christ, and
because God has commanded it. Beloved, it may not be amiss to lay these things
to heart, it is good to hear the Rod and to know who it is, and for what it is
appointed. I do not charge any in particular.

11. And lastly, Here is cause of lamentation, because evil and dark days many
times follows the removal of Gods Worthies. When God take away so many faithful
ones, what may we expect to look for. I might give diverse instances of the sad
effects, or what has followed the taking godly persons and sincere Laborers
away Mr. Clark gives us several instances how the death of the righteous has
been the Forerunner of sad and lamentable Judgments: Begins with Methuselah
before the Flood, whose very name was very significant upon this account. Also
I lately met with a Sermon of a godly Minister in New England that was preached
sometimes before their late calamities and miseries broke forth there, and
amongst their other signs of approaching judgment, that he seemed to be very
apprehensive of, he minds that of the dropping away of many holy and godly
persons. Oh how many able and godly preachers and others have we lost in a
short space? We may look upon it as one sad sign or symptom of approaching
evil.
. But I am afraid I have been too tedious already, remember what the Prophet
says, The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; Merciful men are
taken away; and none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil
to come. Isa. 57. 1.

Thus much by way of Lamentation and Consolation.

I have only one Use more, which shall be in the fourth place by way of
Comfort and Consolation.

1. Must all dye, the godly as well as the wicked? Is the Grave the place
prepared for all Living? Must Fathers, Husbands, Wives, Children, Ministres,
and the dearest Friends we have dye? How shall we then comfort our selves
against death? If thou art a Beleiver, I I have a word of comfort for thee;
there is none I am sure for Christless Souls.

2. Consider death cannot hurt thee; it cannot hurt those that are Believers,
because it has lost his sting. Death may hiss but cannot hurt: Nothing makes
death terrible to an ungodly man but it is Sting. The sting of death is sin, but
this is taken away from Believers by Jesus Christ. Oh death where is thy sting?
O grave where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. 55, 56.

2. Death cannot hurt a Believer, because it cannot bring an annihilation of
the body, though it bring an alteration upon the stare and condition of the
body, yea and though the body be dissolved to dust, yet it shall not be lost,
it shall rise to life again.

3. Death cannot dissolve or break that blessed union there is between Jesus
Christ and believers. Though it may separate soul and body, yet it cannot
separate either from Jesus Christ, and the soul immediately will be in a more
glorious enjoyment of Christ; and though the body for a while must lie in the
grave, yet that dust is precious dust in Christ's sight.

4. Consider Death cannot keep the body long under its power, nor keep soul and
body apart; it is but a little while and they will meet again. Death and the
Grave are conquered enemies. Saints by faith can now, through Jesus Christ
triumph over them, and shall have a complete, a full Conquest, over a short
space.

5. Death has not power to cast into hell, if Conscience condemns thee not, if
the Word convicts thee not, if God passes not the Sentence upon thee, Death
has no power to do it. Death can but bring to the grave, it is sin that casts
the soul into hell.

6. Consider Death is thine, that is, 'twill be for thy profit and advantage
every way. Remember that sweet word of Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3. 22.
Whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours; it will be every way for thy good. Consider what
freedom thou will gain thereby. 1. It will free thee from a body of sin and
death, that often makes thee go with a sorrowful heart. Oh! has it not often
made thee to cry out with St. Paul, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of sin and death? Oh what is a greater trouble to a
Child of God than indwelling sin? He cannot do the things he would do. But now
comes death and frees thee of all these soul perplexities and disquietments.
Sin makes a Saint to groan, being burdened; but now thou shall grieve Christ
and his spirit, nor thy own soul no more. Is not this that a poor Saint longs
for?

2. 'Twill free thee from a poor crazy, diseased, or distempered Body. There
will then be no crying out of back or bone, nor head not heart any more; 'twill
be with thee as with the Church in the glorious day to come, Rev. 21. 4. There
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain; for the former things are passed away.

3. It will free thee from an evil and wicked world. Oh what a defiling,
ensnaring, and bewitching world is this? What hinders us of our joy and peace
in Christ more than it? What greater vexation to us? Oh how many precious
Saints are clogged and imprisoned by the cares of the world, which many times
is ready to choke the seed of holy desires after Christ: But by Death thou
shall be delivered.

4. It will free thee out of the hands of presecutors. Thou will, (with our
dear Brother) be out of their reach then: they shall not disquiet thee,
imprison thee, nor torment thee any more. There, says Job (speaking of the
grave) the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at rest; there
the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor, Job 3.
17, 18.

5. Death will free thee from an envious raging and tempting Devil. He will
have not more power to disturb thee, accuse thee, nor by his cursed
suggestions, to vex and perplex thy soul; no, nor any other ways to hurt or
annoy thee. O will not this be to thy great advantage? Who would be unwilling
to die, that has an interest in Jesus Christ?

6. Thou will hereby also be freed from all the discords and troubles that rise
amongst Brethren. The unworthy and disorderly lives of Professors shall sadden
thy heart then no more. This was that which worried and grieved the blessed
Apostle, Phil. 3. 18. Our dear Brother is set at liberty from all these things,
disorders in the Church, no loose walking of Members thereof, will burden nor
trouble him again.

7. Nay and Death will free thee of all that trouble that rises from those
inward becloudings and hideings of God's face. It will never be night with the
soul any more; thou will then be with Christ and behold his face with joy for
ever.

8. And lastly, Thou will also be freed of all thy toilsome pains and labor,
of what nature soever it be. O how good is rest to a weary soul? Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labors, and their works do follow them, Rev. 14. 13.

But then once again, Consider what a blessed state thy soul will be in at
death. If thou art a true Beliver, thou shall not only have hereby a negative
good, it will not simply a freedom from all those sorrows and troubles thou
have heard, but thy soul shall immediately receive transcendent joy with Jesus
Christ. For me to live, says Paul, is Christ, and to die is gain. The
advantage the soul receives upon this account, made Paul so much desire to
depart and be with Christ; which he says is far better, Phil. 1. 21. Pray
observe his words, he does not say it will be gain to him when he rises again,
no, but to die is gain Some probably may object the dead are not sensible of
time, it is but as a sleep to them; they die and their resurrection to them
immediately follows; no distance of time between Death and Judgment the dead,
and so Paul's gain he speaks of (...) might not be till the resurrection?

Aasw. Though it be granted death to the body is but as a sleep, yet it is not
so to the soul. But that this is not the intent or meaning of the Apostle, is
plain; which I make out thus: Paul Plainly shows that if he did presently
depart or die, it would be gain to him; now if that which you say were true, he
would have lost by death, it is easy to see how, Suppose he might live twenty
or thirty years longer on earth, would not thirty years sweet enjoyment of
Jesus Christ be worth nothing? Is not one* day with God, beholding his lovely
face, better than a thousand? All know, that if he died presently, he should
never the sooner obtain the resurrection, of this body, than if he had lived a
hundred years longer; this being well weighed, to die presently would have been
his great loss, were not the soul in a present enjoyment of Christ at death.


. I shall receive more joy, more consolation, more of the fullness of God and
Christ (as if he should say) when I die, then I can whilst I am in this body.

Mind that passage in 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. Compare this with ver. 6. Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord. The Apostle does not say we know when this earthly house is
broken down and raised up again, we have a building with God, eternal in the
heavens. (Pray consider it) but plainly when it is dissolved, when it is turned
to its dusty crumbs: ( We have) that is our souls, he can intend nothing else.
By ( we) he means their better part, which he compares to an inhabiter, and the
body to the house or tabernacle in which it dwells. Oh what an excellent thing
is the soul of man over the body.

And now beloved, That the soul or better part is capable of being separated
from the body, and in its separate state from the body, capable of glorious
enjoyments of God and high raptures of joy with Jesus Christ, does appear most
evident from that passsage of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3. It is not
expendient for me doubtless, to glory, I will come to vissions and revelations
of the Lord. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the
body, I cannot tell; God knows: such a one caught up to the third heaven.
ver. 4. says, he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
which is not lawful for a man to utter. The soul or spirit then it appears may
be separate from the body. I from this place thus argue,

1. If the soul or spirit of man be not capable of being separated from the
house of clay or earthly tabernacle, then Paul might have boldly and safely
have said the whole man was taken up, a soul and body together, and not one
without the other, because it is impossible to separate them: but since Paul
says he knows not whether in the body or out of the body, he plainly shows what
opinion he was of.

And then secondly, I may from what he says, reason after this manner, viz. If
the soul in its separated state from the body, be not able or capable to enjoy
or take in heavenly comforts or consolations of Jesus Christ, Paul might boldly
and Positively have said he was taken up in the body, because however he was
caught up, whether within or without the body, he heard and saw unexpressible
things; he had high and soul-filling raptures of joy. The Lord Jesus promised
the penitent Thief that he should (that is his chief or better part) be that
day with him in Paradise. Lord Jesus (says Stephen) receive my spirit. O what
a blessed thing it is to die in Christ? O what a happy estate is our friend in,
the gain is exceeding great. Some may say what does a godly man gain by death?

I answer, First, They gain a glorious place, heaven, the glorious Paradise of
God, the Mansions of glory that are in our Fathers House! Who is able to
conceive what a glorious place heaven is? But then,

Secondly, They shall enjoy glorious company too. They shall be with Jesus
Christ, have his company, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand there be pleasures for evermore; be with Christ, holy Angels,
and glorious spirits of just men made perfect. O what a blessed state and
condition of soul have they gained that are gone thither!

Thirdly, we shall gain sweet peace. It Is not only peace in Christ (that Gods
people have as their portion here) but it shall be peace with Christ. A Woman
that has a dear Husband who is gone to Sea, he is it may be in another
Country, yet she hears from him, receives tokens of love, she has much
satisfaction of the stedfasteness of his love, cordialness of his affection; in
this she has peace and comfort, but alas what is this peace to that when he
comes home, when she has him, enjoys his company? O we shall see Christ, enjoy
him, yea lie in his arms to all eternity. Enter thou, says Christ, into the
joy of thy Lord. That joy is too much to enter into us, therefore we must enter
into that. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of that man
is peace. He has peace In death, peace beyond death, yea and peace to all
etrernity.

And now one word more particularly to you that have lost your Pastor: Your
loss I must confess is great (though he has gained hereby) and it may be some
of you are crying out, What shall we do? Beloved, you must labor for a quiet
frame, strive for contentedness of heart; it is the Lords hand upon you, it is
what he has done; remember David, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9.

2. Consider also your loss is not so great, but God is able to repair it and
make it up to you, though you may not see which way it can be done, let it be
your care to wait upon God; cry to him, look up to the Lord of the Harvest, and
patiently wait to see what he will do for you.

3. To support you under this sore affliction, Consider the great Shepherd of
the Sheep never dies, he lives for ever; and sure he that dyed for the Sheep
whose own Sheep they are, will take care of them; he will feed them and
preserve them from danger, Isa. 23. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is my Shepherd, says
David, I shall not want: He makes me to lie down in green Pastures: he leads
me besides the still waters: he restores my Soul: he leads me in the paths
of Righteousness, for his Names sake. And from hence he takes courage, Yea,
though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil. Oh
what a blessed thing it is to have confidence in God, and to have such a
Shepherd; the keeper of Israel never slumbers nor sleeps.

And now to conclude one word to dear Relations, and to comfort us all under
the present dispensation.
1. Consider death shall not separate us long, we shall see one another again
over a short time, he is gone but a little before; let us think upon that
glorious Meeting we shall have ere long in the Air, read 1 These. 4. 13, etc. I
would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope; for if we believe that
Jesus died, and rose again; even so them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring
with him: for this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep: for the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first, then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we
ever be with the Lord: wherefore comfort one another with these words. What can
I speak that may be more seasonable for comfort, then that which the holy
Spirit has left upon record, upon that very account it will be but a little
while and we shall see him again, we shall have a joyful meeting and never part
more.

O therefore be quieted, consider what you have heard what death is to a
Believer.

Shall not our Friend go to rest? Alas he has labored hard, and O how sweet
is this rest to him. When a man has worked hard all day and wearied himself,
how willing is he to go to bed at night? Alas he is but gone to sleep, to take
sweet and quiet rest until the Morning.

2. Shall not we be willing he should have enlargement to be freed out of
Prison. Alas our Souls are as it were but in Prison whilst we dwell here below
in these Houses of Clay; Death as a Porter opens a door into that Glorious
Palace above He is but gone home to his Fathers House, and how earnest was he
to depart, that he might be present with the Lord.

3. Shall not he eat the fruit of his labor, he that sows in tears shall
reap in joy, those that go forth weeping bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again rejoicing and bring their Sheaves with them.

4. He having overcome, shall not he receive the Crown? Paul having fought the
good fight of faith, knew there was laid up for him a Crown of Righteousness:
To him that overcomes, says our Savior, will I grant to sit with me in my
throne. even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father an his throne,
Rev. 3. 21.

5. And now in the last place and to shut up all, consider, uncertain is thy
life, and mind; you know not but that in a very few days you may go after, it
will not be long be sure, and thither we all must go: For, What man is he, that
lives and shall not see death? Shall be deliver his Soul from the hand of the
grave? Selah.

FINIS
ERATA.
Page 4. l. 9. blot forth cut, p. 4. l 10. also blot forth out, p 9. l. 25 for
is read it, p. 11. l. 14. blot out word, p. 15. for Augustus Caesar r. Julius
Caesar, p 17. l. 2. for if r. of, p. 18. for question r. query, p. 32. l. 8.
blot out And, p. 32. l. 9. for And r. For, p. 58. l. 8. blot out and
Consolation, which escaped in some Copies.


